International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
1818H Street, N.W., Washington, D.C, 20433, U.S.A.
Telephone: (202) 458-1534 Faxes: (202) 522-2615 / (202) 522-2027
Website: http:/Awww.worldbank.org/icsid

CERTIFICATE
F-W Oil Interests, Inc
v.
The Republic of Trinidad and Tobago

ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/14)

I hereby certify that the attached document is a true copy of the Arbitral Tribunal’s
Award.

fabwht

Scott B. White
Acting Secretary-General

Washington, D.C., March 3, 2006

 

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Washington, D.C.
Case No. ARB/O1/14
F-W Oil Interests, Inc.
(Claimant)
v.
The Republic of Trinidad and Tobago
(Respondent)

AWARD

Before the Arbitral Tribunal
Comprised of:

Mr. Fali S. Nariman, President
Sir Franklin Berman

Lord Mustill

Secretary of the Tribunal

Mr. Ucheora Onwuamaegbu

Representing the Claimants: Representing the Respondent:

Mr. Stephen York Ms. Lynette Stephenson SC, Solicitor General

Mr. James Loftis
Mr. Shai Wade

Mr. James Dingemans, QC
Mr. John Almeida, Charles Russell Solicitors

Vinson & Elkins Solicitors Mrs. Carol Bristol

Date of Dispatch

to the Parties: March 3, 2006

PART -
1
PART -

2

3
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
PART -

4

x

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

.°

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

8)
10 THEINTELLECTUAL PROPERTY CLAIM
11 THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE STATE

(a)

12. THEMUTUAL ALLEGATIONS OF CORRUPTION AND DISHONESTY .
13. CONCLUSION
14 COSTS

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

I 3
BRIEF INTRODUCTORY TEXT OF THE ISSUES INVOLVED IN THE CASE.

IL. u
THE PARTIES

 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY OF THE CASE:
The Request for Arbitrati
Notice of i i
Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal and Commencement of the Proceeding.....
Claimant’s Memorial
Respondent's Counter Memorial
The Claimant’s Reply
dent’s Rejoinder
Events Subsequent to the Filing of the Pleadings

Tit 24

THE BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION CHARGES AND ALLEGATIONS OF WRONGDOING —
THEIR ULTIMATE WITHDRAWAL AND FILING OF THE AMENDED CLAIMANT’S MEMORIAL DATED 16
JANUARY, 2004, ALONG WITH THE CLAIMANT’S AMENDED REPLY ALSO DATED 16 JANUARY, 2004 —
CONSEQUENTIAL EFFECT ON THE CLAIM OF FWO AGAINST THE RESPONDENT...
THE RELEVANT FACTUAL ASPECTS OF THE CASE AS THEY HAVE UNFOLDED:
FACTS AND EVENTS: CONCERNING THE AWARD OF THE TENDER FOR THE
EXPLOITATION OF THE SOLDADO FIELDS TO FWO AND ULTIMATE WITHDRAWAL
FROM NEGOTIATIONS BY LETTER OF 20 FEBRUARY 2001...
JURISDICTION
THE JURISDICTION OF THE CENTRE...
The Position of the Parties

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Tribunal’s Questions
The Issues.
The ion of the BIT

 

Jurisdiction under the BIT.
“Investment A ”

CONTRACT: FWO’s FINAL CASE
C Rights: F

 

Domestic Law.
Was there a contract
The Position under Domestic Law...

An obligation to negotiate in good faith?

 

 

 

 

Facts and Events: Direct Involvement of the State (through the Minister) in the Bidding proce:
and at Various Stages of FWO’s Dealings with Trinmar...

 

 

PART -I

1 BRIEF INTRODUCTORY TEXT OF THE ISSUES INVOLVED IN THE
CASE

1. In later sections of this Award we set out at some length the factual origins of the
dispute, and examine the legal resources brought to bear by the parties on the issues of law
to which it gives rise. As will appear, much of this material has played no part in our
decision, and at first sight there might seem no reason to enter into it. In the event,
however, it cannot be left wholly out of account. Thus, for example, although the
disappearance from the case of the allegations of fraud and corruption has made it
unnecessary, and indeed undesirable, to analyse in depth the evidence said to bear on these
allegations, at least a general appreciation of the way the claim developed is still relevant to
determining the real nature of the case before us, and in particular whether it is essentially a
case about breach of contract remediable in principle in the local courts under domestic
law, or instead (or as well) an infraction of the obligations of the State under international
law falling within the jurisdiction of a tribunal like the present one. So also the erratic
formulation of the claim has required careful study of the legal materials placed before us
to see what parts of them are relevant to the legal elements of the Claimant’s case in the

shape in which it ultimately came to rest.

2. Accordingly, there remains a considerable amount of ground to cover in the present
Award, and because of the haphazard way in which the issues emerged it is not altogether
easy to identify those parts which are truly relevant to the dispute as it finally came to rest.
We therefore think it useful, at the cost of some repetition, to begin by introducing the case

in its barest outlines, starting with the facts.

3. Offshore oil is an important component of the economic heritage of Trinidad and
Tobago. A part of it lies in the Soldado Fields. By an Act of 1969 this asset, amongst
others, was vested in the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago (hereafter “the State”). Through
a succession of instruments the offshore rights devolved on Petrotrin, the national oil
company of Trinidad and Tobago, a corporate body wholly owned by the State. For the

purpose of developing and exploiting these rights another company, Trinmar Limited

(hereafter “Trinmar”), was incorporated. At the outset of the events in question the State
held a majority interest in the equity of Trinmar through Petrotrin, but there was one
minority shareholder in the shape of Textrin, a local subsidiary of the US oil company

Texaco.

4. In May 1999 one of the structures engaged in extraction of oil and gas in the
Soldado Fields suffered a disaster, the consequence being serious, with a prolonged fall in
production and hence in the revenue flow to the State. The value of this loss of production
was estimated by Trinmar (in September 2000) as being of the order of T&T $200 million.!
One would have expected that in a developing economy the maximum possible effort
would be exerted by the State to help restore production in order to stimulate the economy.
This the State had attempted to do when it directed Trinmar to negotiate an agreement with
the Claimant in this Arbitration (hereafter “FWO”): but for various reasons an agreement
did not fructify, with Trinmar ultimately withdrawing from the negotiations on 26 February
2001. Thereafter no meaningful steps were taken to exploit, either internally or through
foreign participation, the State’s vast resources of offshore oil. The record — oral and
documentary — of this case is a long catalogue of failures; replete with apportioning of
blame, antagonism between officials and inter-corporate bickering, exacerbated by political
pressures. It is not our task to comment on why a vital resource in a developing economy
was not attempted to be exploited: that is a matter for introspection by the Respondent
State. All this however does form an inescapable backdrop to the entire dispute in this

case.

5. After the May 1999 disaster it was a strong policy priority of the Government, quite
understandably, to restore production from the Fields and the situation offered obvious
opportunities to commercial concerns outside Trinidad and Tobago with experience in
offshore construction and development. Prominent amongst those who showed interest at
an early stage was F-W Oil Interests Inc. (hereafter “FWO”), a Delaware corporation, part
of a group of companies established in the state of Texas. During August 1999 an
approach was made by FWO to the relevant Minister; later, a confidentiality agreement

enabled FWO engineers to review data concerning the Field; and by the end of 1999 FWO.

' Letter dated 22 September 2000, addressed by Trinmar to its shareholders, Petrotrin and Textrin.

was presenting two alternative bases for financing, each of them involving a transfer to
FWO of the mineral rights in the field. In the event, however, FWO’s proposal was not

adopted, and in place of direct negotiation a public tender process was begun.

6. The outcome was the distribution to potential bidders, including FWO, of a
document entitled “Request for participation in Trinmar’s West and South West Soldado
Fields”. Together with a brief description of the work, the Request comprised an
“Invitation to Bid” and a Form of Tender. FWO was one of those responding with a

tender.

7. It appears that Trinmar originally contemplated 1 March 2000 as the date for
awarding the project, but this aim was frustrated by the intervention of the minority
shareholder, Textrin, which contended that, Trinmar having no interest in the licences for
the development of the Fields, the invitation was improper, as would be any acceptance of
bids made in response. As it happens, this objection was made at a time when long-
running negotiations for the acquisition by Petrotrin, as the national oil company, of the
outstanding minority shareholding in Trinmar were coming to a head, the completion of
which held up the project for several months. The dealings between Petrotrin and Trinmar
at this stage remain somewhat obscure; what is certain, however, is that, despite having
apparently sought and obtained approval from the upper management of Petrotrin that the
bidding process should be suspended, Trinmar went ahead with it all the same. A series of
undignified exchanges between the two State corporations followed, with each side seeking
to enlist the support of the relevant Minister, who expressed his strong disapproval of the
strained relations between those in charge of the two companies, and recalled in the
strongest terms that the interests of the State (as indicated) lay in resumed production from

the Fields as soon as possible.

8. Ultimately the bidding process led to the selection of FWO as the preferred bidder,
and the Minister directed that negotiations with that company should go ahead. It should
however be noted that by now Trinmar, at the insistence of Petrotrin, had changed the basis
of the proposed transaction in an important respect, namely that the successful bidder

would no longer be granted a licence or other proprietary interest in either the Field or the

minerals gotten from it, but would instead operate as a “Service Contractor”, remunerated
by a rate per barrel of oil produced. In due course the Board of Trinmar approved the
selection of FWO and directed the management to proceed with negotiations, and on 20
September 2000 FWO was formally notified that it had been awarded the tender, “subject
to the negotiation and execution of a mutually agreeable operating agreement...” Draft

Heads of Agreement were annexed to the notification.

9. Meanwhile, having learned unofficially that it would receive the award, FWO had
written two letters to Trinmar. The first reiterated previous requests for a guarantee or
other form of security to secure payment to FWO under the anticipated contract, on the
ground that — now that FWO was not to acquire rights to the oil itself — the outside interests
who were intended to finance FWO’s share in the project required some such security as a
pre-requisite of participation. The second letter asked for assurances that FWO would be
compensated for work done in anticipation of an agreement to carry out the project, if in

the event such an agreement was not concluded.

10. Neither letter received a positive response. As to the former, Trinmar undertook to
request a guarantee or other security from its shareholders but did not itself agree or
promise that one would be provided. In relation to the second letter Trinmar simply replied
that it did not hold itself liable for any costs or expenditure incurred by FWO prior to the

execution of a contract.

11. Although much was happening behind the scenes between persons and bodies in
Trinidad and Tobago the negotiations between Trinmar and FWO made no progress, and
indeed Trinmar did not reply to follow-up letters addressed by FWO during October and
December 2000 and January 2001, except to inform FWO on 11 October 2000 that
Petrotrin had purchased Textrin’s remaining 33.33% shareholding in Trinmar. Ultimately,
however, Trinmar’s Acting General Manager wrote to FWO on 26 February 2001 as

follows:

(i) Trinmar was now wholly owned by Petrotrin.

(ii) The latter had not acceded to the request for a guarantee.

(iii) FWO had indicated that the guarantee was to be made available
so as to enable it to conclude an agreement for the project.

(iv) The award was subject to the negotiation and execution of a
mutually agreed contract.

(v) Trinmar did not hold itself liable for costs and expenditure
incurred by FWO prior to the execution of a contract on the
tender.

(vi) “In the light of the above Trinmar hereby notifies you that it has
withdrawn from the negotiations and is reconsidering its position
on the project”.

12. This letter, which came out of a clear blue sky, five months after the notification
that FWO had been awarded the project, marked the effective end of FWO’s connection
with it. Notwithstanding protests, Trinmar refused to reverse its decision, and the
Government, when approached by FWO, declined to intervene. Following intensive
consultation with Petrotrin and with the responsible Government Minister, Trinmar set in
train instead an alternative bidding process in which FWO declined to take part — although
this process, too, was in due course aborted, and the Soldado Field remains unproductive to

this day.

13. That being, in outline, the history of the dispute, we turn to the proceedings before
the present Tribunal. The Request to Institute Arbitration Proceedings asserted that FWO’s
“investment” in Trinidad and Tobago, for the purposes of ICSID’s jurisdiction, existed in
two forms: first, in the shape of an agreement made by FWO “with T&T”, in relation to the
Soldado project; second, “by contributing money and tangible and intellectual property ...
to the project”. Thus, at this early stage FWO was advancing a claim of the kind which has
become familiar in recent years in multi- and bi-lateral ICSID disputes, whereunder the
foreign investor relies on a contract between itself and the host state which constitutes at
the same time the investment on which ICSID jurisdiction is founded, and also the source

of the obligation, the breach of which is the subject-matter of the claim.

14. Later, however, when FWO served its Memorial in the arbitration, the thrust of the

claim was completely transformed. In its opening lines we read:

“1:1 FWO’s claims in this arbitration result from corruption and
other unlawful conduct by officials of T&T state enterprises. In
retaliation for FWO’s refusal to pay a US$1.5 million bribe in
connection with an oil and gas contract, senior officials of the T&T
state oil and gas company engaged in wrongful conduct that caused a

subsidiary to breach its contractual obligations to FWO ... the officials
then commenced a campaign of disinformation designed to force
FWO’s removal as a successful bidder and abused their oversight
positions in Petrotrin and the T&T government to block Trinmar
proceeding with the award. This conduct was part of a plan to avoid
the acknowledged contractual rights of FWO ... During the
negotiations however, and without FWO’s knowledge, certain T&T
officials hoping to benefit personally from the Trinmar project, had
embarked on a course of conduct that would ultimately cause Trinmar
wrongfully to withdraw the award of the contract.”
Similar allegations were repeated on several occasions later in the document. Finally, in

paragraph 7.1 the reformulated case was summarised as follows:

“Tn view of the matters stated above FWO claims that T&T
° Failed in breach of the Tender Contract and in bad faith to
perform its promise to award FWO the project.
. Failed to treat FWO fairly and protect its investment from harm
in accordance with its treaty obligations under the BIT.

. Was unjustly enriched through its bad faith actions ...”
15. Nothing could be plainer. A relatively mundane, although intellectually rather
elusive, dispute about the existence of contractual rights arising under domestic law from
dealings before the conclusion of a formal agreement, and about their relationship to a bi-
lateral investment treaty, was now to be the stage for a highly-coloured attack on officials,
sufficiently senior for their conduct to be identified with that of the State. This attack was
reiterated in FWO’s Reply, served on 26 September 2003, only six weeks before the start
of the oral hearing. It continued to be part of FWO’s case throughout almost the entirety of
the hearing, until (on 16 December 2003, the penultimate day of the hearing) counsel for
FWO withdrew that part of the allegations which related to the conduct of a junior minister.
The remainder of the allegations did however remain on the record. Pressed by the
Tribunal, counsel for FWO explained that the case had “matured” in the previous year, and
that the allegations of fraud and corruption were no longer “a central plank” of it. The
Tribunal was dissatisfied with this account of the current state of FWO’s case, and required
FWO to state whether or not it was pursuing the allegation. Eventually, counsel said, on
fresh instructions, that the allegation (or at least the part of it which impugned the conduct
of a senior official) was withdrawn. An undertaking was given to amend the Memorial

accordingly, but when the Amended Memorial was delivered, after the conclusion of the

oral hearing, it was found that a considerable portion of the references to bribery had not
been expunged. This was unsatisfactory, but we have not devoted time to pursuing the
matter further. If there had ever been sufficient evidence to justify the levelling of these
charges we have not seen it, nor have we had any proper explanation of how it came about
that very serious accusations were made which in the event the accuser made no effort to
sustain. In the circumstances, we leave these accusations out of account, and concentrate
on the less dramatic, but intellectually more taxing, contentions based on the assertion that
FWO had the benefit of a binding pre-contractual agreement, which constituted an
investment in Trinidad and Tobago, and which the State unfairly infringed, either by using
its powers to ensure that Trinmar did not take the bidding process to a conclusion, or (if on
a true understanding of the contractual situation the counterparty to FWO in this agreement

was the State, and not just Trinmar), by itself failing to perform the agreement.

16. Even this brief description is enough to show that essential to almost every variant
of FWO’s case is the existence of a contract, the benefit of which was lost to FWO when
Trinmar announced that the negotiations would not proceed. Leaving aside for the moment
a separate argument related to pre-contract work and expenditure, the contract relied upon
is said to have been what was called a “Tender Contract”. Drawing on a considerable
number of decided cases from other common law jurisdictions, FWO sought to establish
that it was the obligee under a contract, arising from the dealings between the parties and
reinforced by inferences of law, which governed the way in which both sides were obliged
to carry on negotiations towards a final substantive agreement. This contract, so it was
maintained, was enforceable in Trinidad and Tobago under the law of that country, and was
therefore an investment which the State of Trinidad and Tobago as host nation was bound
as a matter of international law under treaty to recognise and protect. Any claim resulting

from a failure to do so would (so it was argued) be justiciable before this Tribunal.

17. The second critical feature of the alleged Tender Contract was substantive rather
than jurisdictional; namely that, if proved, it established and set the bounds of the rights
which the actions of the State are said to have infringed. In other words, unless the Tender

Contract could be proved, the claim would founder on both jurisdiction and the merits.

18. Much of what follows in this Award is occupied with an examination of the
existence and characteristics of the Tender Contract relied upon by FWO. The bare
outlines of FWO’s case defy being shortly stated because, although the expression “Tender
Contract” is borrowed from decisions on preliminary contracts which at first sight bear a
strong resemblance to what is alleged here, in fact the resemblance is illusory, for the
subject matter of those decisions was almost always a failure to comply with a bidding
process said to be enforceable in law, whereas the complaint of FWO in the present case
was not that something had gone wrong with the bidding - for that ended in an award in
favour of FWO — but that the award had not been followed up by a binding final contract.
There was little analysis of this complaint, and little help to be gained from the reported
cases. We discuss it below. Once the ground has been cleared of irrelevant authority, it

seems to us that a solution is relatively straightforward.

19. Another important respect in which the formulation of FWO’s claim has lacked
precision is in the absence of any consistent identification of the parties to the Tender
Contract. FWO was obviously one party, but who was the other? FWO’s contentions
never made this clear, for the repeated references to “T&T” as both the contracting party
and the party whose actions and inactions brought about and constituted the breach have
blurred the analysis required by the issues which the Tribunal is called on to solve. We
seek to clarify them later. For the moment it is sufficient to indicate that, if the claim is that
the State was itself a party to the Tender Contract (because Trinmar was to be identified
with the State for the purpose), then the cancellation by Trinmar of FWO’s participation
would presumably be argued to be at the same time a breach by the State under domestic
law of the State’s own contractual obligations, and an infringement by the State of the
rights under international law created by the BIT. If on the other hand the Tender Contract
(assuming there was one) was made not with the State but with a separate entity, the
argument would presumably be that the State can be held responsible under the Treaty if
through its own officers or Agencies it illegitimately interfered with FWO’s rights under

the contract.

20. The enquiry must thus be focused on the existence and terms of the alleged Tender

Contract; on the identification of the parties to it; on the acts and omissions alleged to have

constituted a breach of it, or alternatively a wrongful interference with the performance of
it. Then, when answers have been given to these questions it must be considered whether
whatever wrongful act or omission there may have been on the part of persons or bodies in

Trinidad and Tobago, was also a breach of the obligations of the State under the BIT.

21. The above sketch may serve to clarify what might otherwise seem a confused set of
issues, and it will we hope also explain why it seemed obvious to the Tribunal (and
evidently to the parties as well) that questions of jurisdiction and merits were so
inextricably entwined that it would have been pointless to attempt a decision on jurisdiction

in advance of a hearing on the merits.

PART - Il
2 THE PARTIES

22. The Claimant, FWO, is an energy company engaged in the exploration,
development and production of oil and natural gas, primarily from offshore fields; FWO is
a Corporation registered in Delaware, USA founded by Franklin C. Wade (“Wade”) in
1995.2, Wade is FWO’s sole shareholder, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer. The

Claimant’s address is given as:

F-W Oil Interests Inc.
9821 Katy Freeway Suite 1050
HOUSTON Texas 77024

23. The Respondent is the Government of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago.’ The

Respondent’s address is given as:

The Republic of Trinidad and Tobago

Represented by the Office of the Attorney General and Ministry of
Legal Affairs

Cabildo Chambers

25-27 St Vincent Street

? The Claimant was initially established as Offshore Drilling Consultants Inc., and its name was changed to
FW Oil Interests in September 1998.

> For convenience, the Tribunal will, as the occasion permits, use the shorthand form “State” to refer both to
the Respondent State and to its territory, but only where the context is clear enough to avoid ambiguity. The
territory of the State is defined in Section 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago of
1976, as amended by Act, No. 89 of 2000. There is also a definition for treaty purposes in Article I (d)(1) of
the BIT.

   

Port-of-Spain
Republic of Trinidad and Tobago

3 PROCEDURAL HISTORY OF THE CASE:

(a) The Request for Arbitration

24. On September 28, 2001, FWO filed a request for arbitration at the Centre, against
the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago. On the same day, in accordance with Rule 5 of the
ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings
(“Institution Rules”), the Centre acknowledged receipt of the Request, and transmitted a

copy to the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago and to its Embassy in Washington, D.C.

25. In the request, FWO claimed that it had established an investment in the territory of
Trinidad and Tobago by entering into an investment agreement with the State, by acquiring
rights under the laws of Trinidad and Tobago, the “BIT” and international law in relation to
an offshore oil and gas development and production project and by contributing money and
tangible and intellectual property to the project as more particularly described. It was
stated that each of these qualified as an investment of FWO in the territory of the State for

the purposes of both the ICSID Convention and the BIT.

26. The “investments” concerned the financing and development of the West and South
West Soldado oil fields, natural resources and assets vested in the State (“Soldado Fields”).
The Soldado Fields (it was stated) were exploited through two instruments of the State,
namely the Petroleum Company of Trinidad and Tobago Limited (‘Petrotrin”) and Trinmar

Limited (“Trinmar”).

27. The “legal dispute” arising out of or relating to the “investment” was encapsulated

in the Request as follows:

- that relying on its discussions with representatives of “T&T” and
on terms of an Invitation to Bid dated 23 December 1999, FWO.
had submitted bids, and invested substantial sums and
intellectual property in connection with those bids including the
procurement of a platform and jacket to be installed in place of

BS-25 (the central processing station through which until May
1999, all production in Soldado Fields had been routed);

- that in the period from 9 June to 15 September 2000, after
material commercial terms had been discussed and agreed
between the parties, FWO had received on 20 September 2000 a
Notice declaring it the Successful Bidder, and had also been sent
Heads of Agreement — at which time Trinmar undertook to
negotiate in good faith and in an expeditious manner towards the
execution of an Operating Agreement for the provision of
facilities and services in the Soldado Fields; that by the said
process of issuing negotiating, accepting and awarding a tender,
“T&T” had entered into an “investment agreement”, evidenced
in writing by the said Invitation to Bid, submissions, Letter of
Notice to Successful Bidder and Heads of Agreement, and FWO
had further acquired rights in relation to the proposed
development of the Soldado Fields;

- that on 26 February 2001, and without having taken any steps to
negotiate and execute an Operating Agreement or to otherwise
progress the financing and development of the Soldado Fields
and without lawful jurisdiction or excuse, Trinmar informed
FWO that it was withdrawing and seeking to abrogate FWO’s
rights;

- that in June 2001 the State issued another public invitation to bid
for the development of the Soldado Fields utilising the same
process and utilising information and know-how derived from
FWO, thereby seeking to expropriate the rights of FWO.

(b) Notice of Registration

28. On 5 October 2001 and 1 November 2001, the Centre requested further information
and supporting documents from the Claimant with regard to various issues raised in the
request for arbitration, and generally concerning the consent of the Respondent to ICSID
arbitration, to which the Claimant responded by letters dated 10 October 2001 and 7
November 2001.

29. The Request for Arbitration, as supplemented by the Claimant’s letters of 10
October 2001 and 7 November 2001, was duly registered by the Centre on 29 November
2001, pursuant to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention, and on the same day the

Secretary-General, in accordance with Institution Rule 7, notified the parties of the

registration and invited them to proceed to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal as soon as

possible.

(c) Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal and Commencement of the
Proceeding

30. In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 2, the Claimant, by a letter of 6

December 2001, proposed to the Respondent that there be a Tribunal composed of three

arbitrators, one appointed by each party, and the third, who shall be the president,

appointed by agreement of the parties. A deadline for the appointment by the parties of

arbitrators was proposed, as was the method for appointing the presiding arbitrator.

31. On 30 January 2002, sixty days having passed since the registration of the request
for arbitration, and the parties having not reached an agreement on number of arbitrators
and the method of their appointment, the Claimant notified the Centre that it was opting for
the method in Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. In the same letter, the Claimant
notified the Centre of its appointment of Sir Franklin Berman QC, a national of the United
Kingdom, as an arbitrator and of the candidate whom they proposed for appointment as the

presiding arbitrator.

32. By a letter of 27 February 2002, the Respondent notified the Centre of its
appointment of the Rt. Hon. Lord Mustill, a national of the United Kingdom, as arbitrator.
Further, the Respondent by a letter dated 22 March 2002 rejected the candidate proposed
by the Claimant as the presiding arbitrator and proposed another candidate, and this
candidate was, in turn, not accepted by the Claimant who by a letter of 16 May 2002
requested, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 4(1), that the appointment be made by the
Chairman of the Administrative Council, since more than ninety days had passed since the

registration of the request for arbitration.

33. Pursuant to Article 38 of the Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 4(4), the
Acting Chairman of the Administrative Council of the Centre, in consultation with the
parties, appointed Mr. Fali S. Nariman, a national of India, as an arbitrator in the case and

designated him as the President of the Tribunal.

34. All three arbitrators having accepted their positions, the Centre by a letter of 19
June 2002, informed the parties of the constitution of the Tribunal, consisting of Sir
Franklin Berman QC, the Rt. Hon. Lord Mustill and Mr. Fali S. Nariman, and that the
proceeding was deemed to have commenced on that day, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration

Rule 6 (1).

35. As agreed between the Tribunal and the parties, and in consultation with the Centre,
the Tribunal held its first session in London, on 4 October 2002, with the parties and their
representatives in attendance. Various issues of procedure identified in the provisional
agenda sent to the parties in advance of the meeting, were discussed, and the conclusions at
the meeting, including the schedule for the filing of submissions, were recorded in the
minutes of the Tribunal that were subsequently distributed to the parties. The schedule for
filing of written pleadings under Rule 31 of the Arbitration Rules was subsequently

modified by agreement of the parties.
(d) Claimant’s Memorial

36. The Claimant filed its Memorial on 28 February 2003, in which its claim was

summarised in the following terms:

“SUMMARY OF DISPUTE

1.1 FWO?’s claims in this arbitration result from corruption and other
unlawful conduct by officials of T&T state enterprises. In
retaliation for FWO’s refusal to pay a US$1.5 million bribe in
connection with an oil and gas contract, senior officials of the
T&T state oil and gas company engaged in wrongful conduct
that caused a subsidiary to breach its contractual obligations to
FWO and to violate the rights guaranteed to FWO as an investor
under the Bilateral Investment Treaty (“BIT”) between T&T and
the United States. This conduct was part of a plan to avoid the
acknowledged contractual rights of FWO.

1.2. In February 2000, Trinmar invited FWO to participate in a
competitive tender for a contract to redevelop the state owned
Southwest and West Soldado oil and gas fields (the “Soldado
Fields” or the “Fields”), located in the territorial waters of T&T.
Trinmar is a subsidiary of the state oil and gas company,
Petrotrin, and is charged with management of T&T’s offshore oil

and gas resources. Petrotrin and Trinmar are state enterprises of
T&T and act on behalf of the state in oil and gas matters. The
bid process was subject to express and implied terms governing
the evaluation of the bids and the eventual award of a contract
for the project (the “Tender Contract”).

1.3. FWO’s proposal was assessed in a detailed nine-month
evaluation process, supervised by independent auditors. On 20
September 2000, Trinmar formally awarded FWO the contract
for the Soldado Fields. FWO’s proposed capital commitment to
the project was in excess of US$60 million.

1.4 During the negotiations, however, and without FWO’s
knowledge, certain T&T officials, hoping to benefit personally
from the Trinmar project, had embarked on a course of conduct
that would ultimately cause Trinmar wrongfully to withdraw the
award of the contract.

1.5 In July 2000, acting through intermediaries, certain T&T
officials demanded a US$1.5 million bribe and threatened to
block FWO’s proposals unless the bribe was paid. FWO refused.
They later caused a fax to be sent to FWO listing a Cayman
Island bank account and demanding that US$200,000 be
deposited into the account as the first payment on a bribe. FWO
again refused. The officials then commenced a campaign of
disinformation designed to force FWO’s removal as the
successful bidder and abused their oversight positions in
Petrotrin and the T&T government to block Trinmar from
proceeding with the award. These officials ultimately caused
Trinmar to withdraw the award in February 2001.

1.6 Finally, in June 2001, T&T submitted the Project to a new
tender. In breach of its contractual obligations and duties of
good faith, and confidence to FWO, T&T modelled its new
tender on FWO’s confidential business plans and economic
models.

1.7 By its conduct, T&T has breached its agreements with FWO and
its obligations under T&T law, the BIT and international law,
and has caused FWO substantial damage and loss. _FWO
respectfully requests that it be awarded compensation for its lost
profits and wasted costs.”

37. The Memorial went on to give particulars of the bribery and corruption charge in

considerable detail.

38. It was also submitted that it was unfair to award a project in accordance with a
competitive tender and eight months later unilaterally decide to re-tender the project

“without a good faith effort to finalize a substantially completed agreement”.

39. It was contended that in these circumstances by its conduct the State not only
breached its agreements with FWO and its obligations under the law of Trinidad and
Tobago, but also breached its obligations under the BIT and international law, and thereby

caused FWO substantial damage and loss.
(e) Respondent’s Counter Memorial
40. In the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial filed on 29 August 2003:

- it was accepted that the Tribunal had jurisdiction to determine
whether or not there was any legal dispute arsing directly out of
and investment between the State and the Claimant (Article 25 of
the ICSID Convention) and that if there was any such dispute, to
determine the merits of such dispute;

- it was denied that there was any legal dispute arising directly out
of an investment between the Claimant and the State — any claim
that the Claimant might have (it being denied that the Claimant
had any valid claims) would be against Trinmar or the officials
of Petrotrin for their unlawful personal conduct mentioned in
various paragraphs of the Claimant’s Memorial (it being denied
that there was any such conduct); it was contended that Trinmar,
Petrotrin and the officials of Petrotrin were all separate entities
from the State; it was further stated that the relevant actions of
Trinmar, Petrotrin and the officials of Petrotrin were all
commercial or private and not governmental, and the State was
not liable in respect of any such action;

- it was further denied that Trinmar was liable in respect of the
tendering process; it was stated that the selection of the Claimant
as preferred bidder was made expressly “subject to the
negotiation and execution of a mutually agreeable operating
agreement” — which was never agreed to or executed;

- it was stated that the failure to finalize and execute any operating
agreement on the part of Trinmar was not in breach of any duties
owed to the Claimant; Texaco Trinidad Limited (“Textrin”) and
Petrotrin (as shareholders in Trinmar) had reasonably refused to
provide any guarantee to the Claimant; besides, allegations were

17

made about the propriety of the Claimant, and the Claimant was
in dispute with a co-venturer in its bid, which meant that Trinmar
reasonably refused to proceed with the Claimant; it was urged
that all relevant decisions were taken by Trinmar and Petrotrin
and not the respondent State;

it was denied that any contract was awarded to the Claimant; it
was further urged that the Claimant itself sought to impose new
terms, including a demand that Petrotrin should guarantee
Trinmar’s obligations under the proposed contract; these new
terms were not accepted and therefore there was no contract in
law between the Claimant and Trinmar nor breach of any duties
owned by Trinmar to the Claimant; the Claimant’s tender was
made on the condition that if accepted the Claimant would be
obligated to Trinmar only upon the entry into force of a
definitive written agreement between the Claimant and Trinmar;
both Trinmar and Claimant had made it clear that contractual
duties and obligations would arise only on execution of a written
contract;

it was denied that the Claimant had made an investment within
the meaning of the ICSID Convention or the BIT — the allegation
that there was a tender contract was denied; it was also denied
that Trinmar acted in breach of any implied terms (such as that
Trinmar was obliged to act in good faith towards the claimant)
by not providing a guarantee or negotiating with the Claimant;

the allegations of corruption and bribery set out in the Claimant’s
Memorial were specifically denied;

the Respondent further conceded that after the conclusion of the
tendering process with the Claimant, Trinmar did put the
redevelopment of the Soldado Fields out to re-tender (but had not
accepted any re-tender) but denied that it used any of the
Claimant’s business plans and economic models.

it was contended that at the time of the State’s alleged breach of
contract there was no prospect of the Claimant undertaking the
project utilizing its own resources: it would have had to obtain
external finance, its own assumptions were that it would require
between US$45m to US$60m, but the Claimant had no firm offer
of finance to enable it to undertake the project, despite having
contacted more than twenty prospective lenders; the only two
financing term sheets produced by the Claimant made clear on
their face that they were no more than discussion documents;
both discussion documents would, if translated into firm offers,

have been contingent on the Claimant finding equity in excess of
that which the Claimant would have been able to offer;

- it was submitted that, given the Claimant’s lack of an established
track-record (whatever the qualities of some of its personnel) and
the particular difficulty of obtaining finance for projects in
developing projects in developing countries, the Claimant would
not in any event have been able to perform the project had it been
successful.

(f) The Claimant’s Reply
Al. In the Claimant’s Reply filed on 26 September 2003 it was stated:

- the domestic law argument of the Respondent was irrelevant to
the question of responsibility; in the BIT, the State had expressly
agreed to be responsible for the conduct of its state enterprises in
the context of investment disputes; and it was a well-settled
principle of international law that the state is responsible for
conduct such as that alleged in this case; the facts would show
that the wrongful conduct was under the direct supervision of
state officials and the State could not avoid answering for the
damage done to FWO;

- the facts demonstrated that the State had internal problems with
the tender “likely influenced by corruption after T&T had
accepted FWO’s proposal”, and that the facts also showed that at
the time Trinmar had terminated the contract, it had legal advice
that it could not do so without liability to FWO and that its stated
reason was a mere pretext;

- in light of voluminous evidence of the State’s direct active
control over all facets of the tendering process and the
acceptance of the tender, the Respondent’s assertion that neither
the State nor the Minister of Energy was involved in any of the
decisions simply could not be sustained, and were therefore
denied; according to the Respondent’s own submissions Petrotrin
exercised regulatory and policy control over the procurement
process, culminating in its decision to withdraw the award; and
Petrotrin’s conduct both in the nature of and in fact, undertaken
in the exercise of delegated regulatory and administrative
government authority was binding on the State;

- the arguments as to corruption were further amplified and
developed.

42.

(g)

Respondent’s Rejoinder

In the Respondent’s Rejoinder filed on 24 October 2003, it was stated:

the Claimant had failed to identify any “investment dispute”
between the State and the Claimant — at its highest the
Claimant’s case was that it had a contract with Trinmar
(notwithstanding all the express words to the effect that there
would be no contract in force until a contract was signed) which
was breached because the then Chairman of Petrotrin arranged
for copies of existing adverse media articles about the Claimant
to be sent to the Minister of Energy for his own “corrupt
purposes”; there was however no evidence showing that the
Chairman was involved or caused Petrotrin to refuse to offer a
guarantee to Trinmar when demanded by the Claimant; in any
case this was not an “investment dispute” with the State, and the
State was not responsible for the actions of Trinmar or Petrotrin;

it was admitted that the Claimant was selected as the preferred
bidder but the selection of the Claimant by Trinmar as preferred
bidder was expressly ‘subject to the negotiation and execution of
a mutually agreeable operating agreement’, and it was the
Claimant who sought to impose new financial terms to be
incorporated in the operating agreement.

the State had no material involvement and did not control the
bidding process between Trinmar and the Claimant; the evidence
showed that Trinmar failed even to involve Petrotrin in the
bidding process, resulting in difficulties between the Boards of
Trinmar and Petrotrin;

the Claimant had assumed in its Reply that it had a concluded
contract and that the contract was with the State; both
assumptions were wrong: there was no concluded contract
between the Claimant and Trinmar and Trinmar was not carrying
out any governmental act making the State liable for the actions
of Trinmar;

Trinmar was not owned by the State; it was not at all material
times controlled by ownership interests by the State by reason of
the shareholding of Textrin; indeed the evidence showed that part
of the problems related to conflicts between the Boards of
Trinmar and Petrotrin; neither Trinmar nor Petrotrin was
exercising regulatory, administrative or other governmental
authority delegated to it;

20

it was plain that from 1999 Trinmar was pursuing objectives
different from Petrotrin; in particular there was concern that
Trinmar was adopting a ‘high profile public-relations
programme’ at a time when there were negotiations for the
purchase of the Textrin shareholding; further Trinmar invited
bids for participation in the Soldado Fields without the authority
or consent of Petrotrin (as appears from the letter dated 8 March
2000 from Petrotrin) and, having halted the process,
recommenced the process again in June 2000 without the
approval of the Board of Petrotrin;

Textrin had made it clear, as a shareholder in Trinmar, that it was
not appropriate to seek bids for the Soldado fields before an
internal evaluation had been carried out; the letter from the
Chairman of Trinmar to the Chairman of Petrotrin asserted the
independence of Trinmar from Petrotrin in relation to all matters,
including the Soldado Fields, but Petrotrin remained concerned
about the process used to arrive at a preferred contractor and
Textrin disapproved of the decision to nominate the Claimant as
preferred bidder;

the decision of Trinmar to issue a letter of intent to the Claimant
was made without reference to Petrotrin, which only became
involved again in the process because the Claimant wanted it to
provide for a guarantee;

the corruption charges were once again denied and it was
asserted that that Claimant’s making of and persistence in these
allegations was an abuse of the arbitration process;

there was no agreement between the Claimant and Trinmar
because:

both Claimant and Trinmar had made it plain that contractual
relations were not to be entered into until execution of a formal
contract (in the invitation to bid and the Claimant’s bid);

Trinmar had declared the Claimant successful bidder ‘subject to
the negotiation and execution of a mutually agreeable operating
agreement’;

Trinmar had made it plain that the letter declaring the Claimant
successful bidder would be ‘subject to the negotiation and

execution of a definitive agreement’;

the Claimant would not have been able to obtain funding and the
fact that the Claimant was attempting to extract financial

21

guarantees from Petrotrin in part evidenced by the Claimant’s
problems”;

- the Claimant had asked for but had not been provided with an
agreement to pay compensation for anticipatory work in the
event that a definitive agreement could not be concluded (letter
dated 15 September 2000);

- the Claimant had itself noted (in its second letter dated 15
September 2000) that no definitive agreement had been reached;

- as at 26 September 2000 the Claimant was recording uncertainty
regarding security interest and referred to ‘the project after the
award, if awarded’ (email dated 26 September 2000);

- thus the Claimant had no valid claim against Trinmar (or
Petrotrin or the State).

(h) Events Subsequent to the Filing of the Pleadings

(i) Exchange of documents
43. After the filing of the written pleadings, an agreed bundle of documents was
exchanged by the parties in advance of the hearing containing correspondence and other
documents including cases and decisions. Witness Statements and Supplemental Witness

Statements had also been filed by both Parties between February and October 2003.

(ii) Fresh documentary evidence

44. Before the hearing in December 2003, the Respondent filed a further affidavit
attaching documents obtained under the Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty between the USA
and Trinidad and Tobago, in support of further allegations by the Respondent of planned
wrong-doing on the part of FWO and its initial collaborator Lexicon in relation to the

proposed project.

(iii) | The Oral Procedure — Hearing and Post-Hearing Submissions

45. As previously agreed, the Tribunal conducted a hearing in Tobago from 9 to 19

December 2003. The parties were represented by counsel who made presentations of their

22

respective cases to the Tribunal and also examined witnesses from their side and put
questions to witnesses from the opposing side. Transcripts were made of the hearing and

distributed to the parties; as also summary minutes thereof. Present at the hearing were:

Members of the Tribunal: Mr. Fali S. Nariman, President, Sir Franklin
Berman and the Rt Hon Lord Mustill; Secretary of the Tribunal: Mr.
Ucheora O. Onwuamaegbu.

Attending on behalf of the Claimant:

Mr. Stephen York, Mr. James Loftis, Mr. William H. Weiland, Mr.
Shai Wade, Mr. Eugene J. Silva II, and Mr. Mark Beeley, of Vinson &
Elkins; Mr. Frank Wade, Mr. James Brock, Mr. Eric Bosshard, Mr.
Darin Bissoondatt, Mr. Jeffery Hughes, Mr. Robert Moore, Mr.
William Abington, and Mr. Nirmal Rampersad.

Attending on behalf of the Respondent:

Mr. James Dingemans QC, Mr. John Almeida of Charles Russell, Ms.
Lynette Stephenson SC, Ms. Carol Hernandez, Mr. Adrian Darmanie,
Ms. Anne-Marie Rambara, Mr. Martin Daly and Ms. Maureen ... of
the Government; Mrs. Carol Pilgrim Bristol, Mr. Ulric McNicol, and
Mrs Allison Betancourt of Petrotrin; Mr. Haseeb Ali, Mr. Aleem
Hosein, Mr. Shiraz Rajab, Mr. Robert Stauble, Mr. Rodney Jagai, Mr.
Donald Baldeosingh, Mr. Basdeo Panday, Mr. Stuart Travers and Mr.
Rawden Seagerade.

The following witnesses were examined on behalf of the Claimant:
Mr Frank Wade, Mr James Brock, Mr Darin Bissoondatt, Mr Robert
Moore, Mr William Abington, Mr Jeffrey Hughes, Mr Nirmal
Rampersad, and Mr Eric Bosshard.

The following witnesses were examined on behalf of the Respondent:-
Mr Aleem Hosein, Mr Haseeb Ali, Mrs Carol Pilgrim Bristol, Mr
Shiraz Rajab, Mr Robert Stauble, Mr Donald Baldeosingh, and Mr
Baseo Panday.

46. On 2 and 9 February 2004, respectively, Claimant and Respondent filed post-
hearing memorials. Following an exchange of correspondence in that regard, the Parties

filed a second round of post-hearing submissions on 2 April 2004.

23

47. The Tribunal addressed further questions to the parties on 6 August 2004, which

were responded to in writing by each of the parties on 30 September 2004.

48. Following the hearing, Members of the Tribunal deliberated by various means of
communication and, ultimately, the Tribunal declared the proceeding closed pursuant to
ICSID Arbitration Rule 38(1). The Tribunal has taken into account all pleadings,

documents and testimony in this case.

PART - Ill

4 THE BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION CHARGES AND ALLEGATIONS OF
WRONGDOING - their ultimate withdrawal and filing of the Amended
Claimant’s Memorial dated 16 January, 2004, along with the Claimant’s
Amended Reply also dated 16 January, 2004 - consequential effect on the
claim of FWO against the Respondent.

49. Brief reference has been made above to the allegations of corruption, dishonesty

and wrongdoing advanced (by both sides) in the written pleadings and evidence, and

maintained up to and through the main part of the oral hearings in December 2003 in

Tobago. Further important exchanges in this regard took place between the Tribunal and

the Parties which can be found in the transcripts of the proceedings on 17 December 2003

(Vol.7, pp.2215 and following). In the course of these exchanges, Counsel for the

Claimant, having obtained fresh instructions, indicated that his client would no longer be

basing its Claim on the allegations of corruption, etc."

50. The Tribunal asked for a precise indication of how this change in position would
affect the arguments advanced by the Claimant, and this led in due course to the filing of an
amended version of the Claimant’s Memorial along with an amended version of the
Claimant’s Reply on 16 January 2004. In the Amended Memorial, the Summary of the

Dispute was now re-stated (with deletions) as shown below:

“Summary of the Dispute

1.1 FWO’s claims in this arbitration result from—corraption—and
unlawful conduct by officials of T&T state enterprises. In

+ “We are going to withdraw the allegation and we will ask you not to make a ruling on it. Consider that it
has been withdrawn ...” (Vol. 8, pp. 2482-2494)

24

Hath f, FWO"s fasals pay US$ +H 4ribe In
connection with an oil and gas contract, senior officials of the
T&T state oil and gas company engaged in wrongful conduct
that caused a subsidiary to breach its contractual obligations to
FWO and to violate rights guaranteed to FWO as an investor
under the Bilateral Investment Treaty (“BIT”) between T&T and
the United States. This conduct was part of a plan to avoid the
acknowledged contractual rights of FWO.

In February 2000, Trinmar invited FWO to participate in a
competitive tender for a contract to redevelop the state owned
Southwest and West Soldado oil and gas fields (the “Soldado
Fields” or the “Fields”), located in the territorial waters of T&T.
Trinmar is a subsidiary of the state oil and gas company,
Petrotrin, and is charged with the management of T&T’s
offshore oil and gas resources. Petrotrin and Trinmar are state
enterprises of T&T and act on behalf of the state in oil and gas
matters. The bid process was subject to express and implied
terms governing the evaluation of the bids and the eventual
award of a contract for the project (the “Tender Contract”).

FWO’s proposal was assessed in a detailed nine-month
evaluation process, supervised by independent auditors. On 20
September 2000, Trinmar formally awarded FWO the contract
for the Soldado Fields, FWO’s proposed capital commitment to
the project was in excess of US$60 million.

During the negotiations however, and without FWO’s
knowledge, certain T&T officials, hoping+e—benefit_personally
fromthe—Frinmar-project, had embarked on a course of conduct
that would ultimately cause Trinmar wrongfully to withdraw the
award of the contract.

In July 2000, Se
icials a US$1.5 million bribe was demanded and
threatened threats were made to block FWO’s proposals unless
the bribe was paid. FWO refused. Fhey—ater-eaused-a A fax
was then sent to FWO listing a Cayman Island bank account and
demanding that US$200,000 be deposited into the account as the
first payment on a bribe. FWO again refused. Following this
T&T Fhe—officials, then commenced a _ campaign of
disinformation designed to force FWO’s removal as the
successful bidder and abused their oversight positions in
Petrotrin and the T&T government to block Trinmar from
proceeding with the award. These officials ultimately caused
Trinmar to withdraw the award in February 2001.

 

25

1.6 Finally, in June 2001, T&T submitted the Project to a new
tender. In breach of its contractual obligations and duties of
good faith and confidence to FWO, T&T modelled its new tender
on FWO’s confidential business plans and economic models.

1.7 By its conduct, T&T has breached its agreements with FWO and
its obligations under T&T law, the BIT and international law,
and has caused FWO substantial damage and loss. _FWO
respectfully requests that it be awarded compensation for its lost
profits and wasted costs.”

51. In January 2004, the Respondent submitted a Closing Skeleton Argument in which

it was stated inter alia as follows:

“4. The claims in relation to corruption made by the Claimant, which
were the principal claims made by the Claimant (as appears from
its summary of claims), completely failed. So complete was the
failure that the Claimant itself permitted its lawyers to withdraw
the allegations. These were not allegations which were made
only in the Memorial. They were repeated in the Reply (at pages
2-3 and 24-25). They were claims which should not have been
made or pursued.”

“20. The Claimant’s case on corruption had failed completely at the
oral hearing. The Claimant announced on Monday 16 December
(page 1672) that it was withdrawing the allegations against
William Chaitan (paragraph 3.80 of the Claimant’s Memorial)
and has done so. The Claimant announced at the beginning of
the afternoon session on 18 December 2000 that it was
withdrawing its remaining allegations of corruption. It was
understood that this included all of the allegations against Donald
Baldeosingh.

 

21. The Amended Claimant’s Memorial dated 16th January, 2004
does not achieve the purpose of withdrawing the wrongful
allegations made and appears to make a new and distinct case.

22. The Claimant’s continuing attempts to salvage something from
its allegations of corruption appear from its letter dated 14
January 2004 to the Secretary stating the Claimant maintains its
allegations that it received a request for a payment which it
considers improper... this remains relevant to Claimant’s claim
under the protection and security guarantee of the relevant
treaty’. In the circumstances the State respectfully submits that
the Claimant ought to have permission to make the deletions

26

from its memorial but should not have permission to make any
additions to the Memorial.

23. Further the State respectfully submits that the Claimant’s attempt
to rely on the allegation of bribery (in respect of the protection
and security guarantee) should not be permitted. This case was
not developed at the hearing. In any event the new case cannot
be sustained. ...”
52. The relevant portion of the Claimant's letter dated 14 January 2004 to the Secretary
of the Tribunal (mentioned in para 22 of the Respondent’s Closing Skeleton Arguments)

quoted above reads as follows:

“The Tribunal will note that that Claimant maintains its allegations
that it received a request for a payment which it considers to have been
improper — although it no longer alleges that the request came from an

official of the Respondent — and that it reported this request to the then

Prime Minister on two separate occasions. This remains relevant to

the Claimant’s claim under the full protection and security guarantee

of the relevant treaty.” (Emphasis supplied).
53. In short, there remains a significant degree of disagreement between the Parties as
to how completely the Claimant has withdrawn these allegations, or whether (as the
Respondent would have it) the Claimant is trying to rescue something from allegations
supposed to have been withdrawn. The Tribunal was thus left in a situation which it has
found to be extremely unsatisfactory, even though, in the event, it proved unnecessary (in
the light of the conclusions recorded below) for the Tribunal to express any view either as
to whether these allegations had been withdrawn or not, or indeed any view on the
substance of the allegations themselves. The consequences of this uncomfortable state of

affairs are spelled out in more detail in paragraphs 210-212 below.

5 THE RELEVANT FACTUAL ASPECTS OF THE CASE AS THEY HAVE
UNFOLDED:

The Soldado Fields - their Development, Ownership and Control - the
relationship of the State of Trinidad and Tobago with the two corporate
entities, Petrotrin and Trinmar

54. The West and Southwest Soldado Fields (hereafter “the Soldado Fields’) — located

offshore of Trinidad — encompass an area of approximately 67,000 acres and lie in shallow

27

waters of less than 100 feet: they are bounded on the west and south by the
Venezuela/Trinidad maritime boundary, to the north by Trinmar’s North Soldado Field and
east by the coastline of the south-western peninsula of Trinidad. The Southwest Soldado
Field was discovered in 1982 with the successful completion of well $.352. The erstwhile
Colony of Trinidad and Tobago had granted a mining lease No. 1038/53 dated 6 November
1952, to a company incorporated in England and Wales known as Trinidad Northern Areas

Ltd. (“TNAL”); this mining lease included the Soldado Fields.

55. From 1982 up to December 1999 a total of 78 wells had been drilled with the
majority of development taking place in the main southwest area; the well facilities in the
field comprised 9 well protector platforms (known as clusters, each with nine well slots)
and 9 other single well structures. The Field utilized gas lift as the primary means of
artificial lift and facilities. Until May 1999, all production in the Soldado Fields was routed
to a central offshore processing station BS-25 that also housed the gas lift and gas sales
compression equipment. BS-25 was taken out of service in early 1999 resulting in a
decrease in production of approximately 4000 BOPD; in or about May 1999 BS-25 was
completely shut down because of structural problems* and by December 1999, the
production from the Southwest field was limited to only seven flowing wells that were

processed at facilities in the Main Field approximately ten miles away.

56. When Trinidad and Tobago became a Republic on 31 August 1962, the entire
Soldado Fields stood vested in the State pursuant to the provisions of Section 3 of the
Petroleum Act 1969. The exploitation of all gas reserves, including the Soldado Fields, had

been delegated by Acts of Parliament to the national Petroleum Company, Petrotrin.°

57. By a written agreement dated 1 August 1960 three companies viz. Texaco Trinidad
Inc, Shell Trinidad Limited and BP (Trinidad) Limited, who had acquired rights to drill for
oil and gas from TNAL, agreed to incorporate a limited liability company — Trinmar — to
explore, develop and conduct operations in the mining area. Trinmar was duly incorporated

as a limited liability company on 7 February 1962 with a share capital of $W.I. 1,500.”

5 Later in February 2000 it was converted into in a Pipeline Manifold.
° Sections 3 and 4 of the National Petroleum Act, 1969; Petrotrin Vesting Act, 1993.
7 RAD Vol - J/A/3.

28

The shareholding of Trinmar was divided on an equal basis between the three companies.

The main object of Trinmar was stated to be:

“(a) To carry on in all its branches the business of exploring and
prospecting for, producing, refining, storing, transporting, supplying,
selling and distributing petroleum and other oils and any products
thereof”.

58. The State issued in favour of Trinmar an Exploration and Production Licence in

respect of the West and Southwest Soldado Fields, the term of which was to expire in 2012.

59. The Trinidad and Tobago Oil Company (“Trintoc”), and the Trinidad and Tobago
Petroleum Company Limited, (“Trintopec”) became the successors-in-title of Shell
Trinidad Limited and BP (Trinidad) Limited respectively. Later, the assets of Trintoc and
Trintopec were vested in the National Petroleum Company, Petrotrin, pursuant to the
Petrotrin Vesting Act 1993. Petrotrin thus became the owner of two thirds of the issued
share capital of Trinmar, and Textrin remained the owner of one third of the issued capital
of Trinmar.’ The Minister of Finance acted as Corporation Sole for Petrotrin pursuant to

the provisions of the Minister of Finance (Incorporation) Act, Chapter 69:03.

60. On 21 July 1993 Petrotrin was incorporated under the provisions of the Companies
Ordinance Chapter 31 No. 1 as a company limited by shares with the object of acquiring
and taking over the undertakings of Trintoc and Trintopec with a view to acquiring all or
any of the shares, assets, debts and liabilities of those companies.” The subscriber to the
Memorandum of Association of Petrotrin was a representative of the Ministry of Finance
(one hundred shares) along with two officials of Government holding one share each.'°
Petrotrin thus became the owner of two-thirds of the issued share capital of Trinmar, and
Textrin remained the owner of the remaining one-third of the issued share capital in

Trinmar. At all relevant times Petrotrin and Trinmar had their own respective Board of

* Textrin was a separate (USA) corporate entity not alleged to be nor shown to be controlled by the State.
Trinmar became wholly owned by Petrotrin (wholly owned State enterprise) only from October 2000 when
the latter bought out Textrin’s interest in Trinmar.

° See RAD/Vol-I/A/1.

"© See RAD/Vol-I/A/1.

29

Directors “who were responsible for acting in the best interests of the respective

companies”. "

6 FACTS AND EVENTS: CONCERNING THE AWARD OF THE TENDER
FOR THE EXPLOITATION OF THE SOLDADO FIELDS TO FWO AND
ULTIMATE WITHDRAWAL FROM NEGOTIATIONS BY LETTER OF 20
FEBRUARY 2001.

6l. In or about July 1999 FWO developed an “informal understanding” with Lexicon

Inc (“Lexicon”), a Delaware Corporation, to co-operate in developing and exploring

potential for oil and gas projects in Trinidad and Tobago. What is described as an

“informal understanding” apparently never came to fruition and is of no relevance to the

questions that fall for decision in this case or on the alleged liability of the Respondent.

Hence the story of the development of this relationship (although covered in some detail in

the evidence presented to the Tribunal) will be omitted from this Award in the interests of

brevity.

62. It is also the Claimant’s case — not disputed by the Respondent — that Lexicon had
introduced FWO to representatives of Millennium Energy Industries Ltd. (MED), a local
business contact in Trinidad and Tobago, and had arranged a number of introductory
business meetings for FWO and Lexicon — with the Management of Trinmar, the
Management of Petrotrin, the Prime Minister (Mr. Basdeo Panday) and the Minister of
Energy (Mr. Finbar Gangar). Following its meeting with Trinmar, FWO also met with the
President of Petrotrin (Rodney Jagai) and a number of other members of the Petrotrin
Board. Petrotrin explained the nature of relations between the Government, Petrotrin and
Trinmar. According to the Claimant, during this meeting (in July 1999) FWO and Petrotrin
discussed the Soldado Field project and “Petrotrin indicated that it was ultimately
responsible for all oil and gas projects, (but) it directed FWO to work directly with

Trinmar”.'? And FWO did work with Trinmar as instructed.
63. It appears from the correspondence that FWO entered into a Confidentiality

Agreement with Trinmar on 7 October 1999, and the FWO team of Engineers reviewed the

'' Para 16 of Respondent’s Counter Memorial Vol 1.
”? Paras 3.7 to 3.9 (Factual Background) — Claimants Memorial Vol.1.

30

data of South and Southwest Solado Fields project;'* on 1 December 1999, FWO presented
two proposals to Trinmar which contemplated an assignment to FWO of a 100% mineral

interest in Soldado Fields.'*

64. But later in the month Trinmar decided to submit the Project to a public tender
process; this was stated to be at the direction of the Minister of Energy, for “transparency
reasons”.'° Requests for proposals (“RFP”) were issued to nine contractors, the RFP being
issued in accordance with Trinmar’s Contracting Procedures Manual.'® On 23 December
1999, Trinmar specifically invited FWO to tender for the contract to redevelop the Soldado
Fields.'”

65. The RFP stated that Trinmar had 100% ownership in the West and Southwest
Soldado Fields, and that its Exploration and Production Licences would terminate in the
year 2012; that Trinmar could not be responsible for any costs and expenses incurred by
any Bidder in connection with the preparation, submission and presentation of bid
proposals; that upon evaluation, Bidders may be required to present their proposals to
Trinmar, after which the successful bidder “shall be notified in writing of acceptance of its

bid” and that “the formal contract shall be executed thereafter”.

66. Information that was to accompany the Bid included “any technical or commercial
proposals, which Bidder feels can be mutually beneficial to Bidder and Trinmar”; in the
form of tender it was provided that the minimum work programme (MWP) should include
activities to achieve the Year | obligatory targets and other such activities to develop the
fields to their maximum potential — the MWP being the firm commitment of the Bidder for
each year; it was stipulated that costs should provide for capital and investment activities as
well as operating and general administrative activities with each element being separately
identified; there was also a requirement for Bidder’s financial standing and methods of

financing; the extended date for submission of bids for this tender was 8 February 2000.

'8 See Claimant’s Vol.IIC-4, pages 7 to-9.

'4 See Claimant’s Vol.IIC-5 Pages 36 to 37 (proposed commercial terms).
'S See message dated 6 December 1999 from Winston Millet, General Manager of Trinmar (C0006).
'© Exhibit 94 RAD Vol.3.

" See Trinmar letter dated 23 December 1999 Claimant's Documents Vol-2, C8, pages 43 to 50.

 

31

67. On the stipulated date FWO submitted its bid, in which it stated that if it was
adjudicated the winning bidder it or one of its affiliates would be the party to the
Agreement, as defined in Section 12, to be negotiated with Trinmar. To emphasize FWO’s
interest and commitment to complete the project in a timely and successful manner it was
also stated that FWO had purchased an exclusive option on a jacket and deck (the
“Platform Option”) specifically to be utilized to replace BS-25; FWO indicated its
willingness to commit capital to enable it to meet the schedule of Obligatory Targets of the
Minimum Work Programme contained in the Tender; and that, notwithstanding the
minimum commitment as stated in the Tender, FWO would endeavour to accelerate the
schedule (when practical from a business perspective) and obtain the Obligatory Targets in
the shortest possible time; FWO urged for an early decision and finalization of the
Agreement to take advantage of the Platform Option, the term of which would currently

expire on 15 March 2000.

68. In the Technical and Financial Proposals, whilst setting out the Minimum Work

Programme, FWO made it clear that

“FWO’s Tender is made on the condition that if accepted FWO shall
be obligated to Trinmar only upon the entry into force of a definitive
written agreement between FWO and Trinmar (the “Agreement”).”

69. It was further stipulated by FWO that:

“The Agreement shall contain a definition of the Effective Date which
shall mean the last of the date on which F-W Oil receives approval
from Trinmar, the Honourable Mr. Finbar Gangar, Minister of Energy
and Energy Ministries, the Honourable Mr. ANR Robinson, the
President of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago and the date of the
final agreements, licences, authorizations and or approvals required for
it to perform operations under the Agreement, (the “Effective Date’’).”

70. Under the head “Method of Financing” it was stipulated by FWO that:

“1.2 Method of Financing

“The MWP will be financed 100% by F-W Oil through a combination
of shareholder equity and debt funding, cash generated from
operations and external loans, if necessary. Mr. Frank Wade is the
principal shareholder in F-W Oil. Attached as Exhibit 1.2(a) is a letter

32

from Morgan Stanley Dean Witter, a large financial institution with
whom Mr. Wade conducts a portion of his investment business,
referencing Mr. Wade’s character and financial wherewithal.”
71. In a letter of 15 February 2000, Textrin expressed its concern with respect to the
bidding process started by Trinmar on the ground that Trinmar had no authority to request
such bids, and that permission to invite offers had not been requested nor granted by the

Trinmar Board of Directors.'*

72. The Chairman of Trinmar, Gordon Bartlett, thereupon wrote to Trinmar’s principal
shareholder, Petrotrin, on 18 February 2000, drawing attention to Textrin’s concerns, and
suggesting that the Chairman of Petrotrin should communicate specific instructions to
withdraw the bidding process for the West and Southwest Soldado Fields “given Textrin’s
concerns”. The true background, as appears from the letter, was not however Textrin’s
concerns, but that negotiations were then in train between the Government of Trinidad and
Tobago and Texaco for the purchase of Textrin’s one-third shareholding in Trinmar; the
fear was that any release of information would greatly compromise the position of Petrotrin
(and by extension the Government) in respect of a final market valuation of the

shareholding.

73. At a meeting of his Board on 8 March 2000, the Chairman of Petrotrin, Donald
Baldeosingh, stated that as far back as July 1999, the Board meeting of Textrin gave the
Trinmar Board the requisite decision-making authority — and in any case the Board had
regularised the situation in the November 1999 Meeting by directing Management to issue
the RFP which was subsequently issued and responses obtained. '° He stated however that
given Textrin’s position on the unauthorised nature of the bid process and the fact that the
proposed sale of its one third interest contemplated an effective date of 1 January 2000,

“Petrotrin would not object to terminating Trinmar’s involvement in the matter”(sic).
74. Despite these developments, the General Manager of Trinmar wrote to FWO on 9

June 2000:7°

'8 See Respondent's additional documents, Vol. 2, Exh. 54.
' See Respondent’s Additional Document Vol. 2/E/55.
2° See Claimant’s Documents Vol. 2 Exhibit 13 p. 269.

33

“Your proposal has been shortlisted for further consideration and in

order to continue with the evaluation process we request that you make

formal presentations to the Company”.
75. Trinmar must have written similarly to the other bidders, because FWO (along with
other shortlisted bidders) made a presentation to the Evaluation Committee on 19 June
2000. The Evaluation Committee consisted of representatives of Trinmar and Texaco and
of Ernst and Young”! (the latter had been engaged to evaluate the bids and short-list the
bidders). According to Haseeb Ali, the representative of Trinmar on the Committee, it was
made clear to the bidders at this presentation on 20 June 2000, that Trinmar would not be in

a position to sub-licence the Soldado fields as part of the project.”

76. On 20 June 2000, Mr. Jagai of Petrotrin wrote again to Mr. Millet of Trinmar,
confirming “our recent telephone conversation in which I reminded you that Petrotrin had
requested that this project be suspended pending the sale of Texaco’s interest”, and that
accordingly “no decision to award should be made unless the approval of the parties is
sought first and obtained”.”> The objections voiced by each of the shareholders of Trinmar
were not treated by Trinmar as putting the bid process on hold altogether, because Mr.
Millett wrote once again on 23 June 2000 to inform FWO that “as you are aware” Trinmar
has further “short listed the two highest ranked bidders”, but then requested that FWO
“reformat” its bid proposals in accordance with guidelines set out in the letter;* the

guidelines were to the effect that

“Trinmar could NOT award any licence to any Bidder for the
Southwest and West Fields;

The successful bidder would be acting as a Service Contractor to
Trinmar with the Bidder being responsible for providing all the
expenses (capital for infrastructure as well as operating expenses)
associated with the rehabilitation and development of the field

The period of the intended service contract would run to the year 2012,
when Trinmar’s licence expired.” [Emphasis added]

*! At the meeting of the Operating Committee of Trinmar on 10 February 2000 it was recorded that after
discussion between the Ministry of Energy and Energy Industries and the Chairman it was agreed that the
evaluation of the bids be undertaken by Ernst and Young.

> See para 24 of the Witness Statement of Haseeb Ali — for the Respondent.

°3 See Respondent's additional documents, Vol.1 Exhibit 39.

*4 See Respondent's additional documents, Vol. 1 Exhibit 40

  

34

77. These guidelines were very substantially different from FWO’s original proposal;
FWO would no longer own mineral rights and the income stream would become a series of
fee payments: under FWO’s original proposals FWO would have been assigned the licence
and ownership of all hydrocarbons accruing to the company. According to the guidelines
FWO would instead have to provide plant, equipment, finance and operation of the project
and be repaid out of the project cash flow; FWO was not expected to fund all capital and
operating costs, whilst Trinmar was entitled to the oil and gas recovered, and required to

pay FWO a fee on a per barrel basis.

78. Meanwhile on the same date Mr. Baldeosingh of Petrotrin was writing to Mr.

Bartlett of Trinmar in the following terms:”°

“T shall appreciate it if you can, as a matter of urgency, indicate the
reason(s) why, notwithstanding your knowledge of Textrin’s serious
concerns and Petrotrin’s desire to suspend the bid process, Trinmar has
re-commenced the process. Kindly also provide details on the precise
nature of the meeting currently being held with bidders and the
procedure Trinmar proposes to follow to complete the bid process
inclusive of shareholder approval.

As I am due to leave the country tomorrow kindly copy your response
to Petrotrin’s President so that he can apprise me of same while I am
away.

I look forward to your prompt response.”
Mr. Bartlett replied at length on 26 June 2000, stating inter alia:”°
that he “obtained the concurrence of the Hon’ble Minister to
proceed, especially in the light of the need to maximise the

value of all Trinmar’s assets with a focus on the narrow
window of high oil prices”.

He pointed out moreover, that the Minister had expressed his grave concern that Trinmar’s
negligence in allowing BS-25 to deteriorate to a point where it had to be decommissioned
had been exacerbated by the inability to get it restarted thereby severely impacting upon the

State’s revenues.

°5 See Respondent's Additional Documents, Vol. 2 Exhibit 56
?6(See Respondents Additional Document Vol.2 Exhibit 57.

35

79. Thereafter between 26 and 30 June 2000, a team comprising Messrs. Rajab and
Haseeb Ali of Trinmar and Niranjan of Ernst and Young visited the facilities of FWO in
Houston and Aventura in Calgary (Aventura being the second highest bidder) “in order to
ensure themselves that the bidders had the technical and financial capacity to handle a

project of this scope and size.”?”

In June 2000 a report was prepared by Mr. Niranjan
which concluded that FWO was recommended over Aventura to handle the Soldado

project.

80. On 5 July 2000 Mr Baldeosingh returned to the charge in strong terms, taking
particular exception to Trinmar’s having sought the support of the Minister, and threatening

a cleanout of the Trinmar Board.”*

81. Meanwhile, on the same day, FWO responded to Trinmar’s request to “reformat”
its proposals, and covering, amongst other matters, the visit to Houston, the jacket and

deck, and an update of project financing.

82. At this stage the Minister (Mr. Gangar) stepped in once again, in a “private and
confidential” communication of 13 July, to reprimand Messrs Baldeosingh and Bartlett
over their internal bickering and to “instruct” both Petrotrin and Trinmar to continue with

the Soldado Fields Bid Process.

83. The next twist in the tale was a private and confidential letter of 18 July from the
Minister to Mr. Bartlett of Trinmar forwarding an extract from Platt’s Oilgram News”
which in his view “cast very serious doubts as to the propriety” of having Mr. Wade of
FWO as a potential contractor on the Soldado Project.*° Bartlett was instructed to arrange
for a forensic firm (“maybe Kroll who had done work for Petrotrin”) to do a detailed check

and requested that the matter be treated in the strictest confidence.*!

27 See para. 28 of Haseeb Ali’s Statement. See Respondent's Statements and Report Vol.-B Exhibit-I.
°8 Respondent's Additional Document Vol.2, Exhibit 58.

?° Respondent's Additional Documents Vol-2 Exhibit 64.

°° Who passed this extract to the Minister remains a mystery. It is not impossible that it was a member of the
public, as the proposed award of the Project was already being criticised in Trinidad & Tobago. Mr. Gangar
himself declined to appear to give evidence before the Tribunal.

*! Letter dated 18 July 2000; See Respondent's Additional Document Vol.2 Exhibit 64.

 

     

36

84. As with the corruption allegations levelled by the Claimant in this Arbitration®”, the
Tribunal does not believe that any purpose would be served by repeating the detail of the
allegations against Mr. Wade. Suffice it to say for present purposes firstly that the fact that
the allegations had been repeated came to the knowledge of FWO, whose President (Jim
Brock) wrote to Mr. Bartlett on 23 August 2000 offering to meet with Trinmar to set the
matter to rest, and secondly that Trinmar does appear to have set in train an investigation
through Kroll Associates, as required by the Minister. On 31 August 2000, FWO’s
representative met with Trinmar’s representatives who reassured FWO that the Kroll

investigation had resolved all doubts.*4

85. By 4 September 2000, therefore, Mr. Bartlett of Trinmar was writing to FWO
(“Attention Mr. Frank Wade”), somewhat inexplicably headed “without prejudice”,
thanking him for meeting with the members of the Board of Trinmar and senior

management on 31 August, and stating:

“As discussed at that meeting, Trinmar recognizes the importance of
this project to its operations and is committed to bringing this matter to
an early conclusion. The Company has completed its internal
evaluation which has resulted in F-W Oil Interest, Inc. being ranked
the highest.

The approval process will include external stakeholders and Trinmar is
seeking to expedite this process.

We trust that this will allow you to continue negotiations in good
faith.”
86. A report on the situation then went to the Minister, who held a meeting with all
concerned to discuss it on 7 September 2000. The Tribunal was given in evidence a full
report of the meeting in a Memorandum of 11 September 2000, written by Carol Pilgrim
Bristol, Corporate Secretary/Legal Adviser, Trinmar, who also gave evidence and deposed

to the contents of this Memorandum.

* See paras. 209 to 211 below.

* See Claimants Vol:3 Ex. 18.

* See Respondent's Witness Statements and Reports, Vol-B-Haseeb Ali’s Statement para. 38 page 8.
%5 See Claimant’s Vol-3, Exhibit 19 p-492.

 

  

37

87. On 14 September 2000, at a meeting of the Board of Directors of Trinmar it was

3
resolved.*°

“The Board approved the selection of F-W Oil Interests as the
preferred service contractor to reactivate and develop the Southwest
and West Soldado fields based on their proposal of a lower fee per
barrel of incremental oil produced in the fields. Management_is
authorized to proceed with the way forward in negotiations but_to
revert to the Board before the Letter of Intent is issued to the preferred
service contractor.” (Emphasis supplied)

88. Meanwhile by letter dated 15 September 2000 FWO wrote to the Manager of
Corporate Planning, Trinmar (Haseeb Ali), requesting that an interim agreement be arrived
at between the parties which would provide that, in the event that a definitive agreement
was not concluded within a reasonable period of time, Trinmar (or a person acceptable to
FWO) would pay a sum of money as liquidated damages not exceeding USD$10 million,

as follows:*”

“We have been advised that we will receive today a letter from
Trinmar declaring F-W Oil the successful bidder in accordance with
the Tender, subject to the negotiation and execution of a definitive
agreement. As we have indicated to you, F-W Oil has incurred
substantial expense in connection with its preparation of its bid and
has acquired in advance of the award and definitive agreement a
platform and jacket to be installed in the place of Trinmar’s BS-25.

We would be willing to continue to perform work and acquire
equipment in anticipation of concluding an agreement to carry out the
project but in order to do so, we would need to receive assurances
from Trinmar or another person acceptable to us that we would be
compensated for our anticipatory work in the event that a definitive
agreement cannot be concluded with Trinmar.

Please advise us whether you wish us to continue to perform work
prior to concluding the definitive agreement. If you do, we would like
to work with you to conclude an interim agreement to govern our
relationship. The interim agreement would provide that in the event
the definitive agreement is not concluded within a reasonable period of
time, Trinmar or a person acceptable to F-W Oil would pay within 30
days of receipt of invoice to F-W Oil a sum of money as liquidated

*© See Respondent’s Additional Documents Vol-1 Exhibit 8.
See Claimant's Vol-3, Exhibit 24 p-502.

38

damages and not as a penalty equal to those costs incurred by F-W Oil
in connection with the preparation of its bid and the services and
equipment it has engaged and acquired to advance the development of
the project not to exceed US$10 million.”

89. Meanwhile, on 14 September the Trinmar Board (by majority — with a strong
dissent by Textrin)*® approved FWO as the successful bidder and preferred service

contractor and also approved the Heads of Agreement document.

90. FWO was duly notified that it had been awarded the bid in a letter of 20 September

2000*° from the General Manager of Trinmar (Aleem Hosein) in these terms:*°

“Please be advised that Trinmar Limited hereby declares F-W Oil
Interests, Inc. the successful bidder in captioned Tender No:
99/NO2/129. This award is made subject to the negotiation and
execution of a mutually agreeable operating agreement for the
provision of facilities and services in Trinmar Limited’s West and
Southwest Soldado Fields. We intend to negotiate in good faith and in
an expeditious manner towards the execution of such agreement
between Trinmar Limited and F-W Oil Trinidad, L.L.C.

The operating agreement will incorporate the contractual terms
generally set forth in the attached “Heads of Agreement” together with
other terms and conditions mutually acceptable to the parties found in
transactions of this nature.*!

Trinmar is in receipt of letter dated 2000 September 15 and undertakes
to request of its Shareholders a guarantee or other form of security
required by F-W Oil to carry out this project. Trinmar makes no
guarantees as to the provision of this security. We look forward to
working with you.”?

*8 See Minutes of Meeting of 14-09-2000 Trinmar Board. See RASD Vol-3/8.

** The Tribunal was offered no explanation of the delay between the decision of the Board and the issue of the

Award Letter.

*° See Claimant's Vol-3 Exhibit 27 Page 518.

“' The attached Heads of Agreement is headed: “SUBJECT TO NEGOTIATION AND EXECUTION OF A

DEFINITIVE OPERATING AGREEMENT”.

With respect to this important communication, it is stated in the Respondent’s Counter Memorial (para 20)

as follows:
“By letter dated 20th September 2000 Trinmar informed the Claimant that it was the successful
bidder ‘subject to the negotiation and execution of a mutually agreeable operating agreement’. It is
denied that the contract was thereby awarded to the Claimant. There were outstanding issues to be
agreed including the issue about whether or not Petrotrin should provide a guarantee for payments
due to the Claimant under any proposed contract. An operating agreement was never finalized and
executed.

 

 

39

On the same day, Trinmar wrote another letter to FWO as follows:

91.

“Reference is made to your letter of 2000 September 15 wherein you
requested inter alia assurances from Trinmar before proceeding further
on the captioned Tender.

As you are aware Trinmar has today issued to F-W Oil Interest Inc.,
under separate cover, a letter of intent together with Heads of
Agreement. Further as per your other request as stated in another
letter of 2000 September 15, Trinmar has sought from _ its
Shareholders, a guarantee or other form of security to satisfy the
requirements of the Lenders.

As indicated in our letter of intent of even date, Trinmar makes no
guarantee as to the provision of this security, and awaits a decision of
its Shareholders.

Please note further that Trinmar does not hold itself liable for any costs
or expenditure incurred by F-W Oil Interests prior to the execution of a

contract on this tender.

Trinmar followed up on 22 September 2000 by writing to both its shareholders,

Petrotrin and Textrin, seeking the guarantee requested by FWO, in these terms:

“The Board of Directors of Trinmar Limited, by majority decision, has
approved the selection of F-W Oil Interest as the preferred Service
Contractor to reactivate and develop the Southwest and 30 November
2005 West Soldado fields based on their proposal of a lower fee per
barrel of incremental oil produced in the fields. A copy of the letter of
intent together with the Heads of Agreement is attached (see
Attachment 1).

FW Oil has advised Trinmar that in order to obtain financing for this
project, their lenders will require F-W Oil to obtain and maintain
during the term of the agreement, a guarantee or other form of security
interest in form and substance acceptable to the lenders to secure
payment to F-W Oil under the contract. Under the subject
arrangement, Trinmar is required to initiate such request.

 

Thereafter, according to the evidence of Haseeb Ali (of Trinmar):

 
 

“In anticipation of negotiations for concluding a definitive Operating Agreement, and because we
had not previously entered into a contract of this nature, namely a Risk Service Contract, I sought
assistance for the provision of legal and technical services from the US law firm of Baker and
McKenzie as well as Gaffney Cline and Associates, a US firm of management and technical advisors
to the petroleum industry. I also sought to begin the process of due diligence through Dun and
Bradstreet, an international firm of financial consultants. However, this exercise was not pursued,
because the negotiation for an operating Agreement was not initiated.” (Witness Statement of
Haseeb Ali paras 49 and 50).

 

   

 

40

As part of its evaluation, Trinmar contracted with Kroll Associates to
carry out a “due diligence” search on F-W Oil Interest. The company
did not find any evidence of wrongdoing. Attached is a legal opinion
by our Corporate Secretary/Legal Adviser, on the findings of the Kroll
report. (see Attachment 2).

Since the closure of Block Station 25 in 1999 May, #3,500 BOPD of
artificial lift production has been ‘lost’. The value of this ‘lost’
production to date is of the order of $TT200 million at current oil
prices. Early reactivation of the Southwest and West Soldado Fields is
therefore an urgent priority.

Kindly advise whether the Parties as Shareholders will provide such
guarantee. Suggested forms of guarantee as attached have been
supplied by F-W Oil Interests. (See Attachment 3). Kindly advise
whether further information is required in order to accede to this
request.

We await your response since this is critical to the conclusion of the
arrangement between Trinmar and F-W Oil.

Also attached for your information is a summary report of the
Technical and commercial Justification of the Project. (See
Attachment 4.4
92. On 11 October 2000, Trinmar informed FWO of the sale of Textrin’s shareholding
to Petrotrin, indicating that a response was still awaited from the Shareholders (now

reduced of course to Petrotrin alone) on the guarantee or security that had been requested."

93. On 20 October 2000, FWO wrote to Trinmar again urging the latter to resolve any
outstanding issues it may have with its Shareholder “in order that we may initiate and
complete as soon as possible negotiations of the contract that will permit us to start

work”.*°

94. On 27 October 2000, Haseeb Ali prepared a report for the Chairman of Trinmar

concerning the Reactivation of the Soldado Fields;*° Mr. Ali stated in his evidence*’ that

43 See Respondent Additional Document Vol 2, Exhibit 70.

# See Claimant's Vol. 3 Exhibit 29 page 535- confirmed in Haseeb Ali’s Respondent Witness Statement
Vol.-b PARA 81.

*5 (Volume III Exhibit 30 page 537) — This letter was not replied to by Trinmar till 26-02-2001 (Claimant's
Documents Vol..3-Exh. 42 page 582).

46 See Claimant's Documents Vol.-3 C031 page 452 at p.544.

* Para. 54.

41

he presented the contents of this Report to the Minister of Energy (now Senator Lindsay
Gillette). According to FWO,"* Trinmar made a presentation to the directors of Petrotrin
concerning the reactivation of the Soldado Fields, the purpose being to inform Petrotrin of
the nature of the agreement reached with FWO and to obtain “a guarantee or other form of
security interest that is required by the successful bidder to carry out the reactivation of the
Southwest and West Soldado Fields”. However no progress was made. At a Special
Meeting of the Board of Directors of Trinmar on 9 November,” the General Manager,
Aleem Hosein, informed the Board that by a letter dated 2 November Petrotrin had

specified that:

‘a. Trinmar is to go out on the open market for a Risk Service
Contract using a two-envelope system, starting all over and
giving up all potential bidders full details of what is required In
the Scope of Works.

b. That an independent audit on the bid process be conducted in
consultation with Trinmar’s Management.”

95. But in view of Trinmar’s Letter of Award to FWO the Board directed that Trinmar
ascertain the exposure to the Company, both legal and financial, before proceeding further,
and the General Manager indicated that Petrotrin had requested that a forensic audit be

undertaken inter alia on the letter of intent to FWO.

96. On 8 December 2000, Mr. Brock of FWO wrote again to Mr. Hosein of Trinmar as

follows:

“We refer to your letter dated September 20, 2000, in which you
declared F-W Oil Interests. Inc. the successful bidder under the Tender
and the last item of correspondence we have received from you, your
letter dated October 11, 2000. In this latest letter you advised us that
your parent, Petroleum Company of Trinidad and Tobago (‘“Petrotrin’’)
had acquired the remaining one-third interest in Trinmar Limited
(‘Trinmar”) from Texaco Tinidad Inc. You also informed us that
consistent with your undertaking to do so, you had requested on

“8 Para 3.64 of the Claimant's Memorial.

* See Respondent’s Additional Documents Volume -1 part 8 of Exch 8 (Minutes of Board Meeting of
Trinmar held on 9th November 2000).

*° Minutes of Trinmar Board meeting on 9-11-2000, RAD Vol-I/B/8. At the same meeting, Director Chaitan
indicated that in the light of information that had come to his attention since the decision (re Letter of Award
to FWO), he reversed his decision to authorise the company to progress on the project.

42

September 22, 2000, of your shareholder a guarantee of form of
security for the contract under the Tender.

We are aware that developments in the makeup of the boards of
directors of both Trinmar and Petrotrin have made it difficult for
Trinmar to follow up on its agreement to continue our ongoing
negotiations of the Agreement contemplated in the Tender which were
initiated during the week of September 11, 2000, in Point Fortin.
Although we agreed with your staff that we would continue our
meetings during the week of September 25, 2000, we understand that
because of Trinmar’s organizational uncertainties resulting from its
unsettled relations with its shareholder, Petrotrin, it has not been
possible for Trinmar to return to negotiations on our agreement. As
requested by your project team, however, we have completed a revised
draft of the Operating and Services Agreement, to take into account
the matters negotiated and agreed to in principle in the Heads of
Agreement to the above referenced September 20th award letter. We
are prepared to forward this revised document to your management
team for their review and final comments as soon as you deem
appropriate.”*!

FWO wrote a further letter on 12 January 2001 to Trinmar stating that:

“Accordingly, we have requested that you indicate to us by return
letter no later than January 22 2001, if possible, when we should be
prepared to meet to finalize negations of the definitive agreement
between our companies.”

In its response (dated 2 February 2001)*> Trinmar acknowledged receipt and stated that
“this matter is still receiving the attention of our shareholder and the Board of Trinmar

Limited.”

97. Thereafter, armed with the opinion of counsel, Trinmar informed FWO by letter

dated 25 February 2001°° of its withdrawal from the negotiations, in these terms:

*! See Claimant's Vol.-III — Exch. C036 — Page 573.

* See Claimant's Vol-3 Exhibit-40 pages 549-580.

® See Claimant's Vol-3 Exhibit — 41 page 581.

** It is apparent from the Minutes of the Board Meeting that Trinmar was seeking legal advice as to whether
Trinmar or Petrotrin would be subject to liability in law if the award to FWO was not pursued. This Iso
corroborated by the letter from Petrotrin to Trinmar of 8th January, 2001, Claimant’s Col.2 Exhibit 39 at page
578. Ultimately it appears that after receiving counsel’s opinion the letter of February 26, 2001 was
addressed (See Minutes of Board of Trinmar of 16th February, 2001 — Respondent's Additional Document
Volume 2 part of Exhibit -8).

     

43

“We refer to your letters 2000 October 20 and December 08 and 2001
and January 12.

As you are aware Trinmar is now wholly owned by Petrotrin. We
regret to advise that our shareholder has not acceded to our request for
a guarantee or other form of security for the proposed contract.

You have indicated that this support was to be made available so as to
enable the conclusion of an agreement for this project. Indeed you
were requiring the guarantee even before our letter of 2000 September
20 notifying that you were the successful bidder. Further as you are
aware the award was made subject to the negotiation and execution of
a mutually agreed contract and Trinmar does not hold itself liable for
any costs and expenditure incurred by F.W. Oil Interests prior to the
execution of a contract on the tender.

 

In light of the above Trinmar hereby notifies you that it has withdrawn
from the negotiations and is reconsidering its position on the project.”
98. Following the receipt of this letter, FWO made various attempts to have the

decision withdrawn by Trinmar, or countermanded by the Government.

99. On 19 March 2001, Mr. Brock, FWO’s President and CEO, met with Messrs
Hosein and Ali of Trinmar and Mrs. Pilgrim-Bristol. Later that day he met also with Mr.
Parriag, the newly-appointed Chairman of Petrotrin, and then (together with others) saw the

new Minister of Energy (Senator Gillette).

100. On 26 April 2001, Mr Brock wrote to the Prime Minister in person warning of the
damage that would be done by maintaining the withdrawal of the award from FWO. That
led to a further meeting with the Minister of Energy on 1 May 2001, at which the Minister
explained the current situation and made it plain that, on advice, he had decided to re-
submit the project to a new competitive bidding process, and that FWO would be invited to

participate in it.

 

*5 During the hearing the Claimant's representatives withdrew the allegations (initially made in paragraph of
3.80 Claimant’s Memorial) that the final paragraph in Trinmar’s letter of 26.2.2001 was inserted without
Board Approval by the new Energy Minister William Chaitan acting in his own self interest: in the
circumstances the Tribunal must proceed on the b; that the notification to FWO that Trinmar had
withdrawn from the negotiations and was re-considering his position on the project was made with the
authority of the Board of Directors: See Claimant's Documents Vol-3-C042 page 582.

 

 

 

 

44

101. FWO’s objections to the re-tender were expressed in writing in a letter of 2 May
2001 to Mr Hosein of Trinmar, and in a further letter of 11 May 2001. The reply from
Trinmar, dated 6 June 2001, reiterated the substance of the letter of 25 February, and
enclosed FWO’s Invitation to Bid for the re-tender. FWO thereupon reiterated its
objections, this time in a letter to the Solicitor General of Trinidad and Tobago, and in due

course the Request instituting the present arbitral proceedings was lodged.

7 JURISDICTION

102. In its Counter-Memorial and subsequent pleadings, the Respondent has consistently
declined to agree that its consent to ICSID jurisdiction covers the present dispute. It has
however from an early stage been common ground between the Parties that the disputed
issue of jurisdiction was closely linked to the questions of fact and law that lay at the same
time at the heart of the substantive dispute. At the first session of the Tribunal in London
on 4 October 2002, it was agreed by both Parties (although not formally recorded in the
Minute of the Hearing) that outstanding issues as to jurisdiction would be pleaded together
with the merits, both in the written and the oral phases. The Tribunal considers that to have
been a wise decision; it has found itself of necessity having to consider the questions of

jurisdiction and of substance together, and decide them together.

8 THE JURISDICTION OF THE CENTRE

103. The jurisdiction of the Centre depends upon the terms of the Washington
Convention. As is well known, Article 25(1) of the Convention provides that the
jurisdiction of the Centre extends to “any legal dispute arising directly out of an
investment”; and the dispute must be one between a Contracting State and a national of
another Contracting State, which the parties consent in writing to submit to the Centre. It is
common ground that both the United States of America and Trinidad and Tobago are (and
were at all relevant times) Contracting Parties to the Convention, and that FWO meets the
definition of “national of another Contracting State” contained in Article 25(2)(b) of the
Convention. The consent invoked by the Claimant in these proceedings is that given by the
Respondent through the medium of the BIT, which will be analysed in the next following

section. For the moment, it need only be noted that — the question of consent aside — the

45

three requirements under the Washington Convention are that there must be a legal dispute,
it must relate to an investment, and it must arise directly out of the investment. In the
present case, and irrespective of the merits of the claims brought by FWO, there is no issue
as to whether the dispute over those claims is a legal dispute, or as to whether the claims
arise directly out of the transactions summarised above. The sole issues are as to whether
the claims relate to an “investment” within the meaning of the ICSID Convention and

whether the dispute in this regard is with the State.

104. As is so well known that it needs no further demonstration, the term “investment”,
crucial though it is to the operation of the Centre, is not further defined within the ICSID
Convention, but instead was left, quite deliberately, to be given its content through the
particular agreements reached between Contracting States, and between them and
investors.*° The answer is therefore to be sought in the present case in the terms of the

BIT.”

(a) The Position of the Parties

105. Without reciting the opposing contentions in full, the positions of the Parties on the

question of “investment” can be summarised as follows.

106. The Claimant asserts that its claims arise out of the investments made by it in the
bid process for the Concession, and as a result of the rights afforded by a Tender Contract
between itself and the Respondent and by the BIT (Claimant’s Memorial, para. 5.2), and
invokes in that respect Article IX of the BIT, particularly its paragraph (1). The Claimant

describes the nature of its investment in Trinidad and Tobago as a mixture of frustrated

 

*° Although the Parties’ freedom in that respect is not absolute; for a discussion of the limits, see the decision
of the Tribunal in Joy Mining v Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/11).

* The Tribunal refers to the fact that the Parties appeared, at an early stage in the proceedings, to have been
in dispute over the question whether the BIT had been duly ratified and was therefore in force. The
Respondent's initial argument to that effect was clearly based on a serious of mistake of fact, but was very
properly withdrawn when the true facts were drawn to tention, so that it was not in the event necessary
for the Tribunal to devote its own attention to the point, which therefore deserves no more than a brief
mention, and the Tribunal rests no conclusions on it, except to the extent that it may throw some light on the
question whether those who were (on any view of the matter) acting for the State in the chain of factual
events recited in Section 11 of the Award were conscious, at the time of acting, of the State’s obligations
towards foreign investors under this and similar treaties entered into by it.

   

46

contractual rights, intellectual property and preparatory expenditure. (Claimant’s Memorial,

para. 5.96).

107. The Respondent, while not seeking to deny either the consent given by the State in
the BIT or the power vested in the Tribunal to determine its own jurisdiction, nevertheless
does not concede that its consent extends to the claims advanced by the Claimant. It argues
that there was no dispute arising out of (relating to) an investment, as required by both the
ICSID Convention and the BIT, because there was no investment (“covered investment’)
(Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, para. 158). It characterizes the costs and expenditures
incurred by the Claimant as “‘pre-contract expenditure” which (so it asserts) has been held
not to amount to an investment (Counter-Memorial, para. 168). It argues further that the
dispute is not between the Claimant and State, but rather one which arises in respect of the
actions of Trinmar, Petrotrin or their officials, for which the State is not liable. (Counter-

Memorial, para. 3).

108. In reply, the Claimant asserts that the BIT incorporates a wide and _all-
encompassing notion of “investment”, and asserts further that its investment of time,
money and expertise in the tender process; the performance of agreed work; its contractual
relationship arising under local law as a result of the tender process; and its contribution of
intellectual property each constitute an investment within the meaning of both the

Washington Convention and the BIT. (Claimant’s Reply, para. 2.2).

109. The Respondent answers that the dispute is a purely commercial one and the
Government is not party to it; and that the claims submitted to the Tribunal do not fall
within the concept of investment dispute laid down in the BIT, since they are connected
neither to a “covered investment” nor to an “investment agreement” or “investment

authorisation.” (Respondent’s Rejoinder, para. 15).

(b) The Tribunal’s Questions

110. Faced with conflicting contentions of law as well as fact, and with argument on the
meaning and application of the BIT which appeared in some respects to be incomplete, the
Tribunal posed further questions to the parties on 6 August 2004. So far as material to the

present issue, these questions read as follows:-

47

“Please identify with precision the source and content of the rights and
obligations which are the subject-matter of the dispute between FW
Oil Interests and Republic of Trinidad and Tobago.

To the extent that it is contended that these rights and obligations
extend beyond any of those asserted under domestic law, what is their
source and content under international law?

How does the dispute between FW Oil and the Government of
Trinidad and Tobago in the present proceedings relate specifically to
Articles IX(1) and I of the T&T/USA BIT?”
111. Both Parties correctly understood these questions as inviting them, inter alia, to
expand upon the notion of an “investment agreement”, as specifically established by the
terms of Article I(h) of the BIT, and the possible application of that notion to the facts of

this case.

112. The Parties responded in writing on 30 September 2004. The replies from each
Party are of some importance for the disposal of this case, and are therefore set out here in

some detail.

113. The Claimant reiterated that, on the proper construction of the ICSID Convention,
the question of what constituted an “investment” was remitted to what the Contracting
States had agreed upon in the BIT. (Claimant’s Answers, para. 2.9). In the alternative (and
in the event that it was maintained that “investment” had an autonomous meaning under the
Washington Convention) the Claimant argued that the meaning in the Convention was
whether the expenditure incurred contributed to the economic development of the recipient
State — or, more particularly whether the expenditure formed part of an operation the
overall effect of which was to promote the economic development of Trinidad and Tobago.
(Claimant’s Answers, paras. 2.10-15). As regards “investment agreements”, the Claimant
ranked claims in this respect differently from what it termed “International Law Claims”
(i.e., claims arising out of or relating to any alleged breach of any right conferred created or
recognized by the BIT with respect to a covered investment); its assertion was that the BIT
gave the Tribunal an additional jurisdiction over municipal law claims (for example
domestic law breach of contract claims) provided that they arose out of or related to any

“investment agreements.” (Claimant’s Answers, para. 3.2). In sum, the Claimant

48

contended that, inasmuch as the course of conduct described above gave rise to both a
Tender Contract and a Definitive Operating Agreement under the law of Trinidad and
Tobago, both of these legal relationships constituted at the same time “investment
agreements” under the BIT, such that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction extended to any disputes

arising out of them. (Claimant’s Answers, paras. 3.23-24).

114. The Respondent, on the other hand, while denying that on the facts any contract or
agreement came into being with any Trinidad and Tobago party, denied by the same token
that there was an “investment agreement” between the Claimant and the Respondent.

(Respondent’s Answers para. 22).

(c) The Issues

115. The Tribunal accordingly concludes that (questions of breach and its consequences

aside), the principal issues that divide the Parties are:-

(a) whether a contract had come into being between the Claimant
and any of the parties on the Respondent’s side;
(b) whether — in the absence of a contract as in (a) — there could be a
“covered investment” for the purposes of the BIT;
(c) whether — even in the absence of a “covered investment” as in
(b) — there was nevertheless an “investment agreement”, breach
of which would be sufficient to support the claims of the
Claimant.
116. In order to deal with these issues, the Tribunal must first turn to the interpretation of
the BIT itself (issues (b) & (c)), before devoting its attention to what formed the main
portion of the argument and evidence before it, namely whether a contract had come into

existence (issue (a)).

(d) The Interpretation of the BIT

117. | The Tribunal approaches the interpretation of the BIT in accordance with the classic
rules laid down in Articles 31 & 32 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of
1969. This requires the Tribunal to begin with “the ordinary meaning to be given to the
terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose.” (Article 31,

paragraph 1). The remainder of Article 31 defines what is meant by the “context” and

49

specifies other materials to be taken into account, and Article 32 deals with “supplementary

means of interpretation” which may be employed in certain circumstances.

118. In the view of the Tribunal, and in the light of the evidentiary materials presented to
it by the Parties, its task of interpretation can be accomplished by application of the basic
tule cited in the preceding paragraph, without the need for supplementary means. For that
purpose, the Tribunal takes the “object and purpose” of the BIT to be “the encouragement
and reciprocal protection of investment” in their territories, on the basis of a “stable
framework for investment”, as a contribution to “greater economic cooperation between”
the two States, as recited in the sixth, third and first paragraph of the preamble to the BIT.
The BIT, in other words, was conceived as having not just a protective role, but a dynamic

one in encouraging and stimulating future investment.

119. | This is not however to suggest that the Tribunal found the interpretation of the BIT
an entirely simple matter. Its individual provisions are not always harmonious or easy to
follow. In particular, the Tribunal experienced some difficulty with the concept of an

“investment agreement”, as will appear below.

(e) Jurisdiction under the BIT

120. The jurisdiction of the Tribunal is grounded in Article IX of the BIT. Paragraph 4
of Article IX establishes the consent of each State Party to the BIT (in the present case
Trinidad and Tobago, represented by its Government) to the submission of any investment
dispute to binding arbitration at the instance of an investor of the other Party (in the present
case the United States of America), and at the election of such investor pursuant to
paragraph 3. The legal nexus is then completed by Article 25, paragraph 1, of the
Washington Convention, under which “[t]he jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any
legal dispute arising directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State (or any
subdivision or agency of a Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a
national of another Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to

submit to the Centre”.

121. There is no dispute that FWO (assuming it to be an “investor”) qualifies under these

paragraphs and has validly chosen arbitration through ICSID. The crucial questions are

50

rather whether FWO is indeed an “investor”, whether there exists an “investment dispute”
between it and the Government of Trinidad & Tobago, and whether the dispute brought
before the Tribunal is one “which arises directly out of investment in the State”. Although
these can be stated as three questions, in view of the Tribunal they resolve themselves into
one single question, namely whether FWO’s operations in and in relation to the State (i.e.,
those which gave rise to the dispute) did in fact constitute an “investment” within the

meaning of the relevant treaty instruments.

122. The BIT operates principally through the notion of “covered investments”. The
substantive protections laid down in Articles II, If, 1V, V and VI all relate in terms to
“covered investments”, as indeed does the jurisdictional provision in Article IxX.® An
investment is a “covered investment” if it is an investment of a national or company of one
Party in the territory of the other Party. The criterion is not one that gives rise to especial
difficulty in the present case, although circumstances can readily be envisaged in which a
question might arise as to whether an investment is in truth located “in the territory of” the
respondent State. If the Claimant’s expenditures and activities in the present matter do
indeed constitute an “investment”, then the Tribunal has no doubt but that that investment
should be regarded as located in Trinidad and Tobago, especially in the light of the

extended territorial definition given in Article I(I).

123. What, then, constitutes an “investment”? The term is the subject of a long and

particularized definition in Article I(d), as follows:-

“investment’ of a national or company means every kind of

investment owned or controlled directly or indirectly by that national

or company, and includes investment consisting or taking the form of

(I) acompany;

(II) shares, stock, and other forms of equity participation; and bonds,
debentures, and other forms of debt interests, in a company;

(III) contractual rights, such as under turnkey, construction or
management contracts, production or revenue-sharing contracts,
concessions, or other similar contracts;

°8 The word “covered” does not appear in the heading to Article II, but no importance appears to attach to the
omission.

51

(IV) tangible property, including real property; and intangible
property, including rights, such as leases, mortgages, liens and
pledges;

(V)_ intellectual property, including ...;

(VI) rights conferred pursuant to law, such as licenses and permits”.

124. The intention to establish a comprehensive and wide-ranging definition of what is
to constitute an “investment” is plain, and needs no further demonstration.*? The Tribunal
must however decide whether, to bring itself within even so broad a definition of
“investment”, the investor must show the existence of some form of legally enforceable
right, or its equivalent (issue (b) in paragraph 115 above). This is a question that was
debated at some length between the Parties in their written pleadings and in oral argument,
although not at the same length as the debate between them over the underlying question
whether some form of contract had in fact come into existence. The Tribunal believes that
the question as to the existence or not of an “investment”, vital as it is for deciding the case
before it, should not be approached in a narrow technical way, but rather in the context of

the intention animating the BIT and in the light of its terms.

125. Looking at the matter that way, the Tribunal finds that the notion of an
“investment” (“covered investment”), the axis around which the operation of the BIT
revolves, can only realistically be understood as referring to something in the nature of a
legal right or entitlement. This appears clearly enough from the extensively itemized
definition of “investment” in Article I(d) quoted above, each item in which is either a form
of property or is expressed as a “right”. It is admittedly the case that the definition given in
Article I(d) is on its own terms not exhaustive; it is expressed merely to “include” the
forms of investment itemised on the list. The common thread is nevertheless so strong that
the Tribunal is unable to conclude that the intention can have been to bring within the

scope of the term claims other than those based on proprietary or contractual rights, which,

*° It may be noted that the definition is so drawn that the vehicle through which an investment is made or
operated itself becomes an “investment”; hence, for example, the reference to “a company” in sub-paragraph
(d)(i). The intention was no doubt to ensure that an investment vehicle taking the form of a locally
incorporated company did not find itself falling outside the nationality requirements in the accompanying
definition of “covered investment”, and thi eadily understood, despite a certain element of artificiality
that results from time to time: see, for example, the definition of “investment agreement” discussed in
paragraphs 127 and following below.

 

52

in the Tribunal’s view, corresponds in any event to the whole underlying notion of an
“investment”. Further weighty support for this interpretation of the BIT can be drawn from
Articles II, III, 1V & V, which lay down the main substantive protections to be accorded by
each part to “covered investments”, such as national and most-favoured-nation treatment,
fair and equitable treatment, full protection and security, protection against arbitrary
expropriation, freedom to make transfers, and so forth. It would be difficult, or even
impossible, to apply these standards in any meaningful way to claims falling short of actual

proprietary or contractual rights.

126. In support of their opposing contentions on whether there existed an “investment”,
the Parties cited to the Tribunal a number of arbitral decisions, notably those in Fedax NV

y. The Republic of Venezuela,” SGS S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan,°' SGS S.A. v.
2

 

Republic _of_the Philippines, ° and Mihaly International Corporation _v. Democratic
Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.” The Tribunal does not, however, derive much assistance
from any of those decisions in considering the circumstances of the present case. The
decision in Fedax turned on whether the claimant’s rights in respect of promissory notes
issued in connection with a duly concluded contract amounted in themselves to
“investments”, but there was no argument that the rights at issue were not existing
contractual rights. Not dissimilarly, in the two SGS cases, the principal question for
decision was whether SGS’s rights under service contracts were protected under the
substantive provisions of the BITs in question, or in the alternative were subject to the
exclusive jurisdiction of the domestic courts, but again there was no dispute that contracts
had been concluded (and indeed put into operation) under which the claimant possessed
actionable rights. That said, the Tribunal notes the observation of the Tribunal in SGS v.
Philippines that “ICSID Tribunals have been very reluctant to acknowledge that an

investment has actually been made until the contract has been signed or at least approved

© Fedax N.V. v. The Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case N.o ARB/O1/13) Decision on Jurisdiction, July 11,
1997.

°'SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/13)
Decision on Jurisdiction, Agust 6, 2003.

© SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v.The Republic of rhe Philippines, (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/6,
Decision on Jurisdiction, January 29, 2004.

°° Mihaly International Corporation v. The Democratic Socialistic Republic of Sri Lanka, (ICSID Case N.o
ARB/00/2) Award of March 15, 2002.

53

and acted on.” The Mihaly case was perhaps closest to the present one, in that the
preliminary Objection ratione materiae by the respondent (Sri Lanka), which was
ultimately upheld by the Tribunal in that case, was to the effect that the expenditures made
by the claimant in the expectation of the award of the contract for power generation in Sri
Lanka, did not in the circumstances amount to an “investment” for the purposes of the
relevant BIT (the terms of which were very similar to those of the BIT in the present case).
But nevertheless the Mihaly decision appears to have been one very much on its own facts;
and indeed the powerfully reasoned separate Opinion by Mr. Suratgar makes it plain that,
in his view, further facts were required in order to rest the decision of “no investment” on a

sufficiently solid basis.

(f) “Investment Agreements”

127. There remains however a separate question, foreshadowed in paragraph 115(c)
above, as to whether, even in the absence of an “investment” (or “covered investment”),
there nevertheless existed an “investment agreement” under the BIT. Within the Treaty the
two notions lie alongside one another. Indeed, Article IX(1) (the jurisdictional clause) puts
the two side-by-side” in precisely equal terms. This is important. Its consequence would
appear to be that a dispute arising out of an “investment agreement” can be just as much an
“investment dispute” as a dispute arising out of the failure to accord the substantive
protection under the Treaty to a “covered investment” in the strict sense of that term. It
presumably must follow that a dispute of that extended kind would also be brought within
the jurisdiction of the Centre. (Article 25(1); see above). This must apparently be so,
despite the fact that such a dispute may not arise out of an “investment” very “directly” at
all, since any other reading would frustrate the clear intentions and expectation of the
Contracting States as expressed in Article [X(1) of the BIT. In other words, it appears that
Article IX(1) has to be so understood as if the definition of “covered investment” is

extended so far as may be necessary to encompass “investment agreements”.

128. Even if so, the question would remain, what substantive protections does the BIT

extend to “investment agreements”? As indicated above, Articles II, III, V and VI are all

At paragraph 132, Footnote 62 Supra.
°5 And side-by-side with the third notion, that of an “investment authorization.”

54

drafted so as to relate in terms to “covered investments” and to “covered investments”
alone. No doubt, if the jurisdictional reference to “covered investment” in Article IX is
properly to be extended so as to take in “investment agreements”, then the same applies
substantively when it comes to considering what standard of treatment is required from the
host State in respect of an “investment agreement”. Before reaching that point however it

is convenient to look at what an “investment agreement” is.

129. The term is defined (again in an extensive form) in sub-paragraph (h) to Article I, to

mean:

“a written agreement between the national authorities of a Party and a
covered investment or a national of company of the other Party that (i)
grants rights with respect to natural resources or other assets controlled
by the national authorities and (ii) the investment, national or company
replies upon in establishing or acquiring a covered investment”.

130. It follows that seven requirements would have to be fulfilled in order to constitute

an “investment agreement”:

an agreement

in writing

with the national authorities

which grants rights

the rights are with respect to natural resources
and the foreign party relies upon them

in establishing or acquiring a covered investment.

 

It will be evident that the above definition gives rise, in the context of the present case, to
several questions over and above the primary question whether an “investment agreement”
implies the existence of a contractual right that might in appropriate circumstances be

capable of vindication in court.

131. So far as the Tribunal is aware, although the concept of an “investment agreement”
appears regularly in BITs concluded by the USA at around this time, the concept is unique
to those concluded by the USA. Nor is the Tribunal aware of any Arbitral Award or other
decision in which the term has been construed and applied, or its practical consequences
explored. No material of this kind was offered in the written or oral pleadings of either

Party, despite the fact that the Claimant had asserted from the outset inter alia that it had

55

entered into an investment agreement sufficient to ground a claim under the BIT. Given
the questions thus arising, the Tribunal offered the Parties an opportunity for further written

argument, as described in paragraph 110 above.

132. Both parties correctly understood the Tribunal’s questions as a request to define
their position as to whether an “investment agreement” had come into being between FWO

and a Trinidad and Tobago party and, if so, what the legal consequences were.

133. Understood in the light of its response to the Tribunal’s questions, the Claimant’s
case continued to be based on the claim that it had acquired contractual rights as a result of
the course of dealings between it and Trinmar (and other Trinidad and Tobago parties).
These rights constituted at one and the same time “covered investments” and an
“investment agreement”. For the Claimant, the function and effect of the inclusion of
“investment agreement” within the jurisdictional clause of the BIT was to transform its
domestic law claims into international law claims such that they would then fall within the

jurisdiction of this Tribunal. (Claimant’s Answers, paragraphs 3.23-24).

134. The Respondent, for its part, rested ultimately on the argument in its post-hearing
Memorial that the Claimant had been unable to identify the document in which a written

agreement was said to have been concluded.

135. The Tribunal finds itself unable to accept the argument of either Party on these
questions. The Claimant’s argument would turn the provisions of “investment agreements”
into a form of “umbrella clause” apt to transform any contractual claim into a claim
sounding under the BIT, but the Tribunal can find no warrant for such an argument in the
terms of the BIT itself or their context. In any event, the Claimant puts its arguments on
“investment agreement” in terms that require it to establish a concluded contractual claim,
so that the arguments on “investment” and “investment agreement” become, in effect,
rolled into one. The Respondent’s argument, on the other hand, rests on the assumption
that an “investment agreement” must necessarily and in all circumstances take the form of
an enforceable contract between the Respondent and the Claimant, which seems to the

Tribunal to involve a gentle re-writing of the terms in which Article I(h) is cast.

° Paras. 5 & 11 of the Request.

56

136. Given its conclusions on issue (a), the contractual question (paras. 182-183 below),
it is unnecessary for the Tribunal to pursue the question of an “investment agreement”
further. The Tribunal will simply observe that it would not wholly exclude the possibility
that circumstances might arise under which (on an appropriate showing of fact) a tribunal
might conclude that an “investment agreement” with a claimant, as foreseen in a provision
such as Article I(h), had come into being, and was sufficient to found a valid claim under a
BIT, even in the absence of an actionable contract and thus an “investment” (“covered
investment’) in the strict sense of the term. Indeed, there is no other way in which meaning
can be given to the parallel treatment of these two concepts in Article IX. But those are not

the present circumstances.

9 CONTRACT: FWO?’s Final Case

137. Having thus dealt with issues (b) and ()”, relating to “covered investments” and
“investment agreements”, the Tribunal must now proceed to issue (a), namely whether a
contract had come into being between the Claimant and any of the parties on the

Respondent's side.

138. No useful purpose would be achieved by tracing the mutations of FWO’s case on
the components of jurisdiction and breach, as in the course of time the allegations of fraud
and corruption progressively withered away, leaving only vestiges behind. The more
practical approach will be to direct this stage of the analysis to FWO’s own final summary,
which (in defining the relevant “covered investments” on which it bases the jurisdiction of
this Tribunal) impliedly defines the breaches in respect of which recovery under the BIT is

sought. It reads as follows:

“FWO has made a number of qualifying covered investments, as
defined under the BIT each of which is now the subject of a dispute at
issue in this arbitration as a result of the State’s action. In sum, these
investments are as follows; (1) contractual rights obtained by FWO
through the tender process; (2) rights conferred by law; (3) FWO’s
transmittal of specialised industry know-how, intellectual property,
and original, innovative and unique economic business models by the
State; and (4) FWO’s investment of tangible property and funds to
develop the program.”

©? Paragraph 115 above.

s7

139. Just as at the outset of the proceedings FWO began its exposition with a brief and
uncompromising statement of its then central proposition (that the entire transaction was
infected with dishonest conduct), so also at their end FWO launched its Post-Hearing
Memorial by quoting from the transcript of an exchange between counsel and the Tribunal
which stated the essence of the case (as it then stood) in terms which posited the existence
and breach of a contract antecedent to, and anticipatory of, the agreement from which FWO.
was to earn its anticipated profits. Since the Tribunal agrees that this is where the weight
of the dispute can now be seen to be, it will concentrate on the dispute’s contractual
aspects, but must first clear the ground by examining the last three of the cumulative

propositions quoted in the preceding paragraph.

140. Little time need be taken over proposition (2), for although briefly signalled at an
early stage it was scarcely developed thereafter. Whatever may be its theoretical basis, the
Tribunal can see no way in which, given the particular circumstances of the present case, it
could succeed if all other routes were blocked. We therefore set it aside, as for the moment
we also do with proposition (3), which raises wholly distinct factual arguments potentially
yielding a different measure of relief.

141. Proposition (4) “FWO’s investment of tangible property and fund to develop the
programme” is at first sight altogether more attractive, for it depends on two undoubted
facts, namely the wasting of FWO’s pre-contract efforts and expenditures and the
withdrawal from negotiations with FWO before the achievement of a final contract, plus an
obvious causal connection between the two. Moreover, in a different context it might have
had a real prospect of success, in reliance on a small group of English cases which show
that expenditures made in anticipation of a contract may in certain circumstances be
recoverable even if the contract never comes to fruition.” Nevertheless we are in no doubt
that on three cumulative grounds it must be rejected. In the first place, although the precise
juristic basis of these cases may be controversial, it is at least quite clear that whilst facts
such as those just mentioned are necessary pre-conditions for a recovery under this
doctrine, they are not in themselves sufficient. Disappointed expectations are not enough;
8 But see paragraph 184 below.

© These authorities are helpfully discussed in Regalian Properties v London Docklands Development
Corporation [1995] 1 WLR 212, and Goff & Jones, the Law of Restitution (4"" Edn) 554-563.

58

some other ingredient such as an express or implied request to perform the work or make
the expenditure must also be present before the responsibility of the intended employer is
engaged. Competitors for a project often expend work or deploy equipment and materials
in advance to gain a tendering advantage or a flying start on the project once it is under
way. This may be an expensive gamble, yet nobody could assert that if the gamble does
not succeed the loser can simply look to the employer to get its money back. In the present
case we are not at all sure that there was sufficient in the nature of an inducement by the
State to relieve FWO from the risk that for one reason or another the final contract would

not materialise.

142. Secondly, even if FWO were able to clear this hurdle, it would give FWO a cause
of action under the law of Trinidad and Tobago, which would be a promising start, but
would not itself create a valid claim under the BIT without showing that the domestic-law
right of action qualifies as an “investment.” The enquiry into whether this requirement was
satisfied opens the way to an obstacle of a different kind. To establish a valid claim under
the BIT/ICSID regime it must be shown both that the Claimant possessed an investment
and an illegitimate interference with that investment by the State. In the ordinary situation,
exemplified by FWO’s other contractual claims which we come to shortly, there is no
logical difficulty in holding that these requirements can co-exist, because they are
independent of each other. But the position is different here, for the locally enforceable
cause of action relied upon as the “investment” protected by the BIT depends entirely on
the failure of the contract in anticipation of which the moneys etc. were spent. Yet it is that
very failure brought about by the conduct of the State which is relied upon as a breach of
the BIT. The same event, therefore, namely the non-completion of the Final Contract, is
advanced at the same time as a source of the right infringed and the infringement of it.

This logical contradiction proves too much.

143. Finally, however, even if these difficulties could somehow be overcome there is one
hurdle which must surely be insurmountable. It may be very simply expressed. From the
outset of the bidding process it had been made clear that the ordinary position obtained: as
already noted, the Terms of Bid provided that Trinmar would not be responsible for costs

or expenses incurred by bidders in connection with the preparation, submission and

59

presentation of bid proposals. In itself, this disclaimer only went so far, and it could well
be argued that on its own it did not cover expenditures made in connection, not with the
bid, but with preparations for the execution of the works which would be useful if and
when the contract was placed. This topic remained submerged until 15 September 2000,
when there began the exchange of correspondence quoted at paragraph 90 above. It will be
recalled that the second letter of 20 September 2000 concluded with the words: "Please
further note that Trinmar does not hold itself liable for any costs or expenditure incurred by

F-W Oil Interests prior to the execution of a contract on this tender.”

144. In the view of the Tribunal, this state of affairs is inconsistent with any of the routes
by which, in certain instances, it been held that pre-contract expenditures can be recovered.
There is no room for the law to imply a right of repayment, which was expressly requested
and expressly refused. As in the normal tendering situation, FWO undertook the

expenditures at its own risk.

145. In these circumstances we reject the proposition that FWO had a legally enforceable
claim for reimbursement under the law of Trinidad and Tobago. By the same token we are
unable to agree that FWO’s preparatory expenditure constituted an “investment” for the

purposes of the BIT or the Washington Convention.

(a) Contractual Rights: Fundamentals

146. This leaves for consideration only the first of the four cumulative propositions set
out above, namely that FWO obtained “contractual rights through the tender process”,

which the State unfairly destroyed or eroded in breach of its obligations under the BIT.

147. Before entering into any details, it is essential to stand back from FWO’s
submissions to see how they seek to implicate the State in the matters of which complaint
is made. It is not enough to show that Trinmar made a contract and broke it. Only the
State is a party to the BIT; only the State can be held liable for infringing it; and only the

State is a respondent to these ICSID proceedings.

148. In most cases where the investment which is said to be protected by a BIT or

similar treaty takes the shape of a contractual right, the infringement alleged against the

60

host State is an interference with that right from outside. Thus, for example, if the
investment is a debt, it may happen that the host State intervenes to annul or seize it. In
that event the State is a party to the act alleged as an infringement of the BIT, but it is not a
party to the contract whose status as an investment confers jurisdiction on the dispute-
resolution body empowered to adjudicate on disputes arising under the treaty. Recent
jurisprudence shows, however, that a host State may also be a participant in the investment
itself as counter-party to the foreign investor, so that where the complaint is simply that the
contract between investor and State has not been performed, the State potentially occupies
a double role: namely, as both as the maker and the breaker of the contractual obligation.
Here, the State may be said to have infringed the BIT from within. A further variant exists
where the contract is made ostensibly with a third party, but where that party is said to be
an emanation of the State, so that, whatever appearances might suggest, the investment
once again consists of an obligation owed by the State to the investor, and the State is

involved as both the creator and the infringer of the obligation, acting from within.
149. This analysis opens up the following theoretical possibilities:

(a) FWO was a party to a contract made directly with the State. The
contract was protected by the BIT and founds the jurisdiction of
ICSID. Failure by the State to perform the contract was a breach
of the BIT by the State.

(b) FWO was a party to a contract made indirectly with the State
through the medium of Trinmar, which for this purpose is to be
identified with the State. Otherwise, the position is the same as
under (a).

(c) FWO was a party to a contract with Trinmar, which for this
purpose is not to be identified with the State; nevertheless
interference by the State, leading to a non-performance of this
contract by Trinmar, was a breach of the BIT by the State.

(b) Introductory comments

150. Although possibility (a) has been included for the sake of completeness it is of no
practical importance here, since it could not be (and so far as we can discern from FWO’s

submissions was not) suggested that the State was a direct party to any contract with FWO.

61

151. This leaves only possibilities (b) and (c). The question whether FWO made any
contract at all of the kind if alleged is the same for each, but there is a critical difference
when one comes to breach, for in relation to (b) the allegation would be that the breach
consisted of a simple non-performance of the State’s obligations under the contract (i.e., it
acted “internally” to the investment contract), whereas under (c) FWO must prove that the
State wrongfully interfered with a contract to which it was not a party (ie., it acted
“externally” to that contract). Quite plainly, there is a fundamental difference between the
two types of breach, and an examination of whether there was a breach, and if so what was
its nature and consequences, depends critically on which route to a recovery under the BIT

is pursued. We return to this later.

(c) Domestic Law.

152. Before proceeding to consider what enforceable rights FWO lost when Trinmar
withdrew from the negotiations, it must be stated that by “enforceable” the Tribunal means
enforceable in the courts of the State in accordance with the substantive law of that
country, no other courts and no other law having been brought forward as potentially
relevant. We must therefore start by identifying the relevant features of the substantive law
of Trinidad and Tobago (called for convenience “the Domestic Law”). This task cannot be
performed directly, simply by looking up the law in a book. In one sense the entire field of
relevant law does not yet exist, since the legislature and the courts have not had occasion to
address it. This does not of course mean that the Courts would act in an arbitrary manner,
merely that the relevant Domestic Law would have to be developed ad hoc by a court
adjudicating upon FWO’s complaints. Since FWO has not actually chosen to proceed in
Trinidad and Tobago under the Domestic Law we must speculate about how a court would

proceed, in the absence of direct local guidance, if faced with a claim by FWO.

153. It seems to the Tribunal that the court would initially approach the matter from first
principles, and in particular the general principles of the law of contract which can safely
be assumed to be broadly similar” in Trinidad and Tobago to those developed by the

common law throughout the Commonwealth.” Having then arrived at a preliminary

™ Though not necessarily identical, as witness the problem of undertakings to negotiate, referred to below.
7 No decisions from the United States have been cited which assist the present problem

62

opinion in the light of general principles, the court would turn to see how common law
courts elsewhere have reasoned when faced with problems similar to those before it. This
would involve the accumulation of a body of authorities, such as that placed before this
Tribunal, which the court would marshal to see what ideas, perspectives, theories and

reasoning could be deduced and applied to the matter in hand.

154. When performing this exercise the court would be inclined to look particularly at
the English cases, not through any notion of hierarchy of precedent but because the law of
Trinidad and Tobago has founded for much of its history on doctrines from that source, so
that the English authorities may be expected to anticipate what the local court might decide
if the problem were to come before it. Reported cases from other jurisdictions would
however be an important resource, particularly those from Canada where the problem has

been discussed intensively at all levels.

155. In drawing upon this body of English authority the domestic court would, we
believe, exercise caution in two respects. First, because what may at first sight seem to be
decisions based on generally accepted principles of English Law may on examination

prove to be decisively influenced by European Community Law.

156. So also with the Canadian cases, which appear to constitute the most fully
developed jurisprudence on this topic, but were decided against the background of formal
tendering structures and contractual practices unrelated to those existing in Trinidad and
Tobago. The judgments in these cases may prompt ideas which can take root in the present

context, but it would be unsafe to follow them directly.

(d) Was there a contract?

157. It will readily be seen that, leaving aside for the moment the issue of breach, there
are two central questions to be addressed. Did FWO have a contract with anyone

concerning the project? And if so with whom was the contract made?

63

158. The Tribunal starts with the first question. For the sake of simplicity, when
considering the first element of this question, Trinmar will be named as the counter-party to
FWO in the postulated contract, since it was with Trinmar that the negotiations were
conducted. Even if no Final Contract (i.e., the full and formal written agreement towards
which the negotiations were directed) was ever made, did Trinmar nevertheless enter into a
contract or contracts with FWO, constituting the latter’s investment in the State? FWO
contend for an affirmative answer to this question, in terms of two contracts, which must be

carefully distinguished.

159. In its submissions, FWO has called these “The Tender Contract” and “The
Definitive Operating Agreement”. For the purposes of discussion the Tribunal prefers to

call the first of these “the Process Contract” since that begs fewer questions.

160. Although the Process Contract, if it existed, is probably the earlier in time, it is
convenient to start with the Definitive Operating Agreement, which raises fewer problems.
Notwithstanding its name, this was not the complete and formal final Contract towards
which, as a definitive statement of their substantive rights and duties in relation to the
Soldado Fields, both parties were continuing to negotiate. Rather it is said to have been a
binding agreement, embodying fewer terms than the Final Contract, and coming into
existence at an earlier date as a by-product of the negotiations. The problem, whether
sufficient terms have been agreed for the purpose of a binding agreement to have been
reached, is notoriously difficult to solve, especially as it may be significantly affected by
the parallel question whether the parties intended to create legal relations but there is no
need to enter into the law upon that problem for there are two grounds on which it seems
clear that FWO’s contention must be rejected. The first concerns FWO’s request for a
shareholder guarantee, which comes into the case on two separate occasions. One was at
the very end of the story, when the failure by Trinmar to persuade its parent to put up a
guarantee was used by it (Trinmar) as the ground for treating the transaction as at an end.
Yet it seems to us plain that the furnishing of a guarantee never became an agreed term,
non-performance of which would have spelt the termination of whatever contract had been
made, either on the basis that it was a condition precedent to the arising of any obligations

at all, or as a term of the contract sufficiently important to make any breach a wrongful

64

repudiation of the contract. Quite apart from this, any such term would have been a
stipulation in favour of FWO on which Trinmar was therefore not entitled to rely, given

that FWO could have waived this stipulation.

161. On the other hand, the story of the guarantee is of great importance in a quite
different respect: not because the parties agreed that one would be provided, so that the
failure to do so would be a breach of one term of a contract already agreed, but rather as a
condition precedent imposed by FWO itself on the making of any agreement at all. It is
plain that a guarantee was regarded as an important element in the future of the contract,
and the parties were still wrangling over it when the negotiations came to an end. The
failure to agree on a guarantee, not the failure to provide one, left a gap in the consensus

which could not be filled by implication.

162. The combination of this factor with other terms yet to be agreed would in the
Tribunal’s view have made it hard for FWO to establish the “Definitive Operating
Agreement”, even in the absence of a feature which in the Tribunal’s opinion is fatal to
FWO’s argument: namely, the insistence by both parties that they would not be legally
bound before the execution of a formal contract. As to this, quite apart from the disclaimer
in Clause 6 of Trinmar’s Request for Proposals (which is only peripherally relevant, since it
was concerned with bidding, not the ultimate contract), almost the first sentence of the

Formal Notice to Successful Bidder read:

“This award is made subject to the negotiation and execution of a
mutually agreeable operating agreement for the provision of facilities
and services in Trinmar’s West and Southwest Soldado Fields...”

163. The heading of the draft heads of Agreement annexed to this letter stated

prominently —

“Subject to negotiation and execution of definitive operating
agreement”.

FWO made no complaint about this stipulation, either then or later, which is not surprising
since it had made clear at the every outset of the negotiations, in its response to the Request

for Proposals, that-

65

“F-W Oil shall be obligated to Trinmar only upon the entry into force

of a definitive written agreement”.
164. FWO never withdrew from this position and it is quite clear to the Tribunal both
from these express reservations and from the general tenor of the exchanges that the parties
were keeping each other at arms length and wished to preserve their freedom of action until
firmly and formally bound to acceptable terms. The Tribunal is in no doubt that in such
circumstances, even apart from the other obstacles in the way, FWO cannot now be heard
to insist on a preliminary informal contractual relationship which the parties were at such
pains to avoid. Accordingly, quite apart from any question of a lack of consensus, we reject

on these grounds the proposition that there was a “Definitive Operating Agreement”.

165. This leaves for consideration a question on which much time and skill has been
deployed, with the backing of copious citation of authority: namely, whether there was a
“Process Contract”, antecedent to the Final Contract at which the negotiations were aimed,
but not itself (unlike the alleged Definitive Operating Agreement) creating any substantive
obligations in relation to the development and operation of the Soldado Fields. Rather, it is
submitted that a contract came into existence during the negotiations which made legally
binding provision for the way in which a Final Contract was to be arrived at. FWO plainly
cannot rely on any explicit bargain to this effect, for in the letter of 15 September 2000 to
which reference has already been made, they asked for “an interim agreement to govern our
relationship” — and never got one. Furthermore, the reservation to the effect (though not in
those precise words) that the transaction was subject to contract, to which the Tribunal has
already referred, must be as fatal to the idea of a Process Contract as it is to the informal
Definitive Operating Agreement. Nevertheless, in deference to the assiduous assembly of a
large volume of reported decisions from various jurisdictions the Tribunal thinks it right to
see whether it can extract from them any propositions which may enable FWO to overcome
the obstacles which stand in the way of its submission. For this purpose it is convenient to
break down the bulk by looking at the individual propositions which the cases seem to
establish. In doing so, it is also convenient on occasion to follow the practice of some
Canadian judgments and call the Process and the Final Agreements “Contract A” and

“Contract B”, respectively.

66

166. The Tribunal derives from the cases the following propositions:-

(A) General Principles:

(i) | The law recognises the possibility of a process contract, and will
enforce it if one is found, but there is no assumption that one will
exist in the individual instance. Most frequently there is none.

(ii) Whether there is a process contract is to be determined in the
same way as with any other alleged contract. Regard must of
course be to the express terms of the negotiations, and to the
legal, statutory, and administrative background against which the
negotiations take place. In particular it must be proved that the
parties intended to bind themselves contractually, and that there
is sufficiently complete consensus to make the bargain workable.
There is nothing special about process contracts, and nothing
special about the process for determining whether they exist.

(B) Consensus

167. As with other aspects of the modern law of contracts, there is no room for a
mechanistic approach. In the simplest situations it may be enough to look for an offer
matched by an acceptance, or a counter-offer, and so forth, but for complex commercial
negotiations a more flexible method is required. Whilst care must be taken not to build
fragments into an incomplete whole, the entire course of the exchanges must be examined
to see whether they disclose a continuing intention to make a binding contract, reflected in
a sufficient accumulation of terms on which both are agreed, even if they are not all

gathered together at a single place and time.

(C) _ Effect of an invitation to potentially interested parties.

168. In the Tribunal’s opinion, the following rules concerning particular situations can

be collected from the reported decisions cited in argument.

(i) Very often the first step in the tendering process will be no more
than a notification to potentially interested parties that a tender
process is in the offing. Those who wish to learn more about the
project and the terms on which it is currently intended to offer it,
and to show that they are serious contenders, are enabled to
communicate without risk of a present commitment on either
side. It is not normally an offer, and the response to it does not
in general have contractual effect.

67

(ii) On other occasions, an invitation to tender may launch the
contractual exchanges themselves, intended to have some
contractual effect. In the simplest and most usual case, the
invitation may form one side of a bargain, to be completed when
the addressee responds with an unqualified acceptance. There is
a doctrinal problem about this situation. Perhaps the invitation is
a “unilateral contract”, already binding, which is transformed
into a bilateral contract when the invitee proffers a compliant bid.
Nothing turns on this in the present case.

(iii) The invitation may go further and establish a set of criteria which
tenderers must fulfill in order to be considered for an award, or it
may declare that a mandatory method of choice will be applied
as between conforming bids. Such terms may be expressed in the
invitation; or may be derived from a background of established
tendering procedures; or both. In some instances an invitee who
responds with a bid satisfying the criteria by that very act
concludes a process contract (Contract A) with the invitor.

(iv) The process contract may in appropriate circumstances found a
cause of action against the offeror; for example a conforming
bidder who does not receive an award may on occasion have a
right of action under Contract A for the loss of the opportunity
(or even the certainty if there is mandatory bid selection scheme
which guarantees selection of the lowest conforming bidder) of
going ahead to the revenue-generating Contract B. So also, if a
rival non-conforming bid has been admitted into the process, or
if a rival bidder has been given an opportunity to amend his bid
after tender, or if the prescribed method of choosing between
conforming bids has not been followed. Equally, a bidder may
complain if a conforming bid has been excluded from the
process, either because the criteria for conformity have not been
correctly applied, or because the invitor has privately given
effect to further criteria not disclosed to the generality of
invitees. Or again, it may be that the complaint is not about the
treatment of the bidder himself, but about an unfair advantage
given to a rival if (for instance) his non-conforming bid is
admitted into the selection process.

(v) These are examples of the way in which terms expressed or
implied in an invitation to tender may work to the advantage of a
bidder. But they may also work to his disadvantage, for, if the
invitation contains a deadline, the court may be willing to imply
a clause prohibiting him from withdrawing a bid once made.”

(D) A duty to consider bids

” As in paragraph 4 of Trinmar’s Request for Proposals. The cases in the years following Ron Engineering
are helpfully set out in R v. Health Care Developers (1996)D.L.R (4th)609; Best Cleaners and Contractors v.
R (1985) 2 F.C. 293; and MJB Enterprises Ltd. v. Defence Construction [1999] 1 S.C.R. 619.

   

68

169. Even if a Process Contract can be shown to exist, it will not necessarily take the
shape just described. Instead of a regime which determines the outcome once the
conforming bids have been identified, it is common to leave the invitor with a degree of
subjective discretion. The scale of the discretion can vary widely, from (for example) one
which enables the invitor to disregard all the tenders and either cancel the project altogether
or put it out for re-tender, to one fixing a list of factors to be taken into account without
prescribing how they should be weighted. It does however appear that at all points on the
scale the courts will usually infer one common factor, namely that the invitor must at least
consider all conforming bids, even if deciding not to accept them; and that they must be
considered fairly. This term cannot be given any fixed meaning. Its content will depend
on factors peculiar to the transaction, such as its size and complexity, and also on the
background, including local practices and any municipal or statutory rules governing the

tender process.

(E) Discretion over-ridden

170. Clause 6 of Trinmar’s Request for Tenders has already been set out. Provisions of
this type (referred to as “privilege clauses”) have been the subject of considerable
discussion in the Canadian Courts. The Tribunal understands the outcome of these cases to
be, in summary: there is no objection to such clauses in principle, as they may perform a
valuable economic service, and other things being equal they will be applied according to
their terms, thus enabling the invitor to award no contract at all, or to award one to
someone other than the lowest bidder. But a clause of this kind has to be read in harmony
with other provisions of the tender documents. In the most extreme situation this may
require the privilege clause to be disregarded altogether, and short of this there may be
constraints on the invitor’s apparent freedom of action. For example he will not usually be
able to accept non-compliant bids, even though he is not required to accept the lowest of
the compliant bids. And so on. Everything depends on the way in which the clause can be

fitted in to the language and commercial background of the tender documents as a whole.

69

(e) The Position under Domestic Law

171. The Tribunal has set out its understanding of the cases at a little length because
FWO asserts that its investment in the State takes the shape of a Process Contract, or a
Definitive Operating Agreement, or both, enforceable locally under the laws of that
country. To see whether that is so, it is necessary to speculate about what would have
happened if FWO had sought to enforce the alleged contracts in the Courts of Trinidad and
Tobago, and for this purpose the Tribunal has had no choice but to assume that the Courts
there would have arrived at conclusions generally similar to its own, even if not identical in

expression or details.

172. | What guidance would the Domestic Courts have obtained from the propositions set
out above, when reaching the stage of deciding whether FWO had vested rights which were
infringed when Trinmar withdrew from the negotiations? The Tribunal is forced to say:
very little. If the sole question had been whether Clause 6 of the Request for Tenders
(equivalent to “the privilege clause”) enabled Trinmar simply to abandon the process and
either give up the project altogether, or start again in a different basis, the cases would have
posed a delicate problem on which we would have expected (though without great
confidence) Trinmar to succeed. But there is no need to go so far, since there are two

arguments against the application of the case law to which we can see no answer.

173. The first is that the cases are irrelevant. They were all concerned with things
happening or not happening before Contract A came into existence, and then during the
period when, after the receipt of the bids, whatever system for assessing them and awarding
the contract was required by Contract A (if there was one) had to be put into effect. The
outcome of the whole process (if it had worked properly) would then have been the coming
into existence of Contract B, between the offeror and a bidder selected in accordance with
Contract A. The present dispute is not concerned with this at all. The bidding process was
completed, and yielded the notification to FWO that it was the successful bidder. There
could be no complaint about that. What FWO does complain about is that after it had won
the contest it did not achieve Contract B, at which the previous dealings had been aimed.
The cases do not discuss a complaint of this nature, for they deal with a two-stage process,

the first concerned with tendering, and second the necessary outcome of a successful

70

tender. Here, however, one must contemplate the possibility of another intermediate stage,
namely one during which, after Contract A had led to the award of a tender, the parties
strive towards Contract B. About this, the cases cited have nothing to say, and the
Domestic Court would be obliged to proceed from first principles. The outcome of the first
stage obviously contemplates a period of negotiation, but does it involve either party in
obligations about the manner of the negotiations? Clearly it cannot require that the parties
are contractually obliged to reach a successful outcome, but at what level do their duties
operate? Are they both to work towards Contract B in a reasonable way, or only in a way
consonant with good faith? Modern international legal concepts tend to favour the latter,
but some common law systems (amongst them conspicuously English law) do not yet
acknowledge in full the binding effect of an agreement to negotiate. And if the post-
Contract A situation obliges Trinmar to discuss with FWO the terms of the Final Contract

in a particular way, what was that way?

174. It is a curiosity of this (and similar questions) that the present Tribunal is not called
upon to give a direct answer to these questions, for the only purpose of the enquiry is to see
whether under Domestic Law FWO had rights in Trinidad and Tobago which ranked as
investments for the purposes of the BIT; and this exercise calls for an assessment of what
the Domestic Courts would make of the question if it were ever to be brought before them,
which ex hypothesi it will not be. The Tribunal can only say that the judge in the Domestic
Court, faced with widely differing world-wide attitudes to questions of this nature, would

not have had an enviable task.

(f) An obligation to negotiate in good faith?

175. It remains for the Tribunal to consider whether there was an obligation on Trinmar
to negotiate in good faith towards a final project agreement (i.e., Contract B), the breach of

which might serve as the foundation for a claim under the BIT.

176. The Claimant asserts in its Memorial (paras. 5.51 onwards and paras. 5.60 onwards)
and again in the amended Reply (paras. 5.16 and 5.17) that there was an obligation on the

part of Trinmar/Trinidad and Tobago to negotiate in good faith. It asserts also that this

71

obligation was breached, and in support thereof that there was no justification whatever as

to why the definitive operating agreement was not signed.

177. | Whether an obligation on a would-be contracting party to enter into negotiations is
enforceable — a plea prompted by the last sentence of the first paragraph of Trinmar’s letter
of 20th September, 2000 (“We intend to negotiate in good faith and in an expeditious
manner toward the execution of such agreement between Trinmar Ltd., and F.W. Oil
Trinidad LLC”) — is questionable under the English common law of contracts which

applies in Trinidad and Tobago.

178. In the common law, a contract to negotiate, even when supported by consideration,
is not regarded as a contract known to law - it is too uncertain to have any binding force;
and no Court can estimate the damages for breach of such an agreement: see Courtney v.
Tolani 1975 (1) All E.R. 716 (C.A). In that case Lord Denning MLR. said that the
“tentative opinion” of Lord Wright expressed in Hillas and Co., v. Arco, 1932 All E.R.
Rep. 494 at 505 (H.L), that “in strict theory there is a contract (if there is good
consideration) to negotiate” was “not well-founded”. Lord Diplock added that the dictum
of Lord Wright quoted by Lord Denning “though an attractive theory should in my view be
regarded as bad law”: It is still so regarded: See Chitty on Contracts, 28th Edition, Volume
1, General Principles, 1999, paras. 2-126 and 2-127 (Agreement to Negotiate). In the Third
Cumulative Supplement to this Edition an even later case is cited for the proposition that an

agreement to make reasonable endeavours to agree is not enforceable at law.

179. As to the alleged lack of good faith, the correspondence does not substantiate this
plea. On 8 December 2000 we find FWO accepting in a letter to Trinmar that it was
Trinmar’s “unsettled relationship with its shareholders Petrotrin” that had prevented the
definitive agreement being finalized. And even in January 200174 FWO acknowledged that
the parties were still to meet to finalize negotiation of a definitive agreement: no allegation

was then made of any lack of good faith. When one party does not complete negotiations

London and Regional Investments Ltd v. TBI ple and Belfast International Airport Ltd., [2002] EWCA Civ.
355 — where there was express agreement to “use reasonable endeavours to agree” but this was held to lack
contractual force as it “was no more than an agreement to agree”. Most recently, Longmore LJ has revisited
the subject in paras. 115-121 of his judgment in Petromec Inc. v. Petrobras SA [2005] EWCA Civ 891.

™ Letter of 12 January 2001 from FWO to Trinmar.

 

  

72

as agreed and the other party sets out its understanding of the true reason for this, it is not
open to that other party subsequently to complain that the failure to complete is due to a

lack of “good faith” on the part of the first party.

180. On the evidence presented to it, the Tribunal is not able to disentangle the precise
reasons why the definitive operating agreement was not completed. The Tribunal accepts
that there was a strong element of pretext in Trinmar’s latching on to the ultimate refusal of
Petrotrin to authorise a guarantee, and notes in particular that the issue was never presented
to FWO in such a way as to allow it to consider whether the project finance could be
secured in some other way (which at a late stage we were told in evidence would have been
quite possible)” That said, it cannot be denied that a guarantee was nowhere part of the
tender documentation nor of FWO’s formal bid in response. Even when FWO responded
to Trinmar’s request to “reformat” its proposals (i.e., in June 2000) FWO informed Trinmar
that it had available to it “sufficient interim funding through shareholders equity and
contributions to commence and fund the initial stages of the project; and that permanent
financing should be made available and should close within 45 to 60 days from the
Effective Date of Agreement with Trinmar.” And in its letter of 5 July 2000 (when dealing
with project financing under the “reformatted” guidelines) FWO continued to express
complete confidence in its ability to raise finance and funding on its own. The matter was

in fact never raised in writing until mid-September 2000.7°

181. However that may be, the allegation in the Claimant’s Memorial (paragraph 3.76)
that FWO had received “repeated assurances” from T&T or Trinmar in the course of the

tender process and negotiations about furnishing a guarantee or security has not been

™ Byidence of Robert Moore, 11 December 2003: Hearing volume III pp. 905 onwards.

7 FWO’s letter of 15 September 2000; although the letter claims that the issue had already been raised orally:
“As we have advised you on several occasions, in order for F-W Oil to obtain financing for the project
contemplated in the Tender lenders will require F-W Oil to obtain and maintain during the term of our
agreement from either Trinmar, its shareholders or another person acceptable to F-W Oil and the lender a
guarantee or other form of security interest in form and substance satisfactory to the lenders to secure
payment to F-W Oil under the contract concluded in accordance with the Tender and repayment of the
lenders under the arrangements for financing provided to F-W Oils.”

 

 

73

established. Even the sentence fastened upon by the Claimant in its argument 77 was at

best an assertion of what FWO had required, not what Trinmar had agreed to.

(g) Conclusion

182. In reality, however, there is no need to take the enquiry so far. As has been shown,
the discussions were from the start impressed with the assumption that neither side wished
to make a commitment short of a fully enforceable Contract B. The Tribunal sees no
reason why this disclaimer should not also apply to the intermediate obligation postulated
as arising after the performance of Contract A, as much as to any of the other asserted
contractual obligations. In brief it seems that FWO was concerned not to take on any
obligations until the Final Contract was fully agreed and signed. This is a perfectly
understandable commercial stance which it is not the Tribunal’s task to question, but since

the parties were at one in this respect, there is no ground not to give effect to it.

183. Finally, the Tribunal should note that it is far from clear that an intermediate
obligation of the nature presupposed, being concerned only with negotiating methods and
not with substantive rights, could rank as an “investment” for the purpose of conferring
jurisdiction on the present Tribunal.”* There is however no need to explore this further,
since we consider that the “subject to contract” qualification puts paid to all claims that the
Tribunal has jurisdiction by virtue of locally enforceable contractual rights, and hence (on
the views which we have expressed on other jurisdictional issues) to our power to entertain

the dispute at all.

10 THE INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY CLAIM

184. It remains for the Tribunal to deal with FWO’s claim in respect of its contribution
of intellectual property, which can be done briefly. The Claimant’s allegation that its
confidential plans and economic models, produced as part of its offer under the first tender
process, were unlawfully appropriated for use in the second tender process, is denied by the
Respondent. However that may be, given in particular that the second tender process came

to naught, the Tribunal has seen no evidence that FWO has suffered specific loss in this

7 Contained in the letter of 26 February 2001 from Aleem Hosein of Trinmar: “Indeed you were requiring the
guarantee even before our letter of September 20th, 2000, notifying that you were the successful bidder.”
’S See Part III, sections 7 and 8 above.

74

respect. Nor is the Tribunal able to conclude in any case, on the basis of the argument and
evidence presented to it, that FWO’s development of these plans and models, as part of its
preparation of the tender offer, represents an “investment”, any more than do the alleged

intermediate contractual rights dealt with in the preceding section.

11 THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE STATE

185. Having thus dealt with the central question of “investment” under both domestic
and international law, the Tribunal must now proceed to another aspect of the case, namely
how far (if at all) the State was responsible at law for the actions or omissions which form

the foundation for FWO’s claims in this Arbitration.

186. As already indicated, it was a recurrent theme of the Respondent’s argument that
both Trinmar and Petrotrin were and are separate corporate entities with their own legal
personality under the law of Trinidad & Tobago, and that the Government of Trinidad &
Tobago (the Respondent in the Arbitration) could not be held legally responsible for their
actions or omissions, including, that is, for their contractual relations with outside parties.
In an alternative variant, the argument took the form that the “dispute” submitted to
arbitration was not one with the Government of the State at all, so that one of the
preconditions for jurisdiction under Article 25(1) of the Washington Convention was not
met. This argument, primarily one of domestic law, was extended in the course of the
arbitral proceedings to cover the position at international law as well, in other words to
deny that the activities of Trinmar and Petrotrin in relation to FWO could — or in the
premises did — engage the responsibility of the Government under the BIT. In support of
this line of argument, the Respondent relied in particular on the provisions of Article XV(2)
of the BIT, on the distinction in international law between acta jure imperii and acta jure

gestionis, and on the Arbitral Award in Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain.”

187. For its part, the Claimant continued throughout to maintain that the factual
circumstances underlying its case, taken in their totality, and taken together with the legal

status of state enterprises under the law of Trinidad and Tobago, did represent breaches of

” Emilio Agustin Mafezzini v. The Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/91/7) Award, November 9,
2000.

75

the obligations of the State of Trinidad & Tobago under the BIT, though this aspect of the
argument was never concisely drawn together in such a way as to allow the Tribunal to
appreciate the precise basis on which it had been put forward. Indeed, the Tribunal feels
moved to say that it derived no assistance whatever from the undifferentiated way in which
the Claimant continued, throughout both the written phases of the case and the oral
argument, to plead its case in terms of “T&T”, the expression apparently being intended to

be understood to cover indiscriminately any or all of the entities and agencies involved.

188. As the arbitration developed, both of the Parties did however invoke, each in its
own support, the draft Articles on State Responsibility drawn up by the UN International
Law Commission (ILC), and the Parties did, to a degree, join issue on the application of
those draft Articles to the present dispute. It is therefore incumbent on the Tribunal to

respond to these arguments to the extent necessary.

189. Before doing so, it would no doubt be useful to summarize briefly what, in light of
the factual evidence presented to the Tribunal, the involvement of the Respondent

Government did actually amount to.

(a) Facts and Events: Direct Involvement of the State (through the
Minister) in the Bidding process, and at Various Stages of FWO’s
Dealings with Trinmar
190. It would seem that the Respondent acknowledges Petrotrin to be a “State
Enterprise” under the direct control of the Minister of Finance (Corporation Sole) who is
responsible for the management of the entire portfolio of State investments: the corporate
function and the actual monitoring of the performance of the State Enterprises are, it would
seem, carried out by the Investment Division of the Ministry of Finance on behalf of the
Minister. The Minister of Energy as the Line Ministry provides the specialized technical
analyses and statutory approvals for operations while ensuring adherence to the

Government’s sectoral policy guidelines.*°

191. In his witness statement dated 14 August 2003, Mr Andrew Jupiter, Permanent

Secretary to the Ministry of Energy and the Energy Industry, stated:
® http:/www.petrotrin.com/

76

- that Petrotrin was a fully-owned energy based company which
fell under the portfolio of the Ministry of Energy and Energy
Industries - its Line Ministry. It was also accountable to the
Minister of Finance (Corporation Sole) — its shareholder;

- that a Performance Monitoring Manual*! was issued by the
Ministry of Finance which sought to outline the structure within
which enterprises should operate; within the Ministry of Energy
& Energy Industries, Government energy policy was
communicated by the Line Minister who communicated this to
the Board of Directors;

- that “‘in the hierarchy of state enterprise organizations such as
Petrotrin and Trinmar”, the Management was accountable to the
Board, the Board was accountable to the Line Minister who in
turn was accountable to the Government;

- that Petrotrin and Trinmar were State Enterprises in the oil and
gas sector.

192. Mr Jupiter’s evidence in his witness statement coincides substantially with the
Claimant’s case about State involvement in the award of the Project, and furnishes an

uncontroverted factual account of the State’s relationship with Petrotrin and Trinmar.

193.  Trinmar’s direct involvement in the bidding process, in declaring FWO as

successful bidder at various subsequent stages has been established as shown below:

(1) The very first communication was an inquiry in July 1999 from
Darin Bissoondatt (FWO’s representative in Trinidad & Tobago)
to Finbar Gangar, the Minister of Energy, in July 1999, inquiring
whether his Ministry could assist in making appropriate contacts

and appointments to facilitate “potential investors”.*?

(2) This was followed by a letter of 5 August from Wade of FWO to
the Minister, expressing FWO’s high level of interest and
capabilities in performing economic enhancement programmes
within the Energy Industries of Trinidad & Tobago; the Minister
was informed that FWO had established a relationship with
Millennium Energy Industries Ltd., a local Trinidad & Tobago
company and anticipated using this relationship to establish
and/or perform operations in Trinidad & Tobago.**

§! Performance Monitoring Manual (see Petrotrin’s Additional Document Vol.1 item #10).
® See RAD Vol.2 Exhibit 86.
83 See Claimant’s Vol-IIC-2 page 0003.

77

(3) This letter was passed on by the Minister to Trinmar, whose
Chairman wrote to FWO on 27 August 1999 (with a copy to the
Minister) expressing Trinmar’s interest in working with FWO
“subject to agreement” towards increasing the oil production
from their lease acreage in the near term.

(4) In December that year we see Winston Millet telling Calvin
Black (with reference to FWO’s request) that it was the Minister
who had directed that in order to inject transparency into the
process RFPs should be issued to selected interested parties.™*

(5) The evaluation of the Bids received was done by Ernst and
‘Young, again on the instructions of the Minister.*°

(6) Gordon Bartlett’s letter of 26 June 2000 to Donald Baldeosingh
(Petrotrin) states expressly that he had “obtained the concurrence
of the Hon’ble Minister” to proceed with the tender proposals —
stating that the Minister had expressed his great concern at
Trinmar’s negligence in allowing BS-25 to deteriorate to a point
where it had to be decommissioned had impacted very severely
on the country’s revenue.*°

(7) When the internal bickering between Baldeosingh and Bartlett
had reached almost breaking point, it was the Minister personally
who addressed a “private and confidential” reprimand to the
Chairman of each of the Companies stating that he was totally
dissatisfied about the complete breakdown of communication as
between them and laying down a firm Government policy;*” and
indicated in express terms that he expected the two companies to
be “guided accordingly”.

(8) At the meeting on 7 September 2000, it was again the Minister
who received a full report on the state of play, and the Record
prepared by Mrs Pilgrim Bristol indicates unmistakeably that it
was the Minister who gave detailed directions about how to
proceed.**

(9) Subsequent proceedings of the Trinmar Board had as a full
participant (including in the decision to award the Bid to FWO)

* See Claimant’s Exhibit C0006, page 41.

85 See T&T Vol 2 Tab 9, page 170 to 200.

8° See paragraph 78 above, including the Minister's extreme concern at the effect on the national economy of
the delays in resuming production.

§7 See paragraph 82 above.

§§ See paragraph 86 above.

78

Mr Rodney Chaitan, himself a Junior Minister in the Department
of Energy.*®

(10) Finally, after Trinmar decided to abandon their negotiations with
FWO, it is again the Minister (by now Sen. Gillette) who directs
that the project be put back out to tender on terms approved by
him.”

(11) To the above, it might lastly be added that FWO’s protests
against their treatment were not just directed to Trinmar itself,
but to the Minister (and to the Prime Minister).”!
194. These elements in the handling of the Soldado Fields Project have been drawn
together in summary form in this way, because in the Tribunal’s view they rebut a
persistent theme running through the Respondent’s defence to FWO’s claims, namely that
the whole affair was simply a matter of commercial dealings between a foreign corporation
and one or more Trinidad and Tobago corporations which had separate legal personality as
companies under Trinidad and Tobago law, and for whose dealings the Government could
not be held responsible. That the project was not a “mere” commercial deal is amply
evidenced by the nature of the resource in question, and by the important place that
production from the Soldado Fields obviously held in the minds of the Government of
Trinidad and Tobago as a significant element in the national economy. Similarly, it
appears to the Tribunal to be inconceivable that in any ordinary commercial deal, between
ordinary commercial parties, the Government, in the shape of the responsible Minister,
would or could have intervened as regularly — and, it may be added, as decisively — as
happened in this case. Not merely that, but it seems to have been the settled expectation of
all of the Trinidad and Tobago parties that the Minister would intervene in this way, and

that he was entitled and expected to do so.

195. What the consequences of this state of affairs were, in legal terms, is however

another matter, and we deal with that matter below.

* See paragraphs 94 to 98 above, including for Mr Chaitan’s rather ostentatious change of position a short
while later.

°° See paragraph 100 above.

*' See paragraphs 100 to 101 above.

79

196. Having recalled these facts, the Tribunal returns to the arguments of the Parties
based upon them. To resume: the argument, as the Tribunal eventually understood it in the

light of the post-Hearing written submissions, ran somewhat as follows:-

For the Claimant:-

(a) on the basis of their ownership and the exercise of actual control,
both Trinmar and Petrotrin were to be regarded as State
Enterprises within the definition in Article 1(f) of the BIT;

(b) it followed that the Government’s obligations under the BIT
extended to them expressly, in the light of its article XV(2),
according to which “A Party’s obligations under this Treaty shall
apply to a state enterprise in the exercise of any regulatory,
administrative or other governmental authority delegated to it by
that Party”;

(c) the condition in Article XV(2) was met, because, on the evidence
given before the Tribunal, “Trinmar and Petrotrin operated
within the State structure, implement[ed] state policy, and were
subject to the instructions and control of government”;

(d) moreover, under general international law, the actions (or
omissions) of Trinmar and Petrotrin engaged the international
responsibility of the Respondent because the two companies
were either State organs, or were entities exercising elements of
the governmental authority, or were acting pursuant to the
instructions of the State, or under its direction or control, and the
Claimant relied in this context on draft Articles 4, 5 and 8 of the
ILC’s draft Articles;

(e) finally, the Respondent was in any event responsible
internationally for the conduct of Government Ministers.

For the Respondent:-

(aa) international law recognizes a clear distinction between
governmental and commercial activities, and this distinction is
equally reflected in the BIT, specifically in Article XV(2),and in
ICSID jurisprudence;

(bb) Trinmar and Petrotrin do not meet the condition in Article

XV(2), as their activities in the present dispute were purely
commercial;

80

(cc) moreover, the Claimant’s claims in the case are directed
essentially against Trinmar and Petrotrin for their own actions,
not against the State.
197. Had the Tribunal’s decision turned in the end on breach of contract and its
consequences, these questions would have acquired a particular importance. The Tribunal
would no doubt have had to devote detailed attention to the now quite considerable number
of decisions in investment arbitrations in which Tribunals have had to wrestle with the
distinction between contract claims and claims under international law. As it is, given the
conclusions the Tribunal has reached on the contractual questions and on the interpretation
of the BIT, it is not necessary for the tribunal to go into those issues in any detail.
Nevertheless, for completeness’ sake, and to respond to certain elements of the argument
not dealt with elsewhere, the Tribunal will deal briefly with one aspect of this matter,
namely whether (granted the presence of an “investment”) the conduct alleged and proved
on the part of the various Trinidad & Tobago entities in respect of that investment would

have been capable of giving rise to valid claims under the BIT.

198. It should be made plain at once that the Tribunal is not proposing to find, on a
purely hypothetical basis, whether or not the substantive standards of the BIT were
breached, i.e., whether the treatment meted out to the putative “investment” did, or did not,
constitute “fair and equitable treatment’, or “full protection and security”, and so forth. On
the view of the case taken by the Tribunal, those questions do not arise.” The present
section of the Award deals solely with a different question, that of the legal responsibility,
in general terms, of the Government of Trinidad & Tobago, looked at from the point of

view of international law.

199. In this specific context, the Tribunal finds itself unable to follow the line of

argument of either of the Parties.

200. The Respondent argues almost exclusively from the formal position under its
internal law, namely whether Trinmar and Petrotrin were formally part of the apparatus of

the State, carried out in a formal sense administrative functions on behalf of the State, or

* And would only arise if it was established that there was an “investment” — or its equivalent in the form of
an “investment agreement.”

81

were formally subject to Ministerial direction or control. While these considerations are
certainly not irrelevant, and may in some cases be significant, as they were advanced by the
Respondent they nevertheless belie the cardinal principle — on which the ILC lays repeated
stress — that the position under the internal law of any given State is not, and cannot be,
determinative of the responsibility of the State under international law. (cf., for example,
para. (7) of the general Commentary to Chapter II of the draft Articles). Conversely, in
seeking to bolster its argument by drawing on the distinction between commercial and
sovereign activities that underlies the law on State immunity, the Respondent is guilty of
introducing an element foreign to the quite different context of State responsibility — as the
ILC has, once again, been at pains to point out (e.g., para. (6) of the Commentary to Article

4).

201. The Claimant, for its part, has, in the Tribunal’s view, wholly failed to make out its
case that Trinmar at least (whatever the position may be with respect to Petrotrin) is, or was
at the material times, in_a_ general sense, the State’s alter ego — any more than it (the
Claimant) has offered a sustainable justification for treating as a virtually undifferentiated
whole the separate actions of Trinmar, of Petrotrin, and of Ministers of the Government of

Trinidad & Tobago.

202. So far as its own view of the matter is concerned, the Tribunal offers the following
observations. In doing so, the Tribunal draws heavily on the ILC’s draft Articles, together
with the Commentaries to them, which, although not in themselves binding, clearly reflect

the underlying general legal principles.

203. The Tribunal thus observes that, where the operation of a State enterprise is at the
core of an international dispute, it is theoretically possible that the enterprise’s conduct
(acts or omissions) may engage the responsibility of the State either as an organ of the
State; or as a body exercising elements of the governmental authority of the State; or as a
body which is in fact acting on the instructions of the State, or under its direction or control
(ILC draft Articles 4-8). There is in other words a whole gamut of possibilities, whose
application to particular situations depends upon an amalgam of questions of law and

questions of fact which will vary from case to case according to the circumstances. The

82

internal law of the State will be the starting point, but not the end point. One obvious
example may suffice, namely the question whether a State enterprise is or is not exercising
the elements of the governmental authority; the example has been chosen because, to the
eyes of the Tribunal, what the two Governments chose to lay down expressly in Article
XV(2) of the BIT is to all intents and purposes indistinguishable from the position under
general international law, as exemplified by Article 5 of the ILC’s draft Articles. The
Tribunal notes that the draft Articles contain no definition of the broad notion of “elements
of the governmental authority” (any more than does the BIT for the equivalent phrase
“other governmental authority delegated to it.” Indeed the ILC consciously refrained from
including in the draft even elements towards defining its application in particular cases.
Rather, the Commission took the view, as expressed in paragraph (6) of the Commentary to
draft Article 5, that the notion had to be judged in the round, in the light of the area of
activity in question, and in the light of the history and traditions of the country in question.
In short, the notion is intended to be a flexible one, not amenable to general definition in
advance; and the elements that would go in its definition in particular cases would be a
mixture of fact, law and practice. Moreover — and the point is of some importance — it is
not the case that the same answer would necessarily emerge on every occasion; in some of
its activities a State enterprise might fall on one side of the line, in others on the other.

Considerations of a very similar kind would apply to the case lying on the outer edge of the

 

spectrum of possibilities described above, that in which the State enterprise was not
exercising “governmental authority” as such, but has to be regarded as acting in fact on

State instructions, or under State direction, or under State control.

204. The Tribunal accordingly concludes that, although there must be serious doubt as to
whether either Trinmar or Petrotrin constituted organs of the State of Trinidad and Tobago,
it is by no means to be excluded that, for some of their individual activity at least, either of
those two bodies might, in the particular circumstances established in evidence in this
arbitration, have been acting sufficiently within the overall aegis of public authority as to
engage the responsibility of the State for international law purposes. The possibility is
given particular meaning by the general nature of the activity in question in this arbitration,
namely the winning of a sovereign natural resource of undeniably major significance to the

entire economy of the country. It would, self-evidently, be necessary to show, in addition

83

to the attributability of their conduct in this sense, that it also gave rise in substance to a

breach of the international obligations of the State.

205. To say this leads the Tribunal to two features of the present case that are of special
importance in this connection, the first being that the breaches alleged are of a BIT, and the
second that the conduct alleged to found the breaches took place, quite unusually, at three
levels: Trinmar, Petrotrin and the Respondent Government, all of them partly in their
relations with one another, and partly in their direct relations with the Claimant. Why,
however, are these features regarded as having special importance? A brief explanation

may suffice.

206. That the substantive standards against which the Claimant puts forward its claims
are those laid down in a specific treaty, not general international law, immediately opens up
the possibility that particular standards of attributability may apply, as lex specialis, in
substitute for or supplementation of the general rules of State responsibility — a possibility
to which the ILC draws attention repeatedly in its draft Articles and the Commentaries
(notably Article 55 & Commentary). Even if not (i.e., even if the applicable secondary
tules of State responsibility remain unaffected), the fact that the treaty is a BIT opens up a
further possibility at the level of primary obligation, specifically that the broad scope
mutually agreed by the Contracting Parties for encouraging as well as protecting the
investments of one in the territory of the other may have the effect of requiring (sc. as a
matter of treaty obligation) the Government to adopt patterns of conduct in respect of its
State organs and para-statal entities different from those that would ordinarily be required
under general international law or treaty law. Or at least, ie., even if there is in the
particular situation no specific requirement on the State to act in particular ways, there may
nevertheless be a framework of obligation within which, for example, if organs of
Government choose to intervene in the operations of its para-statal entities (or if the State,
for whatever reason, interferes in what would otherwise be purely commercial operations),
an international tribunal ought to be ready to infer that by doing so they have engaged the
international responsibility of the State for effects that, in substance, amounts to breaches
of the standards expressly accepted by the State by treaty. The Tribunal considers that this

conclusion is moreover in harmony with a series of arbitral decisions establishing that

84

interference by the State with the operation of a private contract is capable of constituting a

breach of treaty.

207. It follows from the above that in the factual circumstances of the present arbitration,
if the necessary “investment” had been present, the Tribunal — even while declining to
accept either the Respondent’s denial of State liability of any kind, or the Claimant’s
tendency to treat conduct at all three levels within Trinidad and Tobago as an
undifferentiated lump — would have been prepared to find, on the facts, that the various
admitted interventions by Trinidad & Tobago Government Ministers into the part-
commercial/part-statal operations of Petrotrin and Trinmar were quite sufficient to raise

serious issues as to answerable breaches of the BIT in relation to FWO.

208. For the reasons already given however, the question does not arise, and need not be

further pursued.

209. It might finally be observed that the questions dealt with above are quite different
from the question whether a breach of contract is at the same time automatically a breach
of treaty (as in a whole series of cases, exemplified by Vivendi ° or the question whether,
in the specific context of expropriation, the interference with the Claimant’s rights was a
matter of contract rather than the exercise of public powers (as in R.F.C.C _v. Morocco 4
and the decision in Impregilo v. Pakistan .”> Neither of these questions has any bearing on

the present case.

12 THE MUTUAL ALLEGATIONS OF CORRUPTION AND DISHONESTY

210. The Tribunal must now turn to another question that loomed large in the
presentation of the case by each Party, but has not in the event figured largely in our
decision. We have already drawn attention, in the Introduction to this Award, to the fact
that, what had originally appeared in the Request for Arbitration, to be a case about breach
of contract became transmute, on the filing of the Memorial, into a case revolving around
serious allegations of corruption against highly placed persons in the service of the
° Compania de Aguas del Aconquija $.A. amd Vivendi Universal (formerly Compaignie Générale des Eaux)
v. The Argentine Republic, (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3) Decision on Annullment, July 3, 2002.

** Consortium R.F.C.C. v. Royaume du Maroc (ICSID Case ARB/00/6) Award, December 22, 2003.
°5 Impregilo S.p.A v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/0303) Award, December 22, 2003.

85

Respondent State in various capacities. The narrative portion of this Award also describes
how these allegations were pursued in submissions and in evidence through the written and
oral phases of the case, and describes the circumstances in which they were then ultimately
withdrawn at the very end of the hearing, under pointed questioning from the Tribunal
itself as to whether there was any real evidence to sustain allegations of that breadth and
gravity. The narrative portion of this Award equally shows how some part of the case on
the Respondent’s side was based on generalized allegations of misconduct and dishonesty
on the part of some of the leading personalities on the Claimant’s side which, though they
may not have been of quite the same degree of gravity, were nevertheless capable of being
seriously damaging to professional or commercial reputation. There is fortunately no need
to recall the substance of any of these allegations here, in view of the way in which the case
ultimately rested. The Tribunal is simply obliged to note how substantial a part of the case
as pleaded, as well as of the evidence led before it, revolved around these allegations before

they were, in effect, abandoned by the Claimant, and not pursued by the Respondent.

211. The Tribunal was naturally much concerned from the outset about how these
allegations and cross-allegations should be dealt with in its findings, not merely because of
their serious nature, but as much because it was faced with the problems inherent in
investment arbitrations (by contrast with proceedings in a court of law): no evidence on
oath, and no compellability of witnesses. However, once the Parties abandoned their
reliance on these allegations, there ceased to be any reason for the Tribunal to make
findings upon them, and there was every reason why it should not. Yet simply to pass them
over in silence would give a false picture of the proceedings, and moreover the events
which the Claimant sought to portray as instances of dishonest conduct continue to be
relevant, without their worst overtones, to the issues left for decision. Some account of
them is therefore necessary in order to make the dispute intelligible. That being so, the
Tribunal had for its own purposes, and with a view to possible incorporation into the
Award, prepared an elaborate account of the documents and evidence devoted to every
aspect of this unhappy history. In the end, the Tribunal decided that no useful purpose
would be served by including it, and that to do so risked being positively harmful, since in
the absence of an express finding by the Tribunal definitively rejecting the charges a reader

might be tempted to assume, especially in relation to the two or three named persons who

86

were specially subjected to attack, that there was (as the saying goes) “no smoke without
fire”. The Tribunal must avoid the possibility of any such perceived but unintended
unfairness. Accordingly, the Tribunal has included only such narrative as is necessary to
explain how the remaining issues arise, and to set in context its decisions upon them. The
Tribunal recalls in this context — and in the context of its substantive findings more
generally — that it is no part of the function of a Tribunal such as this to pass moral
judgement on the behaviour of one or another Party, or indeed both Parties, but simply to

decide on the validity of the claims brought, and on their legal consequences.

212. We ought not, however, to leave the matter simply there without making it plain
that this Tribunal (as, we assume, any ICSID Tribunal) is bound to take the most serious
view of allegations of State corruption — if backed by proper evidence. This is not merely
because of the potential effect of such claims on the persons involved, but equally because
of the dire and pernicious effect that corruption has been shown to have on economic
development, (notably so in developing countries), and economic development is after all
the purpose which Bilateral Investment Treaties and the World Bank itself were created to
serve. It follows that, if allegations of corruption had been made and had proved to be well
founded, it would have had a most substantial effect on the view of the case taken by the
Tribunal, and most particularly so if and when it came to the point at which the actions or
omissions of the State came to be measured against the standard of treatment for foreign

investment laid down in the BIT.

13 CONCLUSION

213. As the present dispute has developed through the course of argument and evidence
before the Tribunal, both written and oral, it has become plain that at its core lies a
relatively simple question, which wears nevertheless two faces. In presenting its one face,
the question is: Did the Respondent (i.e., the Government of Trinidad and Tobago) breach
the rights of the Claimant, and in such a way as to fall short of the standards laid down in
the BIT? The other face of the question asks: Did the Claimant in fact have an
“investment” which was the victim of the impugned treatment? The Tribunal is in no way

deterred by the fact that, in this latter aspect, the dispute is less a dispute “arising out of an

87

investment”

than a dispute as to whether an investment came into existence, since that
must also fall within the competence of an ICSID Tribunal, under the well-known doctrine
of the “compétence de la compétence.” To present the dispute in that light does however
serve to bring out an important point, namely that the real complaint of the Claimant in this
case is that it was prevented (by the actions of various parties on the Trinidad and Tobago
side) from acquiring the investment to which it believed it had become entitled. As
explained in the substantive portion of this Award, however, the Tribunal is unable to
accept that FWO had acquired any legal right to that effect, either vis-a-vis Trinmar (and

Petrotrin) or vis-a-vis the State. The Claimant’s Application must therefore be dismissed.

14 COSTS

214. The Tribunal finally proceeds, in accordance with Rule 47(1)(j) of the Arbitration
Rules and the requests contained in the Claimant’s Memorial and the Respondent’s
Counter-Memorial, to apportion the costs of the Arbitration. It will be evident that,
although the Claimant’s contractual and quasi-contractual claims are bound to fail on the
merits, and in doing so failed also to attain the necessary threshold for the establishment of

in “investment” for the purposes of the Washington Convention and the BIT, that is by no
means the same thing as saying that these claims were unarguable, still less as saying that
the conduct of the various parties on the Trinidad and Tobago side, as established by the

evidence led in the Arbitration, might not, in the presence of an “investment”, have been

 

suffi

  

ent to sustain the complaint of breaches of the substantive standards of protection
laid down by the BIT. The story of the dealings between the two sides is not an edifying
one, and neither emerges from it with great credit. That being so, it seems clear to the
Tribunal that the fair and equitable outcome is that each Party should bear its own costs,

and that the costs of the Arbitration as such should be borne equally by the two Parties.

°° Cf. Article IX of the BIT and Article 25 of the Washington Convention

88

seeeeeees / signed /........
Mr. Fali S. Nariman

President

Date: February 20, 2006

teste eee / signed /......... we / signed /........
Sir Franklin Berman Lord Mustill
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: February 10, 2006 Date: February 10, 2006

89

