REDACTED VERSION

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO AWARD

ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/02/01

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(Additional Facility)

FIREMAN’S FUND INSURANCE COMPANY

Claimant

and

THE UNITED MEXICAN STATES
Respondent

AWARD

Before the Arbitral Tribunal constituted under Chapter Eleven of
the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), and comprised of:

Professor Andreas F. Lowenfeld
Mr. Alberto Guillermo Saavedra Olavarrieta

Professor Albert Jan van den Berg (President)

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Claudia Frutos-Peterson

Date of dispatch to the parties: 17 July 2006

Page | of 107

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

[PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK]

Page 2 of 107

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table of Contents
1 INTRODUCTION 4
I. THE CLAIM 5
Il. THE PARTIE! 6
Iv. PROCEDURAL HISTORY
Vv. FAcTS 15
VI. OVERVIEW OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS.....
A. FFIC 53,
B. Mexico 5!
VIL CONSIDERATION BY THE TRIBUNAL ....
A. Introduction 63
B. Observations as to Competence 64
C. Working Group 69
D. Prudential Measures. 3
E. Expropriation 7
F. Conclusion 102
G. Damages. 103
VII. Cost 103
Ix. RESERVED INFORMATION AND RESTRICTED ACCESS...
x. DECISIONS 106

 

ANNEX: Decision on the Preliminary Question dated 17 July 2003.

Page 3 of 107

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

INTRODUCTION

This is the first case under the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
to be heard under Chapter Fourteen, devoted to cross-border investment in
Financial Services. As spelled out in more detail in the Decision on the
Preliminary Question in this case, the architects of the NAFTA were aware that the
Governments of each of the State Parties regulated in considerable detail the
activities of financial institutions engaged in securities transactions, insurance,
banking and related activities. These regulations were often of a macro-economic

character and involved prudential considerations of various kinds.

The regulations concerning financial services were not the same in all three
countries, but each of the State Parties was clear that challenges to such
regulations or interpretations of the regulations and the relevant authorities should
not be committed to investor-State arbitration under the NAFTA. On the other
hand investment in financial institutions across borders was to be encouraged, and
investors were to be protected through the NAFTA from expropriation and

measures tantamount to expropriation.

The solution arrived at in the NAFTA was to include a separate Chapter Fourteen
on Financial Services. The expropriation provisions of the NAFTA as set out in
Chapter Eleven, including the provisions for investor-State arbitration, were made
applicable to claims under Chapter Fourteen, but claims based on other provisions
designed to protect cross-border investors and investments, including provisions
for National Treatment and Most-Favored-Nation Treatment, are excluded from
the competence of an arbitral tribunal in a case involving investment in financial
institutions. Chapter Fourteen contains no counterpart to Article 1105 concerning

Minimum Standard of Treatment.

Page 4 of 107

IL.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

In its Decision on the Preliminary Question, the Tribunal held that the dispute
between Claimant Fireman’s Fund and Respondent Mexico did involve an
investment in a financial institution as defined in Article 1416 of the NAFTA.
Accordingly, the competence of the Tribunal and the scope of the Award in the
present case are limited to the issue of whether an expropriation of Claimant’s

property has occurred, and if so, what compensation may be owing.

THE CLAIM

Fireman’s Fund claims that the Government of Mexico expropriated its investment
in Grupo Financiero BanCrecer, S.A. in violation of Article 1110 of the NAFTA.
The Government of Mexico deprived Fireman’s Fund of the use and value of its
investment, and did so in a discriminatory and arbitrary manner. Further,
according to Fireman’s Fund, the Government of Mexico failed to compensate
Fireman’s Fund for the fair market value of that investment as required by Article
1110. In so doing, the Government of Mexico violated its obligations under

Article 1110.

Fireman’s Fund seeks the following relief:

For the foregoing reasons [set forth in the Reply to the Merits],
and those set forth in Fireman’s Fund Memorial on the Merits,
Fireman’s Fund respectfully requests that the Tribunal find that
the Government of Mexico, through its acts and omissions
described above and in its Memorial, expropriated Fireman’s
Fund’s investment in dollar-denominated debentures issued by
Grupo Financiero in violation of Article 1110 of the NAFTA.
Accordingly, Fireman’s Fund will request that the Tribunal award
it compensation for the full value of its investment-that is, for
US$ 50 million plus interest based on a 90-day LIBOR rate plus

Page 5 of 107

Il.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

four percent from the taking until the date of payment,
compounded annually.

Claimant also respectfully requests an award of its legal fees and
other costs incurred in connection with this proceeding.’

Respondent Mexico does not accept the version of the facts of Fireman’s Fund but
maintains that in any event whatever losses Claimant may have sustained were not

the result of an expropriation within the meaning of the NAFTA.
Respondent Mexico seeks the following relief:

Por lo expuesto, el gobierno de México sostiene que el Tribunal

debe desechar la reclamacién de Fireman’s Fund en su totalidad,
. Sein 2

con la correspondiente condena en costas a favor de México.

[Translation:

For the foregoing reasons, the Government of Mexico submits that
the Tribunal should reject the claim of Fireman’s Fund in its
totality, with the corresponding award of costs in favour of
Mexico.]

THE PARTIES
Claimant:

Fireman’s Fund Insurance Company

Reply on the Merits {{{ 116-117, amending Memorial on the Merits {ff 139-140.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits {| 316; Rejoinder on the Merits { 279.

Page 6 of 107

12.

13.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

777 San Marin Drive
Novato, CA 94998
United States of America

herein: “Fireman’s Fund,” “FFIC,” or “Claimant.”

Fireman’s Fund is incorporated under the laws of the State of California, United
States. It is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Allianz of America, Inc., a Delaware
corporation that is in turn wholly-owned by Allianz AG of Munich, Germany. It is
a sister corporation to Allianz México, S.A. It has as its principal business the
provision of various types of insurance, including accident and fire insurance. See

also [ 51 below.

In these proceedings, Fireman’s Fund was initially represented by Mr. Lawrence
W. Newman and Mr. Raymundo E. Enriquez of the law firm Baker & McKenzie
and from 9 August 2002, by Mr. Daniel M. Price and Mr. Stanimir Alexandrov of
the law firm Sidley, Austin, Brown & Wood LLP, and Mr. Raymundo E. Enriquez

of the law firm Baker & McKenzie.

Respondent:

THE UNITED MEXICAN STATES

General Directorate of Foreign Investments
Ministry of Commerce and Industrial Development
Mexico, DF, Mexico

herein: “Mexico” or “Respondent.”

In these proceedings, the Government of Mexico is represented by Mr. Hugo
Perezcano Diaz, Director General of the Consultoria Juridica de Negociaciones,

Secretaria de Economia.

Page 7 of 107

Iv.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 30 October 2001, Fireman’s Fund submitted a Notice of Arbitration against
Mexico pursuant to the provisions of Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA and requested
that the claims set forth therein be submitted to arbitration under the Additional
Facility Rules of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

(“ICSID”).

In the Notice of Arbitration, Fireman’s Fund alleged violations by Mexico of
Articles 1102, 1105, 1110 and 1405 of the NAFTA and sought, with respect to
each of its claims under those Articles, “an award of damages in its favor and
against Mexico of US$ 50,000,000, together with applicable interest, its attorneys’
fees and the costs incurred by it in this proceeding, together with such further and

additional relief as the Arbitral Tribunal may deem appropriate.” (Notice, {| 40).

Fireman’s Fund supplemented its Notice of Arbitration by two letters dated 27

November 2001 and 11 January 2002.

Mexico submitted a letter dated 11 December 2001 in which it raised concerns

about the applicability of Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA in the present case.

On 15 January 2002, the Secretary-General of ICSID informed the parties that
Fireman’s Fund’s application for access to the Additional Facility was approved

and issued on the same day a Certificate of Registration of the Notice.

On 17 May 2002, the Arbitral Tribunal was constituted. The Tribunal was
composed of Professor Albert Jan van den Berg (appointed as President of the

Tribunal by the Secretary-General of ICSID), of Dutch nationality, residing at

Page 8 of 107

20.

21.

22.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

Tervuren, Belgium, Professor Andreas F. Lowenfeld (appointed by Claimant), of
US nationality, residing at New York, New York, and Mr. Francisco Carrillo
Gamboa (appointed by Respondent), of Mexican nationality, residing at Mexico,
DF, Mexico. Ms. Claudia Frutos-Peterson of ICSID was designated to serve as
Secretary to the Tribunal. All subsequent written communications between the

Tribunal and the parties were made through the ICSID Secretariat.

The first session of the Tribunal was held, with the parties’ agreement, in
Washington, D.C., on 22 July 2002. The Summary of the First Session is deemed

incorporated into this Award.

At the first session it was agreed by the parties that the proceedings in the present
case would be divided into three phases. The first phase would concern the
Preliminary Question, the second phase would concern the merits of the case only
as to liability, and the third phase, if necessary, would concern the quantification

of damages.

By a Decision on the Preliminary Question dated 17 July 2003, which was
communicated to the parties on 13 August 2003 and is attached to this Award as

an Annex, the Tribunal rendered the following decisions:

(1) HOoLpDs that Claimant’s claims brought under Articles 1102,
1105 and 1405 of the NAFTA are not within the competence of the
Tribunal, but that claims brought under Article 1110 are within its
competence;

(2) RESERVES decision on the costs of the present phase of the
arbitration;

Page 9 of 107

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

(3) DETERMINES that the further conduct of the arbitration will be
determined by the Tribunal after consultation with the parties.
By letter of 26 August 2003, the Tribunal invited the parties to agree on an
appropriate schedule for the next stage of the proceedings. By letter of 9
September 2003, the parties submitted an agreed schedule for the merits phase (the

“Schedule”), which the Tribunal approved on 8 October 2003.

Except as set out below, each party made numerous requests for documents of the
other party, and eventually these requests were either granted or ordered by the
Tribunal or rejected. Throughout the proceedings, the parties’ numerous
procedural applications were promptly and unanimously decided by the Tribunal.
The Tribunal is persuaded that no document that should have come before the

Tribunal was missing in any way that affected the outcome of the case.

On 25 June 2004, FFIC submitted a Memorial on the Merits with accompanying

witness statements and exhibits.

On 31 January 2005, Mexico filed its Counter-Memorial on the Merits (Escrito de

Contestacién) with accompanying exhibits.

On 28 July 2004, FFIC had solicited the Tribunal’s assistance in producing a legal
opinion authored by Mr. Francisco Carrillo Gamboa, at that time one of the
members of the Tribunal, and addressed to Grupo Financiero Bancrecer S.A. de

C.V. (the “Carrillo Opinion”). On 23 February 2005, FFIC informed the Tribunal

See also 1 85 infra.

Page 10 of 107

28.

29.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

that it had located a copy of the Carrillo Opinion and enclosed a copy thereof. On
2 March 2005, Mr. Carrillo wrote to the Secretary-General of ICSID and the other
members of the Tribunal to advise them of his decision to resign as arbitrator in
the present case. On 3 March 2005, the ICSID Secretariat declared the
proceedings suspended in accordance with Article 16(2) of the Additional Facility
Arbitration Rules and invited the Tribunal to consider the reasons for Mr.
Carrillo’s resignation and decide whether it consented thereto. On 7 March 2005,
the Tribunal consented to the resignation of Mr. Carrillo as arbitrator. On 15 April
2005, Mexico appointed Mr. Alberto Guillermo Saavedra Olavarrieta as arbitrator
in replacement of Mr. Carrillo. On 26 April 2005, the ICSID Secretariat informed
the parties that Mr. Saavedra had accepted his appointment as arbitrator and that

the proceedings were resumed.

On 26 April 2005, the ICSID Secretariat also circulated three letters from FFIC
dated 4 and 8 March 2005 and 25 April 2005, as well as a letter from Mexico

dated 16 March 2005, all received during the suspension of the proceedings.

By letter of 4 March 2005 (circulated on 26 April 2005), FFIC alleged that Mexico
had exerted pressure on the witness Mr. Ferndndez Garcia not to testify in the
second phase of these proceedings, and requested, inter alia, that the Tribunal
issue an order calling for Mr. Fernandez Garcia to give testimony. Mr. Fernandez
Garcia was formerly the President of the Comisién Nacional Bancaria y de
Valores (“CNBV”) and had testified for FFIC in relation to the Preliminary
Question. Mexico denied FFIC’s allegations in a letter of 27 April 2005. By
Order No. 6 dated 12 May 2005, Mr. Fernandez Garcia was called to give
testimony at the upcoming hearing, and the parties were requested to use their best

efforts to agree upon all practical aspects relating to his testimony. Following

Page 11 of 107

30.

31.

32.

33.

34,

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

correspondence between the parties regarding the ability of Mr. Fernandez Garcia
to testify, on 23 June 2005, the Tribunal advised the parties that it had noted the
unavailability of Mr. Fernandez Garcia as witness in the present phase of the
proceedings, deciding in this respect that the evidence that he had given in the first
phase of the proceedings would not be declared inadmissible, without prejudice to

its relevance, weight or materiality.

On 31 May 2005, FFIC filed a Reply on the Merits with accompanying witness

statements and exhibits.

On 5 August 2005, Mexico filed a Rejoinder on the Merits (Escrito de Duiplica)
dated 4 August 2005 with accompanying exhibits and witness statements. A

corrected version of which was submitted on 10 August 2005.

On 18 August 2005, the parties filed witness notifications.

On 2 September 2005, the Government of Canada filed a submission pursuant to
Article 1128 of the NAFTA. The Government of the United States of America did

not make any submission.

On 8 September 2005, following FFIC’s request for reconsideration of its ruling of
24 August 2005, the Tribunal advised the parties that it maintained its refusal to
strike certain witness statements as requested by FFIC, but gave permission to the
parties to file a pre-hearing brief on any matter deemed relevant for the

forthcoming hearing, which the parties did on 21 September 2005.

Page 12 of 107

35.

36.

37.

38.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

On 22 September 2005, Mexico filed objections regarding the admissibility of
FFIC’s Pre-Hearing Brief and the exhibit and two witness statements attached

thereto. The objections were rejected by the Tribunal on 26 September 2005.

On 22 September 2005, a pre-hearing telephone conference was held between the
President of the Tribunal and the parties to discuss procedural matters relating to

the hearing to be held on the merits (the “Hearing”).

In September 2005, Mr. Eduardo Cepeda Fernandez, the representative of JP
Morgan in Mexico, proposed to be called as a witness by Claimant, advised FFIC
that he would not be able to testify. By letter of 20 September 2005, FFIC alleged
that Mexico had pressured Mr. Cepeda not to appear further in these proceedings.
Mexico denied said allegations by letter of 21 September 2005. Pursuant to a
request by the President made during the pre-hearing telephone conference, FFIC
wrote on 22 September 2005 to Mr. Cepeda inviting him to reconsider his decision

not to appear as witness at the Hearing. Mr. Cepeda maintained his refusal.

The Hearing was held from 27 September until 1 October 2005 in Washington
D.C. Mr. Daniel M. Price, Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov, Mr. Raymundo E.
Enriquez, Judge Stephen M. Schwebel, Dr. Gerhart Reuss, Ms. Katherine Crocker,
Mr. Peter Lefkin, Mr. David J. Lewis, Ms. Marinn Carlson, Ms. Jennifer Haworth
McCandless, Mr. Gus Kryder, and Ms. Dara Levinson appeared on behalf of
FFIC. Mr. Hugo Perezcano Diaz, Mr. Maximo Romero, Mr. Luis Ram6n Marin,
Mr. Salvador Behar, Mr. Stephan Becker, Mr. Cameron Mowatt, Mr. Christopher
Thomas, Mr. Sanjay Mullick, Mr. Alejandro Barragan, Ms. Zuraya Tapia-Alfaro,
Mr. Luis Mancera, Ms. Maria Teresa Fernandez, Mr. Enrique Barrera, Mr. Manuel
Guerrero, Mr. Mario Taméz, Mr. Carlos Guadarrama, and Mr. Alfonso Orozco

appeared on behalf of Mexico.

Page 13 of 107

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

At the Hearing, the Government of Canada was represented by Mr. Rodney
Neufeld and Ms. Yannick Mondy. The U.S. Government was represented by Mr.
Keith Benes, Ms. Renee Gardner, Ms. CarrieLyn Guymon, Mr. Mark McNeill,
Ms. Andrea Menaker, Ms. Laura Svat, Mr. Jason Kearns, Mr. Jonathan Kallmer,

Ms. Kimberly Evans, and Mr. Gary Sampliner.

At the Hearing, the following witnesses appeared on behalf of FFIC: Mr. William
M. Isaac, Mr. José Antonio Garcia, Mr. Rubén Acosta Carrasco, and Dr. Gerhart
Reuss; and on behalf of Mexico: Mr. José Vicente Corta Fernandez, Mr. Fernando
Luis Corvera Caraza, Dra. Patricia Armendariz Guerra, Mr. José Angel Gurria,
Mr. Sergio Méndez Santa Cruz, Mr. Alfonso Orozco, Lic. Guillermo Zamarripa

Escamilla, and Mr. Carlos Sempé Minvielle.

On 29 September 2005, Mr. Saavedra made a disclosure pursuant to Article 14 of
the ICSID Additional Facility Rules. By letters of 11 and 25 October 2005,
Claimant and Respondent advised the Tribunal that they had no objection to Mr.
Saavedra’s continued service on the Tribunal following his disclosure of 29

September 2005.

In the course of the Hearing, the parties submitted an agreed List of Dramatis
Personae, as well as a Consolidated List of Exhibits (which was updated by FFIC
on 6 October 2005).

By letter of 24 March 2006, FFIC drew the Tribunal’s attention to the Partial
Award rendered on 17 March 2006 in Saluka Investments BV (The Netherlands) v.

Page 14 of 107

44.

45.

46.

47.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

The Czech Republic.’ At the request of the Tribunal, FFIC submitted brief
comments on the relevance of the Saluka award on 21 April 2006, and Mexico

responded on 17 May 2006.
The Tribunal declared the proceedings closed on 7 July 2006.
The Tribunal deliberated at several occasions.

Facts

In the Decision of 17 July 2003, the Tribunal made a number of factual findings
relevant to the Preliminary Question without prejudice to its factual findings on the
merits of this case. The factual findings in the present Chapter (and Chapter VII

below) are based on the entire record in this case, including the merits phase.

At the outset it is useful to give a brief overview of the relevant competent

authorities in Mexico:

- Banco de México is the central bank of the country and is an independent
legal person of public law. Its primary objective is to maintain the
stability of the national currency and, additionally, to promote the proper
development of the financial system and to foster the proper functioning

of the payment system.

Available at: http://www.pca-cpa.org/ENGLISH/RPC/SAL-CZ%20Partial%20A ward%20170306
-pdf.

Page 15 of 107

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

The Comisién Nacional Bancaria y de Valores (“CNBV” or
“Commission,” formerly Comisién Nacional Bancaria) is authorized to
supervise and regulate financial entities in order to provide for their
stability and proper functioning as well as to maintain and promote the
proper and balanced development of the financial system and, in

connection therewith, the protection of the public interest.

The Secretaria de Hacienda y Crédito Piiblico (“SHCP” Ministry of
Finance and Public Credit, also referred to as Ministry of Finance) is a
division of the federal executive power, whose principal function is to

define the policies of the federal Government in matters of tax, public

 

spending, financing, creditworthiness, banking, money, currency and

pricing, and tariffs for goods and services of the public sector.

The Fondo Bancario de Proteccién al Ahorro (“FOBAPROA,” Fund for the
Protection of Bank Savings) is a Trust Fund (fideicomiso) established
pursuant to Article 122 of the Ley de Instituciones de Crédito (Act of
Credit Institutions, also called Banking Act) whose objective was to take
preventive measures in order to avoid financial problems of “instituciones
de banca miiltiple” [multiple service banking institutions] as well as
compliances of those institutions with their obligations. The Fund
functioned as a form of deposit insurance. The Comité Técnico [Technical
Committee] of FOBAPROA was charged with the approval of FOBAPROA’s

measures.

The Instituto para la Proteccion al Ahorro Bancario (“TPAB,” Institute
for the Protection of Bank Savings) took over FOBAPROA’s

responsibilities in January 1999.

Page 16 of 107

48.

49.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

- The Grupo de Trabajo (“Working Group’), consisting of representatives

of Banco de México, the CNBV, the SHCP, and FOBAPROA (IPAB as of
January 1999), is an inter-agency taskforce that was formed to address the
financial crisis that arose in Mexico in November — December 1994.
CNBV was the lead agency. The Working Group is considered in more

detail in Section VILC below.

End 1994, a serious financial crisis broke out in Mexico. The Mexican peso
declined significantly in relation to the United States dollar and interest rates
soared. In the first semester of 1995, the Peso declined in value not less than 96%.

That had a significant effect on the financial position of many Mexican banks.

In order to combat the financial crisis which could lead to a collapse of the
Mexican financial system, the Mexican authorities adopted a series of measures,
inter alia, to support banks and depositors and to re-establish their viability. One
of those measures was the Programa de Capitalizacién y Compra de Cartera
[Program of Capitalization and Acquisition of Portfolio] (the “PCCC”). The
PCCC consisted of a scheme under which the Government, through FOBAPROA,
assumed non-performing loan portfolios from the participating banks in exchange
for interest bearing notes issued by FOBAPROA payable in 10 years, and guaranteed
by the Government. The assumption of the loans improved the banks’ financial
condition by taking non-performing loans off the banks’ balance sheets, and
adding interest-generating Government notes to the asset side of the banks’ books
in their stead. The assumption of the loan portfolio and the issuance of the notes
were conditioned upon the bank securing additional funds to increase the
capitalization of the bank. As a rule, for each peso contributed by the shareholders

or others to capital, the Government assumed two pesos’ worth of loan portfolio.

Page 17 of 107

50.

Sl.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

Some 11 banks participated in the PCCC, including BanCrecer.> When a bank
participated, it entered into an agreement called “Bases de Capitalizaci6n” with

CNBV and FoBApROA.®

Grupo Financiero BanCrecer, S.A. de C.V., (hereinafter: “GFB”), a Mexican
corporation, is the holding company of, inter alia, BanCrecer, S.A., Institucién de
Banca Multiple, (hereinafter: “BanCrecer” or the “Bank’”). In 1995, GFB was
owned by public shareholders (43.4%) and a so-called Core Investor Group
(56.6% [ REDACTED

]). In 1995, GFB was in serious financial

difficulties.

As mentioned before, Claimant Fireman’s Fund Insurance Company (“FFIC” or
“Fireman’s Fund”) of Novato, California, United States of America, is an
insurance company founded some 150 years ago, whose principal business is the

provision of various types of insurance, including accident and fire insurance.

Banco Nacional de México, $.A.; Bancomer, S.A. (merged with Banco Bilbao Vizcaya — “BBV”);
Banco Mercantil del Norte, $.A.; Banca Serfin, S.A. (Serfin); Banco Internacional, $.A.; Banco
Vizcaya-México, S.A.; Banco del Atlantico, S.A. (Atlantico); Banca Promex, S.A. (Promex);
Confia, S.A. (Conffa); BanCrecer, S.A. (BanCrecer); BanOro, S.A. (BanOro, merged with
BanCrecer); and Banco Mexicano, S.A. Exh. R2346.

[

 

REDACTED

[ REDACTED

Page 18 of 107

52.

53.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

FFIC is part of the Allianz Group of companies, a global player in the property,
life, and casualty insurance industry. FFIC is a wholly owned subsidiary of
Allianz of America, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Allianz of America” or
“AZOA”), which also owns Allianz México, S.A. (“Allianz México” or
“AZMEX”), a Mexican company involved in the provision of insurance services.
Thus, FFIC and Allianz México are sister companies within the Allianz Group.
Allianz of America is in turn owned by Allianz AG of Munich, Germany. Two
persons who played a significant role within the Allianz Group in this case need to
be mentioned here: Dr. Gerhart E. Reuss, Chairman of Allianz México, and Mr.
Herbert Hansmeyer, member of the Board of Allianz AG and Chairman of the

Board of Directors of FFIC.

In the mid-1990s, Allianz México wanted to strengthen its existing industrial
insurance business in Mexico. In particular, it was interested in building up a
business of so-called “personal lines” of insurance (life insurance, automobile
insurance and household insurance). Allianz México believed that the best way to
expand its business was to seek an alliance with an existing Mexican bank whose
branch offices could be used as outlets for sales of insurance products.* Allianz

México identified BanCrecer for that purpose.

[ REDACTED , Allianz AG and GFB signed a [
REDACTED

] GFB was to pass over to the Joint Venture Company all its

Reuss II, 4.
[ REDACTED |

Page 19 of 107

54.

55.

56.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

life insurance business and Allianz México was to do the same with respect to its

life and health insurance.

On the same date, JP Morgan, retained by Allianz, made a presentation to Allianz
México concerning [ the bank holding company.
] On 4 September 1995, JP Morgan

[ provided additional analysis of that company.

On 20 September 1995, GFB issued US$ 50 million in dollar-nominated
mandatorily convertible five year subordinated debentures,’ which were

purchased by FFIC on 29 September 1995 (the “Dollar Debentures”).

Also on 20 September 1995, GFB issued similar convertible subordinated
debentures denominated in Mexican pesos, the value of which was equivalent to
US$ 50 million at the time (the “Peso Debentures”).'° It is common ground
between the parties that the Peso Debentures were purchased by Mexican

nationals.

[REDACTED
[ REDACTED |

Exh, R0086-0106; see also Exh. RO128-0145.
Exh, RO107-0127; see also Exh. RO146-0164.

Page 20 of 107

57.

58.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

The issuance of the Peso and Dollar Debentures had previously been approved by

Banco de México on 15 September 1995.'*
On 29 September 1995, the following documents were executed:

(a) [ An agreement that provided for an increase of BanCrecer’s capital
including the issuance by GFB of the Peso Debentures and Dollar
Debentures; and provided for the assumption by FOBAPROA of part of
the loan portfolio of BanCrecer against notes issued by FOBAPROA and

guaranteed by the Mexican Government.

(b) [ An agreement between GFB and FFIC concerning the purchase of

dollar debentures.

]
Exh, R0050-0055.
[ REDACTED ]
[ REDACTED | “CMM” refers herein to the exhibits to Claimant's Memorial on the
Merits.”
[ REDACTED

]
[ REDACTED

Page 21 of 107

59.

60.

20

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

(c) [ An agreement between GFB and Allianz of America, Inc. regarding the

establishment of a joint venture in Mexico.

In October 1995, Dr. Gerhart Reuss was elected to serve as member of the Board
of Directors of GFB and as a “miembro suplente” [“alternate member”] of the

Board of Directors of BanCrecer.

Some MPX 5,467 million worth of loan portfolio were transferred by BanCrecer
and BanOro to FOBAPROA [ REDACTED ] with value date 28 September 1995.
[ REDACTED J] Ina
report dated 20 September 1996 addressed to BanCrecer, BanOro and CNBV,
Mancera, S.C. Ernst & Young determined that loans totalling MPX 426 million
out of the MPX 5,467 million had the risk level “E” and that the loan portfolio
required MXP 448 million of “provisiones preventivas” [“contingent reserves] in

20

addition to those determined by the Banks.” That and other related matters

[REDACTED]
Exh. CO765-777, CMM 10. [ REDACTED

Page 22 of 107

61.

62.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

caused further discussion between BanCrecer (and BanOro) and FOBAPROA about

the loans that qualified for the transfer and the required reserves.

[ ]a “Master Agreement” [

REDACTED

] was to the effect that the life insurance business
was left in the hands of Allianz México, while BanCrecer would continue to make
available its branch network to Allianz México for the sale of life insurance as
well car and household insurance. Allianz México “bought out” BanCrecer by a
US$ 30 million debt instrument and a US$ 10 million in the purchase of an equity
interest in GFB by Allianz México (which acquired as result a 3.16% interest in

GFB). [

REDACTED

In the meantime, the financial position of BanCrecer further deteriorated. It
necessitated another [
REDACTED
] capital injection [

REDACTED ] against a further assumption by FOBAPROA of part

[REDACTED
[ REDACTED
[REDACTED ]

Page 23 of 107

63.

64.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

of BanCrecer’s loan portfolio [

REDACTED

In the year 1997, the financial position of BanCrecer again deteriorated. One of
the reasons was that on 1 January 1997 new accounting principles for financial
institutions entered into force in Mexico. On 28 August 1997, GFB deposited its
entire paid up shareholding in BanCrecer in favour of FOBAPROA with S.D.
Indeval, S.A. de C.V., Institucién para el Depdsito de Valores. On 25 November
1997, GFB retained JP Morgan to assist it in the evaluation of GFB’s current
financial position and in making an estimation of the capital needs and projected

performance of BanCrecer.

At the same time, and according to FFIC unbeknownst to it, BanCrecer sought
permission from CNBV by two letters of 17 November 1997 to create a trust to
“repurchase” the Peso Debentures at par value.?° According to BanCrecer, a
number of Peso Debenture holders had claimed that the documentation for
acquiring those Debentures was legally deficient. The Trust (“Fideicomiso No.
9285-9 BanCrecer’”’) was created on 28 November 1997,7” which was controlled

by BanCrecer. The “repurchase” of the Debentures by the Trust was financed by a

[REDACTED ]

[ REDACTED |

Exh. RO166-0168 and C0744-0751, CMM 7.
Exh, RO169-0171.

Page 24 of 107

65.

66.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

loan of BanCrecer, originally of MXP 250 million and later increased to the full
amount of the par value of the Peso Debentures of MXP 500 million to the Trust.
By letter of 8 December 1997, CNBV gave BanCrecer permission to “repurchase”

the Debentures, subject to a number of conditions.”

At the end of 1997 and in the beginning of 1998, BanCrecer and JP Morgan
developed a Recapitalization Plan to rescue BanCrecer for submission to the
Mexican financial authorities.° The Recapitalization Plan as developed by
BanCrecer and JP Morgan met resistance of the Government officials who insisted
that the entire existing equity capital in BanCrecer should be written off to zero
against previous losses and capital deficits. The Recapitalization Plan would have
involved a new foreign strategic partner for 40% of BanCrecer equity. JP Morgan
and the Allianz Group (in particular Dr. Reuss) contacted various foreign banks

for that purpose, including in particular Argentaria, a Spanish bank.

The Recapitalization Plan was the subject of an urgent meeting in the evening of
Thursday 26 February 1998, convened at the office of Governor of Banco de
México. At that meeting participated Dr. Reuss (FFIC/Allianz), Mr. Eduardo
Cepeda (JP Morgan), Mr. Alcantara (GFB/BanCrecer), Mr. Guillermo Ortiz
(Governor of Banco de México), Mr. Eduardo Fernandez Garcia (President of

CNBV), and Mr. Javier Arrigunaga (Director General of FOBAPROA). The Plan

The original loan of MXP 250 million was authorized by BanCrecer’s Executive Committee on 21
February 1998 (Exh. C0800, CMM 15), and the increase to MXP 500 million on 19 May 1998
(Exh. C0801, CMM 16).

Exh, RO172-0173.
[ REDACTED ]

Page 25 of 107

67.

68.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

discussed at that meeting*! consisted in essence of a separation into a “Good
Bank” and a “Bad Bank,” a merger of GFB and its other subsidiaries with
BanCrecer, and a 40-40-20 split in shareholding, 40% for the existing Mexican
shareholders, 40% for a new foreign strategic partner and 20% for FFIC in the
cleaned-up bank. FFIC’s 20% equity participation would consist of its US$ 50
million Debentures and an additional US$ 50 million investment. The non-
performing loan portfolio would be taken over by the Government in a trust. The
new foreign partner was to contribute US$ 200 million in equity. FFIC (Allianz)
would attract the foreign strategic partner. If it failed to do so, the Government
would repay FFIC US$ 25 million of the US$ 50 million Debentures. The parties
to the present case disagree whether the Plan as discussed at this meeting

constituted an agreement between FFIC and Mexico.

The next day, Friday 27 February 1998, FOBAPROA’s Technical Committee met.
The parties disagree whether the minutes of the meeting [ REDACTED ] which
were unknown to GFB, BanCrecer, FFIC and JP Morgan at the time, show that the

Technical Committee approved the plan allegedly adopted the evening before.

On the same day, Friday 27 February 1998, GFB and JP Morgan issued a press

release. The three bullet points in the heading of the press release read:

[ REDACTED
] “CMPQ” refers herein to the exhibits to Claimant’s Memorial on the
Preliminary Question.

[ REDACTED ]
Exh. C0103, CMPQ 8; see also R2930.

Page 26 of 107

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

* Se aprueban las medidas para el saneamiento definitivo de
BanCrecer.

* Nuevos inversionistas, conjuntamente con un grupo de los
accionistas actuales aportardn recursos por $ 500 millones de
dolares.

* El nuevo capital de BanCrecer estaré representado en su
mayoria por capital extranjero.

[Translation:

¢ The measures for the definitive restructuring of BanCrecer
are approved.

« New investors, jointly with a group of current shareholders,
will contribute resources of US$ 500 million.

¢ The majority of the new capital of BanCrecer will be
represented by foreign capital.]

69. Claimant contends that the draft of the press release was discussed with, and
approved by, Mexican officials. Mexico denies this. In any event, the press
release was reported in the Mexican newspapers the next day™ and the Mexican
authorities did not seek a rectification of the press reports or otherwise made

known that the reporting was incorrect.

s Exh. CO1180-1187, CRM 69.

Page 27 of 107

70.

71.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

By letter of 16 April 1998, BanCrecer sent CNBV the trust agreement of 28
November 1997.*° That letter was shown to Dr. Reuss a few days later by[ a
government official. Dr. Reuss reported to his management on the circumstances

surrounding the repurchase of the —peso-dominated debentures.

[ Dr. Reuss also reported to his management on his meeting with a high-ranking
government official regarding the repurchase of the peso-dominated bonds.

]

Exh. C0104-0107, CMPQ 9.
[ REDACTED ]

Page 28 of 107

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

REDACTED
]
72. [
REDACTED
]
73. The Peso Debenture “repurchase” by the Trust controlled by BanCrecer was

substantially completed July 1998.37. While the “repurchase” was initiated due to

alleged deficiencies in certain subscriptions (referred to as “sin contrato”

a See letter of 13 July 1998 from BanCrecer to CNBV, Exh. CO108-0110, CMPQ 10.

Page 29 of 107

74.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

[“without contract”]), in the course of 1998, the decision was taken to apply it to
all Peso Debentures because, as alleged by Mexico in the present arbitration, it
was impossible to distinguish between Peso Debentures “sin contrato” [“without
contract”] and “con contrato” [“with contract”]. On 12 August 1998, CNBV
wrote to GFB that it had taken note (“‘se ha tomado nota’) of the procedure.** On
the same day, CNBV wrote to BanCrecer with reference to the letter to GFB that
its letter of 8 December 1997 had become “without effect” (“sin efecto”).° FFIC
infers from those letters that CNBV had approved the “repurchase” and that
CNBV had lifted the restrictions set forth in its letter of 8 December 1997.

Mexico disputes that inference.

The follow up of the discussions regarding the Recapitalization Plan on 26 and 27
February 1998 was the preparation by JP Morgan of a “Programa de Saneamiento
y Capitalizacién — Resumen de Términos y Condiciones” [“Summary of Terms
and Conditions of the Restructuring and Capitalization Program”] dated May
1998.*° The header on each page of this document reads: “May 1998. Terms and
Conditions Sheet. DRAFT FOR DISCUSSION.” The last page is a signature page for
SHCP, Banco de México, FOBAPROA, CNBV and “Grupo de Inversionistas” (by:
Mr. Alcantara). The document is referred to in this arbitration as the
“Memorandum of Understanding” or the “Memorandum of Intent.” The italicized

introduction to the Memorandum of Intent states:

Exh. C0029, CMPQ 11.
Exh. C0802, CMM 17.
Exh. C0046-0055, CMPQ 5=C0703-0712, unofficial English translation at CO713-C0721.

Page 30 of 107

75.

76.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

The following terms and conditions reflect the agreement reached
between the Grupo Financiero BanCrecer, S.A. de C.V. (the
“Group” ) shareholder group led by Mr. Roberto Alcantara Rojas
(the “Investor Group”), the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit
(“SHCP”), the Bank of Mexico, the Mexican Banking and
Securities Commission (“CNBV”), [and] the Bank Fund to
Protect Savings (“Fobaproa”), which have been ratified by
FOBAPROA’s Technical Committee to carry out the Restructuring
and Capitalization Program for BanCrecer, S.A. Institucién de
Banca Miiltiple, Grupo Financiero BanCrecer (the “Bank” ). The
execution and validity of this document are subject to the approval
of the Interministry Financing Expense Committee of the SHCP
and of the Group’s corporate bodies. In view of the foregoing, no
obligation included herein shall be enforceable until the
respective approvals are obtained. The terms of the program
described herein shall be documented in the final contracts
executed to formalize these agreements to the satisfaction of the
parties.

The stated purpose of the Memorandum of Intent is: “Define the terms and
conditions pursuant to which the Investor Group intends to participate, with the
support of the Federal Government, in the Bank’s Restructuring and Capitalization
Program” (clause 1). The Memorandum of Intent deals with: Restructuring of the
Bank (clause 2); Capitalization and Sale of the Bank (clause 3); Shareholder
Structure (clause 4); FOBAPROA Funding (clause 5); Trust Administration (clause
6); Investor Group Commitments (clause 7); Indemnities (clause 8);

Authorizations (clause 9); and Confidentiality (clause 10).

Mr. José Antonio Garcia, Senior Executive Vice-President of GFB from June 1997

until July 1999, testified that the Memorandum of Intent was developed by JP

Page 31 of 107

77.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

Morgan “in discussions with the Mexican financial authorities.”“' On the other
hand, the witnesses appearing for Mexico in the arbitration testified that they had

not seen the Memorandum of Intent until the present arbitration.

In March — April 1998, the Mexican Government presented financial reform
legislation to the Mexican Congress. Congress then embarked on a critical
examination of the financial authorities dealing with the crisis, in particular,
FOBAPROA. In late 1998, Congress requested an audit of FOBAPROA. Thereafter,
FOBAPROA was replaced by IPAB pursuant to the Ley de Proteccién al Ahorro
Bancario [Law for the Protection of Bank Savings] adopted by Congress in
December 1998 and published in the Diario Oficial [Official Gazette] of 19
January 1999 (entry into force on 20 January 1999). Article Ninth of the
Transitional Provisions of the Law* refers to a Section Four of the “Resumen
Ejecutivo de las Operaciones realizadas por [FOBAPROA]” [“Executive Summary
of the Operations carried out by [FOBAPROA]”] in which it is mentioned that “se
prevén los montos necesarios para las operaciones de saneamiento financiero
correspondientes a Banco del Atldntico, S.A., Banca Promex, S.A. y BanCrecer,
S.A., y que a la fecha no se han finalizado.” [“The amounts needed for the
operations of financial restructuring corresponding to Banco del Atlantico, S.A.,

Banca Promex, S.A. and BanCrecer, S.A., have been planned for, but as of this

Garefa I, { 34.

Exh. 0217-0235, Exh. CMPQ 17. Any person who had been Secretary of SHCP, Governor of the
Banco de México, or President of CNBV and in that capacity member of the Technical Committee
of FOBAPROA during the period 1995-1997 was prohibited from being a member of the Executive
Committee or Executive Secretary of IPAB (Second Article of the Transitional Provisions, Exh.
0231).

Exh. C0233-0234, CMPQ 17.

Page 32 of 107

78.

79.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

date have not been finalized.”] Article Ninth required IPAB to proceed to
“evaluar, auditar y, en su caso, concluir, dichas operaciones” [“evaluate, audit,
and, as the case may be conclude said operations”]. One of the conditions
imposed by Article Ninth for concluding the operations was that “Se aplicard
integralmente el capital de las instituciones mencionadas a cubrir sus pérdidas”
[The capital of the afore-mentioned institutions shall be fully applied to cover its

losses”).

In the meantime, FFIC and JP Morgan were actively seeking a strategic foreign
partner. In the arbitration FFIC claims that it could not really interest foreign
banks to participate since the Memorandum of Intent had not been signed.
Moreover, it was unclear whether the split in the new bank would be 40-40-20 as
foreseen in the plan but not yet legally possible in Mexico. The plan anticipated
that Mexican law would change in that regard, but Congress did not adopt
legislation to that effect. It was then envisaged that a foreign party would have
51% control via a subsidiary, which was possible under Mexican law. That, in
turn, required convincing Mr. Alcantara, the principal shareholder of GFB, who

initially resisted the concept of foreign control.

In fall 1998, the situation was described in another letter from Dr. Reuss to Mr.

Hansmeyer (captioned [ REDACTED ]) as
follows:
REDACTED ]

Page 33 of 107

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

REDACTED

Page 34 of 107

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

REDACTED

Page 35 of 107

80.

81.

82.

83.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

[capitals as in original]

On 11 November 1998, FOBAPROA advised BanCrecer that it had returned the
entire loan portfolio.*° [
REDACTED ] GFB

appears to have accepted the return in a letter of 14 October 1999.47

In January 1999, JP Morgan continued its discussions with BBV to interest them

in a participation in a sanitized BanCrecer.**

As mentioned above, in January 1999 the Instituto para la Proteccién al Ahorro
Bancario (“TIPAB” Institute for the Protection of Bank Savings) took over
FOBAPROA’s responsibilities. IPAB devised a new plan for BanCrecer, whereby it

would take over BanCrecer and auction it to the highest bidder.

By letter of 5 April 1999 from Allianz México (Dr. Reuss) to SHCP, Banco de
México, and CNBV,”’ Dr. Reuss recalled the agreement allegedly made in
February 1998 on the recapitalization of BanCrecer, and in particular that US$ 25
million of the Dollar Debentures would be returned if no foreign strategic partner

could be found (see [| 66-67 above). Dr. Reuss wrote:

Exh, C0215-0216, CMPQ 16.
[ REDACTED }
Exh, R1923-1924.

See Memorandum of 26 January 1999 and proposal to BBV (Exh. CO113-C0131, CMPQ 13, and
0132-0208, CMPQ 14).

Exh. C0236-0237 (CMPQ 18).

Page 36 of 107

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

[N]os permitimos dirigirnos a Ustedes con referencia al proceso
para la futura venta o fusi6n de BanCrecer.

Como Ustedes estén enterados, el Grupo Allianz suscribid en
Octubre de 1996 una emisidn de obligaciones de BanCrecer,
denominados en Délares, por valor de US Délares 50 millones.
Al mismo tiempo, BanCrecer hizo una emisién de obligaciones en
pesos, por un monto equivalente, suscrita por tenedores
mexicanos. Esta emisién de obligaciones suscrita por
inversionistas nacionales fue totalmente liquidada por BanCrecer
en 1998, con la aprobacién de todas las autoridades financieras
competentes.

En el caso de Allianz, habfamos ofrecido a las autoridades en
Febrero de 1998 el volver a invertir la totalidad de los
mencionados US Délares 50 millones en obligaciones, una vez
liquidados, mas inversiones adicionales de otros US Délares 50
millones, en un plan de recapitalizacién de BanCrecer en conjunto
con un socio bancario extranjero, programa que habia sido
aprobad[o] por la Junta de Gobierno de FOBAPROA en el primer
trimestre 1998.

En la consideracién original por parte de las autoridades del plan
de recapitalizacién de BanCrecer, también habiamos aceptado el
que solamente se liquidaria a Allianz un monto de US Délares 25
millones en caso de que el plan de recapitalizacién no pudiese
llevarse a cabo por falta de socios extranjeros interesados.

Por los retrasos lamentables y ataques politicos que sufrieron los
programas pendientes de FOBAPROA, la Junta de Gobierno del
FOBAPROA nunca Ileg6 a entregar a BanCrecer o a J.P. Morgan,
los agentes financieros de BanCrecer, una carta formal de
intenciones, firmada por el FOBAPROA y cuyos términos ya se
habian redactado. Esta carta de intenciones, tantas veces
solicitada, era la base fundamental para que los bancos que en
aquel tiempo estuvieron interesados en adquirir 0 recapitalizar a
BanCrecer, pudiesen concretizar sus intenciones de inversiOn, ya
que, evidentemente, los términos de participacién del FOBAPROA y
su acuerdo al plan de recapitalizaci6n eran condiciones

Page 37 of 107

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

imprescindibles para cualquier entrada de un socio bancario
extranjero.

Actualmente, con la inminente formacién del IPAB y con la
intencién de someter el caso de BanCrecer a un proceso de
licitacién, la venta o fusi6n de BanCrecer posiblemente se
afectaria dentro de un corto plazo.

Es por este raz6n que Allianz quisiera respetuosamente volver a
plantear el tema de las obligaciones para solicitar se liquiden las
obligaciones, como parte del programa de reestructuracién de
BanCrecer, tal como se procedié hacer para el caso de las
obligaciones en posesi6n de tenedores nacionales.

Confirmamos, en este contexto, nuestro compromiso, una vez
liquidadas las obligaciones suscritas por el Grupo Allianz, de
volver a invertir, dentro del capital de la institucién absorbente de
BanCrecer, con el fin de fortalecer su posicién financiera, la
totalidad de los US Délares 50 millones de obligaciones
liquidadas. Claro esta que tal re-inversién por parte de Allianz, asi
como el compromiso de Allianz para inversiones adicionales,
dependerfan de si una inversién de Allianz seria bienvenida por la
institucién absorbente y se otorgue en condiciones aceptables, y si
la institucién absorbente quisiera llegar a acuerdos satisfactorios
para el Grupo Allianz en cuanto a una continuacién de la
colaboracién en el sector de banca-seguros.

[Translation:

[W]e take the liberty of addressing you in reference to the process
for the future sale or merger of BanCrecer.

As you are aware, in October of 1996 the Allianz Group
subscribed to an issuance of dollar-denominated debentures by
BanCrecer, for a value of US Dollars 50 million. At the same
time, BanCrecer carried out the issuance of peso-denominated
debentures, for an equal amount, which was acquired by Mexican
holders. That issuance of debentures, acquired by Mexican

 

Page 38 of 107

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

holders, was liquidated in its entirety by BanCrecer in 1998, with
the approval of all the competent financial authorities.

In the case of Allianz, in February of 1998 we offered to the
authorities that we would reinvest the entire afore-mentioned US
Dollar 50 million debentures, once they were liquidated, plus an
additional investment of US Dollar 50 million, in a
recapitalization plan for BanCrecer, jointly with a foreign banking
partner, the program which had been approved by the Governing
Board of FOBAPROA, in the first quarter of 1998.

In the original consideration by the authorities of the
recapitalization plan of BanCrecer, we had also accepted that only
an amount equal to US Dollar 25 million was to be liquidated with
respect to Allianz, in case the recapitalization plan could not be
carried out by the lack of interested foreign partners.

Given the regrettable delays and political attacks suffered by the
pending FOBAPROA programs, the Governing Board of FOBAPROA
was never able to deliver, either to BanCrecer or to JPMorgan, the
financial agents of BanCrecer, a formal letter of intent signed by
FOBAPROA whose terms had already been drafted. This letter of
intent, so many times requested, was the fundamental basis on
which the banks that at that time were interested in acquiring or
recapitalizing BanCrecer, would have been able to realize their
investment intentions, given that, evidently, the terms of
participation of FOBAPROA and its agreement to the
recapitalization plan were essential conditions to the entry of any
foreign banking partner.

Currently, with the imminent creation of IPAB and with the
intention of submitting the BanCrecer case to a public bidding
process, the sale or merger of BanCrecer possibly would be
effected within a brief period.

It is for this reason that Allianz, respectfully, would like to revert
to the issue of the debentures, in order to request their payment as
part of the restructuring program of BanCrecer, just as it was

Page 39 of 107

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

carried out in the case of the debentures in possession of the
national holders.

In this context, we confirm our commitment to re-invest in the
equity of the entity absorbing BanCrecer the entire 50 million US
Dollars, with the objective of strengthening its financial position,
once the debentures acquired by the Allianz Group are liquidated.
It is clear that such re-investment by Allianz as well as the
commitment by Allianz for additional investments, would depend
on whether an investment by Allianz would be welcomed by the
absorbing entity and be granted on acceptable conditions, and
whether the absorbing entity would be willing to reach agreements
satisfactory to Allianz Group, regarding a continuity in the
collaboration within the banking-insurance sector.]

84.

REDACTED

85. On 15 June 1999, GFB sought legal advice from Bufete Carrillo Gamboa, S.C. on
the return of the loan portfolio by FOBAPROA. The legal opinion dated 23 June

1999 from Bufete Carrillo Gamboa, S.C. concludes that FOBAPROA’s letter of 11

0 [REDACTED |

Page 40 of 107

86.

87.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

November 1998,°! by which it returned the entire portfolio the BanCrecer (and
BanOro), was “of questionable legality since it stems from unilateral conduct.”*”
The legal opinion was based on a number of assumptions, in particular the proper
fulfilment by BanCrecer, BanOro and the shareholders of the obligations
undertaken in the various agreements. It does not appear that BanCrecer took

action on the basis of the Carrillo opinion.

On 7 July 1999, FFIC requested GFB to seek permission from Banco de México
for it to acquire the Dollar Debentures on the same terms as the Peso Debentures
had been “repurchased.”** GFB sought the permission at Banco de México by
letter of 16 July 1999, to which it attached FFIC’s letter of 7 July 1999. On 16
August 1999, Banco de México denied GFB’s request, asserting that “anticipated

payment” of convertible debentures is not allowed under Mexican law.

[ CNBV submitted a “Note for Discussion” to IPAB, which is summarized as

follows:

See J 80 supra.

Exh. C1188-1199, CRM 70. Although the opinion was mentioned on his disclosure statement in
the present case at the time of his appointment in May 2002, Mr. Francisco Carrillo Gamboa
resigned as arbitrator in March 2005 when it became apparent that FFIC relied on this opinion in
the merits phase of the arbitration. See [27 supra.

Exh, RO174-0175.

Exh, RO176.

Exh. C0238, CMPQ 19.

[ REDACTED ]

 

Page 41 of 107

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

« As background, it refers to the two issues of subordinated
debentures with mandatory conversion into capital by GFB: one
for 500 million pesos which were placed in the market, distributed
among a large number of investors; and the other for a value of
USD 50 million which were subscribed by the Allianz Group. It
addresses the establishment of a trust with the knowledge of the
Mexican financial authorities to acquire in the market the peso-
denominated debentures, with the object of re-issuing them once
the capitalization plan materialized. It also refers to the
recapitalization plan that was submitted for consideration of
FOBAPROA’s Technical Committee at its 27 February 1998
meeting. According to such recapitalization plan, the debentures
acquired by the Allianz Group would be considered as part of the
investment it would make in BanCrecer, to be supplemented with
an additional USD 50 million and, in the event that it would not be
possible to conclude the capitalization plan on account of the
foreign interested partners, Allianz would be reimbursed a sum of
USD 25 million.

+ It addresses Allianz’ complaint to the financial authorities, and
its request that it be reimbursed for the totality of its investment in
convertible debentures issued by BanCrecer, asking for the same
treatment as the national holders of the peso denominated
debentures that had been liquidated. It notes that the Allianz
Group has made reference to their rights under investment
treaties.

+ It discusses the Allianz Group’s willingness to negotiate and the
risks of litigation as well as the ability to attract potential foreign
investors when it becomes known that unequal treatment of a
foreign investor was intended. At FOBAPROA’s Technical
Committee meeting on 27 February 1998, those present decided to
negotiate with Allianz and the group of shareholders which
control GFB, on terms that would avoid disputes brought up by
the debenture holders.

Page 42 of 107

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

¢ In conclusion, the CNBV recommended to negotiate with the
Allianz Group.

Page 43 of 107

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

REDACTED

Page 44 of 107

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

REDACTED

Page 45 of 107

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

REDACTED

Page 46 of 107

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

REDACTED

Page 47 of 107

88.

89.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

REDACTED

REDACTED

On 14 September 1999, by letters addressed to the Banco de México and CNBV,*®
GFB attempted to convert the Dollar Debentures (and Peso Debentures) into
shares of GFB prior to the maturity date, 12 October 2000. FFIC asserts that this
attempt was made at the instigation of IBAP.” On 4 October 1999, FFIC was able

[ REDACTED ]
Exh, RO177-0178.
Notice of 14 September 1999, published in the Diario Oficial, Exh. RO179.

Page 48 of 107

90.

91.

92.

60

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

to obtain a court injunction (amparo) to block the anticipatory conversion. By
letter of 12 October 1999, Banco de México denied GFB authorization to convert
the Dollar Debentures prematurely.°! By a decision dated 10 November 1999,
the Federal Mexican Court dismissed the amparo proceeding initiated by FFIC
against actions by Banco de México, the CNBV and other authorities, in
connection with the delivery of an alleged authorization for the anticipated
conversion of the Debentures issued by GFB. By a decision dated 24 April
2000, the Court considered firm and final the dismissal of the amparo

proceeding and thus confirmed the judgment issued on 10 November 1999.
In October 1999, GFB ceased to pay FFIC interest on the Dollar Debentures.

On 3 November 1999, two shareholders’ meetings of GFB resolved that: (1) IPAB
would take control of BanCrecer; (2) BanCrecer would cease to be a subsidiary of

GFB; and (3) GFB would be dissolved and liquidated.

On 29 November 2000, FFIC submitted to the Direccién General de Inversiones
Extranjeras — Secretaria de Comercio y Fomento Industrial [General Directorate
of Foreign Investments — Ministry of Commerce and Industrial Development] an

amended Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim to Arbitration, replacing an earlier

Order of the Court, Exh. C-0246-0249, CMPQ 21. The Banco de México subsequently refused
authorization for the conversion on 12 October 1999, Exh. C0250, CMPQ 22.

Exh. C0250, CMPQ 22.
Exh. R1865-1868.
Exh. R1869.

Exh. C0815-0830, CMM 24, and C0831-C0858, CMM25=R0180-0198. See also letter of 14
October 1999 from GFB and BanCrecer to FOBAPROA (Exh. R1923-1928).

Page 49 of 107

93.

94.

95.

96.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

Notice dated 15 November 1999. The negotiations for a settlement of the dispute
did not yield a result. On 30 October 2001, Claimant filed a Notice of Arbitration

against Respondent with ICSID.

By letter dated 12 October 2001, SHCP notified GFB that it approved the

resolutions of 3 November 1999 referred to in {91 above.

In 2001, BanCrecer was auctioned by IPAB and acquired by Banorte, a Mexican

bank.

Mexico contends that it had to spend [ a large amount in pesos ] to rescue

BanCrecer.°

IPAB discussed the question of FFIC’s Dollar Debentures again at its session of

13 February 2002. [

REDACTED

Exh. C0859-0860, CMM 26=R2750-2751.
[REDACTED]

[ REDACTED ]
[ REDACTED

Page 50 of 107

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

[
REDACTED
]

97. [

REDACTED

]

98. The discussions at IPAB’s meeting on 13 February 2002 were inconclusive. [

REDACTED ]
0 [ REDACTED]
70 [ REDACTED]
a [ REDACTED ]

Page 51 of 107

99.

100.

101.

VI.

102.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

REDACTED ]

GFB appears to be still in the process of liquidation. FFIC has not submitted a

claim in the liquidation process.”*

The Dollar Debentures are physically with S.D. Indeval, S.A. de C.V., Institucién
para el Depésito de Valores. It is unclear whether they are actually converted into

shares in GFB and, more generally, what their current status is. 4

The Peso Debentures appear to be still in the Trust controlled by BanCrecer. It is
again unclear whether they were converted into shares in GFB at the maturity date
in 2000.% At 30 September 2002, they were valued at MXP 0.97479 per

Debenture.”°

OVERVIEW OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

The following two Sections provide an overview of the numerous factual and legal

arguments of FFIC and Mexico as made in their written and oral submissions. The

[REDACTED]
Transcript of the hearing 1292:7-9.

Transcript of the hearing 1287:16 — 1294:1.
Transcript of the hearing 1287:16 — 1294:1.

Exh, C0112, CMPQ 12. The total asset value (“Portafolio de Inversiones, Valorizacién segiin
Precio de Mercado”) is, according to the financial statement, MXP 486,615,168.00 for
499,200,000 Peso Debentures at a market price (“Precio de Mercado”) of MXP 0.97479, while the
corresponding liability (“Pasivo del Fideicomiso”) is MXP 422,604,377.86.

 

Page 52 of 107

103.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

Tribunal will consider them in more detail, and to the extent relevant those made

at the hearing, in the various Sections of Chapter VII below.

A. FFIC

In support of its claim, FFIC asserts that expropriation under NAFTA includes
deprivation of the use or value of a covered investment.” FFIC further asserts that
Mexico permanently deprived it of the use and value of its investment and thereby
expropriated it within the meaning of Article 1110 of the NAFTA, as informed by

international law authorities and precedent, by the following:

qi) In early 1998, the Government of Mexico compelled FFIC to use its
investment to further the Government’s Recapitalization Plan for

BanCrecer.”*

(ii) After compelling FIC to participate in the Government’s
Recapitalization Plan, the Government proceeded to thwart the Program
to which it had committed itself, thereby depriving FFIC of the value of

its investment as envisioned under the Program.”

(iii) At or around the same time that the Government approved and then

subsequently failed to carry out the Recapitalization Plan for BanCrecer,

Memorial on the Merits {ff 86-96.

Memorial on the Merits {| 98-99. At the hearing, FFIC asserted that the alleged expropriation
occurred in November 1997 (Transcript of the hearing 1117:8-9).

Memorial on the Merits 4100-104.

Page 53 of 107

104.

105.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

the Government discriminated against FFIC by refusing to authorize the
repurchase of FFIC’s Dollar Debentures at face value, as the Government

had done for the Mexican investors of the Peso Debentures.*°

(iv) The Government of Mexico also deprived FFIC of the value of its
investment by returning, in November 1998, the non-performing loan

portfolios assumed by FOBAPROA from 1995- 1997.8!

(v) The Government of Mexico, through IBAP, took the ultimate step to
deprive FFIC of the value of its investment by taking control of

BanCrecer in November 1999.*?

FFIC adds that the deprivation of the use and value of its investment is not merely

“ephemeral.”**

FFIC also contends that even if the Tribunal were to find that no single one of the
Government’s actions individually is sufficient to support a finding of
expropriation, it is clear that the totality of the acts and omissions of the
Government, considered cumulatively, had the effect of depriving FFIC of the use

and value of its investment, thereby expropriating it.

Memorial on the Merits {§{ 105-119.
Memorial on the Merits ‘{§{ 120-122.
Memorial on the Merits { 123.
Memorial on the Merits { 124.
Memorial on the Merits {{§{ 126-129.

Page 54 of 107

106.

107.

108.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

Finally, FFIC asserts that it did not receive fair market value for its investment in

violation of Article 1110 of the NAFTA.*°

In its Memorial on the Merits, FFIC also alleges that it is entitled to the full value
of its investment, being US$ 50 million, on which compound interest should be
awarded.*° In its Reply on the Merits, FFIC limited itself to observing that it
would present its full argument on damages when the parties reach the third phase

of these proceedings.*’

In its Reply on the Merits, FFIC first asserts that Mexico mischaracterizes or
ignores key facts regarding its expropriation of its investment. According to FFIC,
these include: (a) the role of the Working Group;** (b) the Peso Debentures
Repurchase;*” (c) the Recapitalization Program;” (d) FFIC’s request for
repurchase;”! (e) FFIC’s participation in the Recapitalization Program; and (f)
Mexico’s destruction of the Recapitalization Program: failure to sign the

Memorandum of Intent and unilateral return of the entire loan portfolio.”

Memorial on the Merits { 130.
Memorial on the Merits ‘{§{ 130-138.
Reply on the Merits { 115.

Reply on the Merits {{ 4-8.

Reply on the Merits {{ 9-17.

Reply on the Merits {{[ 18-24.
Reply on the Merits ‘if 25-35.
Reply on the Merits {] 36-41.
Reply on the Merits {fff 42-53.

Page 55 of 107

109.

110.

111.

112.

113.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

FFIC also contends that the Tribunal has competence to hear all facts and legal

arguments pertaining to FFIC’s expropriation claim.™4

FFIC denies that the measures that form the basis of FFIC’s expropriation claim

are covered by the prudential measures exception.”°

Finally, FFIC asserts that its expropriation claim falls within the core norms of

expropriation prohibited under Article 1110 of the NAFTA.”

In its Supplemental Submission of 21 September 2005, FFIC submits that: (a) the
Working Group is a State organ under international law; (b) that Mexico directed
and controlled the Working Group and that, in any event, its actions are
attributable to Mexico; and (c) that the Government of Mexico acknowledged and

adopted the acts of the Working Group. ”

In the Supplemental Submission, FFIC addresses again the Recapitalization Plan

in rebuttal of Mexico’s defenses and in reliance on what FFIC describes as “new

testimony.” °8

Reply on the Merits {ff 54-62.

Reply on the Merits {ff 63-93.

Reply on the Merits 4 94-114.

Claimant’s Supplemental Submission {{ 7-17.

Claimant’s Supplemental Submission {{[ 18-24.

Page 56 of 107

114.

115.

116.

117.

100

tol

102

103

104

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

FFIC also addresses again the return by FOBAPROA of the loan portfolio to
BanCrecer, arguing, inter alia, that the unilateral return by the Government made

it impossible to pursue the Recapitalization Plan. ”

Finally, in the Supplemental Submission, FFIC responds to the dictamen of SHCP
of 3 August 2005, produced by Mexico in conjunction with its Rejoinder on the
Merits.'°° FFIC summarizes the dictamen “that all of the Government activities in
its various bank rescue efforts during Mexico’s financial crisis were directed to
prudential ends.” FFIC contends that: “What is relevant here, however, is whether
the Government’s specific measures with respect to Fireman’s Fund’s investment

in GFB were ‘reasonable prudential measures.” tol

B. Mexico

Mexico emphasizes that, while being a sophisticated investor, FFIC made a risky
investment in a bank at a time that there was a very serious financial crisis in

: 2
Mexico.'”

Mexico addresses and partially disputes a number of the facts as alleged by FFIC,

103

including those relating to:”~ (a) the financial rescue; !°* (b) the deteriorating

Claimant’s Supplemental Submission {fff 25-32.
Exh. R2934-2947.

Claimant’s Supplemental Submission {| 33-38.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits { 5.

See also Annex 2 to Counter-Memorial on the Merits (“Admissions and Denials of the Government
of Mexico with respect to Claimant’s Memorial”).

Counter-Memorial on the Merits {{[ 47-58.

Page 57 of 107

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

financial situation of BanCrecer and GFB between 1994 and 1999;!°5 (c) the

106 (d) the participation by GFB and

programs implemented by FOBAPROA;
BanCrecer in the PCCC;'” (e) the Ley de Proteccion al Ahorro Bancario [Law for
the Protection of Bank Savings];'" (f) the Debentures;!® and (g) the premature

conversion of the Debentures by GEB.!!°

118. With respect to the legal arguments, Mexico contends that FFIC makes three

fundamental errors in its reasoning as presented in the Memorial on the Merits:

(a) First, in that it presents an inadmissible claim for denial of national

treatment, disguised as a claim for expropriation.

(b) Second, in that it attempts to prove an expropriation on the basis of an
analysis of alleged violations of the requirements set forth in paragraphs
(a) through (d) of Article 1110, instead of establishing that there was an

expropriation and then proceeding to an analysis of the fulfilment of those

requirements.
"05 Counter-Memorial on the Merits {{] 59-77.
‘06 Counter-Memorial on the Merits {f 78-112.
a Counter-Memorial on the Merits {] 113-148.
‘08 Counter-Memorial on the Merits {{] 149-168.
ae Counter-Memorial on the Merits {{f 169-192.

Ho Counter-Memorial on the Merits {{] 193-196.

Page 58 of 107

119.

120.

121.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

(c) Third, in that it extends the concept of expropriation much beyond any
concept recognized until now as an expropriation under international

law. !!!

Mexico further raises a number of questions relating to the competence of the

Tribunal: (1) jurisdictional limits; |!

(2) the claim is based on facts and arguments
that are outside the competence of the Tribunal;!! (3) the United States has
considered bringing a State-to-State claim under Chapter Twenty of the
NAFTA; '"* and (4) the Tribunal must ignore large portions of the Memorial on the

Merits.'!°

With respect to the merits of FFIC’s claim, Mexico contends that the challenged
measures concern prudential measures authorized by Chapter Fourteen of the

NAFTA, in particular Article 1410,'!°

Mexico further contends that FFIC gives an incorrect interpretation of Article

1110 of the NAFTA, which, moreover, is dangerous, extensive and without

precedent. ae

Counter-Memorial on the Merits {| 197.

Counter-Memorial on the Merits {{{| 198-210.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits 211-215.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits {f 216-217.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits {{{[ 218-222.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits {{{| 223-232.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits {{{| 233-286.

Page 59 of 107

122.

123.

124.

125.

126.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

Mexico concludes that the application of the law to the facts of the present case

shows that there was no expropriation. '!®

With respect to FFIC’s request for damages, as set forth in FFIC’s Memorial on
the Merits, Mexico points out that, in the present phase of the arbitration, the

Tribunal is not to deal with damages since the proceedings were bifurcated.'!”

In its Rejoinder on the Merits, Mexico first disputes a number of factual
allegations made by FFIC in its Reply on the Merits: (a) the Working Group;!”° (b)

121

the “temporal acquisition” of the Peso Debentures;'~ (c) the Recapitalization

Program;'”? (d) the proposal to liquidate the Dollar Debentures;'”* and (e) the

return of the loan portfolio. '%

Mexico also maintains that Article 1410 of the NAFTA (Exceptions relating to

. : : . . 12
prudential measures) covers the measures in question relating to the claim. 125

Mexico further contends that FFIC did not respond to two central arguments in

Mexico’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits: (1) Mexico’s objection that FFIC is in

Counter-Memorial on the Merits 4{{ 287-293.

Counter-Memorial on the Merits { 294-315. See also Rejoinder on the Merits {ff 275-278.
Rejoinder on the Merits {{ 16-31.

Rejoinder on the Merits {{{{ 32-60.

Rejoinder on the Merits {[ 61-121.

Rejoinder on the Merits {{{{ 122-131.

Rejoinder on the Merits {ff 132-158.

Rejoinder on the Merits {fff 159-176.

Page 60 of 107

127.

128.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

reality a claim for violation of Article 1405 of the NAFTA (National Treatment);
and (2) FFIC ignores that both the United States and Mexico coincide in that there
is error in interpreting the NAFTA if an expropriation is shown on the basis of the
criteria set forth in paragraphs (a) through (d) of Article 1110 for the purposes of

determining whether an expropriation took place legally. 126

Mexico also voices other criticisms on FFIC’s Reply on the Merits, including
FFIC’s response to allegations that Mexico never made; FFIC’s contentions
regarding creeping expropriation; and the use of State funds as a concession ex
gratia. Further, Mexico asserts that BanCrecer never complied with [REDACTED];
that FFIC’s investment had practically no value in February 1998; that FFIC
voluntarily acquired the Dollar Debentures as part of the PCCC; that there was no
willing buyer of the Dollar Debentures in 1998; that the Government did not
“repudiate” its “agreement” by returning the loan portfolio in November 1998;
that the Memorandum of Intent of May 1998 was merely a draft; and that it is a
factual and legal question whether FFIC held an investment in an insolvent bank

and had an acquired right for demanding a rescue by the Government. 2”

In its Rejoinder on the Merits, Mexico reiterates that the Tribunal has no

competence to address a claim for denial of National Treatment.'

Rejoinder on the Merits { 177.
Rejoinder on the Merits {{{{ 178-197.
Rejoinder on the Merits {{{{ 202-231.

Page 61 of 107

129.

130.

131.

132.

133.

129

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

Mexico further argues that the Tribunal has no competence to determine whether
99129

acts of the Mexican financial authorities were “inappropriate.
Mexico also contends that the Tribunal does not have competence over questions

of internal law.'*°

With respect to FFIC’s contentions regarding the Working Group, Mexico submits

that the Working Group cannot create acquired rights.'*!

Finally, with respect to FFIC’s allegations concerning discrimination, without
prejudice to its position that FFIC’s claim is a disguised claim for denial of
national treatment, Mexico contends that no discrimination occurred in regard of

FFIC.'*?

In its Pre-hearing brief of 21 September 2005, Mexico submitted that its
arguments in its Rejoinder on the Merits responded to FFIC’s arguments in its

Reply on the Merits.

Rejoinder on the Merits {fff 232-238.
Rejoinder on the Merits {fff 239-253.
Rejoinder on the Merits {fff 255-259.
Rejoinder on the Merits {{{{ 260-274.

Page 62 of 107

VIL.

134,

135.

136.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

CONSIDERATION BY THE TRIBUNAL

A. Introduction

The Tribunal has considered all written and oral submissions of the parties and the
written and oral evidence produced by them as well as the submission of the
Government of Canada in the present phase of the proceedings. Every question

submitted to the Tribunal is expressly or implicitly addressed below.

In addressing the questions below, the Tribunal will adhere to the principle set
forth by Article 1131(1) of the NAFTA according to which “A Tribunal
established under this Section shall decide the issues in dispute in accordance with

this Agreement and the applicable rules of international law.”

When interpreting the NAFTA, the Tribunal will follow the rules of interpretation
set forth in Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of
1969. Accordingly, the text of the NAFTA is in the first place to be interpreted in
accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their
context and in the light of its object and purpose. Recourse can be had to
supplementary rules of interpretation under the conditions stated in Article 32 of

the Vienna Convention.

Page 63 of 107

137.

138.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

B. Observations as to Competence’

In its Counter-Memorial on the Merits, Mexico raises four points under the
v9 134

heading “Cuestiones de competencia.
The first point relates to the position of Allianz AG, the ultimate parent company
of FFIC and incorporated under the laws of Germany.'*° According to Mexico,
while FFIC is an investor within the meaning of the NAFTA, a distinction should
be made between the acts of FFIC and those of Allianz AG. Allianz AG

concluded with GFB [ a memorandum of intent to form a company in Mexico.

] Allianz of America, Inc. in turn concluded with GFB [ an
agreement. ] That agreement

contemplates [ the setting up of a joint venture in Mexico.

] In this manner, Mexico argues, the two principal parties are
GFB and Allianz. Mexico adds that Dr. Reuss represented Allianz during the
period 1995-1999 and that no document shows that he ever received instructions

from FFIC. Mexico submits that FFIC cannot include claims on behalf of Allianz

In the present Award, the Tribunal uses the terms “competence” and “jurisdiction” as equivalent
legal concepts. It is to be noted that the NAFTA refers to “jurisdiction” (see, e.g., Article 1126(2));
1126(8)) and the Additional Facility Rules to “competence” (Article 46).

Counter-Memorial on the Merits {{ 198-222.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits {{ 198-209.
[ REDACTED
[ REDACTED

Page 64 of 107

139.

140.

141.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

AG on the basis of the Bilateral Investment Treaty between FR Germany and

Mexico of 25 August 1998.

The Tribunal notes that FFIC does not dispute the fact that it cannot present claims
of Allianz AG under the German-Mexican BIT in the present arbitration.
However, FFIC has not made such a claim and FFIC’s claim in the present
arbitration is based on Article 1110 of the NAFTA concerning expropriation.
Mexico expressly recognizes that FFIC is entitled to bring the latter claim."* The
Tribunal’s mandate is indeed only concerned with that claim. The point raised by

Mexico, therefore, need not be addressed further.

With respect to Dr. Reuss’ authority to act on behalf of FFIC, FFIC points out that
he used “Allianz” as a shorthand for the Allianz Group of which FFIC forms part
and that it was clear that he acted for FFIC in the matters relevant to the present
case.'® A review of the record indeed confirms that Mexico could not reasonably

have understood Dr. Reuss’ authority differently.

The second point is Mexico’s submission that FFIC’s claim is based on facts and
arguments that are outside the competence of the Tribunal." Mexico contends
that at the hearing concerning the Preliminary Question, FFIC recognized that its
claims were mainly concerned with a violation of the obligation of national

treatment and not expropriation, but that its claim in the present phase of the

Counter-Memorial on the Merits { 210.
Reuss III { 4.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits 211-215.

Page 65 of 107

142.

143.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

arbitration is a resuscitation of its claim alleging denial of national treatment, in
particular in respect of allegations of discriminatory treatment. This is denied by

FFIC.'“!

It is indeed the case that, at the hearing on the Preliminary Question, FFIC
focussed on the alleged violation of the obligation of national treatment and not on
expropriation. However, at that hearing, FFIC did not abandon in any manner its

claim based on alleged expropriation.

More generally, the Tribunal wishes to recall that its competence in the present
phase of the arbitration is solely concerned with FFIC’s claim under Article 1110
of the NAFTA. As the Tribunal ruled in its Decision on the Preliminary Question

of 17 July 2003:

66. Several provisions of Chapter Eleven are incorporated into
Chapter Fourteen, including, as here relevant, Article 1110
concerning Expropriation and Compensation, and Articles 1115-
1138 concerning the procedural aspects of dispute resolution by a
tribunal such as the present one. Article 1102 on National
Treatment and Article 1105 on Minimum Standard of Treatment
are not incorporated into Chapter Fourteen. Accordingly, if the
measures alleged to have been taken on behalf of the Government
of Mexico are covered by Chapter Fourteen, this Tribunal lacks
jurisdiction of the claims under Articles 1102 and 1105. Chapter
Fourteen contains no counterpart to the Minimum Standard of
Treatment provision of Chapter Eleven; it does contain, in Article
1405, a counterpart to the national treatment provision in Chapter
Eleven, and indeed a claim for breach of Article 1405 is made in
the present arbitration. However, Article 1405 is not included

Transcript of the hearing 1283-84.

Page 66 of 107

144.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

among the provisions to which the procedural provisions of
Chapter Eleven apply (Articles 1115-1138), and Article 1414
makes clear that claims under Article 1405 are subject to state-to-
state dispute settlement pursuant to Chapter Twenty, not to
investor-state dispute settlement under Chapter Eleven.

67. In sum, if the measures challenged in this arbitration are
covered by Chapter Fourteen, the claims brought under Articles
1102, 1105, and 1405 must be dismissed, and only the claim for
expropriation pursuant to Article 1110 remains to be decided by
this Tribunal. If, on the other hand, the conditions for application
of Chapter Fourteen are not met, the claims under Article 1102
(National Treatment) and Article 1105 (Minimum Standards of
Treatment) remain before this Tribunal, along with the
expropriation claim under Article 1110.

112...(1) HOLDs that Claimant’s claims brought under Articles
1102, 1105 and 1405 of the NAFTA are not within the competence
of the Tribunal, but that claims brought under Article 1110 are
within its competence;

The third point is that, according to Mexico, the United States is considering
bringing a claim against Mexico under Chapter Twenty of the NAFTA, including

2 .
'® Mexico contends

a possible claim based on Article 1405 (National Treatment).
that, although the present Tribunal has already rejected (desechado) a claim based

on Article 1405, it cannot put at risk its legal position in that respect.

Counter-Memorial on the Merits {{{[ 216-217, and Exh. R1882, containing a letter by Ambassador
Robert B. Zoellick to Secretary Fernando Canales Clariond of 28 June 2004.

Page 67 of 107

145.

146.

147.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

The Tribunal takes note of Mexico’s observation. However, it needs to be made
clear that, in the Decision on the Preliminary Question of 17 July 2003, the present
Tribunal did not “reject” a claim based on Article 1405 of the NAFTA, as stated
by Mexico, but only held that FFIC’s claims brought under Article 1405 (as well
as under Articles 1102 and 1105) are not within the competence of the present

Tribunal.

The fourth point is Mexico’s contention that the Tribunal should ignore substantial
parts of FFIC’s Memorial.'*? The parts to be ignored concern, according to
Mexico, those related to a treatment that is less favourable to FFIC than to the
Pesos Debentures and discrimination as they are in fact a National Treatment

claim. This is denied by FFIC.'*

As previously stated, the Tribunal is well aware of its limited competence under
Chapter Fourteen, and it makes no determination concerning claims based on
alleged failure to accord national treatment to FFIC. However, the Tribunal notes
that FFIC makes those allegations in connection with its effort to establish
expropriation within the meaning of Article 1110, which are within the

competence of the Tribunal. See { 143 above.

Counter-Memorial on the Merits {] 218-222; see also Rejoinder on the Merits {{[ 198-254.
Reply on the Merits {ff 54-62.

Page 68 of 107

148.

149.

150.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

C. Working Group

In this Section, the Tribunal will examine the nature of the Working Group and the
question whether acts of the Working Group can be attributed to the Mexican

State.

One of the claims made in the arbitration on behalf of FFIC was based on the
negotiation, development, and ultimate rejection of a Recapitalization Program of
BanCrecer by the so-called Working Group (Grupo de Trabajo). Mexico did not
deny the existence of the Working Group, but took the position that no legal
claims could be based on its activities, because under Mexican law the Working
Group was not a governmental organization with decision-making authority or

power to bind the State. 145

FFIC replied, in essence, that regardless of its internal
administrative law, Mexico could not, under international law, avoid responsibility
for the conduct of a body that acts on its behalf vis-a-vis third parties such as

FFIC. '“

Put in this abstract form, FFIC’s statement is correct. However, the evidence
submitted to the Tribunal does not show a case of a commitment made on behalf
of Mexico by the Working Group and subsequently repudiated by the State.
Rather, the Working Group was a forum in which proposals of various kinds were
discussed among the relevant Mexican agencies and with interested outside
parties, subject at all times to ratification or rejection by the competent

government authorities.

Rejoinder on the Merits {fff 255-259.

Claimant’s Supplemental Submission {{{{ 7-11.

Page 69 of 107

151.

152.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

The evidence before the Tribunal, principally from Dr. Reuss on behalf of FFIC
and Dra. Armendariz Guerra on behalf of Mexico, showed clearly that — like other
working groups established to coordinate the search for solutions for financial
institutions caught in the Mexican financial crisis — the Working Group for
BanCrecer consisted of representatives of the principal agencies of government
with responsibilities in the financial sector — the Banco de México, the Ministry of
Finance (Secretaria de Hacienda y Crédito Publico), the National Banking and
Securities Commission (Comisién Nacional Bancaria y de Valores or CNBV), and
the Fund for Protection of Bank Savings (Fondo Bancario de Proteccién al
Ahorro or FOBAPROA), later replaced by the Institute for the Protection of Bank
Savings (Instituto para la Protecci6n al Ahorro Bancario or IPAB). The Working
Group concerned with the situation of BanCrecer met frequently, usually with the
respective agencies represented by senior civil servants, such as Dra. Armendariz
Guerra on behalf of CNBV. Though no fixed schedule of meetings was in effect
and no formal minutes were kept, the BanCrecer Working Group was clearly a
body that interested parties, including the creditors and shareholders of BanCrecer
and GFB, had to communicate and reckon with. Correspondingly, approaches by
such parties, including FFIC, to individual agencies were often met with the
response that the matter in question would have to be considered by the Working

Group.

As the Tribunal views the considerable evidence on the function of the Working
Group, no major decision — whether acceptance of a given Recapitalization Plan,
approval of the issuance of new securities by GFB, rejection or postponement of a
Recapitalization Plan, assumption of BanCrecer’s loan portfolio by FOBAPROA, or
return of the loan portfolio to BanCrecer — would be taken without substantial

consensus within the Working Group and (where appropriate) its Technical

Page 70 of 107

153.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

Committee. If the Working Group rejected a proposal, or agreement to adopt it
could not be reached within the Working Group, the proposal would go no further,
regardless of whether the proposal had originated in one of the Working Group’s
constituent agencies or had been submitted by an outside party such as FFIC or
BanCrecer. No formal resolution was required to reach that result. If, on the other
hand, the Working Group endorsed a given plan or proposal, it was up to the
relevant agency or agencies that would have responsibility for carrying out the
plan or proposal or issuing the required permit or license to give its (or their)
approval at the level of Governor (for the Banco de México), Minister (for
Hacienda), Director General (for FOBAPROA) or President (for CNBV). It is clear
to the Tribunal that the representatives of FFIC, in particular Dr. Reuss,

understood this process. M7

It is certainly credible, in the estimation of the Tribunal, that FFIC and JP Morgan
believed that the Government of Mexico and all the relevant agencies would
approve a Recapitalization Plan discussed in the Working Group and advised to
representatives of BanCrecer and FFIC on 26 February 1998, "8 Evidently JP
Morgan, acting for or in cooperation with FFIC, also believed this, and
accordingly issued a Press Release on 27 February 1998 jointly with GFB,

9

announcing approval of the Plan.'? But no document was produced in the

See, e.g., letter from Dr. Reuss to Mr. Hansmeyer of 26 February 1998, Exh. C1178-1179=R2533-
2534.

See Reuss II 11; Transcript of the hearing 392-400.

The representative of JP Morgan, Mr. Eduardo Cepeda Fernandez, submitted an Affidavit stating
that the press release would not have been issued “if we had not had the full assurance that the
Mexican government had, in fact, approved the recapitalization of BanCrecer on the terms stated in
the release.” (See Cepeda Fernandez II { 7). Unfortunately, Mr. Cepeda did not testify at the

footnote cont'd

Page 71 of 107

154.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

arbitration purporting to be approval of the Recapitalization Plan, whether by the
Working Group or by its member agencies on recommendation of the Working
Group. It appears to the Tribunal that one or more of the principals did not agree
with the recommendation of the Working Group, or at least wanted to postpone the
decision. The Tribunal concludes that the outsiders who had been negotiating with
the Working Group on behalf of BanCrecer, FFIC, and JP Morgan should have
known and did know that while the recommendations of the Working Group were
crucial to approval of any recapitalization or reorganization, they were
recommendations, not actions and by definition not final. Indeed negotiations over
various documents related to the proposal continued for several months after
issuance of the Press Release, suggesting that both the government representatives
and the representatives of the private parties regarded the process as incomplete.
While the reluctance of Mr. Ferndéndez Garcia, the President of CNBV, either to

1,'°° it cannot, in the

publicly endorse or to repudiate the press release is equivocal
view of the Tribunal, be regarded as an undertaking to be imputed to the State, the

breach of which gives rise to a legal claim.

If FFIC and those consulting or collaborating with it, such as JP Morgan, placed
more reliance on informal recommendations not officially communicated than was
justified, the consequence cannot, in the view of the Tribunal, be attributed to the

Working Group and through it to the State.

 

150

  
  
 
 

  

hearing. While the thrust of Mr. Cepeda’s statement that JP Morgan would not have issued the
press release on 27 February 1998 without ance from the Government is credible, without the
possibility of cross-examination about the scope of the alleged assurance and the context in which

it was given, the Tribunal could not give credence to Mr. Cepeda’s statement, which was
inconsistent with the evidence of Dra. Armendariz Guerra (Second Declaration {[{[ 45-50.)

See testimony of Dra. Armendiriz Guerra, Transcript of the hearing 892-899.

Page 72 of 107

155.

156.

157.

158.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

In conclusion, putting aside the question whether rejection of the Recapitalization
Plan of February 1998 could be regarded as an expropriation or element of
expropriation within the meaning of Article 1110 of the NAFTA — see Section E
below — the relations of the Working Group with Claimant do not give rise to

liability on the part of the Government of Mexico under the NAFTA.

D. Prudential Measures

Mexico contends that the measures in question are “reasonable measures for
prudential reasons” within the meaning of Article 1410 (Exceptions) of the
NAFTA. FFIC denies that the measures fall under Article 1410, and submits that,

in any event, the measures were not “reasonable.”

The Tribunal notes that since the present arbitration is the first case brought under
the Financial Services Chapter of the NAFTA, this is the first occasion for an

international tribunal to set forth its interpretation of Article 1410(1).

Article 1410(1) (Exceptions) of the NAFTA provides:

1. Nothing in this Part [Five, i.e., “Investment, Services and
Related Matters”] shall be construed to prevent a Party from
adopting or maintaining reasonable measures for prudential
reasons, such as:

(a) the protection of investors, depositors, financial market
participants, policyholders, policy claimants, or persons to whom
a fiduciary duty is owed by a financial institution or cross-border
financial service provider;

(b) the maintenance of the safety, soundness, integrity or
financial responsibility of financial institutions or cross-border
financial service providers; and

Page 73 of 107

159.

160.

161.

162.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

(c) ensuring the integrity and stability of a Party's financial
system.

The Tribunal notes, first, that the Article is entitled “Exceptions,” that is, it
provides that a measure otherwise prohibited under “this Part” (i.e., including
Chapter Eleven and Chapter Fourteen) will not constitute a violation of the

NAFTA if it qualifies as a “reasonable measure taken for prudential reasons.”

Claimant argued that if a measure adopted or maintained by Respondent is found
not to be reasonable or taken for prudential reasons, it would give rise to liability,
or at least to a presumption of liability, under Article 1110. The Tribunal rejects
this contention. As the Tribunal understands Article 1410 within the anatomy of
the NAFTA, a judgment as to whether the exception applies is called for only after
an initial, at least tentative, conclusion that Article 1110 or another applicable

provision of the NAFTA may have been violated.

Claimant argued that if a measure is discriminatory, it cannot be regarded as
reasonable, and therefore gives rise to liability under the NAFTA. Respondent
contended that Claimant misreads Article 1410, in an attempt to bring before the
Tribunal a claim for discrimination under Chapter Fourteen, when such claims are

expressly excluded.

The Tribunal, noting that the exception applies to all provisions of Part Five
(‘Investments, Services and Related Matters”) of the NAFTA applicable to
Financial Services, including the National Treatment article (Article 1405),
concludes that Article 1410(1) permits reasonable measures of a prudential

character even if their effect (as contrasted with their motive or intent) is

Page 74 of 107

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

discriminatory. The Tribunal rejects the contention that a measure discriminatory

in effect is eo ipso unreasonable.

163. In his book on the Financial Services Chapter of the NAFTA, Olin L. Wethington,
the principal negotiator of that Chapter on behalf of the United States of America,

writes:

Article 1410(1)(a) . . . carves out of the national treatment and
other obligations of the financial services chapter a right to take
reasonable measures even though discriminatory in application, to
protect the safety and soundness of the financial system. This
regulatory prerogative to protect the integrity of the financial
system is accepted internationally.'*!

164. The author goes on to point out that the prudential exception covers only
“reasonable” measures, such as measures relating to capital adequacy, loan loss
reserve requirements, cash reserve and liquidity requirements and various
regulations pertaining to diversification of risk. However, evidently focusing on

Mexico, he writes:

However, the exception cannot be used as a guise or an indirect
means for discriminating against United States or Canadian
entities or for taking arbitrary action in connection with individual
firm applications or approval or licensing requests. It does not
constitute an exception which permits backhanded avoidance of
the national treatment and other significant obligations in the
financial services chapter.

ist Olin L Wethington, FINANCIAL MARKET LIBERALIZATION, at § 5.07 (Sheppard’s McGraw Hill
1994).

Page 75 of 107

165.

166.

167.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

The Tribunal accepts this exposition of Article 1410(1). It does not, in the context
of the present case, believe that it is called upon to determine whether the
challenged measures, even if they fell unevenly on Claimant, were reasonable or
arbitrary, since the condition precedent for invocation of the Prudential Measures
Exception, a finding of expropriation, has not been fulfilled as it will be seen later

in this Award.

The question was also raised, though not pressed by Respondent, whether Article
1410(1) is a self-judging provision. The Tribunal rejects this suggestion. The
Tribunal is clear that Article 1410(1) makes available to a State-Party an

affirmative defense to be established before an impartial panel or committee.

The Tribunal notes that Article 1415 of the NAFTA makes special provision for
decision of a defense under Article 1410 by the Financial Services Committee
(i.e., by government officials of the three Parties to the NAFTA"), rather than by
a tribunal such as the present one established pursuant to Section B of Chapter
Eleven. However, that procedure depends on a request by the disputing State
Party, and no such request was made on behalf of Mexico in the present case.
Article 1415(4) provides that when no request for decision by the Committee has
been presented to the tribunal concerning the validity of a defense under Article
1410, the validity of the defense is to be decided by the Tribunal. Either way,
while (i) the provision of a separate Chapter on Financial Services, (ii) the express

provision of a prudential measures defense, and (iii) the provision for

2 See Article 1412 and Annex 1412.1 for the composition and mission of this Committee.

Page 76 of 107

168.

169.

170.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

determination of the validity of such a defense at political level, suggest a
consensus in favour of substantial deference to the State Party, it is also clear that
when such a defense is presented in the context of an investor-State dispute,
acceptance or rejection of the defense must be made on a collegial basis, and not

unilaterally by the State that has taken the challenged measure.

The Tribunal concludes with respect to prudential measures that Article 1410 of
the NAFTA provides a defense to the State-Party if a tribunal has found a
challenged measure to constitute an expropriation in violation of Article 1110 of
the NAFTA. The validity of that defense, if necessary to decide a claim under
Article 1110, is to be judged either by the Financial Services Committee, or if no
request has been submitted for invoking the Committee procedure, by the arbitral
tribunal. In the present case, the issue whether the challenged measures were
reasonable or arbitrary is moot, because the Tribunal has not found these measures
to constitute expropriation under the NAFTA for reasons examined in the next

Section of this Award.

E. Expropriation

Having examined various aspects concerning the dispute in the preceding
Sections, the Tribunal will now turn to FFIC’s claim that the use and value of its
investment, i.e., the US$ 50 million Debentures, were expropriated by Mexico and

that Mexico thereby has violated its obligations under Article 1110 of the NAFTA.

Article 1110 (Expropriation and Compensation) of the NAFTA provides:

1. No Party may directly or indirectly nationalize or expropriate
an investment of an investor of another Party in its territory or take

Page 77 of 107

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

a measure tantamount to nationalization or expropriation of such
an investment ("expropriation"), except:

(a) for a public purpose;

(b) ona non-discriminatory basis;

(c) in accordance with due process of law and Article 1105(1);
and

(d) on payment of compensation in accordance with paragraphs 2
through 6.

2. Compensation shall be equivalent to the fair market value of
the expropriated investment immediately before the expropriation
took place (“date of expropriation”), and shall not reflect any
change in value occurring because the intended expropriation had
become known earlier. Valuation criteria shall include going
concern value, asset value including declared tax value of tangible
property, and other criteria, as appropriate, to determine fair
market value.

3. Compensation shall be paid without delay and be fully
realizable.

4. If payment is made in a G7 currency, compensation shall
include interest at a commercially reasonable rate for that currency
from the date of expropriation until the date of actual payment.

5S. If a Party elects to pay in a currency other than a G7
currency, the amount paid on the date of payment, if converted
into a G7 currency at the market rate of exchange prevailing on
that date, shall be no less than if the amount of compensation
owed on the date of expropriation had been converted into that G7
currency at the market rate of exchange prevailing on that date,
and interest had accrued at a commercially reasonable rate for that
G7 currency from the date of expropriation until the date of
payment.

Page 78 of 107

171.

172.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

6. On payment, compensation shall be freely transferable as
provided in Article 1109.

7. This Article does not apply to the issuance of compulsory
licenses granted in relation to intellectual property rights, or to the
revocation, limitation or creation of intellectual property rights, to
the extent that such issuance, revocation, limitation or creation is
consistent with Chapter Seventeen (Intellectual Property).

8. For purposes of this Article and for greater certainty, a non-
discriminatory measure of general application shall not be
considered a measure tantamount to an expropriation of a debt
security or loan covered by this Chapter solely on the ground that
the measure imposes costs on the debtor that cause it to default on
the debt.

It may be recalled that Article 1131(1) of the NAFTA requires the Tribunal to
apply “this Agreement and applicable rules of international law.” The latter

includes customary international law.

In this connection, the parties to the present case have debated the relevance of
international case law relating to expropriation. It is true that arbitral awards do
not constitute binding precedent. It is also true that a number of cases are fact-
driven and that the findings in those cases cannot be transposed in and of
themselves to other cases. It is further true that a number of cases are based on
treaties that differ from the NAFTA in certain respects. However, cautious
reliance on certain principles developed in a number of those cases, as persuasive
authority, to the extent that they cover the same matters as the NAFTA, may
advance the body of law, which in turn may serve predictability in the interest of

both investors and host States.

Page 79 of 107

173.

174.

153

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

The parties have in particular debated the relevance of the case law of the Iran-US
Claims Tribunal. It is true that the Algiers Accords give a notion of expropriation
different from Article 1110 of the NAFTA and also partially depart from
customary international law (in particular: “other measures affecting property
rights”). It is also true that some arbitral awards of the Iran-US Claims Tribunal
are contradicted by others. However, keeping these caveats in mind, it is justified
to rely on certain awards, or at least portions thereof, in determining the customary

international law meaning of expropriation in the present case.

In determining whether a State Party to the NAFTA has violated its obligations
under Article 1110 of the NAFTA, an arbitral tribunal has to start with the analysis
whether an expropriation has occurred. Mexico correctly points out that one
cannot start an inquiry into whether expropriation has occurred by examining
whether the conditions in Article 1110(1) of the NAFTA for avoiding liability in
the event of an expropriation have been fulfilled. That would indeed be putting
the cart before the horse (“poner la carreta delante de los caballos’”).'*
Paragraphs (a) through (d) do not bear on the question as whether an expropriation
has occurred. Rather, the conditions contained in paragraphs (a) through (d)

specify the parameters as to when a State would not be liable under Article 1110.

Counter-Memorial on the Merits {{ 237.

Page 80 of 107

175.

176.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

FFIC seems to concede this point but argues that arbitral tribunals have relied on

discrimination in their determination whether expropriation has taken place. That

argument will be discussed below.'™

NAFTA does not give a definition for the word “expropriation.” In some ten cases
in which Article 1110(1) of the NAFTA was considered to date, the definitions
appear to vary. Considering those cases and customary international law in

general, the present Tribunal retains the following elements.

(a) Expropriation requires a taking (which may include destruction) by a
government-type authority of an investment by an investor covered by the

NAFTA.'*°

(b) The covered investment may include intangible as well as tangible

property.!°°

See || 203 et seq. infra.

A failure to act (an “omission”) by a host State may also constitute a State measure tantamount to
expropriation under particular circumstances, although those cases will be rare and seldom concern
the omission alone. See Draft Articles on Responsibility of States for International Wrongful Acts,
adopted by the International Law Commission at its fifty-third s n (2001), Article 2, hereinafter
“ILC Draft Articles,” available at: _http://www.un.org/law/ilc/texts/State_responsibility/
por ityfra.htm.
Mondev International Ltd. v. United States, \CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2, Award, 11 October
2002, at 98, available at: http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Mondev-Final.pdf. The tribunal in
Methanex observed: “[I]n Pope & Talbot Inc. v. Canada, the tribunal held ‘the Investor's access to
the U.S. market is a property interest subject to protection under Article 1110 [n. 159 infra, at {
96]. Certainly, the restrictive notion of property as a material ‘thing’ is obsolete and has ceded its
place to a contemporary conception which includes managerial control over components of a
process that is wealth producing. In the view of the Tribunal, items such as goodwill and market
share may, as Professor White wrote, ‘constitute [] an element of value of an enterprise and as such

  

  

  

 

footnote cont'd

Page 81 of 107

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

(c) The taking must be a substantially!”

complete deprivation of the
economic use and enjoyment of the rights to the property, or of

identifiable distinct parts thereof (i.e., it approaches total impairment).

(d) The taking must be permanent, and not ephemeral or temporary.

(e) The taking usually involves a transfer of ownership to another person
(frequently the government authority concerned), but that need not
necessarily be so in certain cases (e.g., total destruction of an investment

due to measures by a government authority without transfer of rights).'°*

(f) The effects of the host State’s measures are dispositive, not the

underlying intent, for determining whether there is expropriation.

(g) The taking may be de jure or de facto.

 

158

may have been covered by some of the compensation payments’ [Gillian White, NATIONALISATION
OF FOREIGN PROPERTY, 49 (1961)]. Hence, in a comprehensive taking, these items may figure in
the valuation.” Methanex Corp. v. United States of America, Final Award, 3 August 2005, at {| 17,
available at: http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/MethanexFinalA ward.pdf.

A number of tribuna

 

employ the adjective “significant,” “fundamental,” “radical” or “serious.”

“A deprivation or taking of property may occur under international law through interference by a
state in the use of that property or the enjoyment of its benefits, even where legal title to that
property is not affected” (emphasis added), Tippets, Abbett, McCarthy, Stratton v. TAMS-AFFA
Consulting Engineers of Iran, Award No. 141-7-2, reprinted in 6 Iran-United States Cl. Trib. 219
(1984).

Page 82 of 107

160

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

(h) The taking may be “direct” or “indirect.”!°

(i) The taking may have the form of a single measure or a series of related or
unrelated measures over a period of time (the so-called “creeping”

expropriation).

Gj) To distinguish between a compensable expropriation and a non-
compensable regulation by a host State,’ the following factors (usually
in combination) may be taken into account: whether the measure is within
the recognized police powers of the host State; the (public) purpose and
effect of the measure; whether the measure is discriminatory; the
proportionality between the means employed and the aim sought to be

realized; !°! and the bona fide nature of the measure. !°

“Indirect” expropriation is contemplated by Article 1110(1) of the NAFTA: “No Party may directly
or indirectly nationalize or expropriate . . . or take a measure tantamount to nationalization or
expropriation . . .” (emphasis added). According to certain case law, the expression “a measure
tantamount to nationalization or expropriation” in Article 1110 of the NAFTA means nothing more
than “a measure equivalent to nationalization or expropriation.” Pope & Talbot Inc. v. The
Government of Canada, Interim Award, 26 June 2000, at {{] 96 and 104, available at:
http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Pope-InterimAward.pdf; $.D. Myers Inc. v. The Government of
Canada, Partial Award, 13 November 2000, at ff 285-286, available at:
http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/SDMeyers-|stPartialAward.pdf,; Marvin Roy Feldman Kappa v.
United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/1, Award, 16 December 2002, at | 100,
available at: http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/feldman_mexico-award-english.pdf.

 

  

 

 

S.D. Myers Inc. v. The Government of Canada, Partial Award, 13 November 2000, at J 281,
available at: _ http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/SDMeyers-|stPartialAward.pdf, observed that
regulatory action by public authorities is unlikely to be the subject of legitimate complaint under
Article 1110 of the NAFTA, although the possibility cannot be ruled out. The present Tribunal
believes that the issue is more subtle than the proposition of “unlikely” in S.D. Myers.

 

The Tribunal notes that this factor was relied upon in Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed S.A. v.
United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2, Award, 29 May 2003, at {122 et seq.,

footnote cont'd

Page 83 of 107

177.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

(k) The investor’s reasonable “investment-backed expectations” may be a
48

relevant factor whether (indirect) expropriation has occurred.
In retaining the above elements, the Tribunal notes the doubts expressed
concerning the definition of expropriation given by the Meralclad tribunal as being

too broad.'* However, even if the definition as expounded by the tribunal in

 

 
 

 

available at:
documents/Tecnicas_00|.pdf. The factor is used by the European Court of Human Rights, id.
140, and it may be questioned whether it is a viable source of interpreting Article 1110 of the
NAFTA.

The factors attempt to close the perceived “gaping loophole” of a “blanket exception for regulatory
s”’ as articulated in Pope v. Talbot, supra n. 159, at { 99. For a useful overview, see Jack
Coe, Jr., and Noah Rubins, Regulatory Expropriation and the Tecmed Case: Context and
Contributions, in Todd Weiler, Ed., INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT LAW AND ARBITRATION:
LEADING CASES FROM THE ICSID, NAFTA, BILATERAL TREATIES AND CUSTOMARY
INTERNATIONAL LAW (2005) 597 at 632-643; see also L. Yves Fortier and Stephen L. Drymer,
Indirect Expropriation in the Law of International Investment: I Know It When I See It, or Caveat
Investor, Vol. 19, No. 2, ICSID Rev.-FILJ (2004) 293-327. See also Saluka Investments BV (The
Netherlands) v. The Czech Republic, Partial Award, 17 March 2006, at {| 253-265, available at:
http://www.pcea-cpa.org/ENGLISH/RPC/SALCZ%20Partial %20A ward %20170306.pdf.

“Under a common view of international investment law, the foreign investor and host State are
entitled to have the governmental interference with the investor's enterprise considered in light of
the investor’s chosen business model, the nature of the enterprise, the regulatory regime in place at
the time of investment, and associated expectations,” Jack Coe, Jr., and Noah Rubins, n. 162 supra,
at 624. See also L. Yves Fortier and Stephen L. Drymer, n. 162 supra, at 306-308.

Metalclad Corp. v. United Mexican States, Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1, Award, 30 August 2000, at {[
103, available at: ~—_http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/MetacladAward-English.pdf —_(“Thus,
expropriation under NAFTA includes not only open, deliberate and acknowledged takings of
property, such as outright seizure or formal or obligatory transfer of title in favour of the host State,
but also covert or incidental interference with the use of property which has the effect of depriving
the owner, in whole or in significant part, of the use or reasonably-to-be expected economic benefit
of property even if not necessarily to the obvious benefit of the host State.”). In his judgment of 2
May 2001 on the application for setting aside the award, Typsoe J. observed at {{ 99: “The Tribunal
gave an extremely broad definition of expropriation for the purposes of Article 1110” but held that
such finding by the tribunal was a question of law that is not reviewable in the setting
proceedings under the applicable arbitration law (available at: _ http://ita.law.uvic.ca/
documents/Metaclad-BCSCReview.pdf). FFIC also acknowledges that it “did not cite Metalclad
for its definition of expropriation” (Reply on the Merits at {| 110).

  

 

  
   

 

 

 

 

Page 84 of 107

178.

179.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

Metalclad were controlling, the Tribunal would not have reached a different result

in the present case.

Against the background of the foregoing, the Tribunal will turn to the question
whether there was an expropriation with respect to FFIC’s investment within the

meaning of Article 1110 of the NAFTA.

Before making the analysis, a preliminary observation is in order. It relates to the
nature of FFIC’s investment, which were the Dollar Debentures in GFB. GFB’s
main asset was BanCrecer. At the time of the purchase in December 1995,
BanCrecer was in a delicate financial condition (i.e., a “troubled bank”) and
Mexico was in the process of recovering from a major financial crisis. In its report
of 4 September 1995, JP Morgan [ advised Allianz about the performance and

medium- to long-term prospects of the bank holding company and its assets.

[ REDACTED

[ REDACTED ]

Page 85 of 107

180.

181.

182.

183.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

FFIC, therefore, took a commercial risk that its investment could be adversely
affected. It took that risk in light of its desire to have an “admission ticket” to the

“personal lines” insurance business in Mexico.'”

It soon appeared that the first Recapitalization Plan, in the context of which FFIC’s
Dollar Debentures had been contributed, was insufficient as the financial position
of BanCrecer further deteriorated.' It required another Recapitalization Plan in
June 1996, as amended on 31 December 1996, to which Mexico made significant
further contributions. In 1997, the financial position of BanCrecer again

deteriorated.

At that point in time, it can be fairly assumed that, although interest bearing, the
Dollar Debentures had significantly decreased in value. A buyer would take into
account that BanCrecer may collapse, which would probably have meant a default
by GFB on the interest payments and make a conversion into shares illusory. In
short, the Dollar Debentures had acquired a status comparable to that of junk

bonds.

FFIC’s contention that Mexico had somehow the obligation to preserve the value
of FFIC’s investment, therefore, is already factually incorrect to large extent as

there was very little value left.

REDACTED

]

See for the development of the financial position of BanCrecer and GFB, in particular, Counter-
Memorial on the Merits at {{{[ 59-77, which FFIC has not rebutted convincingly.

Page 86 of 107

184.

185.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

In this connection, the Tribunal is mindful of the observation by the tribunal in

Waste Management:

It is not the function of Article 1110 to compensate for failed
business ventures, absent arbitrary intervention by the State
amounting to a virtual taking or sterilizing of the enterprise. 169

As mentioned in {103 above, FFIC asserts that Mexico permanently deprived it of
the use and value of its investment because of five acts or omissions. For reasons

of convenience, those acts and omissions are reproduced here:.

(i) In early 1998, the Government of Mexico compelled FFIC to
use its investment to further the Government’s Recapitalization
Plan for BanCrecer.

(ii) After compelling FFIC to participate in the Government’s
Recapitalization Plan, the Government proceeded to thwart the
Program to which it had committed itself, thereby depriving FFIC
of the value of its investment as envisioned under the Program.

(iii) At or around the same time that the Government approved
and then subsequently failed to carry out the Recapitalization Plan
for BanCrecer, the Government discriminately refused to
authorize the repurchase of FFIC’s Dollar Debentures at face
value, as the Government had done for the Mexican investors of
the Peso Debentures.

Waste Management, Inc, v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3, Award, 30
April 2004, at { 160, available at: http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/laudo_ingles.pdf. See also
Robert Azinian et al. v. Mexico, Case No. ARB(AF)/97/2, Award, | November 1999, at {if 83, 87,
90-91, available at: http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Azinian-English.pdf,

 

Page 87 of 107

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

(iv) The Government of Mexico also deprived FFIC of the value
of its investment by returning, in November 1998, the non-
performing loan portfolios acquired by FOBAPROA from 1995-
1997.

(v) The Government of Mexico, through IBAP, took the ultimate
step to deprive FFIC of the value of its investment by taking
control of BanCrecer in November 1999.'”°

186. The first act alleged by FFIC cannot be considered by any standard a taking that

deprived FFIC of the economic use and enjoyment of the Dollar Debentures.

187. In early 1998, BanCrecer, which, as mentioned, was GFB’s most important asset,

was in a critical situation. [

REDACTED

70 This reflects the final position put forward by FFIC. The Tribunal notes that at other times counsel

for FFIC suggested other dates, going back to November 1997. See Transcript of the hearing p.
1117:8-9.

Page 88 of 107

188.

189.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

REDACTED

If no action had been taken at that time, by way of recapitalization or otherwise, it
would have been highly likely that BanCrecer would have collapsed (as it is borne
out by the subsequent events). [
REDACTED
] As a consequence, the FFIC’s Dollar
Debentures must be deemed to have had a very low value in early 1998. Without

the Recapitalization Plan, they would have become totally worthless.

Assuming that the Government of Mexico “compelled” FFIC to participate in the
Recapitalization Plan in early 1998, it was for the purposes of rescuing FFIC’s

investment, rather than taking it away from FFIC.

 

[REDACTED] See also Tran:
Garcfa, agreeing with the ass

[

pt of the hearing 631:12-632:14 (examination of Mr. José Antonio
ment by JP Morgan of the financial condition of BanCrecer).

 
  
 

REDACTED

The Tribunal wishes to make it clear that these findings
relate to the alleged taking of property, and not to a quantification of possible damages.

Page 89 of 107

190.

191.

192.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

Moreover, it cannot be said that the Government of Mexico “compelled” FFIC to
participate in the Recapitalization Plan. Actually, the facts show that GFB and
BanCrecer, assisted by JP Morgan, took the initiative for a recapitalization plan at
the end of 1997 in consultation with FFIC and the Government authorities,

because of the deteriorated financial condition of BanCrecer.

The Tribunal does not see how the alleged “requirement” of the Government of
Mexico would have deprived FFIC of its ability to sell the investment to an
interested buyer early 1998. FFIC never raised that option at the time; rather it
sought to recapitalize BanCrecer. In addition, it is highly unlikely that FFIC
would have found a willing buyer, at least for an amount of US$ 50 million. As
mentioned, in early 1998, the financial condition of BanCrecer was such that
FFIC’s Dollar Debentures had very little value. The Tribunal does not consider
the Trust that repurchased the Peso Debentures as a willing buyer of the Dollar

- . 3
Debentures for reasons explained later. 7

The contentions regarding the second act as alleged by FFIC must also fail. It is
based on a Recapitalization Progam that never materialized. FFIC’s Dollar
Debentures were never redeemed and FFIC never made the additional US$ 50
million capital contribution. Nor was the participation by a foreign bank
accomplished. Consequently, the Mexican authorities cannot have proceeded “to

thwart the Program” or “destroy” that Program.

See || 209 infra.

Page 90 of 107

193.

194.

195.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

Assuming that the Government authorities had made promises, as it is alleged by
FFIC, those promises did not include “the Government’s promise that Fireman’s
Fund would receive full value for its debentures.”!”* Rather, the Dollar Debentures
would have been redeemed as capital but the Government authorities did not

promise to give FFIC a guarantee about the face value of that capital.

The alleged promises are based on a meeting in the evening of 26 February 1998
at the office of the Governor of Banco de México.'”° The Tribunal considers it
likely that what was discussed at that meeting is what FFIC has contended
factually in the present proceedings and that those present at the meeting adopted
the main features of the Recapitalization Plan. [

REDACTED ] are
inconclusive, the witnesses of Mexico, to the extent that Mexico has called them,
have not convinced the Tribunal of the contrary. Moreover, the Mexican
authorities did not oppose in any manner the press release of GFB and JP Morgan

of 27 February 1998,'77

However, FFIC must be deemed to have been aware that what was discussed at the
meeting did not yet constitute a binding agreement between the parties. The
reasons are set forth in [| 153-154 above. Furthermore, the introduction to the

Memorandum of Intent of May 1998, designated as a “DRAFT FOR DISCUSSION,”

Memorial on the Merits { 103.
See J 66 supra.
[ REDACTED

See J 68 supra. See also n. 149 supra.

Page 91 of 107

196.

197.

198.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

makes clear that: “[N]o obligation included herein shall be enforceable until the
respective approvals are obtained,” and that: “The terms of the program described
herein shall be documented in the final contracts executed to formalize these

agreements to the satisfaction of the parties.”'8

It should also be added that the agreement envisaged a participation of 40-40-20,

the new foreign bank retaining 40%. 179

When the discussion about the agreement
took place, a participation of 40% by a foreign company was legally not possible
in Mexico. Subsequently, it was envisaged to have a participation of 51% via a
subsidiary. Such change reinforces the finding that no definite agreement had

been concluded.

Mexico, therefore, cannot be considered to have “repudiated” an agreement on a
recapitalization in 1998. At best, the understanding reached at the meeting of 26

February 1998 constituted an agreement to agree, subject to further negotiations.

On the basis of the record before it, the Tribunal is of the view that the Mexican
authorities did not behave appropriately in failing to pursue the conclusion of an
agreement. The Tribunal is persuaded that the Mexican authorities had at least
read a copy of the Memorandum of Intent at the relevant time. The reason for
Mexico’s failure to sign the Memorandum of Intent and to conclude the agreement

may have been a change in the political climate in Mexico at the time.'* It may

See 474 supra.
See | 78 supra.
See 477 supra.

Page 92 of 107

199.

200.

201.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

also be due to fact that Mexico amended its legislation in December 1998 to the
effect that any rescue plan of a bank required that the existing capital be first
applied to losses. '*!

Yet, such a failure cannot be elevated to interference by a host State in the rights
of an investor in the sense that it constitutes a deprivation of the investor’s rights
in its investment within the meaning of Article 1110 of the NAFTA. The object of
the proposed agreement was to rescue BanCrecer with the participation of the
Government, FFIC, shareholders of GFB and a new foreign bank. It would have
had as effect that FFIC’s investment was to be redeemed as capital in BanCrecer.
At the time, FFIC’s investment was almost valueless, due to the financially poor
condition of BanCrecer. That condition was not caused by any government act or
omission, but rather by the economic circumstances prevailing at the time. A
failure to enter into a binding agreement to improve that condition, and possibly
FFIC’s investment, does not deprive FFIC’s investment of its economic use since

there was virtually none at the time of the Government's failure.

The third act is more troubling but does not constitute a taking under Article 1110

of the NAFTA either.
The Tribunal finds that the Peso Debentures repurchase discriminated against

FFIC.'* It may be that the origin of the repurchase in November 1997 was a

deficient documentation for a number of Mexican purchasers of Peso Debentures

Counter-Memorial on the Merits at {| 288, 3d bullet.
See {¥f 64, 70-73 and 86 supra.

Page 93 of 107

202.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

(‘mal colocadas’”’). However, the Tribunal finds it inexplicable that, subsequently
in the beginning of 1998, the repurchase of the Peso Debentures at face value was
applied to all Peso Debentures purchases. It is unconvincing, as Mexico alleges,
that it was impossible to distinguish between “sin contrato” and “con contrato,”
having also regard to the large amount and number of purchasers involved. The
Tribunal is further troubled by the fact that the repurchase of the Peso Debentures
was organized by means of a trust set up, controlled and financed by BanCrecer, a
subsidiary of GFB. The acquisition was not “temporal” either, as on 30 September
2002 the Peso Debentures were still on the Trust’s books at almost their face

value.'**

Worse even, the whole repurchase scheme, as it evolved, was not
disclosed to FFIC, which discovered it accidentally in April 1998 when it had been
completed for some 65%. '84 Tt is also clear that the Government authorities were,
at a minimum, aware of the repurchase program and its financing as from its
inception. 185

The understandable reaction of FFIC was to ask for equal treatment by the
Mexican authorities. On various occasions, the Mexican authorities refused to
allow FFIC via GFB to have the Dollar Debentures repurchased at face value.
While the Tribunal does not pass judgment on Mexican law or its interpretation

and application, it is not convinced by the justification offered by Banco de

See J 101 supra.
Even though some 645 Mexican holders of debentures were involved.

As becomes clear from, inter alia, the letters of 8 December 1997 from CNBV to BanCrecer (Exh.
RO172-0173) and 12 August 1998 from CNBV to GFB and BanCrecer (Exh. C0029-30, C0111,
C0737-38, C0802). A copy of the Trust Agreement was sent by BanCrecer to CNBV by letter of
16 April 1998 (Exh. C0104-07).

Page 94 of 107

203.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

México that “anticipated payment” of convertible debentures is not allowed under

‘86 Tf that were so, one can ask the question why all the Peso

Mexican law.
Debentures were allowed to be repurchased. The distinctions that Mexico
attempts to make between the two are formalistic and cannot mask that, in
substance, there was discrimination. Moreover, FFIC did make it clear to the
Mexican authorities that it was flexible as to the manner in which the repurchase

of the Dollar Debentures was to be formalized.

In the Tribunal’s view, this is a clear case of discriminatory treatment of a foreign
investor. If there is a “haircut” for holders of debentures, all should be shaven. 187
Conversely, if one is allowed to escape the hands of the barber, the other should be
allowed to escape as well. That was also recognized by CNBV in its Note for
Discussion of 9 September 1999.'*§ Such treatment might have given rise to claim
by an investor under Articles 1102 (National Treatment), Article 1105 (Minimum
Standard of Treatment), or Article 1405 (National Treatment) of the NAFTA, or
under two or all of them. The question before the Tribunal is whether it could also
give rise to a claim under Article 1110 (Expropriation and Compensation) of the
NAFTA since the Tribunal lacks competence over claims under Articles 1102,
1105 and 1405.'*? The Tribunal concludes that it does not rise to a claim under

Article 1110.

See J 86 supra.

Transcript of the hearing 912:6-925:12 and 953:2-956:2 (examination of Dra. Armendaériz
Guerra).

See J 87 supra.
See J 22 supra.

Page 95 of 107

204.

205.

206.

190

191

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

FFIC relies upon a number of precedents in which discriminatory treatment was
considered a factor in expropriation cases. These cases address discriminatory

treatment in relation to expropriation in two settings.

First, discriminatory treatment is used to determine whether the expropriation was
unlawful. In the LiAMco case, quoted by FFIC, the tribunal considered that “a
purely discriminatory nationalization is illegal and wrongful” under international

190 However, it presupposes the presence of a nationalization (or

law.
expropriation). In the present case, the question is whether there was
expropriation. It cannot be argued that because there is discrimination, there is

expropriation.

Second, as mentioned before, discriminatory treatment is used as one of the factors
to distinguish between a compensable expropriation and a non-compensable
regulation by a host State. ly Schering Corp., also quoted by FFIC, the tribunal
considered: “[t]he exchange restrictions could constitute a taking subject to
compensation under international law” and that such finding “is dependent upon
such factors as whether such restrictions are non-discriminatory, whether such

restrictions are justified on bona fide economic grounds and whether such

Memorial on the Merits { 111. Libyan American Oil Co. v. The Government of the Libyan Arab
Republic, Award, 12 April 1977, 20 LL.M. 1, 59 (1981).

See J 176 at (h) supra.

Page 96 of 107

207.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

restrictions, in effect, extinguish a foreign national’s enjoyment and use of its

currency.” 192

Assuming that the conduct of the Mexican authorities complained of by FFIC
pertained to regulatory conduct, as it is argued by FFIC, it did not involve a taking.
FFIC’s case is premised on: “The Government undertook to recapitalize the Bank,
with the necessary effect of preserving investors’ value in that enterprise.”!° That
premise is incorrect for two reasons. First, the Tribunal has not been presented
with convincing evidence that there was a specific undertaking of Mexico to
recapitalize BanCrecer vis-a-vis FFIC in 1995 and onwards. With respect to the
Recapitalization Plan of 1998, the Tribunal has found that it did not amount to a
definite agreement. '™* Nor were there reasonable investor-backed expectations
created by Mexico, even though Mexico should have pursued the conclusion of an

agreement. Second, as pointed out above, there was little or no value left of

Memorial on the Merits n. 239. Schering Corp. v. The Islamic Republic of Iran, Award No. 122-
38-3, 13 April 1984, 5 Iran U.S. C.T.R. 361 (R. Mosk dissenting). FFIC also relies (Memorial on
the Merits {{ 114) on the Middle East Cement case, in which the tribunal considered a claim for
“incurred damages” allegedly arising out of a bank loan, foreign employees’ compensation, and
liquidation expenses. The tribunal rejected those claims, observing: “To accept a claim in this
regard under the BIT, the Tribunal would have to find ‘measures the effect of which would be
tantamount to expropriation’ (Art. 4). The provision, thus, does not cover any losses occurring to
an investor due to commercial 's or due to procedures of the State authorities and courts as long
as they are under due process of law and not discriminatory (Art. 4a) and b)).” Middle East Cement
Shipping and Handling Co. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, CSID Case No. ARB/99/6. Award, 12
a lite

     

 

 

d since the tribunal in Middle East Cement considered relief sought
for compensation of an alleged expropriation rather than considering the question whether there
was a measure tantamount to expropriation. In any event, the passing observation by the tribunal in
Middle East Cement cannot be relied upon in support of the proposition that if there is
discrimination, there is expropriation (or a measure tantamount to expropriation).

 

Memorial on the Merits { 116.

See | 193 et seq. supra.

Page 97 of 107

208.

209.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

FFIC’s investment in 1998. A discriminatory lack of effort by a host State to
rescue an investment that has become virtually worthless, is not a taking of that

investment.

FFIC further argues that international tribunals have recognized that in
expropriation cases it is significant whether government’s acts or omissions are
unfair or inequitable.'°° FFIC makes that proposition by relying on paragraph (c)
of Article 1110(1) of the NAFTA which prohibits expropriation except “in
accordance with due process of law and Article 1105(1).” Article 1105(1)
concerns Minimum Standard of Treatment. FFIC’s argument must fail since, as

mentioned before, 196

it must be determined first whether an expropriation has
occurred, while paragraphs (a) through (d) specify the parameters as to when a
State would not be liable under Article 1110. Moreover, FFIC’s argument would
conflate an Article 1110 claim with an Article 1105 claim, which is clearly
inconsistent with the exclusion of Article 1105 claims from investor-State

arbitration under Chapter Fourteen.

A final point regarding the Trust is that it cannot be considered a “willing buyer,”
as is contended by FFIC in support of its argument that the Dollar Debentures
were worth the equivalent of US$ 50 million in 1997-1998. The Trust was set up,
controlled and financed by BanCrecer, a subsidiary of GFB. Its initial objective
was to restitute the original purchase price to those Mexican buyers of the Peso

Debentures who claimed to have deficient documentation. The fact that,

Memorial on the Merits { 117.

See 4 174 supra.

Page 98 of 107

210.

211.

212.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

subsequently, the restitution amount (i.e., the face value of the Peso Debentures)
became the repurchase price for all Mexican buyers of the Peso Debentures — a
matter that is indeed surprising — does not make the Trust a genuine willing buyer

who would have been prepared to pay a price in an open market. 97

The fourth act is the return of the loan portfolio by FOBAPROA in November 1998.

The Tribunal can be relatively short with this claim of FFIC.

One would have thought that after the audit of the initial loan portfolio by
Mancera, S.C. Ernst & Young, the matter was settled. !°* However, BanCrecer and
FOBAPROA continued discussions about the loans that qualified for the assumption
and the required reserves [

REDACTED

]. More discussions ensued after the further

recapitalizations. In the latter cases, which added significantly to the non-
performing loan portfolio purportedly assumed by FOBAPROA, no such auditing
appears to have taken place, at least it is not part of the record. [

REDACTED

]

The back-and-forth between FOBAPROA and BanCrecer about the various loan

portfolios and the reserves is well explained [ REDACTED ]

See also | 182 supra.
See also n. 6 and {ff 60, 62 and 80 supra.
[ REDACTED |

Page 99 of 107

213.

214.

200

201

202

203,

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

[ REDACTED J. The facts
show that BanCrecer and FOBAPROA were unable to agree on the loans that
qualified and the required reserves. It does not appear that BanCrecer opposed the
return of the portfolio, although one may be puzzled by the fact why all loans were

returned.

GEB took advice from Bufete Carrillo Gamboa, S.C. some seven months later. In
its opinion of 23 June 1999, Bufete Carrillo Gamboa, S.C. concluded that the
return of the portfolio was of questionable legality.?” The advice is qualified by
assumptions which turned out not to be correct. In particular, it assumed the
proper fulfillment by BanCrecer of the obligations undertaken in the various
agreements. The Tribunal infers from the record that that was one of the main
issues in the discussions between FOBAPROA and BanCrecer. Since BanCrecer did
not oppose the return of the portfolio, it seems that FOBAPROA’s position in the
discussions was not unlawful. Actually, by letter of 14 October 1999, GFB and
BanCrecer accepted the cancellation of the taking-over of the portfolio, at least
that part that concerned the Recapitalization Plan of 28 June 1996.2

In any event, the effect of the return of the portfolio in November 1998 cannot be
said to have taken away the value of FFIC’s investment. At that point in time, the

financial position of BanCrecer was so bad, that it was de facto already in a state

[ REDACTED
[ REDACTED ]
See J 85 supra.

Exh. R1923. FFIC contends that this letter was orchestrated by the Mexican authorities. The
Tribunal has not been presented with convincing evidence that such orchestration took place.

Page 100 of 107

215.

216.

217.

208

205

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

of insolvency. Moreover, the effect of the return of the portfolio appears to be

included in BanCrecer’s financial statements for 1999 only.

FFIC is also incorrect about its argument relating to reasonable reliance on
commitments made by FOBAPROA.” Those commitments concerned the initial
loan portfolio. The assumption of that portfolio appeared to be subject to
problems of a technical nature. In addition, the next batch of non-performing
loans was not only significantly larger but was also assumed by FOBAPROA well
after December 1995. Hence, no legitimate expectations could have been created

in that regard.

Finally, the fifth act is the taking of control by IPAB of BanCrecer in November
1999. Here again, the Tribunal can be relatively brief. It appears that the
shareholders of BanCrecer, i.e., GFB, voted in favour of a taking of control by
IPAB over BanCrecer and a dissolution and liquidation of GEB.?° They did so in
light of the hopeless financial position of BanCrecer and as a consequence of GFB.
The facts do not demonstrate that the action by IPAB constituted a taking by IPAB

in the sense of an expropriation on behalf of the State.

In conclusion, none of the acts and omissions alleged by FFIC constitutes

individually, or taken together, an expropriation of FFIC’s investment under

Memorial on the Merits ‘{§{ 121-122.

See 491 supra.

Page 101 of 107

218.

206

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

Article 1110 of the NAFTA and the elements identified in | 176 above.” As a
consequence, FFIC’s claim to find that that the Government of Mexico, through its
acts and omissions, expropriated FFIC’s investment in Dollar Debentures issued

by GEB in violation of Article 1110 of the NAFTA, must be rejected.

F. Conclusion

While Claimant FFIC has clearly demonstrated injury - indeed loss of its
investment - none of its claims, separately or in the aggregate, satisfy the concept
of expropriation as understood in the NAFTA and in international law in general.
FFIC undertook an investment that was risky both in terms of the economic
conditions in Mexico at the time, and in terms of the specific financial institution
that issued the Dollar Debentures that FFIC purchased. The NAFTA, like other
free trade agreements and bilateral investment treaties, does not provide insurance
against the kinds of risks that FFIC assumed, and Chapter Fourteen addressed to
cross-border investment in financial institutions, places further limits on the scope
of investor-State arbitration. In rejecting the claim of Fireman’s Fund submitted to
it in this arbitration, the Tribunal does not mean to suggest that Claimant was not
subject to discriminatory and perhaps inequitable treatment by officials of the host
State. It holds only that the evidence submitted to the Tribunal has not
demonstrated a right to compensation under Article 1110 of the NAFTA, as

incorporated by reference in Article 1401 of the NAFTA.

The reliance by FFIC on the award in Saluka, see | 43 supra, is to no avail to it since the issue of
failure to accord fair and equitable treatment on which that award was based is not within the
jurisdiction of this Tribunal.

Page 102 of 107

219.

VIL.

220.

221.

207

208,

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

G. Damages

Since the Tribunal has found that the acts and omissions as alleged by FFIC do not
constitute expropriation under Article 1110 of the NAFTA, FFIC is not entitled to
compensation on that account. Consequently, the Tribunal rejects FFIC’s claim
for compensation. As a further consequence, the next phase of the arbitration

concerning quantification of damages (see {21 above) is no longer necessary.

Costs

The parties agreed at the hearing that no cost submissions were to be made in the
present phase of the arbitration.” The Tribunal understands this agreement to be
premised on the assumption that cost submissions would be made during a next
phase concerning quantification of damages. In light of the conclusions reached in
this Award, such a phase will not take place. Separate cost submissions are also
not required since the Tribunal has reached the conclusion that each Party shall
bear its own costs and shall share 50% each of the Tribunal’s costs. The latter

corresponds to the advances for cost made by each Party.

Mexico prevailed on the Preliminary Question and in the present phase on the
merits. On the basis of the principle set forth in International Thunderbird

208

Gaming Corp. v. United Mexican States,” it would mean that costs should be

awarded in favour of Mexico. However, the circumstances of the present case are

Transcript of the hearing 1299.

Final Award, 26 January 2006, NAFTA (UNCITRAL), at {| 210-215, available at:
hittp://www.i i decisions/Thunderbird-Mexico-Award.pdf

Page 103 of 107

IX.

222.

223.

224.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

such that the Tribunal believes that it is justified to deviate from that principle.
The Preliminary Question was a close one and lost by Fireman’s Fund on a
technicality, while Fireman’s Funds had respectable claims on the merits under
Section A of Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA, over which, however, the Tribunal

had no jurisdiction in this case except Article 1110 concerning expropriation.

RESERVED INFORMATION AND RESTRICTED ACCESS

In Procedural Order No. 3 of 31 March 2004, the Tribunal ruled at paragraph 7:

If and to the extent that the Tribunal makes use of Confidential
Documents or information derived therefrom in any decision,
including an arbitral award, it shall designate the portions relating
to such documents or information as confidential and those
portions shall not be published by the persons authorized under
paragraphs 3 and 4 of the present Order to third parties.

In Procedural Order No. 5 of 23 August 2004, the provisions of Procedural Order

No. 3 were ruled to apply mutatis mutandis to documents submitted in response to

Respondent’s Request that contain business confidential information.

All submissions by the parties subsequent to the issuance of Procedural Orders
Nos. 3 and 5 are designated as “This Document Contains Reserved Information”
(FFIC) and “Este Documento Contiene Informacién con Acceso Restringido”
(Mexico), while a number of exhibits and witness statements bear similar
language. Having regard to this situation, it is not entirely clear to the Tribunal
whether, and if so to what extent, it has relied on Confidential Documents or

information derived therefrom in the present Award.

Page 104 of 107

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

225. The parties, therefore, are ordered to attempt to reach agreement, within 30 days
after the date of dispatch of this Award, on which portions, if any, of the present

Award shall be redacted for the purposes of Orders Nos. 3 and 5.

Page 105 of 107

226.

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

DECISIONS

FOR THE FOREGOING REASONS, the Arbitral Tribunal renders the following

decisions:

qd)

(2)

(3)

(4)

REJECTS FFIC’s request to find that the Government of Mexico, through its
acts and omissions, violated Article 1110 of the NAFTA by expropriating
FFIC’s investment in dollar-denominated debentures issued by Grupo
Financiero BanCrecer S.A. de CV;

REJECTS FFIC’s request that the Tribunal award it compensation for the full
value of its investment;

DETERMINES that each Party shall bear its own costs and that the Parties
shall share the Tribunal’s costs in equal shares corresponding to the

advances on cost made by them;

ORDERS the Parties to attempt to reach agreement, within 30 days after the
date of dispatch of this Award, on which portions, if any, of the present
Award shall be redacted for the purposes of complying with Procedural
Orders Nos. 3 and 5.

Page 106 of 107

REDACTED VERSION
FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO-AWARD

Made in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, being the place of arbitration, in English and Spanish,

 

[SIGNED] [SIGNED]
Professor Andreas F. Lowenfeld, Mr. Alberto Guillermo Saavedra Olavarrieta,
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: July 14, 2006 Date: July 11, 2006

SIGNED
Professor Albert Jan van den Berg,
President
Date: July 14, 2006

Page 107 of 107

