ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/02/01

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(Additional Facility)

FIREMAN’S FUND INSURANCE COMPANY
Claimant

and

THE UNITED MEXICAN STATES
Respondent

DECISION
ON THE
PRELIMINARY QUESTION

Before the Arbitral Tribunal constituted under Chapter Eleven of
the North American Free Trade Agreement, and comprised of:

Professor Andreas F. Lowenfeld
Mr. Francisco Carrillo Gamboa
Professor Albert Jan van den Berg (President)

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

 

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1. INTRODUCTION 3
I. THE PARTIES 4
Ill. PROCEDURAL HISTORY 5
IV. BACKGROUND 12
Vv. CONSIDERATION BY THE TRIBUNAL ..essssssssscssssssssecesssstesessneeensseee

A. Introduction 18

B. Background: NAFTA and Financial ServiceS...........sssussseeesseeese 20

C. Isa sociedad controladora a financial institution?.......

 

D. Do the debentures in question constitute regulatory capital?....... 30

VI. Costs, 39

 

VIL. DECISIONS 40

 

Page 2 of 40

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

INTRODUCTION

Fireman’s Fund Insurance Company has brought a claim against the United
Mexican States, alleging that Mexico has breached its obligations under the North
American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), more specifically under Article 1102
(National Treatment), Article 1105 (Minimum Standard of Treatment), Article
1110 (Expropriation and Compensation) and Article 1405 (National Treatment) of
the NAFTA, with the result that Claimant has suffered damages.

The United Mexican States challenges the competence of the Tribunal ratione
materiae to hear those claims of Fireman’s Fund Insurance Company that are
based on alleged violations of Articles 1102, 1105 and 1405 of the NAFTA. It
contends that the measures in question are exclusively governed by Chapter
Fourteen of the NAFTA relating to Financial Services. On the other hand, the
United Mexican States does not object to the Tribunal’s competence to hear the
merits of the dispute to the extent that the alleged violation concerns Article 1110
(Expropriation and Compensation) of the NAFTA (applicable through Article
1401(2)), without prejudice to the other exceptions available under the applicable
tules.

The present Decision rules on the challenge to its competence brought by the
United Mexican States.'

In present Decision, the Tribunal uses the terms “competence” and “jurisdiction” as being equivalent
legal concepts. It is to be noted that the NAFTA refers to “jurisdiction” (see, e.g., Article 1126(2));
1126(8)) and theAdditional Facility Rules to “competence” (Article 46).

Page 3 of 40

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

i. THE PARTIES
4. Claimant:

Fireman’s Fund Insurance Company
777 San Marin Drive

Novato, CA 94998

United States of America

hereinafter: “Fireman’s Fund” or “Claimant.”

5. Fireman’s Fund is incorporated under the laws of the Sate of California. It is a
wholly owned subsidiary of Allianz of America, Inc., a Delaware corporation that
is in turn wholly-owned by Allianz AG of Munich, Germany. It is a sister
corporation to Allianz México. It has as its principal business the provision of

various types of insurance, including accident and fire insurance.

6. In these proceedings, Fireman’s Fund was initially represented by Mr. Lawrence
W. Newman and Mr. Raymundo E. Enriquez of the law firm Baker & McKenzie
and from 9 August 2002, by Mr. Daniel M. Price of the law firm Sidley, Austin,
Brown & Wood LLP, and Mr. Raymundo E. Enriquez of the law firm Baker &

McKenzie.

7. Respondent:

‘THE UNITED MEXICAN STATES

General Directorate of Foreign Investments
Ministry of Commerce and Industrial Development
Mexico, DF, Mexico

hereinafter: “Mexico” or “Respondent.”

Page 4 of 40

iil.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

In these proceedings, the Government of Mexico is represented by Mr. Hugo
Perezcano Diaz, Director General de Consultoria Juridica de Negociaciones,

Secretaria de Economia.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 30 October 2001, Fireman’s Fund submitted a Notice of Arbitration against
Mexico pursuant to the provisions of Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA and requested
that the claims set forth therein’ be submitted to arbitration under the Additional
Facility Rules of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

(“IcsID”).

In the Notice of Arbitration, Fireman’s Fund alleges violations by Mexico of
Article 1102, 1105, 1110 and 1405 of the NAFTA and seeks, with respect to each of
its claims under those Articles, “an award of damages in its favor, and against
Mexico of US$50,000,000, together with applicable interest, its attorneys’ fees and
the costs incurred by it in this proceeding, together with such further and
additional relief as the Arbitral Tribunal may deem appropriate.” (Notice, J] 40).

Fireman’s Fund supplemented its Notice of Arbitration by two letters dated 27
November 2001 and 11 January 2002.

Mexico submitted a letter dated 11 December 2001 in which it raised concerns
about the applicability of Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA in the present case.

On 15 January 2002, the Secretary-General of 1CsID informed the Parties that

Fireman’s Fund’s application for access to the Additional Facility was approved

and issued on the same day a Certificate of Registration of the Notice.

Page 5 of 40

18.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

On 17 May 2002, the Arbitral Tribunal was constituted. The Tribunal is composed
of Professor Albert Jan van den Berg (appointed as President of the Tribunal by
the Secretary-General of ICsiD), of Dutch nationality, residing at Tervuren,
Belgium, Professor Andreas F. Lowenfeld (appointed by Claimant), of US
nationality, residing at New York, New York, and Mr. Francisco Carrillo Gamboa
(appointed by Respondent), of Mexican nationality, residing at Mexico, D.F.,
Mexico. Ms. Claudia Frutos-Peterson of ICSID was designated to serve as Secretary
to the Tribunal. All subsequent written communications between the Tribunal and

the Parties were made through the ICSID Secretariat.

The first session of the Tribunal was held, with the Parties’ agreement, in
Washington, D.C., on 22 July 2002. The Summary of the First Session is deemed

incorporated into this Decision.

At the first session it was agreed by the Parties that the proceedings in the present
case are divided into three phases. The first phase would concern the Preliminary
Question, the second phase would concern the merits of the case only as to
liability, and the third phase, if necessary, would concern the quantification of

damages.

As to the first phase of the proceedings, the Tribunal decided to establish a written
and oral phase regarding Respondent’s objection to competence and scheduled the

proceedings pursuant to an agreement of the Parties.

By letters dated 29 July 2002, Claimant and Respondent informed the Tribunal
that they had agreed on Toronto, Canada, as the place of arbitration for the
purposes of Article 1130 of the NAFTA.

Page 6 of 40

19.

20.

21.

22.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

By letter of 9 August 2002, Claimant informed the Tribunal that the New York
office of Baker & McKenzie was substituted by the Washington office of Sidley
Austin Brown & Wood LLP, whereas the Mexico office of Baker & McKenzie
was to continue its representation of Claimant. In light thereof, Claimant requested
an extension of the dates agreed upon at the first session of the Tribunal for the
submission by Claimant and Respondent of their pleadings relating to the first
phase of the proceedings. By letter dated 13 August 2002, Respondent informed
the Tribunal that it did not oppose Claimant’s request. Accordingly, the request

was allowed and a new schedule was fixed according to Claimant’s proposal.

On 22 August 2002, Claimant submitted a Request for Production of Documents.
On 23 August 2002, Respondent informed the Tribunal that it did not require the
production of any documents at this stage of the proceedings, but that it reserved

its right to submit such a request at a later stage of the proceedings.

Respondent filed objections to Claimant’s Request for Production of Documents
on 4 September 2002. Claimant replied on 9 September 2002. Respondent filed a
rejoinder on 18 September 2002. By Procedural Order No. 1 of 19 September
2002, the Tribunal denied Claimant’s Request for lack of specificity at this stage
of the proceedings and failure to show whether, and if so to what extent, its
Request comes within the purview of Article 32 of the Vienna Convention,
including “the preparatory work of the treaty and the circumstances of its
conclusions.” The Tribunal allowed Claimant to renew its request within 15 days

after the filing of Respondent’s Memorial on the Preliminary Question.

On 22 October 2002, Respondent filed its Memorial on the Preliminary Question
with exhibits.

Page 7 of 40

23.

24,

25.

26.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

On 4 November 2002, Claimant submitted a Renewed Request for production of
documents. Respondent filed its objections to the Renewed Request on 12
November 2002, Claimant replied on 14 November 2002 and, at the request of the
Arbitral Tribunal, Respondent filed a rejoinder to Claimant’s reply on 20
November 2002. On 22 November 2002, the Tribunal granted Claimant’s
Renewed Request, without prejudice as to whether the documents disclosed to
Claimant would be admissible in the plenary proceedings. Respondent was
requested to produce the requested documents no later than 3 December 2002.

On 20 December 2002, Claimant filed its Memorial on the Preliminary Question
with exhibits, including an opinion by Mr. Fernando Borja Mujica, and affidavits
by Eduardo Fernandez Garcia and Dr. Gehart E. Reuss.

By letters dated 9 January 2003, Mr. K. Thompson, Counsel for the Government
of Canada and Mr. David A. Pawlak, Attorney-Adviser for the Government of the
United States of America informed the Tribunal that their respective Governments
did not intend to file a NAFTA Article 1128 submission on the issue of competence.
Mr. David A. Pawlak indicated further that, in accordance with the schedule
adopted at the first session of the Tribunal, his Government might avail itself of
the opportunity to make such a submission on 27 February 2003.

On 14 January 2003, Respondent requested the submission of a Reply and
Rejoinder on the Preliminary Question and the postponement of the Hearing
scheduled to take place on 6-7 February 2003. By letter dated 15 January 2003
Claimant objected to the Request, by letter dated 16 January 2003 Respondent
replied, and by letter of 17 January 2003 Claimant reaffirmed its objections to the
Request. On 23 January 2003, the Tribunal rejected Respondent’s Request on the
ground that it had not sufficiently substantiated the need for a Reply and a

Page 8 of 40

27.

28.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

Rejoinder. The Tribunal further determined that it would safeguard both Parties?

right to fully present their contentions.

The Parties and the President of the Tribunal held a telephone conference on 30
January 2003 concerning the organizational aspects of the Hearing (summarized in
the letter dated 30 January 2003 from the Secretary of the Tribunal, which is
deemed to be incorporated into this Decision).

During the telephone conference, ICSID received a letter dated 29 January 2003
from Respondent submitting a “dictamen” by the Secretaria de Hacienda y Crédito
Publico (“SHCP”) and signed by Mr. Luis Mancera de Arrigunaga. The President
ordered the dictamen to be forwarded to the Claimant but not to the Tribunal
members pending resolution of its admissibility into the record. At the telephone
conference, Claimant voiced its concerns about the submission by Respondent.
The Parties agreed that if the dictamen were admitted by the Tribunal, Claimant
would be granted the opportunity to (1) cross examine the author of Respondent’s
submission at the Hearing, (2) conduct direct examination of Claimant’s own
witnesses at the Hearing to elicit views on Respondent’s submission, and (3) file
supplemental written affidavits or opinions in response to the submission by the
close of business Tuesday 4 February 2003. By letter dated 31 January 2003,
Claimant maintained its concerns and requested that the Tribunal decide whether

the submission was appropriate. On the same day, the Tribunal ruled:

The Tribunal notes that the submission of the opinion issued by
the Secretaria de Hacienda y Crédito Publico as proposed by the
Respondent in its letter of 29 January 2003 is not contemplated by
the procedural order adopted in the present case. The Tribunal
also notes that it has rejected Respondent's request to file a reply
to Claimant's Counter Memorial, but that at the same time it has
confirmed that it will safeguard both parties’ right to fully present

Page 9 of 40

29.

30.

31.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

their case. The Tribunal further notes that the parties have agreed
on certain modalities if the Tribunal were to accept the submission
and that the Claimant states that the agreed modalities mitigate the
reservations expressed by Claimant with respect to the filing.

Under those circumstances, having also regard to the present
tecord regarding the jurisdictional issue and the interest of
expeditious proceedings, the Tribunal declares the submission
admissible, subject to the agreed modalities.

The Tribunal wishes to make it clear, however, that it will not
tolerate further submissions from either party that are not called
for, save for exceptional circumstances.

On 6 and 7 February 2003, the Hearing on the Preliminary Question took place in
at the offices of ICSID, Washington D.C. For Claimant appeared: Mr. Daniel M.
Price, Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov, and Judge Stephen M. Schwebel (all from
Sidley, Austin, Brown & Wood, LLP), as well as Mr. Raymundo E. Enriquez
(Baker & McKenzie). For Respondent appeared: Mr. Hugo Perezcano Diaz
(Director General de Consultoria Juridica de Negociaciones), Mr. J. Christopher
Thomas, QC, Mr. J. Cameron Mowatt (Thomas & Partners) and Mr. Stephan E.
Becker (P.C. Shaw Pittmann, LLP).

After the Opening Statements, the Tribunal put forward a number of questions to
the Parties to be addressed during the examination of the witnesses and/or Closing
Statements (TR pp. 76-83). In the course of the Hearing, the Tribunal asked
further questions (TR pp. 413-416). To the extent that the Parties and/or their
witnesses addressed the above questions and to the extent that they are relevant,

they will be considered below.

The following witnesses were examined at the Hearing:

Page 10 of 40

32.

33.

34.

35.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

© Mr. Luis Mancera de Arrigunaga (called by Respondent)

e Mr. Fernando Borja Mujica (called by Claimant)

e@ Mr. Eduardo Fernandez Garcia (called by Claimant)

With the consent of Respondent, Claimant waived calling Dr. Gehart E. Reuss

who had made a witness statement for Claimant.

The Government of Canada was represented at the Hearing by Mr. Kevin S.
Thompson, Counsel, Trade Law Bureau of the Department of Foreign Affairs and
International Trade and the Department of Justice, and Mr. Dean Corno of the
Department of Finance. The Government of the United States of America was
represented at the Hearing by Mr. David A. Pawlak, US Department of State,
Office of the Legal Adviser.

By letter dated 13 February 2003, the Tribunal submitted to the Parties a question
concerning Article 1416(7)(a) of the NAFTA. Each Party submitted a response to
the above question on 24 February 2003.

On 27 February 2003, the Government of Canada filed a First Submission
Pursuant to Article 1128 of the NAFTA. The Government of Canada took the
position that the determination of whether an entity is “authorized to do business
and regulated or supervised as a financial institution” for the purposes of Chapter
Fourteen should reflect the fact that it is for the NAFTA Parties, through their
respective regulatory and supervisory frameworks, to define the types of entities,

and hence the scope of activities, that fall within Chapter Fourteen.

+

Page 11 of 40

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

Also on 27 February 2003, the Government of the United States of America filed a
Submission pursuant to Article 1128 of the NAFTA. The Submission by the
Government of the United States of America responds to the Tribunal’s question
on whether a bank holding company under United States law should be considered
a “financial institution” within the meaning of Article 1416. It stated that under
United States law (i.e., the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956), United States
bank holding companies meet all aspects of the definition of a “financial
institution” in Article 1406 of the NAFTA. It also submitted that holding companies
under the laws of other Parties may differ from bank holding companies under
United States law, as may be the case with respect to the laws that apply to such

companies.

The date set for rendering the present Decision was extended by the Arbitral
Tribunal several times.

The Tribunal deliberated at various occasions.

BACKGROUND

The Tribunal gives the background below in the context of its decision on the
Preliminary Question only. With respect to factual findings, they are based on the
facts as presented by Claimant and Respondent in their written and oral
submissions in the present phase of the arbitration to the extent that they are
relevant to the Preliminary Question. The Tribunal’s factual findings are without
prejudice to its factual findings on the merits of this case.

At the outset it is useful to give a brief overview of the relevant competent

authorities inf Mexico.

Page 12 of 40

41.

42.

43.

45.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO ~ DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

One of the principal laws governing the financial sector in Mexico is the Ley de
Instituciones de Crédito (“LIc,” Act of Credit Institutions, also called the Banking
Act), which applies to the general operation of banks.

Banco de México is the central bank of the country and is an independent legal
person of public law. Its primary objective is to maintain the stability of the
national currency and, additionally, to promote the proper development of the

financial system and to foster the proper functioning of the payment system.

The Comisién Nacional Bancaria y de Valores (“CNBV” or “Commission,”
formerly Comisién Nacional Bancaria) is authorized to supervise and regulate
financial entities in order to provide for their stability and proper functioning as
well as to maintain and promote the proper and balanced development of the

financial system and, in connection therewith, the protection of the public interest.

The Secretaria de Hacienda y Crédito Publico (“SHCP,” Secretariat of Finance and
Public Credit) is a division of the federal executive power, whose principal
function is to define the policies of federal Government in matters of tax, public
spending, financing, creditworthiness, banking, money, currency and pricing, and

tariffs for goods and services of the public sector.

Financial holding companies (“‘sociedades controladoras de grupos financieros”)
are subject to the supervision of the commission determined by the sHCP (Article
30 of the Ley para Regular las Agrupaciones Financieras of 1990, “LRAF”). In the
present case, the SHCP determined that commission to be the CNBV. The latter has
wide powers of inspection and supervision (see in particular Articles 1, 6, 7, 11,
12, 17, 20, 23, 26 and 30 of the LRAF, and the Ley de la Comisién Nacional
Bancaria y de Valores of 1995, “Ley de la CNBV,” in particular Articles 2, 3(IV),

Page 13 of 40

46.

47.

48.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

and 4). The LRAF is elaborated in various successive Circulares: No. 1158 of
1992, No. 1384 of 1997 and No. 1456 of 1999. They are also governed by the
LRAF’s implementing Regulations (Reglas Generales para la Constitucién y

Funcionamiento de Grupos Financieros of 1991, “Regulations”).

Under the particular corporate model specified in the LRAF, an essentially passive
financial holding company acquires and holds controlling interests in at least two
or three financial institutions of different types. The financial holding company
device thus organizes financial institutions into semi-integrated “financial groups”

with a shared brand identity.

The authorized activities of a financial holding company are limited. By law, it
may only (i) hold shares of financial institutions belonging to the group, (ii) enter
into a guarantee arrangement (Convenio) to permit indirect pooling of assets
among the financial institutions it owns, (iii) issue subordinated debentures
convertible into shares representing capital, and (iv) engage in a limited range of
investment and borrowing activities on its behalf (see LRAF, Articles 16, 23 and
28).

Furthermore, Article 16 of the LRAF explicitly provides that a financial holding
company may not engage in the financial services activities undertaken by the
financial institutions that it owns. Likewise, the implementing Regulations
provide that a financial holding company may not be involved in any way in the
management of the operations of their financial institutions enterprises
(Regulations, Title III, Section 10(8)). Similarly, Article 8 of the LRAF provides
that the financial institution subsidiaries may not base any of their operations in

the offices of their parent financial holding company.

Page 14 of 40

49,

50.

51.

52.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO ~ DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

As regards the facts, on 29 October 1992 the SHCP gave, in accordance with Article
6 of the LRAF, the authorization for the formation and functioning of Grupo
Financiero BanCrecer, S.A. de C.V., a Mexican corporation (hereinafter: “GF
BanCrecer”):

ARTICULO PRIMERO.- En uso de la
facultad que el articulo 60. de la Ley para
Regular las Agrupaciones Financieras
confiere a la Secretaria de Hacienda y
Crédito Publico, se otorga autorizacion a
Grupo Financiero Bancrecer, S.A. de
C.V., para constituirse y funcionar como
grupo financiero.

(om)

ARTICULO TERCERO.- La _ sociedad
controladora tendra por objeto adquirir y

istrar acciones emitidas por los
integrantes del grupo financiero.

G..)

ARTICULO OCTAVO.- La __ sociedad
controladora estar4 sujeta a la inspeccién
y vigilancia de la Comisién Nacional
Bancaria.

ARTICLE FIRST.- In use of the powers
granted to the Secretaria de Hacienda y
Crédito Publico pursuant to article 6th of
the Ley para Regular las Agrupaciones
Financieras, Grupo Financiero Bancrecer,
S.A. de C.V., is hereby authorized to be
incorporated and to operate.as a financial
group.

(..)

ARTICLE THIRD.- The holding company
shall have the corporate purpose of
acquiring and administrating those shares
issued by the entities that constitute the
financial group.

(.-)

ARTICLE EIGHTH.- The holding company
shall be subject to the inspection and

supervision of the Comisién Nacional
Bancaria.

GF BanCrecer is the holding company of BanCrecer, S.A. (hereinafter: “Banco
BanCrecer’).

In September 1995, Fireman’s Fund purchased US$ 50 million in dollar-
denominated mandatorily convertible five year subordinated debentures issued by

GF BanCrecer.

Also in September 1995, GF BanCrecer issued similar debentures denominated in

Mexican pesos, the value of which was equivalent to US $ 50 million at the time.

Page 15 of 40

53.

34.

55.

56.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

According to Claimant, all the pesos-denominated debentures were sold to

Mexican investors.

The issue of the two series of debentures by GF BanCrecer in 1995 was authorized
by Banco de México subject to a number of limitations and conditions, including
those contemplated by Article 23 of the LRAF and Article 64 of the LIC (see
authorization granted by Banco de México, 15 September 1995, Exh. R-0050-
0055).

Following the financial crisis in Mexico, in 1997, Banco BanCrecer encountered
financial difficulties. A working group was formed to address the circumstances
of Banco BanCrecer, consisting of the CNBV, the SHPC, the Banco de México and
the Fondo Bancario de Proteccién al Ahorro (“FOBAPROA,” Fund for the Protection
of Bank Savings). The working group developed a Program of Rescue and
Recapitalization for GF BanCrecer. Part of the Program developed by the working
group was that Fireman’s Funds’s US$ 50 million dollar-denominated debentures
would be redeemed and Fireman’s Fund would, inter alia, invest the US$ 50
million from the debentures in the restructured Banco BanCrecer under certain

conditions. Fireman’s Fund participated in that part of the Program.

According to Claimant, simultaneously, and without its knowledge, an alternative
plan was developed to pay the holders of the peso-denominated debentures the full
cash value of their debentures through a trust established by Banco BanCrecer.
Claimant alleges that that repurchase was permitted and financially supported by

the Mexican Government.

Claimant contends that it obtained knowledge of the alternative plan in April 1998
only but that its request for equal treatment was denied by the President of the

Page 16 of 40

57.

58.

59.

60.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

Commission (CNBV). The latter further denied a formal request of Claimant to that
effect in April 1999.

In January 1999, the Instituto para la Proteccién al Ahorro Bancario (“IPAB”
Institute for the Protection of Bank Savings) took over FOBAPROA’s

responsibilities.

On 7 July 1999, Claimant requested GF BanCrecer to seek permission from Banco
de México for it to acquire the dollar-denominated debentures on the same terms
as the peso-denominated debentures had been acquired. GF BanCrecer forwarded
the request to Banco de México. On 16 August 1999, Banco de México denied
GF BanCrecer’s request.

On 3 November 1999, two shareholders’ meetings of GF BanCrecer resolved that
(1) 1PAB would take control of Banco BanCrecer, (2) Banco BanCrecer would
cease to be a subsidiary of GF BanCrecer, and (3) GF BanCrecer would be
dissolved and liquidated.

Claimant submitted to the Direccién General de Inversiones Extranjeras —
Secretaria de Comercio y Fomento Industrial an amended Notice of Intent to
Submit a Claim to Arbitration dated 29 November 2000 (replacing an earlier
Notice dated 15 November 1999). The negotiations for a settlement of the dispute
did not yield a result. On 30 October 2001, Claimant filed a Notice of Arbitration
against Respondent with ICsID.

Page 17 of 40

61.

62.

63.

64.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

CONSIDERATION BY THE TRIBUNAL

A. Introduction

The Tribunal has considered all written and oral submissions of the Parties and the
written and oral evidence produced by them as well as the submissions of the
Government of Canada and the Government of the United States of America in the
present phase of the proceedings. To the extent that they are relevant to the issues
concerning the Preliminary Question, they are expressly or implicitly addressed

below.

In addressing the issues below, the Tribunal will adhere to the principle set forth
Article 1131 of the NAFTA according to which “A Tribunal established under this
Section shall decide the issues in dispute in accordance with this Agreement and

the applicable rules of international law.”

When interpreting the NAFTA, the Tribunal will follow the rules of interpretation
set forth in Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of
1969. Accordingly, the text of the NAFTA is in the first place to be interpreted in
accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their
context and in the light of its object and purpose. Recourse can be had to
supplementary rules of interpretation under the conditions stated in Article 32 of

the Convention.

Claimant submits that, as a general policy consideration, direct investor recourse
to arbitration has become the rule in modern investment agreements, although
there may be exceptions, and that the value of investor-state arbitral mechanism is
so substantial that it should only be foreclosed when that result is unmistakably
required by treaty provision. Whilst it is correct that there are more than 1,400

Page 18 of 40

65.

66.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO ~ DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

(some say more than 2,000) Bilateral Investment Treaties which contemplate
investor-state arbitration (albeit under differing conditions) and that the value of
investor-state arbitral mechanism is substantial, the Tribunal does not believe that
under contemporary international law a foreign investor is entitled to the benefit of

the doubt with respect to the existence and scope of an arbitration agreement.

The present dispute is one of the growing number of investor-state arbitrations
under the NAFTA. The previous cases, so far as the Tribunal is aware, have all
been brought under Chapter Eleven, the principal chapter of the NAFTA devoted to
Investment. In the present case, the claim involves alleged default of some US$
50,000,000 worth of a debt security (convertible debentures) issued by a Mexican
financial holding company, and the claim arguably belongs under Chapter
Fourteen, a special chapter of the NAFTA devoted to Financial Services. As
examined hereafter, Claimant contends that all of its claims are to be considered
under Chapter Eleven, because the conditions for application of Chapter Fourteen
are not met; Respondent contends that Chapter Fourteen is applicable, because the
investment in question fits the definitions of that Chapter. In moving to dismiss
for lack of jurisdiction all but one of the claims presented, Respondent points to

Article 1101(3) of the NAFTA, which provides:

This Chapter does not apply to measures adopted or maintained by
a Party to the extent that they are covered by Chapter Fourteen
(Financial Services).

Several provisions of Chapter Eleven are incorporated into Chapter Fourteen,
including, as here relevant, Article 1110 conceming Expropriation and
Compensation, and Articles 1115-1138 concerning the procedural aspects of
dispute resoltition by a tribunal such as the present one. Article 1102 on National

Page 19 of 40

67.

68.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

Treatment and Article 1105 on Minimum Standard of Treatment are not
incorporated into Chapter Fourteen. Accordingly, if the measures alleged to have
been taken on behalf of the Government of Mexico are covered by Chapter
Fourteen, this Tribunal lacks jurisdiction of the claims under Articles 1102 and
1105. Chapter Fourteen contains no counterpart to the Minimum Standard of
Treatment provision of Chapter Eleven; it does contain, in Article 1405, a
counterpart to the national treatment provision in Chapter Eleven, and indeed a
claim for breach of Article 1405 is made in the present arbitration. However,
Article 1405 is not included among the provisions to which the procedural
provisions of Chapter Eleven apply (Articles 1115-1138), and Article 1414 makes
clear that claims under Article 1405 are subject to state-to-state dispute settlement
pursuant to Chapter Twenty, not to investor-state dispute settlement under Chapter

Eleven.

In sum, if the measures challenged in this arbitration are covered by Chapter
Fourteen, the claims brought under Articles 1102, 1105, and 1405 must be
dismissed, and only the claim for expropriation pursuant to Article 1110 remains
to be decided by this Tribunal. If, on the other hand, the conditions for application
of Chapter Fourteen are not met, the claims under Article 1102 (National
Treatment) and Article 1105 (Minimum Standards of Treatment) remain before
this Tribunal, along with the expropriation claim under Article 1110.

B. Background: NAFTA and Financial Services

Though the title of the Agreement among Canada, Mexico and the United States of
America speaks of “free trade,” it was understood from the outset of the
negotiations that transborder investment would be an important component of any

plan to link the economies of the three state Parties. Furthermore, the trade to be

Page 20 of 40

69.

70.

71.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

liberalized. would not be limited to goods, but would apply, with somewhat

different rules, to services as well.
The objectives of the NAFTA, set out in Article 102, include:

(a) [to] eliminate barriers to trade in, and facilitate the cross-
border movement of, goods and services between the territories of
the Parties;

(c) [to] increase substantially investment opportunities in the
territories of the Parties:

A particular concern of the architects of the NAFTA was the field of financial
services. On the one hand, the Parties were anxious to open up the transborder
exchange of financial services, particularly with Mexico, and to integrate Mexico
more fully into the international financial system; on the other hand, the architects
of the NAFTA understood that the principles of open access and national treatment
were not suitable in all respects for the financial sector, which is subject to
regulation on prudential and macroeconomic grounds by each of the state Parties.
Accordingly, the negotiators of the NAFTA from the beginning contemplated a
separate chapter on financial services, and for the most part the negotiations of
what became Chapter Fourteen were carried on by separate teams drawn from the
Finance/Treasury ministries rather than from the trade and commerce ministries of

the respective governments.

The result is that Chapter Fourteen “applies to measures adopted or maintained by
a Party relating to (a) financial institutions of another Party; (b) investors of
another Party, and investments of such investors, in financial institutions in the

Party’s territory; and (c) cross-border trade in financial services” (Article 1401(1)),

Page 21 of 40

 

72.

73.

74.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

and that the structure of the NAFTA is such that Chapter Fourteen does not simply
refer to Chapter Eleven, but rather incorporates certain of its provisions (Article
1401(2)). Chapter Fourteen has its own Annexes, including Annex VII which
establishes exceptions and commitments towards liberalization. It is also to be
noted that Chapter Eleven contains an underride clause in Article 1112(1)
according to which in the event of any inconsistency between Chapter Eleven and
any other Chapter, the other Chapter shall prevail to the extent of the

inconsistency.

In regard to dispute settlement, the drafters of Chapter Fourteen drew on the two
provisions for dispute settlement contained in the NAFTA. Disputes concerning
prudential regulations, including allegations of violation of national treatment,
were committed to state-to-state dispute settlement pursuant to Chapter Twenty;
disputes about alleged expropriation as well as denials of transfers of payments
and certain other prohibitions (Articles 1109 — 1111 and 1113 — 1114) were

committed to investor-state dispute settlement pursuant to Chapter Eleven.

Here again, the provisions relating the investor-state dispute settlement (Article
1115 — 1138) are “incorporated into and made a part of this Chapter [Fourteen]
solely for breaches by a Party of Articles 1109 through 1111, 1113 and 1114, as
incorporated into this Chapter.” (Article 1401(2), italics supplied).

The overall principles of the NAFTA are maintained in Chapter Fourteen, including
the principle that an investor of one state Party should be permitted to establish a
financial institution in the territory of another state Party (Article 1403(1)), and the
principle that each state Party is to accord national treatment to investors of
another Party (Article 1405). But only an investor engaged in financial services in

its home country is entitled to establish a financial institution in the territory of

Page 22 of 40

75.

76.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

another state Party (Article 1403(5)), and each of the three state Parties adopted
significant reservations to Chapter Fourteen, reflecting differences in legislation
and regulations in force at the time the NAFTA was negotiated, as well as different
distribution of regulatory authority between the national governments and the
respective state or provincial governments. Moreover, the reservations permitted
to be taken by Mexico reflected Mexico’s insistence that its financial sector not be
overwhelmed by the major banks and other financial institutions based in the
United States of America.

Each country’s reservations to Chapter Fourteen are contained in separate
schedules set out in Annex VII, as provided in Article 1409 of the principal text.
Article 2201 of the NAFTA confirms that the Annexes constitute an integral part of
the Agreement, and in the view of the Tribunal, the definitions and classifications

there set out are useful in construing the provisions of the Agreement.

C. Is asociedad controladora a financial institution?

Claimant takes the position that Chapter Fourteen is not applicable, because
Article 1401 limits the scope of the chapter (so far as here relevant) to measures
relating to investors of another Party, and investments of such investors, in
financial institutions in the Party's territory (italics supplied). Article 1416 of the

NAFTA defines Financial Institutions as:

any financial intermediary or other enterprise that is [i] authorized
to do business and [ii] regulated or supervised as a financial
institution under the law of the Party in whose territory it is
located.

Page 23 of 40

77.

78.

79.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

The convertible debentures in question in the present case were issued by GF
BanCrecer, which, as is not disputed, was a financial holding company or
“sociedad controladora.” Claimant asserts that a sociedad controladora does not
meet the definition of financial institution, because under the law applicable to
financial groups (Ley para Regular las Agrupaciones Financieras, herein LRAF) it
is not “authorized to do business,” and because it is not regulated as a financial
institution. Claimant points, inter alia, to Article 16 of the LRAF, which expressly
prohibits financial holding companies from carrying on operations for which its
financial subsidiaries are qualified, such as taking deposits if the subsidiary is a

bank, or issuing insurance policies if the subsidiary is an insurance company.

Respondent for its part asserts that a financial holding company such as GF
BanCrecer is subject to approval and licensing by the Banco de México, the
Secretariat of Finance and Public Credit (Secretaria de Hacienda y Crédito
Publico, herein SHCP) and the National Banking and Securities Commission
(Comision Nacional Bancaria y de Valores, herein CNBV), and thus easily passes
the second test. Further, while acknowledging that the LRAF distinguishes between
holding companies such as GF BanCrecer and banks or insurance companies
authorized to engage in transactions directly with the public, Respondent contends
that what financial holding companies are authorized to do constitutes doing
business as a financial institution within the meaning of the definition of financial
institution in Article 1416.

The Tribunal has approached the question of whether GF BanCrecer is a financial

institution within the meaning of Article 1416 of the NAFTA from the three points

of view.

Page 24 of 40

80.

81.

82.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

First, the Tribunal notes that the definition of “financial institution” in Article
1416 is circular, except that it leaves the dispositive classification up to each State
in which the enterprise in question is located. However, the Tribunal observes that
the NAFTA contains chapters addressed to several distinct sectors, including
energy, agriculture, telecommunications, intellectual property, and financial
services. It would be strange indeed to conclude that a financial holding company
such as GF BanCrecer, devoted to investing in banks and insurance companies,
does not belong to the financial services sector. If it is an institution or entity, then
surely GF BanCrecer must bea financial institution. Again, since it is not
contested that GF BanCrecer was regulated and licensed by one or more financial
tegulatory agencies of the Government of Mexico, and since the task of those
agencies is to regulate financial institutions, under any interpretation based on
“plain meaning” GF BanCrecer could not fall into any category other than that of

“financial institution.”

Claimant stresses that in order to qualify as a financial institution under Article
1416, the entity in question should be authorized to do business as a financial
institution. Claimant interprets this as meaning being able to render financial
services to the public. That is, in the Tribunal’s view, too narrow a construction of
the definition of financial institution given in Article 1416 which does not contain
the language suggested by Claimant. Rather, under Mexican law, a specifically
authorized financial holding company must have a majority holding in banks,
insurance companies and other financial service providers. That is its very

purpose and in that sense it is authorized to do business as a financial institution.

It should further be noted that Chapter Fourteen is not only focused on
intermediaries. It also includes the organizations referred to in Article 7 LRAF,

which is in itself not all inclusive (see also Ley de la CNBV). Furthermore, it is

Page 25 of 40

 

83.

84.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

common ground between Claimant and Respondent that Mexican law does not
define specifically the term financial institution. Here, notwithstanding Claimant’s
arguments to the contrary, it appears that financial institutions are the same as
financial entities. Each financial entity is subject to regulations that are different
and the requirements differ depending on what type of financial entity is involved.
Common denominators are that all of them work within the framework of the
financial regulations and that there is an authorization to do business. Sociedades
controladoras appear to meet those common denominators. The legislation to
implement Mexico’s financial services undertakings under the NAFTA does not

lead to a different conclusion.

Second, looked at from the design of the NAFTA, it is evident that the drafters
carved out the financial sector from significant portions of the general provisions,
because none of the state Parties was prepared to engage in the kind of
harmonization and deregulation that would have been necessary to treat banks,
insurance companies, and securities firms (as well as other participants in the
financial sector) in the same way as, say, the soft drink, retail trade, or shoe
manufacturing industries. As noted above, Chapter Fourteen and the Annexes
applicable to that Chapter contain significant differences from the general
provisions on national treatment, omit a provision on “fair and equitable
treatment,” and limit resort to investor-state arbitration. All of these differences, it
is clear, are designed to leave room for national decision-making rather than
harmonization, and to limit the opportunity of investors from another state Party to
resort to international dispute settlement to challenge regulatory measures taken by

the respective national authorities.

As regards Mexico, financial holding companies were expressly provided for in

the LRAF, adopted prior to conclusion of the NAFTA, and were expressly provided

Page 26 of 40

85.

86.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

for in the Annex to the Agreement (see below). If the Parties had intended to
exclude investment in financial holding companies from the scope of Chapter
Fourteen, one would have expected them to do so explicitly. No such exclusion
appears either in Chapter Fourteen itself or in the corresponding Annex; in
contrast, when they wanted to make other protections of the NAFTA available to
investors of another Party in the financial sector, the drafters did so directly, for
instance by providing that Article 1110 (as well as several other provisions of
Chapter Eleven) are incorporated into Chapter Fourteen.

The result, as the Tribunal understands it, is that complaints by investors of
another Party in the financial sector concerning regulations imposed by agencies
of the host country are governed by Chapter Fourteen, and may be raised by the
foreign investor only if supported by the investor's home state. If, on the other
hand, a foreign investor in a financial institution claims expropriation, the
standards and procedures of Chapter Eleven would be available, as they are in the
present case.” There is no indication that financial holding companies were
intended to be left out of this scheme, and to be lumped instead with investments

in non-financial sectors.

Third, the definitions and classifications set out in the Schedule of Mexico to
Annex VII do not support Claimant’s case. Following the outline of Annex VII
applicable to all three state Parties, Section A defines the Sector as “Financial
Services,” and sets out a series of reservations to Article 1403 (Establishment of

Financial Institutions) and Article 1405 (National Treatment), linked to particular

To avoid any possible misunderstanding, the Tribunal states that nothing in this Decision is
intended to construe the scope of Article 1110 and the possible distinction under that article
between a compensable taking and a non-compensable regulatory measure.

Page 27 of 40

87.

88.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

laws or regulations. The first reservation, linked to Article 18 of the LRAF as well
as to Articles 11 and 15 of the LIC (Ley de Instituciones de Crédito) concerns two
Sub-Sectors — Holding Companies (Sociedades Controladoras) and Commercial
Banks (Instituciones de Banca Multiple). In particular, Section A of Annex VII
limits aggregate foreign investment in holding companies (as well as in
commercial banks) to 30 percent of common stock capital, subject to further
qualification in Sections B and C. Several of the other reservations set out in
Section A are applicable only to financial institutions in other Sub-Sectors, but one
additional reservation is applicable to holding companies as well as to all the other
Sub-Sectors — the prohibition of investment by foreign governments and foreign
state enterprises, which but for the reservation would come within the definition of
“investor of a Party” in Article 1416.

In respect of both of these reservations, the Schedule recognizes Holding
Companies as distinct in certain aspects from other Sub-Sectors — for instance
Industry Classification is not applicable. But there is no doubt that the
reservations set out in Section A are expressly made applicable to foreign investors
in holding companies, and that these reservations are directed to Article 1403 —
“Establishment of Financial Institutions.”

Section B of Mexico's Schedule to Annex VII, entitled “Establishment and
Operation of Financial Institutions,” confirms both the distinction between holding
companies and other financial institutions and the understanding that both types of
institutions come within the rubric of financial institutions. Paragraph 2 sets out
maximum individual capital authorized for foreign financial affiliates of
commercial banks, securities firms and insurance companies, respectively, and

paragraphs 5-7 set out limits on the aggregate foreign capital in these and other

Page 28 of 40

89.

90.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

specified financial institutions. No corresponding limits on foreign capital are

placed on financial holding companies in Section B.

In paragraph 14 of Section B, Mexico reserved the right to limit eligibility to
establish a foreign financial affiliate in Mexico to an investor of another Party
engaged in the same general type of financial service in its home country, so that,
say, a Canadian insurance company could establish an insurance affiliate in
Mexico, but not a bank or securities firm. Paragraph 5 of Section C, however,
provides that an investor of another Party that has established or acquired a
commercial bank or a securities firm in accordance with Section B may establish a
financial holding company to get around the restriction in paragraph 14 of Section
B. Since Claimant argued vigorously that paragraph 5 of Section C supports its
contention that a financial holding company is not a financial institution within the
meaning of the NAFTA, see, e.g., Borja Opinion at ] 37, the complete text of
paragraph 5 is set out both in English and Spanish:

An investor of another Party that in
accordance with Section B is authorized
to establish or acquire, and establishes
or acquires, a commercial bank or
securities firm in Mexico may also
establish a financial holding company in
Mexico, and thereby establish or acquire
other types of financial institutions in
Mexico, under the terms of Mexican
measures.

Un inversionista de otra Parte que
conforme a la Seccién B sea autorizado
a establecer o adquirir, y establezca o
adquiera en México, una institucién de
banca multiple o una casa de bolsa,
también podra establecer una sociedad
controladora de agrupaciones
financieras en México, y por ese medio
establecer o adquirir otros tipos de
instituciones financieras en México, de
conformidad con las medidas
mexicanas.

Claimant argues that “other types of financial institutions” refers to the right of the
holding company (if the other conditions are met) to acquire a bank or an
insurance company or a securities firm — an interpretation with which the Tribunal

has no difficulty. It does not follow, as the Tribunal interprets this paragraph, that

Page 29 of 40

 

91.

92.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO ~ DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

a financial holding company is not a financial institution. As noted above, Section
B sets out a series of maximum capital restrictions applicable to investors of
another Party in specified financial institutions, as well as the right to limit
eligibility of establish foreign affiliates to investors of another Party with
experience in the same Sub-Sector. What paragraph 5 of Section C does, is to
liberalize that restriction, so that by use of a financial-holding company a qualified
investor of another Party is able to diversify its participation in the financial
services sector of Mexico. Nothing in paragraph C-5 suggests that it is designed to
contradict or limit the classification of a sociedad controladora as a financial

institution, as stated in Section A.

In sum, the Tribunal understands that financial holding companies are governed
somewhat differently under Mexican law from the kinds of financial institutions
that deal directly with the public, such as commercial banks, insurance companies,
and securities firms. The Tribunal concludes, however, that financial holding
companies (sociedades controladoras) established in Mexico are financial
institutions under the law of Mexico, and thus are within the meaning of Article
1416 of the NAFTA, since they are authorized to do business as a financial
institution and are regulated and supervised as a financial institution under

Mexican law.

D. Do the debentures in question constitute regulatory capital?

The conclusion that a sociedad controladara is a financial institution within the
meaning of Article 1416 of the NAFTA, however, does not suffice to bring it under

the coverage of Chapter Fourteen since paragraph 7 of the same article requires:

Page 30 of 40

93.

94,

95.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

investment means “investment” as defined in Article 1139
(Investment—Definitions), except that, with respect to “loans” and
“debt securities” referred to in that Article:

(a) aloan to or debt security issued by a financial institution is an
investment only where it is treated as regulatory capital by the
Party in whose territory the financial institution is located;

Respondent takes the position that the convertible debentures in question are
treated as regulatory capital in Mexico. Claimant, on the other hand, submits that,
assuming the GF BanCrecer is a financial institution, they were not treated as
regulatory capital because the sociedad controladora faced no capital adequacy
requirements. The Tribunal holds that the convertible debentures in question are
regulatory capital within the meaning of Article 1416(7)(a) for the following

reasons.

At the outset, the Tribunal notes that, as it is common ground between Claimant
and Respondent, the NAFTA does not provide a definition of “regulatory capital.”
Nor do the available travaux préparatoires. The Tribunal therefore has to interpret
that term, as required by Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention of 1969, “in good
faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty

in their context and in the light of its object and purpose.”

The object and purpose of the NAFTA in general and the particular concern
regarding the field of financial services were reviewed in Section B above. The
context in which the term appears is “measures adopted or maintained by a Party
relating to (a) financial institutions of another Party; (b) investors of another Party,
and investments of such investors, in financial institutions in the Party’s territory;
and (c) cross-border trade in financial services” (Article 1401(1)).

+

Page 31 of 40

96.

97.

98.

99.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

Two questions then need to be addressed. First, are the convertible debentures in
question treated as “capital” in Mexico? Second, if the answer to the first question
is affirmative, is the capital in question subject to regulation by the relevant

financial authorities in Mexico?

The answer to first question is indeed affirmative. The treatment of the debentures
in question as capital of GF BanCrecer appears to be in conformity with Cirulares

1158 and 1384 issued by the CNBV, which constitute prudential measures.

From copies of the audited financial statements of GF BanCrecer for the fiscal
years 1995 through 1999, submitted as evidence by Respondent (Exh. RO257 —
R0373), it appears that the Mexican financial holding company in reference
presented the debentures as a component of its stockholders’ equity (capital
contable) during such periods. These statements also show that they were
prepared pursuant to accounting rules and practices applicable to Mexican
financial holding companies as set forth by the Commission in the Circulares,
which rules and practices, as stated by the duly authorized auditors of GF
BanCrecer in some cases differ from Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
(GAAP) as applicable in Mexico.’

If the Basle Accord of 1988 were to be taken into account, it may be that the

debentures in question cannot be counted as capital as they do not exactly meet the

Further references to these differences, specifically to the inclusion of the debentures in question as
a component of the stockholders’ equity (capital contable) of GF BanCrecer are detailed by the
auditors in the notes to each of the audited financial statements of the Mexican financial holding
company in reference for fiscal years 1995 (Note 6), 1996 (Note 8), 1997 (Note 17), 1998 (Notes 5
and 8) and 1999 (Notes 2, 5 and 8). See Exh. R0272, R0293, R0326, R0347, R0349, R0366,
RO0369 and RO371.

Page 32 of 40

100.

101.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

requirements of hybrid (debt/equity) capital instruments as defined in Annex
1(C)(d) to that Accord. In particular, the “Acta de emisién de obligaciones

hordinad.

d, 4
ubc denc

dounid

en délares estadc convertibles forzc

en titulos representativos del capital del Grupo Financiero BanCrecer, S.A. de
C.V.” does not state that interest payments are to be deferred where the
profitability of the financial institution would not support payment (as required by
the fourth bullet point of Annex 1(C)(d)). However, they fulfill to a large extent
the description given. This is reinforced by the reference in the Basle Accord of
“mandatory convertible debt instruments in the United States” as an example of
instruments eligible for inclusion. It is also to be noted that the debentures in
question were not convertible at the option of the holder (i.e., Claimant), but rather
mandatorily convertible into shares of GF BanCrecer after five years (with the
option of conversion by Claimant after four years). In any event, whilst the Basle
Accord appears to have been a source of inspiration of the Mexican legislator,
Mexico was not a Party to that Accord. Thus, the Basle Accord cannot be viewed
as a measure within the meaning of Article 201(1) of the NAFTA (“measure

includes any law, regulation, procedure, requirement or practice”).

With respect to the second question, as it is correctly pointed out by the Claimant,
regulation by authorities of capital of financial institutions is ordinarily understood
to refer to capital adequacy requirements in the sense of tier 1 and tier 2 capital,
spread of capital, deductions, risk asset ratios, market risk, etc. These
requirements do not appear to exist as such for capital of a sociedad controladora

in Mexico.

However, the lack of those requirements does not mean that the convertible
debentures in question are not “regulatory” within the meaning of Article

1416(7)(a) of the NAFTA viewed in conjunction with the Mexican regulation of

Page 33 of 40

 

 

102.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION‘ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

sociedades controladoras. In the context of Chapter Fourteen, the term
“regulatory” is to be interpreted in a wider sense. Such interpretation is permitted
since the carefully negotiated text of the NAFTA in general and Chapter Fourteen in
particular do not refer in any manner to capital adequacy requirements in the sense
described above. Rather, Article 1410(1) of the NAFTA points to the wider notion

of prudential measures which are the underlying rationale of regulatory capital:

1. Nothing in this Part shall be construed to prevent a Party from
adopting or maintaining reasonable measures for prudential
reasons, such as:

(a) the protection of investors, depositors, financial market
participants, policy-holders, policy-claimants, or persons to whom
a fiduciary duty is owed by a financial institution or cross-border
service provider;

(b) the maintenance of the safety, soundness, integrity or
financial responsibility of financial institutions or cross-border
service providers; and

(c) ensuring the integrity and stability of a Party’s financial

system.
The LRAF requires that financial groups be constituted by a holding company
which holds at least 51% of the paid up capital of and has control over the
subsidiaries (LRAF, Articles 7 and 15). It also requires that financial groups have
the authorization of the sHCP following the opinion of the Banco de México and
the CNBV (or, as the case may be, the Comisién Nacional de Seguros y Fianzas)
(LRAF, Article 6). Financial accounting of the financial groups is subject to rules
issued by the relevant supervising authority as determined by the SHCP considering
the dominant entity within a specific financial group (LRAF, Article 30). The

Circulares applicable to financial institutions, including a sociedad controladora,

Page 34 of 40

103.

104.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

which are subject to the supervision of the CNBV provide for the manner in which

financial institutions have to conduct their financial accounting and to present their

annual accounts.

Article 2 of the CNBV Law (concerning “Mexican financial entities” as listed in

Article 3 of said Law), which includes financial holding companies (“sociedades

controladoras de grupos financieros”), sets out the objectives of the regulation and

supervision undertaken by the CNBV over financial holding companies:

... a fin de procurar su estabilidad y
correcto funcionamiento, asi como
mantener y fomentar el sano y
equilibrado desarrollo del sistema
financiero en su conjunto, en
proteccién de los intereses del publico

. procure their stability and due
operation, as well as to maintain and
promote the healthy and balanced
development of the financial system
taken as a whole, in protection of the
interests of the public . . .

Article 4 of the CNBV Law grants the CNBV powers, among others, to:

(a)

(b)

©

@

issue prudential regulation within its competence, which shall

complied with by financial entities (sub-section II);

issue accounting rules applicable to financial entities (sub-section II];

establish rules for valuation of assets and, as appropriate, obligations and

responsibilities of financial holding entities pursuant to applicable law

(sub-section IV);

issue rules applicable to the information that must be periodically

submitted to the CNBV by financial entities (sub-section V);

Page 35 of 40

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

(©) issue generally applicable regulations setting forth the characteristics and
requirements that must be fulfilled and complied with by auditors of
financial entities and the opinions issued by such auditors (sub-section
VD, and

() issue all rules necessary for due exercise of the powers granted to the
CNBV pursuant to the CNBV Law and other applicable legislation, for due
compliance with said rules, and for due enforcement of regulations issued

pursuant to the abovementioned rules (sub-section XXXVI).

105. Further, Article 6 of the CNBV Law expressly sets forth that the prudential
regulation dictated by the Commission shall be oriented towards the preservation
of the liquidity, solvency and stability of financial institutions, in accordance with

the applicable law:

Para los efectos de la fraccién II del
articulo 4 la Comisién, de conformidad
con lo que establezcan las leyes relativas
al sistema financiero, emitird normas de
carécter prudencial orientadas a
preservar la liquidez, solvencia y
estabilidad de las entidades financieras.

For purposes of Section II of article 4,
the Commission shall, pursuant to the
laws relative to the financial system,
issue prudential regulation designated to
preserve the liquidity, solvency and
stability of financial entities.

106. The capital of a sociedad controladora, which ~ as noted above — includes the
convertible debentures in question, is subject to specific regulations and

supervision, as is made clear in Article 23 of the LRAF:

El capital pagado y reservas de capital
de la controladora se invertira de
conformidad con las disposiciones de
caragter general que expida la Secretaria
de Hacienda y Crédito Publico, en lo

The paid-in capital and capital
reserves of the holding company shall
be invested in the following assets,
pursuant to the rules issued by the
Secretaria de Hacienda y Crédito

Page 36 of 40

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO ~ DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

siguiente:

L- Acciones emitidas por los demas
integrantes del grupo. La controladora
sélo podra participar en el capital de
sociedades distintas a las participantes
del grupo, en casos de incorporacién o
fusién conforme a lo previsto en el
articulo 10 de esta Ley;

IL- Inmuebles, mobiliario y equipo,
estrictamente indispensables para la
realizacién de su objeto, y

IL- Valores a cargo del Gobierno
Federal, instrumentos de captacién
bancaria y otras inversiones que
autorice la referida Secretaria.

IV. Titulos representativos de cuando
menos el cincuenta y uno por ciento del
capital ordinario de  entidades
financieras del exterior, previa
autorizacién de Ja Secretaria de
Hacienda y Crédito Piblico, en los
términos y proporciones que dicha
Secretaria sefiale.

La controladora solo podra: contraer
pasivos directos 0 contingentes, y dar en
garantia sus propiedades cuando se trate
del convenio de resp ili aque
se refiere el articulo 28 de esta Ley; de
las operaciones con el Fondo Bancario
de Proteccién al Ahorro 0 con el fondo
de proteccién y garantia previsto en la
Ley del Mercado de Valores, y con
autorizacién del Banco de México,
tratandose de la emisién de obligaciones
subordinadas de conversién forzosa a
titulos representativos de su capital y de
obtencién de créditos a corto plazo, en
tanto se realiza la colocacién de
acciones con motivo de la incorporacién
© fusién a que se refiere el articulo 10
de esta Ley.

La * emisién de obligaciones
subordinadas se sujetara a lo dispuesto

Publico:

I- Shares issued by the other
members of the financial group. The
holding company may acquire shares
of entities which are not part of the
same financial group only in the event
of mergers or incorporation of other
entities into the financial group,
pursuant to article 10 herein;

IL.- Such immovables, movables and
equipment as are strictly necessary for
accomplishment of its purpose, and.

IIL.- Securities issued by the Federal
Government, banks and _ other
investments as authorized by the
Secretaria de Hacienda y Crédito
Publico.

IV. Shares representative of at least
fifty one per cent of the common
capital of foreign financial entities, as
may be approved by the Secretaria de
Hacienda y Crédito Publico.

The holding company may only incur
direct or contingent liabilities and
may only pledge its assets, in

ion with its ing of
responsibilities referred to in article
28 of this law; in connection with the
Fondo Bancario de Proteccién al
Ahorro, or in connection with the
protection and guarantee fund
contemplated in the Ley del Mercado
de Valores, and with authorization
from Banco de México, in the
issuance of subordinated mandatory
convertible debentures or pursuant to
short term loans contracted in regard
to the merger or incorporation of
financial entities into a financial
group referred to in article 10 of this
law.

The issuance of subordinated
debentures shall be made pursuant to

Page 37 of 40

 

107.

108.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO ~ DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

en el articulo 64 de la Ley de
Instituciones de Crédito.

(italics supplied)

Article 64 of the LIC provides:

Las igaci inadas y sus
cupones seran titulos de crédito con los
mismos requisitos y caracteristicas que
los bonos bancarios, salvo los previstos
en el presente articulo.

En caso de liquidacién de la emisora, el
pago de las obligaciones subordinadas
se hara a prorrata después de cubrir
todas las demas deudas de la institucién,
pero antes de repartir a los titulares de
las acciones o de los certificados de
aportacién patrimonial, en su caso, el
haber social. En la acta de emisién
relativa y en los titulos que se expidan
deber4 constar en forma notoria, lo
dispuesto en este parrafo.

G..)

La inversién de los pasivos captados a
través de la colocacién de obligaciones
subordinadas, se hara de conformidad
con las disposiciones que el Banco de
México dicte al efecto. Dichos recursos
no podrian invertirse en los activos a
que se refieren las fracciones I, II y IIL
del articulo 55 de esta Ley, salvo
aquellos que provengan de la
colocacién de obligaciones
subordinadas de conversién obligatoria
@ titulos representativos de capital.

(italics supplied)

+

article 64 of the Banking Law (Ley de
Instituciones de Crédito).

and their
coupons shall be credit instruments
with the same requirements and
characteristics as applicable to
banking bonds, except as set forth in
this article.

In the event of liquidation of the
issuer, payment of subordinated
debentures shall be made pro-rata
after payment of all other debts of the
institution, but before making any
payments to shareholders. The
pertinent. acta de’ emission, and the
debentures as issued shall clearly set
out the provisions of this paragraph.

(.-)

The investment of monies obtained
from the issuance of subordinated
debentures shall be made pursuant to
the applicable rules issued by Banco
de México. Such monies may not be
invested in the assets referred to in
Sections I, Il and III of article 55 of
this law, except for those obtained
JSrom the issuance of subordinated
mandatory convertible debentures.

Article 55 LIC sets forth the rules to which paid-in capital contributions and

reserves of credit institutions are subject.

Page 38 of 40

109.

110.

111.

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

The foregoing considerations lead to the conclusion that the capital of a sociedad
controladora such as GF BanCrecer, and of which the debentures in question form
part, is treated as “regulatory capital” in Mexico within the meaning of Article
1416(7)(a) of the NAFTA.

The Tribunal wishes to emphasize that it has reached the above conclusion in the
rather specific context of Article 1416(7)(a) of the NAFTA, the manner in which
financial holding companies (sociedades controladoras) are regulated and
supervised in Mexico, and the nature of the mandatory convertible debentures in
question.

Costs

As in the present phase of the arbitration no submissions on costs have been

contemplated, the Tribunal reserves its decision on the costs of the present phase.

Page 39 of 40

FIREMAN’S FUND V. MEXICO — DECISION ON PRELIMINARY QUESTION

vil. DECISIONS

112. FOR THE FOREGOING REASONS, the Arbitral Tribunal renders the following

decisions:

(1) HOLps that Claimant’s claims brought under Articles 1102, 1105 and 1405
of the NAFTA are not within the competence of the Tribunal, but that claims
brought under Article 1110 are within its competence;

(2) RESERVES decision on the costs of the present phase of the arbitration;

(3) DETERMINES that the further conduct of the arbitration will be determined by
the Tribunal after consultation with the parties.

Made in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, being the place of arbitration, on 17 July 2003,

 

Lb € Tog’

Professor Andreas F. Lowenfeld, Fraficisco Carrillo Gamboa,
Arbitrator ‘bitrator

LS

Professor Albert Jan van den Berg,
President

Page 40 of 40

