 

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v. The Czech Republic

 

GB — London WC2A 3EG

UNCITRAL ~ Place of Geneva,
ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL
| Prof. Martin Hunter Co-arbitrator
Essex Court Chambers Tel [44] (0)20 7813 8000
24 Lincoln's Inn Fields Fax [44] (0)20 7813 8080

E-mail mhunter@essexcourt.net

 

Prof. Dr. August Reinisch

Department of European, International and
Comparative Law

Section for International Law and International
Relations

University of Vienna

Schottenbastei 10-16

AT — 1010 Vienna

Co-arbitrator

Tel [43] (1) 4277 35307

Fax [43] (1) 4277 9353

E-mail august.reinisch@univie.ac.at

 

Dr. Paolo Michele Patocchi
Patocchi & Marzolini

5, rue Pedro-Meylan

CH — 1208 Geneva

President appointed by the co-arbitrators
Phone [44] (22) 718 33 12

Fax [41] (22) 718.33 11

E-mail patocchi@patocchimarzolini.com

 

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus)

Represented by:

JUDr. Jan Rudolf
Attorney-at-law
Rudolf & Partners
Jungmannova 34
CZ— 110 00 Prague 14

PARTIES
CLAIMANT
Tel [420] (224) 235 860
Fax [420] (224) 235 864

E-mail jan.rudolf@akrudolf.cz

 

The Czech Republic

Represented by:

Ms. Marie TalaSova

Head of the International Arbitration Department
Ministry of Finance of the Czech Republic
Letenska 15

CZ— 118 00 Prague 1

RESPONDENT

Tel [420] (257) 044 734
Fax [420] (233) 373 034
E-mail marie.talasova @mifer.cz

 

 

FINAL AWARD

 

— 15 DECEMBER 2014

 

 

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v. The Czech Republic

UNCITRAL Arbitration — Place of arbitration: Geneva, Switzerland

 

BRIEFS ON THE MERITS REFERRED TO IN THE FOOTNOTES
FONTS USED IN QUOTATIONS,
ABBREVIATIONS

 

vill.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

THE ARBITRATION PROCEEDINGS OUTLINED
A. THE CLAIMANT
B. THE RESPONDENT
Cc. THE DISPUTE
D. THE PROCEEDINGS OUTLINED

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

THE ARBITRATION A IT

THE PRAYERS FOR RELIEF 13
A. THE CLAIMANT 13
B. THE RESPONDENT 14

 

THE QUESTIONS TO BE DECIDED BY THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL ....

iE DECISION BY THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL
WHETHER THE CLAIMANT WAS ENTITLED TO TERMINATE THE
ARBITRATION PROCEEDINGS UNILATERALLY BY WITHDRAWING
ITS NOTICE OF ARSITRATION — WHETHER THIS ARBITRAL
TRIBUNAL HAS JURISDICTION TO MAKE AN AWARD ON COSTS
(THE FIRST PAIR OF ISSUES).
1. The Claimant's Position
2. The pondent's Position
3. The Reasons for the Arbitral Tribunal’s Decision .....
a) The Provisions in Point of the UNCITRAL Rules
b) The Termination of the Proceedings in the Present Case
aa) The Date When the Proceedings Were
Co 17
bb) The Respondent's Claim for Costs pee
ec) Whether the Proceedings Were Terminated by
the Claimant or Are to Se Terminated under Art.
34(2) of the UNCITRAL Rules ..
c) Whether the Arbitral Tribunal Has Jurisdiction to Hear the
Respondent's Claim for Costs ..
4. The Arbitral Tribunal’s Decision ...
8. WHETHER THE RESPONDENT IS ENTITLED TO AN AWARD ON
COSTS AND, IF SO, TO WHICH AMOUNT (THE SECOND PAIR OF
ISSUES) 23
41. The R 's Position 23
ge The Claimant's Position ...
3. The Reasons for the Arbitral Tribunal’s Decision
4. The Arbitral Tribunal’s Decision

THE COSTS OF THE ARBITRATION (OTHER THAN THE RESPONDENT’S
CLAIM FOR COSTS)

OPERATIVE PART OF THE FINAL AWARD

 

 

 
   
 
 
  

 

 

 

 
 

  
 

 

 

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v. The Czech Republic
UNCITRAL Arbitration — Place of arbitration: Geneva, Swilzerland

 

BRIEFS ON THE MERITS REFERRED TO IN THE FOOTNOTES

By the Claimant By the Respondent

 

 

NoA = Notice of Arbitration dated 9 January | Letter dated 6 February 2014
2014

 

 

WNodA = Withdrawal of the Notice of , AWNOoA = Letter dated 26 February 2014
Arbitration, dated 17 February 2014 answering the Claimant’s Notice of
Withdrawal

 

| RSubm = Respondent's Submission
according to Procedural Order No. 2, dated

| 10 duly 2014

ARSubm = Answer to the Respondent's
Submission, dated 11 August 2014

These briefs will be referred to by the abbreviation, followed by the page number followed by
the paragraph number.
Ex: NoA 1 [1 (Notice of Arbitration, page 1 paragraph 1).

 

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v. The Czech Republic

UNCITRAL Arbitration - Place of arbitration: Geneva, Switzerland

 

 

 

All quotations made from any exhibits or briefs on the record in the present Award,
whenever printed in

Courier New font,
are excerpts set out verbatim and will be so set out without inverted commas.

They will accordingly contain no corrections, save for clearly recognisable spelling mistakes.

 

 

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v. The Czech Republic
UNCITRAL Arbitration — Place of arbitration: Geneva, Switzerland

 

 

ABBREVIATIONS
| BIT | Bilateral Investment Treaty |
| =|
| CZ-CY Treaty | Agreement between the Czech Republic and the Republic of
| Cyprus for the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of
| | Investments of 15 June 2001 |
| CZK Czech koruna or Czech crown |
| |
| NoA | The Claimant's Notice of Arbitration dated 9 January 2014 |

| NoA 1 75 means Notice of Arbitration, page 1 paragraph 5
|
UNCITRAL Rules, the | United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
Arbitration Rules (1976)

| The date (1976) is indicated only where the context requires a
distinction to be made between the UNCITRAL Rules (1976)
and the later revision of 2010, which is not applicable in the

| present arbitration.

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v. The Czech Republic

UNCITRAL Arbitration — Place of arbitration: Geneva, Switzerland

 

41.

THE ARBITRATION PROCEEDINGS OUTLINED
THE CLAIMANT

The Claimant in this arbitration is Forminster Enterprises Limited
(‘Forminster’), a private limited liability company incorporated under
registration number No. 78962 in accordance with the laws of the Republic
of Cyprus and having its registered address at Kermia House, Office 601,
4Diagorou Street, 1097 Nicosia, Republic of Cyprus, represented by
Dr. Jan Rudolf, whose professional address is set out on the first page of
the present Award.

THE RESPONDENT

The Respondent in this arbitration is the State of the Czech Republic (“the
Czech Republic”) represented by its Ministry of Finance (see also
paragraph 32 below), the address of which is set out on the first page of the
present Award.

THE DISPUTE

Breach of the CZ-CY Treaty. In its Notice of Arbitration dated 9 January
2014 the Claimant claimed damages for losses resulting from measures
imposed by the Czech State on its investment in the territory of the Czech
Republic. The Claimant relied on Article 5(1) of the CZ-CY Treaty and
Article 3 of the UNCITRAL Rules. The Claimant argued that the effect of
such measures amounted to expropriation and, therefore, constituted a
breach of the said Treaty and Czech law by the Czech Republic.

The Withdrawal of the Notice of Arbitration by the Claimant. On 17
February 2014 the Claimant wrote to the Respondent stating that it
withdrew its Notice of Arbitration. In that letter the Claimant explained both
the reasons for the withdrawal of the Notice of Arbitration and the effects
that such withdrawal should have in its view.

The reasons for the withdrawal were explained as follows. Upon receipt of
the Notice of Arbitration, the Respondent requested that the identity of the
beneficial owner(s) and the current manager(s) of the Claimant be
disclosed, and raised objections to the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal.
The information sought by the Respondent, the Claimant contended, had
little relevance to the issue of arbitral jurisdiction. On the other hand, the
merits of the case were so important to the Claimant that the Claimant had

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v, The Czech Republic

UNCITRAL Arbitration — Place of arbitration: Geneva, Switzerland

 

decided to pursue its claims in a forum, the jurisdiction of which could not
be called into question by the Respondent.

As to the effects of the withdrawal, the Claimant advanced two main points.
Firstly, the proceedings would be terminated upon delivery to the
Respondent of the Claimant's notice of withdrawal. Secondly, the
withdrawal by the Claimant of its Notice of Arbitration did not constitute a
waiver of the Claimant's right to damages and compensation for other
losses sustained as a result of the violation of the CZ-CY Treaty by the
Czech Republic.

Objection by the Respondent to the Purported Termination of the
Arbitration by the Claimant. In a letter dated 26 February 2014 the
Respondent disagreed that the proceedings could be terminated forthwith
upon delivery of the Claimant's letter dated 17 February 2014. The
Respondent took the view that, unless the parties agreed otherwise, only
an arbitral tribunal had the power to terminate arbitral proceedings which
had been properly instituted, whether by an award or a procedural order,
and therefore an arbitral tribunal had to be constituted. In this arbitration
the Parties had not reached any agreement as to the termination of the
arbitration and the Respondent reserved its right to bring any claims or
objections before such arbitral tribunal, once constituted.

The Dispute. It emerged later that the Respondent elected not to pursue
any additional claims other than its claims for costs incurred in connection
with the arbitration. Thus, the dispute essentially relates to the claim for
costs which the Respondent presented in the arbitration.

The Parties’ Ciaims. The Claimant. The Claimant maintains that it was
entitled to bring these arbitration proceedings to an end on 17 February
2014 and opposes the Respondent's claim for costs. The Claimant’s
prayer for relief is set out in paragraph 36 ef seq. below.

The Respondent. The Respondent asked the Arbitral Tribunal to terminate
the arbitration proceedings and award the costs claimed (RSubm 6 5.1).
The Respondent's prayer for relief is set out in paragraph 38 below.

THE PROCEEDINGS OUTLINED

The Notice of Arbitration -— ointment of Prof. Hunter (9 January 2014).
On 9 January 2014 the Claimant filed its Notice of Arbitration against the
Respondent. In its Notice of Arbitration it appointed Prof. Martin Hunter as
arbitrator. Prof. Martin Hunter's contact details are set out on the first page

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v. The Czech Republic
UNCITRAL Arbitration - Place of arbitration: Geneva, Switzerland

 

of this Award. The Notice of Arbitration contained an express reference to
the UNCITRAL Rules (1976) (NoA 3 {[6).

The Respondent’s Request for Information as _to_the Identity of the
Claimant's Beneficial Owner(s) (21 January 2014). On 21 January 2014

the Respondent acknowledged receipt of the Notice of Arbitration on 10
January 2014, adding that such was the date of the commencement of the
arbitral proceedings. The Respondent did not challenge the Claimant's
indication to the effect that the UNCITRAL Rules (1976) were applicable.

Whilst expressing no concerns as to the impartiality and independence of
Prof. Hunter whom the Claimant had appointed, the Respondent requested
the Claimant to disclose the identity of its beneficial owner and its
managers so that it could be determined whether Prof. Hunter, appointed
by the Claimant, met the impartiality and independence requirements, and
so that the Respondent could make an informed appointment of its own
arbitrator.

Prof. Reinisch Appointed by the Respondent — Challenge of Arbitral
Jurisdiction (6 February 2014). On 6 February 2014 the Respondent
appointed Prof. Dr. August Reinisch as arbitrator. The Respondent noted
that its letter of 21 January 2014 and the request for information contained
therein had not been answered by the Claimant. Finally, the Respondent
challenged the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal ratione personae, ratione
materiae and ratione temporis. in this letter the Respondent did not
challenge the indication contained in the Claimant's Notice of Arbitration to
the effect that the UNCITRAL Rules (1976) were applicable.

Acceptance of Appointment by Prof. Dr. Reinisch (10 February 2014). On
10 February 2014 Prof. Dr. Reinisch accepted his appointment and made
two disclosures. Prof. Dr. Reinisch’s contact details are set out on the first
page of this Award.

Notice of Withdrawal by the Claimant (17 February 2014). On 17 February
2014 the Claimant wrote to the Respondent that it withdrew the Notice of
Arbitration (“Notice of Withdrawal”). It replied in essence that, on the one
hand, the information requested by the Claimant with respect to its
beneficial owner(s) was irrelevant to the issue of arbitral jurisdiction. On
the other hand, as the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal had been
challenged by the Respondent even before the Tribunal had been
constituted, the Claimant had decided “to take another course of action”
and intended to pursue its claims in a forum, the jurisdiction of which could
not “be compromised” by the Respondent.

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v. The Czech Republic

UNCITRAL Arbitration - Place of arbitration: Geneva, Switzerland

 

The Claimant further stated that as the Arbitral Tribunal had not been
constituted and was not therefore in a position to issue a termination order
in accordance with Art. 34(2) of the UNCITRAL Rules, the arbitral
proceedings would be terminated according to the Claimant upon delivery
of the 17 February 2014 letter to the Respondent. The arbitration
proceedings would be terminated without prejudice and would not preclude
the Claimant from asserting the claim in question against the Respondent
in the future. Such withdrawal by the Claimant did not constitute a waiver
of any right to damages or any other remedy for the losses sustained as a
consequence of the breach of the CZ-CY Treaty by the Czech Republic.

Respondent's Answer to the Claimant's Notice of Withdrawal (26 February
2014). On 26 February 2014 the Respondent answered the Claimant's
Notice of Withdrawal and objected to the termination of the arbitral
proceedings. The arbitral proceedings had been commenced upon delivery
of the Notice of Arbitration, and unless the Parties agreed otherwise, they
could be terminated in accordance with the UNCITRAL Rules only by an
award or an order for termination, that is by a decision to be made by the
arbitral tribunal to be constituted. The Respondent reserved ail its rights in
connection with the Claimant's Notice of Withdrawal, in particular with
respect to any costs incurred. In this letter the Respondent repeatedly
referred to the UNCITRAL Rules without challenging the indication
contained in the Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration to the effect that the
UNCITRAL Rules (1976) were applicable.

List of Potential Presiding Arbitrators and Consultation of the Parties (9 and
10 March 2014). On 9 March 2014 Prof. Hunter sent the Parties, also on
behalf of Prof. Dr. Reinisch, a list containing the names of six potential
presiding arbitrators, any of which would be acceptable to each of them.
On 10 March 2014 the Claimant and the Respondent wrote to Prof. Hunter
and Prof. Dr. Reinisch, respectively, stating that they did not have
objections as to any of the six names on the list.

Appointment of the Presiding Arbitrator by the Co-arbitrators (11 March
2014). On 11 March 2014 Prof. Dr. Reinisch wrote to the Parties, also on
behalf of Prof. Hunter, informing them that they had agreed on the
appointment of Dr. Paolo Michele Patocchi as President of the Arbitral
Tribunal, chosen from the list mentioned in paragraph 17 above.
Prof. Hunter and Dr. Patocchi received a copy of the same letter. Dr.
Patocchi’s contact details are set out on the first page of this Award.

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v. The Czech Republic

UNCITRAL Arbitration — Place of arbitration: Geneva, Switzerland

 

20.

21.

22.

23.

Acceptance by Dr. Patocchi (12 March 2014). On 12 March 2014
Dr. Patocchi wrote to the Parties that he was ready and willing to accept the
appointment; Prof. Hunter and Prof. Dr. Reinisch were copied in.

Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal (26 March 2014). On 26 March 2014
the Arbitral Tribunal confirmed to the Parties in Procedural Order No. 1 that
it had been constituted in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules
(1976).

In a letter of the same day to Counsel for the Respondent, who had asked
whether the Arbitral Tribunal had expressed the view or the conclusion that
the UNCITRAL Rules (1976) applied, the Arbitral Tribunal stated that the
reference to the UNCITRAL Rules (1976) in Procedural Order No. 1 was
based on what the Arbitral Tribunal had understood to be common ground
between the Parties (see paragraphs 9, 10, 12 and 16 above). if this point
happened, however, to be in dispute between the Parties, the Arbitral
Tribunal would then decide it in due course.

Request for an Advance on Costs (15 April 2014). On 14 April 2014 the
Arbitral Tribunal asked each Party to pay an amount of EUR 20,000.00 by
15 May 2014 and informed the Parties that each Arbitrator would charge an
hourly rate of EUR 400.00. The Arbitral Tribunal further indicated that it
was minded to set the place of arbitration in Geneva (Switzerland) and the
Parties’ views were sought in this respect.

Parties’ Comments (23 April 2014). The Claimant's Comments. On 23
April 2014 the Claimant first restated its case on the termination of the
arbitration. Whilst acknowledging that the UNCITRAL Rules did not make
provision for a withdrawal of the Notice of Arbitration, the Claimant pointed
out that Art. 3 of the UNCITRAL Rules did not require the Notice of
Arbitration to be communicated to the Arbitrators, or to be translated in the
language of the arbitration. The absence of an express provision dealing
with the withdrawal of the Notice of Arbitration could not be reasonably
construed as an implied preclusion, considering that the UNCITRAL Rules
dealt with the initial stage of the arbitration with few provisions and were
intended to confer broad discretion on the claimant. That discretion must
include a decision by the Claimant to withdraw its Notice of Arbitration. It
was contrary to the principles of procedural flexibility, party autonomy and
cost expediency to have to appoint an arbitral tribunal just to have a
termination order issued. The Claimant asked the Arbitral Tribunal to
discontinue the proceedings by a summary decision following Procedural
Order No. 2.

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v. The Czech Republic

UNCITRAL Arbitration — Place of arbitration: Geneva, Switzerland

 

24.

25.

26,

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

The Claimant further submitted that the subject-matter of the proceedings
was substantially limited even in the Respondent's view and that the scope
of the Parties’ submissions should be limited to the allegations and legal
arguments relating to the application of Art. 34(2) of the UNCITRAL Rules.

The Respondent's Comments. On 23 April 2014 the Respondent agreed
that the place of arbitration should be in Geneva, Switzerland, and it agreed
to the hourly rate and the advance on costs proposed by the Arbitral
Tribunal

Payment by the Respondent. On 20 May 2014 the Arbitral Tribunal
acknowledged receipt of payment of the advance on costs by the
Respondent.

Claimant's Objection to the Proposed Hourly Rates and Advance on Costs
(2 June 2014). On 2 June 2014 the Claimant objected to the hourly rate of
EUR 400.00 and the amount of the advance on costs of EUR 20,000.00
proposed by the Arbitral Tribunal on 15 April 2014, on the basis that the
Notice of Arbitration had been withdrawn on 17 February 2014 and there
was no reason to elaborate on the case more than it was necessary to
terminate the proceedings in a summary fashion.

The Claimant added that the hourly rate and the amount of the advance on
costs were disproportionate to the work carried out by the Arbitral Tribunal.
The Claimant did not volunteer to make any payment and did not indicate
whether a lower hourly fee was agreeable.

Further to this objection the Respondent asked the Arbitral Tribunal to
consider whether the proceedings could be limited to one submission by
each Party and the Arbitral Tribunal could consider to proceed on the basis
of the advance on costs paid by the Respondent.

Procedural Order No. 2 (10 June 2014). On 10 June 2014 the Arbitral
Tribunal set the time limits for one comprehensive submission to be filed by
each Party (expiring on 10 July 2014 for the Respondent and on 11 August
2014 for the Claimant). It also decided that the advance on costs paid by
the Respondent was a sufficient basis on which to proceed.

Parties' Submissions. The Parties timely filed their submissions.
New Counsel for the Respondent. On 10 July 2014 Ms. Marie TalaSova,

Head of the International Arbitration Department of the Ministry of Finance
of the Czech Republic informed the Arbitral Tribunal and the other side that

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v. The Czech Republic
UNCITRAL Arbitration — Place of arbitration: Geneva, Switzerland

 

33.

34.

she would represent the Respondent based on a power of attorney issued
by the Ministry of Finance of the Czech Republic, dated 8 July 2014 and
signed by Ing. Andrej Babis.

Proceedings Closed (12 November 2014). On 12 November 2014 the

Arbitral Tribunal sent the Parties Procedural Order No. 3 confirming that the
place of arbitration was in Geneva and informing them that the proceedings
had been closed in accordance with Art. 29(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules.

THE ARBITRATION AGREEMENT

The arbitration agreement contained in Article 8 [Settlement of Investment
Disputes between a Contracting Party and an Investor of the other
Contraction Party] of the CZ-CY Treaty reads as follows:

1. Any dispute which may arise between an investor of
ene Contracting Party and the other Contracting
Party in connection with an investment in the
territory of that other Contracting Party shall be
settled, if possible, by negotiations between the
parties to the dispute.

= If any dispute between an investor of one
Contracting Party and the other Contracting Party
cannot be thus settled within a period of six
months from the written notification of a claim,
the investor shall be entitled to submit the case,
at his choice, for settlement to:

{a} a court of competent jurisdiction or an
administrative tribunal of the Contracting
Party which is the party to the dispute,

or

(b) the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (ICSID) having regard to
the applicable provisions of the Convention on
the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of other States opened
for signature at Washington D.C. on 18 March
1965,

or

{c) an arbitrator or international ad hoc arbitral
tribunal established under the Arbitration

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v. The Czech Republic
UNCITRAL Arbitration — Place of arbitration: Geneva, Switzerland

 

35.

36.

Rules of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law (UNCITRAL). The
parties to the dispute may agree in writing to
modify these Rules,

or

(d) the Arbitration Institute of the Chamber of
Commerce in Stockholm.

a The arbitral awards shall be final and binding on
both parties to the dispute and shall be
enforceable in accordance with domestic
legislation.

In its Notice of Arbitration the Claimant opted for the option available under
Article 8(2)(c) (NoA 1). This Arbitral Tribunal was, therefore, constituted in
accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules (1976), as confirmed by
the Arbitral Tribunal in Procedural Order No. 1 dated 26 March 2014 (see
also paragraphs 20 and 21 above).

THE PRAYERS FOR RELIEF

THE CLAIMANT

In its Notice of Arbitration of 9 January 2014, the Claimant set out the
following prayer for relief (NoA 12-13 7 52):

G.
RELIEF AND REMEDY SOUGHT
B23 Without prejudice to its right to amend,
supplement or restate the relief to be requested in the
arbitration, the Claimant requests the Arbitral
Tribunal to:
(4) Award the Claimant monetary damages of CZK

803,232,139 (to wit: eight hundred and three
million two hundred and thirty-two thousand one
hundred and thirty-nine Czech Crowns) in
compensation for all its losses sustained as a
result of the suspension of rights toa the
Shares;

(ii) Award the Claimant the interest on CZK
803,232,139 at the rate of 3.038% per year from
November 1, 2002 until the date of full payment
of this amount;

(iii) Award the Claimant all costs of legal
representation and assistance incurred by the

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v. The Czech Republic
UNCITRAL Arbitration ~ Place of arbitration: Geneva, Switzerland

 

a7.

38.

39.

Claimant in the course of this arbitration
including, without limitation, attorney’s and
all other professional fees and expenses;

{iv) Order the Czech Republic to pay the fees of the
arbitral tribunal to be fixed by the tribunal in
accordance with Article 39 of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, travel and other expenses
incurred by the arbitrators, the costs of expert
advice required by the arbitral tribunal and the
travel and other expenses of witnesses.

In its submission dated 11 August 2014 the Claimant concluded as follows
(ARSubm 2):

As it follows from the above presented conclusions, FEL
is of the opinion that (i) the Arbitration Proceedings
have been promptly terminated and (ii) no costs should
be awarded to the Respondent.

THE RESPONDENT

In its submission dated 10 July 2014 the Respondent sought the following
(RSubm 6 75):

5. Prayer for Relief

5.1 Respondent respectfully requests the arbitral
tribunal to:

(a) Terminate this arbitration proceeding and;

{b) Render an award on costs obliging Respondent to
reimburse all costs and expenses incurred by
Respondent in relation to these proceedings,
including, inter alia, the fees and expenses of
the arbitral tribunal, external legal counsel,
in-house lawyers, experts, consultants in the
amount of 1.813.432,65 CZK in total as specified
in Annex No. 1.

There is an obvious clerical error in the quotation set out in the preceding
paragraph which the Arbitral Tribunal will correct of its motion. For it is
beyond any doubt (see RSubm 5 {| 4.13) that the Respondent claims its
own legal costs against the Claimant, and the expression “render an award
on costs obliging Respondent to reimburse ...” can only mean “render an
award on costs ordering Claimant to reimburse ...”.

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v. The Czech Republic

UNCITRAL Arbitration — Place of arbitration: Geneva, Switzerland

 

40.

Ai

42.

43,

THE QUESTIONS TO BE DECIDED BY THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL
The issues arising for determination in this arbitration are as follows:

(i) whether the Claimant was entitled to bring this arbitration to an
end by its Notice of Withdrawal dated 17 February 2014 and
whether this Arbitral Tribunal has jurisdiction to make an award
of costs (“the first pair of issues”);

the Arbitral Tribunal's decision on the first pair of issues is set
out in paragraph 88 below;

(ii) in case the answer to the first question set out in (i) is in the
negative and the answer to the second question set out in (i) is
in the affirmative, whether the Respondent is entitled to an
award of costs and, if so, in which amount (“the second pair of
issues”);

the Arbitral Tribunal’s decision on the second pair of issues is
set out in paragraph 112 below.

THE DECISION BY THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

WHETHER THE CLAIMANT WAS ENTITLED TO TERMINATE THE
ARBITRATION PROCEEDINGS UNILATERALLY BY
WITHDRAWING ITS NOTICE OF ARBITRATION — WHETHER THIS
ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL HAS JURISDICTION TO MAKE AN AWARD
ON COSTS (THE FIRST PAIR OF ISSUES)

The Arbitral Tribunal’s decision on the first pair of issues is set out in
paragraph 88 below.

The Claimant's Position

Claimant's Right to Terminate the Arbitral Proceedings. It is the Claimant's
case that the arbitral proceedings were duly terminated on 17 February
2014 (ARSubm 1, first paragraph {i)).

The Claimant acknowledges that there is no provision in the UNCITRAL
Rules expressly dealing with the withdrawal by a claimant of his notice of
arbitration. However, the Claimant argues that it is a common principle of
civil law that “the claimant may withdraw ail or part of his claim at any time
and the withdrawal takes effect on the date on which the respective notice

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v. The Czech Republic
UNCITRAL Arbitration — Place of arbitration: Geneva, Switzerland

 

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

is delivered of it and where the whole claim is withdrawn, proceedings are
brought to an end against the relevant respondent on that date” (ARSubm
1, first paragraph (iv)).

The Claimant further argues that it has repeatedly informed the Arbitrators
and the Respondent that it had duly withdrawn from the arbitration
proceedings and that, as a consequence, “the subject-matter of that
particular case has been thus substantially limited” (ARSubm 1, first
paragraph (iii).

Finally, the Claimant denies that its Notice of Withdrawal is an attempt at
withholding the identity of its beneficial owner(s) as alleged by the
Respondent; the Claimant does not intend to provide information on a point
which is devoid of any relevance in view of the clear and unambiguous
definition of “Investor” in Art. 1(2) of the CZ-CY Treaty (ARSubm 1, second
paragraph (i)).

Answer to the Respondent's Case. The Claimant disagrees with the
Respondent that an arbitral tribunal is to be constituted in order for the
Proceedings to be terminated (ARSubm 1-2, second paragraph (ii)). The
UNCITRAL Rules should have provided for such case. As they do not
contain such a provision, the alleged need to constitute an arbitral tribunal
“just” to bring the proceedings to an end finds no support in the UNCITRAL
Rules. The interpretation of the UNCITRAL Rules advocated by the
Respondent is a self-serving interpretation (ARSubm 2, second paragraph

(ii).

The Respondent's Position

Termination of Proceedings under_the UNCITRAL Rules. The
Respondents submits that only an arbitral tribunal can terminate arbitral
proceedings under Art. 34 of the UNCITRAL Rules, and therefore an
arbitral tribunal must first be constituted in order for proceedings to be
terminated.

It follows that the Claimant's Notice of Withdrawal dated 17 February 2014
did not operate so as to terminate the arbitral proceedings.

The Reasons for the Arbitral Tribunal's Decision

The Arbitral Tribunal’s decision is set out in paragraph 88 below.

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v. The Czech Republic

UNCITRAL Arbitration — Place of arbitration: Geneva, Switzerland

 

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

a) The Provisions in Point of the UNCITRAL Rules

This arbitration is governed by the provisions of the UNCITRAL Rules
(1976) (see paragraph 35 above).

It is common ground between the Parties that there is no provision in the
UNCITRAL Rules conferring a right on a claimant to withdraw its notice of
arbitration. It also appears to be common ground that where a notice of
arbitration has been withdrawn by a claimant, the determination of the
consequences of such withdrawal is a question of interpretation and
construction of the UNCITRAL Rules.

Art. 3 of the UNCITRAL Rules. Art. 3(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules provides
that the claimant shall give the respondent a notice of arbitration.

Art. 3(2) of the UNCITRAL Rules provides that arbitral proceedings shall be
deemed to commence on the date on which the notice of arbitration is
received by the respondent.

Art. 34(2) of the UNCITRAL Rules. Art. 34(2) of the UNCITRAL Rules

reads as follows:

2. If, before the award is made, the continuation of
the arbitral proceedings becomes unnecessary or
impossible for any reasons not mentioned in paragraph
1, the arbitral tribunal shall inform the parties of
its intention to issue an order for termination of the
proceedings. The arbitral tribunal shall have the
Power to issue such an order unless a party raises
justifiable grounds for objection.

b) The Termination of the Proceedings in the Present Case

In this sub-section the Arbitral Tribunal will determine the date on which the
arbitral proceedings were commenced, the relevance of the claim for costs
which the Respondent reserved and the application of Art. 34(2) of the
UNCITRAL Rules prayed in aid by the Claimant.

aa) The Date When Proceedings Were Commenced

It is the Claimant's case that the withdrawal of the Notice of Arbitration
operates so as to terminate the arbitral proceedings as of the date on which
the Respondent received such Notice of Withdrawal (WNoA 2). The
Claimant maintained that its Notice of Withdrawal did not amount to a
withdrawal or a waiver of its claims against the Respondent, but had simply

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v. The Czech Republic

UNCITRAL Arbitration — Place of arbitration: Geneva, Switzerland

 

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

a procedural effect in that it brought the arbitral proceedings to an end
(WNoA 2).

In its answer to the Claimant's Notice of Withdrawal the Respondent
objected to the withdrawal, contending that it was a matter for the arbitral
tribunal to be constituted to terminate the proceedings. The Respondent
also reserved its right to be compensated for the costs incurred.

The Claimant rebutted in its letter dated 23 April 2014 that it made little
sense to constitute a tribunal “for the sole purpose of issuing a termination
order”.

In this letter the Claimant did not mention the claim for costs which the
Respondent had reserved in its answer to the Notice of Withdrawal dated
26 February 2014. However, the claim for costs which the Claimant
reserved in its letter dated 26 February 2014 is not irrelevant in the Arbitral
Tribunal’s view, and this claim will be considered in due course below.

Arbitral proceedings shall be deemed to commence on the date on which
the notice of arbitration is received by the respondent, Art. 3(2) of the
UNCITRAL Rules. In the present case the Respondent received the Notice
of Arbitration on 10 January 2014 (see paragraph 10 above).

The Claimant relied on the fact that it had filed simply a Notice of
Arbitration, as opposed to a full Statement of Claim (Claimant's letter dated
2 June 2014; ARSubm, first paragraph (ii)). The Claimant, however, did not
elaborate on the consequences following from such a distinction in the
circumstances of the present case.

It is not in dispute that the Claimant did not file a Statement of Claim within
the meaning of Art. 18 of the UNCITRAL Rules in the present case.
However, it is also true that in its Notice of Arbitration the Claimant set out
its prayer for relief with an indication of the amounts sought (see
paragraph 36 above) as well as a statement of the facts supporting its
claim; such statement of facts is required for a Statement of Claim under
Art. 18(2)(b) of the UNCITRAL Rules, but not for a Notice of Arbitration
under Art. 3 of the UNCITRAL Rules. The statement of the facts supporting
the Claimant’s claim covers three full pages in the Notice of Arbitration
(NoA 4] 11 to NoA 7 7 24).

The extent to which a notice of arbitration deals with the facts of the dispute
is not relevant, however, to the application of Art. 3(2) of the UNCITRAL
Rules.

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v. The Czech Republic

UNCITRAL Arbitration — Place of arbitration: Geneva, Switzerland

 

64,

65.

66.

67.

68.

It therefore follows that these arbitral proceedings were commenced and
have been pending as of 10 January 2014 in accordance with Art. 181 of
the Swiss Federal Private International Law Act, 1987' and Art. 3(2) of the
UNCITRAL Rules.

bb) The Respondent's Claim for Costs

In the UNCITRAL Rules (1976) there is no opportunity for a respondent to
answer a claimant’s Notice of Arbitration until after the arbitral tribunal has
been constituted and the claimant has filed its statement of claim. This was
changed in the latest version of the UNCITRAL Rules (2010) in which a
respondent is entitled to file a Response to the notice of arbitration (Art. 4).

If one considers the period of time immediately following receipt of the
Notice of Arbitration, the Respondent therefore had an opportunity to give
notice of its claim for costs only by way of a letter in the present case,
rather than an ordinary submission, after the Notice of Arbitration was
received. This is what the Respondent did in its letter dated 26 February
2014, in which it reserved a claim for costs.

The Respondent's claim for costs is a disputed claim (ARSubm 2, second
paragraphs (iii) and (iv)).

cc) Whether Proceedings Were Terminated by the Claimant
or Are to Be Terminated under Art. 34(2) of the

UNCITRAL Rules

The Claimant has pressed different points in relation to the termination of
the arbitral proceedings. In certain submissions the Claimant contended

’ Art. 181 PILA reads as follows in the official German version and the English unofficial translation:

ve Art, 181

Rechtshangigkeit
Das Schiedsverfahren ist hangig, sobald eine Partei mit einem
Rechtsbegehren den oder die in der Schiedsvereinbarung
bezeichneten Schiedsrichter anruft oder, wenn die
Vereinbarung keinen Schiedsrichter bezeichnet, sobald eine
Partei das Verfahren zur Bildung des Schiedsgerichts
einleitet.

v. Art. 181

Lis pendens

The arbitral proceedings are pending as of the time when one
of the parties submits its request to the arbitrator or
arbitrators designated in the arbitration agreement or, in
the absence of such designation, from the time when one of
the parties initiates the procedure for the constitution of
the arbitral tribunal.

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v. The Czech Republic
UNCITRAL Arbitration - Place of arbitration: Geneva, Switzerland

 

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

that the proceedings had been terminated as a consequence of its Notice
of Withdrawal (WNoA 2; Letter of 23 April 2014). In other submissions it
contended that the proceedings were to be terminated under Art. 34(2) of
the UNCITRAL Rules on the basis that the proceedings had become
“unnecessary” within the meaning of this provision (Letter of 23 April 2014
as an alternative argument).

The Arbitral Tribunal will therefore first examine whether the Claimant's
Notice of Withdrawal operates so as to bring the arbitral proceedings to an
end, and, if the answer to that question is in the negative, whether
proceedings should be brought to an end under Art. 34(2) of the
UNCITRAL Rules.

Whether the Claimant Was Entitled to Terminate the Arbitral Proceedings
on 17 February 2014. In the Arbitral Tribunal’s view, if one were to accept
in the circumstances of the present case that the Claimant could bring
arbitration proceedings to an end unilaterally by withdrawing its Notice of
Arbitration and without the constitution of an arbitral tribunal, that would
also mean that the Claimant would be given the right to get rid of the
Respondent’s claim for costs to all intents and purposes. in the Arbitral
Tribunal’s view, such a consequence would be unacceptable by any
standards.

The Claimant's contention is flawed in so far as the Claimant takes the view
that it is entitled to terminate the arbitral proceedings prior to and without
the constitution of an arbitral tribunal. It is inaccurate that an arbitral
tribunal must be constituted “only” in order to discontinue the proceedings
under Art. 34(2) of the UNCITRAL Rules; such an argument turns a blind
eye to the Respondent's claim for costs.

The Respondent opposed the termination of the proceedings which the
Claimant sought to impose relying on its Notice of Withdrawal (see
paragraph 16 above). There is at this juncture no reason to assume that
the Respondent did not have a legitimate interest in reserving its claim for
costs.

The Claimant prays in aid a general principle of procedure in civil law
jurisdictions whereby a claimant or a plaintiff is entitled to withdraw a claim
without prejudice (ARSubm 1, first paragraph {iv)).

The Arbitral Tribunal need not determine whether such a general principle
exists in the circumstances of the present case. The Arbitral Tribunal will
observe at this juncture that the Claimant did not refer to any particular

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v. The Czech Republic

UNCITRAL Arbitration — Place of arbitration: Geneva, Switzerland

 

74,

75.

76.

VW

78.

79.

80.

provisions of any system of law. Be that as it may, even if such a general
principle existed, such principle would not in the Arbitral Tribunal’s view
operate so as to dispense the Tribunal with the determination of a disputed
claim for costs.

Therefore, the answer to the first issue mentioned in paragraph 69 above is
in the negative: the Claimant was not entitled to terminate the proceedings
simply on the basis that its Notice of Arbitration had been withdrawn.

Finding by the Arbitral Tribunal. The Arbitral Tribunal therefore finds that
the Claimant was not entitled to terminate the arbitral proceedings
unilaterally on 17 February 2014.

Whether the Arbitral Proceedings Are to Be Terminated under Art. 34(2) of
the UNCITRAL Rules. The Arbitral Tribunal will then consider, at this

juncture, whether the arbitral proceedings should be terminated by the
Tribunal itself under Art. 34(2) of the UNCITRAL Rules.

In the Arbitral Triburial’s view, the provision in Art. 34(2) of the UNCITRAL
Rules is inapplicable in the present case due to the existence of the
Respondent's claim for costs. As long as there is a claim of either Party to
be determined by the Arbitral Tribunal, arbitral proceedings cannot be said
to be “unnecessary”. One can only fairly assume, at this juncture, that the
Respondent has a legitimate interest in asserting its claim for costs. If this
were not the case or if the claim for costs were devoid of any foundation,
then the Arbitral Tribunal would dismiss it in due course.

Art. 39(2) of the UNCITRAL Rules (2010) contains a sentence which
explains the meaning of “unnecessary” and which confirms that the
conclusion reached by the Arbitral Tribunal in the preceding paragraph is in
line with the spirit of the UNCITRAL Rules; such sentence reads as follows:
“The arbitral tribunal shall have the power to issue such an order unless
there are remaining matters that may need to be decided and the arbitral
tribunal considers it appropriate to do so”,

In the Arbitral Tribunal’s view, the Respondent's claim for costs must be
determined before the proceedings are terminated.

Finding by the Arbitral Tribunal. in the Arbitral Tribunal’s view, the

Claimant's application in order for the arbitral proceedings to be terminated
under Art. 34(2) of the UNCITRAL Rules must be dismissed.

21

Farminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v. The Czech Republic

UNCITRAL Arbitration — Place of arbitration; Geneva, Switzerland

 

81.

82.

83.

84.

c) Whether the Arbitral Tribunal Has Jurisdiction to Hear the
Respondent's Claim for Costs

As a matter of Swiss law, a party may challenge arbitral jurisdiction without
using any particular terms of art (Peugeot c. Omega, ATF/BGE 128 Iil 50).
Accordingly, it is a matter for the Arbitral Tribunal to determine whether a
party has in essence raised such an objection and, if so, to determine
whether such an objection has any foundation. Thus, an objection to
arbitral jurisdiction may be raised by a party simply by challenging the
capacity or focus standj of the other.

The Claimant has not challenged the Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction in so
many words. Yet the main part of the Claimant's argument is to the effect
that the proceedings were terminated as of 17 January 2014 and there was
therefore no need to constitute an arbitral tribunal.

In its letter of 23 April 2014 the Claimant contended that after the
constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal “the second Procedural Order should
only address issues relevant to timely discontinuation of the proceedings
following its termination upon delivery of the Notice of Arbitration withdrawal
to the Czech Republic”.

The Claimant then went on to remark that even if the Respondent were
right in contending that the proceedings could be terminated only by the
Arbitral Tribunal, such view would substantially limit “the subject-matter of
the proceedings” and the Arbitral Tribunal “would only determine whether
the continuation of the proceedings has become (or rather has been since
the withdrawal of the Notice of arbitration) unnecessary within the meaning
of Art. 34(2) of the UNCITRAL Rules (1976)’.

in the same letter the Claimant did not mention the Respondent's claim for
costs.

The same point about the subject-matter of the arbitration being
“substantially limited" was pressed again in the Claimant's latest
submission (ARSubm 1, first paragraph (ii).

The Claimant's argument may therefore be taken to amount to an implied
challenge of the Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction, at least as far as the

Respondent's claim for costs is concerned.

If such an objection to arbitral jurisdiction has possibly been raised at all,
such objection is without foundation in the Arbitral Tribunal's view.

22

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v, The Czech Republic

UNCITRAL Arbitration — Place of arbitration: Geneva, Switzerland

 

85.

86.

87,

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

As noted in paragraph 66 above, the Respondent was entitled to reserve a
claim for costs. That claim was presented by the Respondent as soon as
the procedural timetable allowed, namely in the Respondent’s final
submission.

In the Arbitral Tribunal’s view, arbitral jurisdiction extends in the present
case to the Respondent's claim for costs.

Finding by the Arbitral Tribunal. The Arbitral Tribunai has jurisdiction to
entertain the Respondent's claim for costs.

The Arbitral Tribunal’s Decision

Therefore, the Arbitral Tribunal is driven to the conclusion that the Claimant
was not entitled to terminate the arbitral proceedings unilaterally on 17
February 2014. The proceedings cannot be terminated under Art. 34(2) of
the UNCITRAL Rules as being “unnecessary” since the Respondent had
reserved a claim for costs which it has properly presented in accordance
with the procedural timetable. The proceedings shall therefore continue
until the Arbitral Tribunal has determined the Respondent's claim for costs.

The Arbitral Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear the Respondent's claim for
costs.

WHETHER THE RESPONDENT IS ENTITLED TO AN AWARD ON
COSTS AND, IF SO, FOR WHICH AMOUNT (THE SECOND PAIR
OF ISSUES

The Arbitral Tribunal’s decision on this pair of issues is set out in paragraph
112 below.

The Respondent essentially has the position of a claimant in relation to its
claim for costs and the Arbitral Tribunal will therefore first examine the
Respondent's case and then the Claimant's defence on costs.

The Respondent's Position

The Background. The Respondent alleges that the Claimant first served a
Notice of Arbitration on 71 October 2009, claiming declaratory relief and
compensation for damage allegedly caused by the seizure of shares. The
claim was based on a breach of the CZ-CY Treaty. However, the Claimant
failed to prosecute its claims in those proceedings. The Respondent
incurred significant costs.

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v. The Czech Republic
UNCITRAL Arbitration — Place of arbitration: Geneva, Switzerland

 

93.

94,

95.

96.

97.

98.

9g.

100.

401.

102.

The Present Proceedings. The Claimant then filed a fresh Notice of
Arbitration on 9 January 2014 in the present proceedings, making reference
to its previous submission. Then on 17 February 2014 it withdrew its
Notice of Arbitration in order to avoid to disclose the identity of its beneficial
owner(s).

The Costs Incurred. Emphasis is placed by the Respondent on the fact
that a sovereign State faced with a claim for an amount in excess of CZK
800,000,000.00 based on a breach of international law is bound to act
diligently and prepare its defence to such a claim.

The Amount of the Costs Incurred. The Respondent claims an amount of
CZK 1.813.432,65 as specified in Annex 1 to its final submission.

Annex 1 sets out the costs allegedly incurred by the Respondent in three
distinct categories: (i) attorney fees, (if) in-house lawyer costs and (iii)
Tribunal costs.

Attorneys’ Fees. The costs allegedly incurred in connection with the
outside counsel retained cover a period of 4 years, namely the years 2009
(CZK 214,200.00), 2010 (CZK 990,057.00), 2011 (CZK 257,632.26) and
2014 (CZK 340,222.79).

In-house Lawyers. The costs allegedly incurred in connection with the use
of in-house lawyers in 2004 amount to CZK 11,320.00.

Tribunal’s Costs. The Tribunal’s costs amount to EUR 20,000.00.

The Claimant's Position

The Claimant denies that the Respondent is entitled to any compensation
for legal costs on the basis that the choice of legal advisers was a matter
exclusively for the Respondent and, in the absence of any agreement, the
Claimant cannot be held liable for the consequences of such a decision.

The Claimant further argues that the fact that the Respondent filed its latest
submission signed by in-house counsel is compelling evidence of the fact
that resort to outside counsel was not required at all in the present case,
and the whole case could have been managed by in-house lawyers.

Finally, the Claimant takes the view that the amount claimed is out of
proportion to the scope of work of outside counsel. The Claimant alleges
that there was a meeting at Weinhold Legal on 22 July 2012, and no further
activity was required afterwards until 9 January 2014. The Claimant

24

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v. The Czech Republic
UNCITRAL Arbitration — Place of arbitration: Geneva, Switzerland

 

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.

108.

concludes that “any decision on costs based on simple copies of invoices of
external legal advisors would be wrong and unacceptable”.

The Reasons for the Arbitral Tribunal’s Decision
The Arbitral Tribunal's decision is set out in paragraph 112 below.

There appear to be three issues arising for determination in relation to the
Respondent's claim for costs, as follows:

{i whether costs relating to activities carried out prior to 9 January
2014 are recoverable at all;

(ii) whether the photostat copies of invoices produced by the
Respondent are admissible evidence; and

(iii) whether the costs evidenced by the Respondent are reasonable
under Art. 38(e) of the UNCITRAL Rules.

The Relevant Period of Time. These arbitral proceedings were started by
the Claimant on 9 January 2014. Any claim for costs relating to these
proceedings would prima facie cover activities carried out after such date,
and not beforehand, unless any activities carried out beforehand are shown
to relate to these proceedings.

The Respondent does not make such a showing and confines itself to
claiming costs relating to the first proceedings brought by the Claimant
back in 2009. In the Arbitral Tribunal’s view, such costs are not
recoverable in the absence of specific and convincing explanations, which
the Arbitral Tribunal has been unable to find in the Respondent's
submissions.

Finding by the Arbitral Tribunal. The Arbitral Tribunal is therefore driven to
the conclusion that the Respondent is in principle entitled to recover costs
as from 10 January 2014, subject to proof of quantum.

The Evidence Filed by the Respondent. The Arbitral Tribunal will dismiss
the Claimant's objection based on the alleged inadmissibility of photostat
copies as evidence of legal costs. The Respondent has acted in
accordance with international standard practice. The Claimant has failed to
substantiate its objection. The Claimant's objection in this respect must
therefore be dismissed.

25

Forminstar Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v. The Czech Republic

UNCITRAL Arbitration — Place of arbitration: Geneva, Switzerland

 

109.

110.

141.

112.

Vi.

113.

114.

115.

Reasonableness of Costs. The Claimant has not specifically contested the
reasonableness of the costs claimed by the Respondent in relation to the
year 2014. The Arbitral Tribunal finds that the amount of CZK 340,222.79
(equal to approx. EUR 12,000.00) for outside counsel is reasonable, and so
is the amount of CZK 11,320.00 (equal to approx. EUR 407) for in-house
counsel.

Award of Costs to the “Successful Party’. Arts. 38(e) and 40.1 of the

UNCITRAL Rules provide that an award of costs is to be made to “the
successful party’ and the question therefore arises whether the
Respondent is to be awarded all of its costs relating to the year 2004.

In the Arbitral Tribunal’s view, the Respondent is the successful party in the
present proceedings as the Respondent's case was upheld both on the first
pair of issues (termination of proceedings and arbitral jurisdiction) and on
the first of the second pair of issues (the principle of the Claimant's liability
for costs). The Arbitral Tribunal takes the view that fairness requires that
the amount of costs awarded to the Respondent in relation to the year 2014
should not be further reduced on the basis that the Respondent failed to
recover any costs in relation the years 2009, 2010 and 2011.

The Arbitral Tribunal's Decision

The Arbitral Tribunal will therefore make an award of costs in the amount
claimed by the Respondent for the year 2014, namely CZK 340,222.79 plus
CZK 11,320.00.

THE COSTS OF THE ARBITRATION (OTHER THAN THE
RESPONDENT'S CLAIM FOR COSTS)

The Amount in Dispute. The amount in dispute following the Claimant's
Notice of Withdrawal is of CZK 1,812,112.65 (equal to approx. EUR
65,204.00) and EUR 20,000.00, represented by the costs claimed by the
Respondent.

The Deposit on Costs. The Respondent paid the amount of EUR
20,000.00 (twenty thousand) on 19 May 2014. The Claimant declined to
Pay its share of EUR 20,000.00 in the advance of costs of EUR 40,000.00
requested by the Arbitral Tribunal.

The Costs of the Arbitration: Article 38 of the UNCITRAL Rules requires
the Arbitral Tribunal to determine the costs of the arbitration in its Award.

26

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v, The Czech Republic

UNCITRAL Arbitration — Place of arbitration: Geneva, Switzerland

 

416.

17

118.

119.

120.

421.

122.

123.

The Fees & Expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal. Article 39(1) of the
UNCITRAL Rules provides that the Arbitral Tribunal, in setting its
reasonable fees, shall consider the amount in dispute, the complexity of the
subject matter, the time spent by the arbitrators, among other factors
deemed relevant to the case.

The Arbitral Tribunal has studied the file, made three procedural orders and
made the present Award. The time spent on this case by the three
Arbitrators amounts to 80 hours altogether.

Based on the factors set out in paragraph 116 above, the Arbitral Tribunal
determines that its fees will be allocated on a 40%/30%/30% basis as
follows:

Avbitrator (EUR) Total Fees
Prof. Martin Hunter 6,000.00
Prof. Dr. August Reinisch 6,000.00
Dr. Paolo Michele Patocchi 8,000.00 |
Total toes 20,000.00

The Arbitral Tribunal waives the courier costs incurred in connection with
the signing and the notification of the present Award. The entire deposit on
costs (EUR 20,000.00, see paragraph 114 above) has therefore been
expended.

The Parties’ Costs: The Claimant's Position. The Claimant has not claimed
any costs in this arbitration.

The Respondent's Position. The Respondent's costs have been dealt in
paragraph 90 ef seq. above and the Arbitral Tribunal’s decision is set out in
Paragraph 112 above.

In addition, the Respondent claimed reimbursement of the fees and
expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal (see paragraph 38 above).

In the Arbitral Tribunal’s view, the Respondent is entitled to be reimbursed
also the amount of EUR 20,000.00 paid for the Arbitral Tribunal's fees and
expenses. in the circumstances of the present case, the Arbitral Tribunal
finds that it would not be appropriate and reasonable to reduce such
amount under Art. 40(1) and (2) of the UNCITRAL Rules on the basis that
the Respondent's claim for costs was not awarded in its entirety (the finding
made in paragraph 111 above is hereby expressly adopted and applied
mutatis mutandis).

Forminster Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v. The Czech Republic
UNCITRAL Arbitration ~ Place of arbitration: Geneva, Switzerland

 

Vil. OPERATIVE PART OF THE FINAL AWARD

THEREFORE,
THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL HAS MADE THE FOLLOWING AWARD:

4. DECLARING that these arbitral proceedings are terminated;

2. DECLARING that the Claimant's claims were withdrawn without prejudice;

3. ORDERING the Claimant Forminster Enterprises Limited to pay to the Ministry of
Finance of the Czech Republic the amounts of CZK 340,222.79 (three hundred and
forty thousand two hundred and twenty-two and 79), CZK 11,320.00 (eleven thousand
and three hundred and twenty) plus EUR 20,000.00 (twenty thousand).

Place of arbitration: Geneva, Switzerland
Award made in five originals

r=
Prof. Martin Hunter (Date) f. Dr. August Reinisch (Date)

Arbitrator Arbitrator

 

Cover 85, meted nteveks: 49 Bece rata 2014

Dr. Paolo Michele Patocchi (Date)
Chairman of the Arbitral Tribunal

28

