International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
1818 H Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20433, U.S.A.
Telephone: (202) 458-1534 Faxes: (202) 522-2615/2027
Website: www.worldbank.org/icsid

CERTIFICATE

Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide

v.

Republic of the Philippines

(ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25)

I hereby certify that the attached documents are true copies of the Award of the
Arbitral Tribunal, and of the Dissenting Opinion of one of the members of the Tribunal.

Ana Palacio
Secretary-General

Washington. D.C, August 16, 2007

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF
INVESTMENT DISPUTES
IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN

FRAPORT AG FRANKFURT AIRPORT SERVICES WORLDWIDE
(CLAIMANT)

-AND-
THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
(RESPONDENT)

riCSID Case No. ARB/03/25)

AWARD

Members of the Tribunal
L. Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C., President
Dr. Bernardo M. Cremades, Arbitrator

Professor W. Michael Reisman, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Eloi'se Obadia

Assistant to the Tribunal
Renee Theriault

Representing the Claimant

Jeffrey Barist

Michael Nolan

Lesley A. Benn

Milbank, Tweed, Hadley & McCloy LLP

Cesar P. Manalaysay
Edgardo G. Balois
Siguion Reyna, Montecillo & Ongsiako

Representing the Respondent
Carolyn B. Lamm

Abby Cohen Smutny

White & Case LLP

Judge Florentino P. Feliciano
Senior Associate Justice
Supreme Court of the Philippines (Retired)

Ms. Agnes Devanadera Solicitor
General Mr. Rex Bernardo L.
Pascual Assistant Solicitor
General Mr. Eric Remegio O.
Panga Assistant Solicitor
General Republic of the
Philippines

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: 16 August 2007

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

    

 

 

PROCEDURE -1
A. Overview -1
B. Registration of the Request for Arbitration
C. Constitution of the Tribunal and Commencement of the Proceeding...
D. Written and Oral Phases of the Proceeding.............
FACTUAL BACKGROUND....
A. Introduction - 26
B. The Terminal 3 Project .............
1. The Original Proposal
2. The C ion A - 32
3. The Amended and Restated Concession Agreement ..............+
4. The ARCA I -39
C. Fraport's Investment In The Terminal 3 Project
1 The Initial 1999 Investments .............cceo
2. The Subsequent 2000 - 2001 Investments.......
D. Opposition To The Terminal 3 Project...
1. The Transfer of International Operations to Terminal 3 and PAL's
Emergence from Bankruptcy
2. The MASO Campaign
E. The Collapse of Fraport's Investment

  

1 Early Discussions with Secretary Climaco .....

 

 

2. Secretary Climaco's Negotiations with Fraport and PLATCO

 

3. Secretary Climaco's "Null and Void" Assessment
4. Secretary Climaco's Appearance before the Senate "Blue Ribbon
Committee"

 

5. President Macapagal-Arroyo's Declaration That Her Government

 

Would Not Honour the Terminal 3 Contracts ....

Til.

Iv.

VIL

 

6. Fraport's Continued Efforts to Find a Solution

 

7. The Philippine Supreme Court's Decision that the Terminal 3
Contracts Are Null and Void Ab Initio........

 

F. The Aftermath - 102 -

 

THE PHILIPPINE EXPROPRIATION PROCEEDINGS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

   

 

 

 

 

A. Introduction - 106 -
B. The Background to the Philippine Expropriation Proceedings.........

Cc. The Right of Eminent Domain or Expropriation Generally...

D. The Initial Expropriation Proceedings Before the Regional Trial Court......- I11-
E. The Republic's Petition Before the Supreme Court 7 114-
F. The Subsequent Proceedings Before the Regional Trial Court... 7 120-
G. The Valuation Proceedings by the Court-Appointed Commissioners ..........- 122 -
THE RESPONDENT'S JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS ...... wee 129 -
A. The Treaty. -129-
B. The Respondent's Position -131-
Cc. The Claimant's Position 7 135-
ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS ON JURISDICTION .. wee - 138 -
A. Prelimi Observation: - 138 -
B. The Pertinent Facts ..........00 7 142 -
Cc. The Applicable Legal Standards....... ..- 160 -
D. The Tribunal's Interpretation of the ADL............... 7 165 -
E. The ADL Pr dings in The Philippi -171-
F. The Claimant's C 1 of the Secret Shareholder A - 183 -
G. Conclusi -188 -
COSTS - 193 -

AWARD -194-

Abbreviation
ADB

ADL

AEDC
ARCA

"BIT" or "Treaty"

Blue Ribbon Committee

BOT Law

BSP
Clark
DMIA

DOTC.

Dresdner Bank

EPC Contract

FAG
ICC

IFC

GLOSSARY

Definition

Asian Development Bank

Anti-Dummy Law

Asia's Emerging Dragon Corporation
Amended and Restated Concession Agreement
Agreement between the Federal Republic of
Germany and the Republic of the Philippines on
the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of

Investments

Senate Committee on Accountability of Public
Officers and Investigations

Republic Act No. 7718 entitled "An Act
Authorizing the Financing, Construction,
Operation and Maintenance of Infrastructure
Projects by the Private Sector and for Other
Purposes"

Bangko Sentral ng Philipinas
Clark Field Airport
Diosdado Macapagal International Airport

The Philippine Department of Transportation and
Communication

Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein

Agreement entered into by Takenaka, PIATCO,
and Takenaka's wholly owned offshore
procurement supplier, Asahikosan Corporation, for
the construction of Terminal 3

Flughafen Frankfurt Main AG

NEDA Investment Coordination Committee

International Finance Corporation

Abbreviation

IRR

Kfw
MASO
MIAA
NAIA
NBI

NEDA

PAGS

PAL

PBAC

PEZA
PIATCO

QT

SEC

Security Bank

"TWG" or "ICC Contract Review
Committee"

Definiti

Implementing Rules and Regulations of the BOX
Law

Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau MIA-NAIA
Association of Service Operators Manila
International Airport Authority Ninoy Aquino
International Airport National Bureau of
Investigation

Philippine National Economic Development
Authority

Philippine Airport & Ground Services, Inc.
Philippine Airlines

Prequalification Bids and Awards Committee
Philippine Economic Zone Authority
Philippine International Air Xerminals Co., Inc.
Quisumbing Xorres

Securities and Exchange Commission

Security Bank Corporation

ICC Xechnical Working Group

THE TRIBUNAL

Composed as above,
After deliberation,

Makes the following Award:

I. PROCEDURE

A. Overview

1. At the outset of its present Award, the Tribunal deems it necessary to set out
certain facets of the dispute between the parties to this arbitration. This overview is
meant to shed some light on the reasons why this arbitration has proceeded, in some

respects, in a most unusual manner.

2. The investment at issue in this arbitration was made by the Claimant, a German
company incorporated as Fraport AG Frankfurt Services Worldwide ("Fraport" or the
"Claimant"), which has established itself as a leader in the international airport business.
The Claimant's investment was made in a Philippine company, Philippine International
Air Terminals Co., Inc., later known as PIATCO. Fraport's investment in PLATCO, both
as a shareholder and lender, was influenced by the fact that the Respondent had, prior to
the investment at issue, conferred upon PIATCO the concession rights for the
construction and operation of a new international passenger airport terminal in Manila,
otherwise known as "Ninoy Aquino International Airport Passenger Terminal III" or

Terminal 3.

3. Pursuant to the ICSID arbitration provisions contained in the "Agreement
between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Republic of the Philippines on the
Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments" dated 18 April 1997 and in force
since 2 February 2000 (the "BIT" or "Treaty"), the Claimant initiated this arbitration on
the basis of a number of allegations of breach by the Republic of the Philippines (the
"Republic", the "Philippines", the "Government" or the "Respondent") of its obligations

towards Fraport as an investor in the Philippines.

4. The Respondent, in turn, has challenged the jurisdiction of the Tribunal in this
regard and denies all liability under the Treaty. In the course of the proceeding, the
Respondent has alleged that the Claimant made its investment in violation of the laws of
the Philippines, in particular foreign ownership and control legislation known as the Anti-

Dummy Law (the "ADL").

5. In the course of the proceeding, the Respondent has also made allegations of fraud

and corruption on the part of PIATCO shareholders, including the Claimant, as well as on
the part of various Philippine public officials. In connection with its allegations of fraud

and corruption, the Respondent contends that relevant evidence can be found in
documents and submissions filed in a related pending ICC arbitration initiated by
PIATCO against the Respondent. The Respondent has further alleged that such evidence
could be uncovered in the course of ongoing investigations in Germany, as well as in the

Philippines, the United States and Hong Kong.

B. Registration of the Request for Arbitration

6. On 17 September 2003, the Claimant filed its request for arbitration (the
"Request") with the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes ("ICSID"
or the "Centre") against the Respondent for the resolution of divergencies having arisen
amongst the parties to this arbitration. The Request was submitted in accordance with the
ICSID arbitration provisions contained in the Treaty, in particular paragraph 2 of Article
9 of the BIT entitled "Settlement of Disputes between a Contracting State and an Investor

of another Contracting State":

"If such divergencies cannot be settled according to the provisions of paragraph
(1) of this Article within six months from the date of request for settlement, the
investor concerned may submit the dispute to: [...] (b) the International Centre
for the Settlement of Investment Disputes through conciliation or arbitration."

7. On 17 September 2003, the Centre acknowledged receipt of the Request in
accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution of
Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (the "ICSID Institution Rules"). On 23
September 2003, the Centre submitted a copy of the Request to the Republic of the

Philippines and to its Embassy in Washington, D.C.

8. On 9 October 2003, pursuant to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention and Rule
6 of the ICSID Institution Rules, the Request was registered by the Centre. On the same
day, ICSID's Acting Secretary-General, pursuant to Rule 7 of the ICSID Institution
Rules, notified the parties of the registration and invited them to proceed to the

constitution of the Tribunal as soon as possible.

Cc. Constitution of the Tribunal and Commencement of the Proceeding

9. Regarding the constitution of the Tribunal in this arbitration, it was agreed by the
parties that the Tribunal would consist of three members. It was further agreed that each
party would appoint an arbitrator and that the third arbitrator, i.e. the President of the
Tribunal, would be appointed by agreement of the parties or, failing such agreement, by

the Centre.

10. On 25 November 2003, as set forth at paragraph 90(a) of its Request, the
Claimant confirmed its appointment of Dr. Bernardo M. Cremades, a national of Spain,
as its party-appointed arbitrator. On 24 December 2003, the Respondent appointed
Professor W. Michael Reisman, a national of the United States of America, as its party-
appointed arbitrator. The parties subsequently agreed upon the appointment of Mr. L.
Yves Fortier, a national of Canada, as President of the Tribunal. The President's

appointment was confirmed on 11 February 2004.

11. On this same date, the Centre wrote to the parties confirming the constitution of
the Tribunal and indicating that the proceeding was deemed to have commenced on 11
February 2004 pursuant to Rule 6(1) of the ICSID's Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings (the "ICSID Arbitration Rules"). The parties were further informed that Ms.
Aurelia Antonietti, Counsel at ICSID, would serve as Secretary of the Tribunal. Over the
course of the proceeding, Ms. Antonietti was replaced by Ms. Corinne Clave at ICSID,
who in turn was replaced by Ms. Eloise Obadia, Senior Counsel at ICSID, on 31 January

2007.

12. On 28 January 2005, it was further agreed by the parties, following the suggestion
of the Tribunal, that Ms. Renee Theriault of the law firm of Ogilvy Renault, an associate

of the President of the Tribunal, would act as Assistant to the Tribunal.

D. Written and Oral Phases of the Proceeding

13. In accordance with Rule 13(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, and after
consultation with the parties and the Centre, the Tribunal held its First Session in
Washington, D.C. on 20 April 2004. During this First Session, the parties confirmed that
they did not have any objections to the proper constitution of the Tribunal or to any
member of the Tribunal. It was also agreed that the place of arbitration would be at the

seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C.

14. In its first Procedural Order dated 23 April 2004, contained in the Minutes of the
First Session, the Tribunal ordered that the Respondent file its objection to jurisdiction, if
any, by no later than at the expiration of the time limit fixed for the filing of its Counter-
Memorial. In the event, the proceeding would be bifurcated, with the issue of jurisdiction
and liability to be determined as part of the first phase and the issue of quantum, if

required, as part of the second phase.

15. The Tribunal also established a timetable for the written procedure on liability and
objection(s) to jurisdiction, if any, as follows: the Claimant's Memorial by 10 August
2004; the Respondent's Counter-Memorial by 10 December 2004; the Claimant's Reply
by 10 March 2005; the Respondent's Rejoinder by 10 June 2005; and in the event that the
Respondent filed an objection to jurisdiction with its Counter-Memorial, the Claimant's

Sur-Rejoinder was to be filed by 10 July 2005.

-5-

16. During the First Session, it was also decided, provisionally, that pursuant to Rule
41 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, a pre-hearing conference between the Tribunal and the
parties would be held on 26 July 2005 in Washington, D.C. The oral phase of the
proceeding with respect to jurisdiction, in the event of an objection thereto, and liability
was scheduled to take place in Washington, D.C. from 29 August 2005 to 9 September

2005.

17. The Tribunal was first informed of the related ICC arbitration initiated by
PIATCO against the Respondent during the First Session. In that arbitration, PTATCO
claims from the Respondent amounts allegedly owing pursuant to the concession

agreements applicable to the construction and operation of Terminal 3.

18. On 1 July 2004, the Claimant formally submitted a request for the production by
the Respondent of certain documents, including the submissions it made to PIATCO (and
submissions and documents it would be making) in the related ICC arbitration. On 27
July 2004, the Tribunal issued a Procedural Order addressing some of the issues raised by
this request. On 3 August 2004, a further Procedural Order was issued regarding the
parties' Confidentiality Agreement. Thereafter, on 10 August 2004, the Claimant

submitted its Memorial.

19. On 18 October 2004, by Procedural Order, the Tribunal directed the Respondent
to produce to the Claimant all of its submissions and documents in the related ICC
arbitration proceedings on an "on-going basis". The Tribunal noted in its Procedural

Order:

-6-

"While the present ICSID arbitration and the ICC arbitration are not strictly
speaking, parallel arbitrations, the Tribunal accepts Claimant's representations
that the underlying issues in both arbitration are, in substantial part, overlapping.

In the circumstances, there exists a real possibility that the two arbitral tribunals,
presented with and asked to consider similar facts, could render conflicting or
inconsistent decisions regarding those facts. This is not a desirable outcome."

20. On 24 November 2004, the Respondent sought an extension of the time for the
filing of its Counter-Memorial. On 30 November 2004, the Claimant wrote to the
Tribunal indicating that the parties had agreed to an amended timetable, whereby the
Respondent would file its Counter-Memorial by 20 December 2004; the Claimant would
file its Reply by 8 April 2005; the Respondent would file its Rejoinder by 13 July 2005;
and, in the event that the Respondent filed an objection to jurisdiction with its Counter-

Memorial, the Claimant would file its Sur-Rejoinder in this regard by 13 August 2005.

21. On 21 December 2004, the Respondent submitted its Counter-Memorial,
including its formal objections to jurisdiction. A corrected version of the Respondent's

Counter-Memorial was submitted on 21 January 2005.

22. Also on 21 December 2004, the Respondent filed an expropriation complaint
against PIATCO before the Regional Trial Court of Pasay City in the Philippines. By
virtue of this complaint, the Respondent sought a writ of possession authorizing it to take
immediate possession of the airport terminal at issue in this arbitration (the "Philippine
expropriation proceedings"). The writ was issued and the Respondent was granted
possession of the Terminal. To this date, the Respondent is the owner of the Terminal

and has made a provisional payment to PIATCO representing the proffered value of the

Terminal of approximately US$60 million, of which US$29 million was reportedly

transferred to the Claimant'.

23. On 23 December 2004, following the expropriation, the Claimant submitted an
application for interim measures for the preservation of its rights pursuant to Article 47 of

the ICSID Convention and Rule 39 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

24, On 27 January 2005, the Tribunal convened an in-person meeting with the parties
in Washington, D.C. to dispose of the Claimant's application for interim measures and, if
any, all outstanding requests for document production on the part of both the Claimant
and the Respondent. The Tribunal also requested a full status report from the parties with
respect to the expropriation proceedings in the Philippines. During this meeting, the
Claimant confirmed that its application for interim measures was withdrawn. The issue
of document production was also extensively discussed, including whether the timetable
for written pleadings ought to be modified in light of the parties' recent submissions and
the document production process. The Tribunal decided, inter alia, that the timetable
would remain unchanged. The Tribunal also confirmed that the oral phase of the
proceeding would commence, as previously scheduled, on 29 August 2005, and that the

pre-hearing conference would be held on 17 August 2005.

25. In the interim, the Tribunal issued a number of additional Procedural Orders:
Procedural Order No. 6 on 15 February 2005 regarding the Respondent's requests for

production of documents of 26 August 2004, 29 October 2004 and 11 November 2004;

| This matter is addressed in more detail in Chapter III of this Award ("The Philippine Expropriation
Proceedings").

Procedural Order No. 7 on 31 March 2005 regarding the Claimant's request for an order
compelling the Respondent to produce documents withheld on the basis of privilege; and
Procedural Order No. 8 on 8 July 2005 regarding the Respondent's request for production
of documents dated 14 June 2005. On various occasions, the Tribunal reminded the

parties that their respective disclosure obligations were of a continuing nature.

26. On 8 April 2005, the Claimant filed its Reply. A corrected version of the

Claimant's Reply was submitted on 27 April 2005.

27. On 8 July 2005, the Respondent filed a request seeking an order that the deadline
for the filing of its Rejoinder due on 13 July 2005 be stayed or at a minimum extended by
six months and that the Claimant's Sur-Rejoinder and the hearing on jurisdiction and
liability be rescheduled accordingly. Citing "exceptional circumstances" in support of its
request, the Respondent invoked the recent political crisis in the Philippines which had
led to the resignation of important cabinet ministers and had prevented proper
communication between the Respondent and its counsel in Washington. The Respondent
also referred to the unavailability of one of its key witnesses, Secretary Gloria Tan
Climaco, due to medical reasons. The Respondent also stressed that it had not received
some of the documents which the Tribunal had ordered the Claimant to produce, or the
documents which the ICC tribunal, in the related PIATCO arbitration, had ordered
PIATCO to produce to the Philippines. Finally, as part of the Respondent's request, the
Tribunal was appraised of the ongoing investigations involving Fraport in the Philippines,
Germany and the United States. Such circumstances, the Respondent argued, impeded its

ability to fully present its case.

28. On 11 July 2005, the Tribunal informed the parties that the deadline for the
submission of the Respondent's Rejoinder was maintained. Accordingly, the Respondent
filed its Rejoinder on 13 July 2005, under protest and with the following reservation:

"The Republic submits this Rejoinder under substantial objection and reserving

the right to submit additional evidence that is currently unavailable for reasons
described in our 8 July 2005 letter to the Tribunal [...]."

29. On 19 July 2005, the Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 9 addressing the
Respondent's request for a postponement of the hearing on jurisdiction and liability. The
Tribunal indicated that it was not minded at that time to reschedule the hearing but that it

would only issue a final decision in this regard following a telephone meeting with the

parties which it scheduled for 26 July 2005.

30. On 26 July 2005, the Tribunal held a telephone meeting with the parties.

31. On 3 August 2005, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 10 granting the
Respondent's request for a postponement of the hearing on jurisdiction and liability. The

Tribunal said, in part:

"3, Having considered the Parties’ submissions and deliberated, the Tribunal
has decided, with considerable reluctance, that Respondent's Request should be
granted. The overriding circumstance which, in the final analysis, swayed the
Tribunal is the situation which obtains today with respect to the many documents
produced recently by Claimant to Respondent as well as those documents which
will soon be produced by PIATCO to the Republic of the Philippines in a related
ICC arbitration.

4. The Tribunal accepts that all of these documents, once produced, will
need to be examined and analyzed by Respondent and its experts. Claimant has
asked that Respondent file a witness statement and/or expert statement with
respect to such documents, in accordance with paragraph 7 of the April 23, 2004
Procedural Order. Respondent, for its part, has requested the opportunity to
make a ‘supplemental submission to the Tribunal’ with respect to any new

-10-

evidence which such documents may reveal, as well as the right to submit
additional declarations from various witnesses.

5. Last Friday 29 July 2005, Respondent filed yet another request regarding
the production of documents by Claimant. On Sunday 31 July 2005, Claimant
responded to this request by stating clearly that it ‘has produced all of the
documents that the Tribunal has ordered.’

6. Claimant has also made a request for the production of documents by
Respondent based on the witness statement of Edgar R. Navales, which was
submitted with the Respondent's Rejoinder on 13 July 2005.

7. In these circumstances, the Tribunal is concerned lest, if the hearing
dates are maintained, both Parties may be prevented from fully presenting their
case. The Tribunal is also concerned that, even if it issues, prior to 29 August
2005, orders and directions which dispose of all pending Applications and
Requests, there be a serious risk that the evidentiary record will be incomplete
and that the efficient conduct of the hearing would thus be impeded.

8. In the opinion of the Tribunal, these circumstances are truly
extraordinary and constitute valid reasons for the exercise by the Tribunal of its
discretion to postpone the Hearing in accordance with the Tribunal's Order of
April 23, 2004.

9. The Tribunal has, of course, considered whether a postponement of the
Hearing could cause irreparable prejudice to Claimant. The Tribunal has reached
the conclusion that it would not.

10. However, the Tribunal will maintain the dates of 29 (at 2 p.m.), 30 and,
if necessary, 31 August for a hearing with the Parties. At this hearing, the
Tribunal, after consultation with the Parties, will fix, peremptorily, dates in early
2006 for the hearing on jurisdiction and liability.

ll. At this hearing, the Tribunal will also hear the Parties’ oral submissions
on all other Requests and Applications which are presently pending. The
Tribunal intends to issue rulings on all of these outstanding matters promptly
thereafter. The Tribunal will also establish at that time a definitive procedural
timetable and calendar for the efficient conduct of this arbitration.

12, Before the end of this week, the Tribunal will distribute to the Parties a
list of all pending requests and applications of which it remains seized and which

will be on the Agenda of the hearing at the end of the month. In the meantime,

the Parties are ordered to refrain from filing any further submissions with the
Tribunal.

13. In the present circumstances, the filing by Claimant of its Sur-Rejoinder

which was due on 13 August is suspended. A new date for the filing of
Claimant's Sur-Rejoinder will be fixed at the August hearing."

-ll-

32. A procedural hearing was accordingly held on 29 and 30 August 2005 in
Washington, D.C., at the conclusion of which the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No.
11, as contained in the minutes of this hearing dated 1 September 2005. A schedule for
the production of further documents was established. The Tribunal also decided that the
Respondent would be allowed to file an additional submission by 17 October 2005 in
order to address documents recently produced by the Claimant. Similarly, the Claimant
was given the right to file a Sur-Rejoinder by 17 November 2005 in response thereto.

The Tribunal also directed the parties to report to the Tribunal, on an ongoing basis, on
the progress of discussions which they were having involving the sale of Fraport's equity
and related interests in PLATCO to Manila Hotel Corporation as well as developments in
the various related legal proceedings, particularly in the Philippines and in Germany, to
which the Republic of the Philippines, PLATCO and/or Fraport were parties. Finally, it
was decided that the hearing on jurisdiction and liability would be held in Washington,

D.C. from 6 to 17 January 2006 and that a pre-hearing conference would be held in
December 2005 between the President and the parties at a date to be fixed later after

consultation with the parties.

33. On 12 October 2005, five days prior to the deadline set for its Supplemental
Submission, the Respondent requested an extension of time until 20 January 2006,
invoking in support of its request various alleged deficiencies in the Claimant's
production of documents. As part of its request, the Respondent also asked that the
Claimant's Sur-Rejoinder and the hearing on jurisdiction and liability be rescheduled
accordingly. Two days later, on 14 October 2005, the Respondent also made an

application to submit various additional witness statements.

-12-

34. On 14 October 2005, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 12 informing the
parties that the Tribunal granted the Respondent a one-week extension for the filing of its
Supplemental Submission, i.e. to 24 October 2005. The deadline for the filing of the
Claimant's Sur-Rejoinder was accordingly also extended by one week, i.e. to 24
November 2005. All other dates set by the Tribunal during the August 2005 hearing

were maintained.

35. On 17 October 2005, the Respondent submitted a request for reconsideration of

the Tribunal's Procedural Order No. 12.

36. On the same date, by way of Procedural Order No. 13, the parties were informed
that the Respondent's application to submit additional witness statements by Messrs.
Silverstone, Pringle and Pieth, as well as Secretary Gutierrez, was granted. Its request to

submit statements by two other witnesses was denied.

37. On 19 October 2005, following instruction from the President, the Secretary of
the Tribunal informed the parties verbally that the Tribunal, having considered the
parties’ submissions, had decided, unanimously, that the Respondent's request for
reconsideration of Procedural Order No. 12 was denied, without prejudice, and that a

more detailed order would follow.

38. On 20 October 2005, the Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 14 setting forth
detailed reasons for the dismissal of the Respondent's request for reconsideration of its

Procedural Order No. 12. The Tribunal stated, in part, as follows:

"6. The Tribunal remains concerned with the non-production to the
Respondent of the PIATCO documents in the ICC arbitration. The Tribunal

-13-

recalls that in its Procedural Order No. 4 of October 18, 2004, it accepted that
‘the underlying issues in both arbitrations are, in substantial part, overlapping’ (at
page 1). The Tribunal remains of that view.

Regarding production by PIATCO to the Republic of the Philippines in
the ICC arbitration, the Tribunal notes the statement by counsel for PIATCO that
‘[dJocument production shall r diately and shall be leted
by 9 December 2005'.

8. This is the principal reason why the Respondent's request for
reconsideration is denied, but without prejudice. While the Tribunal will not be
held hostage to the production of PIATCO documents in the ICC arbitration, it
will nevertheless consider any further application which either Party may make
as document production on the part of PIATCO proceeds." (emphasis in original)

39. On 24 October 2005, the Respondent filed its Supplemental Submission, and on

23 November 2005, the Claimant filed its Sur-Rejoinder.

40. Subsequently, in the period prior to the hearing on jurisdiction and liability, the
Tribunal was seized of numerous requests from both parties and issued a number of
further Procedural Orders: Procedural Order No. 15 on 8 November 2005 rejecting the
Claimant's request for an order compelling the Respondent to produce a document over
which it had claimed privilege; and Procedural Order No. 16 on 9 December 2005
pursuant to which the Tribunal, inter alia, granted the Claimant's request for an order
directing the Respondent not to share with the Special Prosecutor of the Office of the
Ombudsman documents marked confidential, granted the Respondent's request for an
order allowing the late submission of a witness submission from Mr. Mendoza, denied
the Respondent's request for an order accepting an affidavit from Mr. Maurits Van
Linder and directed the Respondent to provide to the Claimant copies of all of its

submissions in the ICC arbitration.

-14-

4l. On 15 December 2005, the President of the Tribunal held a pre-hearing
conference with the parties in Washington, D.C. During this conference, various
directions were issued by the President with respect to the orderly conduct of the oral

hearing in January 2006.

42. On 20 December 2005, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 17 pursuant to
which the Tribunal directed the Respondent to produce immediately to the Claimant all
of its submissions in the ICC arbitration that it had not previously provided. The
Respondent was also allowed to submit written statements by Messrs. Barrenchea and De
Ocampo, provided they were limited to rebutting issues raised in the Claimant's Sur-
Rejoinder, by no later than 30 December 2005. Oral testimony on the part of Mr.
Barrenchea for the purpose of rebutting accusations made against Secretary Climaco, in
the absence of exceptional circumstances justifying the introduction of such testimony,

would not be allowed.

43. On 21 December 2005, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 18 granting the
Respondent's request that Mr. Villaraza be permitted to testify at the hearing on

jurisdiction and liability by videoconference.

44. On 22 December 2005, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 19 denying both
the Claimant's request for production of counsel for the Respondent's communications
with the German Prosecutor and the Respondent's request for an order regarding access

to the German Prosecutor's documents.

-15-

45. On 27 December 2005, the Respondent made a further request for a postponement
of the hearing on jurisdiction and liability scheduled to commence less than 10 days later
or, alternatively, a stay of proceedings, pending the resolution of ongoing litigation in
Germany relating to its access to the German Prosecutor's documents and the production

by PIATCO of documents in the ICC arbitration.

46. On 29 December 2005, by Procedural Order No. 20, the Tribunal ruled that the
Respondent's request for a postponement or a stay of the oral proceedings would be
heard at the outset of the hearing on 6 January 2006. The Tribunal further ordered the
parties to refrain, unless otherwise directed, from filing any further written submissions

until the commencement of the hearing on jurisdiction and liability.

47. On 6 January 2006, prior to the commencement of the hearing and as previously
ordered, the Tribunal heard the parties with respect to the Respondent's request for a
postponement or a stay of proceedings and, at the conclusion of arguments, took the
matter under advisement. The request was later denied by the Tribunal. In its Procedural

Order No. 21 dated 6 January 2006, the Tribunal stated, in part, as follows:

"14. In support of its present Request for a Postponement, the Respondent
avers that 'the record is incomplete without the relevant and material PIATCO
documents that [...] [t]he ICC Tribunal has ordered PIATCO to produce [...] by
January 12,2006’.

15. The Tribunal notes that there has been an ongoing debate between
PIATCO and the Republic of the Philippines before the ICC Tribunal in respect
of the production by PIATCO of documents sought by the Respondent. This
Tribunal cannot in any way influence the timely outcome of the document
production process in the ICC arbitration. The Tribunal further notes that
documents may soon be produced. If they are, the Respondent will have the
opportunity of seeking permission from this Tribunal to produce any such
document which it considers relevant and material. In any event, the Tribunal

- 16-

will not postpone the present hearing until a date uncertain in the future when
documents, which may or may not be relevant, become available.

16. The Respondent also invokes in support of its present Request for a
Postponement that 'the record is incomplete without Fraport's relevant and

material documents seized by the German Prosecutor’. The Claimant, exercising
a procedural option granted to it under German law, has opposed access by the

Respondent to these documents, and such access has been suspended pending a
decision of a German court. The Tribunal notes that these documents consist of
‘investigation files' and that according to the Respondent, '[iJn the near future,
either the German court will rule that the documents will not be made available,
or these documents will be forthcoming’. In answer to a question from a member
of the Tribunal in this regard, the Respondent's counsel stated that she did not
know when the German court was likely to rule on the Claimant's objection.

17. The Tribunal believes that the record before it is sufficient to commence
a hearing on jurisdiction and liability. It thus sees the situation which obtains
today as altogether different from the situation which obtained in August 2005
when it issued Procedural Order No. 10. The Respondent's Request for a
Postponement is accordingly denied.

  

18. The Tribunal would caution the Parties that in its Procedural Order No.
19 dated 22 December 2005, after having noted the Respondent's allegations
regarding the Claimant's alleged behaviour which forms part of the Request No.
2 (regarding access to the documents seized by the German Prosecutor), the
Tribunal ruled that ‘each Party will be at liberty during the merits hearing to
invite the Tribunal to draw appropriate inferences from the other Party's failure
to comply voluntarily with its Request’.

19. Before concluding the present Order, the Tribunal wishes to remind the
Parties of ICSID Arbitration Rule 38 (Closure of the Proceeding):

(1) When the presentation of the case by the parties is completed,
the proceeding shall be declared closed.

(2) Exceptionally, the Tribunal may, before the award has been
rendered, reopen the proceeding on the ground that new evidence is
forthcoming of such a nature as to constitute a decisive factor, or that
there is a vital need for clarification on certain specific points.’

20. As mentioned by the Tribunal during oral arguments on 6 January 2006,
in the event that there is an application to the Tribunal by either Party pursuant to
a provision of the above-cited Rule, the Tribunal in exercising its discretion of
necessity will be mindful of and take into account the totality of the record since

it has been constituted."

-17-

48. The hearing on jurisdiction and liability was held in Washington, D.C. from 6
January to 17 January 2006, i.e. 11 hearing days. In addition to opening and closing

arguments, the following witnesses were heard during the hearing:

Called for cross-examination by the Respondent:

Mr. Salih Samim Aydin
Mr. Dietrich F. Stiller Mr.
Manfred Scholch Mr.
Wilhelm Bender Mr.
Peter Henkel Mr. Thomas
W. Golden
Called for cross-examination by the Claimant:
Secretary Gloria L. Tan Climaco
Mr. Reynaldo S. Libutan
Mr. Norbert Losch
Secretary Maria Merceditas N. Gutierrez
Mr. Edgar Navales
Mr. Juan Jose Rodom T. Fetiza
Mr. F. Arthur L. Villaraza
Mr. Victor C. Fernandez
Secretary Alberto G. Romulo
Secretary Avelino J. Cruz, Jr.

49. On | March 2006, the parties, simultaneously, filed post-hearing briefs.

50. At this point, the parties' written submissions had totaled approximately 1300
pages, and their witness and expert statements had totaled collectively over 2300 pages,

in addition to several hundred exhibits.

51. The Tribunal further notes that, at the request of the Respondent, in view of the
ongoing related proceedings and investigations, the proceeding was not closed at the end

of the January 2006 hearing on jurisdiction and liability. In fact, as will be seen later,

-18-

after 17 January 2006, the Tribunal received numerous letters from the parties, as well as

additional requests and applications.

52. Thus, on 10 May 2006, the Claimant wrote to the Tribunal and made the

following application:

"Fraport hereby requests that if Respondent is going to request leave to make any
further submission to the Tribunal with respect to any new information currently
in its possession, that Respondent be directed to so request the Tribunal by close
of business on Friday, May 19. If the Tribunal grants the application, a suitable
briefing schedule should be worked out."

53. On 19 May 2006, the Respondent responded to the Claimant's letter with the

following application:

"For all of the foregoing reasons, the Respondent anticipates that it will request
leave within the next two to four months to file an additional submission. Given
the uncertainty in timing of the ongoing dispute over document production with
PIATCO and the ongoing efforts in Germany, the Respondent submits that it is
premature to require that a briefing schedule be established now, as Claimant
contends. Instead, in the interest of efficiency, the Respondent requests that it be
allowed to notify the Tribunal at the earliest time when a precise date can be set
for the filing of an additional submission."

54. On 30 May 2006, the Claimant responded to the Respondent's application as

follows:

"Having failed to request leave to make any further submission 4 months after
obtaining the PIATCO documents, Respondent should be precluded from making
any further submission based upon those documents. Further, Respondent should
be ordered, again, to abide by the Tribunal's repeated orders that it provide
Fraport on an ongoing basis all documents and submissions in the ICC
arbitration. The Tribunal should accept the Respondent's communication to the
German authorities as further unlawful treatment of Fraport and its executives in
violation of the BIT. Respondent's baseless demands and threats for delay of the
Tribunal's deliberation and issuance of an award on liability and jurisdiction in
this bifurcated Arbitration should be rejected."

-19-

55. On the same date, the Respondent wrote to the Tribunal seeking the following:

"The Republic will continue to update the Tribunal of any new significant
developments in these matters. Beyond providing factual updates, it is critical
that the Parties be allowed to brief the Tribunal on the legal implications of these
developments. As such, the Republic requests that it should be permitted to
address the legal implications of recent developments in the expropriation
proceedings in a later written submission."

56. On 31 May 2006, the Respondent wrote a further letter to the Tribunal:

"Claimant has submitted a 14 page single-spaced letter addressing matters
beyond those mentioned in our May 19 submission. Claimant's letter is
effectively a supplemental submission on the merits that is calculated to impact
the Tribunal's deliberations and should be disregarded.

 

Alternatively, if the Tribunal plans to read and consider Claimant's submission,
then the Republic must be permitted to respond before any consideration is given
to the issues addressed therein. [...]

Accordingly, we ask that the Republic be permitted to respond to Claimant's
extensive and substantive May 30, 2006 submission, that came in the guise of a
response to the Republic's discussion of a potential supplemental submission,
before the Tribunal considers Claimant's submission. We are prepared to file a
response by June 21, 2006. That response is not meant to supplant the requested
supplemental submission based on PIATCO documents and any others obtained
from Hong Kong or Germany in the interim."

 

57. On 6 June 2006, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 22, ordering as

follows:

"(i) the Respondent shall file an additional submission on 19 June 2006 for the
purpose of addressing the Claimant's letter of 30 May 2006, the PIATCO
documents, any other documents obtained from Hong Kong or Germany, as well
as recent developments in the expropriation proceedings in the Philippines;

(ii) the Claimant shall file its response thereto on 3 July 2006; and

(iii) the Respondent shall be entitled to submit a reply to the Claimant's response
of 3 July 2006 on 10 July 2006." (emphasis in original)

-20-

As part of its Procedural Order No. 22, the Tribunal also reminded the Respondent of its
directions that it provide to the Claimant on an ongoing basis all of its documents and

other submissions in the related ICC arbitration.

58. On 14 June 2006, the Respondent sought a revision of the timetable established
under Procedural Order No. 22. By letter dated 16 June 2006, the Tribunal informed the
parties that this timetable was temporarily suspended pending the Claimant's response

and the Respondent's reply.

59. On 23 June 2006, the Tribunal, after deliberating, issued Procedural Order No. 23,

directing as follows:

"the Respondent shall file an additional submission on 15 August 2006 for the
purpose of addressing the Claimant's letter of 30 May 2006, the PIATCO
documents, any other documents obtained from Hong Kong or Germany, as well
as recent developments in the expropriation proceedings in the Philippines:

the Claimant shall file its response thereto on 15 September 2006: and

the Respondent shall be entitled to submit a reply to the Claimant's response
of 15 September 2006 on 29 September 2006." (emphasis in original)

60. On 27 June 2006, the Claimant made an application requesting that the Tribunal

reconsider its ruling under Procedural Order No. 23.

6l. On 18 July 2006, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 24 dismissing the
Claimant's application requesting that the Tribunal reconsider its ruling under Procedural

Order No. 23. As part of its Procedural Order No. 24, the Tribunal also stated:

"7. With respect to the production by Respondent to Claimant of all
documents and submissions in the ICC arbitration between Respondent and
PIATCO, Respondent is reminded yet again that it has been ordered to provide

-21-

these documents to Claimant on an ongoing basis, i.e. as soon as they are
available.

8. With respect to documents which Respondent, or indeed Claimant, may
receive from ongoing Hong Kong or German criminal investigation, both Parties
are minded of their obligations to update the Tribunal and report any new
development in a timely manner.

9. Finally, with respect to the Philippine expropriation proceedings, the
Tribunal notes that Respondent has offered to update the Tribunal (and Claimant)
on all developments in these proceedings and it is so ordered." (emphasis in
original)

62. On 15 August 2006, the Respondent filed its Additional Submission consisting of

80 pages, numerous exhibits and supplementary witness statements.

63. On 7 September 2006, the Respondent filed an additional submission.

64. On 15 September 2006, the Claimant filed its Observations to Respondent's

Additional Submission consisting of 76 pages.

65. On 2 October 2006, the Respondent filed its Reply to Claimant's Observations

consisting of 132 pages as well as further exhibits and witness statements.

66. On 25 October 2006, in accordance with Rule 38 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules,

the Tribunal stated:

"The Tribunal is of the view that the presentation of their case by both parties is
now completed and the instant proceedings are hereby declared closed.

Nevertheless, the Tribunal's Procedural Order of 18 July 2006, as it pertains to
the ongoing expropriation proceedings in the Philippines, remains in effect and
Respondent is accordingly directed to keep the Tribunal (and Claimant) informed
of the status of those proceedings."

-22-

67. On 5 January 2007, the Claimant informed the Tribunal that the Philippine
Department of Justice had dismissed an ADL complaint made against PIATCO and

Fraport officials (the "ADL complaint").

68. On 8 January 2007, the Respondent wrote to the Tribunal, taking issue with the
Claimant's characterization of the Philippine Department of Justice's dismissal of the

ADL complaint.

69. On 10 January 2007, at the Tribunal's request, the Claimant provided the Tribunal

with certain documents forming part of the evidentiary record in the ADL complaint.

70. On 11 January 2007, the Respondent made further submissions to the Tribunal

 

regarding the ADL laint, alleging that altt h the ADL laint was dismissed.

certain "critical documents" had not been before the Department of Justice. The

Respondent contended:

"These critical documents were unavailable to the DOJ, not for lack of effort or
interest, but (1) because of the confidentiality designation in this arbitration under
the ordered confidentiality agreement; and (2) because Fraport, through German
courts, blocked the Philippine DOJ's request for mutual legal assistance in
Germany. Having denied the Philippine DOJ the crucial and relevant evidence,
Fraport cannot celebrate the DOJ's dismissal as evidence of its innocence."

71. Ina letter dated 12 January 2007, the Claimant took issue with this contention of
the Respondent. The Claimant reiterated that it did not have the full record regarding the

ADL complaint.

 

his matter is addressed in more detail in Chapter V of this Award ("Analysis and Findings on
Jurisdiction").

-23-

72. On 14 February 2007, the Tribunal requested that the Respondent produce in
extenso the documents having formed part of the record in the ADL complaint. The

Tribunal added:

"The present request is not a decision by the Tribunal to reopen the proceeding
under ICSID Arbitration Rule 38. The Tribunal merely seeks to complete the
evidentiary record which the Parties have constituted with their attachments to
Respondent's letter of 5 January and Claimant's letter of 10 January.

Until further notice, the Tribunal does not wish to receive any submissions with
respect to this material from either Party."

7. The requested documents regarding the ADL complaint, consisting of over 1900
pages, were produced by the Respondent on 14 March 2007. The Respondent's
document production regarding the ADL complaint was subsequently supplemented,

inter alia, by additional documents provided by the Claimant on 26 March 2007.

74. By letter dated 13 June 2007, the proceeding was declared closed in its entirety.

The Tribunal wrote:

"[T]he Tribunal is of the view that the presentation of their case by both parties is
completed and accordingly, pursuant to Arbitration Rule 38, the proceeding is
now declared closed in its entirely."

75. As a final observation, the Tribunal wishes to emphasize that the above account of
the procedural history of this arbitration is not meant to be exhaustive. As noted earlier,
this has been a bitterly fought case since the constitution of the Tribunal on 11 February
2004. The mere fact that, more than 14 months after the end of the oral hearing on
jurisdiction and liability, the parties were still exchanging letters and submitting reports
and documents to the Tribunal attests to the unusual nature of the present arbitration and

explains why the Tribunal's decision has only been made now.

-24-

76. Throughout this arbitral proceeding, the Tribunal has been required to address a
plethora of procedural requests and applications, in addition to those reviewed in the
present chapter of its Award. They were all extensively and diligently briefed by the
parties, resulting in literally thousands of pages of submissions and exhibits. The
Tribunal considers it unnecessary to describe these submissions beyond the account set
forth above. The Tribunal wishes to acknowledge, however, the dedication and
professionalism of counsel for both parties who, often in trying circumstances, have

always sought to assist the Tribunal.

-25-

II. FACTUAL BACKGROUND

A. Introduction

77. For reasons set out in more detail later in this Award, the Tribunal has decided
that it does not have jurisdiction to rule on the Claimant's allegations of breaches by the
Respondent of certain provisions of the BIT, because the Claimant's investment is not

protected by the Treaty.

7B. In order to fully understand the Tribunal's analysis and findings on jurisdiction, it
is necessary to set out at some length the factual matrix of this case as disclosed by the
evidence, written and oral, presented by the parties and thereby review the history of
Fraport's investment in the Philippines Terminal 3 project. The Tribunal will now

proceed to do so.

B. The Terminal 3 Project

1. The Original Proposal
79. The project to construct an international passenger terminal at Ninoy Aquino
International Airport ("NAIA") in Manila, otherwise known as Terminal 3, dates back to
1990 when, as part of a report ("Master Plan Review") commissioned by the Philippine
Department of Transportation and Communication ("DOTC"), it was recommended that
NAIA continue to be the principal airport for Metro Manila, with construction of

Terminal 2 for domestic passengers and Terminal 3 for international passengers.

-26-

80. In April 1993, the then-President of the Philippines, President Fidel V. Ramos,
met with a group of six Philippine business leaders and asked them to submit a bid to
develop Terminal 3. These business leaders, known collectively as the Six Taipans, were
led by Lucio Tan, Chairman of Philippine Airlines ("PAL"), the national flag carrier; the
other five were Alfonso T. Yuchengco, Henry Sy, Sr., George S.K. Ty, John Gokongwei

and Andrew L. Gotianun.

81. On 15 September 1993, the Six Taipans incorporated a company known as Asia's
Emerging Dragon Corporation ("AEDC") for the purpose of constructing, operating and
maintaining Terminal 3. Approximately one year later, on 5 October 1994, AEDC
formally submitted its bid to the DOTC in the form of an unsolicited proposal for the

construction and operation of Terminal 3.

82. The AEDC Terminal 3 proposal called for a US$369 million terminal that would
be financed entirely by AEDC, i.e. at no cost to the Philippine Government. Under the
proposal, AEDC would construct a world-class passenger terminal with a design capacity
of up to 10 million passengers annually. AEDC would operate and collect revenues from
the terminal over a 25-year concession period, which could be renewed for an additional
25 years. During the construction and concession period, AEDC would also pay to the

Philippine Government a series of fixed annual guaranteed payments.

83. In the period during which AEDC was preparing its Terminal 3 proposal, the
Philippine Congress passed Republic Act No. 7718 on 5 May 1994, entitled "An Act
Authorizing the Financing, Construction, Operation and Maintenance of Infrastructure

Projects by the Private Sector and for Other Purposes", better known as the Philippine

-27-

"BOT Law". The BOT Law regulates, inter alia, project proposals that are not publicly
solicited by the Philippine Government. Under the BOT Law, the incentive for private
investment is the concessionaire's ability to earn revenues from operation of the

concession on agreed terms and conditions for a given period of time.

84. The BOT Law lists three conditions that must be met before a government agency
or unit may accept an unsolicited proposal: (a) the project must involve a new concept or
technology and/or is not part of the list of priority projects; (b) no direct government
guarantee, subsidy or equity is to be required; and (c) the agency or unit concerned must
have subsequently invited by publication, for three consecutive weeks, in a newspaper of
general circulation, comparative or competitive proposals. In the event that another
project proponent submits a lower price proposal, the original proponent has the right to
match it within thirty working days. If the original project proponent matches the
submitted lowest price within the specified period, it is immediately awarded the project;

otherwise, the contract is awarded to the one tendering the lowest price.

85. The BOT Law and Implementing Rules and Regulations of the BOT Law ("IRR")

provide the criteria for selecting the winning proposal:

"[T]he contract shall be awarded to the bidder who, having satisfied the
minimum financial, technical, organizational and legal standards required by this
Act, has submitted the lowest bid and most favourable terms for the project,
based on the present value of its proposed tolls, fees, rentals and charges over a
fixed term for the facility to be constructed, rehabilitated, operated and
maintained according to the prescribed minimum design and performance
standards, plans and specifications."

86. The BOT Law and the IRR further set forth various legal, credential, and financial

requirements for project bidders. In the event of a public utility franchise, the proponent

-28-

and facility operator must be Filipino or if a corporation, it must be duly registered with
the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") and owned and controlled up to at
least sixty percent (60%) by Filipinos, as further required by the Philippine Constitution.
In addition, the project proponent, by itself or through the member-firms in case of a joint
venture/consortium or through the contractor(s) engaged for the project, must have

successfully undertaken a project similar or related to the project at issue.

87. The BOT Law also requires that an unsolicited proposal be approved by the
Philippine National Economic Development Authority ("NEDA"). More particularly,
pursuant to the IRR, the NEDA Investment Coordination Committee ("ICC") is tasked
with leading the approval process in connection with projects "involving substantial
government undertakings". As part of this process, the BOT contract is reviewed by the
ICC Technical Board, and on a line-by-line basis by the ICC Technical Working Group
("TWG", or ICC Contract Review Committee), which recommends approval or

disapproval to the ICC Cabinet Committee.

88. In the present case, the evidence discloses that AEDC's proposal for the Terminal
3 project, as submitted in October 1994, was endorsed six months later on 27 March 1995

by the DOTC Secretary to NEDA-ICC, as required by the BOT Law and applicable IRR.

In May 1995, however, President Ramos publicly approved the simultaneous
development of both Terminal 3 and a second airport which was known then as Clark
Field Airport ("Clark"), a former United States Air Force Base. In light of this
development, a revised proposal was forwarded by the DOTC to NEDA on 13 December

1995.

-29-

89. Thereafter, on 19 January 1996, as required by the BOT Law and IRR, the ICC
Cabinet Committee reviewed and recommended approving the Terminal 3 project

proposal upon the terms formulated by AEDC.

90. On 13 February 1996, the NEDA Board approved the Terminal 3 project in
NEDA Board Resolution No. 2 along the terms and conditions imposed by the ICC, but
added certain conditions concerning appraisal of the land valuation of the site and other
clauses for negotiations. AEDC and the DOTC then held a "Project Launching
Ceremony" for Terminal 3 in February 1996. The parties also signed a memorandum of

agreement to fast-track the implementation of the Terminal 3 project.

91. The only challenge to AEDC's unsolicited proposal came on 20 September 1996
from Paircargo & Associates, Inc. (which would later incorporate as Philippine
International Air Terminals Co. or PLATCO). Paircargo & Associates was a joint venture
composed of People's Air Cargo & Warehousing Co, Inc. ("Paircargo"), Philippine
Airport & Ground Services, Inc. ("PAGS"), and Security Bank Corporation ("Security
Bank"). Paircargo operated a cargo warehouse facility at NAIA and was owned by
Cheng Yong and his son, Jefferson Cheng (the "Chengs"). PAGS was a joint venture
between Paircargo and GlobeGround, the latter a wholly-owned subsidiary of Lufthansa.

Security Bank is a Philippine commercial bank.

92. On 20 September 1996, the Paircargo group thus submitted its proposal to the
Prequalification Bids and Awards Committee ("PBAC"). On 23 September 1996, the

PBAC opened an envelope containing the prequalification documents of the Paircargo

-30-

group. The next day, on 24 September 1996, the PBAC determined the Paircargo group

to be financially capable under the BOT Law and the IRR.

93. Two days later, the PBAC's determination prompted AEDC to make its first
official objection to the Paircargo group's bid, alleging that the Paircargo group did not
have sufficient capital to meet the prequalification requirement. The basis for AEDC's
challenge was the contention that the total net worth of Security Bank, one of the
Paircargo group's consortium members, should not have been considered in evaluating
whether the Paircargo group had the ability to raise 30% of the project cost equity.
AEDC argued that the Philippine General Banking Act limited Security Bank's equity
investment to no more than 15% of the total net worth of Security Bank, as opposed to its

entire net worth.

94, On 2 October 1996, the PBAC rejected AEDC's challenge and informed AEDC
that the Paircargo group had been correctly pre-qualified. The PBAC wrote: "Based on
the documents submitted and established criteria for prequalification the PBAC found
that the challenger pre-qualified to undertake the NAIA 3 project." The PBAC further

stated that the DOTC Secretary had approved the PBAC's findings.

95. On 16 October 1996, despite further objections raised by AEDC, the PBAC thus
opened the Paircargo group's envelope containing its financial proposal. Subsequently,
AEDC received a letter from the PBAC stating that it had accepted the Paircargo group's
financial proposal, attaching Paircargo & Associates' schedule of annual guaranteed

payments to the Government during the construction and 25-year concession period. At

-31-

this point, AEDC had 30 working days to match the proposal of the Paircargo group or

the contract would be awarded to Paircargo & Associates.

96. On 29 October 1996, AEDC's counsel asked the PBAC to provide it with official
copies of the Paircargo group's financial proposal in order for AEDC to evaluate what it
was being asked to match. The PBAC rejected AEDC's request. Consequently, on 2
December 1996, AEDC's lawyers, Villaraza & Cruz, informed DOTC Secretary
Lagdameo that AEDC could not make a decision on whether or not to match the
competing bid due to a lack of sufficient data, which DOTC officials refused to provide.
AEDC never submitted a bid to match the Paircargo group's bid and the latter was

accordingly selected for the Terminal 3 project.

97. Subsequently, on 16 April 1997, AEDC filed a civil suit in the Regional Trial
Court of Pasig City against DOTC officials, PBAC Chairman Cal, Vice-Chairman
Atayde, Technical Committee Chairman Alvarez, and PBAC voting members Ceser
Valbuena, Herminia Castillo, and Wilfredo Trinidad. AEDC's petition requested a
declaration that Paircargo & Associates (which by then had incorporated as PIATCO)
was not properly prequalified, a declaration of nullity of the award of contract to

PIATCO, and an injunction against proceeding with its bid.

2. The Concession Agreement

98. The Concession Agreement was executed on 12 July 1997 by PIATCO (which
had been incorporated on 27 February 1997) and DOTC Secretary Enrile, on behalf of

the Government of the Republic of the Philippines. Its core terms included the following:

-32-

(i) The exclusivity for international passengers at Terminal 3,
whereby the Government committed to relocate international
passenger operations for Terminals | and 2 once Terminal 3
opened, with the result that the older terminals were to be used for
domestic passengers and cargo. The development of Clark as a

facility for international passengers was also restricted.

(ii) Various concession fees and payments to the Government, as well
as a distinction between "public utility revenues" and "non-public

utility revenues".

(iii) A concession period of 25 years, which could be extended by
another 25 years at the Government's request. At the end of the
concession period, PLATCO was to transfer Terminal 3 free of

charge.

(iv) The Government was given several options in the event of the
concessionaire's default under the concessionaire's agreements
with its lenders. Specifically, the Government had the option of
allowing the concessionaire's creditors to be substituted, if
qualified, as the concessionaire and operator of Terminal 3, or to
designate an operator. In the event the Government were to
designate an operator pursuant to this election, the Government
would be obligated to assume attendant liabilities to the

concessionaire's creditors.

(v) A separability clause providing that "[t]he invalidation of any of
the terms, conditions, stipulations, covenants, conditions, or

restrictions, or any part hereof by a final judgment of a court of

 

competent jurisdiction shall not affect the other provisions hereof.

(vi) A conflict clause providing that, "[i]n case of conflict between any
of the provisions of this Agreement and any provision of any
document or instrument relating to the Project (whether or not
forming part of the Bid Documents), the provisions hereof shall

prevail".

-33-

(vii) The Concession Agreement expressly permitted amendments,
changes, modifications or supplements, provided that they were in
writing and executed by both parties.

99. Simultaneously with the signing of the Concession Agreement, a separate
agreement (the "Side Agreement") was executed by the Parties to address the various
possible outcomes following resolution of the ongoing legal challenge to the bid process
raised by the AEDC lawsuit. If the AEDC challenge was resolved in favour of the PBAC
(i.e. in favour of PLATCO), the Side Agreement would become void and of no effect. If,
however, the challenge was successful and the Concession Agreement terminated as a
consequence, the Side Agreement provided that PIATCO would be released
unconditionally from any obligations under the Concession Agreement without liability

and the Government would have to reimburse PIATCO fully for all its expenses.

100. | The Concession Agreement, like all contracts in the Philippines for infrastructure
and development projects, went through the process of being submitted by the DOTC to
the ICC and NEDA "for clearance on a no-objection basis, specifically on the extent of
the final government undertaking to be provided to the project". On 16 April 1997, the
Concession Agreement negotiated between PIATCO and the PBAC members was thus
sent to the ICC for approval. PIATCO's contract was required to meet the same
conditions as AEDC's unsolicited proposal previously approved by NEDA in February

1996; any changes would require review and approval by the ICC and NEDA.

101. On 17 April 1997, the ICC Cabinet Committee held a meeting, the minutes of

which reflect that an ad referendum was conducted. However, only four of the requisite

-34-

six signatures were obtained to approve or clear the contract on a "no objection" basis as
required by the IRR. The contract, therefore, was merely noted. The minutes at issue do
not reflect that additional signatures were subsequently forwarded. In any event, on 9
July 1997, the DOTC issued a Notice of Award to PI ATCO, and the parties proceeded to

execute the Concession Agreement on 12 July 1997.

3. The Amended and Restated Concession Agreement

102. By 1998, the terms of the Concession Agreement were being renegotiated to
allow PIATCO to obtain financing from certain international lenders. The loan PLIATCO.
was depending upon had not materialized and the international lenders were requiring
changes to the Concession Agreement prior to committing financing. The renegotiations
to effect these changes culminated in the Amended and Restated Concession Agreement
("ARCA"), ultimately signed by PIATCO and Secretary Rivera of the DOTC on 26

November 1998.

103. The core terms of the ARCA included the following:

(i) The concession payments, i.e. the basis thereof, would be
established when operations were started by the MIAA. In
addition, a passenger fee of US$20, as opposed to 500 pesos,

would be collected.

(ii) In the event of default by PIATCO, the lenders had the right to
designate a qualified nominee to operate the Terminal or transfer
the Terminal to a qualified transferee. If the lenders were unable
to designate a nominee or transferee, the Terminal was to be
transferred to the Government or its designee, with the

Government being required to make a payment to PIATCO "equal

-35-

to the Appraised Value of the Development Facility or the sum of
the Attendant Liabilities if greater". The Concession Agreement
had specified only that, in the event of a PIATCO default, the
Government would have the option to take over the Terminal and

to assume all attendant liabilities.

(iii) If the ARCA was terminated because of a default by the
Government, it was to pay liquidated damages to PIATCO.

(iv) The ARCA added a special warranty as to the legality of the
ARCA as well as of the actions of the DOTC and the MIAA in
accordance with the contract to PLATCO. The Government further
warranted that it was entitled to enter into the agreement and to
guarantee that all of the procedures of the DOTC/MIAA in
connection with the Terminal 3 project, including the order of
award of the concession to PIATCO, were legal, valid and binding

and in accordance with all applicable regulations.
(v) The ARCA was to take precedence over the Bid Documents in the
event of any conflict.
104. The same day that the ARCA was signed, DOTC Secretary Rivera forwarded it to
NEDA. In his cover letter, Secretary Rivera informed the Director General of NEDA that
the ARCA was the result of negotiations to address the concerns of international lenders.

The cover letter also stated that although there were seventeen substantial changes:

"A great majority of the amendments, however, were for consistency of
reference, adherence to defined terms, brevity, precision, and in some cases a
mere matter of writing style. Rest assured that the so-called substantial changes
do not contravene the minimum requirements of the Terms of Reference and do
not put the government to a disadvantage."

105. The letter also attached a matrix prepared by PIATCO's counsel showing the

section-by-section changes from the Concession Agreement to the ARCA, and the

-36-

reasons for the change. After looking at the 135-page matrix comparing the changes
from the Concession Agreement to the ARCA, Technical Board member Undersecretary
of Finance for Corporate Affairs Lily Gruba suggested to the Technical Board that the

ARCA be reviewed by the ICC Contract Review Committee, also known as the TWG.

106. During this period, on 12 February 1999, President Estrada issued a
Memorandum "Affirming the Government's Commitment to Extend Full Assistance to
the Ninoy Aquino International Airport [NAIA] Terminal 3 Project in order to Ensure its
Completion and the Commencement of its Commercial Operations by 2001". The
memorandum, which President Estrada signed, was directed to the heads of 16
government agencies and "all other pertinent Government Agencies and Officers".

President Estrada stated in the memorandum as follows:

"The Government of the Republic of the Philippines (GRP) has committed to the
fulfillment of all its obligations under the Concession Agreement dated July 12,
1997 (as amended and restated on November 26, 1998) with the Philippine
International Air Terminals Co. In support of this commitment, you are hereby
directed to engage your full cooperation in ensuring into completion of the said
project within the timetable set."

107. Meanwhile, the TWG, which was headed by Department of Finance Assistant
Secretary Juan Jose Rodom T. Fetiza, proceeded with the ARCA review. Undersecretary
Gruba assigned to him the task of reviewing the matrix of changes in the ARCA and
preparing a memorandum for the Chairman of the Technical Board, NEDA Deputy
Director-General Ruperto Alonzo. In a letter dated 12 March 1999 to Mr. Alonzo, Mr.
Fetiza specifically summarized approximately eighty substantive changes in the ARCA

that required further study and recommended that the ARCA be scrutinized by the TWG

-37-

to determine its effect on the Terminal 3 project. At a meeting on 15 March 1999, the

ICC Technical Board decided to refer the amendments to the TWG for further review.

108. |The TWG met over the following months to review and resolve objections to the
ARCA raised by Mr. Fetiza and others. When negotiations broke off, the ARCA was
elevated to the ICC Cabinet Committee with a statement that most of the issues were
resolved except for the direct guarantee language in ARCA section 4.04(c)(vi). On 25
June 1999, the ARCA was thus presented to the ICC Cabinet Committee and the only

issue the Cabinet Committee discussed was the language in section 4.04(c)(vi).

109. Section 4.04(c)(vi) of the ARCA addressed the Government's rights in the event
of default on the part of PLATCO. It provided that in such circumstances, the lenders had
the option to designate a qualified nominee to operate Terminal 3 or transfer it to a
qualified transferee. Otherwise, Terminal 3 was to be transferred to the Government or
its designee, with the Government being required to make a payment to PIATCO "equal
to the Appraised Value of the Development Facility or the sum of the Attendant
Liabilities if greater." The Bangko Sentral ng Philipinas ("BSP"), i.e. the central bank of
the Philippines, had viewed this as a "buy out" that would not be a direct guarantee
provided it were optional, i.e. if the Government was not required to make a termination
payment and that payment was limited to PLATCO's verifiable expenses, and not the

amount of PIATCO's attendant liabilities to its creditors.

110. | The ICC Cabinet Committee ultimately adopted BSP's view and conditioned its
approval of the ARCA on BSP's review, approval, and monitoring of the credit

agreement between PIATCO and the lenders to ensure the buy-out was optional and the

-38-

termination payment limited. The ICC's conditional approval was accordingly contained
in NEDA Board's Resolution that approved the ARCA, subject to "the understanding that
the credit agreement between the concessionaire and the Senior Lenders shall be subject
to the approval and monitoring by the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas". In this regard, the
Tribunal further notes that Annex A of the ARCA (the required certificate from the
Department of Finance) and Annex B (the required opinion from the Minister of Justice)
both required a sovereign guarantee, but were never attached nor is there evidence that

they were ever executed.

4, The ARCA Supplements

111. Three supplements to the ARCA were also executed. The First Supplement,
executed on 27 August 1999, addressed the Government's obligation under the
Concession Agreement to deliver clean possession of the project site to PIATCO so that
construction could proceed as scheduled. The ARCA had mandated that this obligation
be performed by 30 September 1998, but the Government requested an extension of time.
Pursuant to the First Supplement to the ARCA, the date for delivery of clean possession
of the project site was accordingly extended to 31 December 1998, with corresponding
changes to the rest of the contractual timetable. The First Supplement also made express
that PLATCO would have responsibility to construct a surface access road rather than an
access tunnel because a tunnel was deemed neither economically viable nor technically
feasible. Finally, the First Supplement also amended provisions of the ARCA defining

"Revenues" or "Gross Revenues", as well as provisions regarding "Terminal Fees".

-39-

112. The parties executed a Second Supplement to the ARCA on 4 September 2000, by
virtue of which PIATCO agreed to take on the clearing of the site of subterranean
structures. The Second Supplement also contained detailed provisions for determining

compensation for PIATCO's performance of this task.

113. Finally, the Third Supplement, executed on 22 June 2001, dealt with the surface
access road between Terminal 2 and Terminal 3, and imposed on PIATCO the additional
obligation to build and finance the road. Four months later, on 16 October 2001, the
Third Supplement was presented to the ICC Technical Board for approval. Submission
of the Third Supplement raised questions at the ICC about the prior supplements that had
not been approved, but which were submitted about ten days later. The ICC ultimately
decided to defer discussing the Third Supplement until DOTC and MIAA explained why
they executed three Supplements to the ARCA "neither with justification nor prior ICC

approval".

114. The parties subsequently negotiated two additional supplements, i.e. the Fourth
Supplement in 2001 and the Fifth Supplement in 2002. Neither one of these supplements
was ever executed. The Tribunal will revert later in the present Award to these two

Supplements.

Cc. Fraport's Investment In The Terminal 3 Project

115. As indicated earlier, Fraport is a leading company in the international airport
business and owns and operates the Frankfurt Airport, one of the busiest and most

successful in the world. Fraport is also the owner, operator or shareholder, either directly

-40-

or through affiliated companies, of a number of other airport facilities, both in Germany

and elsewhere.

116. Fraport's investment as a financial participant in the Terminal 3 project spans a
period of several years, starting in 1999 and ending in 2002-2003, when, as the evidence
discloses, Fraport progressively wrote off its investment. Fraport's investment was both
directly in PIATCO and, indirectly, in a "cascade" of Philippine companies that have
ownership interests in PIATCO. In addition to its equity investments, Fraport has
extended loans and loan and payment guarantees to PIATCO, the cascade companies and

PIATCO's lenders and contractors.

117. Fraport directly and indirectly owns 61.44% of PIATCO. Its ownership of
PIATCO and the cascade companies is set forth on the following chart submitted in
evidence. As will be seen, the PIATCO shareholders, beside Fraport, are Jefferson G.
Cheng, Paircargo, PAGS, and PTI, all of which are controlled by the Cheng family, as

well as Sojitz and SB Airport.

-41 -

Shareholder Structure of PIATCO

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FRAPORT AG PAIRCARGO CHENG SB SOJITZ
Franklin Airport Services Worldwide AiRPORT
| ]40% 40% 0%
PAGS
Philippnu Airport and Ground St-rvices
60%
PTH
PAGS Terminate Hirfding Inc.
60%
PTI
PAGS Temninals, Inc.
[30% 35% 10% — |3:3% 1% 10% 10%
PIATCO Philippine International Air Inc.

Terminals Co.,

 

1. The Initial 1999 Investments
118. In mid-1998, Stephan M. Bauchspiess, a member of PIATCO's Board of
Directors who was also a manager of GlobeGround, a wholly owned subsidiary of
Lufthansa, and the managing director of PAGS, a joint venture between the Cheng family
and GlobeGround, approached Fraport on behalf of PIATCO and invited Fraport to join
the Terminal 3 project as a consultant. Fraport, then known as Flughafen Frankfurt Main

AG ("FAG"), agreed to become involved in the Terminal 3 project in that capacity.

-42-

119. A short time thereafter, Fraport contemplated initial equity and loan infusions into
PIATCO and affiliated companies. To this end, a Philippine KPMG affiliate, Laya
Mananghaya & Co., conducted a financial due diligence review of the proposed
investment. In addition, Quisumbing Torres (sometimes referred to as "QT"), a local
Philippine affiliate of Baker & McKenzie, conducted a legal due diligence and issued to

Fraport a preliminary report on 28 December 1998.

120. This report which, as will be seen later, addressed important provisions of the
Philippine Constitution and other pertinent legislation, indicated, inter alia: (1) the need
to consider carefully any shareholder arrangement other than an equity investment in
PIATCO, in view of the Philippine constitutional requirement that foreign nationals can
own no more than 40% of the capital of a public utility, and the prohibitions of the ADL
that prevent foreign nationals from intervening in the management, operation,
administration or control of a company that is a public utility; (2) the need to obtain
ICC/NEDA approval for the ARCA; and (3) the need to obtain from the President of the
Philippines a certification attesting to the authority of the government signatories to sign
on behalf of the Philippines, because the BOT Law does not contain an express
delegation of authority from the President of the Philippines as required by the

Administrative Code.

121.  Fraport was also advised to seek termination or resolution of the AEDC lawsuit
(raising the issue whether PIATCO had been prequalified properly as a bidder) because
"court cases involving high profile infrastructure projects for policy reasons can be

politically sensitive".

-43-

122. An event worthy of note, in this regard, which occurred prior to Fraport's
Supervisory Board's consideration of the PIATCO investment, is AEDC's dismissal of
its court challenge to the award of the Terminal 3 concession to PIATCO. In fact,
approximately six months earlier, on 14 September 1998, AEDC had withdrawn its
pending challenge to the award of the concession to PIATCO (including its contention
that PIATCO was not properly prequalified) at the express request of then-President
Estrada, who had summoned AEDC to meet with him and his Executive Secretary
Ronaldo Zamora shortly after taking office. The record discloses however that AEDC
withdrew its challenge with continued misgivings, which AEDC expressed to President
Estrada, as to PIATCO's ability to meet minimum equity requirements and to finance the

bid.

123. During the month of March 1999, Fraport's Supervisory Board ultimately
determined that the investment would be made. The discussions leading to the decision
to invest were recorded in the minutes of the Supervisory Board meeting of 12 March
1999. While the views of those involved in making the decision to invest will be
considered in more detail later in this Award, the following excerpts from the meeting of

12 March 1999 are reproduced here:

"Mr. Schmidt reports that the information given [to] the employees’
representatives is contradictory, so that it is difficult for him to make a decision.
Moreover, the facts certified by the auditor are now being portrayed as no longer
relevant. In order to take the decision requested in the submission, he needs
reliable information that he does not p. today. Dr. Bender points out that it
is very difficult for FAG to get projects if the discussion is conducted in this
manner. He reminds of the joint statement according to which this company
needs outside growth. During the latest strategy retreat, it was stated that FAG,
over the next several years, has a strategic revenue gap of about DM 3 billion.
This revenue cannot be achieved through increased activity in the Frankfurt
market - even if the EWP already provides for an increase from DM 2.5 billion

 

«44.

to DM 3.5 billion DM next year - but must be achieved outside. True, in part the
Manila project is considered to be very risky, but FAG was asked to participate
in it by a German company - GlobeGround. Even though the returns of this
project are already taking /sic] into account the country risks, they are still far
above the margin jointly agreed upon as any project's minimum return. He
points out that it will be difficult to present again a similar project having this
kind of returns and this degree of maturity.

[...] Mr. Struck reports that on February 12, 1999 the President of the Philippines
instructed all government agencies to proceed immediately with the construction
of Terminal 3 at the Manila airport as THE international airport of the
Philippines. This decree had not yet been taken into account by the KPMG
report. Now, the risk of the airport being built anywhere else must be assessed
more cautiously. Also, the support of PIATCO as the airport operator is now
certain. As to the question of the Chairman of the Supervisory Board which
would be the consequences of a failure to reach a decision today, Mr. Struck
explains that the equity contributed by PIATCO is nearly exhausted. Without the
professional leadership of FAG, none of the current shareholders is willing to
invest more funds into the project. Furthermore, the banks have asked PIATCO.
to make room for a competent airport operator; only then can the lending be
finalized." (emphasis in original)

124. The Supervisory Board thus decided to invest in PIATCO in part in reliance on
the representation that the Government had removed the risk of another international
airport and supported the Terminal 3 project, and based on the conclusion that the failure
to participate financially at this time would mean the loss of the project as an investment
opportunity. Fraport's Supervisory Board made this decision with the knowledge that
PIATCO had virtually no capital ("the equity contributed by PIATCO is nearly
exhausted") and that PIATCO's shareholders were not willing to support the project
without Fraport's commitment to provide equity and financing. It is in this context that
Fraport entered into four agreements dated 6 July 1999 (the "1999 Share Purchase
Agreements and Share Subscription Agreements"), whereby it acquired a direct and

indirect interest in PIATCO as follows: 25% of PIATCO, 40% of PTI and 40% of PTH;

PTI further acquired 11% of PIATCO.

-45-

125. It was also during this period that Fraport entered into shareholder agreements
which, on their own terms, were to remain confidential (the "secret shareholder
agreements"). While these secret shareholder agreements are reviewed in more detail
later in this Award as part of the Tribunal's analysis and findings on jurisdiction, the
Tribunal notes at this juncture that these agreements consist of critical evidence
establishing that Fraport sought to exercise managerial control over PIATCO and thereby

knowingly orchestrated its investment in flagrant violation of the ADL.

2. The Subsequent 2000 - 2001 Investments
126. In early 2000, PIATCO, with substantial assistance from Fraport, concluded a
competitive bidding process and selected the Takenaka Corporation as the contractor for
the Terminal 3 project. Takenaka, PLATCO, and Takenaka's wholly owned offshore
procurement supplier, Asahikosan Corporation, entered into several contracts that
collectively are referred to as the "EPC Contract". The EPC Contract effectively
transferred to Takenaka PIATCO's design, construction, supply, commissioning, defects

liability and related obligations under the concession arrangements.

127. Construction commenced under the EPC Contract on 15 June 2000 to be
completed in 30 months in late 2002. Regular meetings with the MIAA were held
throughout construction to ensure that the MIAA was fully informed and that
construction-related issues were properly addressed, including security, design,

subterranean structure demolition, and utilities issues.

-46-

128. Payments under the EPC Contract were to be made from proceeds from long-term
finance agreements. In order to facilitate timely commencement of the work, the EPC

contractors and PIATCO agreed to an interim works procedure whereby they could
suspend work if their entitlement to payments exceeded or was likely to exceed US$70

million. In this connection, Fraport entered into several contracts that effectively made
Fraport the guarantor of up to US$127.4 million of PIATCO's payment obligations to
Takenaka and Asahikosan. In addition, Fraport supported as guarantor a term loan

facility made available to PIATCO by a group of German banks. This term loan facility
was eventually increased to US$165 million, US$138.5 million of which were available
to PIATCO for utilizations. This available amount was fully drawn by PIATCO, in large
part to make payments to the general contractor, 52.4% of which payments were
deducted from Fraport's maximum liability under the US$127.4 million guarantee until

Fraport's guarantee was reduced to US$86.7 million.

129. The Tribunal notes that at the time when it began contemplating further
investments, Fraport had anticipated raising equity from PIATCO's other minority
investors. To that end, in September 2000, Fraport had dispatched its financial adviser,
Dr. Georg Braune of Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein ("Dresdner Bank"), to the
Philippines to "win[] the additional support needed from the shareholders". PIATCO's
other shareholders, however, were unable or unwilling to invest additional money into the
Terminal 3 project. Nissho Iwai, for instance, was still reeling from the effects of the
Asian financial crisis, and thus declined to make its equity call. Paircargo, too, was

"unable even to make its basic contribution". Like PIATCO's other shareholders, SB

-47-

Airports also refused to make its required equity contributions, noting that "its funds are

currently tied-up in different projects".

130. In short, Fraport was the only shareholder in PIATCO willing to invest further
funds. Dr. Braune explained that "[a] decision has to be made as soon as possible
whether to implement the project with the full support of all shareholders (if need be, to
be exchanged) or to abandon it". Fraport accordingly decided to increase its
shareholdings pursuant to two agreements dated 5 May 2000 (the "2000 Share Purchase
Agreements"). Under these two agreements, Fraport acquired an additional 5% of

PIATCO, and PTI acquired another 24% of PIATCO.

131. In 2001, Fraport acquired a 40% stake in PAGS, which resulted in Fraport having
an additional 9.04% indirect interest in PIATCO. The Tribunal notes that, as of this

point, Fraport had acquired 61.44% direct and indirect ownership of PIATCO.

132. The Tribunal further notes that, during this time, Fraport needed to secure long-
term financing for PIATCO to ensure sufficient funds were available to complete the
Terminal 3 project and recoup the bridge loans and loan guarantees to PIATCO. For this
purpose, Dresdner Bank formed a lending consortium with Kreditanstalt fur
Wiederaufbau ("KfW"), the Asian Development Bank ("ADB") and the International
Finance Corporation ("IFC"). On 27 July 2001, KfW, ADB and IFC (collectively, the
"Senior Lenders"), among others, accordingly entered into an "Omnibus Agreement"
with PIATCO as Borrower for the purpose of financing the Terminal 3 project. The
Omnibus Agreement included a "Common Terms Agreement", which in turn identified

various "conditions precedent" (referred to, by the Respondent, as the 77 conditions

-48-

precedent) that required resolution before the Senior Lenders would permit a drawdown

of the loans, including:

. Approval of the project, the ARCA, and the three Supplements by
the cabinet-level ICC.

. A shareholding structure acceptable to the Senior Lenders, which
required reducing the Chengs' shareholding to less than fifty

percent.

. A legally binding commitment letter from Duty Free Philippines
agreeing to: (1) close its flagship store, the Fiesta Mall; (2) relocate
all duty-free operations in Metro Manila to Terminal 3; and (3) pay

PIATCO fifteen percent of duty-free revenues at Terminal 3.

. A Fourth Supplement to the ARCA in a form that was acceptable
to the Senior Lenders and that, among other things, expanded the
Government's obligations as regards attendant liabilities, force
majeure, incremental and consequential costs, and other "special

obligations".

. An agreement with the Philippine Economic Zone Authority
("PEZA") concerning PIATCO's obligation to make full use of the
land allocated by the Government for the Terminal 3 project, in

order to take advantage of certain tax advantages.

. A certified copy of "Presidential Full Powers Authority", ratifying
the DOTC's authority to have entered into agreements (such as the
ARCA) on behalf of the Government.

. A legal opinion from the Philippine Department of Justice
approving the ARCA, its Supplements and the Government's

Direct Agreement.

. A legal opinion from the Philippine SEC attesting to the legality of
PIATCO's shareholder arrangements.

-49-

+ Approval of the Government Direct Agreement by Government
departments and agencies, including the Department of Finance
and the Central Bank.

133. Section 2 of the "Common Terms Agreement", entitled "Conditions Precedent",

states as follows:

"2. CONDITIONS PRECEDENT
21 Initial Conditions Precedent

2.1.1 The Borrower may not submit a Notice of Drawdown in respect
of the Initial Advance unless the Intercreditor Agent has notified
the Borrower and each of the Senior Creditors that all of the
Initial Conditions Precedent are in form and substance
satisfactory to, or have been waived by, each of the Senior
Lenders.

2.1.2 The Intercreditor Agent will promptly give the notification in
Clause 2.1.1 above upon receipt from each of the Senior Facility
Agents of written confirmation that all of the Initial Conditions
Precedent have been satisfied or waived (such confirmation to be
given promptly by the Senior Facility Agents upon such
satisfaction or waiver).

2.2 Conditions Precedent to each Advance

The obligation of each of the Senior Lenders to participate in an Advance
under a Senior Facility (including the Initial Advance) is subject to the
further conditions that, on both the date of the Notice of Drawdown and
the Drawdown Date of that Advance:

2.2.1 (in the case of the Initial Advance only) the Senior Facility
Agents are satisfied that the Initial Conditions Precedent remain
satisfied or waived;

2.2.2 the conditions set out in Part B of Schedule 3 (Conditions
Precedent to each Advance) are in form and_ substance
satisfactory to the Senior Facility Agent under that Senior
Facility;

2.2.3 all conditions precedent specifically set out in the relevant Senior

Facility Agreement are in form and substance satisfactory to the
Senior Facility Agent under that Senior Facility.

-50-

134.
the drawdown of long-term financing that Fraport had arranged were reflected in the draft
Fourth Supplement (in addition to the DOTC's issuance of a letter to all airlines
informing them that all international flights would have to go through Terminal 3 after

the in-service date, and the relocation of Duty Free Philippines to Terminal 3). The

2.3 Waiver of Conditions Precedents

2.3.1 The initial Conditions Precedent may be waived only by all of
the Senior Lenders.

2.3.2 Conditions under Clause 2.2 (Conditions Precedent to each
Advance) may be waived by each Senior Facility Agent in
relation to the relevant Senior Facility Agreement.”

Many of the changes that the Senior Lenders were requesting as preconditions for

Fourth Supplement was never executed.

135.
important IPO in Germany and that the Offering Circular, in a section entitled "Risk

Factors", includes the following pertinent information regarding, inter alia, the issue of

Finally, the Tribunal notes that, on 8 June 2001, Fraport proceeded with an

long-term financing:

"Risks in connection with the NAIA International Passenger Terminal IPT 3
project in Manila

Due to legal restrictions, Fraport AG has only limited commercial influence over the
main project for the construction and operation of the new passenger
terminal IPT3 at Ninoy Aquino International Airport ("NAIA ") in Manila,
Philippines; moreover, the time frame, costs and effects of pending changes of
the project's shareholding structure cannot presently be estimated in detail.

The NAIA IPT 3 project is currently one of Fraport's most capital-intensive
projects and includes the financing, construction and operation of a new
passenger terminal at NAIA. The main project company is the Philippine
International Air Terminal Corporation Inc. ("PIATCO"), in which Fraport AG
participates both directly and, through other companies, indirectly. According to
Philippine law, the direct shareholdings of all foreign investors in PIATCO may
not exceed 40 percent in the aggregate. Fraport AG's direct as well as indirect
shareholdings in PIATCO currently amount to 52.4 percent in the aggregate.
Thus, in spite of its substantial capital investment, Fraport AG can only exert

-51-

limited influence over PIATCO's commercial decisions. The project is based on
complex corporate legal and contractual structures. Discussions and negotiations
are currently being held to secure the overall project, including, without
limitation, the shareholding structure. There can be no assurance that these
negotiations will be concluded successfully within the intended timeframe and
without additional costs for Fraport AG or PIATCO. This could have a material
adverse effect on Fraport's business activity, financial condition and results of
operations.

The profitability of the overall project is dependent on obtaining business
partners for the operation of the airport terminal and on resolving certain
customs and tax issues affecting the legal status of PIATCO and PTI

The profitability of the entire terminal project rests upon PIATCO'S cooperation
with competent and commercially viable business partners on appropriate terms.
In terms of profitability, it is particularly important that duty-free outlets be
operated exclusively in the new IPT 3 terminal and that all international flights
be transferred to this terminal. However, there can be no assurance that these
two goals will be achieved. Additionally, the customs and tax status of PIATCO
and the future operating company Philippine Airport Ground Services Terminal,
Inc. ("PTI") [sic], for which individual issues still require resolution, has a
significant impact on the results of operations of the entire project. To the extent
that these prerequisites for the profitability of the project cannot be met, this
could have a material adverse effect on Fraport's business activity, financial
condition and results of operations.

The success of the entire project depends on the granting of permits from
relevant public authorities

The success of the entire project depends upon the granting of a large number of
permits, concessions, consents and similar authorizations from governmental
bodies, including the consent of the Philippine government for PTI to operate the
terminal. A few of these permits are also important for the project's financing.
Some of the required permits and similar authorizations are still outstanding.
There can be no assurance that all required permits will be granted in the
timeframe anticipated by Fraport, if at all. If the required permits and similar
authorizations are not granted or are only granted after considerable delay, the
project could fail or its results of operations could be materially diminished. This
could have a material adverse effect on Fraport AG's business activity, financial
condition and results of operations.

The timely and complete implementation of the terminal project depends
substantially on obtaining financing and sponsor support

PIATCO presently needs considerable bridge financing to secure the entire
Project until long-term financing arrangements have been concluded. Fraport
AG may be required to assume this bridge financing or a significant portion
thereof. Furthermore, the provisions of the concession contract require that
PIATCO maintains an equity ratio of 30 percent (without taking subordinate
shareholder loans into account as either equity or debt). Other government
agencies may impose even more stringent capital ratio requirements, which
would increase further Fraport's financing burden. Declines in the value of the

-52-

Philippine peso against the U.S. dollar, which in turn have led to changes in other
currency exchanges rates, have occurred in the past. These changes have created
additional funding risks for PLATCO shareholders, and it is possible that these
risks could reoccur in the future. Moreover, the banks financing the project are
likely to require the shareholders to contribute additional equity capital to
PIATCO.

PIATCO's long-term external financing has not been secured and is contingent
on its strengthening its shareholding structure. This restructuring must take into
account restrictions on foreign shareholdings in PLATCO and PIATCO's direct
and indirect shareholders and ensure the profitable operation of the terminal
through corresponding agreements. If it is not possible to achieve the
prerequisites for long-term bank financing, Fraport AG will have to continue to
carry or assume disproportionate economic risks from the loans it has granted
and the collateral it has provided, without being able to participate to the same
extent in the project's dividends. Even if long-term bank financing can be
secured, Fraport AG may have to provide disproportionate financial support (so-
called sponsor support) for the equity capital and liabilities of PLATCO. In either
case, Fraport may have to provide substantial additional financing that could
have a material adverse effect on its business activity, financial condition and
results of operations. If long-term financing is not obtained, PLATCO may
become insolvent. This would lead to a loss of the investments made up to that
time and could thus have a material adverse effect on Fraport's business activity,
financial condition and results of operations."

136. That section of the Offering Circular concluded prophetically as follows:

"Political developments in the Philippines could jeopardize the success of the
project

Recently, political relations within the Philippines have become unstable.
Because of the project's significance to Philippine air traffic infrastructure,
political relations are also of considerable significance to the project. Unforeseen
changes in political relations, unrest or similar developments could have a
negative impact on the project's completion. This could have a material adverse
effect on Fraport's business activity, financial condition and results of
operations."

D. Opposition To The Terminal 3 Project

1. The Transfer of International Operations to Terminal 3 and PAL's

Emergence from Bankruptcy

137. In the late 1990s, PAL had suffered major financial losses and entered

rehabilitation following then-President Ramos' liberalization of the Philippines' domestic

-53-

and international airline industry. PAL thus introduced severe cost-cutting measures and
reduced international destinations from 30 to 4 and domestic destinations from 39 to 14.
But PAL's troubles continued and it was forced to cease all operations in September 1998

due to a breakdown in negotiations with its creditors and employees.

138. By this time, PAL's emergence from rehabilitation depended heavily upon
renewed pledges of commitment by the Government, which the Government

acknowledged in rehabilitation proceedings:

"The Government of the Republic of the Philippines has committed, and will
continue to commit itself to the rehabilitation of PAL. In demonstration of such
commitment, the government has undertaken a review of the air rights granted to
certain competing regional airlines to ensure that PAL will no longer be unfairly
disadvantaged and can operate profitably under the Amended Plan as the
National Flag Carrier."

139. | One important feature of PAL's rehabilitation plan was for all operations of PAL
at NAIA, both domestic and international, to be relocated to Terminal 2. On 10 August
1999 - one day after the inaugural opening of Terminal 2 - PAL moved its operations
exclusively to the new Terminal 2. Mr. Lucio Tan said the opening of the new terminal
indicated that "PAL is well on its way to reclaiming its accustomed place among the
leaders of Asian aviation". By late 2000, just three years after being grounded by

bankruptcy and forced into receivership, PAL had gained back many of its lost routes.

140. Within weeks of the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks, however, PAL
announced that it had "suspended all expansion plans" until the impact of the terrorist
attacks became clearer. PAL announced in November 2001 that it expected to suffer a

quarterly loss for the first time in two years. Throughout the next several months, PAL

-54-

continued to report that it expected to lose money for its fiscal year ending in March
2002. In May of 2002, PAL announced that it had unaudited losses of US$30.3 million

dollars.

141. Under the Concession Agreement, PAL's international operations were to be
relocated prior to the Terminal 3 in-service date. Even before September 11, the aviation
press had described the award of the contract for the construction of Terminal 3 to the

PIATCO group as a "setback for PAL". In post-September 11 testimony to the
Philippine Congress, Mr. Perfecto Yasay, the former chairman of the Philippine SEC at
the time when PAL's rehabilitation plan was approved, who by this time had become a
spokesperson for a group of businesses known as MASO ("MIA-NAIA Association of

"3

Service Operators"’), was more direct, stating that the relocation of international

operations to Terminal 3 would "signal the start of PAL's collapse".

2. The MASO Campaign

142. Opposition to the Terminal 3 project was voiced by MASO which, as noted
earlier, comprised a group of businesses, including PAL, that had contracts to provide
airline-related services in Terminals 1 and 2. In essence, the MASO members feared
their companies would be prohibited from operating in Terminal 3 because of the
exclusivity clause of the concession arrangements in favour of PIATCO with respect to
international passenger operations. In particular, PAL did not want to move to Terminal

3 because it had consolidated operations in Terminal 2 and was reportedly not charged

> These businesses include Cargohaus Inc., Dnata-Wings Aviation System Corp., MacroAsia-Eurest
Catering Services Inc., MacroAsia-Ogden Airport Services Corp., the Miascor Group of Companies and
PAL.

 

-55-

fees for use of the terminal. Ostensibly because of these concerns, the Tribunal notes that
MASO launched a vigorous and unrelenting campaign to keep Terminal 3 from entering
into service or to cause significant amendments to the concession arrangements which

PIATCO held.

143. MASO began its campaign in late June 2001, the month before the planned
execution of PIATCO's long-term finance arrangements pursuant to the Omnibus
Agreement referred to earlier in this Award. The Tribunal notes that MASO wrote to the
lenders alleging that PAGS had been inducing MASO's clients to enter into service
agreements with PAGS by promising to deliver certain favours or concessions when
PAGS took over operations at Terminal 3, and attempted to dissuade the lenders from
loaning money to PIATCO. MASO referred in this letter to the allegedly "onerous and
illegal provisions" of the concession agreements and vowed PAL would "go to the
highest court of the land" in order not to leave Terminal 2. After tying the concession
agreements to the disgraced Estrada administration, and without recognizing that the
concession had been awarded to PIATCO under President Ramos and that the Third
Supplement had been executed under President Macapagal-Arroyo, MASO asked

whether it was in the banks' "charter to lend money to companies that take advantage of
poorer countries by exploiting the weaknesses of some of its public servants, who, in the
end, feel no remorse for selling their own country down the drain". MASO emphasized
that the 25-year concession would outlast several Philippine administrations and asked

the lenders: "Do you really want to be worrying about the contract every time there is an

election?"

-56-

144. | MASO also wrote a letter to President Macapagal-Arroyo in the summer of 2001,
asserting "this Concession Agreement was suspiciously, if not surreptitiously, amended
once and supplemented two times by the Erap Administration, through former DOTC
Secretary Vincente Rivera, Jr., to further favour PIATCO and place the government at the
losing end". In this letter to the President, MASO said it was prepared to got to court, but
that "will create a public spectacle that could put the country in a bad light", and pleaded
with her to have the agreements "reviewed by your new anti-graft body and rectify this
onerous contract immediately before this becomes a national embarrassment that the

entire world will see".

145. In addition, MASO began a public relations attack on the Terminal 3 project by
taking out advertisements in four major Manila newspapers. MASO's advertisements
were essentially "open letters" to DOTC Secretary Alvarez, stating on the purported
behalf of the "Filipino people, the local companies operating in the airport, and the

airlines", that the PLATCO concession arrangements should be invalidated.

146. Fraport expressed concern to the highest levels of the Philippine Government
about the efforts on the part of MASO and others to dissuade the lenders from financing
the project. In particular, on 30 November 2001, Fraport wrote to President Macapagal-

Arroyo. Fraport wrote:

"We are deeply concerned that this ambitious Project, which is designed to serve
13 million passengers annually with its state-of-the-art facilities at no cost the
Philippine Government, has become the subject of political disputes which are
paralysing the honest efforts of all parties involved to achieve the conditions
precedent for a first draw-down of the credit facilities in the near future. It makes
us particularly concerned that the validity of the Amended and Restated
Concession Agreement of PIATCO, which forms the legal basis of the whole

-57-

Project, and the legality of which had been confirmed, inter alia, by the
Committee on Transport and Communication, is now being put in question again.

One of the political arguments raised against this Project is the allegation that the
development and prosperity of the Diosdado Macapagal International Airport
("DMIA") and of the whole province of Pampanga would be adversely affected
by this Project. Presently, DMIA serves around 50,000 passengers per year, and
it is evident that the development of DMIA will take its time until the design
capacity of 850,000 passengers per year has been reached. By then, however, it
appears that NAIA IPT 3 will already have reached its design capacity for three
consecutive years so that the restrictions to the further upgrade of the facilities at
DMIA will no longer be applicable.

We do not have any doubts that the Philippine Government will act in
accordance with the constitution and the law, and that the Philippine Government
will always follow the principle of ‘pacta sunt servanda'. Nevertheless, we
would like to ask you, Madam President, for all possible political support for this
Project, which support is urgently needed by the Project and PIATCO to
overcome the present standstill in relation to various aspects of the negotiations
with the Philippine Government.

Not only international investors, but also the credit institutions from all over the
world look closely on this Project and place their confidence on a reliable climate
for foreign investment in the Philippines to foster the prosperity of the people and
for the mutual benefit of all parties concerned.

We therefore pray for your support for this Project and for a reliable environment
for foreign investment in your great country."

147. One of the PIATCO's long-term lenders, Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau, also

expressed its concerns to President Macapagal-Arroyo in a letter dated 3 December 2001:

"Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau (KfW) is willing to support the long term
financing of the Ninoy Aquino International Airport (NAIA) International
Passenger Terminal III project (the "Project"), based on its financial viability.
KfW forms part of a bank consortium of leading international and multilateral
financing institutions comprising Asian Development Bank (ADB), International
Finance Corporation (IFC) as well as Dresdner Bank. As you know, KfW - like
the other development banks involved in the Project - has been financing
successfully projects over decades within the Philippines and in the region, both
through financial co-operation and through commercial export and project
finance.

 

As the Project is providing state-of-the-art facilities to serve 13 million
passengers annually at NAIA, it is a major contribution to the transportation
infrastructure of the Philippines. It fosters mobility throughout the region,
thereby adding valuable economic benefits to the Philippines. With Fraport as

-58-

major sponsor, the Project will benefit from the know-how of one of the world’s
leading airport operators. All of this is especially remarkable in the world's and
South East Asia's current economic situation. The macro-economic benefits of
the Project for your country and the involvement of a highly qualified private
sponsor such as Fraport are a major consideration for KfW to participate.

 
  

 

 

Unfortunately, we have noted with concern that certain issues - which are
outlined in a separate letter of Fraport to you — have arisen that may cause delays
to the completion of the Project. As we all share the same goals, namely the
successful conclusion of the Project, we would highly appreciate your support to
resolve the open issues in a joint effort."

 

148. Not surprisingly, the need for a solution in light of the circumstances obtaining in
the Philippines was referred to by Fraport in its 2001 Annual Report to its shareholders:
"Our BOT (build, operate, transfer) project for a new international terminal at the
Ninoy Aquino International Airport in the Philippine capital of Manila presented
difficulties in 2001. Construction is on target and the opening is scheduled for
November 2002. Because of a changed forecast of future profitability, we made
a write-down. In addition, political difficulties have arisen in connection with

this project, which were not expected when we first undertook the commitment.
We are vigorously working on a solution."

E. The Collapse of Fraport's Investment

1. Early Discussions with Secretary Climaco
149. Late in 2001, in the midst of MASO's public campaign against the Terminal 3
project, President Macapagal-Arroyo appointed Gloria L. Tan Climaco as a presidential
advisor on strategic projects. Pursuant to Executive Order No. 79, President Macapagal-
Arroyo formally elevated Ms. Climaco to full cabinet rank in March 2002. Her

presidential mandate included the express authority to review the Terminal 3 concession.

150. Shortly after her appointment, on 10 December 2001, Secretary Climaco held

meetings with Fraport and PIATCO representatives, namely Mr. Bernd L. Struck

-59-

(Executive Vice-President of Fraport and PIATCO's Chairman of the Board), Mr.
Johannes Endler (Fraport's Chief Financial Officer), Dr. Deitrich F.R. Stiller (Clifford
Chance Punder) and Mr. Hans-Arthur Vogel (PIATCO's Finance Director). The Fraport
attendees reported that this first meeting with Secretary Climaco had been "friendly" and
"cooperative". The minutes of meeting reveal that the parties discussed, inter alia, the

following:

"1. Sec. Climaco opened the discussion by mentioning that a number of
concerns have been raised with respect to the agreements relating to the Ninoy
Aquino International Airport Terminal 3 (NAIA 3), among which is the lack of
NEDA-ICC approval for the Amended and Restated Concession Agreement and
its 3 supplements. Apparently a 4" supplement [is] pending before DOTC Sec.
Pantaleon Alvarez.

3. Fraport, through Mr. Struck, said they acknowledge the necessity for
approval of these documents by the NEDA-ICC. However, the Terminal is 60%
complete with outside structures finished and work continuing on the structures
within the Terminal. The approval for these amendments to the original
Concession Agreement, as well as the 4" supplement, is necessary for their
senior lenders to release the loans needed to finance the Project. [...] Fraport
hopes to comply with its conditions precedent for financial drawdowns soon so
that it can recover its advances to PIATCO. It has been advancing funds because
its local partners have not been able to invest more than US$50 Million to the
Project because of restrictions imposed by local laws. [NB: figures subject to
verification]

4. Sec. Climaco assured Fraport that the government will be fair, and this
was acknowledged by Fraport. It would after all be to the best interests of both
parties to settle pending issues expediently.

5. There are MASO contracts whose validity extend beyond the targeted In-
Service Date in 2002. Mr. Struck gave his views that MASO is being sponsored
by Messrs. Tan and Delgado for their respective business considerations.

10. Mr. Struck mentioned that in their view, an approval by President Gloria
Macapagal-Arroyo and by the NEDA-ICC of the Amended and Restated
Concession Agreement and the supplements thereto would be ideal.

-60-

11. Mr, Struck said that they have discussed the exclusivity provision with
respect to the Clark Terminal with their senior lenders and the latter are
amendable to relinquishing that right. In return, however, they would want to be
given the right to operate the Clark Terminal.”

151. The Fraport executives attending the meeting of 10 December 2001 also reported:

"We have noted that shortly after the meeting with Hon. Gloria Tan-Climaco
there appeared certain articles in the German and Philippine press, according to
which the Concession Agreement would need to be substantially renegotiated.
We do not know from which sources such misleading information originated.
However, the truth is that the issues raised by the Philippine Government might
lead to certain amendments of the Concession Agreement, as the issues raised by
the Senior Lenders which should lead to certain other amendments of the
Concession Agreement as set out in the draft Fourth Supplement to the
Concession Agreement. This appears to us as a normal bargaining situation
where one party agrees to certain changes in consideration of the agreement of
the other party to other changes. We do not have any reasons to believe that the
Philippine Government would not comply with its obligations under the existing
contracts, or bring forward unreasonable demands which might jeopardize the
commercial and legal basis of the concession."

152. On 19 December 2001, in a memorandum entitled "Expression of Concern by
Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide and Kreditanstalt for Wiederaufbau on the NAIA
Terminal 3 Project" addressed to Executive Secretary Romulo, Secretary Climaco

described her first meeting with Fraport as follows:

"The concerns of Fraport were mutually discussed in a meeting held with their
representatives on 10 December 2001. A copy of the minutes of said meeting is
attached for your perusal. We proposed that the open issues concerning Fraport
and the Philippine Government be discussed in further detail in order to resolve
the same at the soonest possible time and Fraport agreed to commence
discussions in January 2002. We gather that Fraport subsequently referred its
concerns and the discussions in this meeting to Philippine International Air
Terminals Co. Inc. (PIATCO), the concessionaire for the NAIA Terminal 3
Project, and in a letter of PIATCO dated 11 December 2001 to the undersigned.
PIATCO expressed its concern that matters relating to the Project be discussed
with PIATCO directly."

-61-

153. During this time, Secretary Climaco also met with PIATCO representatives.
During the first of these meetings on 7 January 2002, Secretary Climaco indicated that,
although the Government planned to honour the concession agreements, it wanted
revisions to be made to address the concerns of MASO; she stated that certain provisions

in the concession agreements were too onerous.

154. At a further meeting held on 21 January 2002 at which Fraport and PAL
representatives were invited, Dr. Georg Braune of Dresdner Bank, Fraport's financial
adviser for the Terminal 3 project, made a presentation. Dr. Braune sought to
demonstrate to Secretary Climaco that the changes to the concession arrangements she
had proposed on 7 January 2002 would be unacceptable to the Senior Lenders. In her

first witness statement to the Tribunal, Secretary Climaco stated:

"Dr. Georg Braune of Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein made a presentation
explaining from the lenders' view the Project's unsatisfactory situation. Dr.
Braune raised concerns about the lack of an agreement with Duty Free
Philippines ("DFP") to move to Terminal 3; PAL's reluctance to move to
Terminal 3; and that the Project's internal rate of return at the PIATCO level was
dropping. Mr. Braune said that he would show me the financial model. At the
same meeting, Mr. Struck also discussed the possibility of having PLATCO
operate Terminal 2 and the Government becoming a PIATCO shareholder."

155. Further discussions were held the next day, on 22 January 2002. PIATCO handed
a document to Secretary Climaco entitled "List of Action Items Involving the Philippine
Government". This list set forth 18 key items, including 13 items identified as the
"conditions precedent in loan documents" and 5 items identified as "other issues". The

Tribunal considers that this list should be reproduced:

-62-

 

Item

Description

 

I. Conditions Precedent in Loan Documents

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 4” Supplement Draft given to DOTC
Other amendments and supplements,
including clarifying letter to the
Concession Agreement

2 |GRP Direct Agreement This Agreement is being negotiated with the DOTC. This
Other related documents and internal Agreement is between GRP, PIATCO, IFC, ADB, KfW,
approvals, resolutions and Dresdner Bank A.G. Through this Agreement, GRP
(board/shareholder) directly confirms to the Senior Lenders certain terms and

conditions in the ARCA (i.e. Enforcement of Security,
Payments by GRP, Termination of Concession Agreement,
Step-in and Step-Out rights, Transfer of Facility).

3 BCDA 1. Land Direct Agreement
Other related documents and internal approvals, resolutions
(board/shareholder)
This Agreement is being negotiated with BCDA. This
Agreement is between BCDA, MIAA, PIATCO and
Deutsche Bank A.G. This Agreement confirms PIATCO's
consent to the mortgage in favor of the Senior Lenders.
2. Written confirmation re: PIATCO's right to pos: and
use the Site.

4 PEZA Direct Agreement Under this Agreement, PEZA undertakes to grant certain
Other related documents and internal consents and to acknowledge the legality and validity of
approvals, resolutions the Security.

(board/shareholder)

5 QAI Direct Agreement Under this Agreement, QAI confirms its obligations to the
Other related documents and internal Senior Lenders. Japan Airport Consultants, the QAI, prior to
approvals, resolutions any negotiation on the Direct Agreement, gets clearance or
(board/shareholder) consent from MIAA

Related issue: QAI Agreement Extension - parties are JAC,
MIAA, PIATCO.

6 _ [Presidential Full Powers Authority Purpose: to ratify that the DOTC Secretary, who entered in to

the ARCA on behalf of GRP was duly authorized.

7 PIATCO is currently negotiating a Heads of Terms

 

 

Duty Free Philippines: 1. Legally
binding commitment letter

2. Other related documents (i.e. board
and d i

 

Agreement (i.e. Commitment Letter) with DFP.

 

 

-63-

 

 

Register of Deeds

Annotation of Land Lease Agreement Registration of all
Security Documents, including but not limited to the
Mortgage

 

1. Payment of DST and other amounts by MIAA on the
Land Lease Agreement so that PIATCO's rights under the
Land Lease Agreement can be annotated on BCDA's land
titles

2. Written confirmation from MIAA re: availability of the
site and other land required for purposes of NAIA T3,
including all necessary easements, rights of way and access
roads

3. Confirmation of MIAA on revised tender design

 

Written confirmation from owner of
additional land required and registration
of the right of PIATCO to sue additional
land

Owners: BCDA, MIAA, DPWH, PAF

 

DOJ

The DOJ legal opinion will opine on the ARCA, including
the and.

 

OGCC (counsel to MIAA and BCDA)

n
This OGCC legal opinion will opine on the Land Lease
Agreement, Land Direct Agreement and the GRP Direct
Agreement

 

SEC

Opinion confirming legality of shareholder arrangements
of PIATCO

 

ther Issues

 

PEZA

1. Denial of duty free importation of construction
materials

2. Certificate stating compliance by PIATCO of all
reportorial requirements imposed by RA 7916 (PEZA
Law) and its implementing rules and regulations
3. PTI (Pags Terminals, Inc.) will apply for registration
with PEZA

 

 

 

15

ICC-NEDA

Approval of all

 

 

16

BSP

1. Approval of all loans and conversions for repayment
(daily or monthly conversions) 2. Comfort letter
confirming that the approval would not be withdrawn due
to breach of the ratio caused by Peso devaluation 3
Registration of BOT Scheme and all versions of the
Concession Agreement

 

17.

PAL

Agreement re transfer to NAIA T3

 

 

18

 

O01 Case

 

Pending

 

 

156.

In response to PIATCO's presentation of this list on 22 January 2002, Secretary

Climaco indicated that she would shortly be sending what she described as a "Fifth

-64-

 

Supplement" to the ARCA reflecting the revisions that she would like to see made to the

concession arrangements.

157. Later on 22 January 2002, PAL joined the meetings because Secretary Climaco
said she wanted to assist PAL and PIATCO in finding an amicable solution to PAL's
refusal to move to Terminal 3. PAL submitted its "shopping list" and presented demands
that would have to be met if it was to operate out of Terminal 3, principally a
simultaneous transfer of its domestic operations as well as its international operations
from Terminal 2 to Terminal 3. PAL also stated that, if it relocated to Terminal 3, it
wanted to incur no greater charges or fees for the first five years than it paid in Terminal

2. PAL also stated that it expected to perform its own ground handling operations.

2. Secretary Climaco's Negotiations with Fraport and PIATCO
158. On 23 January 2002, negotiations began in earnest when Secretary Climaco
submitted the proposed Fifth Supplement to the ARCA which, according to her witness
statement, contained "the necessary changes to the ARCA that would make it to the
fullest extent possible accord with the Bid Documents and, therefore, acceptable for the
Government". One of the main provisions of the draft Fifth Supplement required that
PIATCO surrender the exclusivity of Terminal 3 for international passenger operations at

NAIA.

159. The Tribunal recalls that the "Exclusivity" provision in the ARCA read as

follows:

-65-

"Section 3.02 Exclusivity.

(a) During the Term of this Agreement, GRP undertakes and guarantees that
Concessionaire shall have the exclusive right to operate a commercial
international passenger terminal within the Island of Luzon, with the exception of
those already existing at the time of the execution of this Agreement, specifically,
the airports at the Subic Bay Freeport Special Economic Zone (SBFSEZ), Clark
Special Economic Zone (CSEZ) and Laoag City. With regard to CSEZ, GRP
shall ensure that no new terminal facilities shall be operated therein until such
time as the Development Facility Capacity shall have been consistently reached
or exceeded for three (3) consecutive years during the Concession Period.
‘Development Facility Capacity’ refers to the ten million (10,000,000) passenger
capacity per year of the Development Facility.”

 

160. The draft Fifth Supplement envisaged that this provision would be replaced by the

following:

"Section 3.02 Exclusivity.

(a) On the In-Service Date, GRP shall cause the closure of the Ninoy
Aquino International Airport Passenger Terminals I and II as international
passenger terminals. Neither shall GRP, DOTC or MIAA use or permit the use
of Terminals I and/or II under any arrangement or scheme, for compensation or
otherwise, with any party which would directly or indirectly compete with
Concessionaire in the latter's operation of and the operations in the Terminal and
Terminal Complex, including without limitation the use of Terminals I and/or II
for the handling of international traffic; provided that if Terminals I and/or II are
operated as domestic passenger terminals, the conduct of any activity therein
which under the ordinary course of operating a domestic passenger terminal is
normally undertaken, shall not be considered to be in direct or indirect
ition with C ionaire in its ion of the D Facility."

161. After having reviewed the draft Fifth Supplement, PLATCO wrote to Secretary
Climaco on 4 February 2002 and concluded categorically that "we are not in a position to
agree on a reopening of the ARCA". PIATCO said:

"On behalf of Philippine International Air Terminals Co., Inc. (PIATCO), we

wish to thank you for meeting with us on several occasions to find a workable

and acceptable solution to all the issues raised in connection with the

construction, development and operation of the NAIA IPT3 Project.

We wish to stress that the Amended and Restated Concession Agreement
(ARCA) dated 20 November 1998 between PIATCO as Concessionaire and the

-66-

Government of the Republic of the Philippines (GRP) is a valid and legally
binding document signed in good faith by the representatives of PLATCO and the
Philippine Government, and approved by ICC-NEDA on 25 June 1999. The
ARCA has long been in implementation, with both parties mutually exercising
their rights there under. We respectfully submit that we are not in a position to
agree on a reopening of the ARCA.

Moreover, a reopening of the ARCA will be unacceptable to the Senior Lenders
of PIATCO who have structured the credit facilities and their financial
projections around the current provisions of the ARCA.

A review of the proposed sf Supplement to the ARCA have [sic] led us to
believe that such 5” toa ion and

of the ARCA and if agreed to, will definitely have a negative impact on the
financing arrangement between PIATCO and the Senior Lenders. This may then
lead to the inability of PLATCO to draw from such credit facilities.

 

We were hoping that the proposed 5* Supplement would have contained the
‘win/win' solution for PLATCO and GRP that we were discussing.

Nevertheless, we are prepared to discuss with GRP the issue related to the
development of the Diosdado Macapagal International Airport (formerly Clark
International Airport), which, we understand, is a major political concern to the
present Administration.

As also discussed during our previous meetings and in the spirit of our mutual
cooperation, we would like to request your invaluable assistance in obtaining
certain consents and documents from GRP, which are required by the Senior
Lenders of PIATCO. These consents and documents are listed in Annex 'A'
hereof."

162. The Tribunal notes that the Senior Lenders' conditions precedent for long-term
financing were expressly discussed with Secretary Climaco from the outset. In this
regard, the Tribunal further observes that Fraport's financial adviser for the Terminal 3
project, Dr. Georg Braune of Dresdner Bank, participated in the early discussions with
Secretary Climaco, PIATCO and Fraport. In a letter dated 26 January 2002, Dr. Braune
of Dresdner Bank wrote to Fraport in order to convey his assessment of these discussions,
indicating that there were problems, but they were not insurmountable from the Dresdner

Bank's point of view.

-67-

163. On 27 January 2002, i.e. the day after Fraport received Dresdner Bank's
assessment of the Project's profitability, Dr. Hippe of Fraport circulated an internal
memorandum addressed to Mr. Endler and copied to Mr. Struck, Dr. Baune and Dr.
Stiller. This memorandum summarized, inter alia, the January meetings with Secretary
Climaco, and indicated that Fraport had made it clear to her that "the results achieved to
date are not enough to prevent a massive write-off. Dr. Hippe referred expressly to
Dresdner Bank's assessment and the scenarios discussed therein, and went on to conclude
that "[i]f however the likelihood increases that the above mentioned scenarios come into
play in the further negotiations, a considerable valuation adjustment for Fraport must be
assumed, which would impact the 2001 financial statements totally. This would require a

further injection of capital by Fraport."

164. Against this background, on | February 2002, Fraport wrote to PIATCO as

follows:

"We write to you in our capacity as one of the Project sponsors of Philippine
International Air Terminals Co., Inc. (‘PIATCO’) in relation to the Project.

After the signing of the long-term financing agreements for the Project on 27
July 2001 and after the release from escrow of the said agreements on 26 August
2001, Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide, as Project sponsor, has
continuously exerted its best efforts to cooperate and coordinate with PIATCO to
enable PIATCO to comply with the conditions precedent for draw-down under
its long-term financing agreements. However, supervening events in the political
and economic environment of the Project has made compliance with the
conditions precedent an extremely complicated and volatile process. You are
already no doubt aware of the substantial change in international passenger
traffic projections following the September 11 events and the resulting dismal
projections on the project's economics including without limitation duty-free
spendings. We also note the extremely political situation of the Project that has
required considerable effort and attention from you and your management team.
The collective effect of these factors is to make compliance with the conditions
precedent extremely difficult and to make any draw-down in 2002 highly
uncertain. Without interim financing, which should be in place by February
2002, PIATCO will have an untenable financial condition and defaults in its

-68-

contractual obligations is (sic) highly foreseeable. Another foreseeable
consequence is that PIATCO would not be in a position to enter into contracts
which give rise to new obligations, and this would inevitably lead to a standstill
and most probably to a failure of the Project.

The amount of the required additional interim financing for the period from
February 2002 to December 2002 is estimated at USD 162.5million. This
amount

. Already includes a possible bridge financing in the form of an
accelerated set-off of advance payments made to the EPC
Contractors against progress payment claims of the EPC
Contractors in the amount of USD 45 million which is presently
negotiated with the EPC Contractors,

. but it is in addition to a USD 39 million increase of a Fraport-
guaranteed bank bridge loan facility, which we hope will push
through during the course of the next days.

As we continue to give our full support to the Project, and as we continue to have
interest in the success of the Project, we are however unable to extend any form
of further financial support pending compliance with all the conditions precedent
to draw-down under PIATCO's long-term financing agreements. Our Board of
Directors and our Supervisory Board are, under the present conditions, no longer
in a position to approve any further financial exposure for our company in the
Project in addition to the already tremendous financial support that Fraport has
extended to the Project, and in addition to the support granted to increase the
Fraport guaranteed bank bridge loan facility from USD 126 million by USD 39
million to USD 165 million, subject always to the overall limits set out in the
Additional Agreement dated December 21, 2001. Our company therefore
exhorts and urges the management of PIATCO to exert its best efforts to obtain
interim financing or other form of alternative financing for PLATCO to enable it
to comply with its payments obligations this fiscal year 2002 and to operate on a
more solid financial basis. We urge you to seek the financial support of the other
Project sponsors, whether in the form of direct financing or other form of sponsor
support.

  

We can not emphasize enough the urgency of putting this interim financing in
place as soon as possible. We look forward and hope that the management of
PIATCO will receive firm commitments of financial support from the other
Project sponsors."

165. Meanwhile, Secretary Climaco was also making a number of inquiries regarding
the Project's financial model, including the Project's "soft costs". Referring to meetings
held on 2 and 4 February 2002 in this connection, Secretary Climaco wrote to PLIATCO's

President on 5 February 2002. She said:

-69-

"As you are aware, some members of my project team met with your Messrs.
Hans-Arthur Vogel and Georg D. Braune last Saturday, 02 February 2002, to
discuss certain queries regarding the Financial Model which Mr. Braune
furnished us previously. This is to provide us with a clearer understanding of the
economics of the NAIA Terminal 3 Project which, in turn, will help the
government fairly address the issues PIATCO is now facing. Unfortunately,
most of the questions posed by my project team members were left unanswered,
and instead, we were requested to provide a list of these queries so that the same
may be replied to point by point."

166. On 6 February 2002, Secretary Climaco again wrote to PIATCO in connection
with the latter's letter of 4 February 2002 regarding the draft Fifth Supplement. She
stated that "[i]t is disappointing that at this late stage of our negotiations, Philippine
International Air Terminals Co., Inc. (PIATCO) has taken the stance it has in this letter,
as if it was caught unaware that its concession agreement with the Government requires
the changes which the Government has proposed in the draft 5"" Supplement to address
infirmities which its concession has sustained because of changes initiated by PIATCO
every year since the time it was awarded the concession for the NAIA Terminal 3 Project

in 1997". She went on:

"Changes to the original Concession Agreement of 1997, which itself appears to
be a departure from the draft concession agreement in the Bid Documents, were
proposed yearly by PIATCO - in 1998 through the Amended & Restated
Concession Agreement (ARCA); in 1999 through the First Supplement; in 2000
through the Second Supplement; and in 2001 through the Third Supplement; and
in 2001-2002 ; with a draft Fourth Supplement pending before the Department of
Transportation and Communications (DOTC), all of which are being questioned
on legal, political, economical, and moral grounds by several sectors, and not
without reason. Even grievances on PIATCO's manner of implementing its
concession, at this stage where Terminal 3 is not even in its operational phase,
has [sic] been raised before the Government. Government's draft 5* Supplement
was one of several actions we deem necessary to address these issues, and this
was explained to you and your local and foreign lawyers on different occasions.

Nonetheless, we shall address each of the points raised in your 04 February letter.
First, PIATCO claims that it is ‘not in a position to agree on a reopening of the

ARCA’. Without prejudice to legal objections to the ARCA, we believe
PIATCO is not in a position to say it is not in a position to reopen the ARCA

-70-

since it has constantly done so in 1999, 2000, and 2001. In fact, the first action
which you requested us to address in Annex A to your 04 February letter is your
draft Fourth Supplement now pending before the DOTC, which would have been
the change to the ARCA for 2002, tantamount to the fourth reopening of the
ARCA. Neither does it appear to be your intention to let these annual changes
end with the draft Fourth Supplement, since the first item of said annex likewise
speaks of Other amendments and supplements, including clarifying letters to the
Concession Agreement.’ Thus far, reopening the ARCA appears to be an annual
activity. Your actions appear inconsistent with your statement.

Second, PIATCO claims that 'a reopening of the ARCA will be unacceptable to
the Senior Lenders of PIATCO who have structured the credit facilities and their
financial projections around the current provisions of the ARCA. A review of
the proposed 5* Supplement to the ARCA have /sic/ led us to believe that such
5* Supplement is tantamount to a renegotiation and reopening of the ARCA, and
if agreed to, will definitely have a negative impact on the financing arrangement
between PIATCO and the Senior Lenders. This may then lead to the inability of
PIATCO to draw from such credit facilities.’ Have the Senior Lenders been
apprised of the three supplements and the pending draft fourth supplement which
have reopened the ARCA? We see no difference in the action to be taken by
PIATCO on its proposed draft Fourth Supplement and Government's draft 5”
Supplement. We believe that the effect of the 5" Supplement, on the whole and
in the long run, is to strengthen the concession granted to PIATCO. PIATCO's
Senior Lenders only stand to benefit from a strengthened concession. From the
undersigned's very first meeting with you, and time and again thereafter, we
informed you that the concerns of PIATCO's Senior Lenders will be met
provided all pending issues relating to PIATCO's concession and its
implementation thereof are suitably addressed. The latter should take precedence
over the former.

Third, PIATCO expressed its sentiment 'We were hoping that the proposed 5"
Supplement would have contained the 'win/win' solution for PLATCO and GRP
that we were discussing.’ The 5" Supplement is one of several actions proposed
to be taken to solve the issues surrounding the NAIA Terminal 3 Project. The
undersigned has stressed that given all that has transpired, a ‘win/win situation’
may be difficult to conceive at this point, although we are nonetheless constantly
exerting efforts to arrive at other legal acceptable solutions. The issues
concerning the Diosdado Macapagal International Airport and consents and
documents which you listed in Annex A of your letter, have always been part of
these discussions.

It is only in the spirit of cooperation, fairness, and good faith that all issues

besieging PIATCO and the Project may be resolved. We trust that this spirit
shall govern our relations."

167. | Secretary Climaco and representatives of PIATCO met again on 7 February 2002.

PIATCO then submitted a presentation regarding the Project's financial model in

-71-

response to Secretary Climaco's queries. Secretary Climaco also continued to meet with

Fraport representatives during this time.

168. On 15 February 2002, Fraport met with President Macapagal-Arroyo and raised
with her, as with Secretary Climaco, the possibility that the Chengs' share participation in
PIATCO be diluted and that the Government eventually become a shareholder in

PIATCO.

169. | Two weeks later, on 1 March 2002, Secretary Climaco wrote to Mr. Endler
indicating that "[i]t does not appear feasible to obtain a written consent between the
Government and Fraport on further proceedings", and also indicated that discussions with

PIATCO had been "hampered", in part due to her "project cost" inquiries.

170. =On7 March 2002, Mr. Stiller wrote to Mr. Endler and Mr. Struck. He warned his
colleagues:
"I believe that we have to rethink our strategy. For the known legal concerns a

of Und ding (or a similar d ) will not be
within the next future. We therefore have to focus on

. negotiating with our local partner whatever changes in the shareholding
structure and / or the relevant agreements we want to achieve from them,
. making sure that our local partner co-operates with the Philippine

Government in all respects where such co-operation is required or
advisable to solve the existing problems (one difficulty in this respect
will be that not all members of the government speak with one voice),

. co-ordinating a joint approach in all relevant negotiations with the
government and third parties,

. convincing our local partners [sic] to move where he has to move to
rescue this project (including without limitation to increase its flexibility
in the areas of ground handling and warehousing),

. working out which conditions precedent (milestones) need to be
achieved from our side before any additional financing could be made
available to PIATCO, if any

-72-

. being prepared that pressure from congress (investigations) and MASO
will further increase, and that senior officers of Fraport will be directly
made subject of suspicions and investigations; Mr. Struck seems to be
the first target, but others might follow,

. protecting the interests of Fraport and of all representatives of Fraport in
a hostile environment,
. continuing to talk to the government in a way where their and Fraport's

representatives’ face can be saved to bring this project forward, because
we do not have influence on the government, but the government has
strongest influence on the project.

In addition, we need to monitor the situation with respect to Fraport's obligations as
a public listed corporation (WPHG etc.)."

71. While Secretary Climaco continued to meet with Fraport in March 2002,
President Macapagal-Arroyo held a news conference. The President addressed the
restrictions on the development of Clark Airport, which by then had been re-named
Diosdado Macapagal International Airport ("DMIA") in honour of President Macapagal-
Arroyo's father. During the press conference, President Macapagal-Arroyo announced
that she had signed a memorandum order authorizing Secretary Climaco to renegotiate
the contract with PIATCO so that her government would be able to "freely undertake
efforts to fully develop the DMIA as an international airport". President Macapagal-

Arroyo quoted from the memorandum:

"As Presidential Advisor for Strategic Projects, you are hereby instructed to
pursue the negotiations, among others, to revise the restrictions on the
development of the Diosdado Macapagal International Airport under the
provisions of the amended and restated concession agreement between the
Philippine government and the Philippine International Air Terminals Co. Inc. in
order that the government may freely undertake efforts to fully develop the
DMIA as an international airport."

172. Approximately one month later, on 11 April 2002, Secretary Climaco provided
President Macapagal-Arroyo with a written "update" regarding the Terminal 3 project.

She stressed that the "issues pending with the Government may be divided into legal,

-73-

commercial, and legal-commercial issues. It was made clear to [Fraport representatives]
that the legal issues are non-negotiable, while the commercial and legal-commercial

issues are negotiable to the extent permitted by law."

173. Since, in the opinion of Fraport, little progress was being made, Fraport decided
to change the leader of its Manila team and dispatched the Vice Chairman of its
Executive Board to make a personal assessment of the situation. The new team leader
was Peter Henkel, Senior Vice-President of Fraport's Special Projects Division. A
meeting between Mr. Henkel and Executive Board Vice Chairman Manfred Scholch,

among others, with Secretary Climaco was scheduled for 17 April 2002.

174. This meeting between Fraport and Secretary Climaco was followed by an internal
memorandum within Fraport, signed inter alia by Mr. Henkel. Under the heading

"Options for action", the memorandum concluded:

"The long-term financing depends on the guaranteed profitability. This is not
assured either on the basis of the CA 1997 or the basis of the ARCA 1998
without adding the 4th Supplement. However, the Government can successfully
stymie the latter. What is more, it insists on the Sth Supplement, which
jeopardizes the profitability of the project even more.

Result: The project is doomed without a willingness to cooperate on the part of
the Government. According to the way things are, cooperation with the
Government is only possible if we succeed in convincing the Cheng family to
give up their shares in PIATCO, if need be against payment of a reasonable
amount, or to prove their criminal behavior and take court action against them. It
remains to be seen whether we could pull it off. It is difficult to conceive that we
can without the Government's help."

175. On 14 June 2002, evidencing the on-going discussions, Secretary Climaco
provided Fraport with another list containing a series of "Commercial Items", 27 "Legal

Matters" and 14 "Other Matters". A few days later, as part of a further update dated 19

-74-

June 2002 to President Macapagal-Arroyo, Secretary Climaco characterized this list as a
"Term Sheet" of "pertinent renegotiating points". As part of this same update, Secretary

Climaco briefed President Macapagal-Arroyo as follows:

"5, Fraport's immediate concern involves the coming shareholder's meeting
on 26 June 2002. It is the first time for Fraport to have a large
shareholder's meeting since it was only made a public company in 2001.
They anticipate several contentious issues to be raised involving the
investment in Terminal 3, and hence have requested for the following:

. A letter from the undersigned which could be read in their
shareholder's meeting, assuring their shareholders that the
Government will continue to assist Fraport in its investment in
the Philippines. A copy of the letter of the undersigned dated 19
June 2002 is attached as Annex 2.

. A call from Executive Secretary Alberto G. Romulo to Fraport's
Chairman Roland Koch informing him that anew DOTC
Secretary has been appointed, but despite said appointment, all
matters concerning NAIA Terminal 3 should be referred to the
undersigned.

6. On international political matters, Fraport's representatives informed us
that should Fraport be constrained to write off its investment in PLATCO,
information on the scandal will be made worldwide to cause detrimental
political repercussions on the current administration. Fraport also
wanted to convey to Her Excellency their desire to deal on all matters
regarding the Project with the undersigned.

7. Ondomestic political matters, the undersigned is of the opinion that to
allow her reports to be made public or subject to congressional scrutiny
at this point in time would be inappropriate, premature and would
impede the ongoing negotiations with Fraport, which is to continue
beginning 01 July 2002. It is therefore requested that all her reports on
this Project be classified as Top Secret in accordance with memorandum
Circular No. 78, series of 1964, as amended by Memorandum Circular
No. 196, series of 1964, or such classification as Her Excellency may
deem appropriate.

8 The undersigned has made it very clear to Fraport that the final deadline
for the conclusion of the negotiations should be on 10 July 2002 to give
the President and Congress time to review and approve the final revised
agreement."

-75-

176. Concurrently, Fraport in its Interim Report to Shareholders as at 30 June 2002,

wrote:

"Our current discussions with the Philippine government are aimed at
establishing negotiating positions for PIATCO. A major aspect continues to be
the concession agreement made between PIATCO and a previous government.
Our most important objective is to limit the changes to this agreement sought by
the Philippine government in order to obtain a customary market return from the
BOT project. Achievement of this objective is a pre-condition for our continued
involvement in Manila. More recently, we have also discussed with the
government alternatives to the present project structure. For us, one alternative is
a transfer of the project from PIATCO back to the Philippine state. In this case,
Fraport would aim to recover the amounts invested and ensure a professional
operation of the terminal as part of a management agreement to be made between
a future operator and the government. This alternative also requires the
Philippine government to buy the terminal for a reasonable price which is
acceptable to PIATCO and its shareholders and that the conditions set out in the
management agreement are in line with international standards.

Following our decision to provide no further financing, PIATCO has
substantially used up its available liquid funds. PIATCO is currently trying to
obtain additional financing. However, Fraport does not consider the current state
of the negotiations far enough advanced to provide further liquid funds.

Due to the financial constraints at PIATCO, in contrast to the original plan there
are not enough personnel hired to operate the terminal, which makes adequate
training by the end of November 2002 questionable. The start of operations will
thus probably also be delayed for this reason. Despite these difficulties,
construction of the terminal will be substantially completed in August 2002.

Despite the slow progress of discussions over the past few months, Fraport
continues to assume that it will be possible to continue the Manila project
successfully. This requires that current discussions will be successful.
Otherwise, risks could arise which could lead to considerable negative effects on
the results for 2002."

   

177. The Tribunal notes that Fraport's auditors, KPMG, subsequently issued Fraport's
financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2001. KPMG's Audit Report
included Fraport's Management Report which set forth an account of the negotiations

with the Government in 2002. Fraport disclosed to its shareholders that a €60 million

-76-

write-down had been made. Fraport's explanation for this write-down is detailed as

follows:

"[Bly the date of the 2001 balance sheet, the financial exposure to this
project - through equity interests, loans and other receivables amount to
€ 234.7 million, plus the securities provided, namely: € 26.3 million to
the general contractor of the construction work, € 118.3 million to banks
in connection with bridge loans and to the group of banks which is to
provide the long-term financing, as well as a € 22.7 million contribution
to the increase of PIATCO's equity by US$ 70 million - was much
greater than the influence in terms of corporate law. After the 2001
balance sheet date, additional securities amounting to € 38.7 million were
provided.

This disproportionate financing exposure of Fraport AG to the Manila
project was caused by the necessity to obtain interim financing for the
terminal construction and by the inability of the fellow shareholders to
contribute to this interim financing. True, on July 27, 2001, the long-
term financing was concluded with an international group of banks led
by the Asian Development Bank, the Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau,
and the International Finance Corporation, but in order for this financing
to be disbursed, various conditions must have been fulfilled, which up to
now is not the case, and their fulfillment depends to a large extent on
decisions and declarations of intent of the Philippine government and its
agencies. For this reason, mainly in the past few weeks, the Executive
Board and other executives of Fraport AG had numerous talks with
members of the government and their advisors, with government
agencies and business partners, in order to create the conditions for
disbursement of the loans. By the end of our audit, Fraport AG had not
yet succeeded in this, but based on the progress of these talks up to now,
especially after involvement of a special representative of the Philippine
President, the Executive Board is confident that they will continue the
Manila project, provided the BOT project achieves an acceptable
profitability and the Fraport AG Supervisory Board releases the
additional funds to cover PIATCO's short-term financing need
amounting to US$ 80 million (roughly € 90.7 million).

From today's perspective, it seems inevitable that the project will be
much less profitable that initially planned, which is reflected in the
Executive Board's risk assessment of the Manila project. Even though a
concession agreement was entered into with the previous Philippine
government, the present government attempts to re-negotiate — for
instance, the amount of the concession fees - so that by now there is the
5* amendment of the concession agreement. The Manila project is
accompanied by allegations of corruption against members of the
government, employees of government agencies, and Fraport AG's
Philippine business partners, and by investigations of PIATCO because

-77-

of the exclusive concession for ground transportation services. Final
decisions on factors crucial for the project's profitability, such as, for
instance, the move of Philippine airline PAL into the new terminal are
still outstanding. The present estimate of the duty free revenue is far
below the assumptions made when Fraport AG joined the project. In
addition, after a January 2002 expert opinion of the Halcrow Group Ltd.,
London, the forecast of the traffic volume had to be reduced, reflecting
among other things, the business climate after the September 11 terrorist
attacks and the weakness of economic activity in East Asia.

Up to now, the delays in disbursing the loans of the long-term financing
have created severe liquidity squeezes for PIATCO. The construction
company threatened to stop the work if PIATCO does not meet its
payment obligations according to contract. Since the project partners are
not willing or able to make a greater contribution to the interim
financing, up to now all these loans were made available by Fraport AG.
Until disbursement of the long-term loans, PIATCO will need additional
loans to prevent its insolvency, which would mean for Fraport AG the
loss of all the investments it has made up to now.

In preparing the financial statements for the year ended December 31,
2001, the Executive Board had to assess the total exposure to Manila and
the related risks. Against the background of the good progress of
construction and the - in the Board's view - constructive talks with the
Philippine government and its advisors, on the one hand, and the
numerous unresolved problems, on the other hand, the financial
investments related to the Manila project were written down by nearly €
60 million, so that total investments of € 234.7 million were written
down by a total of € 67.7 million including the previous year's
adjustments, i.e. by 28.8 % of the gross value of the assets.”

3. Secretary Climaco's "Null and Void" Assessment

178. In early September 2002, during the on-going discussions regarding a potential
takeover plan with Fraport, President Macapagal-Arroyo directed a seven-member inter-
agency Cabinet Review Committee to look into the various issues raised by the Terminal
3 project. In this connection, Secretary Climaco submitted to the Cabinet Review
Committee, on 10 September 2002, a "Chronology & Assessment of the NAIA Terminal
3 Project" outlined by reference to (i) background, (ii) commercial assessment, (iii) legal

assessment, and (iv) proposed directions. In terms of "commercial assessment",

-78-

Secretary Climaco stated that the "Project will not survive under original bid terms". In
terms of legal assessment, Secretary Climaco concluded inter alia: "[mJust get court to

declare contract is void". The directions suggested by Secretary Climaco were:

"A. DOJ/OGCC Opinion saying award & contracts are void
B. Declaration of nullity
Cc Negotiate on mutual termination/amicable settlement
D. Possible options to Government"

179. The Tribunal notes that, while Secretary Climaco had concluded that court
nullification of the concession agreements was one of the Government's options, the
Cabinet Review Committee was still recommending negotiations with PIATCO in line
with Fraport's takeover proposal. Indeed, on 25 September 2002, the Cabinet Review

Committee recommended the following to the President:

"1. Her Excellency directed on 09 September 2002 a seven-member inter-
agency Cabinet Review Committee (hereinafter, "Review Committee")
to look into various issues that have been raised about the Ninoy Aquino
International Airport (NAIA) International Passenger Terminal (IPT) 3
build-operate-transfer (BOT) project, and to assess the Fraport offer
conveyed by Roland Koch. The Review Committee was tasked to
recommend alternative courses of action to the President within two
weeks.

2. The Review Committee is composed of the National Economic and
Development Authority (NEDA) as chairman, and the following
agencies as members: Department of Justice (DOJ), Department of
Transportation and Communications (DOTC), Department of Trade and
Industry (DTI), Department of Finance (DOF), Department of Tourism
(DOT) and Office of the Presidential Adviser for Strategic Projects
(OPASP).

25. The Review Committee took into consideration the concern that, as a
matter of public interest, the timely completion of Terminal 3 must be
pursued.

-79-

26. The Review Committee agreed to recommend to Her Excellency the
following courses of action:

a. The President to designate the negotiating team composed of
DOTC as lead negotiator, the DOJ, and MIAA. The NEDA and
other agencies may be called upon for assistance.

The negotiating team shall initiate informal consultations with
PIATCO pending the clarification on the legal position of the
government. In relation to this, the DOJ pointed out the
"separability principle" in dealing with any legal infirmity in the
contract. An interpretation that could be adopted is that if any of
the provisions in the contract were found void, it would not
necessarily nullify the contract. It could be instead be a point for
renegotiation.

b. The legal agencies of the government, composed of DOJ (as
head), OGCC, and, OSG to be instructed by Her Excellency to
formulate the legal position of the Executive particularly in
response to the contract nullification lawsuit filed before the
Supreme Court. Meanwhile, all officers of the executive
department shall be enjoined to refrain from making any public
pronouncements through any media regarding sub judice matters
pertaining to the suit.

c Once the legal position of the Executive has been formulated,

DOTC, MIAA, and DOJ may start the formal negotiations with
PIATCO."

180. On 30 September 2002, five days after the Cabinet Review Committee's
recommendation for "formal negotiations with PIATCO", Secretary Climaco wrote to
President Macapagal-Arroyo recommending “that the Government proceed with
obtaining a declaration of nullity" of the concession agreement. With her letter of 30
September 2002, Secretary Climaco attached her Memorandum to the Senate Committee
on Accountability of Public Officers and Investigations ("Blue Ribbon Committee") on
the NAIA International Passenger Terminal 3 project. Secretary Climaco had determined
that the concession arrangements were null and void and could accordingly not be re-

negotiated. She stated and recommended very clearly:

-80-

"Being null and void, these agreements cannot be re-negotiated. Novations are
void if the original obligations are void. Further, void contracts cannot be
ratified, nor does the action or defense for the declaration of their inexistence
prescribe. Neither can the Government be held in estoppel for the mistakes or
errors on the part of its officials or agents, nor the erroneous application and
enforcement of the law by public officers.

It is therefore recommended that the Government proceed with obtaining a
declaration of nullity of the above agreements. Parallel thereto, the Government
must determine whether PIATCO was a builder in bad faith or a builder in good
faith in order to ascertain whether the structures constructed on Government land
should be acquired. Should the Government determine that PIATCO is a builder
in good faith, and should the Government deem it feasible to acquire the
structures built on its property, then it may consider the offer of Fraport AG in its
letter dated 06 August 2002."

181. On 2 October 2002, Secretary Climaco also transmitted a copy of her
Memorandum to Secretary Dante B. Canlas, then Director General of the National

Economic Development Authority. In her transmittal letter, she wrote:

"Pursuant to the undersigned's membership in the committee created by Her
Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo to review the NAIA Terminal 3
Project and the proposal of Fraport AG in its letter dated 06 August 2002, the
undersigned is transmitting herewith, to yourself and to all the members of said
committee and others concerned, a copy of the undersigned's memorandum to
the Senate Committee on Accountability of Public Officers and Investigations
(Blue Ribbon Committee) dated 26 September 2002.

Based on a review of the Project, the following conclusions may be made:

First, the award of the Project to Philippine International Air Terminals Co., Inc.
(PIATCO) [then a joint venture composed of People's Air Cargo & Warehousing
Co., Inc. (Paircargo), Philippine Air [sic] & Ground Services, Inc. (PAGS), and
Security Banking Corporation] was void, since the joint venture did not possess
the financial prequalification requirements at the time the bidding was conducted.
The provisions of the General Banking Act which restricted the equity
investment of Security Bank in a non-allied undertaking to not more than 15% of
Security Bank's net worth could not be overlooked nor waived by the
Prequalification Bids & Awards Committee (PBAC).

The BOT Law was violated when the unsolicited proponent was required to
match the bid on an entity not prequalified. Further, the unsolicited proponent
was not provided with an opportunity to match the bid due to a mis-application
by the PBAC of the 1994 Implementing Rules & Regulations (IRR) of the BOT
Law.

-81-

Second, the 1997 Concession Agreement executed between the Department of
Transportation and Communications (DOTC)/Manila International Airport
Authority (M1AA) and PIATCO on 12 July 1997 was null and void.

While the sanctity of contracts is enshrined in the Civil Code, it is also a basic
rule of law that contracts whose cause, object or purpose is contrary to public
policy are inexistent and void from the beginning. These contracts cannot be
novated nor ratified. Neither can the defense of their illegality be waived.

The Supreme Court has held that contracts which require public bidding affect
public interest. To alter these contracts without another public bidding runs
counter to public policy, and makes the contract null and void. The Department
of Justice (DOJ) considers this good law as it continues to cite said rulings in the
opinions which it renders.

Since the 1997 Concession Agreement was altered in material respects, and was
not subject to another public bidding, the 1997 Concession Agreement was null
and void.

Third, the 1998 Amended and Restated Concession Agreement (ARCA)
executed between DOTC/MIAA and PIATCO on 26 November 1998 is likewise
void for being contrary to public policy, applying the Supreme Court rulings
which even the DOJ cites.

In addition, the ARCA, constitutes a novation of the 1997 Concession
Agreement, and a novation is void if the original obligation is void.

Fourth, the 1999 First Supplement, 2000 Second Supplement, and 2001 Third
Supplement are likewise invalid and void. They are invalid pursuant to the 1999
IRR of the BOT Law for not having been approved by the NEDA-ICC prior to
execution and implementation. They are likewise void, applying the principles
laid down by the Supreme Court.

Fifth, the Government is not precluded from having the above contracts declared
null and void. It is hornbook law that the principle of estoppel does not operate
against the Government for the acts of its agents. Nor is it estopped by mistake
or error on the part of its officials or agents. The erroneous application and
enforcement of the law by public officers does not prevent a subsequent correct
application of the statute.

Sixth, the Constitutional provision on non-impairment of contracts does not apply
in this instance since, pursuant to the rulings of the Supreme Court, the provision
applies only to contracts legally-executed. Since the above contracts did not
comply with the requisite public bidding, then legally-speaking, there is no
contract abrogated because the contract was void and inexistent.

The undersigned hopes that the attached Memorandum, which discusses each of

the above points in great depth, will be of assistance to her fellow Cabinet
members in their review of the Project.

-82-

Moving forward, after the determination of the legal status of the Project, the
undersigned suggests that a declaration of nullity for the above contracts be
obtained. Thereafter, our committee should determine whether PIATCO was a
builder in good faith or a builder in bad faith. Parallel thereto, we must
determine whether it is feasible for the Government to acquire the structure built
on its property. Should this be the case, then the Fraport proposal contained in its
letter of 06 August 2002 may be considered.

The undersigned looks forward to working with the committee at the earliest time
possible."

182. The Tribunal notes that notwithstanding Secretary Climaco's conclusions
regarding the illegality of the concession arrangements, it was reported at that time in the
media that President Macapagal-Arroyo had ordered the "soft opening" of Terminal 3 for
15 December 2002. On 10 October 2002, Secretary Climaco wrote to Executive
Secretary Romulo and Chief Presidential Legal Counsel Cruz to express her
disagreement in this regard and concluding that "the statement has caused confusion and

directly and indirectly pre-empted and prejudiced Government's position". She wrote:

"1. Soft Opening - The statement of Press Secretary Ignacio R. Bunye that
Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo has ordered the soft
opening of Terminal 3 on December 15, 2002, which was printed in daily
newspapers starting 03 October 2002, has resulted in effects deleterious
to the Government, which could have been prevented had that statement
not been made.

First, the term 'soft opening’ is being equated with "In-Service Date’
which, as will be explained below, is being used by the Philippine
International Air Terminals Co., Inc. (PIATCO) to compel Government
to comply with stipulations favorable to PIATCO and to compel the
airlines to transfer to Terminal 3 despite it being untested for operational
readiness. With the In-Service Date declared in their favor, PLATCO
effectively holds a Sword of Damocles over Government as it has been
preparing to call Government in default, given the excessive Liquidated
Damages Government has to pay after In-Service Date.

Second, the Executive Branch is widely perceived to have foregone
studying the legality of the contracts involving Terminal 3 since the
signal from the Palace is to open the terminal even before any finding is
made, and to prematurely re-negotiate the onerous provisions of the

-83-

contracts. This has been reinforced by the statements of NEDA Director-
General Dante B. Canlas, as printed in the October 8, 2002 issue of
Business World, page 11 (copy attached), despite his self same
Memorandum to the President dated 25 September 2002 enjoining all
members of the Cabinet, the Presidential Review Committee, and their
subordinates from issuing statement on the matter because this
controversy is subjudice.

Third, the Senate Committee on Accountability of Public Officers and
Investigations (Blue Ribbon Committee) is due to render its report on the
legality of the contracts of the Project, and this apparent eagerness to
open Terminal 3 from the Executive Branch does not further
Government's interest, given the lengthy discussions on the onerous and
apparent illegal provisions of the Project agreements in the Blue Ribbon
Committee hearing, which Sec. Canlas is privy to.

Fourth, this has prompted the House of Representatives Committee on
Transportation to conduct a hearing on 09 October 2002, effectively
criticizing the Manila International Airport Authority (MIAA), Air
Transportation Office (ATO), and Philippine Economic Zone Authority
(PEZA) for not cooperating with PIATCO. We have been informed that
members of the House Committee were reprimanding MIAA and ATO
for not acceding to PIATCO's requests which would lead to the opening
of Terminal 3 on December 16, 2002. We were also informed that
PEZA was criticized for not fully granting PIATCO the tax exemptions it
claims are due to it.

In sum, the statement has caused confusion and directly and indirectly
pre-empted and prejudiced Government's position. It is therefore
strongly recommended that this statement, if not be retracted, be clarified
to refer to a blessing, a site visit, or similar activity NOT EQUIVALENT
TO IN-SERVICE DATE.

The undersigned is in favor of opening Terminal 3, but only:

. Under legal terms acceptable to and favorable to the
Government, unlike the terms of the Project agreements as they
stand;

. Once Terminal 3 is certified by independent appraisers to be
structurally-sound and operational under international standards;

. When the requirements of the airlines and MIAA employees are
addressed; and

. If its operations do not pose a security risk, given international
standards."

-84-

4. Secretary Climaco's Appearance before the Senate "Blue Ribbon

Committee"
183. As noted earlier, in the period during which discussions involving Fraport,
PIATCO and Secretary Climaco were being held, a Philippine Senate Blue Ribbon
Committee was conducting hearings as part of an investigation instituted in response to a
resolution filed in late 2001 by three senators calling for the investigation of the alleged
"grossly anomalous agreement entered into by the Republic of the Philippines and
PIATCO involving the construction, operation and maintenance of the NAIA T3
[Terminal 3 project]"._ The resolution was referred to three Senate Committees, which

jointly conducted an investigation. The Blue Ribbon Committee heard witnesses.

184. In August and September 2002, Secretary Climaco appeared before the Senate
Blue Ribbon Committee and testified that the concession contracts should be declared
null and void. This appears to be the first time that Secretary Climaco took the position
that the contracts which she had been busy re-negotiating were null and void. More
particularly, Secretary Climaco testified that, after reviewing the Terminal 3 concession
arrangements, she had presented to President Macapagal-Arroyo two options: (1) to
declare the agreements null and void; or (2) to renegotiate the contract. She informed the
Committee that her effort to renegotiate the contract had failed. Secretary Climaco also
addressed what she alleged had been corruption by the Cheng family in connection with
the Terminal 3 project, stating unequivocally that she had information that PIATCO's

controlling shareholder took "kickbacks" and received "under-the-table" payments.

-85-

185. At the end of the hearing, on 26 September 2002, at the request of the Chairman
of the Committee, Secretary Climaco provided an extensive Memorandum ("Climaco
Memorandum") in which she advocated that all five of the project contracts, and the

award of the concession to PIATCO, be declared null and void.

186. More particularly, in her Memorandum, Secretary Climaco expressly stated that
there would be severe negative financial consequences for both the Government and PAL
if the Concession Agreement was performed and its invalidation and nullification not
obtained. According to the Climaco Memorandum, "[t]he financial and operational
issues of NAIA Terminals 1, 2 and 3 and the proposed international cargo terminal must

be rationalized". The Climaco Memorandum explained as follows:

"It appears that when the Project was accepted as an unsolicited proposal, a study
on the financial impact thereof to MIAA's capacity to absorb the financial impact
of the requirements for Terminals 1 and 2 was not made. Neither was the impact
of the proposed construction of an international cargo terminal on the site
currently occupied by Nayong Pilipino conducted."

187. The Climaco Memorandum referred to PAL's expressed desire to continue to

operate its domestic and international operations on a consolidated basis and concluded

as follows:

"In any event, if PAL's requests will be accommodated, this will result in:

1. The under-utilization and loss of revenues for Terminal 2, should PAL's
integrated operations be moved to Terminal 3. This will result in
MIAA's inability to pay the JICA loan for Terminal 2.

In the alternative, should PAL's integrated operations be retained in
Terminal 2, then the Government may be called in default for not
transferring all international passenger terminal operations to Terminal 3
upon In-Service Date.

-86-

2. If PAL's integrated operations will be transferred to Terminal 3,
PIATCO will have to construct and /sic] extension of Terminal 3 to be
used for domestic flights, which shall cost around US$15M."

188. The Climaco Memorandum further emphasized that, whether in Terminal 2 or
Terminal 3, PAL would want "to be permitted to enjoy privileges/exemptions which it is
now enjoying in Terminal 2". It also expressly stated that PAL's relocation to Terminal 3
would have negative financial consequences for the Government as well. According to
the Climaco Memorandum, Terminal 2 was "now operating at a loss because of low
traffic volume, low domestic passenger terminal fee, and non-payment of fees by some
end users", giving the Government, as creditor to the Japanese lenders of Terminal 2,
concern about the additional negative revenue consequence of a PAL move to Terminal

3. The Climaco Memorandum explained:

“If Philippine Airlines, which currently uses Terminal 2 as it hub for its domestic
and international operations, transfers to Terminal 3 on In-Service Date, the loss
of revenue will greatly impact upon the ability of MIAA to service its loan for
Terminal 2 to JICA. It should be noted that payments for the principal to JICA
are due beginning 2003, and this amounts to approximately P700M."

189. Ultimately, after seven separate hearings and testimony by witnesses representing,
inter alia, PIATCO and Fraport, the Blue Ribbon Committee issued its Report on 10
December 2002. The report concluded that: (1) the PIATCO contracts are intrinsically
void because the required six signatures of the ICC members were not obtained; (2) the
contracts were also void because there were substantial deviations from the Bid
Documents; (3) the contracts contained onerous and disadvantageous provisions contrary
to public policy and to the BOT Law; (4) the payment to Alfonso Liongson for buying

favours from the Government was condemned; (5) the contract provides for a direct

-87-

government guarantee which is prohibited by the BOT Law; and (6) the condition of the
terminal facility raised serious security concerns. The Committee recommended the
investigation and prosecution of those responsible for the violation of laws and

irregularities at issue.

5. President Macapagal-Arroyo's Declaration That Her Government

Would Not Honour the Terminal 3 Contracts
190. A few days prior to the Senate Blue Ribbon Committee's Report, President
Macapagal-Arroyo delivered a public condemnation of the Terminal 3 project and
PIATCO. These remarks were made on 29 November 2002 before a group of Filipino
exporters in the Ceremonial Hall at Malacanang Palace during the 16 Annual "Golden
Shell Awards". In her speech, the President raised the "PIATCO issue" as a disreputable
example of the hold of "vested interest" on the Philippine State. After recognizing the
importance of PIATCO's concession to build a world-class airport for international
travelers, the President stated that "the Solicitor General and the Justice Department have
determined that all five agreements covering the NAIA Terminal 3, most of which were

contracted in the previous administration, are null and void".

191. | The President then said that the contracts would henceforth not be honoured and
declared: "I cannot honour contracts which the Executive Branch's legal offices have
concluded are null and void." The Tribunal notes that these remarks were delivered ten
days before oral argument in the Supreme Court in the cases brought by petitioners

identified with PAL to prevent the opening of Terminal 3.

192. The President declared that there had been illegality during the procurement and
subsequent negotiations of the Concession Agreement, the ARCA, and its supplements.
She stated that the PIATCO concession was "emerging as a test-case” of her
administration's "commitment to fight corruption" and "to free the state from the hold of
any vested interest". She added that she was ordering "the Department of Justice and the
PAGC (Presidential Anti-Graft Commission) to investigate any anomalies and prosecute
all those found culpable in connection with the NAIA contract". The following day, on
30 November 2002, the President reiterated her declaration in another speech and said
that the "Solicitor General has submitted to the Supreme Court the government position

that all five agreements covering NAIA 3 are null and void".

193. On 28 November 2002, i.e. the day before President Macapagal-Arroyo publicly
declared that the Terminal 3 concession agreements would not be honoured, the
Department of Justice had concluded in a memorandum addressed to the Executive
Secretary that the concession agreements were null and void, mainly because they
contained material deviations from the Bid Documents and the draft Concession

Agreement.

194. The Tribunal notes that this memorandum is strikingly different from the
Department of Justice's prior written advice to the President on 21 May 2002 that had
identified several provisions of the ARCA which "may be possible subjects of
renegotiation" but neither stated that the ARCA was null and void nor questioned the

validity of the original Concession Agreement.

-89-

195. | The conclusion in this memorandum is also diametrically different from "Contract
Review No. 434" dated 30 September 2002, in which the Office of the Government's
Corporate Counsel concluded that the concession arrangements were valid, and added
that "[rjecords attest to the fact that the negotiation, drafting, execution and signing of the
Concession Agreement were strictly in accordance with Republic Act No. 6957, as
amended by Republic Act No. 7718 [(the BOT Law)] and its Implementing Rules and
Regulations". Accordingly, the Office of the Government's Corporate Counsel
recommended that "[s]ubject to the regulatory powers of the government through MIAA,
the parties continue with the implementation of the contract but in the process the

onerous provisions thereof, if any, be negotiated/re-negotiated".

196. The Tribunal also notes that as part of President Macapagal-Arroyo's speech on
30 November 2002, she expressly addressed the shareholders involved in the Terminal 3
project: "Let me, however, assure the shareholders: Your legitimate claims will be
honored to the last peso and the Terminal will open early next year." On 4 December
2002, Fraport wrote to the Government seeking a written confirmation along the same

lines:

"Now we are at a critical junction. We need for internal reasons and in particular
for auditors, a written confirmation along the lines that President Gloria
Macapagal-Arroyo announced publicly.

The key point is, Fraport can only continue to negotiate with Government and
continue the same supportive level if a written confirmation is given to us that
under Philippine Law, our investment is acknowledged and protected. Therefore,
it is urgent that we have someone we can deal with to achieve the goal."

-90-

6. Fraport's Continued Efforts to Find a Solution

197. On 12 December 2002, Mr. Henkel met with representatives of the Government
including Executive Secretary Romulo and Chief Presidential Legal Counsel Cruz.
During this meeting, Fraport expressed its concern regarding the "turn of events". The

minutes of the meeting reveal the following:

"1. Mr. Lauk stated that Fraport was now very concerned with the turn of
events. The Department of Justice rendered an opinion saying that the
PIATCO concession agreements were void. Her Excellency President
Gloria Macapagal Arroyo delivered a speech quoting said opinion, and
that of the Solicitor General, and said that she could not enforce a void
contract. The Senate Blue Ribbon Committee had rendered Senate
Report No. 130 which, among others, stated that the concession
agreements of PIATCO were void. Further, third parties have initiated
proceedings before the Supreme Court to confirm that PIATCO's
concession agreements are void.

2. Fraport believes that the Chengs were the ones who originated the
problems PIATCO now faces. Fraport is nonetheless bound to the
Chengs as fellow-shareholders in PLATCO. Mr. Lauk stated that Fraport
will be coming out with a press release soon stating these matters.

3. Given the above, Fraport seeks assurance from the Philippine
Government that Fraport, as the primary funder of Terminal 3, will
receive compensation.

4. Secretary Cruz stated that President Arroyo stated in her speech that all
legitimate claims shall be paid to the last centavo, provided the same are
legitimate and valid. The Solicitor General likewise mentioned the same
in its pleading before the Supreme Court.

5. Mr. Lauk requested for Executive Secretary Romulo’s indulgence that he
speak with Fraport Chair Roland Koch to inform him of what President
Arroyo and the Solicitor General had said. Mr. Lauk also requested that
these be reduced to a letter which Fraport can show to its shareholders
and other interested parties, such as Fraport's auditors who are currently
in the process of auditing the books of Fraport. Fraport's auditors are
considering a total write-off of the amounts infused by Fraport into the
NAIA Terminal 3 project. Mr. Lauk said that if that is done, then
Fraport can no longer join hands with the government, which has been
his recommendation.

6. Executive Secretary Romulo replied that these requests shall be given
due consideration.

-91 -

7. Secretary Cruz reiterated that Philippine laws amply protect local and
foreign investors provided their claims are legitimate and valid."

198. On 27 December 2002, Secretary Romulo wrote to Fraport. Some of the extracts
from this letter are quoted at length since they are not irrelevant to the aftermath of the

Tribunal's decision in respect of jurisdiction:

"This refers to your letter to Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo
dated December 18, 2002.

Philippine laws protect legitimate investments and arm's length transactions.

Accordingly, Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, during her
speech for the Bonifacio Day Celebration on November 30, 2002, assured the
stakeholders that 'your legitimate claims will be honored to the last peso’. Her
statement was reiterated by Solicitor General Alfredo L. Benipayo in a
Supplemental Comment dated December 9, 2002 filed before the Supreme Court
wherein it was stated: 'To disabuse PIATCO of its apprehension that a
government takeover will send a wrong signal to foreign investors, President
Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo has made it plain in a speech on November 30, 2002
that ‘legitimate claims of stakeholders in PIATCO will be honored to the last
peso’.

During our meeting on December 11, 2002, Secretary Avelino J. Cruz and I
reiterated that all legitimate investments shall be protected and honoured in
accordance with the Philippine Constitution and laws.

Rest assured that our Administration intends to implement fairly and justly the
law as the Constitution mandates."
199. Notwithstanding these assurances, there were no discussions between Fraport and
the Government. On 17 January 2003, Mr. Henkel wrote to Executive Secretary Romulo
to express Fraport's disappointment:
"With disappointment I have noted that, despite several attempts through various
channels, it was not possible to get any appointment with your goodself or with
any other representative of the Philippine Government who is responsible for the
NAIA IPT 3 Project during my stay in Manila from 7 January 2003 through 17

January 2003. Unfortunately I have to travel back to Germany on 18 January
2003 to report the status of the NAIA IPT 3 Project to my Board.

-92-

Bearing in mind that the discussions with the Philippine Government on several
open issues on this ambitious Project have now been pursued for more than one
year, and that a world class and state of the art terminal has been materially
completed and ready for operations since December 2002, but despite of this is
not allowed to enter into operations and earn revenues for an unforeseeable
period, we believe that the present status of the Project leads to a tremendous
waste of resources and unnecessary costs and risks.

We therefore urgently request you that the talks about the future of our
investment are resumed as soon as possible, and I am pleased to assure you that I
will be available again, together with my team, here in Manila from 27 January
2003 to meet with your goodself or any other duly authorized representative of
your Government who is responsible for this Project.

Please allow me to suggest that a final solution for the various pending issues
should be achieved until the mid of February of 2003."

200. On 10 February 2003, Mr. Henkel again wrote to Executive Secretary Romulo

reiterating Fraport's request for an amicable settlement:

"We hereby reiterate our appeal to the Philippine Government to finally come to
an expeditious solution for our investment in the NAIA IPT 3 Project either
through an economically viable concession or through an amicable settlement.

Based on the bilateral Agreement for the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of
Investments between your Country and the Federal Republic of Germany, we
repeat our numerous requests for a counterpart to seriously and actively discuss a
mutually acceptable solution on the future of our investment in the Philippines.

With disappointment we have noted that we have neither received any reply to
our letter dated January 17, 2003 nor have we been advised of who is the duly
authorized representative of the Philippine Government for discussions with us
about our investment. We would be grateful if such nomination could be notified
to us by February 13, 2003, and it should be our joint goal to reach an agreement
in principle, subject to further detailed negotiations, by February 28, 2003.

Without feedback from Government's side, we have no other recourse but to
initiate the commencement of arbitration proceedings before World Bank in
Washington D.C. in order to protect our investments in the event that no
agreement in principle has been reached by February 28, 2003."

201. By letter dated 14 February 2003, Fraport repeated its desire to settle the issue

amicably through negotiations and stated its position as follows:

-93-

"Please understand that it is completely unacceptable for Fraport if Fraport's
investment is questioned only after the NAIA International Passenger Terminal 3
Project has been almost completed, and the government has received benefits
under the relevant agreements without raising any objections, and without
assurance that Fraport shall receive compensation in accordance with the
Agreement between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Republic of the
Philippines for the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments
(‘Bilateral Investment Treaty') in the event the concession agreements are
deemed by your national courts to be null and void as announced by your
government."

202. On 18 March 2003, Dr. Wilhelm Bender, Fraport's CEO, wrote to Secretary Cruz

in his capacity as Chief Legal Counsel of the Office of the President:

"Over the last week, the Executive and the Supervisory Board of Fraport AG had
the impression that a mutually acceptable solution for the problems of the NAIA
IPT 3 Project had been agreed upon in principle. This impression was confirmed
by the conversations between Executive Secretary Romulo and Prime Minister
Koch. It was confirmed that the Government of the Republic of the Philippines
is willing to cooperate to come to an amicable settlement, which would secure
Fraport's investments in the Philippines.

On this basis, and with the explicit support of our shareholders, I decided to come
personally to Manila to discuss with the authorized representatives of the
Philippine Government the major issues to come to an acceptable solution. It
was always very clear to me from our previous discussions with the Philippine
Government that you sought a solution involving an exit for Fraport and thereby
securing the value of the NAIA IPT 3 Project, in which we invested in good
faith.

It is evident that such solution has to recognize the value of our commitment
either through the economic viability of the Project or through a fair
compensation of Fraport in the amount of at least 300 Mio. USD. The draft
memorandum of understanding distributed to us and discussed with Secretary
Tan Climaco still has significant gaps and unresolved critical issues.

However, we would be very pleased to continue fruitful negotiations with the
Philippine Government, in which the following key issues should be addressed:

. Minimum compensation for Fraport's investment in 2003
We would be willing to receive a compensation which is
determined by an internationally renowned auditor, which
both sides agree upon. Based on the size of our investment,
we expect that this will result in a compensation to Fraport
not less than 300 Mio. USD.

. Appropriate financing terms and conditions

-94-

We could agree to a financing agreement reflecting market
conditions, which will not result in further write-off for
Fraport upon the determination of the value of the project on
market conditions.

According to the requirements of German law, we could sign such an agreement
immediately to take effect after approval by the Supervisory Board of Fraport

G."

203. Onthe same day, Dr. Bender also wrote to President Macapagal-Arroyo
requesting a meeting with her and indicating that he was "optimistic that we will be
signing an agreement with your Government on a mutually beneficial solution within the

next day".

204. On 25 March 2003, Secretary Climaco responded to Fraport's letter of 18 March

2003. She wrote:

"It was pursuant to the numerous requests of Fraport and its claim that it has a
proposed amicable solution which prompted the undersigned to meet with its
representatives. The following communications may be referred to: the letter of
Mr. Peter Henkel to Executive Secretary Alberto G. Romulo dated 17 January
2003; the facsimile transmission of Mr. Henkel to Executive Secretary Romulo
dated 03 March 2003; and the facsimile transmission of Mr. Henkel to the
undersigned dated 06 March 2003. Copies of these are attached for immediate
reference.

Fraport likewise requested for meetings through diplomatic channels.
Accordingly, the undersigned met with German Ambassador to the Philippines
Herbert D. Jess on 07 March 2003.

It was likewise these requests which prompted Executive Secretary Romulo to
call your Mr. Roland Koch and inform him that the undersigned would meet with
Fraport's representatives to listen to Fraport's proposed amicable solution.

During the undersigned's meetings with Fraport, the undersigned emphasized
that the issues on the validity of the award of the NAIA Terminal 3 Project to
Philippine International Air Terminals Co., Inc. (PIATCO), and the five (5)
contracts executed thereafter, have been submitted to the Philippine Supreme
Court before any discussions could be commenced with PIATCO.

Nonetheless, since Fraport claimed that it had an amicable solution for all parties
concerned, the undersigned met with your representatives. The undersigned

-95-

reiterated in said meetings that any amicable solution should be made on the
basis that the award of the Project to PIATCO, and the five (5) contracts
executed thereafter, are null and void. This is the same premise which any
negotiations with PIATCO was to be made. Further, Fraport's proposed solution
should be in accordance with Philippine laws and further discussions on the
issues on the Project should be with the Department of Transportation and
Communications (DOTC) headed by Secretary Leandro R. Mendoza, with the
assistance of Solicitor General Alfredo L. Benipayo and Government Corporate
Counsel Manuel A. J. Teehankoe.

 

In said meetings, Fraport informed the undersigned that it is in the process of
purchasing its local partner's equity interest in PIATCO, and its proposed
solution calls for an agreement between Fraport, PIATCO, and our Government.
Fraport's proposal included the following principal terms: (1) the immediate
delivery and turnover of ownership and physical possession of Terminal 3 by
PIATCO to the Government; and (2) payment by the Government to PIATCO of
an appropriate value for Terminal 3 to be determined by a reputable international
auditing firm, subject to the verification and confirmation of the Commission on
Audit.

Fraport's proposed terms also included: (1) a minimum guaranteed payment to
Fraport for its financial exposure to the Project; and (2) a Technical Services
Agreement (TSA) for the operation of Terminal 3.

The undersigned in her meetings with Fraport representatives has advised them
that the minimum guaranteed payment to Fraport may not be allowed under
Philippine laws. With respect to the TSA, that is an operational matter best
addressed to DOTC Secretary Mendoza and the Manila International Airport
Authority, subject to compliance with the Philippine procurement laws.

In addition, should PIATCO decide to dissolve its corporate existence, as your
representatives have claimed, then the amounts which PIATCO possesses, under
our laws, should first be used to pay its creditors. The balance, should there be
any, is distributed to its shareholders. We are not privy to the credit agreements
of PIATCO, and the shareholder agreements among its shareholders.
The above issues were emphasized by the undersigned in all of her meetings with
Fraport. The undersigned trusts that the above narration is a faithful summary of
what transpired in her discussions with Fraport and its representatives, and that
the same clarifies some misunderstandings in the letter dated 18 March 2003."
205. This would turn out to be Secretary Climaco's last official letter to Fraport
regarding the Terminal 3 project. In the end, when the takeover proposal became public,

the Manila press presented the plan as evidence of government mismanagement and self-

dealing. Secretary Climaco later denounced the takeover plan in testimony before the

-96-

Senate and the plan was never implemented. In a subsequent press statement, President

Macapagal-Arroyo declared:

"Even while the Government was taking the correct position that the concession
contracts are null and void, negotiations with both PIATCO and Fraport were
being conducted, to explore the possibility of avoiding protracted litigation [...].
Immediately upon assumption of my second term, I directed renewed efforts to
arrive at a negotiated solution so that the terminal could be examined, and if it is
safe, structurally sound, and conforms to international standards, open it in a way
that adheres to law. Two new waves of effort were undertaken, but both failed,
not because of any fault of Government, but due to deep reasons that prevent
PIATCO and Fraport representatives from coming to a unified, reasonable
position vis-a-vis the Republic. Those reasons are beyond the capability of the
Republic to address and are internal to the two companies."

 

206. In his witness statement to the Tribunal, Fraport's CEO, Mr. Bender, states that as
of this point, "Fraport's management decided to write down the value of our investment
to zero in accordance with German accounting requirements". Mr. Bender's statement

concludes:

"Because of the write-down, Fraport had an annual net loss of 121 million euros,
and retained earnings were zero after a release from capital reserves. As a result,
no dividend payments were made for fiscal year 2002. This was the first loss that
Fraport had experienced since I joined the company in 1993."

7. The Philippine Supreme Court's Decision that the Terminal 3
Contracts Are Null and Void Ab Iaitio

207. Starting in September 2002, several petitions for prohibition were filed with the
Philippine Supreme Court against PIATCO and others. Under the Philippine
Constitution, the Court has original jurisdiction over petitions for writs of prohibition.
Rule 65, paragraph 2, of the Philippine Rules of Civil Procedure provides for use of the

writ to restrain ministerial acts of a government agency, including the performance of

-97-

public contracts, when such acts are without or in excess of authority or constitute grave

abuses of discretion and when administrative appeal is unavailable or inadequate.

208. In case number G.R. No. 155001, filed on 17 September 2002, the petitioners*
were employees of international airline service providers operating at Terminals 1 and 2
who claimed that they stood to lose their employment upon the implementation of the
Terminal 3 concession contracts. On 15 October 2002, employers of the petitioning
workers filed a motion to intervene and a petition-in-intervention. In G.R. 155547, filed
on 24 October 2002, Congressmen Salacnib Baterina, Clavel Martinez and Constantino
Jaraula filed a similar petition. In G.R. 155661, filed on 6 November 2002, several
employees of the MIAA also filed a petition for prohibition seeking to nullify the
Terminal 3 concession contracts. On 11 December 2002, another group of Congressmen
moved to intervene as Respondents-Interveners seeking to defend the validity of the

concession agreements and seeking dismissal of the petitions.

209. PIATCO filed comments in response to the petitions on 7 and 27 November 2002.

PIATCO sought as relief a denial of the petitions with an award of costs.

210. The Office of the Solicitor General, on behalf of the public respondents, filed
comments on November 11 and 18, 2002 seeking to have the contracts declared null and
void, and filed a supplemental comment on 9 December 2002 reiterating its prayer and
adding the argument that PIATCO had not been properly qualified. The Office of the

Government Corporate Counsel filed comments on behalf of MIAA on 7 November

Including one Demosthenes Agan, Jr., hence the subsequent references to the "4gan decision".

-98-

2002, in which it requested that the ARCA and supplements, but not the 1997 Concession

Agreement, be declared null and void.

211. The Supreme Court heard oral argument on the petitions from all parties to the
proceedings, including PIATCO, on 10 December 2002. After the oral argument, the
Court required the parties to file memoranda in amplification of the issues heard in oral
argument within 30 days and ordered the parties to explore the possibility of mediation or
arbitration. The Office of the Solicitor General, now joined by the Office of the
Government Corporate Counsel, filed a joint memorandum seeking a judgment from the
Supreme Court declaring the 1997 Concession Agreement, the ARCA and the
Supplements to the ARCA void as contrary to the Constitution, the BOT Law and its

Implementing Rules and Regulations.

212. The Tribunal has noted that during the Supreme Court proceedings, the Solicitor
General at first had urged that the original Concession Agreement be upheld, and that
only certain provisions of the ARCA be struck down. Specifically, on 11 November
2002, then-newly appointed Solicitor General Benipayo filed a comment which was, with
a few exceptions, a verbatim restatement of the fact section and other parts of the legal
discussion of Secretary Climaco's Memorandum to the Blue Ribbon Committee.
Solicitor General Benipayo's comment, unlike Secretary Climaco's Report, however, did
not contest the validity of the Concession Agreement itself. Instead, it requested that the
parties "reinstate, and comply with the 1997 Concession Agreement, except as regards

material deviations therein from the Bid Documents".

-99-

213. As indicated earlier, on 18 November 2002, the Office of the Solicitor General
also filed a comment in the Agan case. This comment was a major reversal of the
Solicitor General's position a week earlier. The Solicitor General was now requesting
that all PLATCO agreements be declared null and void, rather than having the original
concession agreement reinstated, which he acknowledged "in all candour" to be a
reversal of position. The 18 November comment, like the 11 November comment,
restated verbatim the facts and some of the legal sections of Secretary Climaco's
Memorandum. But for the first time, the Solicitor General argued that a basis for
nullifying the concession agreements was the PIATCO group's failure to satisfy the

bidding prequalification requirements.

214. The full reformulation of the Solicitor General's position came on 9 December
2002, a week after President Macapagal-Arroyo's public denunciation of PIATCO and
the Terminal 3 project. The occasion was the supplemental comment in the Baterina
case. The Solicitor General stated that "Paircargo, PLATCO's predecessor, was not
validly prequalified, and thus the award to PIATCO is void", concluding that "[c]learly,
the award to PIATCO, and consequently, the PIATCO contracts are void". Again, the
supplemental comment constituted a mostly verbatim restatement of the relevant
passages of Secretary Climaco's Memorandum to the Blue Ribbon Committee. Indeed,
the supplemental comment reiterated, with very minor editing, pages 15 to 22 of
Climaco's argument, according to which the award of the Terminal 3 concession and
each of the concession agreements were considered void because the PIATCO group had
lacked the requisite financial capability. The Solicitor General concluded that "since the

subject contracts are void, it follows that no irreparable injury will be suffered by

- 100-

PIATCO" in the event of a government takeover of the Terminal, and PLATCO would
not be entitled to argue that such a takeover would constitute a confiscation without due
process and just compensation, because the "facility is not the private property of

PIATCO".

215. The Philippine Supreme Court issued its decision on the Agan and related
petitions on 5 May 2003°. The Court first decided the question of standing, and
determined that the airport employees and concessionaire petitioners had standing
because they had a direct personal stake in the outcome of the proceeding. As for the
public official petitioners, the Court determined that the case was of "transcendental
importance" to the Philippine public and therefore supported a waiver of the technical
requirements of standing, consistent, the Court said, with a longstanding and well-

established line of Philippine precedents.

216. The Court then determined to take the case as a matter of original jurisdiction
under its Rule 65 writ of prohibition procedure because the facts essential to the decision
were well-established, a speedy disposition was important, and the parties agreed that the

petitions raised issues of transcendental importance.

217. In considering the merits of the issues raised by the petitions, the Court
determined that serious violations of Philippine law and public policy in respect of
several issues raised by the petitioners compelled it to conclude that the concession
agreements in the Terminal 3 project were null and void ab initio. The Court considered
the contention that the Terminal 3 project concessionaire (then the Paircargo consortium)

5 G.R. No. 155001, G.R. No. 155547 and G.R. No. 155661

-101-

had not been properly pre-qualified as financially able to undertake the contract because
the PBAC had improperly factored into the net worth of the consortium the entire equity
of Paircargo's partner, Security Bank, in disregard of the provisions of the Philippine
Banking law that limited Security Bank's contribution to no more than 15% of its equity.
The Court determined that it was erroneous to include all of Security Bank's equity,
which was never available to Paircargo because of the restrictions of the Banking Law, in
deciding the Paircargo consortium's net worth. Had the proper calculation been made
prior to the award of the concession, it would have been evident that Paircargo did not
qualify, because its equity would have amounted only to 6.08% of the project cost,
instead of the 30% required. Because Paircargo was not a qualified bidder, the Court
concluded that PBAC's award of the Terminal 3 concession contract to Paircargo was

null and void.

218. In addition, among various other findings, the Court found that the 1997
Concession Agreement was "entirely different" from the draft Concession Agreement
that had been bidded out, which "directly translates concrete financial advantages to
PIATCO that were previously not available during the bidding process". Therefore the

1997 Concession Agreement was void as being contrary to public policy.

F. The Aftermath

219. At the time of the Supreme Court's decision, Terminal 3 was almost fully built.
In fact, after the Supreme Court's decision invalidating the PIATCO concession and
related contracts, as was noted earlier, the Macapagal-Arroyo administration officials

repeated assurances that Fraport would receive due compensation. One day after the

- 102-

Supreme Court's decision, the Philippine Finance Secretary said that investors in the
Terminal 3 project would be justly compensated, stating that the "issue of just
compensation is one that is respected by this administration. I don't think there's any
question of getting it for free. I don't think that's an issue." The next day, President
Macapagal-Arroyo repeated that the investors would be "justly compensated".
Moreover, President Macapagal-Arroyo instructed the Philippine Ambassador to
Germany Minerva Jean Falcon to brief the German government on the options open to
the Philippine government and to assure that Fraport would be treated fairly and

equitably.

220. Following the "null and void" decision of the Supreme Court, Fraport accordingly
continued its discussions with the Government in order to obtain compensation. In June
2003, President Macapagal-Arroyo issued Administrative Order No. 75 establishing a
Cabinet Oversight Committee to resolve the various outstanding issues with respect to
Terminal 3. The Committee first met with Fraport in a joint session also attended by the
other PIATCO shareholders. Committee Chairman Roxas refused to consider separate
treatment for individual shareholders. He declared that if a solution could not be found
which was satisfactory to all parties, he would recommend that the President dissolve the
Oversight Committee. In response to Roxas' statement and in an effort to move the talks
forward, the PIATCO shareholders agreed to and did in fact consolidate their requests for
compensation. They also appointed a common representative to facilitate negotiations

with the Government.

- 103-

221. However, by year-end 2003, the discussions between the Oversight Committee,
on the one hand, and PIATCO and Fraport, on the other hand, had been postponed
indefinitely. It is noted that during this period, PIATCO sought reconsideration before
the Supreme Court of its decision in Agan, but PLATCO's motions were denied by a
Resolution of the Supreme Court dated 21 January 2004. As of this point, the Supreme
Court's decision in Agan became final. On 1 March 2004, in Administrative Order No.
96, President Macapagal-Arroyo dissolved the Oversight Committee. In the interim, on

17 September 2003, Fraport had submitted its Request for Arbitration to ICSID.

222. Shortly after Fraport's Request for Arbitration was registered by ICSID on 6
August 2004, Attorney F. Arthur L. Villaraza filed a criminal complaint for libel against
two of Fraport's senior executives, Dr. Wilhem Bender and Dr. Manfred Scholch, as well
as against two of Fraport's Philippine lawyers, Cesar Manalaysay and Edgardo Balois,

alleging that the Request contained derogatory statements against him and his law firm.

223. On 19 September 2004, Secretary Climaco also filed a criminal complaint for
libel against the same respondents alleging that Fraport's Request for Arbitration

contained malicious and derogatory statements against her.

224. Although these two complaints were dismissed in the spring of 2006, at the time
of writing the present Award, the two complainants have sought leave to appeal these

decisions. To the Tribunal's knowledge, these appeals are presently pending.

225. Finally, the Tribunal notes that following a lawsuit filed by Takenaka in London's

High Court of Justice against PLATCO claiming substantial sums due pursuant to the

- 104-

EPC Contract for Terminal 3, it obtained a ruling in its favour for the unpaid amount of

US$83 million under that agreement.

-105-

III. THE PHILIPPINE EXPROPRIATION PROCEEDINGS
A. Introduction

226. As the Tribunal noted earlier, after the Request for Arbitration had been registered
by ICSID and the Tribunal constituted, and while the written phase of the instant
arbitration was proceeding, the Republic of the Philippines, in December 2004, took

possession of Terminal 3.

227. At the time of writing the present Award, the expropriation proceedings in the

Philippines have not been concluded.

B. The Background to the Philippine Expropriation Proceedings

228. In December 2004, the Republic of the Philippines instituted court proceedings to
take possession of Terminal 3. In a statement issued on 24 December 2004 titled "NAIA.
Terminal 3 takeover", President Macapagal-Arroyo explained the Respondent's action as

follows:

"On Tuesday, December 21, 2004, I directed the Solicitor General to file the
expropriation complaint to allow Government to acquire the NAIA Terminal 3.
We are now in possession of the terminal, and after the necessary inventory and
inspection to ensure the safety of the travelling public, we will take steps to
complete and operate the Terminal as soon as possible. Public interest requires
that the Government take all lawful measures to immediately provide for the
increasing demands of international passenger traffic. I am concerned at the
unmet need of our overseas Filipino workers, businessmen and tourists who are
deprived of a modern, safe and convenient airport terminal.

The expropriation was undertaken only after all reasonable measures to arrive at
a negotiated settlement broke down. In November 2002, I announced that after
careful study it was my Government's view that the concession contracts to
Terminal 3 were null and void ab initio. The position was upheld by the Senate
Blue Ribbon Committee in December, and by the Supreme Court in May of
2003. PIATCO moved to reconsider the decision by the Supreme Court twice,
and both motions were rejected. The care shown by the three branches of
Government, and our careful adherence to law and due process are underscored

-106-

by the availability of remedies to PLATCO every step of the way. We could not
have taken possession of the Terminal until the judgment of the Supreme Court
became final in March 2004, at a time when the country was engrossed in the
presidential electoral exercise.

Even while the Government was taking the correct position that the concession
contracts are null and void, negotiations with both PIATCO and Fraport were
being conducted, to explore the possibility of avoiding protracted litigation.
While the case was pending before the Supreme Court, both PIATCO and
Fraport sued the government before two international arbitration bodies. We are
vigorously defending our right to implement our own laws as a sovereign country
in those two arbitration proceedings.

This includes the constitutional role of the Supreme Court as the final arbiter of
the law. Its decisions must be and will be fully respected and upheld.

Immediately upon assumption of my second term, I directed renewed efforts to
arrive at a negotiated solution so that the terminal could be examined, and if it is
safe, structurally sound, and conforms to international standards, open it in a way
that adheres to law. Two new waves of effort were undertaken, but both failed,
not because of any fault of Government, but due to deep reasons that prevent
PIATCO and Fraport representatives from coming to a unified, reasonable
position vis-a-vis the Republic. Those reasons are beyond the capability of the
Republic to address and are internal to the two companies."

 

229. The President concluded her statement with the following commitment to, inter

alia, Fraport:

"Let me take this occasion to assure everyone that prompt just
compensation will be paid in accordance with Philippine law. Existing legal
processes will be observed, and due process will be accorded /sic/ all genuine
parties in interest, including foreign investors and contractors, who will have
the full benefit of the observance of law. The Government has deposited the
sum required by law into the custody of the expropriation court with the
filing of the Complaint." (emphasis added)

230. The Respondent, in its Rejoinder, addressed the context in which the Terminal 3

expropriation was undertaken:

"In short, following the litigation before the Supreme Court, which finally
concluded on January 21, 2004 when the Court issued its decision on
reconsideration, PIATCO could not lawfully operate the Terminal. PIATCO,
however, retained its rights in the terminal facility and denied government
officials any access to it. PLATCO's unpaid contractor, Takenaka, in fact, fenced

- 107-

it off and employed armed guards to exclude the government officials and others
from the premises. That is, Takenaka barred entry to MIAA and DOTC and
posted armed guards to physically exclude government personnel from the
Terminal, a public utility situated on the Government's own land. That situation
was threatening the safety and security of the airport as a whole. At the same
time the public need for the terminal was increasing with increasing passenger
traffic, given that the Republic had refrained from improving Terminal 1
expecting that Terminal 3 would be operational by 2002. Finally, expropriation
followed numerous serious efforts to resolve the situation amicably, ending with
the last failed attempt several days earlier in December." (emphasis in original)
(footnotes omitted)

231. As noted, at the time of writing the present Award, the legal proceedings in
connection with the expropriation of Terminal 3 have yet to reach their final resolution.
The Tribunal has been informed by the parties that the expropriation proceedings have in

fact resulted in literally dozens of related motions and orders which need not be described

in extenso for purposes of this Award. The Tribunal nonetheless will summarize the key
rulings and procedural milestones regarding the expropriation proceedings thus far, in
particular as they relate to the compensation to be made to Fraport as a result of the

expropriation of Terminal 3.

Cc. The Right of Eminent Domain or Expropriation Generally

232. The right of eminent domain is defined as the right of the sovereign to appropriate
any property within its territory for a public purpose. Under the Philippine Constitution,
this right of eminent domain, or expropriation, is subjected to the requirement to pay just

compensation .

233. The Tribunal understands that the process for taking property by eminent domain

or expropriation in the Philippines consists of two principal judicial stages: a first stage

1987 Philippine Constitution, Article IIL, § 9.

- 108-

during which the authority and public purpose for the expropriation are scrutinized prior
to the authorization of the expropriation, and a second stage in the course of which the

just compensation for the expropriated property is determined.

234. The first stage focuses on the authority of the plaintiff to exercise the power of
eminent domain and the propriety of its exercise in the specific case. It ends with an
order (if the expropriation complaint is not dismissed) of condemnation declaring that the
plaintiff has a lawful right to take the property sought to be condemned for the public use
or purpose described in the complaint for expropriation, upon compensation to be
determined as of the date of the complaint. The only requisites for judicial authorization
of immediate entry upon the property pursuant to a writ of possession are (1) the filing of
a complaint for expropriation sufficient in form and substance, and (2) the making of the
deposit of an assessed value of the property at issue, also referred to as the "proffered
value"’. It is observed that the writ of possession is issued by the court seized of the

complaint on an exparte basis.

235. As noted, the second stage is concerned with the determination of the just
compensation for the property to be taken. This is done by the court seized of the
complaint for expropriation with the assistance of not more than three commissioners. In
essence, the commissioners are required to view and examine the property sought to be
expropriated, assess its value and make a full and accurate report to the court of all their
proceedings. Thereafter, the court seized of the complaint is required to hold a hearing.

A number of outcomes are then possible: the court may accept the commissioners! report

7 Revised Rules of Court, Rule 67, § 2.

- 109-

and render judgment in accordance therewith; or, for cause shown, recommit the file to
the commissioners for a further report of facts; or, set aside the report and appoint new
commissioners; or accept the report in part and reject it in part. In any case, the court
may make such order or render such judgment as shall secure to the plaintiff the property
essential to the exercise of the right of expropriation, and to the defendant just

compensation for the property so taken.

236. Finally, the Tribunal observes that just compensation for the expropriated
property is based on market value, which is defined under Philippine law as the price
which the expropriated property will command when it is offered for sale by one who
desires, but is not obliged to sell it, and is purchased by one under no necessity of having
it’, In this connection, the Tribunal further notes that the provisional deposit upon entry
of the order of condemnation, i.e. the proffered value, serves the double purpose of
prepayment upon the value of the property, if finally expropriated, and as an indemnity
against damages if the expropriation suit fails’. The difference between, on the one hand,
the proffered value already paid and, on the other hand, the just compensation as
subsequently confirmed by the court, is to be paid when the court's decision on just

compensation becomes final and executory.

8 Manila Railroad Company v. Caligsihan, G.R. No. L-12484 (29 October 1919) reprinted in 40 Phil. 326.
The owner of private property should be compensated only for what he actually loses; it is not intended that
his compensation shall extend beyond his loss or injury. And what he loses is only the actual value of his
property at the time it is taken (Eslaban v. Vda de Onorio, G.R. No. 146062 (28 June 2001)). " Visayan
RefiningCo. v. Camus, G.R. No. 15870 (3 December 1919) reprinted in 40 Phil. 550 (1919).

-110-

D. The Initial Expropriation Proceedings Before the Regional Trial Court

237. Expropriation complaints in the Philippines are filed with the Regional Trial
Court, which has original and exclusive jurisdiction over such matters. In the
circumstances at issue, the complaint was filed on 21 December 2004 before the Regional
Trial Court of Pasay City, where Terminal 3 is located. A deposit with the Land Bank of
the Philippines in the amount of US$62,343,175.77 was made by the plaintiffs, who were
identified as the Republic of the Philippines, the Manila International Airport Authority
and the Department of Transportation and Communications. PIATCO, as owner of
Terminal 3, was impleaded as an indispensable party to the expropriation proceedings.
The complaint for expropriation included a plea for the immediate issuance of a writ of

possession of Terminal 3.

238. The Writ of Possession was obtained on the same day that the complaint was
filed, i.e. on 21 December 2004, based on an Order issued by Judge Henrick Gingoyon of
the Regional Trial Court. More particularly, Judge Gingoyon instructed that the plaintiffs
be made "in possession and control of the International Passenger Terminal 3 described
above and to eject therefrom all adverse occupants, defendant Philippine International Air

Terminals Co., Inc. and all other persons claiming under it". The Tribunal notes that in
his Order directing the issuance of the Writ of Possession, Judge Gingoyon took judicial
notice of the Supreme Court's decision to "set aside the 'PIATCO Contracts". Judge
Gingoyon also stated that "IPT 3 is a structure for a well-defined public purpose". He

concluded as follows:

-Ill -

"The case record shows that plaintiffs have deposited the assessed value of the
IPT3 in the Land Bank of the Philippines, an authorized government depository,
as shown by the certification attached to their complaint. This Court adds that
due notice to the defendant PIATCO of the instant complaint has been made.
Plaintiffs have thus complied with the requisites for the issuance of the writ of
possession."

239. On 4 January 2005, Judge Gingoyon issued a supplemental order ("January 4
Order") that (a) directed the release of US$62,343,175.77 to PIATCO, which would be
deducted from the yet-to-be determined amount of just compensation; (b) directed the
submission of a Certificate of Availability of Funds to cover the payment of just
compensation; and (c) pending the expropriation proceedings, directed the Republic,
through the DOTC and the MIAA, to maintain, preserve and safeguard the Terminal, but
prohibited them from performing "acts of ownership such as awarding concessions or
leasing any part of the NAIA IPT3 to other parties". In so doing, Judge Gingoyon relied
on Republic Act No. 8974 entitled "An Act To Facilitate The Acquisition Of Right-Of-
Way, Site Or Location For National Government Infrastructure Projects And For Other

Purposes" (R.A. No. 8974) as the applicable law.

240. On 5 January 2005, the Republic filed an Urgent Motion for Reconsideration of
the January 4 Order. The Republic challenged the applicability of R.A. No. 8974 to
Terminal 3 on the basis this law refers only to acquisition of real property needed as

right-of-way, site, or location. The Republic also challenged the January 4 Order to

release to PIATCO an amount which exceeded the provisional deposit.

241. On7 January 2005, Judge Gingoyon issued a further supplemental Order
("January 7 Order") appointing three commissioners to value Terminal 3 and instructing

them to take oaths of office within three days. On the same date, the Republic filed a

-112-

Motion for Inhibition of the Regional Trial Court judge, i.e. Judge Gingoyon, which led
to a hearing on both the Urgent Motion for Reconsideration and the Motion for
Inhibition. The Republic argued that the January 4 and 7 Orders were issued motu
proprio in favour of PIATCO, which had not yet entered its appearance or filed its
answer. The hearing of both motions was held on 10 January 2005 and, on that same
date, an Omnibus Order denying both the Motion for Reconsideration and the Motion for

Inhibition was issued ("January 10 Order").

242. Two days later, on 12 January 2005, the Republic filed a Petition for Certiorari
before the Supreme Court of the Philippines. While the outcome of this petition is
discussed in greater detail later in this chapter, the Tribunal notes here that pursuant to its
petition the Republic sought a temporary restraining order against the Regional Trial
Court Judge Gingoyon to (1) cease implementing the January 4, 7 and 10 Orders; and (2)
inhibit himself from further actions on the Republic's expropriation complaint. The

Republic also sought nullification of the three orders at issue.

243. On 14 January 2005, notwithstanding its Petition for Certiorari before the
Supreme Court, the Republic filed in the Regional Trial Court its "Objections to the
Appointment of Commissioners". The Republic again objected that the January 7 Order
had been issued motu proprio and with none of the interested parties having been notified
or given the opportunity to be heard on the matter of appointment of commissioners. The
Republic also objected inter alia to the alleged haste with which the January 7 Order was

issued.

-113-

244. On 17 January 2005, PIATCO filed its Answer in the expropriation proceedings
before the Regional Trial Court. More particularly, PLATCO sought the dismissal of the
Republic's complaint for expropriation of 21 December 2004 on the basis that, inter alia,
the Regional Trial Court lacked jurisdiction. PIATCO also raised the pending ICC
arbitration between the same parties involving the "same cause" and maintained that the

Republic had engaged in forum shopping.

245. The Tribunal observes that the Republic argued in the hearing before the Regional
Trial Court on 10 January 2005 that Fraport should be included as an interested party in
the expropriation proceedings'®. The Republic stated that while PLATCO was the named

party in the expropriation complaint, Fraport, among others, is a necessary party which,
though not indispensable, has a right to join if it so desires. However, to the Tribunal's
knowledge, no such action has formally been taken by Fraport in the expropriation

proceedings to date.

E. The Republic's Petition Before the Supreme Court

246. As noted earlier, on 12 January 2005 the Republic filed a Petition for Certiorari
before the Supreme Court of the Philippines. In essence, with this petition the Republic
sought to prevent the implementation of the Regional Trial Court's Orders of 4, 7 and 10
January 2005. In effect, the Republic appealed against these orders. According to the
Republic, these orders amounted to grave abuse of discretion and unjustly prejudiced its

rights in the expropriation for substantially the reasons argued before the trial judge.

' Transcript of Stenographic Notes, 10 January 2005, 8:30 a.m., at page 9.

-114-

247. On 14 January 2005, the Supreme Court, in an en bane Resolution, issued a
temporary restraining order instructing the trial judge to cease and desist from executing
the assailed orders, thereby allowing the Republic to perform all acts necessary to
accomplish the public purpose for which the expropriation was undertaken. PIATCO
filed its comment on the Petition for Certiorari on 27 January 2005, and the Republic in
turn filed a reply on 11 February 2005. In addition, on 4 April 2005, the Republic filed a
Motion for Early Resolution with the Supreme Court, arguing that an expedited
resolution of the Petition for Certiorari "would allow the expropriation case before
another branch of the Regional Trial Court in Pasay City, other than the present one, i.e.
Branch 117, to progress in accordance with law and justice". In a Resolution dated 26
April 2005, the Supreme Court required the parties to submit memoranda and by June

2005, the Petition for Certiorari was ready for resolution.

248. The Supreme Court issued its ruling on the Republic's Petition for Certiorari on
19 December 2005 (the "Gingoyon decision"). In brief, the Supreme Court's decision
directed that the implementation of the 21 December 2004 Writ of Possession over
Terminal 3 be held in abeyance, pending payment by the Republic to PIATCO of the

amount of Php3,002,125,000.00 representing the proffered value of the Terminal.

249. Less than two weeks later, on 2 January 2006, the Republic filed a Motion for
Partial Reconsideration of the Supreme Court's Gingoyon decision. The Republic's
principal argument was that the release of the proffered value solely to PLATCO would
deny full and final relief to the Philippine Government and would work an injustice to

lawful claimants of the just compensation. In its Motion, the Republic referred to various

-115-

claims against PIATCO such as Fraport's as well as judgment creditors of PIATCO,
namely Takenaka and Asahikosan. The Republic argued that the amount of
Php3,002,125,000.00 should not be released until legitimate claims against PLATCO with
respect to the Terminal were ascertained and liquidated, and the fair value of the
Terminal determined. The Republic also argued against the applicability of Republic Act

No. 8974.

250. Motions for intervention were filed with the Supreme Court after the
promulgation of the Gingoyon decision. Takenaka filed a Motion for Partial
Reconsideration in Intervention on 5 January 2006, arguing that the Php3,002,125,000.00
amount should not be released to PIATCO pending the determination of its claim against
PIATCO and the amount of just compensation. Takenaka pointed out that, after
determining the value of the Terminal and the unsettled obligations of PIATCO, the just
compensation may not be sufficient to settle PLATCO's obligations to its creditors.
Takenaka informed the Supreme Court of its favourable judgments in the courts of the
United Kingdom against PIATCO. In its separate motion of same date, Asahikosan made

similar arguments.

251. The Supreme Court denied all these motions in a Resolution dated 1 February
2006. The interventions were denied as filed after promulgation of the Gingoyon
decision, which the Supreme Court considered as contrary to procedural rules. In
particular, the Supreme Court emphasized that the directive enjoining payment was in
accordance with Republic Act No. 8974, which the Supreme Court again upheld as the

applicable law.

-116-

252. On 17 March 2006, the Republic filed a Motion for Clarification and Second
Motion for Reconsideration before the Supreme Court, praying that the Court clarify
whether the awarding of concessions and leasing airport premises to airport-related
operating businesses in Terminal 3 could be undertaken while full payment of the just
compensation remained pending. The Republic also requested a reconsideration of the
Gingoyon decision and the Supreme Court's Resolution of 1 February 2006.
Alternatively, the Republic also requested that the deposit of the Terminal 3's proffered
value be placed in escrow pending determination of just compensation due to PLIATCO.
The Supreme Court denied this Second Motion for Reconsideration as a prohibited
pleading under the Rules of Court in a Resolution dated 21 February 2006. The
Gingoyon decision thus became final and executory, and an Entry of Judgment was
thereafter made on 17 March 2006. More particularly, the following rulings in the

Gingoyon decision were entered into judgment as final and executory'':

253. First, the Supreme Court stated that its 21 January 2004 Resolution denying
PIATCO's motions for reconsideration of the Agan decision was the principal reason
why it ruled as it did in respect of the issues raised in the Gingoyon Petition for
Certiorari. The Tribunal recalls that in its January 2004 Resolution, the Supreme Court
specifically held that the Government had to pay PIATCO just compensation in
accordance with law and equity prior to taking over Terminal 3. According to the
Gingoyon decision, "[t]his pronouncement contains the fundamental premises which
permeate [the Agan/ decision of the Court", and "any disposition of the present petition

must conform to the conditions laid down by the Court in its 2004 Resolution”. It is

"GR. No. 166429, 19 December 2005

- 117-

abundantly clear that the Supreme Court of the Philippines was well aware of the close

nexus between its Agan decision and the Gingoyon decision.

254. Second, the Supreme Court ruled that Republic Act No. 8974 and _ its
Implementing Rules provided the legal regime which the Government had to follow in
the expropriation of Terminal 3, and not Rule 67 of the Rules of Civil Procedure.
Accordingly, the amount of payment to PIATCO under R.A. No. 8974 was to include the

value of the improvements and/or structures on the land.

255. Third, the Supreme Court ruled that because there was no way to ascertain
immediately the value of the improvements, a factual determination, the Republic had to
pay PIATCO a provisional amount denominated the "proffered value" of Terminal 3
pursuant to R.A. No. 8974”. The Supreme Court refused to accept PIATCO's argument
that the proffered value be set at its alleged Terminal cost of "not less than US$ 350
million". Instead, the Supreme Court deemed that the proffered value should be equal to
the amount the Republic had deposited to commence the expropriation proceedings, i.e.
Php3,002,125,000.00. The Supreme Court ruled that the Republic could not take

possession of the Terminal until it paid PIATCO the proffered value'’.

256. Fourth, the Supreme Court recognized a critical distinction between possession of
the Terminal through a Writ of Possession upon payment of the proffered value, and

"taking over" the Terminal upon paying PIATCO just compensation, which was the same
® Section 4(c) of R.A. 8974 provides in relevant part that "in case the completion of a government

infrastructure project is of utmost urgency and importance, and there is no existing valuation of the area

concerned, the implementing agency shall immediately pay the owner of the property its proffered value"

® The Supreme Court suspended the Republic's Writ of Possession to the Terminal until PIATCO was paid
the proffered value.

-118-

as exercising full ownership rights over the Terminal. The Supreme Court ruled that the
Government is limited under the Writ of Possession "to perform the acts that are essential
to the operation of the NAIA 3 as an international airport terminal. [...] These would
include the repair, reconditioning and improvement of the complex, maintenance of the
existing facilities and equipment, installation of new facilities and equipment, provision
of services and facilities pertaining to the facilitation of air traffic and transport, and other
services that are integral to a modern-day international airport". However, until the
Government paid PIATCO final payment of just compensation, the Government could
not "perform[] acts of ownership such as awarding concessions or leasing any part of

NAIA 3 to other parties".

257. Fifth, to ensure that PLATCO was promptly paid, the Supreme Court ruled that the
Regional Trial Court must determine the amount of PLATCO's just compensation within
the 60-day period for paying a property owner just compensation as set forth in R.A. No.
8974. This time period would start to run from the date of the "finality" of the Supreme

Court's decision.

258. Sixth, the Supreme Court ruled that the appointment of three Commissioners to
hear evidence on valuation under Rule 67 was appropriate under the circumstances and
that any objection to the appointments was to be lodged with the Regional Trial Court

and not by way of petition to the Supreme Court.

-119-

F. The Subsequent Proceedings Before the Regional Trial Court

259. On 27 March 2006, the Regional Trial Court, referring to the "finality" of the
Gingoyon decision and without being seized of any motion, ordered the issuance of a

Writ of Execution, and the release of Php3,002,125,000.00 to PIATCO.

260. On the same date, the ceiling of the arrival lobby section of Terminal 3 collapsed.
This prompted the Republic to file an Urgent Motion to Quash the Writ of Execution of
27 March 2006. Pointing to the supervening event of the collapse of the ceiling, as well
as the procedural requirement under the Philippine Rules of Court that writs of execution
can only be issued upon motion by the prevailing party, the Republic challenged the
issuance of the Writ of Execution. A hearing on the Republic's Motion to Quash was

held on 7 April 2006. PIATCO filed its comment on 12 April 2006.

261. The Tribunal notes that AEDC, which had filed a Motion for Intervention in the
expropriation proceedings, filed a Manifestation and Motion dated 8 May 2006 praying
that the resolution of the Republic's Motion to Quash be held in abeyance pending
resolution of its Motion for Intervention. This Manifestation and Motion were promptly
met with PIATCO's Opposition on 16 May 2006. The Tribunal further notes that
throughout the valuation proceedings, AEDC attempted to prevent the payment of the

Terminal's proffered value to PIATCO™.

'§ For example, in a brief filed with the Supreme Court on 5 September 2006, AEDC asserted that it had a
legal right as “original proponent" of the Terminal to obtain the concession to operate the facility and
accordingly argued that the Republic cannot assume ownership of the Terminal or transfer it to third parties
without AEDC's consent.

- 120-

262. In an Order dated 15 June 2006, the Regional Trial Court denied the Republic's
Urgent Motion to Quash the Writ of Execution. The Court, upholding the arguments in
PIATCO's comment, concluded that collapse of the ceiling could not be considered as a
supervening event that would warrant quashing the Writ of Execution. The Court opined
that the collapse of the ceiling did not have a direct effect on the matter already litigated
and settled by the Supreme Court in Gingoyon, as it did not create a substantial change in
the rights or relations of the parties. The Court directed immediate compliance by the

Republic with the Order of 27 March 2006.

263. Following the denial of the Urgent Motion to Quash, the Republic filed an Urgent
Manifestation and Motion on 21 June 2006 declaring that it would comply with the order
of payment, but requested that, in anticipation of the operation of the Terminal, the Court
issue an order granting plaintiffs an effective writ of possession authorizing them to
implement the Terminal 3 project by performing acts essential to the operation of an
international airport passenger terminal, such as the awarding and execution of lease
contracts and concession agreements. PIATCO opposed this Motion on the basis that it
was identical to the Motion for Clarification and Second Motion for Reconsideration

which the Republic had filed previously in the Gingoyon case.

264. In an oral hearing before the Regional Trial Court on 23 and 28 June 2006, the
Republic reiterated its commitment to pay the proffered value as required under
Philippine law while requesting confirmation of its rights under the Writ of Possession.
During the hearing, EPC contractors Takenaka and Asahikosan requested that the release

of payment be held in abeyance pending a determination of the amount of just

-121-

compensation and the identification of the rightful claimants. In order to determine what
action needed to be taken in view of Takenaka's interest as a judgment creditor of
PIATCO (now judgment creditor for the unpaid US$83 million on the EPC Contract) and
also in the interest of orderly procedure, the Court declared on 28 June 2006 that it would
resolve the remaining pending motions in an Omnibus Order before it ordered the actual

release of the Republic's deposited proffered value.

265. Thus, by Order dated 7 August 2006, the Regional Trial Court denied the
Republic's Urgent Manifestation and Motion. This Order was followed by an Order on 8
August 2006 denying all motions for intervention from third parties, including those of
Takenaka, and another Order on 9 August 2006 directing the Manila International Airport
Authority and the Land Bank ofthe Philippines to cause the release of the
Php3,002,125,000.00 to a duly authorized PIATCO representative. The Board of
Directors of the Manila International Airport Authority accordingly issued a Board
Resolution where it "approved the payment to PIATCO of the proffered value of NAIA
Terminal 3" and authorized its General Manager "to take the necessary steps in order to
effect immediate payment of the said proffered value to PLIATCO". The second stage
proceedings for the valuation of the Terminal for payment of just compensation could

then commence.

G. The Valuation Proceedings by the Court-Appointed Commissioners

266. Under Rule 67 of the Philippine Rules of Court, which is suppletory to Republic
Act No. 8974, upon payment of the proffered value by the Republic and issuance of the

order of expropriation (already issued), just compensation is determined by three

- 122-

competent and disinterested commissioners in order to ascertain and report to the court
the just compensation for the expropriated property. Evidence may be introduced by
either party to the proceedings who may also examine the property sought to be

expropriated.

267. As noted earlier, the determination of just compensation and the transfer of title to
the Republic is the last stage of the expropriation proceedings. As also noted earlier, on 7
January 2005, the Regional Trial Court had already issued an order appointing three
commissioners for the determination of just compensation, to which the Republic had
filed its objections on 14 January 2005, questioning the competence of the appointees.
The resolution of this matter had been held in abeyance pending resolution of the
Gingoyon case. On 5 April 2006, the Regional Trial Court issued an Order denying the
Republic's opposition and set the oath-taking of the commissioners for 11 April 2006.
The Regional Trial Court ordered the commissioners to submit their report on the

valuation of the Terminal on or before 22 May 2006.

268. The Republic filed a Motion for Reconsideration on 11 April 2006, on the
grounds that (1) the appointed commissioners did not appear to be competent for the task;
and (2) there was no showing that the appointed commissioners were disinterested. Of
particular relevance to the present arbitration, the Republic of the Philippines submitted
that since the determination of the valuation of the Terminal and the just compensation
for its taking would impact inter alia on the ICSID arbitration proceedings, the valuation
should be made by a disinterested, competent and respected international airport

engineering construction expert. Only in this way would the valuation be respected by

- 123-

international tribunals. PIATCO took issue with these arguments in its comment of 26
April 2006. In the interim, on 12 April 2006, the Regional Trial Court ordered a
valuation conference to be held between the parties and the appointed commissioners on
18 April 2006. On 19 April 2006, the Regional Trial Court ordered an "ocular

inspection" of the Terminal to be held on 25 April 2006.

269. The Republic filed a Manifestation and Motion on 24 April 2006 praying that the
Regional Trial Court resolve all pending motions, including a number of motions filed by
various intervenors, before continuing with the valuation proceedings. In light of the
unresolved objections to the appointment of commissioners, the Republic also objected to
the “ocular inspection" and submitted that it should not be considered part of the
valuation proceedings but should merely be a "visit" to the Terminal. The viewing of the

Terminal nonetheless proceeded on 25 April 2006, with all parties present.

270. Ina Request for Extension of Time by Court-Appointed Commissioners, filed on
5 May 2006, the commissioners asked the Regional Trial Court to allow them "to
determine the appropriate appraised value unilaterally by engaging an internationally
accepted professional entity that would perform the actual technical work of appraisal of
the Terminal in question". The commissioners also asked for an extension of three

months to complete the task of determining just compensation.

271. The Tribunal observes that Section 4 of R.A. No. 8974 provides that in the event
the owner of the property contests the implementing agency's proffered value, the
Regional Trial Court shall determine the just compensation to be paid to the owner within

sixty (60) days from the date of the filing of the expropriation case. It will be recalled

-124-

that the Supreme Court in its decision in Gingoyon directed the Regional Trial Court to
determine just compensation within the same period. However, consistent with the
Court's inherent power to control its own processes, the commissioners’ Motion for
extension of time was granted by the Court in its Order of 17 May 2006. This Order was
silent on the matter of the commissioner's proposed engagement of an "internationally

accepted professional entity".

272. On 22 May 2006, the Republic filed a Manifestation stating that it had retained
the international engineering firms of TCGI Engineers, Ove Arup Consulting, and Gleeds
Management Services for the assessment of the safety, operability and value of Terminal
3. The Republic informed the Regional Trial Court that notwithstanding its continuing

objection to the appointment of the commissioners, it would submit the final report of
these engineering firms for use in the expropriation proceedings. Three days later, on 25

May 2006, the Republic filed a Motion for Production and Inspection of Documents and

Things.

273. On 11 September 2006, while the valuation proceedings were pending, the
Government of the Philippines made a provisional payment to PLATCO representing a
proffered value for the Terminal of Php3,002,125,000.00. The Tribunal notes that
PIATCO transferred approximately half of this amount, i.e. US$29 million, to Fraport
during the month of September'®. On that same date, i.e. on 11 September 2006, the

'S In a press release dated 25 September 2006 posted on Fraport's website (www.fraport.com) under the
heading "Fraport Receives First Payment for Manila Terminal Project", the following is stated:

"The Philippine government has made a first partial compensation payment of

3,002,125,000 Philippine pesos (about US$60 million) to PIATCO terminal company, in
which Fraport AG holds a 30-percent share. Of this amount, some US$29 million were

- 125-

Regional Trial Court issued an Order memorializing payment of the proffered value to
PIATCO and stated that the Republic had complied with the Supreme Court's Gingoyon
decision and the Regional Trial Court's Orders directing payment. The Regional Trial

's Writ of Possession over Terminal 3 dated 21

 

Court thus reinstated the Republi

December 2004.

274. The commissioners subsequently held a valuation conference with the Republic
and PIATCO on 21 September 2006, during which the commissioners stated that the
quantitative determination of just compensation could be simplified if the parties could
agree on the valuation. The parties were invited to confer and consider whether they
were willing to engage in negotiations. In a conference on 19 October 2006, the
commissioners again proposed setting aside a period of time to negotiate and attempt to
reduce the issues in dispute. The commissioners nevertheless stated that they would
simultaneously seek presentations for a formal valuation in the event negotiations were

not fruitful.

 

 

transferred to Fraport AG's account in Frankfurt today. Part of this amount is
redemption of a loan which Fraport granted to PIATCO. The remainder of this initial
payment was used for the reduction of other PIATCO liabilities. The definitive total
amount of ion shall soon be i with the help of i experts.

 

‘This is a first success in our efforts to get appropriate compensation for our investment
in the Philippines," said Fraport AG's executive board chairman Dr. Wilhelm Bender.
‘The sum remitted can therefore only be a down payment for PIATCO. We are still
vigorously pursuing the arbitration procedure before the World Bank in Washington."
The full amount of the payment made will have an effect on earnings in the current
business year so that Fraport will show additional non-recuring income of about €22.6
million."

 

-126-

275. The Tribunal notes that a subsequent commissioners’ conference on 30 October
2006 was attended by representatives of the Republic and PIATCO, as well as by Fraport

official Peter Henkel and legal counsel for Takenaka.

276. The next valuation conference took place on 24 November 2006, during which
the commissioners stated that the informal negotiations between the parties had failed.
The formal valuation would accordingly proceed and, to this end, an independent

appraiser would be appointed.

277. The parties to the valuation proceedings were subsequently requested to provide
the commissioners with various documents, including the Tender documents, the
Terminal-related contracts between the Republic and PIATCO as well as the EPC
Contract. The commissioners' request for documents resulted in a production Order
dated 5 January 2007. As of the date of the present Award, the parties had yet to fully
comply with this Order, and an independent appraiser had yet to be appointed to proceed

with the formal valuation of Terminal 3.

278. Asa final observation, it is noted that on 17 March 2007, the Regional Trial Court
modified its Order of 8 August 2006 and allowed the intervention of Takenaka and
Asahikosan in the expropriation proceedings. The Court held that the two firms, as
PIATCO's construction contractor and procurement supplier, are in the best position to
elucidate actual construction costs, which is the most important consideration facing the

commissioners and the Court.

- 127-

279. The valuation phase of the expropriation proceedings regarding the Terminal
continues as of the date of the present Award. As they progress, the Tribunal recalls the
commitment made by President Macapagal-Arroyo on 24 December 2004 when

Respondent instituted the expropriation proceedings to take possession of Terminal 3:

"Let me take this occasion to assure everyone that prompt just compensation will
be paid in accordance with Philippine law. Existing legal processes will be
observed, and due process will be accorded /sic/ all genuine parties in interest,
including foreign investors and contractors, who will have the full benefit of the
observance of law. The Government has deposited the sum required by law into
the custody of the expropriation court with the filing of the Complaint."

 

- 128-

IV. THE RESPONDENT'S JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS A.
The Treaty

280. Before addressing the Respondent's jurisdictional challenge, it is essential to
reproduce those provisions of the Treaty which the Tribunal is called upon to interpret

and analyze in this regard.

281. The relevant provisions of the Preamble to the Treaty, as well as part of Article 1,
read as follows:
"The Federal Republic of Germany
and the Republic of the
Philippines

hereinafter referred to as the Contracting States,

Desiring to intensify economic co-operation between both States;

Intending to create favorable conditions for investments by nationals and

companies of either Contracting State in the territory of the other Contracting
State, and to increase prosperity in their respective territories;

 

that and ion of such ii will benefit
the economic prosperity of both States -

Have agreed as follows:
Article 1 Definition
of Terms
For the purpose of this Agreement:
1. The term ‘investment’ shall mean any kind of asset accepted in
accordance with the respective laws and regulations of either

Contracting State, and more particularly, though not exclusively:

(a) movable and immovable property as well as other rights in rem,
such as mortgages, liens, pledges, usufructs and similar rights;

(b) shares of stocks and debentures of companies or interest in the
property of such companies;

- 129-

(c) claims to money utilized for the purpose of creating an economic
value or to any performance having an economic value;

(d) intellectual property rights, in particular copyrights, patents,
utility-model patents, registered designs, trademarks, trade-
names, trade and business secrets, technical processes, know-
how, and good will;

(c) business concessions conferred by law or under contract,
including concessions to search for, extract or exploit natural
resources;

any alteration of the form in which assets are invested shall not affect
their classification as an investment." (emphasis added)

282. Paragraph | of Article 2 of the Treaty further contains the following relevant

provisions regarding jurisdiction:

"Article 2 Promotion and
Acceptance

(1) Each Contracting State shall promote as far as possible investments in its
territory by investors of the other Contracting State and admit such
investments in accordance with its Constitution, laws and
regulations as referred to in Article 1 paragraph 1. Such investments
shall be accorded fair and equitable treatment." (emphasis added)

283. Also of significance to the issue of jurisdiction are the following provisions from
the Protocol to the Treaty:
"Protocol
to the Agreement
between the Federal Republic of Germany

and the Republic of the Philippines concerning the
Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments

(2) Ad Article 2
(a) As provided for in the Constitution of the Republic of the Philippines,

foreign investors are not allowed to own land in the territory of the
Republic of the Philippines. However, investors are allowed to own up

- 130-

to 40 % of the equity of a company which can then acquire ownership of
land.

(5) Ad Article 5

(a) With respect to the Republic of the Philippines it is understood that duly
registered investments are assets of any kind as defined in Article 1,
admitted in accordance with Article 2 (1) and reported to competent
governmental agencies at the time the investment was made. It is further
understood, that the transfer guarantee is not limited to the capital values
of the investments that have been duly registered. The Republic of the
Philippines will relax as soon as possible existing reporting
requirements." (emphasis added)

284. With these Treaty provisions in mind, the Tribunal now turns to the parties’
respective positions regarding the issue of jurisdiction. As the Respondent is the moving
party, the Tribunal will consider its arguments in this regard first. The Tribunal will then

review the Claimant's arguments regarding jurisdiction.

B. The Respondent's Position

285. In essence, the Respondent challenges the Tribunal's jurisdiction in this
arbitration on the basis that the protections afforded by the BIT at issue do not extend to
investments made in violation of Philippine law. The premise to this challenge is that the
BIT entered into between the Philippines and Germany provides the only possible basis
for the Tribunal's jurisdiction over the Claimant's BIT claims. In this regard, the
Respondent refers to the "limited nature" of the BIT's application and contends that the
Claimant's investment falls outside of the BIT's expressly limited scope because it was
not made in compliance with Philippine law. In brief, the Respondent avers that the
Claimant's investment was not "accepted" in accordance with the laws of the Philippines,

in the words of Article 1(1) of the BIT.

-131-

286. It is in this connection that the Respondent emphasizes that "even once 'admitted'
an investment may fall outside the scope of the BIT's protections where it is implemented
in a manner that materially violates the host State's laws that directly regulate the
investment or the investment activities". In other words, the duty to comply with the host
State's law is an ongoing one which must be respected throughout the period in which the
investment is made. It is also in this connection that the Respondent posits that "[t]he
burden is on the investor to ensure that its investment complies with host State law if the

investor wishes to avail itself of the rights and benefits of the BIT".

287. More particularly, the Respondent contends that the Terminal 3 concession is a
public utility subject to the nationality restrictions of the Philippine Constitution and the
prohibitions imposed by the ADL, and that both have application to Fraport's investment
in PIATCO. It is the Respondent's contention that Fraport openly sought to evade the
nationality requirement limiting foreign ownership of the capital of a public utility to
40% through the device of "indirect" ownership coupled with the secret shareholder
agreements referred to earlier in this Award'*. The Respondent argues that Fraport

sought de facto control of the Terminal 3 project and/or of PIATCO as the corporate
vehicle of Fraport's investment because its Supervisory Board would not otherwise

permit the flow of its funds into the Terminal 3 project.

288. The Respondent expands on its argument that the BIT's protections extend only to
investments made in accordance with Philippine law by referring to, inter alia, the
decision in the ICSID case of Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Kingdom

" Supra at paragraph 125.

- 132-

of Morocco''. Where a BIT contemplates, as it allegedly does here, a threshold analysis
of the legality of the investment as a jurisdictional matter, such an analysis must be
conducted. According to the Respondent, broad and general statements in the preamble
to a BIT to the effect that it is meant to promote investments cannot serve as grounds to
circumvent the duty to conduct this analysis. The Respondent argues that "interpreting
the provisions of a BIT requires a balanced approach that takes into consideration that
States seek to create favourable environments for the promotion of investment, but not at
the cost of other /sic] imperatives legal and regulatory imperatives that must be respected

in order to promote and sustain governments based on the rule of law".

289. In terms of the applicable standard regarding jurisdiction, the Respondent refers to
the Claimant's argument that the Tribunal must dismiss the Respondent's jurisdictional
objection if it is satisfied that the Claimant has "alleged facts" that if proven would be
"capable of falling with /sic] the provisions of the treaty". According to the Respondent,
the Claimant's argument confuses the general standard of proof for establishing
iurisdictional elements with the standard applied to assessing the sufficiency of claims
that the substantive terms of the BIT have been breached. The Respondent further adds
that it is not challenging whether the causes of action alleged by the Claimant are capable
of constituting violations of the BIT. Rather, the Respondent's jurisdictional objection
focuses on whether a basic element necessary to establish jurisdiction is present, i.e. the

existence of an investment covered by the BIT.

‘ICSID Case No.ARB/00/4 (23 July 2001).

-133-

290. Finally, according to the Respondent, it is precisely because the Claimant's
capital investments, loans and guarantees to PLATCO were made in violation of the
Philippine Constitution and ADL that they do not benefit from the BIT's protection. In
particular, the Respondent contends that, starting in 1999, the Claimant structured its
investment in PIATCO in a manner that was intended to evade Philippine nationality and
anti-dummy laws. It devised a series of arrangements designed to assure that it could
exert influence and control over PIATCO, including authority to make additional
appointments to PIATCO's board, veto rights over decisions of the terminal operator,
pooling arrangements to permit it to influence areas of terminal operations and retail
management, as well as contractual arrangements through which it had the exclusive
authority to determine the financial arrangements for the Terminal 3 project. The
Respondent further states that the Claimant had been advised that "arrangements, other
than mere equity investments between FAG /i.e. Fraport] and the Company /i.e.

PIATCO}, must be considered carefully".

291. From a broader perspective, the Respondent's jurisdictional challenge, to the
extent that it relates to the Claimant's alleged non-compliance with Philippine law (with
emphasis on ADL prohibitions), is based on the following statement: "The point is not
that Fraport controlled PIATCO, but that Fraport tried but failed to control PIATCO, and
in so doing violated the Philippine Anti-Dummy Law." According to the Respondent,
the Claimant's (failed) attempt to control PIATCO is conclusively evidenced by the
secret shareholder agreements produced by the Claimant in December 2005 and during

the hearing in January 2006.

-134-

c. The Claimant's Position

292. The Claimant's central position on jurisdiction is that its investment, which
allegedly totals more than US$425 million, was made in accordance with Philippine law.

In the Claimant's own words:

"Fraport's indirect investment in PIATCO by means of the cascade companies
allowed funds to be provided to the Terminal 3 project in compliance with
Philippine law, including Philippine restrictions on foreign ownership of public
utilities. The members of the Cheng family are citizens of the Philippines and
control PIATCO. Fraport is a 30% non-controlling shareholder of PIATCO
notwithstanding its 61.44% direct and indirect ownership of PIATCO through the
cascade companies."

293. In terms of general observations, the Claimant maintains that the "Respondent's
arguments based on Fraport's non-compliance with the 'anti-dummy' and nationality
laws should also be understood as inventions for this arbitration", and states that the
Philippines has not "ever taken any action under its own laws to charge Fraport with any

violation of those laws".

294. Regarding the manner in which its investment was structured, the Claimant makes

this further general observation:

"An obvious fundamental flaw of Respondent's argument is its failure to

i ish between ic participation and control. Fraport is
a minority shareholder in PIATCO. Control is in the hands of the majority
shareholders of PIATCO, the Cheng family. Fraport is also a minority
shareholder in the cascade companies, and Fraport does not have control over
any company owning stock in PIATCO. This was the structure by which Fraport
complied with the Philippine law's prohibition against its having control over a
public utility while also achieving an economic interest commensurate with its
investment. Fraport should not be viewed with suspicion for having structured
its investments on the basis of legal advice so as to have the influence in the
project that Philippine law permitted." (emphasis in original)

-135-

295. As atheme running through its arguments on jurisdiction, the Claimant
emphasizes that the Respondent has long known the details of PLATCO's shareholding
structure, and never charged the Claimant in the Philippines with violating its foreign
ownership laws. In particular, the Claimant maintains that its investment(s) has always
been fully disclosed to the Philippine SEC, and furthermore that the Respondent was
aware of the Claimant's investment(s) at the highest levels of government. The Claimant
also makes the point that although it was provided with a chart of PLIATCO's shareholder
structure, the Philippine Supreme Court did not address this issue in its May 2003 Agan
decision. The Claimant stresses that it asked for and followed legal advice to ensure it

respected the law while achieving permissible influence in the Terminal 3 project.

296. In addition, the Claimant maintains that the Philippine SEC and DOJ have
rendered opinions to the effect that "companies that are at least 60% owned by Philippine
nationals are considered Filipino-owned irrespective of minority ownership". Similarly,
it submits that the Respondent's own description of facts and the statements of its
witnesses foreclose the argument that the Claimant controlled PIATCO in violation of
Philippine law and that, furthermore, none of the Respondent's experts on Philippine law

conclude that the Claimant violated Philippine law.

297. The Claimant contends that the BIT creates an obligation for the Respondent to
admit foreign investments. The Claimant argues that "tribunals will look to the broader

purpose of a BIT when defining the scope of a clause containing a reference to the

 

adm: n of foreign investments and their compliance with local laws" (emphasis

-136-

added). The Claimant adds that the interpretation of BIT provisions must be guided by

the fact that the purpose of bilateral investment treaties is to promote foreign investments.

298. Finally, it is the Claimant's contention that the parties' dispute in this arbitration
is indeed about an "investment" made pursuant to the BIT. The Claimant makes a
number of assertions in this regard. First, the Claimant maintains that its prima facie
showing that its investment satisfied Philippine law has not been rebutted, with the result
that the investment must be deemed accepted under the BIT. Second, the Claimant
stresses that the Respondent bears the burden to produce evidence that Fraport's
investment was not in accordance with its laws, and that the Respondent cannot satisfy its

burden merely by showing non-compliance with local laws. The Claimant also argues

that its compliance with Philippine law must be assessed at the time of the investment.
Finally, the Claimant maintains that acts of approval and acquiescence of competent
authorities constitute further evidence that the Respondent accepted the Claimant's

investment(s).

299. Against this background, the Tribunal's analysis and findings in light of the

parties' respective arguments and submissions on jurisdiction follow.

- 137-

 

V. ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS ON JURISDICTION
Preliminary Observations

300. As gleaned from the overview of their respective arguments regarding the issue of
jurisdiction, the parties fundamentally disagree on the scope of the BIT in terms of
limitations imposed by the laws and regulations of the host state. In order to make a

determination in this regard, the terms of Article 1(1) of the BIT will be recalled:

"Article 1
Definition of Terms

For the purpose of this Agreement:

1. The term ‘investment’ shall mean any kind of asset accepted in
accordance with the respective laws and regulations of either
Contracting State, and more particularly, though not exclusively:

(a) movable and immovable property as well as other rights in
rem, such as mortgages, liens, pledges, usufructs and similar
rights;

(b) shares of stocks and debentures of companies or interest in
the property of such companies;

e

) claims to money utilized for the purpose of creating an
economic value or to any performance having an economic
value;

S

}) intellectual property rights, in particular copyrights, patents,
utility-model patents, registered designs, trademarks, trade-
names, trade and business secrets, technical processes,
know-how, and good will;

business concessions conferred by law or under contract,
sions to search for, extract or exploit natural

    

any alteration of the form in which assets are invested shall not affect
their classification as an investment." (emphasis added)

301. The Tribunal observes that as a result of the BIT's wording, the arguments of both

parties address at some length the interpretation to be given to the term "accepted" used

- 138-

in the BIT.

UNCTAD:

302.

be met.

"In agreements that apply this limitation, investment that was not established in
accordance with the host country's laws and regulations would not fall within the
definition of investment' as used in the agreement.

Such a limitation in an investment agreement obviously is intended to induce
foreign investors to ensure that all local laws and regulations are satisfied in the
course of establishing an investment by denying treaty coverage to non-
compliant investment."

The Respondent also refers to the "objective standard of lawfulness" which must

It quotes, in aid of its argument, the following extract from the Dolzer and

Stevens treatise:

303.
relates solely to circumstances where a State has laws and regulations for the admittance

of investments. More particularly, the Claimant does not accept that Article 1(1) of the

' UNCTAD, Scope and Definition: UNCTAD Series on issues in international investment agreements at

"A further important consideration as to the limited scope of the BIT's
application is that the requirement that investments be made in accordance
with law is premised upon an objective standard of lawfulness.

BITs generally do not include any specific requirements that an investor must
follow other than that it must be done in accordance with the law; however, a
few BITs have laid down objective conditions in the treaty itself.

Although therefore not a common phenomenon, it is critical to examine
whether this type of condition has been introduced by the Contracting
Parties, insofar as it may well exclude investments that would otherwise fall
under the treaty."

The Claimant argues that this passage from Dolzer and Stevens is inapposite as it

page 24. ° Rudolf Dolzer and Margrete Stevens, Bilateral Investment Treaties (1995) at page 54.

- 139-

For instance, the Respondent points to the following passage from

BIT can be construed as a substantive jurisdictional limitation. The Claimant elaborates

as follows:

"L...] An analysis of other BITs shows that there is nothing 'remarkable' about
the phrase 'in accordance with domestic law’, as it appears to be a common
feature of BITs. Even if one were to conclude that these phrases reflect a special
emphasis on the part of the contracting parties, such emphasis may only be
understood to concern the right of States to regulate the initial access of
foreign investments to their territories. This is acknowledged by Professor
Dolzer. Such barriers to foreign investment are not, however, at issue in the
current dispute." (emphasis added)

304. The Claimant adds:

"It further derives from the object and purpose of the BIT that the phrase 'in
accordance with the law' shall not be understood to mean that foreign
investments have to comply with each and every provision of domestic law or
else risk forfeiture of the protection afforded by the BIT. As Professor Dolzer
concedes, ‘it would appear implausible to argue that each infraction of the local
laws would deprive the investor of the guarantees laid down in the BIT'. Such a
conclusion would also contradict general principles of law, such as Article 27 of
the Vienna Convention, which provides that '[a] party may not invoke the
provisions of its internal law as justification for its failure to perform a treaty’.

Further, a tribunal would have jurisdiction to hear a claim even in the presence of
a violation of local investment laws that could otherwise deprive it of jurisdiction
when, for example, 'the actions of the Respondent were out of proportion with
any non-compliance that may have existed’. It would indeed be inappropriate
and inconsistent with the BIT to deprive the investor of the protections of the BIT
on the basis of non-compliance with municipal law where, for example, such non-
compliance may be cured or rectified by the investor."

305. It is further observed that the boundaries of this Tribunal's jurisdiction are
delimited by the arbitration agreement, in the instant case, both the BIT and the
Washington Convention. Article 25 of the Washington Convention, which provides,
inter alia, parameters of jurisdiction ratione materiae, does not define "investment",
leaving it to parties who incorporate ICSID jurisdiction to provide a definition if they

wish. In bilateral investment treaties which incorporate an ICSID arbitration option, the

-140-

word "investment" is a term of art, whose content in each instance is to be determined by
the language of the pertinent BIT which serves as a /ex specialis with respect to Article

25 of the Washington Convention.

306. With respect to a bilateral investment treaty that defines "investment", it is
possible that an economic transaction that might qualify factually and financially as an
investment (i.e. be comprised of capital imported by a foreign entity into the economy of
another state which is party to a BIT), falls, nonetheless, outside the jurisdiction of the
tribunal established under the pertinent BIT, because /egally it is not an "investment"
within the meaning of the BIT. This will occur when the transaction that might otherwise
qualify as an "investment" fails ratione temporis, as occurred in Empresa Lucchetti S.A.
et ah v. Republic of Peru”’, or fails ratione personae, as occurred in Soufraki v. The
United Arab Emirates’'. It will also occur when the transaction fails to qualify ratione

materiae, as occurred in Inceysa Vallisoletana, S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador

307. In the case before this Tribunal, there are no plausible objections to its jurisdiction
ratione temporis or ratione personae. Objections have, however, been lodged with
respect to its jurisdiction ratione materiae. In addressing these objections, the Tribunal
will first consider the factual allegations regarding the Claimant's investment as it relates
to the laws of the Philippines, in particular the ADL. The Tribunal will then set forth the
legal standards established by the relevant instruments before proceeding to elaborate its

own analysis.

2°ICSID Case No. ARB/03/4 (7 February 2005).
2 ICSID Case No. ARB/02/07 (7 July 2004).
* ICSID Case No. ARB/03/26 (2 August 2006).

-141-

B.

308.
in Manila and is affiliated with Baker & McKenzie, submitted a preliminary due
diligence report on legal issues to Fraport or FAG as it was then known as part of
Fraport's preparations for its planned investment in the Philippines.
taken out of context, the Tribunal believes it will be useful to quote in extenso,

emphasizing the portions of the QT report that are of special relevance by setting them in

The Pertinent Facts

On 11 January 1999, the law firm of Quisumbing Torres ("QT"), which is based

boldface.

309.

At pages 6-9 of its report, QT stated:

"Regulatory Environment

We set out certain general aspects of Philippine law, which will assist in
understanding this preliminary Report:

(a) Foreign Ownership. RA 7042, Foreign Investments Act of 1991, as
amended (‘FIA') governs and regulates equity investments in domestic
corporations made by non-Philippine nationals, either in the form of foreign
exchange or other assets actually transferred into the Philippines.

Generally, a non-Philippine national may own up to 100% of domestic
corporations, except domestic corporations engaged in any business activity
included in the Negative List of the FIA. The Negative List of the FIA contains
the areas of economic activities where foreign ownership is prohibited or limited.
The Negative List contains 2 lists, List A and List B. List A contains areas of
investment where foreign ownership is limited by mandate of the Philippine
Constitution and/or by specific laws. List B contains areas of investment where
foreign ownership is limited for reasons of security, defense, risk to health and
morals and protection of local small and medium scale enterprises.

 

The following are included in the Negative Lists of the FIA:

. Operation and ownership of public utilities (up to 40% foreign equity
allowed);

. Retail Trade (no foreign equity allowed);

. The practice of licensed professions such as engineering (no foreign
equity allowed);

. Ownership of private lands (up to 40% foreign equity allowed); and

- 142-

Lest segments be

. Advertising (up to 30% foreign equity allowed).

In respect of ownership and operation of public utilities, the Philippine
Constitution provides that:

'No franchise, certificate, or any other form of authorization for
the operation of a public utility shall be granted except to
citizens of the Philippines or to corporations or associations
organized under the laws of the Philippines at least sixty
percentum of whose capital is owned by such citizens, nor
shall such franchise, certificate or authorization be exclusive in
character or for a longer period than fifty years. Neither shall
any such franchise or right be granted except under the condition
that it shall be subject to amendment, alteration, or repeal by the
Congress when the common good so requires. The State shall
encourage equity participation in public utilities by the general
public. The participation of foreign investors in the
governing body of a public utility enterprise shall be limited
to their proportionate share in its capital, and all the
executive and managing officers of such corporation or
association must be citizens of the Philippines.' (underscoring
supplied)

Pursuant to the Philippine Constitution, if the operation of the infrastructure or
development facility requires a public utility franchise, the BOT Law requires
that the project proponent must be a Filipino or a corporation registered with the
SEC and owned up to a least 60% by Filipinos.

Philippine law does not provide an exact definition of a public utility. In the
1989 Supreme Court case of Albana v. Reyes (175 SCRA 264), ‘public utility’
was defined in a footnote only citing American Jurisprudence as follows:

‘A ‘public utility’ is a business or service engaged in regularly
supplying the public with some commodity or service of public
consequence such as electricity, gas, water, transportation,
telephone or telegraph service. Apart from statutes which define
public utilities that are within the purview of such statutes, it
would be difficult to construct a definition of a public utility
which would fit every conceivable case. As its name indicates,
however, the term public utility implies a public use and service
to the public’

This means that the term ‘public utility! may be subject to a broad interpretation.
Other than utilities traditionally falling within the term public utility, it is not

certain as to what activities fall within the term public utility.

Generally, the operations of the Project fall within the meaning of a public utility.
Thus, foreign ownership of the Company is limited to 40% of its capital.

- 143-

310.

The Concession Agreement appears to imply that the Company will undertake
both public utility activities and non-public utility activities.

Although the leasing of space for the operations of retail outlets or restaurants or
for putting up advertising signs, in the terminal, are not nationalized or partially
nationalized activities, engaging in retail, restaurant or advertising business are
covered by nationalization laws. The transportation business is also considered a
public utility business.

The limitations on foreign equity in corporations engaging in these activities are
as follows:

: Operation and ownership of public utilities (up to 40% foreign equity
allowed);

: Retail Trade (includes restaurant business) (no foreign equity allowed);
and

: Advertising (up to 30% foreign equity allowed).

(b) Anti-Dummy Law. Commonwealth Act No. 108 (as amended by
Presidential Decree No. 715), otherwise known as the 'Anti-Dummy Law'
imposes criminal and civil penalties to those violating nationalization laws.
The Anti-Dummy Law prohibits, among others, foreign nationals from:

‘interven(ing) in the management, operation, administration
or control thereof, whether as an officer, employee or laborer
therein with or without remuneration, except technical
personnel whose employment may be specifically authorized
by the Secretary of Justice’.

In addition, the Anti-Dummy law provides that:

‘the election of aliens as members of the board of directors or
governing body of corporations or associations engaging in
partially-nationalized activities shall be allowed in
proportion to their allowable participation or share in the
capital of such entities’.

As a public utility, the operations and ownership of the Company are also
covered by the Anti-Dummy Law.

This means that any arrangements with foreign nationals by the Company
will have to be considered carefully. Foreign nationals may only be
employed in technical positions after prior approval of the Secretary of
Justice. All ive and ma itions must be ied by

Filipino citizens." (emphasis added)

 

In its Executive Summary of the same due diligence report, QT stated:

- 144-

"1. The operation and ownership of a public utility is reserved by the
Philippine Constitution to Filipino citizens or to domestic corporations
owned at least 60% by Filipinos. This means that foreign nationals can
only own a maximum of 40% of the capital of a public utility. The
operations of the Company generally fall within the term ‘public utility’.
Thus, the direct equity investment of FAG together with the equity in the
Company presently held by foreign nationals cannot exceed 40% of the
outstanding capital stock of the Company. At present, the Company is
owned 75% by Philippine nationals and 25% by foreign nationals.

2. The Anti-Dummy Law prohibits foreign nationals from, among others,
intervening in the management, operation, administration or control of a
company engaged in a partially nationalized activity (e.g. a public utility)
except as technical personnel with specific authority from the Secretary
of the Department of Justice. Further the Philippine Constitution
provides that all executive and management positions in a public utility
company must be occupied by Filipino citizens. However, foreign
nationals are entitled to such number of directors /sic] in the board of a
public utility in proportion to their actual and allowable equity in the
Company. In view of the Anti-Dummy Law and the provisions of the
Philippine Constitution, arrangements, other than mere equity
investments between FAG and the Company, must be considered
carefully." (emphasis added)

311. Nine days later on 20 January 1999, the financial services firm of KPMG
submitted to Fraport or FAG, as it was then known, a due diligence report on financial

issues. In light of its extensive analysis, KPMG identified three alternatives for Fraport:

"Subject to the above milestone provisions, we believe that the following are the
best alternatives open to FAG with regards to its role in NAIA Terminal 3:

1. Invest in the project and simultaneously take on the responsibility as
Master Concessionaire.

Considering that we believe the Project is generally viable, this would
appear to be the ideal alternative available to FAG. As Master
Concessionaire, FAG would have the access and authority to manage the
operation to ensure that their best interests are taken into account as an
investor because of the planned majority shareholding structure with
PAGS and Pair Cargo. More so considering that PIATCO does not
possess the experience nor expertise to properly manage and co-
ordinate the technical and commercial operations of an international
airport terminal.

The dual role of investor and Master Concessionaire would minimise any
agency problems and costs associated with FAG coming in only as an

-145-

investor, hence we have not offered the latter as an alternative. We
believe that considering FAG's limited exposure in the Philippines
taking a less active role than being actually part of the project as Master
Concessionaire where it can readily protect its interests would not be
prudent.

It should be noted, that at this time we are not in a position to offer
further advice particularly on the structuring of FAG's entry
because this is beyond the confines of this engagement.

Upon entry, however, FAG should consider that PIATCO indicated that
it would be heavily reliant on FAG as Master Concessionaire to realize
the full potential of the Project upon operation. Consequently, the entry
of FAG would require a substantial commitment of resources on a
continuing basis covering not only the initial investment but other
resources, such as funds and people, for its role as Master
Concessionaire. The resources would be used formulating concepts,
strategies and a business plan in the pre-operational phase and to
manage the new terminal in the operational period.

 

This alternative offers 2 financial benefits - cash dividends and
management fees. In terms of the latter, there is also significant potential
for performance related compensation, should FAG desire to include
such provisions in its contract as Master Concessionaire. In general
terms, we believe that a fixed fee plus performance related compensation
calculated on certain targets and milestones with full cost recovery would
be an ideal structure. More definitive advice requires further study,
which would fall under a separate engagement, as this would be beyond
the current engagement scope.

Enter only as the contracted Master Concessionaire in exchange for a
management fee.

We believe that this would be the next best alternative, although it does
offer a more limited potential for profitability. As Master
Concessionaire, FAG would profit only in terms of receiving
management fees for its services. The inherent risk covering this
alternative is that unless FAG secures sufficient authority and
leverage from PIATCO to make necessary changes, modifications
and orders to better ensure the successful /sic/ of their role and
subsequent tasks as Master Concessionaire FAG may not really
capture the full benefits under this alternative.

Unless this is clarified and ensured at the outset, there is a significant
potential for problems in meeting performance targets especially if
certain FAG recommended facility specifications that are integral to
successful airport terminal operations are not implemented. If FAG
believes that securing the necessary authority and leverage discussed
above would be [a] problem, then only alternatives 1 and 3 should be
considered.

 

- 146-

3. Do not invest in the Project and do not assume role of Master
Concessionaire for the new terminal.

Although we believe that the Project is viable and has the good profit
potential for its investors and participants, i.e. good chances of healthy
performance related compensation, FAG always has this option if it feels
that its expectations are not in the line with our findings." (emphasis
added)

312. There is no indication in the record as to whether Fraport made the QT due

diligence report available to KPMG.

313.  Fraport's final report to its supervisory body of 26 February 1999 addressed the
concerns of the KPMG report with respect to the preferred structuring of the investment
from a financial perspective, but ignored the legal concerns which QT had expressed with
respect to the ADL. The proposed arrangements set forth in Fraport's final report did not
comply with the legal requirements of Philippine law which QT had spelled out. Indeed,

Fraport did not mince words, as the underscored segment indicates:

Under Philippine law, the share of non-Philippine capital in PLATCO
may not exceed 40%. Currently, 25% are in non-Philippine ownership,
with only 10% being up for sale. This means that FAG can have a
maximum direct share in PIATCO of 25% (nominally 63.75 million
DM). This investment is written into the Sale Purchase Agreement.

Within PIATCO, all shareholders will enter into a Shareholder
Agreement that will also define the management appointments, voting
rights and provisions for the acquisition and sale of shares.

Another Shareholder Agreement between FAG, PAGS, Paircargo and
PTI makes sure that the above-mentioned parties will hold a majority of
51% in PIATCO. It also establishes that FAG will be consulted in
matters that represent its core competencies (retailing, terminal
operation). PAGS and Paircargo are willing to accept the
professional advice of FAG in above-mentioned decisions as binding,
which, however, cannot be enforced legally because of local laws. In
order to reinforce this declaration of intent, the idea is for
GlobeGround and FAG to conclude an additional agreement under
German law making the provisions of the Shareholder Agreement
binding on the mandate holders.

- 147-

After the afore-mentioned transactions, PIATCO will only have a passive
role, while the main activities will be controlled by PTI as concessionaire
for operations and center management.

As a result of its direct investment in PIATCO of 25%, FAG will receive
two seats on the Board out of eleven, and, as a result of the direct
investment via PTI, it will receive two seats on the Board on behalf of
PTI, one of which will be occupied by FAG. Together with the
mandates of PAGS and Paircargo, the consortium will have six seats
on the Board of PIATCO.

PIATCO will limit itself in the future to oversee compliance with all
agreements and the agreement with the Government. The entire
project management will be assigned to PTI, i.e. PTI will plan, build and
operate the terminal. We have a joint 51% share in PIATCO via our
partnership with PAGS and Paircargo. According to the agreements
FAG will have financial and operating control over the project.

According to the agreements, FAG will assume the management
function together with PAGS/GlobeGround (see Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 for
the following comments). In terms of dividing up the business,
PAGS/GlobeGround will be responsible for anything to do with local
dealings and FAG will be responsible for anything to do with the
airport. The partners will be given the right to make proposals for
management positions based on their respective responsibilities. The
shareholders of PAGS have decided that GlobeGroundV DLH will handle
PAGS' management positions." (emphasis added)

314. Previously, on 19 January 1999, the PLATCO Master Concession Concept Brief

had made the arrangement explicit:

"In compliance with the requirements of Asian Development Bank and Export-
Import Bank of Japan (Senior Lenders), PIATCO intends to appoint a Master
Concessionaire (MC) which will be an entity controlled by an internationally-
known airport terminal operator with proven recent experience in managing
international airport terminals at least of the size and with the full management
scope described herein. At this point, PLATCO is looking to Flughafen Frankfurt
Main AG (FAG) to be the international airport terminal operator.

The MC may be a joint venture consisting of FAG and a Filipino company. The
ratio of national to foreign participation should be in accordance with Philippine
laws. A shareholders agreement will have to secure the actual control by

- 148-

FAG as may be allowed by Philippine laws. Actual control refers to full
executive and management control by FAG. This requirement of actual
control must be backed up by an undertaking from the shareholders of the
MC in favor of PIATCO and Senior Lenders so that PIATCO and Senior
Lenders can enforce such requirements. Changes to the shareholders
agreement relating to FAG's exercise of actual control of the MC will
require PIATCO's consent. FAG will be expected to guarantee the
performance in all respects of the functions to be carried out by the Master
Concessionaire." (emphasis added)

315. Fraport's Supervisory Board, which was charged with making the decision of
whether to proceed with the project, was fully aware of the inconsistency of the proposed
arrangements with Philippine law. In a document dated 7 March 1999, i.e. before its
decision was taken, Dr. Werner Schmidt, a member of the Board wrote ("Comments on
Investing in the Consortium for the Construction and Operation of Terminal 3 in Manila,

Philippines" (Meeting of the Supervisory Board re Agenda Item 8 on March 12, 1999)):

"A. Control of the Consortium of Companies by FAG

The documents show that an actual majority shareholding by FAG is to be
reached by investment in various nested equity interests and the granting of a
shareholder loan to PAGS against a subordinate collateral. In fact, FAG's equity
interest shall total 64%. A ‘control agreement! shall ensure that FAG
exercises control over the enterprise.

This is also absolutely necessary since KPMG points out repeatedly that the
current owners are not in a position to ensure the proper operation of the airport.

In fact, however, such control is not practicable for legal reasons, as
PIATCO's legal due diligence states the following: ‘Foreign citizens are
prohibited from intervening in the management, operation or control of the
company...'. Moreover, the summary of the agreements contains the
statement that 'a decisive voting right of FAG would violate the anti-dummy
law of the Philippines’.

Consequently, FAG cannot legally enforce its intended leadership in this

consortium. This, however, is the most important prerequisite for the entire
transaction.” (emphasis added)

- 149-

316. Like the QT due diligence report, Werner Schmidt's comments were ignored.
Indeed, the legal problem to which he drew attention appears to have been ignored from
the very outset; those concerned with designing the architecture of the Terminal 3 project
always assumed, as did KPMG, that Fraport's effective control of the project was vital
for its success. In a letter dated 18 December 1998 from the Chairman and President of
Fraport to a senior investment officer in ADB, i.e. one of the Senior Lenders, Fraport's

Chairman had summarized discussions with ADB as follows:

"(i) Single point operator for both airside and landside which is currently
envisioned to be a company made up of FAG, Paircargo and PAGS (‘FPP’). This
company will be a 60/40 Filipino company in accordance with the requirements
of Philippine Law.

(ii) Within the FPP, FAG will have effective control and responsibility
for the performance of the master concessionaire." (emphasis added)

317. Similarly, on 19 January 1999, Jesse Ang, then CFO of PIATCO, had written to
John Archer, Department Head, Product, Marketing and Consulting of FAG, as Fraport
was then named, referring to "the percentage ownership of FAG within FPP and the
manner in which FAG will assume and retain effective control" (emphasis added).
But the attached Concept Brief elaborated that "[a] shareholders agreement will have to
secure the actual control by FAG as may be allowed by Philippine laws" (emphasis

added).

318. Mr. Ang's letter referred to what was allowed by Philippine law. The problem
was that the actual control and management that a Senior Lender, KPMG and Fraport's
Supervisory Board understood to be necessary for the success of the investment was not

compatible with the ADL, as QT had explained to Fraport.

- 150-

319. Fraport proceeded to deal with this problem by implementing the strategy

described in its confidential d of concluding secret sharehold that

circumvented the relevant Philippine law. A confidential shareholders agreement
between it, Paircargo, PAGS and PTI, concluded on 6 July 1999, characterized by the
Respondent as the "Control Agreement" or "Pooling Agreement", provided in Article

2.02:

"2.02 The Shareholders' or their directors' vote shall be determined in
accordance with the following rules:

(dd) Within a reasonable time prior to the date set for a stockholders’ or board
meeting, the Shareholders shall have their own preliminary meeting for the
purpose of extensive discussions and deliberations on the matters to be put to a
vote. During the preliminary meeting, the Shareholders shall thoroughly discuss
all the possible consequences of an affirmative and of a negative note, with a
view to arriving at a unanimous vote. The position of each Shareholder during
the preliminary meeting shall be given equal weight (i.c., FAG, PAIRCARGO,
PAGS and PTI shall have one vote each).

(2) Incase the Shareholders are unable to reach a common position,
(a) The Shareholders shall consult FAG and FAG may make

recommendations in relation to any of the following matters
(which matters fall within FAG's area of expertise and

competence):
(i) _ the implementation of the O&M Agreement, as executed;
(ii) the operation, maintenance and management of the Terminal
Complex;
(iii) the conduct of commercial operations within the Terminal

Complex in the ordinary course of business.

The Shareholders shall thereafter act upon the recommendations of
FAG.

(b) _ inall other matters not covered by (a) above, the issue shall be
submitted to the respective boards of directors of the Shareholders
for further independent deliberations. If the position taken by the
boards of directors is not unanimous, unless the Shareholders
thereafter agree to postpone any action on the matter, the issue shall
be submitted for resolution by three (3) arbitrators appointed under

-1S1-

and acting pursuant to the Rules of Arbitration of the International
Chamber of Commerce. Arbitration shall be for the purpose of
determining the course of action most favorable to the interests of the
Shareholders and most consistent with Article 1.02. The place of
arbitration shall be Singapore and the language of arbitration shall be
English. Arbitration shall be concluded within sixty (60) days from
submission.

The following, without limitation, shall be deemed matters not
covered by (a) above: the amendment of the Corporation's Articles
of Incorporation or By-laws; the amendment of the PIATCO
Shareholders' Agreement; the dividend policy of the Corporation; a
public offering of the shares of stock of the Corporation; the election
of directors, the appointment of officers; the formation of
committees and their composition; the appointment of and entering
into contracts with consultants, advisers and external auditors; the
maintenance of corporate accounts; the designation of authorized
representatives and check signatories; the conduct of business
outside the Terminal Complex, such as hotels, convention centers
and jewelry manufacturing; relations with GRP in matters not falling
under (a) above." (emphasis added)

320. Under Article 1.07 of the above-quoted FAG-PAIRCARGO-PAGS-PTI

Shareholders’ Agreement, strict confidentiality was undertaken:

"1.07 The Shareholders shall keep the terms and conditions of this
Agreement strictly confidential and undertake not to disclose the contents
hereof to any third party without the prior written consent of the other
Shareholders, except to the extent necessary in order to perform their
obligations hereunder or to enforce the provisions hereof." (emphasis added)

321. A second relevant agreement was the Addendum to the PIATCO Shareholders’
Agreement of 6 July 1999. Article 9 of the Addendum gave "exclusive authority" to

Fraport as finance arranger:

"Notwithstanding any provision in the Shareholders Agreement to the
contrary, FAG shall be the finance arranger for the Project and shall have
the exclusive authority to determine the financial arrangements for the Project,
if necessary, including the nomination of the Company's financial advisers, on
terms and conditions not disadvantageous to the Company. Articles 7.1.2, 7.1.4
and 8.1.18 shall not be construed to include and shall not apply to the financial
arrangements to be undertaken or arranged by FAG for the Company. FAG

- 152-

hereby undertakes to obtain debt financing for the Project from third party
Project Lenders and undertakes to work for a successful financial closing.
However, FAG shall not be responsible for any event or circumstance beyond its
control. FAG acknowledges the fact that the Company has, to date, expended
substantial sums of money in an effort to obtain a successful debt financing from
international financial institutions." (emphasis added)

322. The Tribunal notes that this agreement, while it does not contain a confidentiality
clause, was only produced to the Tribunal in January 2006 during the hearing on

jurisdiction and liability, at the President's request and insistence.

323. The Tribunal need not refer to the other secret agreements which were only
discovered in January 20067°. Indeed, the above-quoted agreements and, in addition, the

Claimant's own internal documents show that Fraport was consciously, intentionally and
covertly structuring its investment in a way which it knew to be a violation of the ADL.
Fraport's equity investment in terms of the statutorily limited percentage in the Terminal
3 project was lawful under Philippine law. Fraport's controlling and managing the
investment was not. Despite having been advised and plainly understanding this, Fraport
secretly designed its investment in the project so as to have that prohibited management

and control, in particular by reserving to itself the ultimate authority as a shareholder in
PIATCO to decide those matters set out in subparagraphs (i), (ii) and (iii) of Article 2.02

(2) (a) of the FAG-PAIRCARGO-PAGS-PTI Shareholders' Agreement of 6 July 1999.

324. Ina meeting on 14 December 1999, Herr Vogel posed a number of questions to

QT, once again indicating Fraport's awareness of a concern about violations of the ADL.

 

?3 These secret shareholder agreements include a shareholders’ agreement amongst PTH Inc. and FAG
dated 6 July 1999, as well as a shareholders' agreement amongst PAGS and FAG of the same date.

- 153-

A week later, in a letter of 21 December 1999, the law firm of QT responded. QT stated

the question posed to it as follows (at page 1):

"We understand that together with SB Capital Investment Corporation (‘SB
Capital’) and using appropriate legal structures/vehicles, FAG is contemplating
acquiring 26% of PIATCO. FAG currently directly owns 25% of PIATCO. We
understand that other foreign shareholders, namely Chuan Hup Incorporated
(‘Chuan Hup') and Nissho Iwai Corporation (‘Nissho Iwai') own 10% and 5% of
PIATCO respectively. Chuan Hup may be selling its 5% of PIATCO. We
further understand that the other 21% will be purchased from the other
shareholders.

16. You inquire in respect of the following:

1. To what possible extent may foreigners assume positions in public utility
companies?"

325. QT, in answering the first question, reviewed the relevant Philippine

constitutional law and then stated (at page 3-4):

"However, the constitutional provision should be read in conjunction with
the Anti-Dummy Law which appears to contain a more rigid prohibition in
respect to alien employment in public utility companies. Under the Anti-
Dummy Law, in respect of nationalized and partially nationalized activities,
foreign nationals are prohibited from intervening in the management,
operation, administration or control of the business, whether as an officer,
employee or laborer, with or without remuneration, except:

a technical personnel whose employment may be specifically
authorized by the Secretary of Justice; and

b. as members of the board of directors ofthe corporation in
proportion to their actual and allowable equity participation.

In this regard the Supreme Court has held in the case of King v. Hernaez (4
SCRA 792) that the words 'management, operation, administration and control,’
followed by the words ‘whether as an officer, employee or laborer’ in the
nationalized or partially nationalized business enterprise signify that the
employment of a person who is not a Filipino citizen even in a minor or clerical
or non-control position is prohibited.

Based on the foregoing, it appears that aside from holding positions in
PIATCO's board of directors in proportion to its share in PIATCO's equity,
FAG's representatives can only be appointed to technical positions in
PIATCO's enterprise, upon prior approval by the Secretary of Justice.

- 154-

Included among the allowable positions is that of Chairman of the Board of
Directors because, generally, the Chairman is the head of the board of
directors.

In respect of technical personnel in public utility companies, the Department
of Justice ("DOJ") has held that the criteria used by the DOJ in granting
specific authorization to employ alien “technical personnel" in a
nationalized business or activity are: whether the position sought to be filled
is technical in nature, taking into consideration the duties involved therein,
and whether the applicant possesses the required qualifications. In this
connection, it may be stressed that DOJ, in construing the term "technical
personnel" to determine whether it applies to a given situation usually refers
the application for employment of technical personnel in partly nationalized
undertakings to the government office that exercises supervision over the
employing corporation for its comment and recommendation (DOJ Opinion
No. 120, dated 30 June 1982). Thus, if FAG would like to have
representatives appointed to positions outside of PIATCO's board of
directors, the employment of these representatives would have /sic/
authorized by the DOJ as technical personnel. The DOJ will likely refer this
matter for recommendation by the Department of Transportation and
Communications." (emphasis added)

326. The preliminary meeting required in Article 2.02 (1) of the FAG-PAIRCARGO-
PAGS-PTI Shareholders’ Agreement of 6 July 1999, which ensured Fraport's control
over the items specified in Article 2.02 (2) thereof, was not consistent with the ADL.

The actual board meeting in which the other shareholders were obliged to act in
accordance with the confidential preliminary meeting was no more than a rubber stamp
of "the recommendations of FAG". The confidentiality clause contained in this
shareholder agreement indicates that Fraport's strategy was to conceal its illegal control

from the Philippine authorities.

327. In summary, Fraport had been fully advised and was fully aware of the ADL and
the incompatibility with the ADL of the structure of its investment which it planned and

ultimately put into place with the secret shareholder agreements.

- 155-

328. The Claimant had opportunities to provide an explanation in this regard during the

hearing. The relevant part of the cross-examination on 10 January 2006 of Mr. Bender,

Chairman of Fraport's Executive Board, follows:

16:38:1
5
6
7
8
9
10
I
12
13

22

"1320
9
Q.. Sir, let me ask you another question based
on that same paragraph on page 5, the third bullet
point.

Do you see, sir, the sentence there that
states, PAGS and Paircargo are willing to accept
the professional advice of Fraport in
above-mentioned decisions as binding which,
however, cannot be enforced legally because of

local laws?

Do you see that section, sir?

A. Yes, Isee it.

Q. So, sir, in fact, Fraport, PAGS,
Paircargo, and PTI were agreeing to certain
provisions that were not enforceable legally under
Philippines law; correct?

A. No. That is not correct because if I see
this correctly, this dates back to February 26,
'99, and only after that we received counsel by the

1321

16:39:35

Philippines attorneys, and then all the agreements
that were entered into were then based on the legal
advice that we received, and for that reason this
is not an agreement, but this is just the way the
considerations were in February of 1999, and later
on the agreements, of course, were reworded and
rephrased.

Q. Sir, at this point in time, in this
document, executives of Fraport were proposing that
Fraport enter into an agreement that it knew was
not enforceable legally under Philippines law;
correct?

 

A. No, that is an erroneous quote. This part
of this sentence, however, cannot be enforced
legally because of local law.

Q. Is that an accurate statement in this
document?

A. Yes, I just quoted from this document.

Q. And that was your understanding of the
situation at this point in time, in March of 1999?

-156-

21 A. Yes. This was in February of '99, by the
22 way, not in March, and that was the state of the

1322
16:41:12
considerations at that point in time, and it was
clear that there is an Anti-Dummy Law imposing
certain restrictions in terms of the rights of the
Fraport AG, and then based on counsel's advice,
which we didn't have at that point in time, but
received later on. Based on counsel's advice, then
we worded the agreements to be in accordance and in
agreement with Filipino law.
9 Q. Sir, you referred a couple of times to
10 advice under Philippines law in connection with
Il these terms. Have you ever seen any written
12 Philippine law opinions with regard to those terms?
13. A. I don'tremember exactly, but I don't
14 think so that I have seen that, but they reported
15 our project managers and the employees responsible
16 for the project reported to the executive board
17 that the contracts are in line with the Philippine
18 law, and also told us that we had this advice by QT
19 law firm."

CADAARWNE

329. No document from the firm of QT supporting the above-quoted statement that the
secret shareholder agreements at issue were "in line with the Philippine law" is to be
found in the extensive record of this arbitration. The documents which were produced to
the Tribunal, all of which emanate from Fraport, contradict this statement insofar as they
were even responsive to the questions posed. It seems that the Republic of the
Philippines is factually correct in its Post-Hearing Memorandum when it says "[n]Jot only
is there is no evidence of any counsel's review of the shareholder agreements in 1999, the
record shows that every Philippine lawyer who looked at Fraport's shareholder

agreements after that time advised that they violated the Anti-Dummy Law".

330. In 2001, as noted earlier, Fraport, anxious to secure a loan from a consortium,

referred to as the Senior Lenders, which would reduce its own financial exposure, was

- 157-

again advised, this time by legal counsel for the Senior Lenders, of the incompatibility of
its arrangements with the ADL. The due diligence report of the law firm of SyCip, which
was not produced to the Tribunal, is, however, referred to in the email traffic between
officials of Fraport which is part of the record before the Tribunal. Thus every legal due
diligence report with respect to the way that Fraport had elected to structure its
investment in PIATCO confirmed that it was in violation of the ADL and thus in

violation of Philippine law.

331. On 2 June 2001, after the SyCip report, Mr. Bernd Struck, Fraport's Executive

Vice President, wrote a stern letter to QT:

"Having received your report of the meeting held with the counsel of the Senior
Lenders, I am deeply concerned about the way, how the position of Fraport in the
NAIA IPT III Project is threatened by issues under the Anti Dummy Law. The
same is true in relation to the Second Addendum, where we had discussed the
Anti Dummy Law issues extensively before we learned that the nomination
rights structure already adopted on the level of PIATCO and on the level of PTI
might constitute a breach of the Anti Dummy Law.

Fraport is a foreign investor and cannot be familiar with the Philippine laws and
regulations. We have to rely on the legal advice obtained on the Philippines and
in particular from your distinguished law firm. Large parts of the contractual
structure of our investment have been crafted by your distinguished firm, and the
amounts at risk are paramount if something goes wrong because of a possible
non-compliance with the local law.

We therefore expect that the advice obtained from your firm is consistent and
provides us with a firm legal basis which enables you and us to defend the
structures created against any attack from whatever side. If you find out that
certain contemplated structures are not, or may not be, in line with Philippine
law, we wish that you warn us early enough, and that you advise us early enough
on safe alternatives to achieve our goals. Please understand that it is not
acceptable for us if resolutions which have been adopted, and which have been
prepared by you, are questioned thereafter, or if contractual structures on which
you have advised are questioned by the Senior Lenders or any other party
without being vigorously defended by you against any attack whatsoever.

Please make sure that Quisumbing Torres is represented by partners familiar with
our Project and the contracts concluded in relation thereto during all upcoming

-158-

discussions with the Senior Lenders' counsels, and I would very much appreciate
your personal attendance during these meetings.

Please make also sure that whoever will join these meetings shall have all

necessary information and shall defend vigorously the legality of the agreements
entered into during the course of this Project."

332. Whatever Mr. Struck's personal knowledge may have been, considering the
documents which have been excerpted in the previous pages of this Award and, in
particular, Werner Schmidt's statement to Fraport's Supervisory Board when it was
considering the investment, the Tribunal cannot see how the highest executive levels of
Fraport can evade their own responsibility and attribute responsibility for its problems to
a mistake of QT, some obscurity on this point in Philippine law, or Fraport's
misunderstanding of QT's warning. It is especially difficult to see how the highest
executive levels of Fraport can plausibly claim not to have been aware of the advice
previously given and confirmed in the communication of Werner Schmidt regarding the
incompatibility of the arrangements that Fraport had concluded with PIATCO with the
legal requirements of the Philippines. The Tribunal is persuaded from Fraport's own
internal and contemporaneous documents that it was consistently aware that the way it
was structuring its investment in the Philippines was in violation of the ADL and

accordingly sought to keep those arrangements secret.

333. | While this factual record is troubling, it does not eo ipso mean that the Tribunal is
without jurisdiction ratione materiae to hear the substance of the claim. The Tribunal's
task is to make this determination in accordance with applicable legal standards, which

are considered next.

-159-

Cc. The Applicable Legal Standards
334. As observed earlier, the BIT at issue in this arbitration has a jurisdictional

limitation ratione materiae to which the Tribunal now turns.

335. Article 1(1) of the BIT provides that for the purpose of this Agreement "[t]he term
‘investment' shall mean any kind of asset accepted in accordance with the respective
laws and regulations of either Contracting State [...]"._ The qualification "accepted in
accordance with the respective laws and regulations of either Contracting State" applies
to every form of investment covered by the BIT. Article 2(1) provides:
"Each Contracting State shall promote as far as possible investments in its
territory by investors of the other Contracting State and admit such investments
in accordance with its Constitution, laws and regulations as referred to Article 1,
paragraph 1. [...]"
336. The Protocol to the Agreement, which was concluded on the same day as the BIT,
states in reference to ad Article 2:
"As provided for in the Constitution of the Republic of the Philippines, foreign
investors are not allowed to own land in the territory of the Republic of the

Philippines. However investors are allowed to own up to 40% of the equity of a
company which can then acquire ownership of land."

337. The Republic's Instrument of Ratification, which was exchanged with Germany

on 10 July 1997, provided:

"KNOW YE, that whereas, the Agreement between the Republic of the
Philippines and the Federal Republic of Germany for the Promotion and
Reciprocal Protection of Investments was signed in Bonn on 18 April 1997;

WHEREAS, the Agreement, consisting of eleven (11) Articles, seeks to
promote, protect and create a favorable condition for investments by investors of
one Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party based on the
principle of mutual respect for sovereignty, equality and mutual benefit;

-160-

WHEREAS, the Agreement provides that the investment shall be in the
areas allowed by and in accordance with the Constitutions, laws and
regulations of each of the Contracting Parties;

WHEREAS, the Agreement also provides for the free transfer of investments
and returns thereto out of the Contracting Parties territories;

WHEREAS, Article 11 of the Agreement provides that it shall enter into force

on the first day of the second month following the date of exchange of the
German instrument of ratification and the Philippine notification of approval;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it known that I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the
Republic of the Philippines, after having seen and considered the aforementioned
Agreement Between the Republic of the Philippines and the Federal Republic of
Germany for the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments, do hereby
ratify and confirm the same and each and every Article and Clause thereof.

IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal
of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed." (emphasis added)

338. Because the exchange of instruments of ratification puts a treaty into effect in
accordance with its terms, the second preambular paragraph emphasized above is

particularly important in regard to the issue at bar.

339. While all of these provisions are manifestly limitations ratione materiae, their
interpretation is not simple. Article 31 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
enjoins interpretation of particular provisions in their context, i.e. with reference to the
rest of the treaty and in the light of its objects and purposes. The fact that there are three
explicit references in the total of 16 provisions in the Treaty and Protocol plus an
additional reference in the Instrument of Ratification, which selected only four items in
the treaty deemed so important to the Philippines as to require additional recitation,
indicates the significance of this condition. The parties had in mind explicit
constitutional limitations in the Philippines. Article 2 of the Protocol as well as the

Instrument of Ratification make that clear beyond peradventure of doubt.

- 161 -

340. It is also clear that the parties were anxious to encourage investment, which was
the raison d'etre of the treaty. But while a treaty should be interpreted in the light of its
objects and purposes, it would be a violation of all the canons of interpretation to pretend
to use its objects and purposes, which are, by their nature, a deduction on the part of the
interpreter, to nullify four explicit provisions. Plainly, as indicated by these four
provisions, economic transactions undertaken by a national of one of the parties to the
BIT had to meet certain legal requirements of the host state in order to qualify as an

"investment" and fall under the Treaty.

341. There are some linguistic differences between the provisions. In the equally
authentic German version of the Treaty, the same verb "zulassen" is used in both Article
1 and Article 2, while the English version uses two different verbs: "accept" and "admit"
in Articles 1 and 2, respectively. Article 1(1) refers to investments "accepted in
accordance with the respective laws and regulations of either Contracting State". Article
2(1) obliges each state to "admit such investments in accordance with its Constitution,
laws and regulations as referred to in Article 1, paragraph 1". The Instrument of
Ratification states that "[t]he Agreement provides that the investment shall be in the areas
allowed by and in accordance with the Constitutions, laws and regulations of each of the

Contracting Parties".

342. But lest any difference be inferred from the use of two different verbs in the
English version, the Tribunal would note that the chapeau of Article 2 is "Promotion and
Acceptance" and "acceptance" is the verb used in Article 1 (the chapeau of Article | is

"Definition of Terms".). Thus, this linguistic difference does not appear to indicate an

-162-

intentional nuance and hence to be legally significant. Article 2 refers to the
Constitution, as well as laws and regulations; Article 1 uses a generic reference to laws
and regulations. Here again, the difference does not appear significant. The Instrument
of Ratification of the Philippines which is only in English does not include the word
"acceptance" but simply requires that investments be "in the areas allowed by and in

accordance with [...]".

343. Broadly speaking, there are two types of international investments. The first is
comprised of an investment based on or accompanied by some explicit agreement with or
unilateral communication from the host state”; the second involves an investment in the
market of the host state without an accompanying specific agreement between the
investor and the government of the host state. The English version of the BIT might be
read as applying Articles 1(1) and 2(1) only to the first type of investment. But such a
construction would seem unreasonable and even doubtful for a number of reasons. First,
it is unlikely that state parties would insist on compliance with their respective
constitutions, laws and regulations only with respect to the first type of investment but
would, at the same time, discharge potential investors from such compliance with respect
to the quite common type of investments in the second category. Second, ad Article 2 of
the Protocol, which elaborates Article 2 of the Treaty, relates to purchasing shares in a
company which might then acquire land in the territory of the Republic. The acquisition
of shares by a foreign investor in a domestic corporation is a legal transaction that does

not, by its nature, involve some action by the government involving acceptance or

** "The Question of Unilateral Governmental Statements as Applicable Law in Investment Disputes" by W.
Michael Reisman and Mahnoush H. Arsanjani, 19:2 1CSID Review 328 (2004).

-163-

permission. Third, the Instrument of Ratification uses a comprehensive formulation: "the
investment shall be in the areas allowed by and in accordance with [...]". So it would
appear that the material restrictions on investments relate both to investments of the first

and second types.

344. With respect to the temporal extension of the condition in the relevant provisions
of the BIT, it has been contended by the Respondent and some of its experts that an
investment, in order to maintain jurisdictional standing under the BIT, must not only be
"in accordance" with relevant domestic law at the time of commencement of the
investment but must continuously remain in compliance with domestic law, such that a
departure from some laws or regulations in the course of the operation of the BIT would

deprive a tribunal under the BIT of jurisdiction.

345. Although this contention is not relevant to the analysis of the problem which the
Tribunal has before it, namely the entry of the investment and not the way it was
subsequently conducted, the Tribunal would note that this part of the Respondent's
interpretation appears to be a forced construction of the pertinent provisions in the
context of the entire Treaty. The language of both Articles 1 and 2 of the BIT
emphasizes the initiation of the investment. Moreover the effective operation of the BIT
regime would appear to require that jurisdictional compliance be limited to the initiation
of the investment. If, at the time of the initiation of the investment, there has been
compliance with the law of the host state, allegations by the host state of violations of its

law in the course of the investment, as a justification for state action with respect to the

- 164-

investment, might be a defense to claimed substantive violations of the BIT, but could not

deprive a tribunal acting under the authority of the BIT of its jurisdiction.

346. There is, however, the question of estoppel. Principles of fairness should require
a tribunal to hold a government estopped from raising violations of its own law as a
jurisdictional defense when it knowingly overlooked them and endorsed an investment

which was not in compliance with its law.

347. But a covert arrangement, which by its nature is unknown to the government
officials who may have given approbation to the project, cannot be any basis for estoppel:
the covert character of the arrangement would deprive any legal validity (assuming that
informal and possibly contra legem endorsements would have legal validity under the
relevant law) that an expression of approbation or an endorsement might otherwise have
had. There is no indication in the record that the Republic of the Philippines knew,
should have known or could have known of the covert arrangements which were not in

accordance with Philippine law when Fraport first made its investment in 1999.

348. Having set forth the legal standards applicable to its jurisdictional analysis, the

Tribunal now turns to its interpretation of the ADL.

D. The Tribunal's Interpretation of the ADL

349. While the relevant provisions of the ADL have been set out earlier in this chapter,
the Tribunal deems it useful to reproduce here, in extenso, Commonwealth Act No. 108,
entitled An Act to Punish Acts of Evasion of the Laws on the Nationalization of Certain

Rights, Franchises or Privileges, commonly known as the Anti-Dummy Law:

-165-

"SEC. 1. In all cases in which any constitutional or legal provision requires
Philippine or any other specific citizenship as a requisite for the exercise or
enjoyment of a right, franchise or privilege, any citizen of the Philippines or any
other specific country who allows his name or citizenship to be used for the
purpose of evading such provision, and any alien or foreigner profiting thereby,
shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than five nor more than fifteen
years, and by a fine of not less than the value of the right, franchise or privilege,
which is enjoyed or acquired in violation of the provisions hereof but in no case
less than five thousand pesos.

The fact that the citizen of the Philippines or of any specific country charged with
a violation of this Act had, at the time of the acquisition of his holdings in the
corporations or associations referred to in section two of this Act, no real or
personal property, credit or other assets the value of which shall at least be
equivalent to said holdings, shall be evidence of a violation of this Act.

SEC. 2. In all cases in which a constitutional or legal provision requires that, in
order that a corporation or association may exercise or enjoy a right, franchise or
privilege, not less than a certain per centum of its capital must be owned by
citizens of the Philippines or of any other specific country, it shall be unlawful to
falsely stimulate the existence of such minimum of stock or capital as owned by
such citizens, for the purpose of evading said provision. The president or
managers and directors or trustees of corporations or associations convicted of a
violation of this section shall be punished by imprisonment of not less than five
nor more than fifteen years, and by a fine of not less than the value of the right.

SEC. 2-A. Any person, corporation, or association, which having in its name
or under its control, a right, franchise, privilege, property or business, the
exercise or enjoyment of which is expressly reserved by the Constitution or
the laws to citizens of the Philippines or of any other specific country, or to
corporations or associations at least sixty per centum of the capital of which
is owned by such citizens, permits or allows the use, exploitation or
enjoyment thereof by a person, corporation or association not possessing the
requisites prescribed by the Constitution or the laws of the Philippines; or
leases, or in any other way, transfers or conveys said right, franchise, privilege,
property or business to a person, corporation or association not otherwise
qualified under the Constitution, or the provisions of the existing laws; or in any
manner permits or allows any person, not possessing the qualifications
required by the Constitution, or existing laws to acquire, use, exploit or
enjoy a right, franchise, privilege, property or business, the exercise and
enjoyment of which are expressly reserved by the Constitution or existing
laws to citizens of the Philippines or of any other specific country, to
intervene in the management, operation, administration or control thereof,
whether as an officer, employee or laborer therein with or without
remuneration except technical personnel whose employment may be
specifically authorized by the Secretary of Justice, and any person who
knowingly aids, assists, or abets in the planning, consummation or
perpetration of any of the acts herein above enumerated shall be punished by
imprisonment for not less than five nor more than fifteen years and by a fine of
not less than the value of the right, franchise or privilege enjoyed or acquired in

 

-166-

violation of the provisions hereof but in no case less than five thousand pesos:
Provided, however, That the president, managers or persons in charge of
corporations, associations or partnerships violating the provisions of this section
shall be criminally liable in lieu thereof: Provided, further, That any person,
corporation or association shall, in addition to the penalty imposed herein, forfeit
such right, franchise, privilege and the property provisions of this Act: And
Provided, finally, That the election of aliens as members of the board of directors
or governing body of corporations or associations engaging in partially
nationalized activities shall he allowed in proportion to their allowable
participation or share in the capital of such entities." (emphasis added)

The Tribunal need hardly add that statutory interpretations are never to be made in
hypothetical legislative vacuums. Each interpretation must be made in the light of the

Constitution and the ensemble of legislation of which a particular statute is a part.

350. The issue upon which the Tribunal focuses in connection with the ADL is not to
be found in the fact that Fraport may have exceeded the statutorily determined level of
equity investment lawfully permitted to a foreign investor in a constitutionally defined
category of public utilities. In the view of the Tribunal, Fraport did not. Nor did Fraport
violate the "in accordance" requirement of the BIT in that it may have loaned "too" much
money to the public utility in question. Neither of these actions, both essentially
quantitative, translates per se into managerial control over a modern corporation. But the
FAG-PAIRCARGO-PAGS-PTI Shareholders’ Agreement of 6 July 1999, set forth earlier

in this Award, does.

351. That agreement makes the preliminary meeting of the shareholders the moment of
actual decision: the board meeting that follows it simply endorses the outcomes. At the
preliminary meeting, two things which sound in the ADL happen: first, the actual voting
weight according to the percentage of shares held (which is subject to a statutory cap

under Philippine law) is ignored and replaced by an equalization of the voting power of

-167-

each of the shareholders ("The position of each Shareholder during the preliminary
meeting shall be given equal weight (i.e, FAG, PAIRCARGO, PAGS and PTI shall have
one vote each).)". Second, even then, if the shareholders do not agree, Fraport's view is
controlling with respect to the matters itemized in Article 2.02 (2). In short, for those

items, Fraport secures managerial control in violation of the ADL.

352. It is clear from the texts of the ADL, as confirmed by the QT due diligence report,
that it was managerial control which was the concern of the Constitution and the ADL;
quantitative findings such as the percentage of equity investment were simply
"significant indicators" or "badges" as Philippine law puts it’. In terms of quantitative

findings, Fraport is correct that the Republic's relaxation of the quantitative test was
especially clear after the abrogation of the "Grandfather Rule" for computing, for ADL

purposes, the percentage of foreign equity (which seemed to create a strong legal
presumption) and the adoption of the so-called "Control Rule". The "Control Rule", the
shorthand reference in Philippine law for the replacement of the Grandfather Rule, is a
misleading rubric, for it does not involve an empirical examination to determine whether
a foreign investor actually exercises managerial control. It simply uses a more lenient
non-cumulative quantitative test for computing the permissible equity ceiling and does
not turn the new quantitative test into an irrebuttable presumption, as might have been

inferred from Department of Justice Opinion No. 165.

353. | Nothing in the record even suggests that the relaxation of the quantitative test of

the Grandfather Rule by the introduction of the more lenient Control Rule can be

" Department of Justice Opinion No. 165, Series of 1984.

- 168-

interpreted to mean that the relevant constitutional provision and the ADL prohibiting
managerial control ceased to be applicable. None of the lawyers consulted by Fraport in
the various due diligences it commissioned assumed that the constitutional provision and
the ADL had lapsed by operation of desuetude. Quite the contrary. Nor is there anything
in the National Bureau of Investigation ("NBI") or DOJ documents, i.e. the record
established as part of the ADL proceedings, to which the Tribunal will turn below, to

suggest that the agencies of the Philippine Government hold that view.

354. Under Philippine law, there are two ways of establishing an ADL violation:

first, a quantitative test (whether the numerical threshold applied is the
cumulative one in the Grandfather Rule or the non-cumulative one in the

Control Rule), which, if violated, leads to a praesumptio juris; or
second, an actual demonstration of managerial control, in which case the
quantum of equity in the company is irrelevant.
In other words, if a foreign investor owned, let us say, 15% of the equity of a public
utility, but had secret managerial and control agreements with the Philippine component,

that would constitute a violation of the ADL.

355. The first way is only a means of inferring the second way. The only relevant
change in Philippine law was with respect to the quantitative way of establishing a
violation, i.e. replacing the cumulative computational formula of the Grandfather Rule
with the more generous, non-cumulative formula of the Control Rule. The Tribunal's
concern here is not with Fraport's quantitative equity; it is with the secret shareholder

agreements. In the context of the internal Fraport documents, the secret shareholder

- 169-

agreements show that Fraport from the outset understood, with precision, the Philippine
legal prohibition but believed that if it complied with it, the prospective investment could
not be profitable. So it elected to proceed with the investment by secretly violating
Philippine law through the secret shareholder agreements. These agreements evidence
that Fraport planned and knew that its investment was not "in accordance" with

Philippine law.

356. It is correct that Fraport's real modality of intervention in "the management,
operation, administration or control" of PIATCO for the items specified in the FAG-
PAIRCARGO-PAGS-PTI Shareholders’ Agreement is as a shareholder in the
confidential but binding preliminary meeting described at Article 2.02 thereof. Fraport
does not, as the ADL specifies, intervene "as an officer, employee or laborer" in the
subsequent formal board meeting that rubber-stamps the result of the confidential but
binding meeting. To be sure, the formal modality of unlawful intervention would still be
accomplished by Fraport's designated officer in PIATCO; indeed the real control
decision would always have to be implemented, wherever it may have been made, by "an
officer, employee or laborer" within PIATCO; that would satisfy a literal interpretation.
But a literal interpretation here could produce an absurdity: an alien would violate the
ADL if its designated officer intervened to manage and control matters A, B and C, but
the same alien would not violate the ADL if it secretly intervened as a shareholder to
manage and control those same matters. The Tribunal construes this part of the ADL as
covering intervention by shareholders, if that is the actual means of intervening in "the
management, operation, administration or control" of PIATCO. Nor does this

interpretation impose a retroactive burden on Fraport, for its own documents, which the

- 170-

Tribunal reviewed above, indicate that Fraport was well aware that the arrangements it

was making were not in accordance with the ADL.

E. The ADL Proceedings in The Philippines

357. In 2003, two Philippine lawyers, Messrs. Balayan and Bernas, complained to the
NBI that the officers and directors of Fraport and PIATCO had violated the ADL,
referring to the fact that Fraport owned 61.44% of PIATCO's shares. As the NBI Report
makes clear, "[t]he procedures instituted by the NBI [in response to the complaints of
Balayan and Bernas] are merely to gather facts and evidence to determine the need to

refer the matter to the Prosecutor's Office for Preliminary Investigation".

358. The "sole express basis" for the ADL complaints rested on statements in the
Request for ICSID arbitration. The documents submitted to the NBI, which are listed at
pages 7-13 of the Report, did not include the secret shareholder agreements nor Fraport's

internal documents which have been set out above. Indeed, the NBI received an affidavit

to the contrary. The NBI Report records:

"Subjects CHENG ONG, ET. /sic/ al., likewise alleged that none of them are
bound by any contract commitment or undertaking to allow Fraport AG to, in any
manner, exercise legal rights reserved under Philippine law to Philippine citizens
or Philippine nationals. They further alleged that Complainants have failed to
even insinuate the existence of any such contract, commitment or undertaking,
much less submit any evidence thereof."

359. This was not correct, as is clear from the documents which the Tribunal has set

out above.

-171-

360. The arguments considered in the NBI Report about immunity and the
admissibility of the Request for ICSID arbitration, whose equity share descriptions were
the basis of the two ADL complaints, are not relevant for the Tribunal's inquiry. The
NBI Report concluded that there had been a violation by Fraport of the quantitative test
of the Grandfather Rule. But the ratio of the NBI Report was that the annulment of the
PIATCO concession by the Supreme Court before Fraport could have exercised the
potential managerial control it had acquired, which the NBI inferred from the quantitative
indicators, rendered the ADL violation moot. The NBI Report nonetheless recommended

prosecution on the basis of the Respondents "intent".

361. Asa matter of Philippine law, the NBI Report is plainly incorrect in its
application of what had become the obsolete "Grandfather" quantitative test. But more
important for the analysis of the Tribunal is that the NBI could have known nothing of
the secret shareholder agreements, which were only produced in the present arbitration in
December 2005 and January 2006. ‘Yet the existence of the secret shareholder
agreements was the critical factor for answering the question of whether there was a

violation of the ADL.

362. The NBI Report was issued in June 2004. Eighteen months later, the Prosecutor

rejected the NBI recommendation in his report which was issued on 27 December 2006.

363. Again, the jurisdictional and admissibility issues in that latter Prosecutor's Report
are not relevant for the analysis of the Tribunal. The Prosecutor summarized the Bernas
and Balayan complaints as based on a quantitative violation of the ADL: Fraport's equity

exceeded 60% by its own admission and would exceed 71% if the holdings of Nissho

- 172-

Iwai were included. The Chengs rejected this Grandfather type computation and, more

relevantly, said:

"The Board of Directors of the said corporations are controlled by Filipino
citizens to the extent of at least 60% of the total number of members of the said
Board.

The FRAPORT's financial contribution and technical support to the PLATCO are
completely irrelevant in so far as the Anti-Dummy law was concerned since none
of those have been attended by an unlawful level of control over PIATCO's
board of directors or management. The officers of PIATCO are all Filipino
citizens and they never acted as fronts or FRAPORT AG's dummy or lending
their names for FRAPORT AG's benefit. Any allegations, statements or act
made by FRAPORT AG before ICSID is not binding upon them as they are not
parties thereto.”

364. This was consistent with the Cheng's submission to the NBI, which is quoted
above. It is an accurate statement of Philippine law but a misrepresentation of the critical

facts.

365. The Prosecutor stated that "it is obvious that the complainants erroneously used
the Grandfather Rule". The Prosecutor relied upon the Foreign Investments Act, which
adopts a non-cumulative and more lenient quantitative test and quoted approvingly an
SEC opinion of 23 November 1993 which affirms the non-cumulative computation for
the equity of the foreign investor, subject however to an important proviso: "provided,
however, that the voting and Board membership requirements under Section 3 R.A. 7042
are complied with." The Prosecutor applied the same lenient quantitative test with
respect to loans by a foreign investor to a public utility type corporation; the issue was
not quantum but "what is prohibited is the engagement by the alien himself of a

nationalized activity" (emphasis added).

-173-

366. The Prosecutor agreed that if the Terminal concession had been annulled, the
ADL could not be applied. But the Prosecutor's rejection of the NBI report was centrally
based upon the applicability of the more lenient non-cumulative computational formula
and not on the secret shareholder agreements. At page 10 of the Report, the Prosecutor

states, in what is the central holding:
"From the foregoing corporate structure of PIATCO, it is far-fetched that a
foreign corporation like FRAPORT could gain dominion, control and ascendancy
in the management or control of PIATCO considering 60% of its shares are
owned by Filipinos [...]. Thus, the prohibitions imposed under the provisions of
the Anti-Dummy Law have not been transgressed specifically that is, is to
prevent foreign intervention or participation in areas traditionally reserved for
citizens of the Philippines or to corporations or associations at least 60% of the
capital stock of which is owned by citizens of the Philippines or allowing a no-
qualified person or corporation from intervening ‘in the management, operation,
administration or control’ of such right, franchise, privilege, property or
business."
367. | What is missing here is reference to or any indication of awareness of the actual
secret shareholder agreements by which the management and control prohibited by the
ADL was effectively assigned to Fraport. Indeed, in holding that the so-called "badges of

dummy status" "were inconclusive and inapplicable to the present case", the Prosecutor
quoted, regarding the third badge, that "[t]he organization structure of PLATCO would
unmistakably show Fraport's clear and concrete control over affairs of the respondent".
But, as is clear from the factual account set out above, the secret shareholder agreements

were designed to and did precisely this. Neither the NBI nor DOJ Reports deals with the

issue of the secret shareholder agreements and their violation of the ADL.

368. This Tribunal decided to review the full record of evidence regarding the ADL

proceedings which resulted in the Department of Justice's Chief State Prosecutor's

- 174-

Resolution of 27 December 2006 (the "Prosecutor's Resolution") dismissing the Bernas
and Balayan complaints. Accordingly, as noted earlier in the Award, it requested all of
those documents from the Respondent, and the Claimant supplemented the record with
other documents. Aside from the legal question of whether a finding by a competent
Philippine institution on a matter which arises both under Philippine law and under the
BIT binds this Tribunal, the factual question, on which the Tribunal sought to satisfy
itself, was whether the secret shareholder agreements constituted part of that record and

had been considered in the ADL proceedings. The Respondent contended:

"Rather, this Tribunal has before it Fraport's secret shareholder agreements
themselves (which Fraport belatedly produced at the oral hearing in January
2006). These documents provide the critical proof that Fraport intended to, and
did, implement a scheme to exert financial dominance and effective corporate
control of PIATCO, and thereby evade Philippine nationality and anti-dummy
laws. The Philippine DOJ, by contrast, has never had the central evidence
proving Fraport's violations of the Anti-Dummy Law, including

. Fraport's Final Holding Report, which set out Fraport's intention to
evade Philippine nationality laws;

. Fraport's secret shareholder agreements with the Chengs, which
established the means by which Fraport obtained unlawful influence in
PIATCO and PTI, through ‘pooling,’ block voting, vetoes, and the right
to appoint, indirectly, members of PIATCO's board of directors; and

Fraport's secret loan agreements to the Chengs, which enabled the
Chengs to make their share subscription payments in PIATCO and its
shell companies.

These critical documents were unavailable to the DOJ, not for lack of effort or
interest, but (1) because of the confidentiality designation in this arbitration under
the ordered confidentiality agreement; and (2) because Fraport, through German
courts, blocked the Philippine DOJ's request for mutual legal assistance in
Germany. Having denied the Philippine DOJ the crucial and relevant evidence,
Fraport cannot celebrate the DOJ's dismissal as evidence of its innocence."”°

' See Respondent's letter to the Tribunal of 11 January 2007 at page 2 (supra at paragraph 70).

- 175-

369. Neither the NBI Report nor the Prosecutor's Resolution, it will be recalled, refers
to the secret shareholder agreements. The DOJ Prosecutor's summary of the
Bernas/Balayan complaints also imports that the secret shareholder agreements were not

part of the record, despite oblique references to Fraport's control over PIATCO:

"Complainant Bernas, alleged among others that Fraport, the officers/directors
PIATCO violated the Anti-Dummy as he pointed out in the Request for
Arbitration of Fraport with the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes as regards to NAIA Terminal 3 Project where it allegedly flaunted its
61.44% foreign ownership in PIATCO. He further added that Nisho /sic] Iwai, a
foreign corporation, has equity shareholdings of 10 % in PIATCO, which if
combined with Fraport's 61.44 ownership would result to a 71.44 % foreign
ownership. Thus, 31.44 percent over and above the 40% foreign ownership
allowed by the Constitution.

He, likewise, stressed that badges of a dummy status as embodied in Department
of Justice Opinion No. 165, Series of 1984 are present in PIATCO's stockholding
composition. He explained that through Fraport's equity stockholding together
with Nissho Iwai equity, provided practically all the funds for the operation of
PIATCO. In addition, he stated that along with dominant foreign equity
contributions, Fraport arranged most of the borrowed funds that were used in the
construction of NAIA Terminal 3. This fact can be gleaned from the records of
the Senate Blue Ribbon Committee, which showed that the Cheng Group has
only contributed US$9.7 million, while the rest of the funds used come from
Fraport ranging from US$ 425 million to US$ 500 million.

Furthermore, he alleged that Fraport may have practically provided all the
technological support for the construction of the NAIA Terminal III Project.
This came about by reason of the Fraport's representative designation as
technical and operation manager for the Project, through PTI. He opined that
neither the consortium nor any of the shareholders could provide funds, which
could have been used to pay for technical expertise or services. With these
controlling or withholding flow of funds and extension of expertise, Fraport
obviously influenced the management and operations of PIATCO.

Meanwhile, complainant Balayan alleged that Fraport in conspiracy with the
member corporation in consortium who participated in the bidding process for
the construction of NAIA Terminal Project violated the Constitution and
Commonwealth Act No. 108. This is due to the fact that Fraport ownership with
PIATCO 61 % comprising of: direct ownership of 30% and indirect ownership of
31.44 % through PAGS, PTH and PTI. He also added that since Nissho Iwai, a
foreign corporation has a 10 % shareholding in PIATCO, the total foreign
ownership in PIATCO is 71.44 %." (emphasis added)

- 176-

370. According to the DOJ Prosecutor, "badges of dummy status", in light of the now-
confirmed "Control Test", are "inconclusive and inapplicable" when "determining the
nationality of the corporation". The Prosecutor's reasoning thus suggests that it
focussed on whether an ADL violation had been demonstrated by a quantitative
determination of nationality as opposed to an actual demonstration of managerial
control. As noted, the evidentiary record before the DOJ Prosecutor did not include the

direct evidence of such managerial control, such as the secret shareholder agreements.

371. While it is clear that the Prosecutor's Resolution and the related NBI Report
focussed on the issue of nationality as opposed to the issue of managerial control, the
record of these proceedings does include references to a "control agreement" and
adjustments] of the Shareholder Agreement", as noted by the Claimant”’. The
Claimant has drawn attention to Balayan's Consolidated Reply-Affidavit dated 20
November 2006 in this regard. Balayan's Consolidated Reply-Affidavit expressly refers
to the Schmidt Report which recommended a "control agreement”. Reference is made
therein to Fraport's "intention to control the management of respondent PIATCO", as it
was discussed at the Supervisory Board Meeting on 12 March 1999. This section of
Balayan's Consolidated Reply-A ffidavit also identifies one of the July 1999 shareholder
agreements, namely the Addendum to the PLATCO Shareholders Agreement dated 6 July
1999 (referred to as "Annex S" of the Complaint-A ffidavit”). But the Tribunal would

5 See Claimant's letter of 12 January 2007 at page 3 (supra at paragraph 71).

* At paragraphs 16.8 and following under the heading "Respondent Fraport Exercises Management and
Control of Respondent PIATCO",

* It is further noted that the Balayan Complaint-A ffidavit states that Fraport increased its shareholdings in
1999 pursuant to four agreements dated 6 July 1999 (at paragraph 10), but solely attaches the Addendum to

the PIATCO Shareholders Agreement dated 6 July 1999. The June 2004 NBI Report also refers to these
four 1999 shareholder agreements at paragraph 39.

- 177-

note that this is not the secret "Control Agreement" described earlier in this chapter as

being critical to the issue of jurisdiction ratione materiae.

372. Nor does Dr. Schmidt's statement, which was quoted in extenso earlier in this
chapter, indicate that secret shareholder agreements had been concluded and actually
existed. It is useful to recall the critical passages in Dr. Schmidt's words of 7 March
1999 to Fraport's Supervisory Board:

"In fact, FAG's equity interest shall total 64%. A ‘control agreement’ shall

ensure that FAG exercises control over the enterprise.

This is also absolutely necessary since KPMG points out repeatedly that the
current owners are not in a position to ensure the proper operation of the airport.

In fact, however, such control is not practicable for legal reasons, as
PIATCO's legal due diligence states the following: 'Foreign citizens are
prohibited from intervening in the management, operation or control of the
company |[...]'. Moreover, the summary of the agreements contains the
statement that 'a decisive voting right of FAG would violate the anti-dummy
law of the Philippines’.

Consequently, FAG cannot legally enforce its intended leadership in this
consortium. This, however, is the most important prerequisite for the entire
transaction." (emphasis added)

373. These words would not indicate to an investigator charged with determining
whether there was probable cause for a criminal indictment, but from whom the existence
and content of the secret shareholder agreements were kept by operation of the
confidentiality agreement between the parties to the present arbitration, that such secret
agreements were ever concluded. Indeed, the secret agreements continued to be denied
by Fraport's officers who were the respondents in the ADL proceedings. Thus, in a
comment submitted as part of the ADL proceedings on 19 January 2007, Dr. Stiller

stated:

- 178-

"Fraport never entered into a control agreement with respect to PIATCO. It is
quite natural for a foreign investor, who plans an investment in a legal
environment not familiar to it, to explore all legal options available in the
relevant jurisdiction. That a foreign investor explores its legal options and then
complies with the law is exactly what can be expected from a prudent investor,
and does not violate any law."

374. Dr. Stiller had made the same point before in a manifestation submitted as part of

the ADL proceedings on 8 December 2006:

"At no time did PIATCO or its stockholders allow the intervention of aliens in its
management, operation, administration or control. The Philippine shareholders
are actually in control. Control is exercised by the board of directors of PLATCO
and not by Fraport. Fraport did not cause, or procure, or itself in any way
participate in the management, operation, administration or control of PLATCO
other than by nominating the members of the board, to the extent it was
authorized to do so under the shareholder agreements. Note that the law allows
aliens to be elected to the governing board of nationalized or partly nationalized
entities in proportion to their allowable participation of share in the capital of
such entities, although such alien directors may not occupy management
positions. Aside from pure speculation that control of PIATCO flows from
Fraport's alleged substantial funding of the project, there is no independent and
concrete proof of control. Admittedly, the Philippine shareholders have always
been firmly in control."

375. Plainly Balayan and Bernas suspected and alleged that there was a conspiracy on
the part of Fraport to control PIATCO. That was the common predicate of their
respective ADL complaints. Balayan's Consolidated Reply-Affidavit does not expressly
refer to the secret shareholder agreements, as he was unaware of them, but his conclusion
indicates his suspicion of some such arrangement. Balayan's Consolidated Reply-

Affidavit states:

"16.13 The organizational structure of respondent PLATCO would unmistakably
demonstrate respondent Fraport's clear and concrete control over the affairs of
respondent PIATCO in that respondent Fraport has assigned consultants and
officers in the Philippines for the NAIA Terminal III project. Thus, in view of
respondent Fraport's hold on both the financial and technical operations of
respondent PIATCO, respondent Fraport has necessarily assumed complete and

- 179-

steadfast control over the management of respondent PIATCO's affairs over the
NAIA Terminal HI project.

17. Indeed, the totality of the foregoing plainly shows that respondents
Fraport, PIATCO, PTH, PTI, PAGS and Paircargo, in conspiracy and for the
benefit of one another, knowingly aided, assisted, and/or abetted in the planning,
consummation or perpetuation of violations of the Anti-Dummy Law.
Resultantly, appropriate criminal charges should be filed against all the
respondents." (emphasis added)

376. Balayan's Complaint-Affidavit dated 19 November 2003 is referred to in the NBI

Report as containing "details [of] how respondents have allegedly fraudulently created an

elaborate web in order to hide their ploy to circumvent our nationality laws". Later in the

NBI Report, there is also a reference to the "scheme to violate the anti-dummy law". The

point is argued in Balayan's Reply-Affidavit dated 21 June 2004 as follows:

"3.2 Indeed, it may be conceded that, on paper, the capital structure of
respondent PIATCO complies with the constitutional limit on foreign ownership.
However, this does not serve to stop the NBI from further investigating
respondents because even if the capital stock of a corporation appears to comply
superficially with the requirement of at least sixty percent (60%) Filipino
ownership, this may actually be disregarded, and a review of the contracts or
agreements governing the actual relationship of its shareholders may be
undertaken by the proper government agency to determine whether the
Constitution and the Anti-Dummy Law have, in fact, been violated. Otherwise,
the Anti-Dummy Law, which was designed to /sic/ precisely to prevent foreign
intervention or participation in areas of investment reserved for Philippine
nationals whether directly or indirectly through the use of 'dummy
relationships', would be an utter failure and rendered vacuous and nugatory.
Notably, respondents have not even disputed, much less denied, the Complaint-
Affidavit dated 19 November 2003, which details how respondents herein have
fraudulently created an elaborate web in order to hide their ploy to circumvent
our nationality laws." (emphasis in original)

377. Not surprisingly, the theories put forward by Bernas and Balayan, without the

benefit of the secret shareholder agreements, could not and did not persuade the DOJ

Prosecutor.

As every lawyer knows, to bring an indictment and initiate a criminal

- 180-

prosecution, one needs evidence and not theories. The evidence was to be had in the

secret shareholder agreements. The ADL charges were accordingly dismissed.

378. The Prosecutor's Resolution was subsequently challenged pursuant to Bernas!
Motion for Reconsideration dated 18 January 2007 and Balayan's Petition for Review
dated 19 January 2007. The former, in particular, is described as being based on the

following grounds”:
"1. Section 3(a) of the Foreign Investment Act, as cited in the assailed resolution
does not provide the phrase 'the control test shall be applied for this purpose’;
2. The actual citation of SEC Opinion dated November 23 1993 which allegedly
resolved 'to do away with the strict application of the Grand Father Rule and
instead applied the Control Test in determining corporate nationality for purposes

of investment was not stated;

3. The administrative interpretations of the DOJ and SEC are at best persuasive,
and not controlling, hence, reliance thereon is misplaced;

4. There is no Supreme Court decision stating that the Grand Father Rule is no
longer the de jure standard in determining the nationality of a corporation for

purposes of criminal prosecution for violation of the Anti-Dummy Law;

5. The resolution would in effect render impossible for anyone to be indicted for
violating the Anti-Dummy Law;

6. This Office erred in setting aside the badges of dummy status as enunciated in
one of its opinions;"

379. On 15 March 2007, Bernas' Motion for Reconsideration was granted by a DOJ
Resolution recommending that a criminal indictment for ADL violations be filed with the

appropriate court as follows (at pages 12-13):

"After a careful evaluation of the arguments raised in the motion for
reconsideration, it is respectfully opined by this Office that the same is
meritorious.

* See DOJ Resolution dated 15 March 2007.

- 181 -

Record shows that all foreign investments without using the control test to
determine the nationality of the corporation constitutes 71.44% thereby violating
the Anti-Dummy Law.

Lastly, settled is the rule that preliminary investigation is essentially inquisitorial
and is often the only means to discover who may be charged with crime, its
function is merely to determine the existence of probable cause. (Pilapil vs.
Sandiganbayan, 221 SCRA349)

WHEREFORE, the motion for reconsideration is hereby respectfully
recommended to be GRANTED. Let an information for violation of Anti-
Dummy Law be filed against herein respondents before the appropriate court."

380. Having reviewed the additional 1900 pages of documents produced by the
Respondent on 14 March 2007, it is clear to the Tribunal that the record of the ADL
proceedings did not include the secret shareholder agreements themselves. It is true that
there are various references to shareholder agreements generally, and some copies of
them, but the vast majority of such references relate to the 200/ shareholder agreements.
In fact, apart from the 1999 Addendum to the PLATCO Shareholders Agreement referred
to inter alia in Balayan's Consolidated Reply-Affidavit, which was set out above, there is
no actual copy of any of the 1999 shareholder agreements and, a fortiori, of any of the

secret shareholder agreements.

381. The 1999 Addendum to PIATCO Shareholders Agreement is the only 1999
shareholder agreement that the Claimant has identified as being part of the record in the
ADL proceedings, with the added observation that shareholder agreements were
"discussed" in the proceedings of the Philippine Senate Blue Ribbon Committee in

August and September 2002*'. The Claimant argues that there are "many references to

3! See Claimant's letter of 16 March 2007 at pages 1-2.

-182-

shareholder agreements", but, as the quotation from its submission shows, fails to point to
any of the secret shareholder agreements
: 32

"See, e.g, PIATCO's Amended Articles of Incorporation, Annex D to Balayan
Complaint-A ffidavit (Ex. R-510 Annex B), at ROP-T-00159 (‘Shares represented
by this Certificate are subject to the terms of the Shareholders' Agreement, which
was executed by and among the Corporation's Shareholders on 23 August 2001
...); PIATCO's Audited Financial Statements, Annex N to Balayan Complaint-
Affidavit (Ex. R-510 Annex B), at ROP-T-00347 (Summary of ‘Significant
Contracts', including Memorandum of Understanding, July 6, 1999, O&M
Agreement and Advisory Services Agreement); PIATCO's Amended By-Laws,
Annex B to Respondent Castro's Counter-Affidavit, Ex. R-545, at ROP-T-01489
(referring to 'PIATCO Shareholders Agreement dated 14 July 1997 among the
stockholders of the Corporation, as amended and supplemented by the
Addendum to the PLATCO Shareholders Agreement dated 17 May 2001, and any
and all other amendments and supplements thereto ...')."

382. Thus, the Respondent is correct in stating that "neither the prosecutors nor the
Sandiganbayan had access to the more substantial record of evidence presented to this

33

Tribunal [...] because of the confidentiality restrictions’ The Tribunal will consider

the legal significance of this factual finding below.

F. The Claimant's Concealment of the Secret Shareholder Agreements

383. Although the Respondent raised objections to jurisdiction and admissibility, the
specific objection based on a violation of the ADL, as a challenge to jurisdiction ratione
materiae, was essentially argued in post-hearing submissions because most of the
documents that established it were produced either immediately before the hearing on
jurisdiction and liability or, at the President's insistence, during the hearing itself. As a

result, the Claimant's contention that the Respondent's experts did not address this

See ibid, at footnote 4.
” See Respondent's letter of 7 March 2007.

 

- 183-

problem is jejune; the Respondent, its experts and the Tribunal cannot be expected to be

clairvoyant and could not have known of this critical issue before the hearing.

384. The Claimant argues, nonetheless, that the word "accepted" in Article 1(1) of the
BIT is critical to the operation of that provision and since the Philippines did not establish
an acceptance regime, that provision does not apply. As noted above, the word
"acceptance" does not appear in the Instrument of Ratification, which simply states that
"the Agreement provides that the investment shall be in the areas allowed by and in
accordance with the Constitutions, laws and regulations of each of the Contracting
Parties". But, without regard to that, it is, as explained in the analysis of the BIT earlier
in this Award, unreasonable to assume that state parties would incorporate a reiterated
insistence on compliance with their respective constitutions, laws and regulations only

not to have them apply.

385. Nor is there need for an acceptance procedure for the purchase of shares, the form
of putative investment in this case and the focus of ad Article 2 of the Protocol, which
elaborates Article 2 of the BIT. It relates to purchasing shares in a company which might
then acquire land in the territory of the Republic. The acquisition of shares by a foreign
investor in a domestic corporation is a legal transaction that does not, by its nature,
require some action by the government involving acceptance or permission, yet it is quite
clear from the BIT and the Protocol that accordance with the host state's law is
nonetheless required. That was the ostensible form of Fraport's putative investment.
And, to repeat, the Instrument of Ratification makes no mention of "acceptance" but

speaks only of "areas allowed by and in accordance with".

- 184-

386. The Claimant argues, further, presumably in the alternative, that there was, in
fact, acceptance through many acts of the Respondent and that the Respondent "has never

initiated any official action pursuant to the Nationality or Anti-Dummy Laws".

387. Asa matter of law, the Claimant is correct that the cumulative actions of a host
government may constitute an informal "acceptance" of a foreign investment that
otherwise violates its law. The Claimant is also correct that a failure to prosecute
something of the order of a violation of the ADL, such that an investor reasonably
inferred that it was acting lawfully and made further investments, could obviate an
objection to jurisdiction ratione materiae. The issue here, however, is fact. The
Claimant, knowing of the violation of the ADL, consciously concealed it, such that any
actions that might otherwise have been viewed by a foreign investor in good faith as
endorsements by the Philippine government cannot be deemed to have cured the violation
or estopped the Government. The Respondent could hardly have initiated legal action

against the Claimant for violations which the Claimant had concealed.

388. The timing of the initiation of criminal action by the host state in the instant case
is particularly complex. A detailed confidentiality agreement was negotiated by the
parties to this arbitration and noted by the Tribunal. At the insistence of the Claimant, it

precluded the Philippines from using material which might be produced in the course of

document exchange in criminal proceedings in the Philippines.

389. Even in the absence of such an agreement, it is doubtful whether the Philippines

could have lawfully undertaken an action which usurped a matter within the jurisdiction

- 185-

of the Tribunal. It is significant that Fraport's directors, who were respondents in the

ADL proceedings, submitted a letter in those proceedings before the Prosecutor, stating:

"The ICSID has the exclusive jurisdiction to decide the issues presented to it
pursuant to the agreement between Germany and the Government of the
Republic of the Philippines."

390. Assuming further that the findings of the Prosecutor had dealt directly with the
secret shareholder agreements, which is not the case here, such a finding would not
constitute a res judicata because of a difference in the identity of the parties and the
claim. The complaints designed to initiate ADL prosecutions were undertaken by private
citizens in a type of actio popularis which is available in Philippine law. The parties
were different, the claim (initiation of a criminal action) and the issues that were the ratio

of the preliminary decision were different from those which engage this Tribunal.

391. Moreover, holdings of municipal legal institutions cannot be binding with respect
to matters properly within the jurisdiction of this Tribunal. As the Jnceysa tribunal put it,
"as the legality of the investment is a premise for this Tribunal's jurisdiction, the
determination of such legality can only be made by the tribunal hearing the case, i.e. by
this Arbitral Tribunal". The Claimant can hardly challenge this legal proposition, for if
this were not the case, then its entire substantive case would fail; the decision of the

Philippine Supreme Court would have decided the issue against it.

392. The Tribunal agrees with the point of law in the Claimant's additional argument

which is based on "the foreign investor's reasonable reliance upon the state's

** At paragraph 209.

- 186-

contemporaneous manifestations of its understanding of its laws". A foreign investor is,
indeed, entitled to reasonable reliance upon the state's contemporaneous manifestations
of its understanding of its laws. The Claimant's problem, again, derives from the facts.

The Claimant argues:

"Fraport was aware of the Nationality and Anti-Dummy Laws from the outset.
Fraport continuously sought and acted upon Philippine legal advice to
ensure compliance." (emphasis added)

393. This assertion is simply incorrect, as the review of pertinent facts which is set out

above and which is based entirely on the Claimant's own documents, shows.

394. The Tribunal cannot agree, as a matter of law, with the Claimant's contention that
"[e]ven if there could be said to be an issue as to whether the Philippine laws were
complied with [...], it could be of only municipal, not international legal significance".
This interpretation, if accepted, would deprive a significant part of the ordinary words of
a treaty of any meaning and effect. The BIT is, to be sure, an international instrument,
but its Articles 1 and 2 and ad Article 2 of the Protocol effect a renvoi to national law, a
mechanism which is hardly unusual in treaties and, indeed, occurs in the Washington
Convention. A failure to comply with the national law to which a treaty refers will have

an international legal effect.

395. The Claimant offers a congeries of arguments to the effect that it never actually
exercised control over PIATCO and subsequently revised the secret shareholder
agreements to bring them into conformity with the ADL which, in any event, the
Claimant alleges, does not criminalize attempts to violate it. The Respondent

characterizes these arguments as admissions. The Tribunal does not but rather takes them

- 187-

as legitimate arguments in the alternative which scrupulous counsel are entitled to make.
Nonetheless, the arguments fail, for two reasons: first, because the relevance of
compliance with national law for jurisdiction ratione materiae purposes is at the moment
of the investment, as explained in the analysis of the BIT's terms. That is a limitation
which actually works in favour of both the foreign investor and international arbitral
jurisdiction. Second, because the ADL, which the Claimant only quotes selectively,

criminalizes:

"any person who knowingly aids, assists, or abets in the planning, consummation
or perpetration of any of the acts herein above enumerated shall be punished by
imprisonment for not less than five nor more than fifteen years [.. .].""°

The contention that Fraport never intended to exercise the power which it took pains to

acquire through the secret shareholder agreements is simply not credible.

G. Conclusion

396. When the question is whether the investment is in accordance with the law of the
host state, considerable arguments may be made in favour of construing jurisdiction
ratione materiae in a more liberal way which is generous to the investor. In some
circumstances, the law in question of the host state may not be entirely clear and mistakes
may be made in good faith. An indicator of a good faith error would be the failure of a
competent local counsel's legal due diligence report to flag that issue. Another indicator
that should work in favour of an investor that had run afoul of a prohibition in local law
would be that the offending arrangement was not central to the profitability of the

investment, such that the investor might have made the investment in ways that accorded

‘ Anti-Dummy Law, Commonwealth Act No. 108, section 2-A.

-188-

with local law without any loss of projected profitability. This would indicate the good

faith of the investor.

397. In this case, the comportment of the foreign investor, as is clear from its own
records, was egregious and cannot benefit from presumptions which might ordinarily

operate in favour of the investor.

398. The record indicates that (i) the BIT explicitly and reiteratedly required that an

investment, in order to qualify for BIT protection, had to be in accordance with the host
state's law and (ii) local counsel explicitly warned that a particular structural arrangement
would violate a serious provision of Philippine law. Moreover, the violation qua
violation was explicitly discussed at the level of the Board of Directors. In view of the

due diligence study prepared by financial experts (who had apparently not been briefed

on the local law restrictions), the investor, Fraport, concluded that the only plausible way
for its equity investment to prove profitable was to arrange secretly for management and
control of the project in a way which the investor knew were not in accordance with the
law of the Philippines. This was accomplished by Article 2.02 of the FAG-

PAIRCARGO-PAGS-PTI Shareholders' Agreement of 6 July 1999 which allowed
Fraport (or FAG as it was then known) to have a casting and controlling vote over
matters which fell within its "area of expertise and competence". Thus the violation
could not be deemed to be inadvertent and irrelevant to the investment. It was central to
the success of the project. The awareness that the arrangements were not in accordance

with Philippine law was manifested by the decision to make the arrangements secretly

- 189-

and to try to make them effective under foreign law. All of these facts derive from

internal Fraport documents whose credibility can hardly be impeached by Fraport.

399. A brief comment on evidentiary standards: whatever standard of proof is required
under Philippine law to prove a criminal act, the jurisdictional question before this
Tribunal, which is seized of an international investment dispute, is not a determination of
a crime but whether an economic transaction by a German company was made "in
accordance" with Philippine law and thus qualifies as an "investment" under the German-
Philippine BIT. Even assuming, however, that the "preponderance of evidence" test
which applies in civil law must yield in the instant case to a "beyond a reasonable doubt"
test because the subject of the "in accordance" inquiry is a Philippine criminal statute,
this is a case in which res ipsa loquitur. The relevant facts, all of which are found in

Fraport's own documents, are incontrovertible.

400. There is a further troubling factor. Despite requests for document production, the
obvious relevance of these secret documents to the Respondent's jurisdictional objection,
and a stern warning by the President of the Tribunal early in the arbitration that adverse
consequences could be drawn from the failure to produce such documents, it was only in
the course of the hearing that the existence of many of these documents became known.
It was only at the insistence of the President of the Tribunal at that moment that they
were finally produced. In that regard, it lies ill in Fraport's mouth to allege, in its
defense, that the Philippines had not "ever taken any action under its own laws to charge

Fraport with any violation of those laws". If Fraport, as its own documents attest,

- 190-

concealed the agreements in violation of the ADL, how could the Philippines take any

legal action against it?

401. Fraport knowingly and intentionally circumvented the ADL by means of secret
shareholder agreements. As a consequence, it cannot claim to have made an investment
"in accordance with law". Nor can it claim that high officials of the Respondent
subsequently waived the legal requirements and validated Fraport's investment, for the
Respondent's officials could not have known of the violation. Because there is no

"investment in accordance with law", the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae.

402. As for policy, BITs oblige governments to conduct their relations with foreign
investors in a transparent fashion. Some reciprocal if not identical obligations lie on the
foreign investor. One of those is the obligation to make the investment in accordance
with the host state's law. It is arguable that even an investment which is not made in
accordance with host state law may import economic value to the host state. But that is
not the only goal of this sector of international law. Respect for the integrity of the law
of the host state is also a critical part of development and a concern of international
investment law. That said, the Tribunal's decision in this matter does not rest on policy.

It is the language of the BIT which is dispositive and it is unequivocal in this matter.

403. In Lucchetti v. Peru, the tribunal observed that:

"Lucchetti may therefore consider it a harsh result that its effort at obtaining an
international remedy is brought to a halt before the merits of its contentions are
even examined. Such a conclusion, however, would not be warranted in light of

-191 -

the fact that Lucchetti did not have an a priori entitlement to this international
forum."*°

404. Nor does Fraport, mutatis mutandis, in the instant case. Compliance with the host
state's laws is an explicit and hardly unreasonable requirement in the Treaty and its
accompanying Protocol. Fraport's ostensible purchase of shares in the Terminal 3
project, which concealed a different type of unlawful investment, is not an "investment"
which is covered by the BIT. As the BIT is the basis of jurisdiction of this Tribunal,

Fraport's claim must be rejected for lack of jurisdiction ratione materiae.

°° At paragraph 61.

- 192-

VI. COSTS

405. The Respondent has prevailed in this proceeding since the Tribunal has decided
that the dispute is not within its jurisdiction and that the Claimant's claim is therefore
dismissed. The general practice in international arbitration is that the successful party
should recover its legal costs. Having regard to all the circumstances of this unusual
arbitration, the Tribunal is of the view that such an approach would be inappropriate.
There is no successful party on the merits in the traditional sense. Accordingly, the
Tribunal, in the exercise of its discretion, has formed the view that each party shall bear
in full its own legal costs as well as one half of the arbitration costs, including the

administration fees for the use of the Centre.

- 193-

VII. AWARD
406. For the reasons set forth herein and pursuant to Rules 41(5) and 47(1 )(i) and (j) of
the Arbitration Rules and Article 61(2) of the Convention, a majority of the Arbitral

Tribunal decides:

1 To accept the objection to the jurisdiction of the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes raised by the Republic of the
Philippines;

2. To declare that the Centre does not have jurisdiction to hear this dispute

and that this Arbitral Tribunal is not competent to resolve it;

3. To dismiss the claim of Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services
Worldwide; and

4. To order that each party shall bear in full its own legal costs and that the
payment of the fees and expenses of the members of the Arbitral Tribunal
and of the administrative fees for the use of the Centre shall be paid in
equal share by each party.

/signed/ /signed/
Dr Bernardo M. Cremades, Arbitrator Professor W. Michael Reisman, Arbitrator
(Subject to dissenting opinion attached)

Date: July 17*2007 Date: July 19, 2007

/signed/

L. Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C.
President

Date: July 23, 2007

-194-

Dissenting Opinion of Mr. Bernardo M. Cremades

A. Introduction

§1.- The decision of the majority is based on the confidential shareholder
agreements that the President obtained from the Claimant during the hearing.
The significant provisions of these shareholder agreements appear in the
quotations in paragraphs 319, 320 and 321 of the majority decision. Paragraph
319 refers to Article 2.02 of the Pooling Agreement that states 'in case the
Shareholders are unable to reach a common position' then after consultations
‘the shareholders shall thereafter act upon the recommendations of [the
Claimant]'. Paragraph 320 refers to Article 1.07 of the same agreement that
states ' [t]he Shareholders shall keep the terms and conditions of this Agreement
strictly confidential...' Paragraph 321 refers to Article 9 of the addendum that
states that the Claimant 'shall be the finance arranger for the Project and shall
have the exclusive authority...’

If these are the significant sections of the secret shareholder agreement then my
question is where is the breach of the Anti-Dummy Law, given the vast
submission of documents in this arbitration, as part of the written evidence and
after lengthy discovery battles? The majority of the arbitral tribunal understands
that these contractual phrases constitute a violation of the Anti-Dummy Law.
And even if they were, would these sections strip the Claimant's investment of
all treaty protection? The majority thinks so, but I do not, particularly given that
the shareholding of the Claimant in PIATCO and related companies was legal
under Philippine law (as the majority accepts). After the Supreme Court of the
Philippines has declared the Terminal 3 Concession null and void, and given the
way the government and especially the Attorney-General have acted, is there any
possibility at all of demonstrating a violation of the Anti-Dummy Law? I do not
believe so. Firstly, PIATCO has not been a dummy. Secondly because the
declaration by the Supreme Court that the Terminal 3 Concession is null and
void takes effect ex tune and not ex nunc, so that the contract was never valid and
had no effect. If this is the case, then PIATCO never held a public utility
franchise and so the Anti-Dummy Law could not apply.

The majority also speaks of good faith in international arbitration. As I will
explain, good faith applies to both the investor and the State Party.

1/24

B. The Philippines-Germany BIT

§2.- This is an arbitration pursuant to the Agreement between the
Federal Republic of Germany and the Republic of the Philippines for the
Promotion and the Reciprocal Protection of Investments (hereafter «the
Philippines-Germany BIT» or «the BIT»). Article 9 of the BIT provides for
the Settlement of Disputes between a Contracting State and an Investor of
another Contracting State. Article 9 provides that «all kinds of divergencies
between a Contracting State and an investor of the other Contracting State
concerning an investment)) shall first be addressed through negotiations, and if
a settlement is not reached within six months, then the investor may submit the
divergencies to arbitration pursuant to the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States, of March 18,
1965 done in Washington D.C.

The Claimant has commenced this arbitration pursuant to Article 9 of the
Philippines-Germany BIT in relation to its investment in an international
passenger terminal of Ninoy Aquino International Airport (Terminal 3).

§3.- On July 12, 1997 PIATCO entered into a Concession Agreement
with the Republic of the Philippines for the construction and operation of
Terminal 3. Further negotiations culminated in the Amended and Restated
Concession Agreement of November 1998 (the original Concession
Agreements and its subsequent amendments are collectively referred to as the
«Terminal 3 Concession)}). Fraport became a shareholder in PIATCO and
various related Philippine companies in July 1999, and increased its
shareholdings in May 2000 and again in 2001. The result of these successive
investments was that Fraport owned 30% of the shares of PIATCO and 40% of
the shareholding of three related companies (namely, Philippine Airport and
Ground Services, Inc. («PAGS»), PAGS Terminal Holdings, Inc. («PTH») and
PAGS Terminals, Inc. («PTI»)). The latest share purchase by Fraport occurred
on September 5, 2001 with the purchase of 450,000 shares in PAGS for the
amount of USD 14,700,000.

By 2002 the construction of Terminal 3 was virtually completed, and the
Claimant and PIATCO wished to commence commercial operations. However,
there was opposition to the Terminal 3 project within the Philippines which
during 2002 reached the highest levels of government. These developments are
fully described in section IIE of the Award.

By late 2002 the Respondent had decided that the Terminal 3 Concession

granted to PIATCO was null and void. On November 29, 2002 the President of
the Philippines declared publicly that «/t/he Solicitor General and the Justice

2124

Department have determined that all five agreements covering the NAIA [i.e.
Ninoy Aquino International Aiport] Terminal 3, most of which were contracted
in the previous administration, are null and void». The President then said that
the Terminal 3 Concession would henceforth not be honoured and declared: «J
cannot honour contracts which the Executive Branch's legal offices have
declared null and void».

§4. -In a decision dated May 5, 2003 in Agan et al. v. PIATCO (G.R. N°s
155001, 155547, and 155661) the Philippine Supreme Court found
irregularities in the bidding and terms of the PIATCO Concession. The
Supreme Court held:

«WHEREFORE, The 1997 Concession Agreement, the Amended and Restated
Concession Agreement and the Supplements thereto are set aside for being null
and void.»

The Supreme Court subsequently confirmed the finality of its decision on a
motion for reconsideration. In December 2004 the Respondent sought and
obtained a court order expropriating the Terminal 3 works. The same day the
Respondent deployed 200 armed security personnel to take physical possession
of Terminal 3.

§5.- The Claimant alleges numerous violations of the Philippines-
Germany BIT arising from the annulment of the Terminal 3 Concession and the
expropriation of Terminal 3. The Respondent alleges that this Tribunal does not
have jurisdiction to determine this dispute because the Claimant does not have
an investment within the meaning of the Philippines-Germany BIT.

"Investment' is defined in Article 1 of the Philippines-Germany BIT as follows:

<{For the purpose of this Agreement:
1. the term ‘investment' shall mean any kind of asset accepted in accordance
with the respective laws and regulations of either Contracting State, and

more particularly, though not exclusively:

(@ movable and immovable property as well as other rights in rem, such
as mortgages, liens, pledges, usufructs and similar rights;

(b) shares of stocks and debentures of companies or interest in the
property of such companies;

(©) claims to money utilized for the purpose of creating an economic value
or to any performance having an economic value;

3/24

(d@) _ intellectual property rights, in particular copyrights, patents, utility-
model patents, registered designs, trademarks, trade-names, trade and
business secrets, technical processes, know-how, and good will;

  

(ce) _ business concessions conferred by law or under contract, including
concessions to search for, extract or exploit natural resources;

any alteration of the form in which assets are invested shall not affect their
classification as an investment.»

§6.- The assets alleged by Fraport to constitute its investment within the
meaning of the BIT (Claimant's Memorial, paragraphs 35-37; Award
paragraphs 115-117) are:

(i) Fraport's shareholding in PIATCO and in the cascade of Philippine
companies (namely PAGS, PTH and PTI) that had direct or indirect
shareholdings in PIATCO. The primary asset at issue in this arbitration
therefore is the shareholdings in Philippine companies; and

(ii)Loan and payment guarantees to PIATCO, the cascade companies,
PIATCO lenders and constructors, and various expenses relating to the
Terminal 3 Concession.

The Respondent states that Article 1(1) of the BIT contains a fundamental
limitation in requiring an asset to be ((accepted in accordance with the
respective laws and regulations of either Contracting State» which
incorporates compliance with internal law as part of the international law
standard that must be applied as part of the BIT's provisions. The Respondent
argues that the Claimant breached Commonwealth Act N° 108 entitled An Act
to Punish Acts of Evasion of the Laws on the Nationalization of Certain Rights,
Franchises or Privileges (hereafter the «Anti-Dummy Law») and for this
reason its shareholdings fall outside the definition of 'investment' in Article
1(1) of the BIT.

§7.- Article 1(1) must be interpreted in accordance with Article 31 of the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties:

«Article 31 General rule of interpretation

1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary
meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of
its object and purpose.

2. The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall comprise, in
addition to the text, including its preamble and annexes:

4/24

(a) any agreement relating to the treaty which was made between all the parties
in connection with the conclusion of the treaty;

(b) any instrument which was made by one or more parties in connection with
the conclusion of the treaty and accepted by the other parties as an instrument
related to the treaty.

3. There shall be taken into account, together with the context:

(a) any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the interpretation of
the treaty or the application of its provisions;

(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which establishes the
agreement of the parties regarding its interpretation;

(c) any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between the
parties.

4. A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the parties
so intended.»

The requirement that an investment be made in accordance with or in
conformity with the laws of the Host State is a common provision in bilateral
investment treaties. It has been considered, or at least referred to, in a number
of awards (see, for example, Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v.
Kingdom of Morocco (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/4, Decision on Jurisdiction of
July 23, 2001); Saipem S.p.A. v. People's Republic of Bangladesh (ICSID Case
No. ARB/05/7, Decision of March 21, 2007); Inceysa Vallisoletana S.L v.
Republic of El Salvador (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/26, Award of August 2,
2006); Tokios Toheles v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Decision on
Jurisdiction of April 29, 2004)). The meaning of this requirement is a question
of treaty interpretation, and not of precedent or analogy. The meaning must be
determined in light of the terms, context, object and purpose of each bilateral
investment treaty. The integrity of this interpretative process must not be
compromised by the pronouncements of other arbitral tribunals in their
interpretation of different treaties in wholly unrelated factual and legal
contexts. Other awards or decisions are no more than illustrative of the
implications of a standard form of treaty wording.

§8.- The object and purpose of the Philippines-Germany BIT is
summarised in its title, namely, the promotion and reciprocal protection of
investments. This object and purpose is confirmed by the preamble to the BIT,
its content, and the second paragraph of the Instrument of Ratification of the
Republic of the Philippines.

There are a number of other provisions within the context of Article 1 (as
'context' is defined in the Vienna Convention) including the following:

Article 2(1) of the BIT:

5/24

«Article 2 Promotion and
Acceptance

(1) Each Contracting State shall promote as far as possible investments in its
territory by investors of the other Contracting State and admit such investments
in accordance with its Constitution, laws and regulations as referred to in Article
1 paragraph I. Such investments shall be accorded fair and equitable
treatment.»

Article 11(5) of the Philippines-Germany BIT states that the attached Protocol
forms an integral part of the BIT. Ad Article 2(a) and Ad Article 5(a) of the
Protocol state:

«(2) Ad Article 2

(a) As provided for in the Constitution of the Republic of the Philippines,
foreign investors are not allowed to own land in the territory of the
Republic of the Philippines. However, investors are allowed to own up to
40% of the equity of a company which can then acquire ownership of land.

(5) Ad Article 5

(a) With respect to the Republic of the Philippines it is understood that duly
registered investments are assets of any kind as defined in Article 1,
admitted in accordance with Article 2(1) and reported to competent
governmental agencies at the time the investment was made. It is further
understood, that the transfer guarantee is not limited to the capital values
of the investments that have been duly registered. The Republic of the
Philippines will relax as soon as possible existing reporting
requirements.»

Finally, the third paragraph of the Instrument of Ratification states:

«WHEREAS, the Agreement provides that the investment shall be in the areas
allowed by and in accordance with the Constitutions, laws and regulations of
each of the Contracting Parties; »

§9.- These provisions demonstrate an intention to restrict the protection
of the BIT to investments ‘accepted’ (Article 1(1)), ‘admitted’ (Article 2(1) and
Ad Article 5(a)) or ‘allowed’ (Ad Article 2, and the Philippine Instrument of
Ratification) in accordance with the laws and regulations of the Contracting
States, with Article 2 and the Philippine Instrument of Ratification adding
express references to the Constitution of the Contracting Parties and Ad Article
2 referring specifically to 'the Constitution of the Republic of the Philippines’.
There is, in my view, no difference in meaning intended in the terms

6/24

‘accepted’, ‘admitted’ or 'allowed', and although Ad Article 5 suggests a form
of admittance on registration regime for foreign investments, it was common
ground between the Parties that no such regime applied to the Claimant's
shareholdings in this case.

§10.- Ad Article 2 refers to a specific limitation in the Constitution of
the Republic of the Philippines on the ownership of land by foreign investors.
Article XII of the Constitution of the Republic of the Philippines, entitled
‘National Economy and Patrimony' defines in some detail the role of the State
in the economy, including resources inalienably owned by the State, reserved
privileges for Filipino citizens and restrictions on the participation in the
Philippine economy by foreign investors. Sections 2, 10 and 11 of Article XII
read as follows:

«ARTICLEXII NATIONAL ECONOMY
AND PATRIMONY

Section 2. All lands of the public domain, waters, minerals, coal, petroleum, and
other mineral oils, all forces of potential energy, fisheries, forests or timber,
wildlife, flora and fauna, and other natural resources are owned by the State.
With the exception of agricultural lands, all other natural resources shall not be
alienated. The exploration, development, and utilization of natural resources
shall be under the full control and supervision of the State. The State may
directly undertake such activities, or it may enter into co-production, joint
venture, or production-sharing agreements with Filipino citizens, or
corporations or associations at least sixty per centum of whose capital is owned
by such citizens. Such agreements may be for a period not exceeding twenty-five
years, renewable for not more than twenty-five years, and under such terms and
conditions as may be provided by law. In cases of water rights for irrigation,
water supply, fisheries, or industrial uses other than the development of water
power, beneficial use may be the measure and limit of the grant.

The State shall protect the nation's marine wealth in its archipelagic waters,
territorial sea, and exclusive economic zone, and reserve its use and enjoyment
exclusively to Filipino citizens.

The Congress may, by law, allow small-scale utilization of natural resources by
Filipino citizens, as well as cooperative fish farming, with priority to subsistence
fishermen andfishworkers in rivers, lakes, bays, and lagoons.

 

The President may enter into agreements with foreign-owned corporations
involving either technical or financial assistance for large-scale exploration,
development, and utilization of minerals, petroleum, and other mineral oils
according to the general terms and conditions provided by law, based on real
contributions to the economic growth and general welfare of the country. In such

724

agreements, the State shall promote the development and use of local scientific
and technical resources.

The President shall notify the Congress of every contract entered into in
accordance with this provision, within thirty days from its execution.

Section 10. The Congress shall, upon recommendation of the economic and
planning agency, when the national interest dictates, reserve to citizens of the
Philippines or to corporations or associations at least sixty per centum of whose
capital is owned by such citizens, or such higher percentage as Congress may
prescribe, certain areas of investments. The Congress shall enact measures that
will encourage the formation and operation of enterprises whose capital is
wholly owned by Filipinos.

In the grant of rights, privileges, and concessions covering the national economy
and patrimony, the State shall give preference to qualified Filipinos.

The State shall regulate and exercise authority over foreign investments within
its national jurisdiction and in accordance with its national goals and priorities.

Section 11. No franchise, certificate, or any other form of authorization for the
operation of a public utility shall be granted except to citizens of the Philippines
or to corporations or associations organized under the laws of the Philippines, at
least sixty per centum of whose capital is owned by such citizens, nor shall such
franchise, certificate, or authorization be exclusive in character or for a longer
period than fifty years. Neither shall any such franchise or right be granted
except under the condition that it shall be subject to amendment, alteration, or
repeal by the Congress when the common good so requires. The State shall
encourage equity participation in public utilities by the general public. The
participation of foreign investors in the governing body of any public utility
enterprise shall be limited to their proportionate share in its capital, and all the
executive and managing officers of such corporation or association must be
citizens of the Philippines.

These provisions of the Constitution prohibit ownership of natural resources,
including land, by foreign investors; limit the participation of foreign investors
in joint ventures relating to natural resources to no more than 40% of the
capital (Section 2); prohibit the holding by foreign investors of any franchise
for a public utility; and limit their participation in any Philippine corporation
holding a public utility franchise to 40% of its capital, as well as limiting the
participation of foreign investors in the management and governance of any
public utility enterprise (Section 11).

8/24

Ad Article 2 of the BIT in making express reference to the limitation on the
rights of foreign investors to own land in the Philippines reflects the terms of
Article XII, Section 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of the Philippines.

§11.- Article 1(1) of the Philippines-Germany BIT defines an investment
as an ‘asset', and makes express reference to 'shares' as a class of asset
included in the protection of the BIT. The Claimant's claim in this arbitration is
based primarily upon the treatment by the Respondent of its shareholdings in
Philippine corporations. These shareholdings are an 'asset' and therefore an
investment within the meaning of Article 1(1) of the BIT.

The Respondent submits that the Claimant's shareholdings fall outside Article
1(1) because they were not accepted in accordance with the laws and
regulations of the Philippines in that the Claimant's investment breached the
Anti-Dummy Law. I will deal with the Anti-Dummy Law later in this opinion.
Assuming, however, that there were a breach of the Anti-Dummy Law, this
would not deprive the Arbitral Tribunal of jurisdiction because the Claimant's
shareholdings in a Philippine corporation are still a «kind of asset accepted in
accordance with the laws and regulations of the Philippines».

§12.- It is clear from the context of Article 1(1) that the word 'asset' is
qualified by 'accepted in accordance with the respective laws and regulations
of either Contracting States’ because certain assets by law cannot be owned by
foreign investors. In the case of the Philippines, a foreign investor that owned
land, natural resources, a public utility franchise, or a shareholding in
corporations exceeding the restrictions in the Constitution would possess an
asset not accepted by law, and therefore would fall outside the protection of the
BIT.

§13.- The Claimant's shareholdings in PIATCO and the other Philippine
corporations do not violate any Philippine law relating to the holding of this
kind of asset. PIATCO was awarded a public utility franchise (namely the
Terminal 3 Concession), but at all times at least sixty percent of PLATCO's
capital was owned by Philippine citizens (including other Philippine
corporations), and Fraport's direct and indirect shareholding in PIATCO
complied at all times with Philippine law.

The fact that the Claimant's asset may have engaged in illegal conduct in the
Philippines (allegedly, a breach of the Anti-Dummy Law) does not change the
fact that its shareholdings are an asset accepted in accordance with Philippine
law. The Respondent's interpretation of Article 1(1) does not respect its

9/24

ordinary meaning, nor its context, nor the object and purpose of the BIT. The
Respondent proposes, in effect, that any illegal conduct by an investor shall
deprive the investor to the protection of the BIT. This is not what Article 1
states.

§14.- Of course, any illegal behaviour by an investor is likely to have
consequences. Criminal conduct can and should be punished within the
domestic criminal justice system. Illegal conduct by the investor might well
excuse or limit any liability of the State Party in an arbitration pursuant to the
BIT, depending on the circumstances. It is also possible for the Contracting
Parties to a BIT to exclude the jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal for illegalities
committed by the investor. Investor illegality is serious, and there are many
means to address it. However, in my opinion, it is an artificial, decontextualised
interpretation of Article 1(1) of the BIT that excludes the jurisdiction of this
Arbitral Tribunal for an alleged breach of the Philippine Anti-Dummy Law,
and an interpretation that does violence to the object and purpose of promoting
and protecting investment in the Philippines.

C. The Anti-Dummy Law

§15.- The Respondent submits, and the majority of this Arbitral Tribunal
accepts, that the Claimant has breached Section 2-A of the Anti-Dummy Law.
Section 2-A is not drafted for easy interpretation, consisting of a single
complex sentence with three provisos. Comprehension is assisted by breaking
the text up as follows:

(Section 2-A - Unlawful use, exploitation or enjoyment:

Any person, corporation, or association which, having in its name or under its
control, a right, franchise, privilege, property or business, the exercise or
enjoyment of which is expressly reserved by the Constitution or the laws to
citizens of the Philippines or of any other specific country, or to corporations or
associations at least sixty per centum of the capital of which is owned by such
citizens,

    

 

ale or allows the use, exploitation or enjoyment thereof by a person,
¢c or iation not ing the requisites prescribed by the
Constitution or the laws of the Philippines; or

leases, or in any other way, transfers or conveys said right, franchise, privilege,
property or business to a person, corporation or association not otherwise
qualified under the Constitution, or the provisions of the existing laws; or

in any manner permits or allows any person, not possessing the qualifications
required by the Constitution, or existing laws to acquire, use, exploit or enjoy a
right, franchise, privilege, property or business, the exercise and enjoyment of
which are expressly reserved by the Constitution or existing laws to citizens of

10/24

the Philippines or of any other specific country, to intervene in the management,
operation, administration or control thereof, whether as an officer, employee or
laborer therein with or without remuneration except technical personnel whose
employment may be specifically authorized by the Secretary of Justice, and

any person who knowingly aids, assists or abets in the planning consummation
or perpetration of any of the acts herein above enumerated

shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than five nor more than fifteen
years and by a fine of not less than the value of the right, franchise or privilege
enjoyed or acquired in violation of the provisions hereof but in no case less than
five thousand pesos:

Provided, however, That the president, managers or persons in charge of
corporations, associations or partnerships violating the provisions of this section
shall be criminally liable in lieu thereof:

Provided, further, That any person, corporation or association shall, in addition
to the penalty imposed therein, forfeit such right, franchise, privilege, and the
property or business enjoyed or acquired in violation of the provisions of this
Act:

And provided, finally, That the election of aliens as members of the board of
directors or governing body of corporations or associations engaging in partially
nationalized activities shall be allowed in proportion to their allowable
participation or share in the capital of such entities».

§16.- The Claimant's actual shareholding in PIATCO never exceeded
30% of the total share capital. It also had an indirect shareholding in PTATCO
through its shareholdings in PAGS, PTH and PTI. There is no doubt in this
case that Fraport's direct and indirect shareholdings in PLATCO complied with
Philippine law on foreign ownership (as accepted in the Award).

The treatment of indirect shareholdings in Philippine law is governed by the
‘Control’ test, which has replaced the earlier 'Grandfather' test and brings the
Anti-Dummy Law into line with the definition of a 'Philippine national’ in the
Foreign Investments Act of 1991. The 'Control' test treats actual voting power
as the decisive characteristic of a Philippine corporation, as it treats a
corporation in fact 60% owned by Philippine citizens as entirely Philippine.
The Control test is not, as the majority suggests (paragraph 352) 'a misleading
rubric’ but a rule of Philippine law, with the virtue of simplicity, that states
there can be no violation of the Anti-Dummy Law on the grounds of illegal
control where 60% of the capital of the alleged dummy is in the hands of
Philippine citizens (other possible breaches of the Anti-Dummy Law, such as
the violation of the provision relating to the election of aliens to the Board, are
not of relevance here).

11/24

Notwithstanding this clear rule of Philippine law, the majority accepts the
Respondent's submission that the Anti-Dummy Law may still be violated by a
foreign investor where 60% of actual voting control is in the hands of
Philippine citizens.

The extensive analysis in the Award (paragraphs 357 to 382) devoted to the
decision of the State Prosecutor, the official responsible in Philippine law for
the prosecution of Anti-Dummy Law crimes, seeks to demonstrate that the
reliance on this official on the 'Control' test and his failure to examine other
forms of control is explained by the fact that the State Prosecutor did not have
access to the secret shareholder agreements. In fact the State Prosecutor applied
the Control test and no other because, as he explained, this is the law of the
Philippines. The State Prosecutor considered and rejected the position, now
adopted by the majority of this Tribunal, that control might be identified in
‘organisational structure’ as old law that «can no longer be used in this case
because the Foreign Investment Act already provided that the Control Test
shall be used in determining the nationality of the corporation)) (Resolution of
the State Prosecutor dated December 27, 2006 in the matter of National Bureau
of Investigation v. Cheng Yong & others, 1.8. N° 2006-817, page 13).

§17.- The Respondent submits that the «evidence shows that Fraport
made a conscious decision before investing to evade nationality restrictions by
use of contractual arrangements that it knew were not enforceable under local
law)). The Respondent identifies the breach of the Anti-Dummy Law in
Fraport's contractual and financial relationships with the other shareholders in
PIATCO, including the agreement of July 6, 1999 between four PIATCO
shareholders (Fraport, PAGS, PTI and Paircargo) referred to as the 'Pooling
Agreement’ or the 'FAG-Paircargo-PAGS-PTI Shareholders' Agreement’, and
particularly Article 2.02 of this Pooling Agreement (set out in paragraph 319 of
the Award).

The confidential nature of the Pooling Agreement and other agreements is
presented as evidence of criminality. Reference is also made to subsequent
legal advice, both from Fraport lawyers and from a consortium of lenders. The
subsequent amendment of the shareholder agreements (including the removal
of the allegedly illegal agreements in Article 2.02 of the Pooling Agreement,
including the requirement that in certain circumstances the shareholders
'shall.... act upon the recommendations of FAG') is presented as evidence of
the criminality of the previous agreements.

§18.- The purpose of the Anti-Dummy Law as its long title (‘An Act to
Punish Acts of Evasion of the Laws on the Nationalization of Certain Rights,

12/24

Franchises and Privileges') states, is to punish the evasion of Philippine
nationalisation requirements, such as those in Article XII of the Constitution,
through the use by foreigners of a Philippine entity that is a mere sham or
‘dummy’. It is a criminal statute, and the offence created by Section 2-A is a
serious felony punishable by imprisonment «for not less than five not more
than fifteen years», fines, forfeit of «such right, franchise, privilege, and the
property or business enjoyed or acquired in violation of the provisions of this
Act» and (in Section 3) dissolution of an offending corporate entity.

 

§19.- The Anti-D. 1y Law criminalises the duct of the di ye
Section 2-A creates an offence for a Philippine person or corporation in
possession of a right, franchise, privilege, property or business expressed
reserved by the Constitution or laws to citizens of the Philippines to allow itself
to be used as a 'dummy' by foreigners in the ways particularised in Section 2-
A. Section 2-A only indirectly provides for possible criminal liability by
foreign investors in criminalising the conduct of a person who «knowingly aids,
assists or abets in the planning consummation or perpetration of any of the
acts herein above enumerated.» However, the guilt of an accomplice depends
upon the commission of an offence by the Philippine principal i.e. proof of
«any of the acts herein above enumerated)).

§20.- The Terminal 3 Concession was a public utility franchise. Pursuant
to Article XII, Section 11 of the Philippine Constitution such a franchise could
only be held by Philippine citizens or Philippine corporations «at least sixty
percent of whose capital is owned by such citizens)). The Terminal 3
Concession was granted to PIATCO, a Philippine corporation sixty percent
owned by Philippine interests.

The Respondent has not demonstrated that PIATCO had violated the Anti-
Dummy Law. IfPIA TCO did not breach the Anti-Dummy Law, then Fraport
cannot have aided, assisted or abetted or otherwise participated in any

offence.

§21.- The Respondent's extensive submissions on Fraport's knowledge
of the Anti-Dummy Law, its alleged criminal purpose, the secrecy of the
shareholder agreements and the role that the Philippine shareholders allegedly
conceded to Fraport ignore the sine qua non of its Anti-Dummy Law argument,
namely, that PLATCO -the alleged dummy- has violated the Act.

The majority decision is based on the shareholder agreements between Fraport
and the other PIATCO shareholders that allegedly gave Fraport illegal control

13/24

of PIATCO. However, PIATCO was not itself a party to these agreements, and
the Respondent did not demonstrate -and conceded it could not do so- that
Fraport exercised any of its allegedly illegal powers of control or, more
importantly, that PIATCO permitted and allowed Fraport to exploit or enjoy
the Terminal 3 Concession by being used as a dummy.

For example, notwithstanding the emphasis given to Article 2.02 of the Pooling
Agreement, and the massive discovery and disclosure of documents in this
arbitration, there is no evidence that Fraport sought to exercise the powers in
Article 2.02 on any occasion, or that the other shareholders accepted any
purported exercise of this power, or any decision or action of PLATCO was in
any manner influenced by the provisions of the Pooling Agreement. The
Respondent conceded that Fraport never exercised these allegedly illegal
powers (hearing transcript page 2528; Award paragraph 291). Accordingly,
PIATCO never permitted itself to be used as a dummy and there was never
any violation of the Anti-Dummy Law.

§22.- The majority states that «/i/t is clear from the texts of the ADL, as
confirmed by the QT due diligence report, that it was managerial control which
was the concern of the Constitution and the ADL» (paragraph 352, emphasis
original). 'Managerial control’ is not an expression that appears in the Anti-
Dummy Law. The Anti-Dummy Law does not criminalise Fraport for
possessing 'managerial control' of PIATCO, rather it criminalises PIATCO if
PIATCO has in any manner permitted or allowed Fraport «to acquire, use,
exploit or enjoy a...franchise [i.e. the Terminal 3 Concession]...to intervene in
the management, operation, administration or control thereof [i.e. the Terminal
3 Concession], whether as an officer, employee or laborer therein...».

  
   

For this reason, the mere execution of the Pooling Agreement cannot of itself
be a violation of the Anti-Dummy Law.

§23.- The Respondent's submission, and regretfully, the decision of
the majority, confuse a perceived recklessness by Fraport towards its
obligations under Philippine law with the violation of a criminal statute. 1 do
not share the interpretation of the documents that led the majority to the
conclusion that Fraport «was consistently aware that the way it was structuring
its investment in the Philippines in violation of the ADL and accordingly
sought to keep those arrangements secret» (Award, paragraph 332) but in any
event this is a conclusion of no more than an illegal intent.

 

Further, the finding of criminal intent relies heavily on legal advice provided to
the Claimant by its Philippine lawyers, Quisumbing Torres. This legal advice

14/24

was obtained by the Respondent indirectly, and not through disclosure in the
discovery process in the arbitration. When the subject of the legal advice is a
serious criminal offence then the double violations of professional secret and
the privilege against self-incrimination is problematic. It is particularly
problematic when combined with the peculiar form of legal reasoning adopted
by the majority (see, for example, Award paragraphs 323, 327, 329, 332, 355
and 356) that infers a crime from the Claimant's legal advice, rather than from
a careful examination of its actions in light of the text of the Anti-Dummy Law.

I also would not be prepared to construe a confidential clause in a shareholders
agreement, such as Article 1.07 of the Pooling Agreement referred to in
paragraph 320 of the Award, as evidence of criminal intent.

§24.- As a final point, the majority approach by equating the execution
of shareholder agreements with an illegal managerial control, fixes the
illegality at the moment the shareholders executed the agreements (i.e. July
1999). If the execution of the shareholders agreements was the commission of
the offence, what then are the legal consequences of the repeal of certain
provisions (such as Article 2.02 of the Pooling Agreement) of the shareholder
agreements at the suggestion of the Senior Lenders in 2001? If the entry of the
investment is the critical moment to determine legality (Award, paragraphs 315
and 395) in what way was Fraport's investment of a further USD14,700,000 in
PAGS in September 2001, after the amendment of the offending sections of the
shareholder agreements, tainted with any illegality?

§25.- The Anti-Dummy Law also requires that the dummy in fact holds
a public utility franchise. The dummy in this case is PIATCO, and the
franchise is the Terminal 3 Concession. However, the Philippine Supreme
Court in Agan v. PIATCO, on an application supported by the Respondent
State, has found that the grant of the Terminal 3 Concession to PIATCO in
1997 was null and void. The Supreme Court denied reconsideration and the
nullity of the Terminal 3 Concession is now res judicata in Philippine law.

The expropriation of the Terminal 3 Concession as a result of this Supreme
Court decision is the basis of this arbitration.

As a matter of Philippine law, the Terminal 3 Concession was null and void
when granted in 1997. Is it possible for PLATCO to be guilty of a criminal
offence by acting as a dummy for Fraport to enjoy this franchise some time
after Fraport first invested in this project in July 1999? This question has both a
substantive and a procedural dimension.

15/24

§26.- On a substantive level, the Respondent has not demonstrated to the
Tribunal that, as a matter of Philippine law, a corporation might breach the
Anti-Dummy Law when the public utility franchise -a key element of the
criminal offence- is null and void. As a matter of principle, in the interpretation
of a criminal offence carrying penalties of up to fifteen years imprisonment, the
subject matter of the offence should exist as a matter of law at the time the
alleged offence was committed.

This Tribunal is bound to apply Philippine law to the interpretation of the Anti-
Dummy Law (Article 42 of the Washington Convention), and it manifestly
exceeds its powers if it does not do so. It is not bound by a decision of a
Philippine court -even the Supreme Court- but its own judgment on Philippine
law must be premised on Philippine law itself. It is res judicata in Philippine
law that the Terminal 3 Concession is null and void ex tune and not ex nunc,
and this must be accepted by the Arbitral Tribunal.

In my view, the Tribunal should respect the consequences of the Supreme
Court decision. On this basis, it is impossible for PIATCO, or Fraport, to be
guilty of any breach of the Anti-Dummy Law.

§27.- As a final point, I refer again to the decision of the Philippine State
Prosecutor dated December 27, 2006 in respect of a complaint against PIATCO
for a breach of the Anti Dummy Law (Resolution of the State Prosecutor dated
December 27, 2006 in the matter of National Bureau of Investigation v. Cheng
Yong & others, 1.8. N° 2006-817). The State Prosecutor is the official
responsible in Philippine law to decide whether a prosecution should be made
under the Anti-Dummy Law. In his lengthy and reasoned rejection of grounds
for prosecution, the State Prosecutor stated (page 13):

((Finally, what the law prohibits is the granting of a franchise or the operation of
a public utility by a corporation already in existence without the required
proportion of Filipino capital as held by the Supreme Court in a long line of
cases. Thus, if there is no grant of a franchise, as in this case where the
government itself denies the existence of a public utility franchise in favor of
PIATCO, then a non-holder of a franchise will result to the absurd and unfair
situation where a non-holder like PIATCO is prosecuted for an offense which
may only be committed by a holder of a franchise. This could not have been the
intention of the Anti-Dummy Law. We certainly cannot prosecute the individuals
who clearly have not committed or could not possibly have committed the crimes
penalized by the Anti-Dummy Law.» (emphasis added)

D. Procedural Good Faith
§28.- Article 26 of the Vienna Convention provides:

«Pacta sunt servanda
Every treaty in force is binding upon the parties to it and must be performed by
them in good faith.»

The Respondent must perform the Philippines-Germany BIT in good faith, and
this includes its obligation under Article 9 to arbitrate its divergencies with a
German investor such as Fraport. The principle of good faith in international
law precedes and transcends Article 26 of the Vienna Convention. It extends,
for example, to the abuse of rights, the improper use of internal law by State
parties (a matter addressed in Article 27 of the Vienna Convention), and the
principle that a State cannot adopt inconsistent positions in respect of the same
state of facts (an application in the international sphere of the principle known
in Anglo-Saxon jurisdictions as estoppel).

§29.- The investor-State dispute resolution provision in Article 9 of the
Philippines-Germany BIT constitutes an open offer of arbitration to the
investors from the other State. The investor's acceptance of that offer, and so
the formation of the arbitration agreement, does not arise until the investor
commences arbitration (Lanco International, Inc. v. Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/97/6, Preliminary decision on jurisdiction of December
8, 1998)). The standing offer of the State parties must be made and maintained
in good faith, and when accepted, the arbitration must be conducted in good
faith.

As already noted, the requirement that an investment be made in accordance
with or in conformity with the laws of the Host State is a common provision in
bilateral investment treaties. At the same time, the abuse of its own law by
State parties is a perennial problem in investment and international commercial
arbitration. Indeed, the generic purpose of investment treaties of providing
juridical security and certainty presupposes the need to control the Host State's
use of its law for its own convenience. International investors and contractors
have a long experience of the ingenuity of State parties in the use of their
legislative, executive and judicial powers to escape their responsibilities,
including their obligation to arbitrate. Investment arbitration requires a mutual
respect for the law of the Host State, by both the investor and the Host State
itself.

The misuse by the State party of its own law is the subject of the substantive
provisions of bilateral investment treaties such as the requirements of fair and

17/24

equitable treatment, and that there is no expropriation without compensation. It
is also the subject of obligations of public international law such as denial of
justice. However, the misuse of a State party of its own law can take
procedural forms, and therefore effects the formation of the arbitration
agreement and the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal. In the context of an
arbitration agreement arising from a bilateral investment treaty, such as Article
9 of the Philippines-Germany BIT, the formation and performance of the
arbitration agreement is governed by good faith, derived from both Article 26
of the Vienna Convention and fundamental principles of procedure.

§30.- The epitome of the abuse of law is its inconsistency or
arbitrariness. Where rules are applied to one person, and not to another, or at
one time and not another, or at the discretion of one official or another, or
recognised and enforced by one organ of the State and ignored by another, then
there is an inconsistency contrary to the nature of law. As regards the
formation of an arbitration agreement, the principle of good faith or estoppel
prevents the State from taking a legal position that is inconsistent with its
internal law, or the position it has previously taken with the investor regarding
the proper application of its internal law.

§31.- On July 12, 1997 the Respondent granted the Terminal 3
Concession to PIATCO, and in December 2001 negotiations began between
the Claimant and the Respondent to bring Terminal 3 into commercial
operation. Over the next year, political opposition to the Terminal 3
Concession intensified. The following is a short summary of the position of the
Respondent (or state organs for which the Respondent is responsible in
international law) in relation to the validity of the Terminal 3 Concession from
this point:

(a) November 29, 2002: President of the Philippines publicly declares
that the Solicitor General and Department of Justice have advised
that the Terminal 3 Concession is null and void and will not be
honoured by the government (Award, paragraphs 190-192);

 

(b) May 5, 2003: Philippine Supreme Court sets aside the Terminal 3
Concession as being null and void (Award, paragraphs 207-218);

(c) January 21, 2004: Philippine Supreme Court denies with finality

motions for reconsideration of its May 5, 2003 decisions setting
aside the PIATCO Concession as null and void;

18/24

(d) September 17, 2003: The Claimant initiates this arbitration with its
Request for Arbitration alleging that the nullification of the
Terminal Concession amounts to an expropriation of Fraport's
investment in PIATCO and related companies, unfair and
inequitable treatment, and a denial of justice by the Philippine
judicial system. In its Counter-Memorial dated December 20, 2004
the Respondent particularised many irregularities in the bidding and
award process for the Terminal 3 Concession, and specifically
defended the Supreme Court's decision to declare the Terminal 3
Concession null and void ab initio (Counter-Memorial paragraph
294);

December 21, 2004: Respondent files an exparte petition before the
Regional Trial Court and obtains an ex parte Writ of Possession of
Terminal 3 on the same date. Both the Respondent's petition and the
decision of the Court refer to the Supreme Court decision declaring
the Terminal 3 Concession null and void (Award, paragraphs 237 et
seq.);

(e

@

 

(f) December 27, 2006: The State Prosecutor rejects the initiation of an
Anti-Dummy Law Prosecution against PLATCO and its shareholders
on various grounds, including the non-existence of a public utility
franchise as required by the Anti-Dummy Law.

 

§32.- The Respondent has consistently taken the position that the
Terminal 3 Concession was void ab initio. The Philippine President has
publicly taken this position. The Supreme Court has confirmed this position.
The State Prosecutor has acted on this position. The Supreme Court of the
Philippines, the highest court in the country, has declared the Terminal 3
Concession void ab initio and confirmed the finality of this decision on a
motion for reconsideration, so the question is res judicata as a matter of
Philippine law.

The Respondent cannot in good faith take a position in this arbitration -namely
that PIATCO held a valid public utility franchise- that is (i) contrary to its own
internal law; and (ii) contrary to the position its officials have consistently and
publicly taken over a period of four years. Yet this is exactly the position that
the Respondent has taken in pursuing the Anti-Dummy Law violation as an
objection to jurisdiction. The Respondent is this arbitration escapes from its
agreement to arbitrate by asserting the criminal control of a franchise that
for four years it has insisted does not exist.

19/24

In my view, this defence must be rejected on the grounds of procedural bad
faith.

§33.- There is a further disturbing element to the Respondent's
behaviour regarding the State Prosecutor's decision of December 27, 2006 not
to prosecute PIATCO and its shareholders for violations of the Anti-Dummy
Law. The Respondent: (i) misrepresented the content of this decision to the
Arbitral Tribunal; (ii) misrepresented to the Arbitral Tribunal the material
available to the Special Prosecutor when he made this decision; and (iii)
publicly insinuated that the Special Prosecutor should change his decision
because it might damage the State's position in this arbitration.

§34.- The Respondent's apparent attitude that its internal law may be
manipulated for own convenience shows a disdain for the rule of law and is the
epitome of bad faith.

E. Conclusions:

§35.- For these reasons, I consider that this Arbitral Tribunal has
jurisdiction over this dispute, and in particular:

1. The Claimant's shareholdings in Philippine companies constitute an
‘investment’ within the meaning of Article 1(1) of the BIT;

2. These shareholdings are a 'kind of asset accepted in accordance with
the respective laws and regulations of [the Philippines]', irrespective
of whether the Claimant is guilty of any breach of the Philippine
Anti-Dummy Law;

3. The Respondent has not demonstrated that PIATCO as the public
utility holder is guilty of any breach of the Anti-Dummy Law, and if
PIATCO is not guilty of any breach then Fraport cannot be guilty as
an accomplice;

4. This Arbitral Tribunal must apply the current Philippine law relating
to the Anti-Dummy Law. Philippine law applies the 'Control' Test
to determine the legality of the shareholding of a foreign investor in
a public utility franchise holder, and does not criminalise managerial
control by the foreign investor. Fraport's shareholding at all times
complied with the 'Control' test, and in any event it was conceded
that Fraport never exercised any of the allegedly illegal powers
under the shareholders agreements;

20/24

5. Asa matter of Philippine law, the Terminal 3 Concession was null
and void ab initio, and therefore a violation by PIATCO or Fraport
of the Anti-Dummy Law is legally impossible on the grounds of the
non-existence of a public utility franchise;

6. The Respondent's Anti-Dummy Law submission is premised on the
validity of the public utility franchise, and therefore is an argument
against its own internal law;

7. The Respondent's Anti-Dummy Law submission violates the good
faith required of a party in investment arbitration in (i) being
contrary to its own law; (ii) being contrary to the consistent position
of its senior officials in their dealings with the Claimant, with the
public and in the exercise of their official duties; (iii) that the actions
of its officials have been misrepresented to and manipulated before
this Arbitral Tribunal.

The Respondent presented the 'secret shareholder agreements' as the 'smoking
gun' of the ADL crime. There has certainly been plenty of smoke in this
arbitration. However, if the actions of the Claimant, PIATCO and the
Respondent, the terms of the ADL and Philippine law, are studied carefully,
then the smoke disperses and reveals that there is no bullet, no victim and no
crime.

F. Final Observations: Ilegality and Jurisdiction

§36.- An investor that contravenes the law of the Host State of the
investment must expect to suffer the consequences prescribed by law. Foreign
investment occurs within a sophisticated legal framework of foreign
ownership, tax, antitrust, administrative, labour, environmental and other
regulations as well as the law relating to obligations arising directly from
contractual relations. An investor that breaches any law or regulation bears the
consequences, in the appropriate forum and in accordance with the applicable
rules.

The principle of legality in investment arbitration, like the principles of pacta
sunt servanda and good faith, applies equally to both Parties. Indeed, the very
purpose of investment arbitration is to determine the legality of the conduct of
the Host State and the investor under the applicable law.

As I have said, it is not uncommon for BITs to include in the definition of

investment some reference to domestic law and regulation similar to the
language of the Philippines-Germany BIT. The purpose of these provisions is

21/24

not to condition the right to arbitrate on the minute compliance by the investor
at all times and in all respects with the domestic law and regulation of the Host
State. It was not the intention, for example, that a Host State might escape
responsibility for unfair or expropriatory acts because the investor did not
comply with domestic regulation relating to the expression of corporate names.
Such an argument has been raised before an international arbitral tribunal and
was properly rejected because «to exclude an investment on the basis of such
minor errors would be inconsistent with the object and purpose of the Treaty)}
see Tokios Tokeles vy. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Decision on
Jurisdiction of April 29, 2004, paragraphs 83-86.

§37.- The legality of the investment in investment arbitration has its
analogy in international commercial arbitration in the validity of the contract.
If the applicable law does not insist on the separability of the arbitration
agreement from the main contract, then respondents quickly seek to subvert the
arbitral process by challenging the validity of the main contract. Similarly, the
phrase 'according to the laws and regulations of the Host State’ might provide
the Achilles Heel of investment arbitration if jurisdiction depends on the
Claimant passing a full legal compliance audit.

If the legality of the Claimant's conduct is a jurisdictional issue, and the
legality of the Respondent's conduct a merits issue, then the Respondent Host
State is placed in a powerful position. In the Biblical phrase, the Tribunal must
first examine the speck in the eye of the investor and defer, and maybe never
address, a beam in the eye of the Host State. Such an approach does not respect
fundamental principles of procedure.

§38.- As a matter of principle, therefore, the legality of the investor's
conduct is a merits issue. The inquiry at the jurisdictional phase required by the
phrase «in accordance with the laws and regulations of the Host State» is
limited to determining whether the type of asset is legal in domestic law. For
the reasons already explained, I consider that the proper interpretation of
Article 1(1) of the Philippines-Germany BIT in accordance with the principles
of the Vienna Convention produces exactly this result.

§39.- It is important to emphasise that there is no question of an Arbitral
Tribunal passing over or treating lightly any illegal conduct by the investor.
The question is the proper time and context to consider and evaluate the proof
and consequences of illegality. In many cases, legal action will also be possible
in competent domestic tribunals. There is no question of impunity for the

foreign investor. The foreign investor that commits a crime should go to jail or
suffer the other penalties prescribed by law.

However, it is equally mistaken to adopt an interpretation of a standard phrase
in investment instruments in a manner capable of leaving an investor without a
remedy, and a Host State secure and immune in a gross violation of a Bilateral
Investment Treaty.

§40.-1 referred to the Tokios Tokeles v. Ukraine case as an example of a
State's reliance on a trivial breach of local law to challenge the jurisdiction of
the arbitral tribunal. What of an example at the other extreme, of an investor
that has engaged in systematic fraud or corruption? The recent award in
Inceysa Vallisoletana S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador (ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/26, Award of August 2, 2006) involved systematic fraud in securing a
contract with the Republic of El Salvador, for the operation of vehicle
inspection stations, and the tribunal held that there was no jurisdiction on a
number of grounds, including that the investment was not made in accordance
with the laws of El Salvador.

As a matter of principle, even in such an extreme case the proper question is
whether the kind of asset is legal under domestic law and, if so, the tribunal has
jurisdiction and should move on to consider the merits. In a case of gross
illegality the Host State will almost certainly have a defence on the merits, and
the claim will be dismissed.

In cases of gross illegality there may also be other reasons for the
inadmissibility of a claim. In some cases, for example, the principles of good
faith and public policy may bar a claim. Both good faith and international
public policy were important in Inceysa Vallisoletana S.L. v. Republic of El
Salvador. International public policy barred the claims in World Duty Free v.
The Republic of Kenya (ICSID Case N° ARB/00/07, Award of October 4,
2006). Alternatively, illegality might have consequences for jurisdiction
peculiar to the circumstances of a particular dispute, as for example, where the
illegality connects the dispute to events before the treaty entered into force, and
therefore deprives the tribunal of jurisdiction rationae temporis (Empresas
Lucchetti, S.A. and Lucchetti Peru, S.A. v. Republic of Peru, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/03/4, Award of February 7, 2005.)

As a final point, I refer to the practice of the casual use of citations from other
awards without regard to their original contexts. Awards have been cited as if
they were authorities or precedents on, for example, the significance of illegal
conduct by the investor that bear no similarity to the case at issue. Salini
Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Kingdom of Morocco (ICSID Case

23/24

No. ARB/00/4, Decision on Jurisdiction of July 23, 2001) concerned the proper
separation of contract from treaty claims. Empresas Lucchetti, S.A. and
Lucchetti Peru, S.A. v. Republic of Peru, (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/4, Award
of February 7, 2005) concerned the date when a dispute had arisen, and the
effect on this determination of certain decisions of the Peruvian courts, for the
purposes of jurisdiction rationae temporis under the Chile-Peru BIT. Inceysa
Vallisoletana S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/26,
Award of August 2, 2006) is also not relevant to the arbitration before us, as it
involved a concession solicited and obtained by fraud, where the documentary
evidence of the fraud was overwhelming.

§41.- For these reasons, I consider that the decision of the majority in this
arbitration is not only contrary to the terms of Article 1(1) of the Philippines-
Germany BIT, but it is also fundamentally wrong in its approach to illegality as
a matter of principle.

/signed/
Bernardo M. Cremades

Arbitrator
Date: July 19*2007

24/24

