INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON D.C.

FRAPORT AG FRANKFURT AIRPORT SERVICES WORLDWIDE

v.

Applicant

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25
Annulment Proceeding,

 

DECISION ON THE APPLICATION FOR ANNULMENT OF FRAPORT AG
FRANKFURT AIRPORT SERVICES WORLDWIDE

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee

Judge Peter Tomka (President)
Judge Dominique Hascher
Professor Campbell McLachlan QC

Secretary of the Committee

Ms. Eloise Obadia

Representing the Applicant:

Mr. Michael Nolan,

Mr. Edward Baldwin,

Ms. Elitza Popova-Talty and

Mr. Frederic Sourgens

Milbank, Tweed, Hadley & McCloy LLP
Washington, D.C.

and

Ms. Lesley Benn

Shulman, Rogers, Gandal, Pordy & Ecker PA
Potomac, Maryland

and

Ms. Sabine Konrad

K&L Gates LLP

Paris, France

and

Mr. Eric Schwartz

King & Spalding LLP

Paris, France

Representing the Respondent:

Ms. Agnes VST Devanadera,

(until January 2010)

Former Solicitor General

Mr. Alberto Agra, (until June 2010)
Former Solicitor General

Mr. Jose Anselmo I. Cadiz

Solicitor General (from August 2010)
and

Justice Florentino P. Feliciano (Ret.)
Sycip Salazar Hernandez & Gatmaitan
and

Ms. Carolyn Lamm

Ms. Abby Cohen Smutny, and

Ms. Andrea Menaker

White & Case LLP

Washington, D.C.

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: 23 December 2010

-2-

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PROCEDURAL HISTORY
THE DISPUTE
THE ARBITRAL AWARD
THE GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT
A. Manifest Excess of Power
a) Introduction
b) Parties’ Submissions
c) The Committee’s Analysis
B. Serious Departure From a Fundamental Rule of Procedure
a) Fraport’s Case
i) Nullum crimen sine legelin dubio pro reo
ii) The right to be heard
b) The Philippines’ Response
i) Nullum crimen sine legelin dubio pro reo
ii) The right to be heard
c) The Arbitral Tribunal’s Approach
i) Procedural treatment of new evidence on the ADL
ii) Consideration of the ADL in the Award
d) The Committee’s Analysis

i) Construction of Article 52(1)(d) of the
ICSID Convention

ii) Nullum crimen sine legelin dubio pro reo
iii) The content of the right to be heard

iv) The issue raised by the Tribunal’s treatment of
new evidence on the ADL

e) Conclusions on the Right to Be Heard Before the Arbitral
Tribunal

Paragraphs

1-13
14-26
27-31
32-280
33-118
33-45
46-72
73-118
119-247
120-133
121-126
127-133
134-148
134-143
144-148
149-179
150-163
164-179
180-217

180-187

188-196
197-208

209-217

218-247

-3-

i) As to the factual record before the Philippine
Prosecutor

ii) As to the implications of the Prosecutor’s Resolution

on Section 2-A of the ADL
C. Failure to State the Reasons
a) Introduction
b) Parties’ Submissions
c) The Committee’s Analysis

i) The award as actually decided by the Tribunal is
controlled under Article 52(1)(e)

1) Discrete investments

2) Public utility

3) Principal/accessory

4) Nullum crimen sine legelin dubio pro reo

ii) The scrutiny of the Award by the ad hoc
Committee under Article 52(1)(e) cannot cause
a reopening of the case

V. COSTS

Vi DECISION

219-234

235-247

248-280
248-250
251-257
258-280

259-271

260-262
263-266
267-269
270-271

272-280

281-286

I. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

1. On 6 December 2007, Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide
(“Fraport’) filed with the Secretary-General of the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“JCSID” or “the Centre”) an application in writing requesting the
annulment of the Award, dated 16 August 2007 in the arbitration proceeding between

Fraport and the Republic of the Philippines (“the Philippines” or “the Respondent”),
(ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25). The Award was rendered by the Arbitral Tribunal
composed of Mr. L. Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C. (a national of Canada), Dr. Bernardo M.

Cremades (a national of Spain), and Professor W. Michael Reisman (a national of the

United States).

2. The Application was submitted within the time period provided for in Article
52(2) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of Other States of 18 March 1965 (“the ICSID Convention”). In its application,
Fraport seeks annulment of the Award on three of the five grounds set forth in Article
52(1) of the ICSID Convention, specifically claiming that:

1. the Tribunal had manifestly exceeded its powers (Article 52(1)(b));
2. there had been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure
(Article 52(1)(d)); and

3. the Award had failed to state the reasons on which it was based (Article

52(1)(e)).

3. The Acting Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Application on 8 January
2008 and on the same date, in accordance with Rule 50(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules,
transmitted the Notice of Registration to the parties. A copy of the Application had been
sent to the Philippines on 6 December 2007, when the ICSID Secretariat acknowledged

receipt of the Application.

4. By letter of 14 April 2008, in accordance with Rule 52(2) of the Arbitration Rules,

the parties were notified by the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID that an ad hoc

-5-

Committee (“the Committee”) had been constituted, composed of Judge Dominique
Hascher (a national of France), Professor Campbell McLachlan Q.C. (a national of New
Zealand), and Judge Peter Tomka (a national of the Slovak Republic), and that the
annulment proceeding was deemed to have begun on that date. The parties were also
notified that Ms. Eloise Obadia, Senior Counsel, ICSID, would serve as Secretary of the
Committee. By letter of 18 April 2008, the parties were notified that the Members of the

Committee had designated Judge Peter Tomka as President of the Committee.

5. The first session of the Committee was held, with the agreement of the parties, in
the Peace Palace at The Hague on 11 June 2008. Several issues of procedure were
discussed, agreed upon and decided. The agreements and decisions were recorded in the

Minutes.

6. On 9 July 2008, the Respondent submitted to the Committee an application for an
order disqualifying one of the Applicant’s counsel. After providing the parties and the
counsel in question with the opportunity to submit their comments and replies on the
request and after having deliberated, the Committee issued, on 18 September 2008, the
Decision on Application for Disqualification of Counsel. The Committee dismissed the
application and reserved all questions concerning the costs and expenses of the Committee
and of the parties in connection with that application for subsequent determination,

together with the Application for Annulment.

7. In accordance with the agreed schedule, the Applicant filed its Memorial on 25
September 2008, and the Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial on 15 January 2009. In
the second round of the written procedure, the Applicant filed its Reply on 15 April 2009,

and the Respondent filed its Rejoinder on 15 July 2009.

8. On 2 April 2009, Fraport filed an Urgent Request to the Committee for an order of
protection in connection with the initiation by the Philippines’ Department of Justice of
criminal prosecution of “Fraport’s Philippine arbitration counsel.” The Committee, after
having provided opportunity to the parties to submit their observations and comments,

issued, on 3 June 2009, its Decision on the above request. The Committee decided that

-6-

“{uJnder the circumstances as they ha[d] been presented to it, the Applicant ha[d] not

satisfied the Committee that the requested relief [was] justified. Its request [was] therefore

dismissed.” The Committee further decided that “[a]ll questions concerning the costs and

expenses of the Committee and of the parties, in connection with this Request [were]

reserved for subsequent determination, together with the Application for Annulment.”

9. As agreed, a three-day hearing was held at the seat of the Centre in Washington

D.C. on 24, 25 and 26 August 2009, at which counsel for both parties presented their

arguments and submissions, and responded to questions from the Members of the

Committee. Present at the hearing were:

10.

1.

3.

The Members of the Committee: Judge Peter Tomka, Judge Dominique
Hascher, Professor Campbell McLachlan, Q.C., and the Secretary of the

Committee Ms. Eloise Obadia;

. Fraport’s representatives: Mr. Peter Henkel, Ms. Aletta von Massenbach and
Ms. Dérte Ochs of Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide; Dr.
Sabine Konrad of K&L Gates LLP; Mr. Eric Schwartz of King & Spalding
LLP; Mr. Michael D. Nolan, Mr. Edward Baldwin, Mrs. Elitza Popova-Talty
and Mr. Frederic Sourgens of Milbank, Tweed, Hadley & McCloy, LLP; Ms.
Lesley Benn of Shulman, Rogers, Gandal, Pordy & Ecker, PA; Mr. Cesar P.
Manalaysay and Mr. Edgardo G. Balois of Siguion Reyna Montecillo and
Ongsiako.

The representatives of the Republic of the Philippines: Mr. Alfonso Cusi,
Former General Manager, Manila International Airport Authority; Ms.
Gloria Victoria Yap-Taruc and Ms. Ellaine Rose A. Sanchez-Corro,
Assistant Solicitors General, Office of the Solicitor General of the Republic
of the Philippines; Justice Florentino P. Feliciano (Ret.) of Sycip Salazar
Hernandez & Gatmaitan; Ms. Carolyn B. Lamm, Ms. Abby Cohen Smutny,
Ms. Andrea Menaker, Ms. Anne D. Smith, Mr. Stephen Ostrowski, Mr.
Hansel Pham, Mr. Rahim Moloo, Mr. Amr Abbas, and Ms. Erin Vaccaro of
White & Case, LLP.

On 15 October 2009, the parties submitted their statements of costs.

-7-

11. On 3 August 2010, the Respondent informed the Committee that the Arbitral
Tribunal of the International Chamber of Commerce rendered an Award, dated 22 July
2010, in Philippine International Air Terminals Co., Inc. v. Government of the Republic of
the Philippines (“ICC Award”), and sought the Committee’s leave to submit that Award
for the Committee’s consideration. The Applicant, in its letter of 5 August 2010, took
issue with certain statements in the Respondent’s request, concluding that “if the
ad hoc Committee wishes to include the ICC award in the record, Fraport requests an
opportunity briefly to comment on the award and in particular its reliance upon Philippine
legal materials not in the record of this [annulment] proceeding.” The Committee
subsequently invited the parties, on 13 August 2010, to elaborate in writing why the Award
of 22 July 2010 would be relevant for the annulment proceeding, as well as to provide the
legal basis for admitting this Award into the annulment record. Both parties availed
themselves of this opportunity and filed within the prescribed time limits their
submissions, the Philippines on 23 August 2010, and Fraport on 31 August 2010. The
Committee duly considered their submissions at its meeting on 6 September 2010 and
informed them, through a letter from its Secretary, dated 7 September 2010, of the

following decision:

“The Committee has decided not to admit the ICC Award into the annulment
record in view of the limited nature of the annulment proceeding. The
function of the Committee is to review the conduct of the Arbitral Tribunal
which rendered the challenged decision and the decision itself. As the ICC
Award had not been in front of the ICSID Arbitral Tribunal in the Fraport v.
The Philippines case, being non-existent at that moment, it could not have
been taken into account by the ICSID Tribunal. The Committee is of the view
that its task is to review the Award rendered by the ICSID Tribunal only in
light of the original arbitration evidentiary record.”

12. The Committee declared the proceeding closed on 22 October 2010, pursuant
to Arbitration Rules 53 and 38(1).
13. During the course of the proceedings, the Members of the Committee

deliberated by various means of communication, including meetings in Washington on 27

August 2009, at The Hague on 3 November 2009, in Washington on 11 April 2010, in

-8-

Paris on 28 June 2010, and in The Hague on 6 September 2010, and have taken into

account all pleadings and documents before them.

Il. THE DISPUTE

14. The dispute has arisen out of an investment made by Fraport, which is a
German company, in a Philippine company, Philippine International Air Terminals Co.,

Inc., later known as PIATCO.

15. In 1997, the Philippine government conferred upon PIATCO the concession
rights for the construction and operation of an international passenger terminal at Manila’s
principal airport, known as “Ninoy Aquino International Airport Passenger Terminal III”
(“Terminal 3”). The Concession Agreement was entered into on 12 July 1997 between
PIATCO and the Philippine government, represented by its Secretary of Transportation

and Communication.’

16. In 1998, the terms of the Concession Agreement were renegotiated in order to
allow PIATCO to obtain financing from certain interested lenders. The Amended and
Restated Concession Agreement (“ARCA”) was signed by PIATCO and the Secretary of
the Department of Transportation and Communication on 26 November 1998.> Three
supplements to the ARCA were executed between 1999 and 2001, the first on 27 August

1999, the second on 4 September 2000, and the third one on 22 June 2001.5

17. Fraport’s investment started in 1999 when, on 6 July, it entered into four
agreements (the “J999 Share Purchase Agreements and Share Subscription Agreements”)
whereby it acquired direct and indirect interest in PLATCO as follows: 25% of PIATCO,
40% of PAGS Terminals, Inc. (“PTT”) and 40% of PAGS Terminal Holding, Inc. (“PTH”);
PTI further acquired 11% of PIATCO.*

" Award, para. 98.

? Ibid., para. 102.

§ Tbid., paras. 111-113.
* Ibid., para. 124.

-9-

18. The construction of Terminal 3 commenced on 15 June 2000 to be completed
in 30 months, by late 2002. As the project under construction required further financial
resources and PIATCO’s other shareholders were either unable or unwilling to invest
additional money into the Terminal 3 project, Fraport accordingly decided to increase its
shareholdings pursuant to two agreements dated 5 May 2000 (the “2000 Share Purchase
Agreements”) and thus it acquired an additional 5% of PIATCO, and PTI acquired another

24% of PIATCO.*

19. In 2001, Fraport acquired a 40% stake in PAGS, thus having an additional
9.04% indirect interest in PIATCO. The Award notes that, as of that point, Fraport had

acquired 61.44% direct and indirect ownership of PIATCO.°

20. In late 2001 and throughout 2002 PIATCO/Fraport’s representatives were
involved in numerous negotiations on the two further supplements to the ARCA. The
Fourth Supplement was proposed by PIATCO in order to accommodate the conditions set
by the Senior Lenders for a drawdown of the loans,’ the Fifth Supplement was sought by
the Philippine government which required, inter alia, that PIATCO surrender the
exclusivity of Terminal3 for international passenger operations at Ninoy Aquino
International Airport (“NAIA”) 5 The Government representative asserted in a
communication to PIATCO that the concession agreement required changes which the
Government proposed in the draft Fifth Supplement “to address infirmities which

[PIATCO’s] concession has sustained.”®

21. Despite the numerous meetings and exchanges between the parties, no
agreement was reached on the proposed Fourth and Fifth Supplement to ARCA. In
September 2002, the government considered its options. While the Cabinet Review
Committee was still recommending negotiations with PIATCO, the Presidential Advisor

5 [bid., paras. 127, 129 and 130.

° Ibid., para. 131; see also para. 11 of the Award.

7 Ibid., paras. 132 and 134.

§ Tbid., para. 158.
° Ibid., para. 166.

-10-

on Strategic Projects, who held a Cabinet rank, wrote to the President of the Philippines
advising “that the Government proceed with obtaining a declaration of nullity” of the

concession agreement. '°

22. In the same period, PIATCO’s concession agreement and the circumstances
surrounding its conclusion were the subject of the Philippines’ Senate investigation. In her
testimony before the Senate Blue Ribbon Committee in August and September 2002, the
Presidential Advisor on Strategic Projects opined for the first time, as the Arbitral Tribunal
noted, that the concession contracts, which she had been busy renegotiating, should be
declared null and void.''! In her memorandum submitted to the Committee, she expressly
stated that there would be severe negative financial consequences for both the Government
and Philippine Airlines if the Concession Agreement was performed and its invalidation
and nullification not obtained. As she explained, “the financial and operational issues of
NAIA Terminals 1, 2 and 3 and the proposed international cargo terminal must be
rationalized.”'? The Report, issued by the Senate Committee on 10 December 2002,
concluded that: (1) the PIATCO contracts were intrinsically void because the required six
signatures of the Members of the Investment Coordination Committee of the Philippine
National Economic Development Authority were not obtained; (2) the contracts were also
void because there were substantial deviations from the Bid Documents; (3) the contracts
contained onerous and disadvantageous provisions contrary to public policy and to the Act
Authorizing the Financing, Construction, Operation and Maintenance of Infrastructure
Projects by the Private Sector and for Other Purposes (“BOT Law”); (4) the payment for
buying favors from the government was condemned; (5) the contract provides for a direct
government guarantee which is prohibited by the BOT Law; and (6) the condition of the
terminal facility raised serious security concerns. '3

'° Tbid., paras. 178-180.

"' Tbid., paras. 183 and 184.

" Tbid., para. 186.
8 Tbid., para. 189.

-ll-

23. At the end of November 2002, the President of the Philippines declared that her
Government would not honor the Terminal 3 contracts as “the Solicitor General and the
Justice Department have determined that all five agreements covering the NAIA, most of
which were contracted in the previous administration, are null and void.”'* The Arbitral
Tribunal did not fail to note that the Memorandum of Department of Justice of 28
November 2002, to which the President of the Philippines referred in her statement, was
“strikingly different from the Department of Justice’s prior written advice to the President
on 21 May 2002 that had identified several provisions of ARCA which ‘may be possible
subjects of renegotiation’ but neither stated that the ARCA was null and void nor
questioned the validity of the original Concession Agreement.”'> The Arbitral Tribunal
also noted that the 28 November 2002 memorandum was diametrically different from
“Contract Review No. 434,” dated 30 September 2002, in which the Office of the
Government’s Corporate Counsel concluded that the concession agreements were valid,
and added that “[rJecords attest to the fact that the negotiation, drafting, execution and
signing of the Concession Agreement were strictly in accordance with” the BOT Law and

its Implementing Rules and Regulations. !°

24. Fraport continued in its efforts to find a solution. In that period the Supreme
Court of the Philippines had been considering, since September 2002, several petitions for
prohibition against PIATCO and others. The Supreme Court, in its decision of 5 May
2003, determined that serious violations of Philippines law and public policy, in respect of
several issues raised by the petitioners, had taken place, and concluded that the concession
agreements in the Terminal 3 projects were null and void ab initio. It also concluded that
PairCargo was not a qualified bidder and therefore the award of the Terminal 3 concession
contract to PairCargo was null and void.'”

" Thid., para. 190.

'S Tbid., para. 194.

'6 Tbid., para. 195
"" Tbid., para. 217

-12-

25. On 17 September 2003, Fraport initiated arbitral proceedings against the
Philippines by submitting its Request for Arbitration to ICSID, pursuant to arbitration
provisions contained in the “Agreement between the Federal Republic of Germany and the
Republic of the Philippines on the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments,

dated 18 April 1997 and in force since 2 February 2000 (the “BIT” or “Treaty”’).

26. While international arbitral proceedings were in progress, the Republic of the
Philippines, in December 2004, took possession of Terminal 3 and instituted domestic

court expropriation proceedings, also in December 2004.

Ill. THE ARBITRAL AWARD

27. In the arbitral proceedings, which developed, as the Tribunal itself noted, “in

some respects, in a most unusual manner,”'*

the Respondent challenged the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction ratione materiae, arguing that the Claimant’s investment did not enjoy
protection afforded by the BIT. The Respondent argued that the Claimant made its
investment in violation of the laws of the Philippines, in particular the Philippine
Constitution and Commonwealth Act No. 108, entitled “An Act to Punish Acts of Evasion
of the Laws on the Nationalization of Certain Rights, Franchises or Privileges,” (the so-
called Anti-Dummy Law (the “ADL”)).'? In the view of the Respondent, the Claimant’s
investment fell outside of the BIT’s expressly limited scope because it was not made in
compliance with Philippine law.” The Tribunal understood the Respondent to be arguing
that “the Claimant’s investment was not ‘accepted’ in accordance with the laws of the

Philippines, in the words of Article 1(1) of the BIT.””!

28. The Claimant argued that its investment was an investment within the meaning

of the term, as defined in Article 1(1) of the BIT, and, therefore, that the Tribunal had

'§ Tbid., para. 1

" Tbid., para. 290.
 Thid., para. 285
7" Ibid.

-13-

jurisdiction to decide the case. The Claimant emphasized that the Respondent knew the
details of PIATCO’s shareholding structure and never charged Fraport with any violation

of its ADL or nationality laws.”

29. The Tribunal, at the outset of its analysis, observed that “it is possible that an
economic transaction that might qualify factually and financially as an investment... falls,

nonetheless, outside the jurisdiction of the Tribunal established under the pertinent BIT,

23

because /egally it is not an ‘investment’ within the meaning of the BIT.” Then it

proceeded to consider the factual allegations regarding the Claimant’s investment as it
related to the laws of the Philippines, in particular the ADL. It came to the conclusion that,
while “Fraport’s equity investment in terms of the statutorily limited percentage in the

Terminal 3 project was lawful under Philippine law,” its “controlling and managing the

24

investment was not. The Tribunal was “persuaded from Fraport’s own internal and

contemporaneous documents that it was consistently aware that the way it was structuring

its investment in the Philippines was in violation of the ADL and accordingly sought to

925

keep these arrangements secret. Having then observed that “[w]hile this factual record

is troubling, it does not eo ipso mean that the Tribunal is without jurisdiction ratione
materiae to hear the substance of the claim,”*® it proceeded to the determination of its
jurisdiction in accordance “with applicable legal standards.””” The Tribunal identified as

the legal standards applicable to its jurisdiction Articles 1(1) and 2(1) of the BIT,”* the

 Tbid., paras. 293, 295.

® Tbid., para. 306 (emphasis in the original)
* Thid., para. 323.

% Tbid., para. 332.

° Thid., para. 333.

7 Ibid.

°8 Thid., para. 335. Article 1(1) of the BIT, in its relevant part, reads as follows: “[tJhe term ‘investment’ shall
mean any kind of asset accepted in accordance with the respective laws and regulations of either Contracting State.”
Article 2(1) reads as follows: “Each Contracting State shall promote as far as possible investments in its territory by
investors of the other Contracting State and admit such investments in accordance with its Constitution, laws and
regulations as referred to in Article 1, paragraph I[...].”

 

-14-

Protocol to the BIT (ad Article 2)” and the Philippines’ Instrument of Ratification®’ of the
BIT. The Tribunal stressed that “[b]ecause the exchange of instruments of ratification puts

a treaty into effect in accordance with its terms, the second preambular paragraph. ..is
particularly important in regard to the issue at bar.”*!

30. The Tribunal considered that the above-mentioned “provisions [were]
manifestly limitations ratione materiae,” noting that “their interpretation [was] not
simple.”*? Then having considered the FAG-PAIRCARGO-PAGS-PTI Shareholders’

Agreement of 6 July 1999, it concluded that it “translates per se into managerial control

9933

over a modern corporation” by Fraport, with managerial control being in violation of the

ADL.*™ In the view of the Tribunal, “Fraport knowingly and intentionally circumvented
the ADL by means of secret shareholder agreements.” Therefore, in its view, Fraport
“cannot claim to have made an investment ‘in accordance with law.” The Tribunal
concluded that “[b]ecause there is no ‘investment in accordance with law,’ the Tribunal

lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae.”*° The Tribunal thus, by a majority vote, decided:

“ 1. To accept the objection to the jurisdiction of the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes raised by the Republic of the Philippines;

2. To declare that the Centre does not have jurisdiction to hear this dispute
and that this Arbitral Tribunal is not competent to resolve it;

3. To dismiss the claim of Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services
Worldwide; and

4. To order that each party shall bear in full its own legal costs and that the
payment of the fees and expenses of the members of the Arbitral Tribunal and

® Tbid., para. 336. The provision ad Article 2 reads as follows: “As provided for in the Constitution of the
Republic of the Philippines, foreign investors are not allowed to own land in the territory of the Republic of the
Philippines. However, investors are allowed to own up to 40% of the equity of a company which can then acquire
ownership of land.”

°° Tbid., para. 337

*! Tbid., para. 338. The second paragraph of the Philippines Instrument of Ratification reads as follows:
“Whereas, the Agreement provides that the investment shall be in the areas allowed by and in accordance with the
Constitutions, laws and regulations of each of the Contracting Parties.”

* Tbid., para. 339.
* Tbid., para. 350.
™ Tbid., para. 351.
* Tbid., para. 401
*© Ibid.

-15-

of the administrative fees for the use of the Centre shall be paid in equal share
by each party.”*"

31. Arbitrator Bernardo Cremades attached to the Award a twenty-four page,
single-spaced dissenting opinion. He strongly disputed the finding of the majority that
there was a breach of the ADL. Even if a violation had occurred it would not have, in his
view, stripped Fraport’s investment of all BIT protection. Fraport’s shareholdings in a
Philippine corporation are still a kind of asset accepted in accordance with the laws and
regulations of the Philippines and therefore, in his view, the Tribunal would not have been
deprived of its jurisdiction even if the ADL was breached. He relied on the Philippine
Supreme Court decision in Agan v. PIATCO which found that the grant of the Terminal 3
Concession to PIATCO in 1997 was null and void. That decision, in his view, is now
res judicata in Philippine Law. He pointed out that the Tribunal is bound to apply
Philippine Law in its interpretation of the ADL and that it manifestly exceeds its powers if
it does not do so. He further added that the Tribunal is not bound by a decision of a
Philippine court — even the Supreme Court — but the Tribunal’s decision on Philippine Law
must be premised on Philippine law itself. He considered that it is res judicata in
Philippine law that the Terminal 3 Concession is null and void ex func and not ex nunc, and
that this must be accepted by the Arbitral Tribunal. In his view, the Tribunal should have
respected the consequences of the Supreme Court decision. On this basis, he concluded, it
is impossible for PLATCO, or FRAPORT, to be guilty of any breach of the ADL. Finally,
he addressed the issue of illegality and jurisdiction, which he considered to be a matter of
principle. In his view, the legality of the investor’s conduct is an issue for the merits. The
inquiry at the jurisdictional phase required by the phrase “in accordance with the laws and
regulations of the Host State” is limited to determining whether the type of asset is legal in
domestic law. He was of the view that the proper interpretation of Article 1(1) of the
Philippines-Germany BIT in accordance with the Vienna Convention produces exactly this

result. He concluded that the decision of the majority is not only contrary to the terms of

*7 Thid., para. 406.

-16-

Article 1(1) of the Philippine-Germany BIT, but that it is also fundamentally wrong in its

approach to illegality as a matter of principle.

IV. THE GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT RELIED UPON BY FRAPORT

32. As noted above (paragraph 2), the Applicant in its request to the Committee for
the annulment of the Award relies on three separate grounds provided for in Article 52 of
the ICSID Convention; namely that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers
(Article 52(1)(b)), that there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure (Article 52(1)(d)), and that the award has failed to state the reasons on which it
is based (Article 51(1)(e)). The Committee will in turn consider whether any of these
grounds has been established to its satisfaction in the course of this proceeding, and if so
whether it should annul the award. Article 52(3) provides that “the Committee shall have

the authority to annul the award or any part thereof.”

A. Manifest Excess of Power (Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention)

a) Introduction

33. The first ground upon which the Applicant relies in its Application for the
annulment of the Award is that which is set forth in Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID

Convention. Article 52(1)(b) reads as follows:

“Either party may request annulment of the award by an application in writing
addressed to the Secretary-General [of the ICSID] on...the following
ground[]:

(b) that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers;”

34. As stated earlier (see paragraph 30 above), the Arbitral Tribunal decided that
“the Centre does not have jurisdiction to hear this dispute and that this Arbitral Tribunal is

not competent to resolve it.”

-17-

35. The Applicant argues that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers when it
declined to exercise jurisdiction which, according to Fraport, it possessed under the ICSID
Convention and the German-Philippine BIT. The Committee will deal below with the

arguments advanced by the parties regarding this alleged excess of powers by the Tribunal.

36. The Committee notes, at the outset, that it is well established in the practice of
the application of Article 52(1)(b) by various ad hoc Committees that a failure to exercise
jurisdiction where such jurisdiction does exist constitutes an excess of powers. The ad hoc
Committee in Vivendi I, in an oft-cited passage, explained, in the following terms, that a

failure to exercise jurisdiction could constitute an excess of powers:

“Tt is settled that an ICSID Tribunal commits an excess of powers not only if
it exercises jurisdiction which it does not have under the relevant agreement or
treaty and the ICSID Convention, but also if it fails to exercise a jurisdiction
which it possesses under those instruments. One might qualify this by saying
that it is only where the failure to exercise jurisdiction is capable of making a
difference to the result that it can be considered a manifest excess of power.
Subject to that qualification, however, the failure by a tribunal to exercise a
jurisdiction given it by the ICSID Convention and a BIT, in circumstances
where the outcome of the inquiry is affected as a result, amounts in the
Committee’s view to a manifest excess of powers within the meaning of
Article 52(1)(b).”**

37. A number of ad hoc Committees have endorsed this reading of Article
52(1)(b), albeit using different words and formulations, as equally covering both instances
(1) when a Tribunal assumes jurisdiction and exercises it when in fact no jurisdiction has
been granted to it, and (2) when a Tribunal fails to exercise the jurisdiction which it has

been granted.”

38. Several arbitral awards in which Tribunals concluded that they lacked
jurisdiction have subsequently been annulled by ad hoc Committees. In those cases, the ad
hoc Committees, having duly considered the awards and arguments of the respective

% Vivendi v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, 3 July 2002, (“Vivendi 1”), 6 ICSID Reports, p. 363, para. 86.

* See, e.g., Soufraki v. UAE, Decision on Annulment, 5 June 2007, para. 43; Lucchetti v. Peru, Decision on
Annulment, 5 September 2007, para. 99.

-18-

parties, reached the conclusion that the Tribunals by failing to exercise jurisdiction

manifestly exceeded their powers.’”

39. The Committee further notes that under Article 52(1)(b) the excess of powers
must be “manifest” in order to provide a ground for the Committee to annul an Award. As
is well known, Article 52 of the ICSID Convention was inspired by Article 35 of the
Model Rules on Arbitral Procedure, which were adopted by the United Nations
International Law Commission in 1958 on the basis of the reports submitted by its Special

Rapporteur Professor Georges Scelle. Article 35 of the Model Rules provides that

“The validity of an award may be challenged by either party on one or more
of the following grounds:

(a) That the tribunal has exceeded its powers;...”“!

The word “manifestly” was added to the First Draft of what was to become the ICSID
Convention upon the suggestion of the German delegate, who thought that otherwise there
might be some risk of frustration of Awards.” ~The proposal to delete the word
“manifestly” was put to the vote and rejected.** Therefore, because the adjective is part of
the rule contained in Article 52(1)(b), it must be given effect. The question is what is the
implication of the adjective “manifestly” for the proper construction of this ground for

annulment.

40. The Commentary to the ICSID Convention declares that “Article 52(1)(b)
entails a dual requirement: there must be an excess of powers, and that excess must be

manifest.” Referring to the dictionary meaning of the term “manifest,” which may be

understood as “plain,” “clear,” “obvious” or “evident,” the Commentary expresses the

view that the manifest nature of an excess of powers “relates to the ease with which it is

perceived,” concluding that “[a]n excess of powers is manifest if it can be discerned with

* See, e.g., Vivendi I, supra n. 38, paras. 86-88, 93-115; Malaysian Historical Salvors SDN BHD v. Malaysia,
Decision on Annulment, 16 April 2009.

+! See Yearbook of the International Law Commission, 1958, Vol Il, p. 86. (Also in History of the ICSID
Convention, (“History”), Vol. I, p. 230). Model Rules were originally drafted for arbitral proceedings in order to settle
disputes between States.

© History, Vol. I-1, p. 423, Vol. II-2, p. 850.
* Tbid., pp. 851-2.

-19-

little effort and without deeper analysis.”** If this were to be the case, it would mean that
the important and exclusive control over the integrity of the arbitration process instituted
by the Contracting States through inclusion of Article 52 in the ICSID Convention may be
satisfied by a merely superficial inquiry. One may further wonder why there is need for
extensive submissions by the parties on the manifest excess of power if it would suffice for
the members of the Committee merely to read the award and to “discern[] with little effort

945

and without deeper analysis””” that the Arbitral Tribunal exceeded its powers. Such a

conclusion, of course, would have been reached on the basis of a simple reading, and

would therefore be manifest.

41. The Committee is aware that several ad hoc Committees have in the past made
a number of various pronouncements on manifest excess of power, and adopted different
methodological approaches to this issue. Some favoured a “self-evident” or “simple

reading” approach (test). Thus the ad hoc Committee in Wena Hotels v. Egypt stated:

“The excess of power must be self-evident rather than the product of elaborate
interpretations one way or the other. Where the latter happens the excess of
power is no longer manifest.’

For the ad hoc Committee in CDC v. Seychelles, “the excess must be plain on its face for
annulment to be an available remedy.”*” The Committee then added that “[a]ny excess
apparent in a Tribunal’s conduct, if susceptible of argument ‘one way or the other,’ is not
manifest.” This approach reached its zenith in Repsol v. Petroecuador, in which the ad
hoc Committee held the view that “manifest” should be interpreted as “obvious by itself”
and ascertainable “simply by reading the Award, that is even prior to a detailed

examination of its contents.”*”

“ Ch. Schreuer with L. Malintoppi, A. Reinisch, A. Sinclair, The ICSID Convention, A Commentary, 2" ed.,
(2009), p. 938, para. 135,

* Ibid.
“© Wena Hotels Lid. v. Egypt, Decision on Annulment, 5 February 2002, 6 ICSID Reports, pp. 135-136, para. 25.
“CDC v. Seychelles, Decision on Annulment, 29 June 2005, 11 ICSID Reports, p. 251, para. 41.
48
Ibid.

* Repsol v. Petroecuador, Decision on Annulment, 8 January 2007, para. 36.

- 20 -

42. Some other Committees perceived the requirements of “manifest excess” to be
a condition for the annulment related not so much to the clarity of an excess as to its extent

or seriousness.*°

43. Another ad hoc Committee in Soufraki v. UAE attempted to reconcile these

views when it stated:

“,.the Committee believes that a strict opposition between two different
meanings of ‘manifest’ — either ‘obvious’ or ‘serious’ — is an unnecessary
debate. It seems to this Committee that a manifest excess of power implies
that the excess of power should at once be textually obvious and substantially

serious.”*!

44. In the view of this Committee, the requirement of a “manifest excess of power”
goes to the nature of the review exercise. In cases where the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is
reasonably open to more than one interpretation, the ad hoc Committee will give special
weight to the Arbitral Tribunal’s interpretation of the jurisdictional instrument. The
Committee will not intervene where the Tribunal’s decision on its jurisdiction was not
unreasonable. This approach seems to be justified because what is at issue here is the
interpretation of an international treaty - the BIT concluded between the two sovereign
States. Such an approach has been followed by the International Court of Justice in its
review jurisprudence.” The Committee is convinced that the jurisprudence of ICSID ad
hoc Committees on the “tenable” standard for review on issues of jurisdiction is to be
interpreted to like effect. The Committee considers that the excess of jurisdiction should

be demonstrable and substantial and not doubtful.

45. The fact that difficult questions of law are raised, requiring extensive
argument, is not necessarily conclusive of whether or not the Tribunal manifestly exceeded

its powers. Instead, because the purpose of the inquiry is to determine the reasonableness

* Vivendi I, supra n. 38, paras. 104-112, 115.
*! Soufraki v. UAE, Decision on Annulment, 5 June 2007, para. 40.

* See Arbitral Award of 31 July 1989 (Guinea-Bissau v. Senegal), I.C.J. Reports 1991, p. 69, paras. 47-48. See
also Government of Sudan and The Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army (the Abyei Arbitration), Final Award of
July 22, 2009, para. 510, referring to “the standard of review established by the ICJ”.

% See, e.g., Kléckner I v. Cameroon, Decision on Annulment, 3 May 1985, 2 ICSID Reports, p. 115, para. 52.

-21-

of the Tribunal’s approach, there is necessarily a heavy burden upon the applicant to
establish a manifest excess of powers. The Committee must determine the reasonableness
of the Tribunal’s approach in light of the evidence and submissions which were before the

Tribunal, and not on the basis of new evidence.

b) Parties’ Submissions

46. Fraport contends that the Arbitral Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers
when it wrongly refused to exercise the jurisdiction conferred upon it by the parties’
agreement to arbitrate. Fraport alleges that “the Tribunal refused jurisdiction on the basis

of a series of findings of which none are ‘tenable’, let alone ‘clearly’ so.”**

Fraport
challenges two findings of the tribunal’s majority:
(i) that the BIT required, as a jurisdictional prerequisite, that investments had to be
made in accordance with Philippine Law at the time the investment was made; and

(ii) that Fraport’s investments were not in accordance with the Philippine Anti-Dummy

law, a criminal statute.>>

47. Fraport asserts that neither of these propositions has any reasonable basis. In

Fraport’s view and contention,

“the Tribunal:

(i) disregarded the express language of the BIT, remaking it to fit the Tribunal’s
own conception of what the BIT should, but does not, say;

(ii) failed to apply the BIT to each of Fraport’s discrete investments; and

(iii) distorted the requirements of Philippine criminal law, in breach of
fundamental norms of public international law, in order to find an imagined
violation by Fraport based upon the potential for unlawful acts pursuant to a
shareholding agreement that was amended prior to the occurrence of any
unlawful act.”*°

Fraport’s criticism of the majority conclusion on the lack of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is
thus three-pronged.
™ Memorial, para. 46.

® Ibid.
°° Ibid., para. 47.

-22-

48. On the first prong, namely that the Tribunal allegedly disregarded the express
language of the BIT, Fraport puts emphasis on Article 1(1) of the BIT. It quotes what it

considers to be a relevant part:

“The term ‘investment’ shall mean any kind of asset accepted in accordance
with the respective laws and regulations of either Contracting State, and
more particularly, though not exclusively ...” (emphasis added by Fraport).

Fraport argues that the Tribunal ignored the word “accepted” in Article 1(1) and failed to
interpret that provision in accordance with its ordinary meaning as required by

Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.””

49. Fraport agrees that “the BIT permits the Philippines to put in place laws and
regulations that regulate its acceptance of assets as investments.”** But in its view, “to the
extent no legal regime for the acceptance of foreign investments exists, the requirement in
the treaty can refer only to legal requirements for certain types of property rights under

759 Fraport further adds that the ordinary meaning of the BIT comports with

host state Law.
Philippine law, which has set up “an acceptance regime for certain types of investments
requiring certain conditions to be met for admission of investments.” Fraport, however,
notes that its investment did not require homologation under this regime to be accepted.°!
Fraport maintains that the ordinary meaning of the treaty in light of the statutory regime in
place in the Philippines on its face shows that the Tribunal was vested with jurisdiction
ratione materiae on account of the acceptance requirement in Article 1(1) of the BIT. In
its view, “any issue of legality that the majority believed to exist with respect to any
investment of Fraport could have been relevant only to determinations about the merits or

ar 2262
compensation. 6

* Ibid., para. 50.
°8 Ibid., para. 51
» Ibid.

© Tbid., para. 53. Fraport specifically refers to Republic Act N°7042, entitled “An Act To Promote Foreign
Investments, Prescribe the Procedures For Registering Entreprises Doing Business in the Philippines And For Other
Purposes”, as amended, known as the “Foreign Investment Act of 1991”.

" Ibid.
© Ibid.

-23-

50. Fraport is particularly critical of the majority’s statement in the Award that

“(i) the BIT explicitly and reiteratedly required that an investment, in order to
qualify for BIT protection, had to be in accordance with the host state’s
law.”

In Fraport’s view, the majority “erased” the word “accepted” from the definition of
investment in Article 1(1) of the BIT.“ It goes as far as asserting that the “Majority

removed an operative word from the BIT to reach its desired result.”

Fraport contends
that “the BIT does not define an investment as an investment made in accordance with
law.” Fraport points to the fact that the Tribunal replaced the express words of the BIT in
Article 1(1) “any kind of asset accepted in accordance with the law” by its own
formulation “any kind of economic transaction made in accordance with the law,” which,
according to Fraport, are two different things. Fraport submits that the relevant language

of the BIT operates as an admission provision, and not as the majority construed it as a

legality requirement provision.

51. The second prong of Fraport’s challenge of the Award on account of the
alleged manifest excess of power consists of the assertion that the Tribunal failed to apply

its jurisdictional analysis to its discrete investments.

52. Fraport explains that it made investments not only through the purchase of the
shares but also provided loans to PIATCO, PTI, PTH and PAGS and guarantees (securing
loans granted by banks to PIATCO). It criticizes the majority for having reached the
conclusion that the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction solely on the basis of Fraport’s conduct
(namely the entry of secret shareholder’s agreements on 6 July 1999) which concerned
only part of its investments consisting of shares, but had nothing to do with its other

© Tbid., para. 54. The quote is from para. 398 of the Award, emphasis added by Fraport.

© Reply, para. 19.

® Ibid.

° Transcript, Day 1, 38.

° Tbid., p. 58.

°§ Memorial, para. 61.

© Tbid., paras. 72-84.

-24-

investments (such as Fraport’s shareholdings themselves, loans and guarantees). It adds
that it had made successive investments in the 1999-2001 period, some of them after the
amendments of the provisions, deemed by the majority as offensive, of the shareholding

agreement on 23 August 2001 a

53. The third prong of Fraport’s challenge of the award as being the result of the
manifest excess of power by the Tribunal is directed against the Tribunal’s allegedly
wrong application of Philippine law, the Anti-Dummy Law, as a precondition to its
jurisdiction ratione materiae under the BIT and against “an untenable interpretation of that

Law.”7!

54. Fraport argues that “the majority improperly extended the reach of the
Philippine Anti-Dummy Law, a criminal statute, to impute a violation to Fraport, where

there clearly was none” and “[iJn doing so, the majority declined jurisdiction on a
manifestly erroneous basis.””?

55. In order to follow the argument of Fraport on this point, it is useful to quote
Section 2-A of the Anti-Dummy Law, which Fraport according to the majority of the

Tribunal “knowingly and intentionally circumvented””> and thus committed its violation

which “could not be deemed to be inadvertent and irrelevant to the investment.””*

The pertinent section reads as follows:
“Section 2-A — Unlawful use, exploitation or enjoyment:

Any person, corporation, or association which, having in its name or under
its control, a right, franchise, privilege, property or business, the exercise or
enjoyment of which is expressly reserved by the Constitution or the laws to
citizens of the Philippines or of any other specific country, or to corporations
or associations at least sixty per centum of the capital of which is owned by
such citizens,

™ Tbid., para. 82; Reply, para. 35.
™ Memorial, para. 87.

® Tbid., paras. 88, 90.

® Award, para. 401.

™ Thid., para. 398.

-25-

permits or allows the use, exploitation or enjoyment thereof by a person,
corporation or association not possessing the requisites prescribed by the
Constitution or the laws of the Philippines;

or leases, or in any other way, transfers or conveys said right, franchise,
privilege, property or business to a person, corporation or association not
otherwise qualified under the Constitution, or the provisions of the existing
laws;

or in any manner permits or allows any person, not possessing the
qualifications required by the Constitution, or existing laws to acquire, use,
exploit or enjoy a right, franchise, privilege, property or business, the exercise
and enjoyment of which are expressly reserved by the Constitution or existing
laws to citizens of the Philippines or of any other specific country, to
intervene in the management, operation, administration or control
thereof, whether as an officer, employee or labourer therein with or
without remuneration except technical personnel whose employment may
be specifically authorized by the Secretary of Justice,

and any person who knowingly aids, assists or abets in the planning
consummation or perpetration of any of the acts herein above
enumerated

shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than five nor more than
fifteen years and by a fine of not less than the value of the right, franchise or
privilege enjoyed or acquired in violation of the provisions hereof but in no
case less than five thousand pesos:

Provided, however, That the president, managers or persons in charge of
corporations, associations or partnerships violating the provisions of this
section shall be criminally liable in lieu thereof:

Provided, further, That any person, corporation or association shall, in
addition to the penalty imposed therein, forfeit such right, franchise, privilege,
and the property or business enjoyed or acquired in violation of the provisions
of this Act:

And Provided, finally, That the election of aliens as members of the board of
directors or governing body of corporations or associations engaging in
partially nationalized activities shall be allowed in proportion to their
allowable participation or share in the capital of such entities.””°

56. Fraport argues that it did not possess the necessary quality as perpetrator of the
violation of the ADL’s Section 2-A as it did not fulfil the ratione personae conditions of
Section 2-A. The Award, Fraport contends, makes no finding that Fraport had in its name

or under its control a right, franchise, privilege, property or business subject to nationality

® The text of Section 2-A is quoted in para. 349 of the Award. It consists of a single complex sentence. Broken
into paragraphs, as above, in order to facilitate the reading, it appears in para. 92 of the Memorial (emphasis by Fraport).

- 26 -

restrictions and permitted or allowed any person, corporation or association not possessing
the nationality condition to intervene in the management, operation, administration or

control of such right, franchise, privilege, property or business.”

57. Fraport further points to the actus reus under Section 2-A which it interprets as
consisting of permitting or allowing a third party to intervene in the management,
operation, administration or control of a public utility concession falling within that
Section.”” Fraport stresses that the Award fails to establish the existence of the

actus reus.”

58. Fraport further submits that it could not have violated Section 2-A as an aidor,
assistor or abettor as “there can be no crime of aiding, assisting or abetting in the absence
of a criminal act committed by a principal.” It maintains that “[i]f there is no principal,
there can be no accessory.”*” Fraport points out that the Tribunal’s majority failed to find

any wrongful act by a principal. It further adds that in any case the accessory has to be a

natural person.* With reference to the Philippine Supreme Court decision in Agan Case,

which held the Terminal3 concession as null and void ab initio, Fraport draws the

conclusion that the ADL was ipso facto inapplicable.*”

59. Fraport finally submits that the Tribunal’s majority extended the scope of the

law rather than applied it as written. It quotes a following passage from the award:

“a literal interpretation [of the law] here could produce an absurdity: an
alien would violate the ADL if its designated officer intervened to manage and
control matters A, B, and C, but the same alien would not violate the ADL if it
secretly intervened as a shareholder to manage and control the same matters.
The Tribunal construes this part of the ADL as covering intervention by

7 Memorial, paras. 93 and 95.
 Tbid., para. 98.

*8 Tbid., para. 98 and 100.

” Tbid., para. 101.

Ibid. See also Reply, para. 46.

8! Memorial, para. 107.

© Tbid., para. 106; Reply, para. 51.

-27-

shareholders, if that is the actual means of intervening in ‘the
management, operation, administration or control’ of PIATCO.”**

60. In Fraport’s view such expansive interpretation of the ADL violated mandatory
norms of public international law. Fraport argues, relying on the Expert Opinion of
Professor Antonio Cassese,** that it is not possible for a tribunal, including an international
arbitral tribunal, to interpret and apply national criminal law extensively, even when, as in
the case at hand, it is only being applied incidenter tantum> In doing so, Fraport
contends, the Tribunal’s majority violated the principle nullum crimen sine lege which, in

its view, forms part of jus cogens.*°

61. Fraport concludes that the Tribunal’s majority, by disregarding the
nullum crimen principle and thus violating international jus cogens, manifestly exceeded

its powers*’,

62. The Respondent, the Republic of the Philippines, maintains, that “the Tribunal
did not manifestly exceed its powers in declining to exercise jurisdiction over Fraport’s
claims.”** It argues that “[t]he Tribunal ruled correctly as to its jurisdiction, articulating an
interpretation of the parties’ consent to ICSID arbitration in the BIT that fully accords with

the principles set forth in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties and certainly was
tenable.”*”

63. The Respondent denies Fraport’s argument that the Tribunal ignored the word
“accepted” in Article 1(1) of the BIT. It emphasizes that the words in a treaty are to be

interpreted in their context and recalls the Tribunal’s observation that “Article 31 of the

° Memorial, para. 110. The quotation is from para. 356 of the Award (emphasis added by Fraport).

Expert Opinion of 9 September 2008 “How International Tribunals Should Incidentally Apply National
Criminal Law”, submitted by Fraport with its Memorial, (hereinafter “Cassese 1”).

‘5 Memorial, para. 123.

86 Tbid., Fraport relies on the view of Professor Cassese who states that “[iJt is widely accepted that the
nullum crimen sine lege principle has become a general rule of international law, and is in addition endowed with the
legal force of peremptory norms (jus cogens)", Cassese 1, para. 14.

57 Memorial, para. 142.
S$ Counter-Memorial, para. 9.

® Tbid., para. 9, also para. 79.

- 28 -

Vienna Convention ... enjoins the interpretation of particular provisions in their context,

i.e., with reference to the rest of the treaty and in light of its objects and purposes.”””

64. The Respondent contends that “the Tribunal came to the tenable conclusion
that the language of both Articles 1 and 2 refer to the temporal requirement that an

investment must comply with host State Law at ‘the initiation of the investment’.””!

65. The Respondent further rejects Fraport’s allegation that the Tribunal manifestly
exceeded its powers applying Article 1(1) of the BIT incorrectly. The Respondent

maintains that the Tribunal’s application of Article 1(1) was tenable.”

It points to the
holding of the Tribunal that Article 1(1) required that economic transactions undertaken by
a national of one of the parties to the BIT had to meet certain legal requirements of the host
state in order to qualify as an ‘investment’ and fall under the Treaty.°* As the Tribunal
considered that an asset accepted in accordance with Philippine law need not only refer to
a single asset, but plainly may refer to a bundle of rights, particularly when it is a bundle of
inter-related rights acquired in a single transaction, as it was in the case of Fraport which,
in the Tribunal’s view, agreed to acquire equity interests on the basis that it would enjoy
related rights of control, the Respondent maintains that the Tribunal, when it concluded
that the bundle of rights so acquired by Fraport violated requirements under Philippine law
and Fraport’s “investment” thus was not covered by the BIT, did not manifestly exceed its

powers.”*

66. In reply to Fraport’s contention that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its
powers by failing to consider Fraport’s “other discrete” investments, including additional
purchases of equity and loans and guarantees contributed over time to the project, the
Respondent argues that “there is no basis to require a tribunal to treat separate elements of
an investment in separate categories or on a per unit basis, and then to make separate

°° Tbid., para. 82 quoting para. 339 of the Award.

°! Tbid., para. 88, referring to para. 345 of the Award.

 Tbid., paras 114-118, 124-128.

°° Tbid., para. 118 referring to para. 340 of the Award
™ Thid., paras. 117 and 118.

- 29 -

jurisdictional determinations accordingly.”

The Respondent is of the view that the
Tribunal, having found that Fraport’s investment in the project was initiated unlawfully
and thus was not accepted in accordance with Philippine law, acted fully consistently with

the BIT and the ICSID Convention when it decided not to treat subsequent contributions to

the “tainted project” as separate investments.”°

67. The Respondent also rejects Fraport’s view that the Award is based on an
untenable interpretation of the Philippine Anti-Dummy Law (ADL), that the majority
improperly extended the reach of that Law and thus declined jurisdiction on a manifestly

erroneous basis.

68. The Respondent submits that Article 1(1) of the BIT limits the scope of its
consent to arbitrate. The scope of the consent was to be determined as a matter of
international law, according to the Respondent. Although Article 1(1) contains, in
Respondent’s view, “a renvoi” to Philippine law, that law — it argues — was not directly
applicable but rather was to be consulted to assess in good faith what investments were

intended to be covered by the BIT’s protection.°”

69. The Respondent further argues that an erroneous application of law, even if
manifest, does not provide a ground for annulment. With reference to the travaux
préparatoires of the ICSID Convention, it recalls that a proposal to insert a “manifestly
incorrect application of the Law” as a ground for annulment was expressly considered and

rejected.°*

70. The Respondent stresses that the Tribunal devoted over twenty pages to an
analysis of the ADL and to the evidence presented that Fraport’s investment “was in
violation” thereof. It takes the view that this “extensive attention ... devoted to the ADL

°° Thid., para. 125.

° Thid., para. 128.

° Thid., para. 145.
°8 Tbid., para. 149, referring in p. 276 to History of the ICSID Convention, Vol. II-2 at pp. 853-854.

- 30-

and its application in the present case should foreclose any further inquiry as to whether

the Tribunal applied the Law.”””

71. The Respondent rejects the arguments of Fraport that it could not have
breached Section 2-A of the ADL as a principal, explaining that the Tribunal concluded
that Fraport’s investment was made in violation of the ADL’s provision on aiding and
abetting the planning, consummation or perpetration of acts prohibited by the ADL.'
Further, it adds that Fraport’s various arguments on issues relating to the ADL “are in the

nature of appeals that the Tribunal was mistaken in its application of the ADL.”""!

72. The Respondent considers the arguments of Fraport that the Tribunal’s
decision violated the rule nullum crimen sine lege, which Fraport considers to be part of

jus cogens, as being “without merit”.!

In the Respondent’s view, nullum crimen sine lege
does not apply to the determination by an international tribunal of the scope of its
jurisdiction over an investment dispute.' Relying on the Expert Opinion of
Professor Pocar, it maintains that “this rule is limited to cases when statutes are applied in

order to establish the individual criminal responsibility of an accused.”!*

c) The Committee’s Analysis

73. The Committee starts its analysis with the observation that this is a case which
concerns the interpretation of a treaty, in concreto of the Agreement between the Federal
Republic of Germany and the Republic of the Philippines, for the Promotion and
Reciprocal Protection of Investments, concluded on 18 April 1997. Whether the Arbitral
Tribunal was endowed with jurisdiction to decide the claims brought by Fraport depends
on the interpretation of this BIT. The Committee notes that for the proper construction of
the BIT, the rules of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties are relevant; they are

® Tbid., para. 154.

'® Thid., para. 159.

'°! Thid., para. 162.
"© Tbid., para. 180.
'® Ibid.

' Thid., para. 183.

-31-

directly applicable as conventional rules since both Germany and the Philippines had been

parties to it at the moment when they concluded the BIT in 1997.15

74. The relevant Articles of the Vienna Convention for the interpretation of treaties
are contained in Articles 31-33. The Committee considers sufficient to quote the text of
Article 31. — Article 32 concerns supplementary means of interpretation when the
interpretation according to Article 31 leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure, or leads to
a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable. One of the supplementary means
specifically mentioned in Article 32, namely the preparatory work of the treaty, has not
been brought to the attention of the Arbitral Tribunal. In the course of the annulment
proceeding, Fraport submitted three diplomatic notes!°° exchanged between Germany and
the Philippines in the process of their negotiating the BIT. They had not been submitted to
the Tribunal. Even if they were to be deemed as bearing on the interpretation of the BIT,
the Committee is of the view that it would not have been appropriate to have recourse to
them in the context of the annulment proceeding. The Committee considers that it has to
review the Tribunal’s treatment of the BIT in light of the record concerning that Treaty
which was available to the Tribunal. Article 33 of the Vienna Convention (Interpretation
of treaties authenticated in two or more languages) is of little practical use in the instant
case as the parties, which concluded the BIT in the German, Filipino and English
languages, all three texts being authentic, expressly agreed that “in case of divergent

interpretation of the German and Filipino texts, the English text shall prevail.”
75. Article 31 of the Vienna Convention reads as follows:

General rule of interpretation

1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary
meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the
light of its object and purpose.

'°5 The Philippines ratified the Vienna Convention on 15 November 1972; Germany on 21 July 1987. Article 4

of the Vienna Convention provides: “Without prejudice to the application of any rules set forth in the present Convention
to which treaties would be subject under international law independently of the Convention, the Convention applies only
to treaties which are concluded by States after the entry into force of the present Convention with regard to such States.”

196 Application for Annulment, Annex F-3.

-32-
2. The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall comprise,
in addition to the text, including its preamble and annexes:

(a) any agreement relating to the treaty which was made
between all the parties in connection with the conclusion of
the treaty;

(b) any instrument which was made by one or more parties in
connection with the conclusion of the treaty and accepted by
the other parties as an instrument related to the treaty.

3. There shall be taken into account, together with the context;

(a) any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the
interpretation of the treaty or the application of its
provisions;

(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty
which establishes the agreement of the parties regarding its
interpretation;

(c) any relevant rules of international law applicable in the
relations between the parties.

4. A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the
parties so intended.

76. Before proceeding further, a word of caution is needed. The Applicant’s
criticism of the interpretation of the BIT’s provisions by the Tribunal and its suggestion of
a different interpretation cannot be decisive. The task of the Committee is not to
pronounce itself on which interpretation is better or more plausible. If the Committee were
to proceed in this way, it would have been treating, as the International Court of Justice
observed, “the request as an appeal and not as a recours en nullité.”""” The role of the
Committee is rather to inquire whether the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by
failing to exercise its jurisdiction. The International Court of Justice has stated that “[s]uch
manifest breach might result from, for example, the failure of the Tribunal properly to
apply the relevant rules of interpretation of the Arbitration Agreement which govern its
competence.”"* In the present case, such arbitration agreement relied upon by Fraport is

the BIT.

'" arbitral Award of 31 July 1989 (Guinea-Bissau v. Senegal) I.C.J. Reports 1991, p. 69, para. 47.
"8 Tbid., para. 48.

- 33 -

77. The BIT, in its Article 9, provides for ICSID jurisdiction. Article 9 reads as

follows:

“Settlement of disputes between a Contracting State and an
Investor of another Contracting State.

1) All kinds of divergencies between a Contracting State and an investor
of the other Contracting State concerning an investment shall be settled
amicably through negotiations.

2) If such divergencies cannot be settled according to the provisions of
paragraph (1) of this Article within six months from the date of request
for settlement, the investor concerned may submit the dispute to:

a) the competent court of the Contracting State for decision;

b) the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes
through conciliation or arbitration, established under the Convention
on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of other States, of March 18, 1965 done in Washington
D.C.

3) Neither Contracting State shall pursue through diplomatic channels any
matter referred to arbitration until the proceedings have terminated and
a Contracting State has failed to abide by or to comply with the award
rendered by the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes.

4) The award shall be binding and shall not be subject to any appeal or
remedy other than those provided for in the said Convention. The
award shall be enforced in accordance with domestic law.”!”

78. The Respondent’s objection to the jurisdiction of ICSID, and thus to the
competence of the Arbitral Tribunal, was based on the assertion that Fraport’s investment
was not an investment within the meaning of that term in the BIT, in other words that
Fraport’s investment is not covered by the BIT, as it allegedly was not made in compliance
with Philippine law.''°

79. So the critical question for the Tribunal was the determination whether

Fraport’s investment was an investment to which the BIT was applicable, whether it was

an investment as defined by the BIT.

' United Nations Treaty Series (“UNTS”), Vol. 2108, p. 24.
"© Award, paras. 285, 289.

- 34.-

80. The Tribunal started its analysis by recalling the terms of Article 1(1) of the
BIT which reads as follows:
“Definitions of Terms
For the purpose of this Agreement:
1. The term “investment” shall mean any kind of asset accepted in
accordance with the respective laws and regulations of either

Contracting State, and more particularly, though not exclusively:

a

movable and immovable property as well as other rights in rem, such as
mortgages, liens, pledges, usufructs and similar rights;

b

shares of stocks and debentures of companies or interest in the property of
such companies;

claims to money utilized for the purpose of creating an economic value or
to any performance having an economic value;

d

intellectual property rights, in particular copyrights, patents, utility-model
patents, registered designs, trademarks, tradenames, trade and business
secrets, technical processes, know-how, and good will;

e

business concessions conferred by law or under contract, including
concessions to search for, extract or exploit natural resources;

any alteration of the form in which assets are invested shall not affect their
classification as an investment.”

81. It was not disputed by the Respondent that the assets expended by Fraport in
the Terminal 3 Project fall within the categories of assets as exemplified, of course not in
an exclusive manner, in Article 1(1) of the BIT. The Respondent argued that Fraport’s
assets were not “accepted in accordance with the respective laws and regulations of the
[Philippines]”. It was for this reason that the Arbitral Tribunal highlighted the quoted
formula in the reproduction of the text of Article 1(1) of the BIT in paragraph 300 of its
Award. The Tribunal observed “that as a result of the BIT’s wording, the arguments of
both parties address at some length the interpretation to be given to the term ‘accepted’

used in the BIT.”"!

"The text of Article (1) is reproduced in para. 300 of the Award (emphasis added by the Arbitral Tribunal), see

also UNTS, Vol. 2108, p. 20.
"? Tbid., para. 301

-35-

82. Despite the above observation, the Arbitral Tribunal did not proceed
immediately to the interpretation of Article 1(1) of the BIT, and in particular of the words
“asset accepted in accordance with the respective laws and regulations of either
Contracting State,” contained therein.

83. Instead, the Arbitral Tribunal focused its attention on what it considered were

“the pertinent facts”!

of the case. It quoted extensively from a preliminary due diligence
report on legal issues prepared for Fraport by the Philippine law firm Quisumbing Torres,
from a due diligence report on financial issues prepared for Fraport by KPMG, from
Fraport’s final report to its supervisory body, from some of Fraport’s other internal
documents, from a confidential shareholders agreement of 6 July 1999 (‘Pooling
Agreement’) and the Addendum to it. Based on the analysis of these documents and other
facts it considered pertinent, the Arbitral Tribunal concluded that it was “persuaded from
Fraport’s own internal and contemporaneous documents that it was consistently aware that
the way it was structuring its investment in the Philippines was in violation of the ADL and

accordingly sought to keep those arrangements secret.”"'4

84. It is not for the adhoc Committee to review, within the confines of the
annulment proceeding, the consideration of the factual record by the Arbitral Tribunal nor
to pronounce on the correctness of the view that “the way [Fraport] was structuring its
investment in the Philippines was in violation of the ADL,”'"> that is to say Philippine
Law. When its task is limited to the determination of its jurisdiction, which has been
objected to by the Respondent, the Committee observes that a dispute settlement organ
should only consider the factual records to the extent necessary to make the determination
regarding its own jurisdiction. Which facts are pertinent or relevant for that purpose would
depend on the provisions of the legal instrument on which the Applicant wishes to base the
jurisdiction of the dispute settlement organ seized of the case. Thus, in an investment
treaty case, the provisions of the BIT govern the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. To determine

"3 Award, pp. 142-159, paras. 308-333.

"4 Thid., para. 332.
"8 Ibid.

- 36 -

jurisdiction in such a case, it is only necessary to analyse such facts that are relevant to the
application of the BIT’s jurisdictional provisions, as properly interpreted (evidently if the
case was brought under the ICSID Convention, Article 25 of the ICSID Convention will

also apply).

85. In the arbitration under review, the Tribunal first reached certain conclusions
on the facts, being convinced, or to use the language of the Tribunal “persuaded,” that
Fraport “was consistently aware that the way it was structuring its investment in the
Philippines was in violation of the ADL.” It thus formed its conviction regarding the
conduct of Fraport in relation to the Philippines’ statute, the ADL, without first
determining whether the ADL itself, and Fraport’s compliance with that statute, have a role

to play in determining the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

86. Having thus first looked at the facts, the Tribunal proceeded to the
determination of its jurisdiction with the following note:
“While this factual record is troubling, it does not co ipso mean that the
Tribunal is without jurisdiction ratione materiae to hear the substance of the
claim. The Tribunal’s task is to make this determination in accordance with
applicable legal standards.”"!”
Having already been troubled by the factual record, the Tribunal next proceeded to a

consideration of these applicable legal standards.

sl 18

87. In the section titled “The Applicable Legal Standards,” ” the Tribunal recalled

its earlier observation that “the BIT at issue ... has a jurisdictional limitation
ratione materiae.”''° The Tribunal thought that there were “four explicit provisions”'”°
which limit its jurisdiction ratione materiae, namely Articles 1(1) and 2(1) of the BIT, ad
Article 2 of the Protocol to the BIT and a clause in the Philippines’ Instrument of
Ratification.

''6 Tid. (emphasis added).

"7 Tbid., para. 333.

"8 Tbid., p. 160.

"9 Thid., para. 334

"°° Ibid., para. 340, see also para. 339.

-37-

88. What do these provisions, identified by the Tribunal as the applicable legal

standards, say and how did the Tribunal interpret them?

89. Article 1(1) of the BIT provides that “[t]he term “investment” shall mean any
kind of asset accepted in accordance with the respective laws and regulations of either
Contracting State”. The Tribunal stated that “[t]he qualification ‘accepted in accordance
with the respective laws and regulations of either Contracting State’ applies to every form

of investment covered by the BIT.”!7!
90. Article 2, quoted by the Tribunal, reads as follows:

“Each Contracting State shall promote as far as possible investments in its
territory by investors of the other Contracting State and admit such
investments in accordance with its Constitution, laws and regulations as
referred to [in] Article 1, paragraph 1 [.. jer

91. The next provision, identified by the Tribunal as the applicable legal standard,

the provision ad Article 2 of the Protocol to the BIT, states the following:

“As provided for in the Constitution of the Republic of the Philippines,
foreign investors are not allowed to own land in the territory of the Republic
of the Philippines. However investors are allowed to own up to 40% of the
equity of a company which can then acquire ownership of land.”

92. Finally, the Tribunal felt necessary to quote the text of the Philippines’
Instrument of Ratification and further to highlight its second paragraph. '7* The Committee
considers that for the present purpose it is sufficient to reproduce just the highlighted

paragraph of the Instrument of Ratification which reads as follows:

“Whereas, the Agreement [i.e. the BIT] provides that the investment shall be
in the areas allowed by and in accordance with the Constitutions, laws and
regulations of each of the Contracting Parties.”

"1 Tbid., para. 335.
Ibid.

3 Tbid., para. 336.
4 Tbid., para. 337.

- 38 -

93. The Tribunal attached to this part of the Instrument of Ratification a particular
importance. In its view, “[b]ecause the exchange of instruments of ratification puts a treaty
into effect in accordance with its terms, the second preambular paragraph emphasized

above is particularly important in regard to the issue at bar.”!5

94. The “issue at bar” was the determination of the jurisdiction of the Arbitral
Tribunal under the BIT; whether Fraport’s investment was an investment within the
meaning of the BIT as that term was defined in its Article 1(1); in other words, whether
Fraport’s investment falls within the scope ratione materiae of the BIT. If it falls within it,
the Tribunal would have jurisdiction over the dispute brought to it by Fraport under
Article 9 of the BIT. If Fraport’s investment is not an investment within the meaning of
the BIT, falling thus outside its scope ratione materiae, the dispute would not be within the

Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

95. The scope ratione materiae of the BIT, and the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, are
governed by the provisions of the BIT itself. The provisions of the BIT are controlling,

while a preambular paragraph of the Philippines’ Instrument of Ratification is not.'*°

96. An instrument of ratification is a unilateral act by which a State expresses, on

the international plane, its consent to be bound by a treaty. v7

97. It is true that through the exchange of the Instruments of Ratification of the
Philippines and Germany, respectively, which occurred on 10 July 1997, the BIT entered
into force in accordance with its Article 11. But that fact has no bearing on the scope
ratione materiae of the BIT, nor does it provide any basis for attaching any particular

importance to one of the two instruments of ratification. |

98. The quoted paragraph of the Philippines’ Instrument of Ratification does not

modify the legal effect of the BIT, nor was it established before the Tribunal that such was

25 Tbid., para. 338.

8 See Transcript, Day 1, 63/ 1-4.
"T See ibid., 61/ 14-18.

®8 See ibid., 62/ 19-22.

- 39 -

the intention of the Philippines. It was not formulated as a reservation, something
extraordinary in the context of a bilateral treaty, nor as an interpretative declaration

intimated to the other Contracting Party to the BIT, Germany, for its acceptance. 129

99. The Tribunal relied heavily on the Philippines’ Instrument of Ratification to
determine whether Fraport’s investment fell within the meaning of the BIT.'*° The Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties is directly applicable to the interpretation of the BIT.
However, the Tribunal did not provide any explanation based on the Vienna Convention
for attaching so much importance to the Instrument, in its determination of the scope

ratione materiae of the BIT and its jurisdiction.'*!

100. The Tribunal proceeded to the interpretation of the above quoted provisions of
Articles 1(1) and 2(1) of the BIT, of the provision of ad Article 2 of the Protocol, and of
the second preambular paragraph of the Philippines’ Instrument of Ratification, which it
considered as “manifestly limitations ratione materiae”, observing that “their
interpretation is not simple.”!? It referred to Article 31 of the Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties as “enjoin[ing] interpretation of particular provisions in their context, i.e.
with reference to the rest of the treaty and in the light of its objects and purposes.”!** The
Tribunal observed simply that “there are three explicit references [to the condition] in the
total of 16 provisions in the Treaty and Protocol plus an additional reference in the
Instrument of Ratification”, and concluded that “[t]he parties had in mind explicit

9134

constitutional limitations in the Philippines. One can understand that the Tribunal,

from its perspective of assessing Fraport’s investment in the Philippines, was focused on
the “constitutional limitations in the Philippines”. However, the provisions of the bilateral

treaty operate both ways, unless specifically provided otherwise.'*° The BIT uses the

See Memorial, paras. 56-57, Transcript, Day 1, 61-63.
80 See Award, paras. 337-343

81 See Memorial, paras. 65-66; Reply, para. 25.

' Award, para. 339.

' Ibid.
'™ Ibid.

135

See Memorial, paras. 56-57.

- 40 -

formula “in accordance with the respective laws and regulations of either Contracting
State.” Of the all quoted provisions on which the Tribunal relied, only the one contained in
the Protocol, ad Article 2, specifically refers to the Constitution of the Republic of the

Philippines and the foreign ownership restrictions contained therein. 186

101. Article 31, paragraph 1, of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
requires that a treaty be interpreted in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to

the terms of the Treaty in their context and in light of its object and purpose.

102. Fraport is highly critical of the way the Tribunal interpreted Article 1(1) of the
BIT, alleging that the Tribunal disregarded the express language of the BIT, in particular

the word “accepted” in the definition of the term “investment”.'*”

103. It is true that the Tribunal never expressly referred to the ordinary meaning of
the terms of the BIT when it construed its provisions in order to determine its jurisdiction

which had been challenged by the Respondent.'**

Rather, it emphasized the object and
purpose of the BIT. On the other hand, the Tribunal was certainly aware of the limits of

relying on the object and purpose in the interpretation exercise when it observed that:

“while a treaty should be interpreted in the light of its objects and purposes
[encouraging investment], it would be a violation of all the canons of
interpretation to pretend to use its objects and purposes, which are, by their
nature, a deduction on the part of the interpreter, to nullify four explicit
provisions.”'”

104. Further, it appears from the Award that the Tribunal did consider the express
terms of Article 1(1) of the BIT, including the words “accepted in accordance with the
respective laws and regulations of either Contracting State.” It pointed to some linguistic

differences in the German and English versions of the BIT'*° but concluded that they do

ties had in
in the actual

 
 

 

6 The assertion of the Tribunal that “the Instrument of Ratification make[s] that [i.e., “[t]hat the p
mind explicit limitations in the Philippines”] clear beyond of doubt” lacks a basi
text of the Instrument of Ratification. (Award, para. 339, emphasis added).

 

87 See paras. 47 and 48 above.
'8 See Memorial, paras. 51-53.
' Award, para. 340.

“® Tbid., para. 341

-41-

not appear to indicate an intentional nuance and hence be legally significant. ‘4 Then it

offered its analysis of Article 1(1) at two different places.

105. First, in paragraph 343 of the Award, although the words of Article 1(1) are not
expressly used, in particular the word “accepted” emphasized by Fraport in its argument,
there is no doubt that the Tribunal considered them in its discussion. It starts
paragraph 343 with the observation that “[b]roadly speaking, there are two types of
international investments.” It explains that “[t]he first is comprised of an investment based
on or accompanied by some explicit agreement with or unilateral communication from the
host state; the second involves an investment in the market of the host state without an
accompanying specific agreement [...].”'*” The Tribunal admits that “[t]he English version

of the BIT might be read as applying Articles 1(1) and 2(1) only to the first type of

143

investment. But it does not accept such reading of the BIT because, in its views, “such

a construction would seem unreasonable and even doubtful for a number of reasons.”"“* It

explains:

“First, it is unlikely that state parties would insist on compliance with their
respective constitutions, laws and regulations only with respect to the first
type of investment, but would, at the same time, discharge potential investors
from such compliance with respect to the quite common type of investments
in the second category. Second, ad Article 2 of the Protocol, which elaborates
Article 2 of the Treaty, relates to purchasing shares in a company which might
then acquire land in the territory of the Republic. The acquisition of shares by
a foreign investor in a domestic corporation is a legal transaction that does
not, by its nature, involve some action by the government involving
acceptance or permission. ... So it would appear that the material restrictions
on investments relate both to investments of the first and second types.”'*°

106. Second, in another section of its jurisdictional analysis, titled “The Claimant’s

9146

Concealment of the Secret Shareholder Agreements, the Tribunal specifically

addressed Fraport’s argument that the word “accepted” in Article 1(1) of the BIT implies

') Tbid., para. 342

' Tbid., para. 343, footnote omitted.
‘8 Ibid.
'S Ibid.
“8 Ibid.

6 Award, p. 183.

-42-

an acceptance régime for foreign investments to be established by the Contracting States.
The Tribunal rejected for several reasons the Claimant’s argument that “the word
‘accepted’ in Article 1(1) of the BIT is critical to the operation of that provision and since

the Philippines did not establish an acceptance regime, that provision does not apply.”""7

107. Its first reason was that “the word ‘acceptance’ does not appear in the
Instrument of Ratification, which simply states that ‘the Agreement provides that the
investment shall be in the areas allowed by and in accordance with the Constitutions, laws
and regulations of each of the Contracting Parties’.”""* As explained above, this reason is
not well founded in the rules of interpretation binding upon the Tribunal, as the

Philippines’ Instrument of Ratification did not modify the legal effects of the provisions of

the BIT which govern the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. 49

108. But the Tribunal also rejected Fraport’s contention on the basis that “without
regard to that [i.e., the provision of the Instrument of Ratification], it is, ... , unreasonable
to assume that state parties would incorporate a reiterated insistence on compliance with
their respective constitutions, laws and regulations only not to have them apply.”!? In
particular, the Tribunal supported its view, as a matter of treaty interpretation, by reference
to ad Article 2 of the Protocol to the BIT,'*! which elaborates Article 2 of the BIT itself. In
accordance with Article 11(5) of the BIT, the Protocol “forms an integral part of this
Agreement.” Based on its construction of that provision, the Tribunal expressed the view
that there is no need for an acceptance procedure for the purchase of shares, the form of
putative investment in Fraport’s case, but that nevertheless “it is quite clear from the BIT
and the Protocol that accordance with the host state’s law is nonetheless required.”

“7 award, para. 384.

\8 Ibid. The Tribunal repeated in para. 385 of the Award that the Instrument of Ratification makes no mention of
“acceptance” but speaks only of “areas allowed by and in accordance with.”

™ See paras. 94-99 above. See Memorial, paras. 56-57.
8° award, para. 384.
'5! Cited supra para. 91.

'8? Award, para. 385 in which the Tribunal repeats its explanation already provided in para. 343 of the Award and
quoted in para. 105 above.

-43-

109. The point which the Committee understands the Tribunal to be making here is
that it would have been unnecessary for the Contracting Parties to add an express
qualification to Article 2, recognising that “investors are allowed to own up to 40% of the
equity of company which can then acquire ownership of land” (a form of acquisition which
required no acceptance procedure), if the limitation in Article 2 vis-a-vis the “Constitution,
laws and regulations” of each Contracting State applied only in cases where a specific
acceptance regime had been put in place. Rather, the Tribunal considered that the need to
add this provision supported a broader construction of the requirement, to include other
limitations on the making of investments under the law of the respective Contracting
States. Such a construction was applied by the Tribunal equally to the definition of the
investments protected by the BIT in Article 1(1), a definition to which Article 2 cross-

refers.

110. An alternative and plausible interpretation of Article 1(1) of the BIT, submitted
by Fraport, is that Article 1(1) contemplates the establishment of an acceptance regime. If
the investment was accepted by the state under this regime, or, in the absence of an
acceptance regime, if it fell within the definition of investment, then, it would constitute an
investment for the purposes of the BIT which, being thus applicable to such investment,
would provide protection to it (including through arbitration as envisaged in Article 9 of
the BIT). On this interpretation, ad Article 2 of the Protocol was required in order to
exclude an investment in land from the scope of Article 2 of the BIT. Otherwise such land
ownership by foreign investors (being simply prohibited by the Constitution and, thus, not
being an investment which could require an acceptance regime) would have been included
within the BIT’s protections—the reverse of the objective to which the Philippines was
committed under its Constitution. Once this specific exclusion from the scope ratione
materiae of the BIT had been added, it was necessary to also add the qualification
regarding minority shareholders in land-owning companies, since otherwise the exclusion
would be inaccurate. Thus, the qualification found in ad Article 2 is neutral, so far as

concerns the construction of the meaning of Articles 1(1) and 2 of the BIT, since ad Article

-44-

2 does not otherwise suggest that any investment must comply in all respects with

Philippine law to fall within the scope ratione materiae of the BIT.

111. But the Tribunal rejected Fraport’s interpretation. Instead the Tribunal held
that “[p]lainly, ... , economic transactions undertaken by a national of one of the parties to
the BIT had to meet certain legal requirements of the host state in order to qualify as an

‘investment’ and fall under the Treaty.”!

112. Fraport criticizes the Tribunal for its interpretation and construction of the BIT,
in particular Article 1(1) thereof. Although this Committee expressed earlier some
reservations about the way the Tribunal proceeded in its interpretation exercise, it is not
itself empowered to act as an appeal body and substitute its own interpretation of the BIT
for the one adopted by the Arbitral Tribunal. It is not for the Committee to decide which
interpretation is correct. As long as the interpretation arrived at by the Tribunal is a
tenable one, it is not open to the Committee to conclude that the Tribunal manifestly
exceeded its powers. The Committee, without necessarily endorsing the interpretation of
the BIT provided by the Tribunal, considers that the latter’s interpretation, based in
particular upon its reading of ad Article 2 to the Protocol, is not untenable. It cannot,

therefore, conclude that, by adopting it, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers.

113. The Committee cannot accept the second prong of Fraport’s criticism directed
at the Award, namely that the Tribunal failed to apply its jurisdictional analysis to, what
Fraport calls, its “discrete investments” made after 23 August 2001 when the provision of
the secret shareholder agreement of 6 July 1999, deemed by the majority as constituting
the violations of the ADL, had been amended. The Committee is of the view that the
Tribunal was entitled to treat Fraport’s investment participation in the Terminal 3 Project
as a unity pursuing the same objective. The Tribunal by applying its analysis to the

investments of Fraport as a whole has not manifestly exceeded its powers.

'S award, para. 340.

-45 -

114. It remains for the Committee to deal, in this part of its decision, with the third
prong of Fraport’s criticism, namely the wrong application of the ADL and its “untenable

interpretation” by the Tribunal.

115. The Committee observes that the ADL, known as the Anti-Dummy Law, is a
criminal statute of the Philippines as its official title clearly indicates: An Act to Punish
Acts of Evasion of the Laws on the Nationalization of Certain Rights, Franchises or
Privileges. If the Tribunal had interpreted Article 1(1) of the BIT as encompassing only
those laws which admit investments through an acceptance regime by way of explicit
agreement by the host state, then, as a criminal law statute, the ADL would not have
played any role in the jurisdictional analysis of the Tribunal. Rather, the Tribunal took the
view that “economic transactions undertaken by a national of one of the parties to the BIT
had to meet certain legal requirements of the host state in order to qualify as an

‘investment’ and fall under the Treaty.”!™*

This conclusion perhaps explains why the
Tribunal turned to its interpretation of the ADL, although it nowhere expressly stated the
ADL contains “legal requirements” which “an economic transaction...had to meet...in

order to qualify as an investment.”

116. The Committee does not consider it appropriate to review, in the context of an
annulment procedure, the findings of the Tribunal that Fraport violated the ADL, or
whether it was legally possible for Fraport to be a perpetrator of the violations of the
ADL’s Section 2-A. Nor does the Committee express a view on Fraport’s argument that in
the absence of a principal offender (who can, as Fraport stresses, be only a Philippine

national), Fraport cannot be liable as aider or abettor. 155

117. The Tribunal’s Members were not experts in Philippine law. Therefore the

interpretation and construction of the Philippine law, to the extent it was relevant, should

'S award, para. 340.

'55 On the last point, the Committee observes that the Appeal Chamber of the International Criminal Tribunal for

Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), having set aside R. Krstié’s conviction as a participant in a joint criminal enterprise to
commit genocide, the most serious crime, found him guilty of aiding and abetting genocide when no principal actor was
yet convicted: Prosecutor v. Radislav Krstié, Case No.: IT-98-33-A, Judgment of the Appeal Chamber, dated 19 April
2004. It was only in 2010 that the Trial Chamber found V. Popovié and L. Beara guilty of genocide. Prosecutor v.
Popovié et al., Case No.: IT-05-88-T, Judgment of the Trial Chamber of 10 June 2010; the appeal is pending.

 

- 46 -

have been based on the evidence and research as to the actual application of that law by the
competent Philippines’ organs. How the Tribunal proceeded on this issue is the subject of

the Committee’s analysis in the next section of this Decision.

118. To conclude this section, devoted to the question of whether the Tribunal
manifestly exceeded its powers when it declared the Centre without jurisdiction and itself
without competence to hear the dispute and resolve it, the Committee, applying the test for
review as outlined above, is of the view that it would trespass the limits of its annulment
powers, transforming itself in an organe d‘appel, if it were to uphold Fraport’s claim that

the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers.

B. Serious Departure From a Fundamental Rule of Procedure (Article 52(1)(d) of
the ICSID Convention)

119. The second ground for annulment of the Award relied upon by Fraport in its
Application for Annulment is “that there has been a serious departure from a fundamental

rule of procedure”, the ground provided for in Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention.

a) Fraport’s Case

120. Fraport alleges that the Tribunal committed a serious departure from a

fundamental rule of procedure in two respects:

(a) In disregarding the principles required to be respected in determining
whether a criminal law had been violated, specifically the principles of nullum
crimen sine lege and in dubio pro reo.'° This ground of complaint relates in
particular to the manner in which the Tribunal approached the construction of

the ADL;

'86 Memorial, paras. 150-162.

-47-

(b) By relying upon evidence admitted after the close of proceedings in denial
of Fraport’s right to be heard.'"’ This ground relates in particular to the
Tribunal’s decision to admit evidence from the investigation leading to the
decision of the Philippines Special Prosecutor on the criminal complaint
concerning Fraport’s alleged breach of the ADL (“the Prosecutor’s

Resolution”'**

) after the closure of the proceedings, without providing the
parties with an opportunity to be heard as to the effect of the material produced

to the Tribunal.

@ Nullum crimen sine lege/ in dubio pro reo

121. In its Memorial, Fraport submits, with the support of an expert Opinion of
Professor Cassese dated 9 September 2008,'* that the general principle of due process
includes the requirement to apply the principles of nullum crimen sine lege and in dubio
pro reo in the construction of the ADL.' The ADL is a criminal statute and these
principles are applicable, even where such a statute is applied only incidentally in the
context of international arbitral proceedings. Failure to do so amounts to the breach of a

fundamental rule of procedure. tel

122. In its Reply, Fraport submits that in dubio is a fundamental procedural rule

“necessitated by the application of criminal law in the arbitration”.'© It relies upon a

163

further Opinion of Professor Cassese dated 14 February 2009.” Professor Cassese opines

that international tribunals may need to determine issues relating to the criminal liability of
individuals when they apply national criminal law for the purpose of ruling on an issue
preliminary and incidental to the public international law dispute. International tribunals

are bound to apply national law as interpreted and applied by national courts, unless the

'57 Thid., paras. 163-188.
'S* Ex RA-36: NBI v. Cheng Yong et al (Prosecutor's Resolution) I S No 2006-817 (27 December 2006).
'® Cassese 1, paras. 39-40.

‘© Memorial, paras. 150-162.

'®! Cassese 1, paras. 41-42

'© Reply, para. 95.
‘6 Supplementary Expert Opinion on the Incidental Application of Philippine Criminal Law by International
Tribunals, (hereinafter “Cassese 2”)

- 48 -

national interpretation is manifestly unreasonable. Compliance with the nullum crimen
principle is required in the Philippines both by the Constitution and by treaties to which the
Philippines is party. Fraport submits that such a principle has a jus cogens character and

binds international tribunals.

123. Responding to the argument that in dubio cannot apply in international
arbitration because it would be contrary to the principle of equality, ‘4 Professor Cassese

expresses the view that this distinction is merely semantic, since:

“t]he notion of ‘presumption of innocence’ is intended to convey the idea that

nobody can be held to be responsible for any misconduct, whether civil (a

tort) or criminal (a penal offence), without his being first heard...” 165

124. At the hearing, Fraport developed the application of these principles in the
context of the approach of the Tribunal in the present case, in the light of Article
52(1)(d).!° It submitted that nullum crimen and in dubio are expressions of the right to a
fair trial in any case where a court or a tribunal is applying criminal law. ‘67 Tt relied, inter
alia, upon Orr v. Norway'®* for the proposition that the criminal presumption of innocence
is still applicable in the context of civil proceedings where criminal law features are

apparent in the civil court’s reasoning. '

125. Fraport emphasises that the ADL is a criminal statute.'”” It submits that the
protections of Article 52(1)(d) are not to be reduced to merely technical rules of procedure,
but rather include those emanations of the right to a fair trial and those principles of natural

justice that govern any kind of legal procedure, including arbitral procedure.!7!

't Expert Opinion of Professor F. Pocar, “How Should an International Arbitral Tribunal Interpret and Apply
Domestic Criminal Law,” submitted by the Philippines with its Counter-Memorial, (hereinafter “Pocar 1”), paras. 41-42.
'S Cassese 2, para. 69.
‘6 Transcript, Day 1, 205-270, especially at 244-270.
‘7 Transcript, Day 1, 245/ 6-9.
'68 Ex RA-205: ECHR, App No 31283/04, 15 May 2008, para. 51.
‘© Transcript, Day 1, 246/ 19-20.
' Transcript, Day 3, 657/ 11-6607 4.
"| Transcript, Day 3, 674/ 17-22.

- 49 -

126. Fraport submits that the Award shows on its face that the Tribunal did not
approach the evidence as to Fraport’s breach of Section 2-A of the ADL applying such a
presumption. The Tribunal expressly accepted that a literal interpretation of the ADL
would not cover Fraport’s conduct,'” but nevertheless proceeded to find that Fraport had
infringed the law by applying the Tribunal’s own view of the proscribed conduct, which

found no support in the text of the ADL itself!”

Fraport submits that the Tribunal
proceeded on the basis of a ‘preconviction’ against Fraport, and did not entertain the

possibility of doubt, in violation of the principle in dubio.‘™

(ii) The right to be heard

127. The second basis on which Fraport alleges that there had been a failure to
observe a fundamental rule of procedure is that the Tribunal failed to hear it by way of
rebuttal on the significance of new evidence admitted after the closure of proceedings, in
breach of its right to be heard.

128. The Philippines does not dispute that a failure to accord a right to be heard

could constitute a breach of a fundamental rule of procedure, 5

thus opening the way to
annulment under Article 52(1)(d). The issues under this heading relate to the application
of the principle in the context of the procedures in fact adopted by the Tribunal. The

essential facts as to these procedures are not in dispute, being a matter of record in the

arbitration.

129. In its Application for Annulment, Fraport submits that the Tribunal breached

this principle in admitting evidence and substantively relying upon it after the close of
proceedings without giving Fraport an opportunity to address the new material. 176
'? Transcript, Day 1, 217/ 8, referring to Award, para. 356.
"S Transcript, Day 1, 222/ 4, referring to Award, para. 395.
' Transcript, Day 1, 263/ 9-20.

"5 Cassese 2, para. 69.

'% Application, para. 88.

-50-

130. This submission was developed in its Memorial by reference to the documents
from the file in the arbitration proceedings.'”” Fraport contends, on the basis of this record,
that its right of rebuttal in relation to the admission of this evidence has been violated in

three respects:

(a) The majority of the Tribunal concluded that Fraport’s transaction counsel,
Dr Stiller, had testified falsely in the Philippines without allowing Fraport or

the witness to be heard on that serious but untenable ruling;!”*

(b) The majority made an outcome-determinative, but incorrect, factual
characterisation of the record before the Philippine Prosecutor. The majority
held that the critical factual question in relation to the Prosecutor’s Resolution
was whether the secret shareholder agreements had been part of the record and
considered by the Prosecutor.'”. This question was not disclosed to the parties,
who thus did not have an opportunity to confront the evidence upon which the
Tribunal relied.'*” Fraport argues that the Tribunal’s conclusion that the two
such agreements which were dispositive could not have been disclosed to the
Prosecutor because of confidentiality agreements in the arbitration was

incorrect; and

(c) The majority acknowledged that, if the facts concerning these materials had
been different, its decision on jurisdiction would have been different, since it
would have accorded effect to an estoppel created by the Prosecutor’s decision

that the ADL had not been breached.'*!

"77 Infra paras. 150 and following.
"8 Memorial, paras. 170-175.

' Award, para. 368.

'8 Memorial, para. 176.

'8! Thid., paras. 183-188, citing Award, para. 387.

-51-

131. In its Reply,'® Fraport submits that the right to be heard includes the right to

confront primary facts.'*3

Its application on this ground relates to primary facts, and not
simply to inferences which the Tribunal might decide to draw from them. The material in

question is the decision of the Special Prosecutor and his documentary record. '**

132. As to waiver, Fraport submits that the Tribunal had informed the parties that
the procedure was used merely to complete the record rather than consider it in substance:
“[T]he Majority changed the purpose for receiving the underlying materials
without informing the parties. The change in purpose was not communicated
to Fraport, which is why Fraport could not respond and — as a consequence —
was denied the right to be heard.” 185
133. At the hearing before the ad hoc Committee, Fraport did not further develop its
submissions on this issue in opening, resting its case on the written pleadings. 186 In reply
to the Respondent’s arguments, Fraport addressed the extent of the disclosure as to the
shareholder agreements in the record in the arbitration, and before the Philippine
Prosecutor.'*” It submitted that the Tribunal should have afforded Fraport an opportunity
to be heard about the legal question of whether a finding by the Philippine Prosecutor
bound the Tribunal and about the factual question of whether the shareholder agreements
(including the Pooling Agreement) had in fact been produced to the Prosecutor.'** These
questions implicate both the equality of arms between the parties and the opportunity to
confront the particular questions of concern to the Tribunal. Each of these are related, but

distinct, aspects of the right to be heard.'*?

'® Reply, paras. 131-152.
'83 Tbid., para. 132, citing Counter-Memorial, para. 229.
'S Ibid, para. 133.

"5 bid, para. 152.

'86 Transcript, Day 1, 205/ 20-206/ 2.

'§’ Transcript, Day 3, 599-624.

"88 Tbid., 602, citing Award, para. 368.

'® Transcript, Day 3, 623.

-52-

b) The Philippines’ Response
(i) Nullum crimen sine lege/in dubio pro reo

134. The Philippines, in its Counter-Memorial, supported by expert Opinions filed
by Professors Pellet, Pocar and Schreuer, submits that the Tribunal did not seriously depart
from a fundamental rule of procedure in this respect, since nullum crimen sine lege and in
dubio pro reo are not rules of procedure. Rather nullum crimen is a substantive rule, and
in dubio establishes a standard of evidential proof applicable only to criminal cases. 190 Th

any event, the Philippines contends that the Tribunal had not infringed either principle.

135. In its Rejoinder,'”! which was accompanied by a further round of supplemental
expert opinions, the Philippines develops its submission that in dubio and nullum crimen
are not rules of procedure. Professor Pellet accepts that such principles are general
principles of law, but disagrees with the proposition advanced by Professor Cassese that
they have a jus cogens character.'°* He opines that to apply the principles in the context of
the issue before the Tribunal would be to mistake the nature of its task, which was not to
sentence Fraport for a criminal offence, but to determine the conformity of Fraport’s

investment with the relevant provisions of Philippine law. 198

136. This question would have been the same, whether or not the ADL were a
criminal statute, since, even if it were not, there would still be “a legal prescription which
needs to be given effect, whatever the sanction of its non-compliance might have been
under Philippine law”.'4 Nullum crimen as a general principle of law applies only to
criminal proceedings. It finds no recognition in international instruments outside that

5

context.'°> When international tribunals have applied it, they have done so in order to

'® Counter-Memorial, paras. 207-215, relying upon Professor Schreuer’s Legal Opinion dated 13 January 2009,
para, 132 (hereinafter “Schreuer 1”), Professor Pellet’s Legal Opinion dated 13 January 2009, para. 31, (hereinafter
“Pellet 1”), and Professor Pocar’s Legal Opinion dated 12 January 2009, para. 41, (hereinafter “Pocar 1”).

 

‘9! Rejoinder, paras. 128-136.
'® Professor Pellet’s Supplemental Legal Opinion dated 14 July 2009, filed with the Rejoinder, paras. 5-13,
(hereinafter “Pellet 2”)

"83 Thid., para. 16.

' Tbid., para.17.

"85 Thid., paras. 19-23.

-53-

assess the conformity of a municipal law or the decision of a municipal court with the
international obligations of the state, not to apply the principle to the underlying municipal

law case.'"°

137. Professor Pocar adds that the reason why the principle of legality has become a
norm of customary international law is in order to protect persons accused of criminal acts

from the abuse of state power by judges and prosecutors. He explains:

Where, outside of criminal proceedings, the values protected by the principle
of legality are not in jeopardy, its application is unjustifiable as it would end
up protecting one side — the beneficiary of the more restrictive interpretation
that this principle entails — over the other without a proper ground for such
more favourable treatment. '°”

138. Even if the principle of nullum crimen were applicable, this did not necessarily
mandate a literal interpretation, since fidelity to the law requires interpretation in the light

of the context and purpose of the particular provision. 198

139. At the hearing before the ad hoc Committee, the Philippines developed these
points. '°? It submitted that Article 52(1)(d) was designed to ensure that parties were
accorded “basic guarantees of due process”.? It argued that Fraport’s submissions in

relation to nullum crimen and in dubio failed for three reasons:

(a) Because both principles only apply in a criminal context, they cannot be

considered a fundamental rule of procedure for ICSID purposes;

(b) Even in the criminal context, they can not properly be considered

procedural rules; and,

© Tbid., para. 25.

‘7 Professor Pocar’s Supplemental Legal Opinion dated 14 July 2009, filed with the Rejoinder, para. 10,
(hereinafter “Pocar 2”).

"8 Tbid., para. 28.
' Transcript, Day 2, 457-515.
2 Transcript, Day 2, 458/ 22-459/ 1

-54-

(c) The Tribunal did not in any event contravene either principle, even if they

were applicable.””!

140. The Philippines points out that the in dubio principle applies in criminal
proceedings, as a reflection of the fact that the state has many advantages at its disposal in
such proceedings, including compulsory powers to obtain evidence and the right to indict.
Moreover, the interest at stake in criminal proceedings is the liberty of the person.7°?
Neither of these factors is present in international arbitration, and the application of the
principles would therefore serve to distort the equality of the parties. It would lead to
absurd results if, in order to determine admission in accordance with host state law, the
Tribunal were bound to apply a higher standard of proof to more serious violations of the

ae . . - coe 203
criminal law than to less serious violations of the civil law.*°

141. A procedural rule is one which governs the work of the tribunal and the
conduct of the proceedings, and not the manner in which it interprets the applicable law or

assesses the evidence.™

142. In the view of the Philippines, the approach of the Tribunal in this case could
not be criticized on the ground that it had failed fairly to assess the evidence, since it has

been widely held by annulment committees that an arbitral tribunal is its own judge of the

205

admissibility of any evidence, and of its probative value. An alleged defect in the

Tribunal’s approach to the evidence could not therefore amount to the breach of a

fundamental rule of procedure.”

"! Transcript, Day 2, 463/ 14-464/ 4.

*” Transcript, Day 2, 466/ 6-467/ 4.

3 Transcript, Day 2, 471/ 7-472/ 18.

4 Transcript, Day 2, 477/ 8-14.

"3 ICSID Arbitration Rule 34(1).

© Wena Hotels Ltd. v. Egypt, Decision on Annulment, 5 February 2002, 6 ICSID Reports, p. 129, para. 65.

-55-

143. The Philippines stresses that the fundamental question is simply whether the
parties had been treated fairly by the Tribunal.2”” It accepts that a failure to accord a fair
hearing would constitute a breach of Article 52(1)(d), but submits that this right has not

been violated in any respect in the present case.

(ii) The right to be heard

1208

144. The Philippines submits in its Counter-Memorial”™” that Fraport did not choose

to present detailed submissions on the ADL during the course of the hearing, despite the
fact that it was on notice of the importance that the Tribunal attached to the construction of
the ADL in the light of the shareholder agreements. *”° Then, in its post-hearing written
submissions, Fraport did in fact address in some detail the proper construction of the

ADL.?”°

145. Turning to the position following disclosure of the Prosecutor’s Resolution, the

Philippines submits that:

(a) Fraport was heard on the completeness of the record before the Philippine
Prosecutor. Fraport pointed out the incompleteness of the record by letter to the

Tribunal?!’ In response, the Tribunal invited Fraport to supplement the record

by providing the Tribunal with copies of the documents listed in its letter?!”

Fraport continued thereafter to make submissions by letter to the Tribunal as to

the completeness of the record;7!*

(b) Fraport was heard on the explanation for the statements made to the

Philippines Department of Justice by Dr Stiller, since he had in fact given

°°" Transcript, Day 3, 841/ 21-842/ 2.

2°8 Counter-Memorial, paras. 216-256.
2” Tbid., para. 224.
210 Thid., para. 226.
71 Bx RA-59,
717 Ex RA-60.

213

Letter dated 19 April 2007, Ex RA-62.

-56-

evidence before the Tribunal as to the construction of the Pooling Agreement,

which the Tribunal considered and expressly rejected;?!4

(c) The factual findings about the Department of Justice’s access to evidence
that Fraport claimed were incorrect were not outcome-determinative. Fraport
had in fact submitted at the oral hearing that the Philippines had access to the

2
shareholder agreements.”

In any event, the Tribunal expressly pointed out
that the knowledge of the Prosecutor many years later was not relevant to the
question of whether the Philippines knew of the agreements in 1999, when the
investment was admitted.7!° Further, the Tribunal did not consider the

municipal decision binding upon it;?"” and

(d) Finally, the Philippines submits, relying on ICSID Arbitration Rule 27, that
Fraport had waived the right to challenge the irregularity of the Tribunal’s
proceeding in this regard, not having made such an objection to the Tribunal at

the time.7!*

146. In its Rejoinder, the Philippines contends that the Tribunal had respected

Fraport’s right to be heard in addition because:

(a) The interpretation of the ADL was within the legal framework of the

dispute, since it had been raised in the pleadings and at the hearing;?"” and

(b) Fraport had the opportunity to be heard on the evidentiary record before the

Philippine Department of Justice:

24 Counter-Memorial, para. 239-244.
215 Thid., para. 248, referring to Hearing on Jurisdiction and Merits Transcript (hereinafter “Hearing Transcript”),
(Ex RA-63) Day 11, 2933/10-16.

216 Tbid., para. 249, referring to Award paras. 344-345.

217 Thid., para. 250, citing Award, paras. 390-391.
218 Thid., paras. 252-256.

2!° Rejoinder, paras. 156-158.

-57-

(i) The Tribunal’s request for production of documents after closure of the
arbitral proceedings was proper under Article 43 of the ICSID Convention,

even after the closure of proceedings;””

(ii) Fraport had the opportunity to address the completeness of the record. In
fact it did so in its correspondence with the Tribunal. The Tribunal’s
direction limiting further submissions was fair because it applied to both

parties;77! and

(iii) Fraport had waived its right to object. Its correspondence in response to
the Tribunal’s request demonstrated that it was well aware of the
importance of demonstrating the extent to which the Prosecutor had

knowledge of the shareholder agreements.”

147. At the hearing before the ad hoc Committee, the Philippines submitted that: 223

(a) The Philippines had argued that Fraport had violated the ADL in its post-
hearing submissions, to which Fraport had had an opportunity to reply.” At
the hearing itself and in its post-hearing briefs, counsel for Fraport had, to the
contrary, declined to take the allegations in relation to breach of the ADL
seriously and to confront them,” even when the point was put to it expressly

by the Tribunal;?”° and

(b) As far as the later introduction of the Prosecutor’s Resolution and file was
concerned, the Philippines notes that Fraport had not alleged in the annulment
proceedings that the Prosecutor had had access to the Pooling Agreement;
merely that he had had access to documents which referred to it. Thus the

Tribunal was well entitled to reach the conclusion that this would not be

9 Ibid., para. 161

2! Thid., paras. 162-166.

~~ Ibid., paras. 180-181, citing Fraport letter dated 16 March 2007, Ex RA-57.

3 Transcript, Day 2, 518/ 13-560/ 19.

4 Transcript, Day 2, 519/ 8-520/ 15.

5 Transcript, Day 2, 522/ 12-528/ 13

- 58 -

sufficient to persuade the Prosecutor that there was proof of a violation of the
ADL.” The issue was not in any event outcome-determinative, since the
Tribunal held that, for an estoppel to arise, the Philippines would have had to
have been aware of the Pooling Agreement at the time the investment was

made.”**

148. In the course of the oral submissions by way of rejoinder, the Philippines
responded to two specific questions raised by the ad hoc Committee in relation to the ADL

prosecution in the Philippines:

(a) First, it accepted (subject to its checking) that the only underlying evidence
of law as to the construction of the ADL (as opposed to the statute itself or
contemporaneous evidence of fact) relied upon before the Tribunal was two

Department of Justice Opinions (Nos 141 and 165°

) and the decision of the
Supreme Court in Luzon2*® The Philippines submits that these Opinions went
to the question of the construction of the shareholding restriction under the
Foreign Investment Act and not to other means of control proscribed by the

ADL;?*! and

(b) Second, the Philippines informed the Committee that the Department of
Justice proceedings in the Philippines were still pending. Since the decisions of
the Prosecutors which had been disclosed in the arbitration proceedings, there
were pending motions for reconsideration and petitions for review. The DOJ

had completed its investigation, but no Criminal Information had been filed.

© Referring in particular to the exchange between Arbitrator Reisman, President Fortier and Mr. Nolan, counsel
for Fraport, at Hearing Transcript, Day 9, 2321/ 22-2331/ 7 (Ex CA-26)

27 Transcript, Day 2, 550-552.

28 Transcript, Day 2, 554-557, referring to Award, paras. 344-346, and relying upon World Duty Free Co Ltd v.
Kenya (Award) ICSID Case No ARB/00/7, 7 October 2006, para. 180.

2° Of these, only the latter is expressly cited in the Award at para. 352.

> Transcript, Day 3, 787/ 15-19. The Philippines subsequently confirmed by letter dated 14 September 2009, in
response to the Committee’s query, that these Opinions had not in fact been produced in the record in the arbitration. See
further infra para. 178 and n. 373.

?5! Transcript, Day 3, 794-797/ 8.

-59-

c) The Arbitral Tribunal’s Approach
149. In the light of these submissions, it is therefore in the first place important for
the Committee to consider carefully (i) the manner in which the Tribunal proceeded in
relation to the new evidence produced after the oral hearing, and some of it even after the
closure of the arbitral proceeding, relating to the Prosecutor’s Resolution; and (ii) its

significance in the light of the issues found to be dispositive by the Tribunal in its Award.

(i) Procedural treatment of new evidence on the ADL

150. The Tribunal had closed the arbitral proceedings pursuant to ICSID Arbitration

Rule 38 on 25 October 2006 in the following terms:?*?

Having deliberated the Tribunal, unanimously, denies Claimant’s request of 4
October 2006 for leave to file a further written submission.

The Tribunal is of the view that the presentation of their case by both parties
is now completed and the instant proceedings are hereby declared closed.

Nevertheless, the Tribunal’s Procedural Order of 18 July 2006, as it pertains
to the ongoing expropriation proceedings in the Philippines, remains in effect
and Respondent is accordingly directed to keep the Tribunal (and Claimant)
informed of the status of those proceedings.

151. Then, on 5 January 2007, the Philippines submitted to the Tribunal the
Prosecutor’s Resolution dismissing the criminal complaint under the ADL.?*° The
Philippines stated in its letter that the Prosecutor’s dismissal had been made on the basis of
only two publicly available documents, namely Fraport’s Request for ICSID Arbitration

and the Report of the Senate Blue Ribbon Committee.

>° Transcript, Day 3, 851-852.
3 Ex CA-32.

24 The reference in the final paragraph was to ongoing proceedings instituted by Fraport in the Philippines for
compensation for expropriation, and not to the extant ADL criminal complaint.

Ex CA-34,

- 60 -

152. Fraport responded on 8 January 2007 by submitting evidence to show that this
statement was incorrect.2*° The Prosecutor, Fraport claimed, had in fact had access to
extensive witness and documentary evidence, some of which Fraport referred to in its

letter.

153. The Tribunal requested Fraport, on 9 January 2007, to produce two documents
referred to in its letter of 8 January (and offered to the Tribunal if it so requested) as
establishing that the Philippines’ assertion that only two documents have been available to

the Prosecutor was incorrect.”*” Fraport provided these on 10 January 2007, adding:

“Please understand that we do not have a full record of the DOJ proceeding. ...
We do not know the extent to which the DOJ’s decision was premised on
other documents and investigative materials in addition to those indicated in
the exhibits to this letter.” ***

154. The Philippines replied on 11 January 2007 asserting that: “[t]he Philippine
DOJ, by contrast, has never had the central evidence proving Fraport’s violations of the
Anti-Dummy Law,” including, inter alia, the secret shareholder agreements.”*” The
Philippines claimed that these had been kept from the Prosecutor by reason of the
confidentiality order in the arbitration, and Fraport’s own blocking application in the
German courts. The letter accepted that further documents in addition to the two original
mentioned in its letter of 5 January 2007 had been available to the DOJ. Fraport replied on
12 January 2007, reiterating: “we do not have a full record of the DOJ proceeding and thus

do not know all the documents that were before it.”™"°

155. In these circumstances, on 14 February 2007, the Tribunal directed the
Philippines to submit to it additional evidence submitted to the Prosecutor, together with

relevant Philippines legislation. The request included “all documents, transcripts,

6 Ex CA-35, Ex CA-37
7 Ex RA-49.
8 Ex RA-50.
Ex RA-SI.
0 Ex RA-52.

-61-

statements or other evidence received by the DOJ Prosecutor in the course of his
investigation.” The Tribunal expressly stated:
“The present request is not a decision by the Tribunal to reopen the
proceeding under ICSID Arbitration Rule 38. The Tribunal merely seeks to
complete the evidentiary record which the Parties have constituted with their

attachments to Respondent’s letter of 5 January and Claimant’s letter of 10
January.

Until further notice, the Tribunal does not wish to receive any submissions
with respect to this material from either Party.

After considering the documents which it has requested, the Tribunal will
determine whether it requires additional clarification from the Parties. In the
meantime, it continues its deliberations.”7*!

156. When the Philippines requested an extension of time to submit these
documents, which was opposed by Fraport, 2 the Tribunal on 28 February 2007 granted
the extension, noting that the documents “were pertinent to its continuing deliberations”
and that, nevertheless, “its Decision/Award will be issued within as short a time as possible

“ soot . 99243
after submission of these documents.”**

157. In response to the Tribunal’s order, on 14 March 2007, the Philippines
submitted a documentary record of more than 1900 pages, stating that this included “the
entirety of the Department of Justice’s Chief State Prosecutor’s file in the Philippine anti-

dummy cases.”** The letter continued:

“The DOJ file does not include the confidential Fraport due diligence
documents, final holding report, or the shareholder and loan agreements of
PIATCO and Fraport that were presented to the Tribunal in this arbitration
and relied upon by Respondent in its submissions.”

158. Further, on 19 March 2007, the Philippines produced the Prosecutor’s

Resolution of 15 March 2007 on Reconsideration of his earlier decision.”“°

1 Ex CA-38.
>? Ex RA-S4.
8 Ex RA-SS.
4 Bx RA-56; Award, para. 73.
8 Ex RA-S8.

-62-

159. Fraport responded on 26 March 2007, referencing a number of documents
(comprising evidence given by Fraport officials in the DOJ investigation) which the

Philippines had not produced in compliance with the Tribunal’s order.”“° Fraport stated:

“We would be happy immediately to provide copies of the above documents
should the Tribunal wish to have them. Most bear stamps indicating receipt by
the Philippines Department of Justice. We of course do not know whether
there may have been other documents received by the DOJ that the Tribunal
also has not received from Respondent.”

160. On the same day, the Tribunal invited Fraport to produce copies of the
documents listed in its letter “in order to complete the evidentiary record.”"4” This Fraport

did by return.”"*

161. The Philippines responded to Fraport’s letter on 30 March 2007. It produced
further documents and gave the following explanation of the omissions in its previous

production of documents:

“The Respondent’s production of documents on 14 March 2007 was the
product of an extensive search by lawyers in the OSG [Office of the Solicitor-
General] of the DOJ Prosecutor’s files relating to the anti-dummy
investigations. The OSG is not a party to the DOJ proceedings and relies on
the DOJ for access to these documents. Respondent was informed that its
production to the Tribunal was complete. As is the case with government
agencies in many developing countries, the Philippine DOJ Prosecutor’s
Office is overworked and understaffed, and its recordkeeping can be
imperfect. This is the circumstance that Respondent described during the
discovery process in this proceeding that necessitated the lengthy and repeated
efforts to locate documents in various agencies. Any omission in
Respondent’s production was unintentional and inadvertent...

Respondent will supplement its production if any additional responsive
documents are located.”

162. Following further correspondence from the parties, dealing inter alia with

allegations as to the extent to which the Prosecutor’s Reconsideration had been procured

6 Ex CA-40.
*7 Ex RA-60.
8 Ex RA-OL.

>” Ex CA-41, internal footnotes omitted, emphasis added.

- 63 -

°° the President of the

by the Philippines in order to assist its defence in the arbitration,
Tribunal wrote to the parties on 19 April 2007 to curtail the need for further
correspondence.”* ' The Tribunal repeated and enlarged this direction on 23 April 2007 in
the following terms:
“Until further notice, the Tribunal directs the Parties to cease and desist from
sending any further letter to the Tribunal. This also applies to any further

update by the Respondent in respect of the ongoing expropriation proceedings
in the Philippines.””

163. The Tribunal did not communicate further with the parties until, on 13 June
2007, it wrote:
“[T]he Tribunal is now of the view that the presentation of their case by both

parties is completed and accordingly, pursuant to Arbitration Rule 38, the
proceeding is now declared closed in its entirety.””**

(ii) Consideration of the ADL in the Award

164. The Tribunal referred to two categories of evidence relating to the construction
of the ADL in its Award: first, factual evidence from Fraport’s contemporaneous
documents relating to legal advice which it had received and its reactions to it; and,

second, the evidence from the Prosecutor’s file as to the ADL proceedings.

165. As to the contemporaneous evidence of fact, the Tribunal referred to the

following:?**

(a) A due diligence report from Fraport’s Philippine lawyers, Quisumbing
Torres (“QT”) dated 11 January 1999;55

(b) A provisional due diligence report from KPMG of 20 January 1999;7°°

25 Referred to in Fraport’s letter of 19 April 2007 (Ex RA-62).
1 Ex RA-236.
5? Ex RA-239,
253

Ex RA-240.
24 Award, paras. 308-333.

- 64 -

(c)  Fraport’s final report to its supervisory body dated 26 February 1999;?57
(d) The PIATCO Master Concession Concept Brief of 19 January 1999,
which referred to the need to conclude a shareholders’ agreement in

accordance with Philippine law;?*

(e) The comments by Dr Schmidt recorded in the minutes of a meeting of
Fraport’s Supervisory Board;’ a letter dated 18 December 1998 from the
Chairman and President of FRAPORT to the Asian Development Bank, one of
the Senior Lenders;?° and a letter from Jesse Ang, CFO of PIATCO, to John
Archer of Fraport”*! which attached the Concept Brief referred to at (d)

above;?°

(f) The Pooling Agreement dated 6 July 1999 itself and the Addendum to

that A; greement;?™

(g) Questions raised by Mr Vogel of Fraport to QT on 14 December 1999;76

(h) A letter from Mr Struck to QT that followed the SyCip report,” which

indicated concern at the content of QT’s prior advice; and

(i) A further letter from QT dated 21 December 1999.7”

*5 Ex RAS.
°° Ex RA-96.
57 Ex RA-9.

°8 Award, para. 314.

259

Ex RA-10.

20 Ex RA-95.
*61 Ex RA-97.

2 Award, paras. 315-318.
°8 Ex RA-23.
2 Ex RA-24.

°5 Award, para. 324.

266

Ex RA-12.

166.

follows:?*

167.

- 65 -

The evidence as to the ADL proceedings to which the Tribunal referred was as

(a) In 2003, two Philippine lawyers, Messrs. Balayan and Bernas
complained to the National Bureau of Investigation (“NBI’) that the officers
and directors of Fraport and PIATCO had violated the ADL based on Fraport’s
ownership of 61.44% of PIATCO’s shares. The Complaint was based solely
and expressly on statements made by Fraport in the Request for ICSID

9
arbitration;?

(b) The NBI Report, issued on 10 June 2004,7”° found that the Supreme Court’s
annulment of the PIATCO concession occurred before Fraport could exercise
any managerial control it could have acquired in violation of the ADL. The 10
June 2004 report was followed by Reports dated 13 February 2006,27! 13 June
2006 and 16 June 20067" and Evaluation Comments dated 28 July
2006;?"*and

(c) On 27 December 2006, the Prosecutor’s Resolution rejected the NBI’s
recommendation to prosecute the officers and directors of Fraport and PIATCO

for their “intent” to breach the ADL.?”°

Against that background, the Tribunal turned, in Part V Section D of its Award,

to a consideration of its interpretation of the ADL. The Tribunal held that Fraport had not

infringed the level of equity investment permitted to a foreign investor in a Philippine

public utility.?”° But it found that an ADL violation might alternatively be established by

°57 Award, para. 325.

268 Award, paras. 357-382.

28 Ibid, paras. 357-359.
27 Ex RA-132.

771 Ex RA-133.

7? Ex RA-134,

7 Ex RA-135.

77 Ex RA-136.

7 Ex RA-36.

77° Award, para. 350.

- 66 -

“an actual demonstration of managerial control, in which case the quantum of equity in the

2

company is irrelevant. 7” The Tribunal accepted that managerial control by means of a

shareholder meeting did not infringe a literal interpretation of the ADL. But it decided:
“{A] literal interpretation here could produce an absurdity.... The Tribunal
construes this part of the ADL as covering intervention by shareholders, if that

is the actual means of intervening in “the management, operation,
administration or control” of PIATCO.””*

168. The Tribunal then considered, in Section E of the Award, the ADL Proceedings
in the Philippines. Noting that the Prosecutor had, by his Report of 27 December 2006,
rejected the recommendation of the NBI that Fraport and its officers be prosecuted for their
intent to violate the ADL, the Tribunal repeatedly observed that the Report did not give
“any indication of awareness of the actual secret shareholder agreements by which the

management and control prohibited by the ADL was effectively assigned to Fraport.”?”?

169. The Tribunal then stated that it had decided:

“to review the full record of evidence regarding the ADL proceedings which
resulted in the Department of Justice’s Chief State Prosecutor’s Resolution of
27 December 2006 (the “Prosecutor’s Resolution”) dismissing the Bernas and
Balayan complaints. Accordingly ... it requested all of those documents from
the Respondent, and the Claimant supplemented the record with other
documents.”*°

170. The Tribunal continued by citing an extensive extract from the letter from the
Philippines to it dated 11 January 2007 in which the latter submitted that its Department of
Justice had never had the central evidence as to the secret shareholder agreements. The
Tribunal conducted its own review of the Prosecutor’s Report and those documents in his
file which had been produced to and inspected by the Tribunal. It concluded from that
review that, although there were references to Fraport’s control of PIATCO and some

277 Ibid, para. 354.

278 Ibid, para. 356.

°” Ibid, para. 367; see also para. 377
289 Ibid, para. 368.

-67-

shareholder agreements, there was no evidence that the Prosecutor had seen the critical

secret shareholder agreement, namely the Pooling Agreement.”*!

171. The Tribunal then cited from evidence filed by Dr. Stiller in the ADL
Proceedings on 8 December 2006 and 19 January 2007, contrasting it with Dr. Schmidt’s

advice to the Fraport Board of 7 March 1999.28

172. The Tribunal pointed out that the Complainants may have suspected that there
was a conspiracy on the part of Fraport to control PIATCO, but found that they had not had
access to the secret shareholder agreements. Thus the Tribunal observed:

“Not surprisingly, the theories put forward by Bernas and Balayan, without
the benefit of the secret shareholder agreements, could not and did not
persuade the DOJ Prosecutor. As every lawyer knows, to bring an indictment
and initiate a criminal prosecution, one needs evidence and not theories. The

evidence was to be had in the secret shareholder agreements. The ADL
charges were accordingly dismissed.””**

173. Finally, in this section, the Tribunal referred to Fraport’s letter to it of 16
March 2007, but observed that Fraport was not able to point to the Prosecutor having had

access to any of the secret shareholder agreements. ”**

174. Section F of the Award considers the effect of “[t]he Claimant’s Concealment
of the Secret Shareholder Agreements.” The Tribunal rejected the submission that the
issue was not dealt with by the Philippines’ experts on the basis that most of the evidence
in relation to it was produced either immediately before or at the hearing itself. 285 Tt held
that the Philippines could not be estopped from making the point, as Fraport had concealed

the relevant agreements.

175. Asa matter of law, the Prosecutor’s decision could not bind the Tribunal, since

there was not sufficient identity of parties and claim. The proper extent of the Tribunal’s

38! Ibid, paras. 369-373.
28? Ibid, paras, 372-374.
283 Award, para. 377.
284 Thid, para. 381.

285 Thid, para. 383.

- 68 -

jurisdiction was a matter for it and it could not be bound as to that question by the decision

of a municipal legal institution.?*°

176. But in any event, Fraport’s submissions were rejected by the Tribunal as a

matter of fact. The Tribunal considered that, irrespective of the standard of proof which

was applied, “this is a case in which res ipsa loquitur. The relevant facts, all of which are

found in Fraport’s own documents, are incontrovertible.

9287

177. Thus, the Tribunal concluded:

178.

“Fraport knowingly and intentionally circumvented the ADL, by means of
secret shareholder agreements. As a consequence, it cannot claim to have
made an investment “in accordance with law.” ... Because there is no
“investment in accordance with law”, the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione
materiae.” ***

Pausing at this point, the Committee observes that:

(a) The Tribunal’s finding that Fraport had infringed the ADL by means of the
secret shareholder agreements forms an essential part of the ratio of the Award,
since, on the view that the Tribunal took of the matter, it is by virtue of that

finding that the Tribunal decided that it lacked jurisdiction ratione materiae;

(b) The majority of the evidence in relation to that aspect of the matter had not
been produced until immediately before or at the hearing, and accordingly its

significance was not dealt with in the expert reports on Philippines law;?*?

(c) The Tribunal’s analysis of illegality under Philippines law is derived from

factual evidence both produced before it and before the Philippines Prosecutor.

286 Thid, paras. 390-391.

257 Thid, para. 399.

°88 Tbid., para. 401

°® award, para. 383.

- 69 -

Aside from that material, and apart from the text of the ADL itself, the

Tribunal cites only one Department of Justice Opinion as to its construction;?”°

(d) By contrast to the Award, the Prosecutor’s Resolution expressly finds no

breach of the ADL by Fraport or its officers; and

(e) The Tribunal therefore had to find, and did find, both that the Prosecutor
had not had access to the secret shareholder agreements and that, had he had
such access, he would likely have found a breach of the ADL, in order to reject
the significance of the evidence of the Prosecutor’s Resolution for what it
considered to be the central issue before it. This required the Tribunal to
consider the entirety of the file of evidence collected by the Prosecutor and the

terms of his Resolution. 7°

179. All of this material was produced after the oral procedure and the Tribunal did

not permit submissions from the parties on it.

d) The Committee’s Analysis

(i) Construction of Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention

180. The object and purpose of the power to annul an award for “a serious departure
from a fundamental rule of procedure” is to control the integrity of the arbitral

procedure,” a formulation accepted in the present case by both parties 293 With this object

 

in mind, Article 52(1)(d) contains the twin requirements that the rule of procedure must be

fundamental and that the departure from it must be serious.

2 DOJ Opinion No 165 (1984), cited at para. 352 of the Award. In fact this Opinion was not produced to the
Tribunal (as the Philippines accepted before the ad hoc Committee by its letter of 14 September 2009 in response to the
Committee’s query raised in its letter of 10 September 2009). The document described as DOJ Opinion No 165 s. 1984
exhibited at RA-217 (Mendoza Ex 82) is not a copy of the Opinion of 1984, but rather a note purporting to apply the
badges of dummy-ship in the Opinion to the facts of the Fraport case.

*! Arbitrator Cremades in his Dissenting Opinion observed, inter alia, that the Prosecutor had expressly rejected
any test for control under the ADL other than shareholding (para. 16). He opined at para. 23 that the majority “infers a
crime from the Claimant's legal advice, rather than from a careful examination of its actions in light of the text of the
[ADL}.”

© Soufraki v. UAE, Decision on Annulment, 5 June 2007, para. 23.

* Applicant, Transcript, Day 1, 50/ 12-51/ 21; Philippines, Transcript, Day 2, 307/ 17-308/ 3.

181.

-70-

The Convention does not define “a fundamental rule of procedure.” This

ground of annulment was taken with little amendment” from Article 35(c) of the Model

Rules on Arbitral Procedure prepared by the International Law Commission.”

> Tt was

adopted unanimously by the Commission in 1952.7

182.

The importance of this safeguard is explained in the Commentary to the

International Law Commission’s Model Rules:

183.

184.

“Tt is not the fact alone that the compromis may provide that the award is
binding on the parties which makes it so binding. The view of States that
international law makes an arbitration award binding, the circumstance that
the tribunal faithfully has adhered to the fundamental principles of law
governing its proceedings, these are the ultimate sources of the binding
authority of an international arbitral award. States are required to take all
necessary measures to carry into effect an award so rendered.

The converse of the foregoing is that an award rendered in violation of such
principles is not binding upon the parties.” 297

The Commentary describes this provision as affirming:

“the principle that the tribunal must function in the manner of a judicial body
and with respect for the fundamental rules governing the proceedings of any
judicial body. The paragraph is concerned with error in procedendo, not with
error in judicando. It is, further, concerned with serious departures from
fundamental procedural rules rather than minor departures.””*

In support of this latter proposition, the Commentary cites with approval

Carlston’s formulation of the issue:

™ History, Vol. I, pp. 230-2.

295

296

297

Yearbook of the International Law Commission, 1958, Vol. Il, p. 86.
Yearbook of the International Law Commission, 1952, Vol. I, p. 87, para. 61.

International Law Commission “Commentary on the Draft Convention on Arbitral Procedure adopted by the

International Law Commission at its Fifth Session, prepared by the Secretariat of the United Nations” (A/CN.4/92), 105
(emphasis added).

298

Ibid., p. 109.

-71-

“Does the departure constitute a deprivation of a fundamental right so as to
cause the arbitration and the resulting award to lose its judicial character?
Unless its effect is to prejudice materially the interests of a party, the charge
of nullity should not be open to a party.” a

185. The Commentary further confirms that “[t]he right to be heard, including due

opportunity to present proofs and arguments”*”” is one such fundamental rule of procedure.

186. The travaux of the ICSID Convention show a consensus that not all rules of
procedure contained in the ICSID Arbitration Rules would fall under this concept. Rather,
the concept was restricted to the principles of natural justice, including the principles that
both parties must be heard and that there must be adequate opportunity for rebuttal.*°' This

view was also taken by the ad hoc Committee in MINE v. Guinea>”

187. This context to the formulation in Article 52(1)(d) demonstrates that a
“fundamental rule of procedure” is intended to denote procedural rules which may properly

9303 sn
03 insofar as such rules concern

be said to constitute “general principles of law

international arbitral procedure.

(ii) Nullum crimen sine lege/in dubio pro reo

188. In the Committee’s view, the question whether the Tribunal committed “a
serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure” is not to be resolved by applying

the principle nullum crimen sine lege, or the principle in dubio pro reo.

189. The principle nullum crimen sine lege encapsulates a fundamental human
rights principle in the construction of criminal law for the protection of the accused that

“TnJo one shall be held guilty of any penal offence on account of any act or omission which

® Carlston, The Process of International Arbitration (1946), pp. 38-9, cited ibid., pp. 109-110.

5 Tbid., p. 110, with numerous citations of publicists in support.

*! History, Vol. I-1, pp. 271, 423, 480, 517.

3° Maritime International Nominees Establishment (MINE) v. Guinea, Decision on Annulment, 22 December

1989, 4 ICSID Reports, p. 87, para. 5.06.

*? Tn the sense of Article 38(1)(c) Statute of the International Court of Justice.

-72-

did not constitute a penal offence, under national or international law, at the time when it
was committed.”>™

190. The ADL, by its express terms (“An Act to Punish Acts of Evasion of the Laws

on the Nationalization of Certain Rights, Franchises or Privileges”*°°

), has as its purpose to
prohibit certain acts; to define them as criminal; and to proscribe appropriate sanctions for
their commission. It was treated as a criminal statute by the Philippines at the hearing

before the Tribunal and by the Tribunal itself. 306

191. But it would be a distortion of the important function of the principle to
consider it applicable in the present context as a fundamental rule of procedure. The
question for the Tribunal was whether the investment was accepted or admitted in
accordance with Philippines law, such that the Tribunal was endowed with jurisdiction
ratione materiae. If a party wishes to argue that an investment was not admitted in
accordance with host state law, such an argument inherently requires clear and positive
evidence that host state law was not complied with. But the resolution of this question is
not assisted by the invocation of a principle which exists in order to prevent the conviction
of an accused person for a criminal offence. However important it may be, the principle is
not procedural in character. On the contrary, it applies to the determination of the scope of

the substantive law.*””

192. The maxim “in dubio pro reo” also encapsulates an important human rights

protection that “[e]veryone charged with a penal offence has the right to be presumed

™ Article 11(2) Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1947 (“UDHR"); Article 15(1) International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights (“ICCPR”) (16 December 1966, entered into force 23 March 1976). The ICCPR was ratified
by Germany on 17 December 1973 and by the Philippines on 23 October 1986. Such a principle is an essential attribute
of a state conducting itself in accordance with the Rule of Law: Consistency of Certain Danzig Legislative Decrees with
the Constitution of the Free City (Advisory Opinion) PCU Rep Ser A/B, No 65 (1935).

*5 Ex RA-2.

*° Award, para. 399. The new explanation offered by Justice Feliciano as counsel during the annulment hearing,
(Transcript, Day 2, 443/ 14-444/ 9 and 445/ 10-448/ 13) is inconsistent with the record on this point before the Tribunal.

*T It therefore receives treatment as a right separate to the right to a fair trial in the major international human
rights instruments referred to supra n. 305.

-73 -

innocent until proved guilty according to law in a public trial at which he has had all the

Coe hi F 3
guarantees necessary for his defence. 08

193. But such a principle cannot be applied in the context of international arbitral
proceedings instituted by an investor against a state. Indeed, the application of such a
presumption could itself, in the context of ICSID proceedings, amount to a failure of due
process since it may unbalance the essential equality between the parties. The principle in
dubio has proper application as a right of the defence in criminal proceedings, because it
counterbalances the coercive power of the state. It cannot, however, be transposed into the
context of international arbitral proceedings because to do so would be inconsistent with

the principle of equality of the parties.

194. The Committee is fortified in reaching this view by the fact that, despite very
extensive citation of jurisprudence and doctrine in these annulment proceedings, it was not
referred to any arbitral decision in which either nullum crimen or in dubio had been held by
the tribunal to be applicable as a fundamental rule applicable to the procedure before it.
Cases in which an international tribunal has been mandated by the parties to investigate
whether a national court has met the requisite standards of international law, whether by
virtue of a human rights treaty or the customary international law standard of denial of
justice, raise an entirely different issue.*? Nor is reference to the principles applicable to
the procedure of international criminal tribunals apposite, since such tribunals must, in

view of their criminal function, respect the rights of the accused.

195. In the end, Fraport accepted in its written pleadings that the essential interest
protected by the in dubio principle in the context of arbitral proceedings was the right to be

heard. Thus, Professor Cassese states in his second Opinion that:

*8 Article 11(1) UDHR, supra n. 305; see also Article 14(2) ICCPR, supra n. 305: “Everyone charged with a
criminal offence shall have the right to be presumed innocent until proved guilty according to law.”

* As in the case of the decisions of international tribunals cited in Cassese 1, paras. 12-15 and Cassese 2, paras.
13-25. Mondev Int'l Ltd v. United States of America (Award) (2002), 6 ICSID Reports, p. 181, in which the principle of
in dubio was considered but not applied, was a case of alleged denial of justice by a national court allegedly giving rise to
an investment treaty claim of failure to accord fair and equitable treatment, and is not, therefore, an exception to this
point. Nor is the case of Orr v. Norway, supra n. 169, of assistance, as that case concerned the particular issue of the
relevance of an acquittal in a criminal case for determination of a civil claim in the same proceedings.

-74-

“t]he notion of ‘presumption of innocence’ is intended to convey the idea that
nobody can be held to be responsible for any misconduct, whether civil (a
tort) or criminal (a penal offence), without his first having been heard....”

196. Thus, the critical question for the Committee to resolve is whether Fraport’s

right to be heard was respected by the Tribunal.

(iti) The content of the right to be heard

197. The requirement that the parties be heard is undoubtedly accepted as a
fundamental rule of procedure, a serious failure of which could merit annulment. It was
expressly referred to as an example of such a rule by the framers of the ICSID Convention

and was accepted as such by both parties to the present annulment proceeding.

198. The right to be heard has been recognised as a fundamental rule of procedure
applicable to international arbitral proceedings generally. It was for that reason that the
Annulment Committee in MINE v. Guinea stated that:

“a clear example of such a fundamental rule is to be found in Article 18 of the
UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration which
provides:

The parties shall be treated with equality and each party shall be given full
opportunity of presenting his case.” *!!

199. Thus Article 34(2)(a)(ii) of the UNCITRAL Model Law further provides that
one ground on which an award may be annulled is if the applicant “was otherwise unable
to present his case.” This provision is in turn closely modeled on Article V(1)(b) of the
1958 New York Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral
Awards, which likewise provides that an award may be denied recognition if the party
against whom the award was rendered “was otherwise unable to present his case.”

9312

200. The right to present one’s case, or “principe de la contradiction, in arbitral

proceedings includes the right of each party to make submissions on evidence presented by

5 Cassese 2, para. 69.

5"! Supra n. 303.

-75-

its opponent.*!? Tf an arbitral tribunal fails to accord such a right, then its award will be

subject to annulment.*!* One example of this principle being applied in the international
commercial arbitration context is where the arbitral tribunal has permitted one of the
parties to adduce additional documentary evidence after the oral hearing, without giving

the other party the opportunity to comment on it

201. The same principle also applies in proceedings before Public International Law

courts and tribunals:

“[W]henever there is such new evidence, alteration of the legal basis of the
claim, or amendment of the original submission, the other party is always
assured of an opportunity to reply thereto, or comment thereon.” *!°

202. The right to present one’s case is also accepted as an essential element of the
requirement to afford a fair hearing accorded in the principal human rights instruments.*!”
This principle requires both equality of arms and the proper participation of the contending
parties in the procedure, these being separate but related fundamental elements of a fair
trial. The principle will require the tribunal to afford both parties the opportunity to make
submissions where new evidence is received and considered by the tribunal to be relevant
to its final deliberations.*"* It is no answer to a failure to accord such a right that both

parties were equally disadvantaged.*"°

312

? Gaillard & Savage (eds), Fouchard, Gaillard, Goldman on International Commercial Arbitration (1999), pp.
947-948, para. 1638; Poudret & Besson Comparative Law of International Commercial Arbitration (2 ed, trans. Berti &
Ponti, 2007) paras. 546-554.

58 Born, International Arbitration (2009), pp. 2582-3.
*4 Thid. and the numerous authorities there cited.

is

See, e.g., Rice Trading (Guyana) Lid v. Nidera Handelscompagnie BV (Hague Court of Appeal) (28 April
1998) (1998) XXIII Ybk Comm Arb, p. 731

56 Cheng General Principles of Law as Applied by International Courts and Tribunals (1952), p. 295, citing inter
alia Legal Status of Eastern Greenland Case (Denmark v. Norway) (1933) PCU Rep, Ser A/B No 53, pp. 25-6; Chorzéw
Factory Case (Germany v. Poland) (1928) PCH Rep, Ser A No 17, p. 7, where the Permanent Court afforded a party a
further opportunity to be heard on new evidence or submissions submitted by its opposing party. Specific recognition of
this principle in relation to submissions made, or evidence produced, after the closure of written and oral proceedings, is
given in the Rules of Court of the International Court of Justice, Articles 56 and 72.

 

 

57 Article 10 UDHR, supra n. 305; Article 14 ICCPR, supra n. 305; Article 6 European Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“ECHR”) (signed 4 November 1950, entered into force 3
September 1953).

518 Feldbrugge Case (29 May 1986) ECHR Ser A, No 99, 8 EHRR 425, para. 44.
319
Ibid.

- 76 -

203. The right to be heard has found specific application in the only ICSID
annulment decision so far to annul an Award under Article 52(1)(d).2° In that case, the
ICSID Arbitration Rules expressly required that the decision of the Tribunal in question, a
request for rectification, be taken only after an opportunity had been given to the other
party to file observations on the request: ICSID Arbitration Rule 49(3). But the ad hoc
Committee was in no doubt that such a requirement was in any event a fundamental rule,

oy . 3
the breach of which was serious!

204. It is frequently observed in the context of ICSID annulment proceedings that a
party may lose its right to object on this ground if it raised no such objection before the
arbitral tribunal itself.” Such decisions have relied upon what is now ICSID Arbitration

Rule 27, which provides:

“A party which knows or should have known that a provision of the
Administrative and Financial Regulations, of these Rules, of any other rules or
agreement applicable to the proceeding, or of an order of the Tribunal has not
been complied with and which fails to state promptly its objections thereto,
shall be deemed — subject to Article 45 of the Convention — to have waived its
right to object.”

205. In the context of the ordinary operation of ICSID arbitration proceedings in
accordance with the particular arbitration rules applicable to the proceedings, this provision
makes sound practical sense. It supports the validity of the procedure, by ensuring that

steps taken by the tribunal stand unless one of the parties objects.*75

206. In the context of an application for annulment on the grounds of serious
departure from a fundamental rule of procedure under Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID

Convention, however, Rule 27 gives effect to a more fundamental principle. That is: a

*° Amco Asia v. Indonesia I, Decision on Annulment, 3 December 1992, 9 ICSID Reports, pp. 55-56, paras.
9.05-9.10,

“1 Thid., paras. 9.08-9.10.
* See, e.g., Kléckner I, supra n. 53, p. 128, para. 88.
*3 Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2009), 920-1.

-77-

party forfeits its right to seek annulment under Article 52(1)(d) if it has failed promptly to

raise its objection to the tribunal’s procedure, upon becoming aware of it.

207. However, if such a principle is to be invoked so as to preclude a party from its
right to seek annulment for an otherwise serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure by the tribunal, the objecting party must know of the conduct of the tribunal and
have a reasonable opportunity to raise its objection. This point is, in the view of the
Committee, an elementary one, since a party cannot be treated as having waived an
objection to a course of action of which it was unaware. As a leading text on international
arbitration puts it:

“[A] breach of due process will only justify an action to set aside or prevent

enforcement of an award on condition that the party relying on the breach
protested as soon as it became aware of it.” 3

208. So, too, Schreuer observes in his Commentary on the ICSID Convention:

“Some violations of procedural principles will be evident to the affected party
in the proceeding before the tribunal. Others may become visible only after the
award has become available. A party that is aware of a violation of proper
procedure must react immediately by stating its objection and by demanding
compliance.” 325

(iv) The issue raised by the Tribunal’s treatment of new evidence on the

ADL

209. In the Committee’s view, there can be no concern as to the Tribunal’s process
up to and including receipt of the Prosecutor’s Resolution on 5 January 2007. Nor was the
contrary suggested by Fraport in its Annulment Application. The issue of the wider
construction of Section 2-A of the ADL was raised with the parties by the Tribunal during
the hearing.*”° It was addressed by both parties, with specific reference to the Pooling

*% Gaillard & Savage, supra, n. 313, p. 951, para. 1643, emphasis added.

* Supra n. 44, pp. 994-5, para. 334, emphasis added.

*6 Tribunal: Hearing Transcript (Ex CA-26) Day 9, 2321/ 22-2331/ 7; Annulment: Transcript, Day 2, 525/ 5—
527/20.

-78 -

Agreement, in their post-hearing briefs.*?”. The limits imposed by the Tribunal on post-
hearing briefs and communications were reasonable. A full opportunity to present one’s
case does not preclude a tribunal from setting reasonable limits on the timing and scale of
both parties’ submissions, provided that, in so doing, it affords the parties equality of
treatment. The Committee well understands the practical difficulties faced by arbitral
tribunals in achieving finality of the record, especially in the context of heavily-contested

arbitral proceedings.

210. The position which had been reached on post-hearing briefs was that the
Philippines specifically alleged that Fraport had knowingly implemented a scheme to
evade the ADL by exercising management and control over PIATCO.**® The Philippines
stated that breaches of the ADL are serious and “may give rise to potential criminal
penalties.”*”° But it had conceded at the hearing that it had not commenced a criminal
investigation for breach of the ADL, the only such investigation being as a result of a

private complaint.*”

211. Against this background, the receipt of the Prosecutor’s Resolution was, on any
view, a highly material development in relation to the issue of Philippine law which the

Tribunal ultimately decided was dispositive of the case. That issue was whether “an actual

 

demonstration of managerial control” was sufficient to establish a violation of Section 2-A

of the ADL, so that “the quantum of equity in the company is irrelevant.”**!

212. For that reason, the Philippines was right to draw it to the attention of the
Tribunal, since otherwise the Tribunal could have reached a view on the construction of
the ADL without the benefit of the view of the Philippine Prosecutor on the very question
at issue.

*7 Ex RA-72-RA-76.

8 Ex RA-73, paras. 6-38.

°° Thid., para. 38.

5 Hearing Transcript (Ex CA-26) Day 3, 626/ 10-627/ 22.
1 Award, para. 354.

213.

-79 -

One of the allegations made by the private Complainants in the criminal

complaint in the Philippines was that Fraport exerted control over PIATCO not simply

through an impermissible level of shareholding, but also because it met the various

“badges of dummy status” covered by DOJ Opinion Nos 141 and 165,” including “3.

[t]hat the foreign investors, while being minority shareholders, manage the company.

99333

The Complainants alleged that:

214.

141, that:

“Using such an ostensible legal set-up, respondent Fraport was able to control
and in fact controls the financial, technical and operational aspects of
respondent PIATCO through respondents PTH, PTI and PAGS in
circumvention and gross violation of the Anti-Dummy Law.” 334

Balayan’s Reply-Affidavit specifically alleged, relying on DOJ Opinion No

“[T]he following terms and conditions of an agreement are indicative of a
dummy relationship between the foreign investors and the Filipino
stockholders: (i) nominees of the Filipino shareholders may be elected only to
positions with ceremonial functions; (ii) giving the foreign investor the right
to select the management personnel/staff of the corporation; and (iii)
providing that during the term of the agreement, the foreign investor will
exercise sole discretion and judgment in arriving at decisions for the best
interest of the corporation. According to the DOJ, the effect of these
provisions (together with others dealing with the first two indicators) was to
allow the foreigner to dominate areas of management, administration and
control and operation of the corporation to an extent not proportionate to, and
much more than called for by its forty percent (40%) equity.” 335

Relying on certain internal Fraport documents, the Complainants alleged that this criterion

wee . . 33
was infringed in this case.**°

5® Balayan Complaint-Affidavit, Ex RA-127, paras. 13-20.

333

Ibid., para. 14.

 Thid., 21.2.

335

Ex RA-176, para. 15. These paragraphs were omitted from the copy originally produced to the Tribunal and

exhibited at Ex RA-50. Upon the specific request of the Tribunal, they were produced by the Philippines under cover of
their letter of 14 March 2007 as document Nos ROP-T-01641 to ROP-T-01646, and are exhibited in the Annulment
record at Ex RA-176.

°° Tbid., paras. 16.8-17.

- 80-

215. The Complaint was dismissed outright by the Prosecutor in his Resolution.
The Prosecutor decided that the Control Test enacted in the Foreign Investment Law
(based solely on the percentage of equity investment) was the controlling test for
determining nationality, and that this test had not been infringed by Fraport by the structure
of its shareholding. He specifically found that the badges of dummy status listed in DOJ

Opinion Nos 141 and 165 (including criterion (3)) were no longer applicable:

“[T]his Office finds, and so holds, that these badges shall not be controlling in
the present case, in view of the clear and unequivocal provisions of the
Foreign Investment Act of 1991. At the time, no specific rule was established
in determining the nationality, hence the need to enumerate “badges” in the
absence of unequivocal rule on the matter. Considering, however, that the
Foreign Investments Act has expressly provided for the Control Test, those
badges are inconclusive and inapplicable to the present case.

In fine, these badges can no longer be used in this case because the Foreign
Investment Act already provided that the Control Test shall be used in
determining the nationality of the corporation.” **7

216. This finding was not set aside by the Prosecutor in his Resolution granting the
Motion for Reconsideration.** On the contrary, the Prosecutor specifically reconfirmed
the earlier finding in relation as to the irrelevance of the DOJ Opinions which predated the

Foreign Investment Act.” He held that the Complainants:

“failed to consider that said DOJ Opinion No. 165 was issued way before the
DOJ, the SEC and RA No. 7042 [the Foreign Investment Act] decided to do
away with the strict application and computation of the ‘Grandfather Rule’.
The cited indicators or badges of dummy status now find no application vis-a-
vis the categorical and clear cut rule laid down by the DOJ, the SEC and RA
No. 7042 for determining the citizenship of corporations with foreign equity.

As intimated by this Honourable Office, the respondents in this case had a
right to rely o[n] the provisions of RA No. 7042 and the application of the
DOJ and SEC of the control test in determining corporate nationality.” 340

557 Prosecutor’s Resolution (27 December 2006), Ex RA-36, pp. 12-13.
338 DOJ Resolution (15 March 2007), Ex RA-39.

*® Ibid, p. 10.

“9 Thid, pp. 10-11.

-81-

The Prosecutor based his grant of reconsideration solely on the need to investigate the

actual extent of the shareholding.

217. Nevertheless, as detailed in Section C above, the Tribunal held in its Award
that the exercise of managerial control was sufficient.**' It dismissed the relevance of the
Prosecutor’s Resolution on the basis that there was no evidence of fact to suggest that the

® Tt held that the omission of

Prosecutor was aware of the secret shareholder agreements.
these agreements from the record before the Prosecutor had been dispositive of the

dismissal of the criminal complaint.*

e) Conclusions on the Right to Be Heard Before the Arbitral Tribunal

218. In the Committee’s view, the Tribunal’s treatment of the parties following
receipt of the Prosecutor’s Resolution did constitute a serious departure from the
fundamental rule of procedure entitling the parties to be heard. This was so in respect of
the Tribunal’s consideration of both (i) the factual record before the Philippine Prosecutor;
and (ii) the implications of the Prosecutor’s Resolution for the issue of Philippine law
before the Arbitral Tribunal as to the construction of Section 2-A of the ADL. It is

necessary to explain the Committee’s reasons on each of these points in turn.
@ As to the factual record before the Philippine Prosecutor

219. The first respect in which the Tribunal failed to accord the parties the right to
be heard was as to the factual record of material produced to the Prosecutor. The Tribunal
justified its decision not to apply the Prosecutor’s Resolution on the ground that there was
no evidence to suggest that the Prosecutor had had available to him the Pooling
Agreement, which the Tribunal regarded as the critical piece of evidence establishing
breach of the ADL. Quite apart from the fact that this evidence would only be relevant to

the extent that, as a matter of Philippine law, control exercised in this manner could

4 Supra, para. 167, citing Award paras. 354 & 356.
*® Supra, para. 172, citing Award para. 377.

*8 Thid.

- 82-

constitute a breach, the Committee is bound to regard the Tribunal’s approach to the

determination of this question of fact as a serious departure from the right to be heard.

220. Three dates are important regarding Fraport’s denial of an opportunity to
address this new material, since they provide for the progressive closure of the
proceedings.** First, on 25 October 2006, the Tribunal declared the proceedings closed in
accordance with Article 38 of the ICSID Rules, however reserving the possibility to the
Philippines to inform Fraport and the Tribunal of the status of the expropriation
proceedings in the Philippines. Paragraph 9 of Procedural Order N° 24 of 18 July 2006,
which ordered the Respondent to update the Tribunal and the Claimant on all
developments in the expropriation action, thus remained in effect notwithstanding the
closing of the proceedings. *“° Second, on 23 April 2007, the Tribunal directed the parties
not to send any further letter to the Tribunal. It added: “This also applies to any further
update by the Respondent in respect of the ongoing expropriation proceedings in the
Philippines.”*° Third, the Tribunal finally on 13 June 2007 informed the parties that it “is
of the view that the presentation of their case by both parties is completed and accordingly,

pursuant to Arbitration Rule 38, the proceeding is now closed in its entirety.” *47

221. It was the Philippines that took the initiative to inform the Tribunal on 5
January 2007 about the Prosecutor’s Resolution of 27 December 2006, dismissing the
ADL Criminal Complaint against PIATCO and Fraport officials, an issue which was
otherwise covered by the closing order of 25 October 2006. Fraport immediately replied
on 8 January 2007 to stress the Philippines had misrepresented the factual record available
to the DOJ in rendering its dismissal and contended that the dismissal was not based on
two documents only, i.e., Fraport’s request for ICSID arbitration and the Philippine Senate

Blue Ribbon Committee's Report on the Terminal 3 Project, as claimed by the Philippines.

“4 Supra, para. 163.
“S Award, para. 61.
M6 Supra, para. 162.

“7 Award, para. 74.

- 83 -

222. Without reopening the proceedings, the Tribunal then decided to complete the
evidentiary record of material produced to the Prosecutor (i) by asking Fraport on 9
January to submit the documents referred to in its letter of 8 January; (ii) by directing the
Philippines to produce the entire evidentiary record before the Philippine Prosecutor on 14
February; and (iii) by inviting Fraport to produce copies of additional documents referred

to in its letter of 26 March 2007.

223. This further production of documents added over 1900 pages of documents to
the file in the arbitration. But it did not result (as the Tribunal had stated in its letter of 14
February was its objective) in any final assurance as to the completeness of the evidentiary
record before the Prosecutor. As set out above, the Philippines had originally informed the
Tribunal that the Prosecutor’s Resolution had been based on only two documents.** On
Fraport informing the Tribunal in its letter of 8 January 2007 that this was not the case, the
Philippines produced on 14 March 2007 some 1900 pages of documents from the
Prosecutor’s file. When Fraport replied on 26 March 2007 that the record was still
incomplete, the response of the Philippines on 30 March 2007 was to produce yet further
documents. When doing so it stated the Prosecutor’s Office’s “recordkeeping can be
imperfect” and that “Respondent will supplement its production if any additional

. 993
responsive documents are located. 49

224. Despite its indication that it was only seeking to complete the evidentiary
record, the Tribunal proceeded to make extensive use in its Award of the documents which
had been produced in the Prosecutor’s investigation. This included drawing an inference
from a statement given before the Prosecutor as to the credibility of a witness (Dr. Stiller,

> 5 35
Fraport’s transaction counsel). 0

225. The Tribunal also found that the secret shareholder agreements were not in the

Prosecutor’s file.**! In so doing, it relied upon the Philippines’ assertion in its letter of 11

“8 Letter dated 5 January 2007, Ex CA-34.
“Ex CA-41.

55 Award, paras. 373-374.

*5! Award, para. 381.

- 84-

January 2007 that “[t]hese critical documents were unavailable to the DOJ”? and on the
failure of Fraport to be able to point specifically to disclosure of the relevant document in
its letter of 16 March 2007.° But Fraport had consistently pointed out it did not have a
full record of the documents disclosed to the Prosecutor,>** and thus cannot be taken to
have conceded this point. Moreover, the Philippines had in effect conceded that the record
was incomplete by its letter of 30 March 2007. Nevertheless, the Tribunal made no
specific request to either party for submissions as to the adequacy of the disclosure of
documents from the Prosecutor’s file. Nor did it give any indication as to the importance
which it attached to establishing whether the Prosecutor had had access to the secret

shareholder agreements.

226. The Tribunal then proceeded to draw the negative inference that the
Prosecutor’s decision may well have been different had he been in possession of the

Pooling Agreement.**°

227. In view of the fact that the information as to what documents were in the
possession of the Prosecutor had been shown to be unreliable, the Tribunal could not
properly, in the Committee’s view, have made such a determination, without hearing both
parties on the adequacy and effect of the record before the Prosecutor and considering such
further evidentiary enquiries or proceedings as may have been necessary in light of those

submissions.

228. Despite this, the Tribunal had pre-emptively, and before it had even received

the additional factual material, directed by letter dated 14 February 2007 that “the Tribunal
does not wish to receive any submissions with respect to this material from either party.”>*°

229. The Tribunal nonetheless continued to investigate the factual record before the

Philippine Prosecutor by giving directions to the parties in this respect on 26 March

52 Award, para. 368.
553 Award, para. 381.
54 Supra para. 154.

*55 Award, para. 377.

6 Ex CA-38.

- 85 -

2007,°*" before declaring a total closure of the proceedings on all counts on 13 June 2007.
Throughout this period, as stated in its letter of 14 February 2007, the Tribunal

“continue[d] its deliberations.”*°*

230. In the Committee’s view, the Tribunal’s direction of 14 February was
incompatible with the fundamental obligation on the Tribunal to permit both parties to
present their case in relation to the new material. Given the central importance which the
proper construction of the ADL came to play in the Tribunal’s analysis, the Prosecutor’s
Resolution on the evidence before him had a particular significance. The Tribunal ought
not to have proceeded to analyse and consider this evidence itself in its deliberations
without having afforded the parties the opportunity to make submissions on it, and availed

itself of the benefit of those submissions.

231. In sucha confused situation, where a factual investigation was conducted on an
issue which proved determinative in the outcome of the case, while the deliberative process
had already been underway for some months, the Committee considers that the Tribunal
ought not to have continued its deliberations. Rather, it ought to have re-opened the
proceedings, pursuant to its powers under ICSID Rule 38(2), which provides:

“Exceptionally, the Tribunal may, before the award has been rendered, reopen
the proceedings on the ground that new evidence is forthcoming of such a

nature as to constitute a decisive factor, or that there is a vital need for
clarification on certain specific points.”

232. However, and on the contrary, the Tribunal expressly decided on 14 February
2007 that its request “was not a decision by the Tribunal to reopen the proceeding under
ICSID Arbitration Rule 38.”°°° Whilst indicating in the same letter that it would make a
determination as to whether it required additional clarification from the parties after
considering the requested documents, the Tribunal in fact never made such a
determination, or, if it did, it did not communicate it to the parties. Rather, it merely

7 Ex RA-60.
8 Ex RA-S3.

*? Ex CA-38.

- 86 -

peremptorily foreclosed further communications from the parties, without indicating the

issues to which it considered the new material might relate.

233. In view of the fact that the Tribunal had both closed the proceedings and had
expressly stated that it would not receive submissions from either party on the new
material, the Committee does not consider that Fraport has forfeited its right to object in
these annulment proceedings to the Tribunal’s failure to observe this fundamental rule of
procedure. Fraport could only have forfeited its right to complain in the annulment
proceeding on the ground of Article 52(1)(d) if it had known the significance that the
Tribunal would draw out of this investigation in the factual record of the Prosecutor in the

deliberations phase, which obviously it could not do before reading the award.

234. A party can only waive an objection if it is reasonably aware of the decision of
the tribunal to which it may wish to object. In the present case, the Tribunal had stated that
it “merely seeks to complete the evidentiary record.”> It gave no indication of the use to
which it may put the new material. Moreover, it stated that it would “determine whether it

361 after it had considered the new

requires additional clarification from the Parties
material, but that, in the meantime, the proceedings were not reopened under Rule 38 as
they should have in order to provide the parties an opportunity to explain themselves in an
adversarial manner on the factual record of the Prosecutor. The Tribunal never
communicated its determination on the question whether it required additional clarification
from the parties. Accordingly, there was no determination to which the parties could either
have acquiesced or objected. On the contrary, the Tribunal repeatedly instructed the

parties not to make submissions to it. In the circumstances, Fraport cannot be criticised for

having failed to make its objection known. It was prevented from taking that very course.

*© Letter from Tribunal dated 14 February 2007, Ex CA-38.
°°! Thid.

-87-

(ii) As to the implications of the Prosecutor’s Resolution on Section 2-A of

the ADL

235. Failure to reopen the proceedings following receipt of the Prosecutor’s
Resolution and documents from his file also had consequences with regard to the
conclusions in the Award on the Respondent’s objection to the jurisdiction ratione
materiae of the Tribunal based on an alleged violation of the ADL. This was the issue
which came to form the ratio of the Tribunal’s Award. In the Committee’s view, the
Tribunal’s failure to permit the parties to make fresh submissions to it in the light of
important new material casting doubt on the whole basis on which the Tribunal was

proceeding underscores the serious nature of the departure from the right to be heard.

236. In light of the express requirements of the BIT, the Tribunal decided that

Philippine law, as the “laws and regulations of [a] Contracting State” had to be applied as

362

part of its enquiry into whether it had jurisdiction ratione materiae.”~ Both international

3

law and Philippine law are thus relevant to this enquiry.*° So far as Philippine law was
concerned, the Tribunal identified ADL as the specific law in question. To the extent of its
applicability, the Tribunal (whilst retaining its independent powers of assessment of the
evidence and decision) should give particular consideration to municipal decisions as to the
construction of the ADL in determining how it would be applied within the municipal legal
system.** This was particularly important in the present case as it is recognised that the
Tribunal had not been chosen for its knowledge of Philippine law. It follows that the right
of the parties to be heard importantly includes an opportunity to be heard on the meaning
and effect of any such relevant municipal decisions.**

*© Award, paras. 335-343.

* See MTD Equity Sdn Bhd (‘MTD’) v. Chile, Decision on Annulment, 21 March 2007, 13 ICSID Reports, pp
521-522, para. 72

3 Serbian Loans Case (France v. Serbia) (1929) PCU Ser A, No 20, p. 46; Brazilian Loans Case (France v.
Brazil) (1929) PCI Ser A, No 21, p. 124.

* Accord: Recommendations 8 & 10-11, ILA Committee on International Commercial Arbitration Final Report

“Ascertaining the Contents of the Applicable Law in Intemational Commercial Arbitration” (2008) 73 ILA Conf. Rep.
pp. 850, 881-2.

- 88 -

 

237. This

 

issue as to violation of Section 2-A of the ADL was, as the Tribunal itself
accepted, “essentially argued in post-hearing submissions because most of the documents
that established it were produced either immediately before the hearing on jurisdiction and
liability or, at the President’s insistence, during the hearing itself.”*°° The consequence of
this was that the matter was not considered in any detail in the expert reports as to

Philippine Law filed in the proceedings.**”

238. Nor was further authority as to the issue of construction which had arisen on

the application of Section 2-A cited by the parties in their post-hearing briefs.°%

239. In the result, therefore, as was accepted by the Philippines during the oral

369

hearing of these annulment proceedings,” the evidence as to the construction of Section

2-A as a matter of Philippine law, other than contemporaneous factual documents,
available to the Tribunal to assist it in its determination of the dispositive issue was limited

to:

(a) The text of the ADL itself;

(b) Reference to two Department of Justice Opinions (Nos 141 and 165), the
texts of which (as was accepted by the Philippines before the Committee) were

not produced to the Tribunal;>” and

(c) The decision of the Supreme Court in Luzon v. Anti-Dummy Board,"

which is concerned with the express provisions of the ADL relating to the

* Award, para. 383.

°7 The Legal Opinion of Professor Mendoza dated 18 December 2004 (Ex RA-79) and filed on behalf of the
Philippines with its Counter-Memorial contains references to the ADL in three paragraphs (129-131), which cite DOJ
Opinion No 165 without elaboration.

*8 Ex RA-72-RA-76.
* Transcript, Day 3, 787/ 15-788/ 3

*” White & Case letter 14 September 2009. The document described as DOJ Opinion No 165 s. 1984 exhibited at

RA-217 (Mendoza Ex 82) is not a copy of the Opinion of 1984, but rather a note purporting to apply the badges of
dummy-ship in the Opinion to the facts of the Fraport case.

57 (18 August 1972) Ex RA-13.

- 89 -

employment of aliens and does not decide the point at issue in the instant

case.>”

240. In arriving at its construction of the ADL in Section D of the Award, apart
from its reference to the contemporaneous factual record, the Tribunal only cites the text of

the ADL itself*”* and to DOJ Opinion No 165.°"4

241. Against this background, the Prosecutor’s Resolution, and the subsequent
Resolution on Reconsideration of 15 March 2007, which were submitted by the Philippines
on 5 January and 19 March 2007, after the closure of the proceedings by the Tribunal on
25 October 2006, provide for the first time specific evidence of Philippine law on the
relevant issue. Both resolutions state in express terms, in response to a specific complaint
that Fraport’s exercise of management control over PIATCO constituted a breach of the

ADL, that this test was no longer applicable to determine breach.

242. This is not to say that the Prosecutor’s Resolution was necessarily dispositive
of the point for the purpose of the Tribunal’s determination of its jurisdiction. On the
contrary, the decisions of municipal authorities seized of cases against an alien which arise
directly out of the same set of facts may need to be scrutinised very carefully by an
international tribunal. The tribunal would need to satisfy itself, inter alia, as to the
impartiality of the relevant decision-maker, in view of the pendency of proceedings against
the state of which that decision-maker is an organ. The tribunal retains the ultimate power

to judge the probative value of evidence placed before it.

243. However, in the context of the manner in which the issue arose in the instant
case, the Prosecutor’s Resolution was of singular significance. In the first place, one of the

issues raised by the complainants was the very issue of construction of the law which

5? After the hearing, and in response to the Committee’s enquiry in relation to the record before the Tribunal

concerning the evidence of Philippine law, the Philippines supplied the Committee with a complete list of the legal
authorities pertaining to Philippine nationality laws and the ADL in the record of the underlying arbitration: Letter dated
14 September 2009, supra n. 231. The Committee has considered all of those to the extent that they are either recited in
the Award or exhibited in the Annulment Proceeding. None of them add materially to the specific issue relating to the
effect of managerial control under Section 2-A of the ADL.

* Award, para. 349.
* Thid., para. 352

- 90 -

troubled the Tribunal. Secondly, the Prosecutor was the very official charged with
responsibility for administration of the ADL. Thirdly, his decision, being adverse to the
interests of the state, appeared to have been reached independently. Fourthly, the decision
specifically rejected the applicability of the one legal authority which had been cited as
pertaining to the issue of managerial control (DOJ Opinion No 165).  Fifthly, the
Prosecutor decided that a test of managerial control was not applicable to determine

Fraport’s liability under the ADL.

244. The consequence is that Fraport should, as it has submitted before this
Committee, have been accorded an opportunity to make submissions before the Tribunal,

as to the legal effect of the Prosecutor’s Resolution, including that:

(a) The Philippines was estopped from contending for a construction of the

ADL contrary to that adopted by its responsible official; or alternatively,

(b) the Tribunal should have given effect to the Prosecutor’s Resolution on
the point, bearing in mind the obligation upon the Tribunal to apply
municipal law as it would be applied in the Philippines, taking into account

the evidence of the relevant authorities as to the proper construction of that

law”

245. The consequence is that, at least to the extent that the Tribunal determined to
base the ratio of its decision on its construction of Section 2-A of the ADL, and to depart
from the decision on its construction taken by the Prosecutor, it ought to have provided a
further opportunity to the parties to submit evidence on Philippine law and to make
submissions thereon relative to this specific question. Its failure to do so underscores the

serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.

246. The departure was one which materially prejudiced Fraport, in view of the
Tribunal’s adverse findings both as to the question of fact relating to the record before the

Prosecutor and as to the relevance of the Prosecutor’s Resolution for the question of law

*® Serbian Loans Case, supra n. 365, p. 46; Brazilian Loans Case, supra n. 365, p. 124.

-91-

concerning the construction of the ADL (irrespective of what the proper construction of
that law might finally be). Each of these related specifically to evidence which had been
tendered to the Tribunal after its closure of the proceedings. Each was an essential step in
the Tribunal’s reasoning, leading to the decision in its Award to accept the Philippines’

objection to ICSID jurisdiction and to dismiss Fraport’s claim.*”°

247. Accordingly, for all of the reasons set out in Part IV B of this Decision, the

Award must be annulled in its entirety.

C. Failure to State the Reasons
a) Introduction

248. The third ground for annulment of the Award raised by Fraport is “that the
award has failed to state the reasons on which it is based”: Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID
Convention. The ad hoc Committee in CDC v. Seychelles observed:

“Annulment under Article 52(1)(e) is permissible where a tribunal fails to
state the reasons on which its award is based. This ground for annulment has
been a cause of great concern to commentators since, unlike (b) and (d), it
does not include any limiting terms such as ‘manifest’, ‘serious’ or
‘fundamental’. Early on, ad hoc Committees interpreted this clause in such a
way that it appeared to allow inquiry into the sufficiency or substance of the
reasons offered.”*”

249. The ground for annulment under Article 52(1)(e) relates to the requirement
expressed in Article 48(3) of the Washington Convention that “[t]he award shall deal with
every question submitted to the Tribunal, and shall state the reasons upon which it is
based.” The rationale for a reasoned award as required by Article 48(3) of the Washington

Convention is that the parties will want to assure themselves that the Tribunal properly

understood the questions before it as stated by the ad hoc Committee in MINE:
“The Committee is of the opinion that the requirement that an award has to be

motivated implies that it must enable the reader to follow the reasoning of the
Tribunal on points of fact and law. It implies that, and only that. [...] In the

576 Supra para. 30; Award dispositif, para. 406.
57 CDC v. Seychelles, Decision on Annulment, 29 June 2005, 11 ICSID Reports, p. 259, para. 66.

-92-

Committee's view, the requirement to state reasons is satisfied as long as the
award enables one to follow how the tribunal proceeded from Point A. to
Point B. and eventually to its conclusion, even if it made an error of fact or of
law. This minimum requirement is in particular not satisfied by either

contradictory or frivolous reasons.”*”*

250. Reasons are important to the legitimacy of the decision. The obligation to give
a reasoned award is a guarantee that the Tribunal has not decided in an arbitrary manner.
The parties will want to assure themselves as to how the Tribunal reached its conclusions
and whether such conclusions can be challenged before an ad hoc committee. Such a
challenge, nevertheless, can only take place in the very limited setting of Article 52 of the
ICSID Convention of reviewing the legality of the award without retrial of the factual and

legal issues dealt with by the tribunal.

b) Parties’ Submissions

251. First, Fraport contends that the Tribunal failed to give reasons for its finding
that it violated the ADL.*” It submits that there are no reasons with regard to its alleged
breach as principal or accessory. The fact that the parties are unclear about the meaning of
the reasons set forth in paragraph 356 of the Award, according to which “[t]he Tribunal
construes this part of the ADL as covering intervention by shareholders, if that is the actual
means of intervening in ‘the management, operation, administration or control’ of
PIATCO,” shows that the Award fails to give an understandable decision.*®° There cannot
be violation by an accessory in the absence of a violation by a principal and there was no
finding of a violation by PIATCO as a principal.**! The Tribunal would have to find with
regard to the criminal act of the principal that a company holding a reserved interest such
as a public utility concession permitted or allowed a non-Philippine party to intervene in

the management, operation, administration or control of the company holding the reserved

578 Maritime International Nominees Establishment (MINE) v. Guinea, Decision on Annulment, 22 December
1989, ICSID Reports, p. 88, paras. 5.08-5.09.

* Memorial, paras. 191-193, Transcript, Day 3, 632.

5° Reply, paras. 168-171.

8! Thid., paras. 171, 174, Transcript, Day 1, 155.

- 93 -

interest, and that the manner of intervention, which the company holding the interest
permitted, was “as an officer, employee or laborer therein with or without remuneration
except technical personnel whose employment may be specifically authorized by the
Secretary of Justice.” With regard to accessory, the Tribunal would have to find that a
person (not a corporation) carried out an act objectively aiding, assisting or abetting the act
of the principal and did so knowingly, i.e., in full knowledge of the acts of the principal
and that its own action was aiding, assisting or abetting. ** Fraport contends that the
Award is devoid of any factual finding of the existence of a constitutionally defined
category of public utility with respect to which the ADL could be applicable, and asserts
that the Tribunal did not state reasons as to how a public utility can be said to exist because
the date of nullification of the Terminal Concession was prior to the Terminal becoming

. 3
operational.**

Fraport criticizes the Award further for providing no reason as to why the
QT Report and letters should have given Fraport knowledge that the Pooling Agreement
could result in intervention in PIATCO management in violation of Philippine law nor as
to why, having received advice that the employment of aliens by PIATCO was restricted
by the terms of the ADL, Fraport knew or should have known that participation as a

shareholder in a preliminary meeting could violate the ADL. According to Fraport, the

Award also fails to state reasons with regard to the mens rea.*4

252. Second, Fraport says that the Award does not give reasons for its conclusion
that it violated the ADL. Fraport cites paragraph 395 as a “prime example” of reasons that
do not enable one to follow how the tribunal proceeded from point A to point B and
eventually to its conclusion.**° The Applicant says that paragraph 395 contradicts the
majority’s hypothesis of a reference to Philippine law in Article 1 of the BIT and is even in
itself contradictory. The majority of the Tribunal argues that, despite a reference to

Philippine law, the commission of the actus reus in Section 2-A of the ADL, consisting in
‘© Memorial, para. 102, Reply, para. 171.

‘8 Transcript, Day 1, 142-148

“4 Thid., 179-184.

*S Reply, para. 180; Transcript, Day 1, 34, Day 3, 591-592.

- 94 -

“permitting or allowing” a third party to intervene in the “management, operation or
control” of a public utility concession falling within Section 2-A, is unnecessary for
finding a breach of Philippine law as “the relevance of compliance with national law for
jurisdiction ratione materiae purposes is at the moment of the investment”,*** i.e., before
any actus reus can be performed. The majority of the Tribunal also cites the part of
Section 2-A of the ADL which allows for the act of assistance to be performed during the
planning phase. Fraport alleges that the reader cannot determine whether what the
majority had in mind was something describing an attempt to commit a breach of Section
2-A by a principal or attempted aiding and abetting. There is no guidance in the Award
which of the two alternatives was on the majority’s mind, as the majority’s reasoning fails

to explain whether Fraport qualifies as principal or accessory.**”

253. Third, Fraport alleges that the Award next fails to give reasons for the failure to
apply the principle of nullum crimen sine lege. The application of the ADL in paragraphs
356 and 395 of the Award violated this principle. The Applicant argues that, because there
is no trace that the nullum crimen principle was considered by the Tribunal, the Award has
an important lacuna which makes it impossible for the reader to follow the reasoning on
this point.*** The Applicant also contends that the Award fails to give reasons enabling the
Committee to assess the fairness of the weighing of evidence. It says that the majority did
not approach the evidence with an open mind admitting the possibility of doubt. Instead,
the Tribunal in paragraph 399 of the Award speaks of “a case in which res ipsa loquitur”.
The reasons dealing with the applicable standard of evidence given by the majority and the
conclusions are contradictory and do not enable the ad hoc Committee to verify that the
Tribunal acted in accordance with the principles of fair trial and in dubio pro reo.”

58 Award, para. 395.

“7 Reply, para. 180.

“8 Tbid., paras. 72-87, 183-184, Transcript, Day 1, 265-268.
*® Tbid., paras. 186, 189, 190, Transcript, Day 1, 248-249, 265-270, Day 3, 680.

- 95 -

254. Fourth, Fraport contends that the Award fails to give reasons for its failure to
apply the BIT separately to each of Fraport’s discrete investments.*”’ There are no reasons
provided in the Award for treating all of Fraport’s various equity and debt investments —
all of which the majority found to be legal — as a single illegal investment; for treating the
entire investment as unlawful on account of the Pooling Agreement and the Addendum to
the PIATCO Shareholders Agreement, which were entirely severable and independent of
Fraport’s investments; and finally for dismissing Fraport’s investments made during 2001
after the allegedly offending provisions of the Pooling Agreement and Addendum had been
amended, even though the Respondent itself accepted that following the amendments
Fraport’s shareholding structure was fully in accordance with Philippine law.**' The
Award does not address the question of Fraport’s debt investment in the project although
these non-equity investments amounted to more than US$340 million or 80% of the overall
value of Fraport’s investment in the Philippines and were not governed by any of the
Shareholder Agreements. Similarly, the Award does not address clearly identified equity
investments with a monetary value of more than US$25 million which were made after the

allegedly offending provisions of the Shareholder Agreements had been amended.*””

255. The Republic of the Philippines replies that the Award is supported by both

explicit and implicit reasons sufficient to satisfy Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID

393

Convention.””” The Philippines recalls that neither disagreement with the reasoning of an

award nor the persuasiveness of the reasons provide grounds for annulment. sot According

to the Respondent, it is possible to follow the reasons that led the Tribunal to the

conclusions that Fraport’s investment as a whole fell outside the protections of the BiT.*>

Fraport’s contention that the Tribunal failed to state reasons of its conclusion that its

investment ran afoul of the ADL is without merit, as each of its arguments stems from its
*°° Memorial, para. 194.

*! Memorial, para. 194, Reply, para. 191, Transcript, Day 1, 183-184.

* Reply, paras. 193,194.
*°8 Counter-Memorial, para. 258.
™ Thid., paras. 259, 262-265; Rejoinder, paras. 184-193; Transcript, Day 2, 333-337, 564-567.

*5 Tbid., paras. 268, 269.

- 96 -

substantial disagreement with the Tribunal's conclusions.*”° In the Respondent’s view, the
Tribunal made all the key findings necessary to conclude that Fraport violated the aiding or

abetting provision of the ADL.*”

256. According to the Philippines, the Tribunal’s conclusion that there was a
principal violator is plainly evident from the face of the Award and is in any event implicit

in the Tribunal’s analysis.*°*

The ADL indicates that the principal violator is the
Philippine citizen holding the public utility concession that permits or allows a foreign
entity to intervene and control and the aider or abettor is the entity which intervenes to
exercise that control.” The Tribunal identified the actus reus as Fraport’s knowing and
intentional circumvention of the ADL by means of secret shareholder agreements which
provided unlawful control over PLIATCO. It was by planning and then entering into the
Secret Shareholder Agreements that Fraport was permitted or allowed to exercise control
over PIATCO, thereby committing the necessary actus reus as an aider or abettor. The
Tribunal referred to Fraport’s intent because the ADL requires an aider or abettor to
knowingly act. Since this violation of Philippine law knowingly occurred at the outset of

rp 400

its investment, that investment did not qualify for protection under the BI In the

Respondent’s view, the nullity of the Concession Contract does not mean that retroactively
there is no possible relevance to the constitutional limitations and ADL. The Terminal is

the public service.4!

257. The Respondent maintains that the Tribunal did not fail to state reasons for not
citing the principle of nullum crimen sine lege because this principle is not applicable to an

international tribunal’s determination of its jurisdiction in an investment dispute and was

not invoked by Fraport in the arbitration.“

Article 52(1)(e) has no role in ensuring that
*°6 Rejoinder, paras. 194, 195.

*7 Thid., paras. 196, 199.

*°8 Thid., para. 202

°° Thid., para. 199

4 Thid., paras. 204, 205; Transcript, Day 2, 406, Day 3, 769-772.

*°! Transcript, Day 2, 407-409.

4 Rejoinder, paras. 207-210, Transcript, Day 3, 778.

-97-

tribunals comply with fundamental rules of procedure. In any event, the Tribunal devoted
a substantial portion of its award to consideration of the Secret Shareholder Agreements

and Fraport had a full opportunity to comment in written and oral submissions. *°

The
Republic of the Philippines declares that the Tribunal did not fail to consider Fraport’s
entire investment in NAIA Terminal 3 Project but concluded that it was not entitled to
protection because it was not accepted in accordance with Philippine law. Fraport’s
decision to continue to pour money into its ill-conceived and unlawfully structured
investment obviously did not provide a basis for the Tribunal to consider those late
additions to be lawful stand-alone investments.’ In the Respondent’s view, the Tribunal
considered the composite of the investments which were characterized by Fraport as a

unitary investment.*”°

The Award is amply supported, the Republic of the Philippines
argues, by explicit and implicit reasoning sufficient to satisfy the requirements of the

Washington Convention.*°°

c) The Committee’s Analysis

258. As early as in the Kléckner I annulment decision in 1985, it was made clear
that “the Committee can only take the award as it is.”4°’ The disputed subject matter is not
submitted once again for adjudication to an ad hoc committee. It is only the award as
made by the Tribunal which is scrutinized under the limited number of grounds of Article
52 of the ICSID Convention. The above mentioned declaration of the Kléckner I

Committee has the following implications in the context of Article 52(1)(e).

495 Thid., paras. 211-212.
44 Thid., para. 216.

“5 Transcript, Day 2, 338.
4 Rejoinder, para. 183.

4° Kléckner I v. Cameroon, Decision on Annulment, 3 May 1985, 2 ICSID Reports, p. 95, para. 73.

- 98 -

(i) The Award as actually decided by the Tribunal is controlled under
Article 52(1)(e)

259. A first implication of the holding in Kléckner I is that an ad hoc committee
controls the award for what has been actually decided by the Tribunal and not for what the
applicant would have wished the award to be. This point has particular implication for

Fraport’s first, third and fourth objections under this ground.
1) Discrete investments

260. Fraport explains that its equity investment did not take place at one time. After
its initial investment in PIATCO in 1999, Fraport stresses that it increased its shareholding
in PIATCO and in cascade companies (PTI, PTH, ....) in 2000 and 2001 and that it also
made non-equity investments in the form of loans and guarantees during 2000 and 2001
which accounted for the largest part of its investments by exceeding 80% of its overall

claim of US$425 million.“°*

261. The Award describes Fraport’s investment in the Terminal 3 Project as one
“made in a Philippine company, Philippine International Air Terminals Co., Inc., later
known as PIATCO. Fraport’s investment in PIATCO, both as a shareholder and lender,
was influenced by the fact that the Respondent had, prior to the investment at issue,
conferred upon PIATCO the concession rights for the construction and operation of a new
international passenger airport terminal in Manila, otherwise known as Ninoy Aquino
International Airport Passenger Terminal III or Terminal 3.4 At paragraph 116 which is

cited by Fraport,*””

the Award reports that “Fraport’s Investment as a financial participant

in the Terminal 3 project spans a period of several years, starting in 1999 and ending in

2002-2003, when, as the evidence discloses, Fraport progressively wrote off its investment.

Fraport’s investment was both directly in PIATCO and, indirectly, in a cascade of

Philippine companies that have ownership interests in PIATCO. In addition to its equity
48 Memorial, paras. 76, 79, 80, 81.

4 Award, para. 2.

*° Memorial, footnote 108.

- 99 -

investments, Fraport has extended loans and loan payment guarantees to PIATCO, the

cascade companies and PIATCO’s lenders and contractors”.

262. The Applicant has in the annulment proceeding atomized its investment as a
financial participant in the Terminal 3 Project into several investments which, it claims,
should have been considered individually by the Tribunal for admission under Article 1 of
the BIT. However, at the time of the arbitration, the Republic of the Philippines rightly
observes, Fraport characterized its investment exceeding US$425 million which funded the
design and construction of a state-of-the-art international passenger terminal at Manila’s
airport as one global investment in share acquisition in PIATCO and in the cascade
companies in PIATCO in addition to the loans and loan and payment guarantees.*"!
Reasons are obligatory under Article 48(3) of the ICSID Convention to the extent a
question was put to the Tribunal. However, Fraport here is attempting to open before the
Committee a question which has not been presented to the Tribunal. The Award cannot be
criticized for neglecting a question which was not addressed to the Tribunal and for not

giving reasons thereof.
2) Public utility

263. In its discussion regarding the interpretation of the ADL, the Tribunal states
that “[e]ach interpretation must be made in the light of the Constitution and the ensemble
of legislation of which a particular statute is a part.”*!? At paragraph 309, the Award also
underlines in the QT Report of 11 January 1999 the provisions of the Constitution of the
Philippines which require that the participation of foreign investors in the governing body
of a public utility enterprise shall be limited to their proportionate share in its capital, and
that all the executive and managing officers of such corporation or association be citizens
of the Philippines. The Award notes that the QT Report of 11 January 1999 states that,
although the term public utility is not defined with exactitude in Philippine law and is

#1! Claimant's Arbitration Memorial, paras. 34-41.

*? award, para. 349.

- 100 -

subject to broad interpretation, “[g]enerally, the operations of the Project fall within the

meaning of a public utility."

264. The ad hoc Committee in Wena declared that

“{njeither Article 48(3) nor Article 52(1)(e) specify the manner in which the
Tribunal’s reasons are to be stated. The object of both provisions is to ensure
that the Parties will be able to understand the Tribunal's reasoning. This goal
does not require that each reason be stated expressly. The tribunal’s reasons
may be implicit in the considerations and conclusions contained in the award,
provided they can be reasonably inferred from the terms used in the
decision.”*"*

It is also accepted that an ad hoc committee may clarify the reasons of the decision when

they are implicit.
265. The ad hoc Committee in Soufraki explained that

“if the Committee can make clear — without adding new elements previously
absent — that apparent obscurities are, in fact, not real, that inadequate
statements have no consequence on the solution, or that succinct reasoning
does not actually overlook pertinent facts, the committee should not annul the
initial award. For example, as regards the ground that the award has failed to
state the reasons on which it is based, if the ad hoc Committee can ‘explain’
the Award by clarifying reasons that seemed absent because they were only
implicit, it should do so!

266. In the case at hand, when the Award, at paragraph 350, declares that Fraport
did not exceed the statutorily determined level of equity investment lawfully permitted to a
foreign investor or loaned too much to a constitutionally defined category of public utility,
there is no indication that it refers to anything else than the Terminal 3 Project. The

Applicant offers no other reasonable explanation.

8 Award, para. 309.

“4 Wena Hotels Ltd. v. Egypt, Decision on Annulment, 5 February 2002, 6 ICSID Reports, p. 146, para. 81.

 

415 Soufraki v. UAE, Decision on Annulment, 5 June 2007, para

- 101 -

3) Principal/accessory

267.

The Award declares that there are two alternative ways of establishing an ADL

violation under Philippine law, a quantitative test or an actual demonstration of managerial

control. In the latter case, the quantum of equity in the company is irrelevant.“'° The

Tribunal stresses that its concern is not with Fraport’s quantitative equity but with the

shareholder agreements*!” and then holds:

268.

“Ti]t is correct that Fraport’s real modality of intervention in ‘the management,
operation, administration or control’ of PIATCO for the items specified in the
FAG-PAIRCARGO-PAGS-PTI Shareholders’ Agreement is as a shareholder
in the confidential but binding preliminary meeting described at Article 2.02
thereof. Fraport does not, as the ADL specifies, intervene, as an officer,
employee or laborer in the subsequent formal board meeting that rubber-
stamps the result of the confidential but binding meeting. To be sure, the
formal validity of unlawful intervention would still be accomplished by
Fraport’s designated officer in PIATCO; indeed the real control decision
would always have to be implemented, wherever it may have been made, by
‘an officer, employee or laborer’ within PIATCO; that would satisfy a literal
interpretation. But a literal interpretation here could produce an absurdity: an
alien would violate the ADL if its designated officer intervened to manage and
control matters A, B and C, but the same would not violate the ADL if it
secretly intervened as a shareholder to manage and control those same
matters. The Tribunal construes this part of the ADL as covering intervention
by shareholders, if that is the actual means of intervention in the management,
operation, administration or control of PLATCO. Nor does this interpretation
impose a retroactive burden on Fraport, for its own documents, which the
Tribunal reviewed above, indicate that Fraport was well aware that the
arrangements it was making were not in accordance with the ADL.”*'*

According to the Kléckner I decision:

“Tt]he text of [Article 52(1)(e)] requires a statement of reasons on which the
award is based. This does not mean just any reasons, purely formal or
apparent, but rather reasons having some substance, allowing the reader to
follow the arbitral tribunal's reasoning, on facts and on law. [...] [T]here would
be a ‘failure to state reasons’ in the absence of a statement of reasons that are
‘sufficiently relevant’, that is, reasonably sustainable and capable of providing
a basis for the decision.”*!”

“16 Award, para. 354.

417 Award, paras. 323, 355.

“18 Award, pa

 

. 356.

 

4! Klockner I'v. Cameroon, Decision on Annulment, 3 May 1985, 2 ICSID Reports, p. 95, paras. 119-120.

- 102 -

The above passage of the Award makes clear that, according to the Tribunal, Fraport did
not intervene “as an officer, employee or laborer” as mentioned in Section 2-A of the
ADL, but notwithstanding, it would still violate the ADL if it secretly intervened as
shareholder to manage and control PIATCO. The Applicant nonetheless claims that there
is a failure to state reasons for the violation of the ADL as a principal or accessory which is
material to the solution. Fraport is correct in contending that a finding of its criminal
liability or that of its officers or employees would have required a declaration as to whether
the accused was a principal or an accessory. The construction of a criminal statute such as
the ADL by an ICSID tribunal, however, does not turn the arbitration proceeding into a
criminal proceeding. The question before the Tribunal was not that of the criminal liability
of Fraport or of its officers or employees, but that of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione
materiae under the Agreement between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Republic
of the Philippines for the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments of 18 April

1997.

269. The Award stresses that “whatever standard of proof is required under
Philippine law to prove a criminal act, the jurisdictional question before this Tribunal,
which is seized of an international investment dispute, is not a determination of a crime,
but whether an economic transaction by a German company was made ‘in accordance’
with Philippine law and thus qualifies as an ‘investment’ under the German-Philippine
BIT”? Determining the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, in view of the preliminary objection
raised by the Respondent, required the Tribunal to interpret Article 1 of the BIT which
reads: “the term ‘investment’ shall mean any kind of asset accepted in accordance with the

»©1 The Tribunal considered

respective laws and regulations of either Contracting State.

the ADL in the course of its examination of whether Fraport’s investment was protected by

the BIT,*”? not in the context of criminal charges against Fraport or its officers or

employees. The Tribunal resolved the question of its jurisdiction ratione materiae with a
°° Award, para. 399.

©! Award, paras. 334-348.
* award, para. 396.

- 103 -

negative answer, holding that “Fraport knowingly and intentionally circumvented the ADL
by means of secret shareholder agreements. As a consequence, it cannot claim to have
made an investment ‘in accordance with law’ [....] Because there is no ‘investment in

accordance with law’, the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae.”*”*

In reaching this
conclusion, the Tribunal did not have to give reasons for the criminal liability as principal
or accessory of Fraport, its officers or employees, or to the existence of a guilty mind on

their part, a question of interest to a criminal court, but which was not within the remit of

the Tribunal. Fraport fails to prove a defect of the Award under Article 52(1)(e).
4) Nullum crimen sine lege/ in dubio pro reo

270. In the context of criminal proceedings, nullum crimen sine lege is a substantive
principle for the protection of the accused which holds that criminal law may not be
extensively construed, for instance by analogy.*”4 It is common ground that Fraport, its
officers or employees were never charged before the Tribunal for violation of the ADL and
did not have to defend against an accusation of penal nature in the ICSID arbitration
proceeding. It bears reiterating that the question submitted to the Tribunal was solely that
of the legality of Fraport’s investment for jurisdictional purposes under the German-
Philippines BIT of 18 April 1997. As a consequence, the Tribunal cannot be criticized for
not providing in its Award reasons why it did not apply a substantive principle of criminal
law. This did not come within its mission. The Committee further observes that Fraport
did not invoke said principle in the arbitration proceeding. Failure to deal with questions
submitted to the Tribunal may amount to a failure to state reasons where this results in a
failure in the intelligibility of the reasoning in the Award itself,’ but this is a different
situation from the present case. Fraport’s criticism of the Award for giving no reasons to

* Award, para. 401.

"4 See ECHR 25 May 1993, Kokkikanis v. Greece, No 14307/88; 12 February 2008, Kafkaris v. Cyprus, No
21906/04.

5 Maritime International Nominees Establishment (MINE) v. Guinea, Decision on Annulment, 22 December
1989, 4 ICSID Reports, p. 89, para. 5.13 and pp. 107-108, paras. 6.98-6.108.

- 104 -

arguments which the Applicant introduces for the first time in the annulment proceeding is

groundless. Accordingly, there is no lacuna in the Award.

271. Commenting on the evidentiary standards, the Tribunal emphasized that the
issue before it was not whether a crime under Philippine law was committed, but whether
an economic transaction by Fraport was made “in accordance” with Philippine law and
thus qualifies as an “investment” under the German-Philippine BIT. Then the Tribunal
observed: “[e]ven assuming, however, that the ‘preponderance of evidence’ test which
applies in civil law must yield in the instant case to a ‘beyond a reasonable doubt’ test
because the subject of the ‘in accordance’ inquiry is a Philippine criminal statute, this is a
case in which res ipsa loquitur. The relevant facts, all of which are found in Fraport’s own
documents, are incontrovertible.”*”° The Applicant’s arguments regarding the failure of
the Tribunal to abide by the presumption of in dubio pro reo cannot be considered in the
context of Article 52(1)(e). There are instances where the absence of reasons may impact
upon other issues, for example, if the motivation of an award is so aberrant that it would
violate a fundamental rule of procedure.*?’ Such grievance must then be examined under
Article 52(1)(b) or Article 52(1)(d) and not under Article 52(1)(e). Accordingly, the
Committee decides that the essential interest protected by the in dubio principle is the right
to be heard and answers Fraport’s arguments in the context of the serious departure from a

fundamental rule of procedure.

(ii) The scrutiny of the Award by the ad hoc Committee under Article

52(1)(e) cannot cause a reopening of the case

272. The holding in the Kléckner I decision, according to which “the Committee can
only take the award as it is”, also implies that the annulment proceeding cannot cause an
entire reopening of the case. Referring to the decisions of the ad hoc Committees in
MINE, Vivendi and Wena, the ad hoc Committee in CDC v. Seychelles observed that “[i]t

*° award, para. 399.

7 See the Amco I decision at para 32 on the relationship between Article 52(1)(e) and (d) and (b). Amco Asia
Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia (“Amco I”), Decision on Annulment, 16 May 1986, | ICSID Reports, p.
517, para. 32.

- 105 -

thus appears that the more recent practice among ad hoc Committees is to apply Article
52(1)(e) in such a manner that the Committee does not intrude into the legal and factual
decision-making of the Tribunal.’“?* This point has particular significance for Fraport’s
second objection under this ground, the failure to give reasons as to whether an attempt
constitutes an offence under the ADL. Insufficient, inadequate or contradictory reasons
have been assimilated by ad hoc committees to a failure to state reasons as established by
Klockner? and Soufraki v. UAE* decisions. They must be distinguished from reasons
which are claimed to be legally or factually wrong, the latter escaping from review by an

ad hoc committee.

273. In the present case, the parties discussed the violation of the ADL by Fraport at
some length in their post-hearing submissions, including whether an attempt constitutes an
offense.**! Fraport denounces what it alleges are two main contradictions in the reasoning
of the Tribunal. First, Fraport argues that the Tribunal dispenses with the requirement of
actus reus defined in Section 2-A of the ADL but nonetheless decides that a breach of
Philippine law has been committed. Next, Fraport claims that the Tribunal invented a
crime of attempt in Section 2-A and held that Fraport committed such crime without

finding an act of assistance or abetment or without the identification of a principal.

274. The ad hoc Committee in Kléckner I stated the following on contradictory

reasons in an arbitral award:

“As for ‘contradiction of reasons’, it is in principle appropriate to bring this
notion under the category ‘failure to state reasons’ for the very simple reason
that two genuinely contradictory reasons cancel each other out. Hence the
failure to state reasons. The arbitrator’s obligation to state reasons which are
not contradictory must therefore be accepted." 2

8 CDC v. Seychelles, Decision on Annulment, 29 June 2005, 11 ICSID Reports, p. 260, para. 70.
*° Kléckner I v. Cameroon, Decision on Annulment, 3 May 1985, 2 ICSID Reports, p. 136, paras. 114-120.

*° Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates (“Soufraki"), Decision on Annulment, 5 June 2007, para.

 

 

 

126,

1 Claimant’s  post-hearing paras. 13-17; ’s post-hearing paras. 3-38;
Respondent's supplemental post-hearing submission, paras. 135-161; Claimant’s Observations regarding Respondent's
second post-hearing paras. 109-118; 's post-hearing Reply, paras. 94-117

42

° Kléckner I v. Cameroon, Decision on Annulment, 3 May 1985, 2 ICSID Reports, p. 137, para. 116 (emphasis
in the original).

- 106 -

This view has been accepted by other ad hoc committees, such as in MTD v. Chile, where

the ad hoc Committee confirmed that “outright or unexplained contradictions can involve a

99433

failure to state reasons. The Applicant’s criticisms must also be examined bearing in

mind the declaration of the ad hoc Committee in Vivendi v. Argentina that “tribunals must
often struggle to balance conflicting considerations, and an ad hoc committee should be

careful not to discern contradiction when what is actually expressed in a tribunal’s reasons

could more truly be said to be but a reflection of such conflicting considerations.”**

275. Having declared that “the acquisition of shares by a foreign investor in a
domestic corporation is a legal transaction that does not, by its nature, require some action
by the government involving acceptance or permission, yet it is quite clear from the BIT
and the Protocol that accordance with the host state's law is nonetheless required,’”**° the
Tribunal could without any contradiction hold that “the relevance of compliance with
national law for jurisdiction ratione materiae purposes is at the moment of the investment,
as explained in the analysis of the BIT’s terms. That is a limitation which actually works
in favour of both the foreign investor and international jurisdiction.”**° The Tribunal
principally relied on the fact that, in its final report of 26 February 1999 to its Supervisory
Board, Fraport disregarded the requirements of Philippine law which had been expressed
by QT in its due diligence report on legal issues, in particular with respect to the ADL.*%”
According to the Tribunal, Fraport’s Supervisory Board was fully aware of the
inconsistency of the proposed arrangements with Philippine law, but decided to proceed
with the project.*** The Tribunal held that Fraport implemented its strategy by means of
secret shareholding agreements that circumvented Philippine law.*? The Tribunal

explained that Fraport structured its investment in a way that “consciously, intentionally

*3 MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. (‘MTD’) v. Chile, Decision on Annulment, 21 March 2007, 13 ICSID Reports, p. 516,
para. 78.

“™ Vivendi v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, 3 July 2002, (“Vivendi I”), 6 ICSID Reports, p. 358, para. 65.
5 Award, para. 385.

86 Award, para. 395.

7 Award, para. 313.

8 Award, para. 315.

*° Award, paras. 319-323.

- 107 -

and covertly” violated the ADL“ and held: “[iJn summary, Fraport had been fully advised
and was fully aware of the ADL and the incompatibility with the ADL of the structure of
its investment which it planned and ultimately put into place with the secret shareholder
agreements.’*"! In light of the view which the Tribunal took as to the relevant date for the
purpose of deciding the question of jurisdiction ratione materiae, it could reasonably
deduce that the investment could not qualify for the German-Philippine BIT protection
regardless of whether the Pooling Agreement was amended in 2001 to provide with a

2

shareholder structure which complied with Philippine law.“ The first criticism of a

contradiction of reasons is accordingly inaccurate.

276. The parties expressed different views before the Tribunal as to whether the

ADL criminalizes attempted violations.*

In Fraport’s view, which it elaborated upon in
its Observations regarding the Respondent’s second post-hearing submission of 15
September 2006, the ADL does not define “attempt” as a punishable offense because no
such language is present in the ADL. At any rate, Fraport further alleged that the
acquisition of the ability to commit an offense does not constitute an attempt to commit
such offense and added that there is no evidence that it intended to exercise any alleged
rights under the 1999 Shareholder Agreements to intervene in PLIATCO management. It
said all that the Republic of the Philippines could demonstrate is an intent of Fraport to
achieve such ability to intervene.“ Clearly, the Applicant disagrees both with the factual
finding by the Tribunal of its awareness that its arrangements were not in accordance with
the ADL as stated in the above cited paragraph 356 of the Award as well as with the
consequences which the Tribunal made thereof.
0 Award, para. 323.

4) award, para. 327.

“2 Award, paras. 398-401.
“3° Claimant’s Observations regarding Respondent’s second post-hearing submission, paras. 114-116;
Respondent’s supplemental post-hearing Reply, paras. 94-117.

“# Claimant's Observations regarding Respondent’s second post-hearing submission, paras. 114-116.

- 108 -

277. It is not the task of the ad hoc Committee under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID
Convention to consider whether the reasons given by the Tribunal are convincing. As the

ad hoc Committee in MINE declared:

“t]he adequacy of the reasoning is not an appropriate standard of review
under paragraph (1)(e), because it almost inevitably draws an ad hoc
Committee into an examination of the substance of the tribunal's decision, in
disregard of the exclusion of the remedy of appeal by Article 53 of the
Convention. A Committee might be tempted to annul an award because that
examination disclosed a manifestly incorrect application of the law, which,
however, is not a ground for annulment.”

The ad hoc Committee in Vivendi also stated that “it is well accepted both in the cases and
the literature that Article 52(1)(e) concerns a failure to state any reasons with respect to all
or part of an award, not the failure to state correct or convincing reasons.”“° The ad hoc
Committee in Wena v. Egypt further made clear that “[t]he ground for annulment of Article
52(1)(e) does not allow any review of the challenged Award which would lead to
reconsider whether the reasons underlying the Tribunal’s decisions were appropriate or
not, convincing or not.”"7 The ad hoc Committee in CDC v. Seychelles also underlined
that Article 52(1)(e) “does not provide us with the opportunity to opine on whether the
Tribunal’s analysis was correct or its reasoning persuasive.”“** The second criticism of a

contradiction of reasons is also unfounded.

278. The same applies to Fraport’s further criticism that the ADL could be
applicable to Terminal 3 as a public utility notwithstanding the nullification ab initio of the

Terminal Concession by the Philippine Supreme Court. Such allegation is only an

449

affirmation inspired by the Dissenting Opinion.“”” While such a view was expressed in the

450

Dissenting Opinion,” the point formed no part of the reasoning of the Tribunal whose

award cannot therefore be criticized on this ground.

+8 Maritime International Nominees Establishment (MINE) v. Guinea, Decision on Annulment, 22 December
1989, 4 ICSID Reports, p. 88, para. 5.08.

“© Vivendi v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, 3 July 2002, (“Vivendi I”), 6 ICSID Reports, p. 358, para. 64.
“7 Wena Hotels Ltd. v. Egypt, Decision on Annulment, 5 February 2002, 6 ICSID Reports, p. 146, para. 79.
“8 CDC v. Seychelles, Decision on Annulment, 29 June 2005, 11 ICSID Reports, p. 260, para. 70.

° Dissenting Opinion of Arbitrator B. Cremades, para. 25.

*° Thid., paras. 25 and 26.

- 109 -

279. Fraport’s criticism of the meaning of the QT Report and letter of 21 December
1999 in the Award and of the consequences which the Tribunal drew from it cannot be
reviewed by the Committee without engaging in a discussion on the merits of the case.
There is a long and consistent line of decisions of ad hoc committees to the effect that this
does not square with the limited scope of review permitted under Article 52(1)(e). The
Tribunal considered the disregard by Fraport’s supervisory board of the QT report’s
warnings as incontrovertible evidence that Fraport’s investment was knowingly made not
in accordance with Philippine law. The expression “this is a case in which res ipsa
loquitur” in paragraph 399 means that without possible contradiction, under all standards
of proof which had been alluded to by the Tribunal, “preponderance of evidence” or

“beyond a reasonable doubt,**!

the conclusion that Fraport’s investment did not meet the
requirements of Article 1 of the BIT was inescapable. Fraport deplores the conclusion of
the Tribunal but its argument that the Tribunal’s reasoning was contradictory and

incomplete is merely a criticism of the solution, a criticism which cannot be admitted by

the Committee under this ground.

280. The Committee concludes that there was no lack of reasoning or contradictions
in the reasoning of the Tribunal. Accordingly, the conditions for annulment of the Award

under Article 52(1)(e) of the Convention are not present in the case at hand.

Vv. COSTS

281. The parties have submitted their claims for costs upon the invitation of the
Committee. Fraport’s costs for its legal representation and expenses total
US$ 2,378,902.75 and EUR 1,003,652.67, respectively. In addition, Fraport as the
Applicant on Annulment, made, in accordance with Regulation 14(3)(e) of the
Administrative and Financial Regulations, the whole advance payment to ICSID for the

costs referred to in Regulation 14(2) of the said Regulations. The Respondent claims that

*! Award, para. 399.

- 110-

it incurred in total legal fees and expenses in this annulment proceeding amounting to
US$ 5,672,667.05. It requests the Committee to order the Applicant to reimburse the

Respondent the costs of the latter’s representation and assistance.**”

282. Under Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration
Rule 47(1)G), read together with Article 52(4) of the ICSID Convention and
ICSID Arbitration Rule 53, the Committee has the discretion to decide how and by whom
the expenses incurred by the parties in connection with the proceeding (“the parties’
costs”), the fees and expenses of the members of the Committee and the charges for the

use of the facilities of the Centre (together “the ICSID costs”) shall be borne.

283. The Committee is of the view that, in the circumstances of the present case,
and having regard to its decision to annul the Award, it would not be reasonable and fair if
it were to accede to the request of the Respondent and order the Applicant to reimburse the
former the party costs of the Respondent’s legal representation and assistance.

Accordingly, the request of the Respondent on this point is denied.

284. With respect to the costs of Fraport for its legal representation and assistance
the Committee notes that the Applicant in none of its submissions to the Committee,
neither written nor oral, requested that it be reimbursed for such costs by the Respondent.
But in any case, having regard to the Committee’s conclusion that the Award is to be
annulled on the ground that it was the Tribunal which seriously departed from a
fundamental rule of procedure it would not be fair and reasonable, in the view of the
Committee, if it were to decide that the Respondent would have to reimburse Fraport for

the costs of its legal representation and assistance.

285. Accordingly, each Party shall bear the costs of its legal representation. This
decision applies equally to the costs, which were previously reserved, of the two

interlocutory applications made to the ad hoc Committee.**

+? Rejoinder, conclusion at p. 96.

453 Referred to supra at paras. 6 & 8,

-111-

286. With respect to the costs of the annulment proceeding itself, i.e., the costs
incurred by ICSID, including the fees and expenses of the members of the Committee, the
Committee first recalls that it reserved its decision on the allocation of costs relating to
each Party’s one request for incidental decision (see paragraphs 6 and 8 above) to the final
stage of this annulment proceeding. Having regard to the circumstances of the case at
hand, the Committee is of the view that it is appropriate and fair in the present case that
ICSID costs be borne equally by both parties. Accordingly, the Respondent shall
reimburse the Applicant half of the ICSID costs (including the costs of the interlocutory

applications).‘**

VI. DECISION

For the foregoing reasons, the Committee unanimously decides:
— (1) To annul the Award of 16 August 2007 in Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services
Worldwide v. The Republic of the Philippines (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25);
— (2) Each Party shall bear one half of the ICSID costs incurred in connection with this
annulment proceeding; and
— (3) Each Party shall bear its own party costs and expenses incurred with respect to this

annulment proceeding.

44 The ICSID Secretariat will in due course provide the parties with a financial statement on the costs of the
proceeding.

 

-112-

~et Soul,

Judge Peter Tomka
President of the ad hoc Committee

Date: 17 Decousbt, Kolo

DAS. C.a.mycdlas>

Judge Dominique Hascher Professor Campbell McLachlan, QC
Member of the ad hoc Committee Member of the ad hoc Committee

Date: 15 Decuwse 20/0 Date: 7 December 2010

