INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the annulment proceeding between

FABRICA DE VIDRIOS Los ANDES, C.A. AND
OWENS-ILLINOIS DE VENEZUELA, C.A.

Applicants

and

BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/21
Annulment Proceeding

 

DECISION ON ANNULMENT

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda, President
Prof. Diego P. Fernandez Arroyo, Member
Dr. Inka Hanefeld, Member

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Ms. Sara Marzal Yetano

Date of dispatch to the Parties: November 22, 2019

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

REPRESENTING THE APPLICANTS:

Mr. Darrow Abrahams
and

Mr. Robert Volterra
Mr. Alvaro Nistal
Mr. Govert Coppens
Mr. Roberto Lupini
Mr. Ricardo Gerhard
Volterra Fietta

8 Mortimer Street
Fitzroy Place
London WIT 3JJ
United Kingdom

" Left the firm in July 2019.

REPRESENTING THE RESPONDENT:

Dr. Reinaldo Enrique Mufioz Pedrosa
Procurador General de la Reptiblica (E)

Dr. Henry Rodriguez Facchinetti

Gerente General de Litigio - Coordinacién de
Juicios Internacionales

Procuraduria General de la Reptiblica

Avenida Los Ilustres

cruce con Calle Francisco Lazo Marti,

Edif. Sede Procuraduria General de la Reptiblica
Urbanizacién Santa Ménica

Caracas 1040

Venezuela

and

Mr. Osvaldo C. Guglielmino

Mr. Guillermo Moro

Mr. Alejandro Vulejser

Ms. Camila Guglielmino

Ms. Verénica Lavista”
Guglielmino Derecho Internacional
Cerrito 1320 — Piso 11
(C1010ABB) Buenos Aires
Argentina

VI.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW OF THE APPLICATION .........-c0:ccscesesessesseeeesees 1
PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 2
A. The Registration of the Application and Constitution of the Committee................006 2
B. The Parties’ Written Submissions ...........0.c.cccccccseeseseeeseesesteseseesestesestesesnesesnesesneseseneas 3
C. The Representation of V: 1 5
D. The Hearing on Annul 7
E. The Post-Hearing Procedure 9
SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS .........ccscsesssessesesseeseeseesessnesnssseneeneeseenees 9
A. Applicants’ Ar; 10
(1) Manifest Excess Of POWeLS .........ccccccsccccseetesessseeeseessseeseseessseessseessaeessanensaneseaneneas 10
(2) Failure to State the Reasons ..........ccccccccccssesssseeseseessseeseseeseseessseessseessanessanenssenees 18
B. Respondent’s Arguments 20
(1) Nature and Scope of the Annulment Mechanism ............cccccsecsesseseeteseeteseenees 20
(2) Manifest Excess Of PoWeYS ......cccccceceeeessseeessesesseeseeeseessessseesseessieatseeeteeenees 21
(3) Failure to State Reasons 25
RELIEF REQUESTED 26
ANALYSIS OF THE COMMITTEE ..........:scccsessesessessessesssssssseeseeseeseeseesessssnsansensesseseeaess 26
A. Nature and Scope of the Annulment Mechanism.............cccccsssescesesseseeteseeeseeteseeees 27
B. The Tribunal Has Manifestly Exceeded Its Powers ..........:.cccceeeeeseseseseeeeeeees tenses 27
(1) Legal Standard 27
(2) Application of the Legal Standard to the Present Case.........c.cccceseeeseseeeeeeeee 29
C. The Award Failed to State the Reasons on Which It Is Based... 36
(1) Legal Standard 36
(2) Application of the Legal Standard to the Present Case.......cccceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 39
D. Costs 4l
DECISION 43

 

TABLE OF SELECTED ABBREVIATIONS / DEFINED TERMS

 

Application

Fabrica de Vidrios Los Andes, C.A. and
Owens-Illinois de Venezuela, C.A.’s
Application for Annulment of the Award
rendered on November 13, 2017, dated March
9, 2018

 

Arbitration Rules

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings

 

Award

Fabrica de Vidrios Los Andes, C.A. and
Owens-Illinois de Venezuela, C.A. v.
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case
No. ARB/12/21, Award, November 13, 2017

 

Background Paper

Updated Background Paper on Annulment for
the Administrative Council of ICSID, dated
May 5, 2016

 

BIT or Treaty

Agreement on the Encouragement and
Reciprocal Protection of Investments between
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, which entered
into force on November 1, 1993

 

Counter-Memorial on Annulment

Venezuela’s Counter-Memorial on Annulment,
of December 19, 2018

 

Applicants or Claimants

Fabrica de Vidrios Los Andes, C.A. and
Owens-Illinois de Venezuela, C.A.

 

Hearing on Annulment

Hearing on Annulment held in Paris, France,
from July 10-11, 2019

 

ICSID Convention or the Convention

Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of
Other States, dated October 14, 1966

 

Memorial on Annulment

Applicants’ Memorial on Annulment, dated
September 20, 2018

 

 

Notice of Denunciation

 

Venezuela’s denunciation of the ICSID
Convention on January 24, 2012

 

iii

 

 

OIEG Pleading

Counter-Memorial on Annulment, dated
August 5, 2016 filed by OI European Group
B.V. on August 6, 2016 in the annulment
proceeding in OJ European Group B.V. v.
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case
No. ARB/11/25)

 

Post-Hearing Brief

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, dated June 6,
2016

 

Rejoinder on Annulment

Venezuela’s Rejoinder on Annulment, of May
18, 2019

 

Reply on Annulment

Applicants’ Reply on Annulment, dated
February 18, 2019

 

 

Respondent or Venezuela

 

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

 

 

INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW OF THE APPLICATION

This case concerns an application for annulment (the “Application”) of the award rendered
on November 13, 2017 in ICSID Case No. ARB/12/21 (the ““Award”) in the arbitration
proceeding between Fabrica de Vidrios Los Andes, C.A. (“Favianca”) and Owens-Illinois
de Venezuela, C.A. (“OIdV”, jointly with Favianca, the “Applicants” or “Claimants”)
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (the “Respondent” or “Venezuela’) (the

“Arbitration”).

The Applicants and the Respondent are collectively referred to as the “Parties”. The

Parties’ representatives and their addresses are listed above on page (i).

The Award decided on a dispute submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) on the basis of the Agreement on
Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments between the Republic of
Venezuela and the Kingdom of the Netherlands, which entered into force on
November 1, 1993 (the “BIT” or “Treaty”) and the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States, dated October 14, 1966

(the “ICSID Convention” or the “Convention’).

The dispute relates to the expropriation of the two largest glass container production plants
in Venezuela, which the Applicants allege was carried out illegally and with no payment

of compensation, in breach of several provisions of the BIT.

In the Award, the Tribunal reached the conclusion that it did not have jurisdiction over the
dispute submitted to it on the basis that there was no mutual consent to submit the dispute
to ICSID arbitration due to Venezuela’s denunciation of the ICSID Convention on January

24, 2012 (“Notice of Denunciation”).

The Applicants applied for annulment of the Award on the basis of Article 52(1)
subparagraphs (b) and (e) of the ICSID Convention, identifying two grounds of annulment:
(i) manifest excess of powers, and (ii) failure to state the reasons on which the Award is

based.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

THE REGISTRATION OF THE APPLICATION AND CONSTITUTION OF THE COMMITTEE

On March 9, 2018, the Applicants filed with the Secretary-General of ICSID the
Application, including exhibits AA-1 to AA-8.

The Application was filed in accordance with Article 52 of the ICSID Convention and Rule
50 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“Arbitration Rules”),
within 120 days after the date of the Award.

By letter of March 13, 2018, the Secretariat confirmed receipt of an original of the
Application, together with five hard copies and six USB devices containing an electronic

copy of the aforementioned document as well as legal authorities AALA-1 to AALA-18.

By letter of March 16, 2018, the Acting Secretary-General informed the Parties that the
Application had been registered on that date and that the Chairman of the Administrative
Council of ICSID would proceed to appoint an ad hoc committee pursuant to Article 52(3)

of the ICSID Convention.

By letter of April 23, 2018, in accordance with Arbitration Rule 52(2), the Acting
Secretary-General notified the Parties that the ad hoc committee (the “Committee”) had
been constituted and that the annulment proceeding was deemed to have begun on that

date.

The Committee was composed of Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda, a national of Spain, Prof. Diego
P. Fernandez Arroyo, a national of Argentina and Spain, and Dr. Inka Hanefeld, a national
of Germany, designated to the ICSID Panel of Arbitrators by Spain, Argentina, and
Germany, respectively. Ms. Marisa Planells-Valero, ICSID Legal Counsel, was designated

to serve as the Secretary of the Committee.

In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rules 53 and 13(1), the Committee held a first
session with the Parties on June 12, 2018, at 10:30 a.m. (EDT), by telephone conference
(the “First Session”). In addition to the Members of the Committee and the Secretary of
the Committee, participating in the teleconference were:

2

On behalf of the Applicants:

Mr. Darrow Abrahams Applicants’ representative
Mr. Robert Volterra Volterra Fietta
Mr. Giorgio Mandelli Volterra Fietta
Mr. Alvaro Nistal Volterra Fietta
Mr. Roberto Lupini Volterra Fietta

On behalf of the Respondent:

Mr. Osvaldo Guglielmino Guglielmino & Asociados
Mr. Diego Gosis Guglielmino & Asociados
Ms. Verénica Lavista Guglielmino & Asociados
Ms. Mariana Lozza Guglielmino & Asociados
Mr. Guillermo Moro Guglielmino & Asociados
Mr. Pablo Parrilla Guglielmino & Asociados
Mr. Alejandro Vulejser Guglielmino & Asociados

Following the First Session, on June 28, 2018, the Committee issued Procedural Order
No. 1 recording the agreement of the Parties on procedural matters and the decision of the
Committee on disputed issues. Procedural Order No. 1 provides, inter alia, that the
procedural languages would be English and Spanish, and the place of proceeding would be

Paris, France. Annex A to Procedural Order No. | set forth the procedural calendar.

THE PARTIES’ WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

Pursuant to the procedural calendar, on September 20, 2018, the Applicants filed their
Memorial on Annulment (the “Memorial on Annulment”) together with exhibits AA-9 to

AA-40 and legal authorities AALA-19 to AALA-110.

On December 19, 2018, the Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial to the Applicants’
Application for Annulment (the “Counter-Memorial on Annulment”) together with

exhibits RA-1 to RA-22 and legal authorities RALA-1 to RALA-73.

By letter of January 21, 2019, the Applicants submitted procedural objections to the
Counter-Memorial on Annulment. The Applicants requested that the Committee strike

from the record of this proceeding:

Factual exhibits RA-7 and RA-21, both of which are copies of the Counter-Memorial
on Annulment filed by OI European Group B.V. on August 6, 2016 in the annulment
proceeding in OJ European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID
Case No. ARB/1 1/25) (the “OIEG Pleading”), which the Applicants argued were filed

in violation of Sections 15.2 and 15.3 of Procedural Order No. 1;

Paragraph 79 of the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on Annulment in which the

Respondent made references to the OIEG Pleading; and

The Respondent’s comments embedded in factual exhibit RA-11, which was the
response to the Respondent’s request for bifurcation that the Applicants filed in the

Arbitration on August 30, 2013.

In the same letter, the Applicants requested that the Committee take into account the

Respondent’s procedural violations described in this letter as well as any future procedural

violations when it renders its decision on the allocation of the costs of this annulment

proceeding.

By letter of January 25, 2019, the Respondent presented its observations to the Applicants’

letter of January 21, 2019. The Respondent requested that the Committee:

Reject the Applicants’ request to strike from the record factual exhibits RA-7 and RA-
21 and paragraph 79 of the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on Annulment, because:
(a) Sections 15.2 and 15.3 of Procedural Order No. 1 would not be applicable to the
OIEG Pleading since this is a document prepared by the Applicants in a proceeding to
which Venezuela was also a party, and (b) the Applicants would have the opportunity
to argue on the documents and the merits of the Respondent’s position in their reply

memorial, and

Grant authorization to replace factual exhibit R-11 with a clean version of such

document.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

In the same letter, the Respondent further requested that the Committee assign to the
Applicants the costs arising from this submission at the time of distributing the costs of this

annulment proceeding.

After considering the Parties’ respective positions, on February 1, 2019, the Committee

informed the Parties of its decision:

e To strike from the record of this proceeding: (i) factual exhibits RA-7 and RA-21, and

(ii) paragraph 79 of the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial.

e To authorize the Respondent to replace factual exhibit R-11 with a clean version of

such document in the electronic file-sharing folder created for this case.

On February 18, 2019, the Applicants filed their Reply Memorial in support of their
Application for Annulment (the “Reply on Annulment”) together with exhibits AA-41 to
AA-48 and legal authorities AALA-111 to AALA-138.

On April 24, 2019, the Committee and the Parties were advised that Ms. Sara Marzal
Yetano, ICSID Legal Counsel, would be replacing Ms. Marisa Planells-Valero as Secretary

of the Committee.

On May 18, 2019, the Respondent filed its Rejoinder to the Applicants’ Application for
Annulment (the “Rejoinder on Annulment”) without any new exhibits or legal

authorities.

THE REPRESENTATION OF VENEZUELA

On March 27, 2019, the Secretary-General received a communication (PER-26-2019) from
Mr. José Ignacio Hernandez G., professing to act as Special Attorney General of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, concerning the representation of the Republic of
Venezuela before ICSID. Mr. Hernandez requested that any notice or communication from
ICSID to the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela should be addressed solely to

Mr. Hernandez in his capacity as Special Attorney General of the Republic of Venezuela,

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

and not to any other person claiming to act on behalf of the Bolivarian Republic of

Venezuela.”

On March 28, 2019, the Secretary-General transmitted Mr. Hernandez’s communication

of March 27, 2019 (PER-26-2019) to the Parties and the Members of the Committee.

On April 4, 2019, the Committee informed the Parties that it had decided to address the
question of the representation of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in this proceeding
as a preliminary matter. Further, the Committee decided to (i) suspend the procedural
calendar, and (ii) invite the individuals appearing on behalf of the Applicants, the
individuals appearing on behalf of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, and
Mr. Hernandez to file two rounds of simultaneous submissions on the questions raised by

Mr. Hernandez’s communication on April 18 and May 2, 2019.

On April 4, 2019, Dr. Reinaldo Enrique Mufioz Pedroza, in his capacity as Procurador
General de la Repiblica (E), Procuraduria General de la Repiblica, presented a
communication addressing Mr. Hernandez’s communication of March 27, 2019

(PER-26-2019) and the Secretary-General’s communication of March 28, 2019.7

Pursuant to the schedule set by the Committee, on April 18, 2019, Dr. Henry Rodriguez
Facchinetti in his capacity of Gerente General de Litigio, Procuraduria General de la
Repitiblica, the Applicants and Mr. Hernandez, professing to act as Special Attorney

General of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, submitted their observations.*

On April 24, 2019, the Committee informed the Parties that it considered the issue of the
representation of the Respondent to have been sufficiently briefed and did not wish to

receive further communications on this matter.

? Communication (PER-26-2019) from Mr. José Ignacio Hernandez to ICSID, March 27, 2019.
3 Communication from Dr. Reinaldo Enrique Mujioz Pedroza to ICSID, April 4, 2019.

4 Communication from Mr. José Ignacio Hernandez to ICSID, April 18, 2019.

6

31. On April 29, 2019, the Secretary-General received a communication (PER-55-2019) from
Mr. Hernandez following up on his letter of March 27, 2019.°

32. On April 30, 2019, the Secretariat transmitted Mr. Herndndez’s communication of
April 29, 2019 (PER-55-2019) to the representatives of the parties on record and to the
members of the tribunals and annulment committees constituted in each of the cases before
ICSID involving the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, including the present annulment

proceeding.

33. On May 3, 2019, after giving to all involved the opportunity to fully present their positions,
the Committee ruled that “the evidence on record does not justify a change in the status
quo. For this reason, and taking into account considerations of fairness to both Parties
and the efficiency of the proceedings, the Committee sees no basis to hold that, for purposes
of this annulment proceeding, the representation of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

has changed.” Further, the Committee lifted the suspension of the procedural calendar.

D. THE HEARING ON ANNULMENT

34. By communication of May 17, 2019, the Secretary of the Committee circulated a draft
pre-hearing organizational meeting agenda to the Parties in preparation for the upcoming
hearing on annulment. The Parties were invited to confer on the agenda items and to
submit, by May 28, 2019, a joint proposal advising the Committee of any agreements they
were able to reach, or of their respective positions where they were unable to reach an

agreement.

35. By communications of May 28 and 29, 2019, the Parties submitted their joint proposal on
the procedural matters included in the draft pre-hearing organizational meeting agenda.
The Parties reached an agreement on all items in the agenda and therefore requested that,
unless the Committee wished to discuss any other procedural matter, the pre-hearing

organizational conference meeting be cancelled.

> Communication (PER-55-2019) from Mr. José Ignacio Hernandez to ICSID, April 29, 2019.

7

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

In light of the Parties’ agreements, on May 31, 2019, the Committee cancelled the pre-
hearing organizational meeting, and, on June 5, 2019, the Committee issued Procedural

Order No. 2 recording such agreements.

By letter of June 18, 2019, the Applicants requested authorization from the Committee to
introduce into the record the “Decision on Italy’s request for Immediate Termination and
Italy’s Jurisdictional Objection based on Inapplicability of the Energy Charter Treaty to
Intra-EU Disputes” issued in Eskosol S.p.A. in liquidazione v. Italian Republic (ICSID
Case No. ARB/15/50) on May 7, 2019 (“Eskosol v. Italy’).

By letter of June 24, 2019, the Respondent submitted to the Committee its observations on

the Applicants’ request of June 18, 2019.

On June 26, 2019, after considering the Parties’ respective positions, the Committee
decided to grant the Applicants’ request and admit into the record the decision on
jurisdictional objections issued in Eskosol v. Italy. Pursuant to the Committee’s decision,
on June 27, 2019, the Applicants submitted into the record such decision (as legal authority

AALA-139).

The hearing on annulment was held in the Bosphorous Room of the Hearing Centre of the
International Chamber of Commerce in Paris, France, from July 10-11, 2019 (the “Hearing

on Annulment”). The following persons were present at the Hearing on Annulment:

Committee:
Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda President
Prof. Diego P. Fernandez Arroyo Member
Dr. Inka Hanefeld Member
ICSID Secretariat:
Ms. Sara Marzal Yetano Secretary of the Committee
For the Applicants:
Mr. Robert Volterra Volterra Fietta
Mr. Alvaro Nistal Volterra Fietta
Mr. Govert Coppens Volterra Fietta

Al.

42.

43.

Mr. Roberto Lupini
Mr. Ricardo Gerhard

For the Respondent:

Dr. Reinaldo Mufioz Pedroza
Mr. Osvaldo Guglielmino
Mr. Guillermo Moro

Mr. Alejandro Vulejser

Ms. Camila Guglielmino

Court Reporters:

Mr. Dante Rinaldi
Ms. Michelle Kirkpatrick

Interpreters:

Ms. Amalia Thaler - de Klemm

Mr. Jesus Getan Bornn
Ms. Ronzana Dazin

THE POST-HEARING PROCEDURE

Volterra Fietta
Volterra Fietta

Procuraduria General de la Reptblica
Bolivariana de Venezuela
Guglielmino Derecho Internacional
Guglielmino Derecho Internacional
Guglielmino Derecho Internacional
Guglielmino Derecho Internacional

The Parties filed their statements of costs on August 10 and 12, 2019.

On September 25, 2019, the Committee declared the proceeding closed in accordance with

ICSID Arbitration Rules 53 and 38(1).

SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS

As noted above, the Applicants seek the annulment of the Award on two of the five grounds
for annulment set forth in Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention: (i) the Tribunal

manifestly exceeded its powers; and (ii) the Award fails to state the reasons on which it is

based.

44.

4S.

46.

Below is asummary of the Parties’ arguments on each of the grounds of annulment invoked

by the Applicants.°

APPLICANTS’ ARGUMENTS
qd) Manifest Excess of Powers

The Applicants refer first to the standard applicable for annulment under Article 52(1)(b)
of the ICSID Convention. This provision requires that the Tribunal has exceeded its powers
and that the excess is manifest. With regard to the first requirement, the Applicants affirm
on the basis of previous decisions of ICSID annulment committees that a tribunal may
exceed its powers if it does not exercise the jurisdiction it has or if it exercises jurisdiction
when jurisdiction does not exist.” Similarly, a tribunal may exceed its powers if it wrongly
establishes the relevant facts or fails to apply the proper law.* While an error of
interpretation of the law does not meet the threshold for annulment, a misinterpretation or
misapplication may be so gross as to amount to a failure to apply the law, “particularly on

questions of jurisdiction.”®

As regards the requirement that the excess be manifest, the Applicants refer to the various
interpretations of this term by annulment committees: for some, “manifest” means that the
excess is “easily understood or recognized by the mind;”'® for others, it refers to the extent

1

or consequences of the excess;!! and finally, for a third group, the excess must be both

clear and serious.!? The Applicants submit that these nuances of interpretation are

© The summary of the Parties’ positions that appears below is not intended to be a comprehensive survey of all points
that they made, but rather to identify their principal positions. The Committee has taken into account the full range of
arguments advanced by the Parties.

7 Memorial on Annulment, { 27.
® Memorial on Annulment, {ff 28 and 31.

° Memorial on Annulment, {| 32.

‘© Memorial on Annulment, { 35. The quotation is from Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, ICSID
Case No. ARB/02/16, Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Application for Annulment of the Award, June 29, 2010,

q2u.

'! Memorial on Annulment, 36.

"? Memorial on Annulment, J 38.

47.

48.

49.

immaterial in the present case because the “manifest” requirement is met under all of

them."

In their Reply on Annulment, the Applicants reject the Respondent’s “unduly narrow” view
on the extent to which annulment committees may review the underlying award under
Article 52(1)(b).'4 First, the Applicants point out that the kKompetenz-kompetenz principle
does not entail an unlimited degree of deference towards jurisdictional decisions.'° On the
contrary, Applicants insist that annulment committees must undertake a full and
independent analysis of the applicable rules and facts of the case, particularly as regards
jurisdiction.'© Second, the Applicants maintain that the term “manifest” does not mean that
annulment committees cannot conduct an elaborate analysis of the award.!7 Third, the
Applicants reiterate that gross errors in the application of the laws may amount to manifest
excess of powers.!* In sum, the Applicants contend that “in determining whether the
Tribunal exceeded its powers, the Committee must review the Tribunal’s factual and legal
findings, including by assessing whether it ‘properly [...] appl{ied] the relevant rules of

interpretation’ codified in the VCLT to the BIT and the ICSID Convention.” '?

The Applicants argue that, in failing to interpret the BIT and ICSID Convention in
accordance with the rules codified in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
(“VCLT”), the Tribunal failed to acknowledge its jurisdiction and thus manifestly

exceeded its powers under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention.

In particular, the Applicants argue that, by the ordinary meaning of Article 9(1) and (4) of
the BIT, the Respondent unconditionally consented to arbitration and that such consent
subsists throughout the life of the BIT, but the Tribunal failed to analyze and give effect to

the terms of that provision when it stated that the consent was “conditional upon actions

3 Memorial on Annulment, { 39.
4 Reply on Annulment, | 46.
'5 Reply on Annulment, 1 48.

'6 Reply on Annulment, { 50.
"7 Reply on Annulment, {ff 56 to 62.
'8 Reply on Annulment, {ff 63 to 68.
© Reply on Annulment, | 69.

50.

51.

52.

53.

taken by the Contracting Parties to the BIT in their capacities as Contracting States to the
ICSID Convention.” The Tribunal thereby transformed the unconditional consent in the
BIT into a consent entirely conditional on the Respondent’s unilateral actions under a

different treaty.7!

The Applicants further argue that the interpretation of the Tribunal is contrary to the
context of Article 9(1) and (4) of the BIT, that is, the remaining terms of Article 9 and to
the other provisions of the BIT. Article 14 is the last article of the BIT and provides that
in case the BIT terminates, the previous articles continue to be effective for another 15
years. The interpretation of the Tribunal, which would enable the Respondent to terminate
the BIT simply by filing a notice of denunciation for a different treaty, renders Article 14(3)

pointless to the extent it applies to Article 9.75

The Applicants also refer to Article 9(2) of the BIT which applied before Venezuela
became a party to the ICSID Convention and provides the consent to arbitration under the
Additional Facility Rules. The Applicants argue that “for at least as long as the Respondent
is a party to the ICSID Convention, those disputes [disputes under Article 9(1)] shall be

submitted to ICSID arbitration pursuant to Article 9(1).”*+

The Applicants question whether the Tribunal’s interpretation of Article 9 meets the
requirement of interpretation in good faith.?> It fails as a reasonable interpretation and

deprives Article 9 and Article 14(3) of any meaningful effect.”°

According to the Applicants, the Tribunal’s interpretation is contrary to the object and
purpose of the BIT, which is to encourage and protect investments by providing access to

a neutral dispute settlement mechanism (which is what distinguishes a BIT from “mere

2° Memorial on Annulment, { 49, quoting { 260 of the Award.
2! Memorial on Annulment, { 61.

?? Memorial on Annulment, {[ 62.

3 Memorial on Annulment, {[ 64.

4 Memorial on Annulment, [ 65.

°5 Memorial on Annulment, {| 66.

?6 Memorial on Annulment, {[ 66.

54.

55.

56.

political declarations”).”’ For the Applicants, had the Contracting Parties intended to
subordinate access to ICSID arbitration to a possible, future political decision to file a
notice of denunciation of the ICSID Convention, they would have done so explicitly, as

other investment treaties do.”*

The Tribunal’s interpretation is also contrary to the principle of pacta sunt servanda
enshrined in Article 26 of the VCLT because it enables the Respondent to escape its
obligation to the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Dutch investors.”? It is also contrary
to Article 43 of the VCLT, which does not permit that treaty obligations be evaded by

indirect means.*°
The Applicants conclude:

[i]n sum, had the Tribunal fulfilled its obligation to interpret the BIT
in accordance with the rules codified in the VCLT, the conclusion
would have been clear: Venezuela’s unconditional consent to ICSID
arbitration enshrined in Article 9 subsisted on 20 July 2012, when
the Applicants’ filed the RFA. By straying from its obligation, the
Tribunal failed to acknowledge its jurisdiction and manifestly
exceeded its powers under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID
Convention.*!

In their Reply on Annulment, the Applicants argue that the Respondent’s Counter-
Memorial on Annulment fails to rebut any of these points or to engage with the applicable
treaty interpretation rules. Instead, its principal response is simply to note that the
interpretative issues were already ventilated during the Arbitration. However, the

Applicants contend that that does not undermine their arguments.*”

2 Memorial on Annulment, { 67.

°8 Memorial on Annulment, [ 70. The Applicants cite as an example, Article XII.4(a) of the Agreement between the
Government of Canada and the Government of the Republic of Venezuela for the Promotion and Protection of

Investments,

signed on July 1, 1996 (AALA-49).

 

2° Memorial on Annulment, {71 and 72.

8 Memorial on Annulment, 74. See also Memorial on Annulment { 76.

3! Memorial on Annulment, { 78. See also Reply on Annulment, {{ 74 to 76.
* Reply on Annulment, ff 77 and 79. See also {ff 80 to 94.

13

57.

58.

59.

The Applicants further argue that the Tribunal misinterpreted Article 71 of the Convention
in a way that amounts to a disapplication of Article 71.°° The Tribunal saw Article 71 as
only regulating the effects from a notice of denunciation in respect of the State as a
Contracting State to the Convention and the consequences of the denunciation in an ICSID
arbitration as being governed by Article 72. According to the Applicants, this interpretation
is contrary to the ordinary meaning of Article 71, in that “nothing in Article 71 suggests a
notice of denunciation immediately prevents the nationals of other Contracting States from
accepting the consent to ICSID arbitration previously given by the denouncing State in
other instruments.”** It is also contrary to the context of Article 71. The core jurisdictional
provision —Article 25 of the Convention— does not distinguish between Contracting States

that have filed a notice of dispute and those that have not.°

The Applicants contend that the Tribunal’s interpretation of Article 71 is contrary to the
object and purpose of the Convention because it limits “the ability to settle investment
disputes during the Six-Month Period.”* It is also contrary to the requirement of good faith
because it leads to unreasonable situations, as “it would allow an ICSID Convention
Contracting State to embark on a wide-scale expropriation programme against foreign
investors and then prevent those investors from exercising their right under any applicable
investment treaties [...].”*’ It also deprives of full effect the sentence in Article 71 that

reads, “[t]he denunciation shall take effect six months after receipt of such notice.”*®

Furthermore, the Tribunal’s interpretation is inconsistent with the generally accepted

rationale of waiting periods in treaty provisions.*? The Applicants point out that the drafters

3 Memorial on Annulment, { 85.

4 Memorial on Annulment, { 86. See also Reply on Annulment, {{ 100 to 107.

38 Memorial on Annulment, { 88. See also Reply on Annulment, {[ 108 to 111.

57 Memorial on Annulment, { 92. See also Reply on Annulment, {{{ 119 and 120.

1
1

3 Memorial on Annulment, {[ 91. See also Reply on Annulment, {{[ 112 to 118.
1
1

38 Memorial on Annulment, { 93. See also Reply on Annulment, {{{ 121 and 122.

°° Memorial on Annulment, { 94. See also Reply on Annulment, {{ 124 to 127, where the Applicants refer to a series
of decisions of other international courts and tribunals regarding similar waiting periods, including: the Case
Concerning Military and Paramilitary Activities in and against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States of America),

Jurisdiction of the Court and Admiss

 

ibility of the Application, Judgement, November 26, 1984, I.C.J. Reports 1984,

p. 392, para. 13 (AALA-83); the Case of Hilaire v. Trinidad and Tobago, Inter-Am. Ct. H.R. (ser. C) No. 80, Judgment
(Preliminary Objections), September 1, 2001 (AALA-113); and the Second Greek Case (Application No. 4448/70,
Denmark, Norway and Sweden v. Greece), Partial Decision of the Commission as to the Admissibility of the

14

of the ICSID Convention could have included language that gave immediate effect to the
notice of denunciation as in the case of the treaties establishing the Bretton Woods
institutions. The Applicants contend that “[t]hey deliberately chose not to adopt such
language.”*° They also contend that the Tribunal’s interpretation contradicts the customary
international law regulating the consequences of a State’s denunciation of a treaty as

codified in Article 70 of the VCLT.!

60. The Applicants also dispute the Tribunal’s interpretation of Article 72 in the Award.
According to the Applicants, the Tribunal concluded that Article 72 means the opposite of
what its clear terms say.’? First, the Tribunal read the words “consent ... by one of them”
to mean “mutual consent”.** Second, “the Tribunal was not allowed to apply, a contrario,
its own misinterpretation of Article 72 to conclude, with no textual basis whatsoever, that
the Notice of Denunciation produced effects from the very same day it was received by the
depositary, depriving the Six-Month Period in Article 71 of any meaningful effect.”**

61. In this regard, the Applicants refer to the International Court of Justice (“ICJ”) case
concerning Alleged Violations of Sovereign Rights and Maritime Spaces in the Caribbean
Sea (“Nicaragua vy. Colombia”).*° For the Applicants, given the incontrovertible
similarities between such case and the present proceeding, the ICJ’s unanimous findings
confirm that the Tribunal exceeded its powers by refusing to exercise its jurisdiction on an

impermissible a contrario interpretation.*°

Application, May 26, 1970 in Yearbook Of The European Convention On Human Rights (Martinus Nijhoff, 1972), p.
110 (AALA-117).

“© Memorial on Annulment, 95.

4! Memorial on Annulment, | 96. See also Reply on Annulment, {{{ 128 to 134.

2 Memorial on Annulment, { 104.

8 Memorial on Annulment, 105. See also #¥{ 108 to 153. See also Reply on Annulment, {{[ 145 to 159.

4 Memorial on Annulment, { 106. See also {ff 154 to 172.

+5 Alleged Violations of Sovereign Rights and Maritime Spaces in the Caribbean Sea (“Nicaragua v. Colombia”),
Preliminary Objections, Judgement of March 17, 2016, ICJ Reports 2016, p. 3 (AALA-81).

46 Memorial on Annulment, {| 172. See also Reply on Annulment, §{f 163 to 165. In their Reply on Annulment, the
Applicants stress that they could not have made their arguments regarding the Nicaragua-~Colombia ICJ case before
since these are arguments that relate to the Tribunal’s reasoning in the Award. See Reply on Annulment, {J 199 to
221.

15

62. In response to Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on Annulment, the Applicants contend that
the Tribunal’s conclusion that Article 72 only protects mutual consent is also contrary to
the drafting history of the ICSID Convention.*” Further, they also stress that they have
always maintained consistent interpretations of Articles 71 and 72,** and have never
claimed that investors can accept open offers to arbitrate at any time. Instead, they have
consistently argued that, “pursuant to Article 14(3) of the BIT, the Respondent’s consent to
ICSID arbitration ‘shall continue to be effective for a further period of fifteen years from

[the date of the termination of the BIT].’”*°

63. The Applicants refer to the “unitary jurisprudence of ICSID tribunals,”®° including those
dealing with the Notice of Denunciation, in their understanding that notices filed by a
Contracting State under the ICSID Convention may not modify unilaterally the consent
given by that State in another treaty.*! According to the Applicants, this unity in the
jurisprudence “underscores the manifest nature of the Favianca Tribunal’s excess of
powers.”>> Furthermore, all of these relevant decisions were part of the record of the
Arbitration and “[t]he Tribunal had a duty to either adopt a solution that was consistent

with those decisions or explain the reasons that compelled it to diverge from them.”** The

47 Reply on Annulment, §{f 182 to 194.

48 Reply on Annulment, if 222 to 227.

4° Reply on Annulment, {[ 228. See also {229 to 235.

5° Memorial on Annulment, p. 57. Reply on Annulment, p. 90.

5! Memorial on Annulment, { 173. See also {| 174 to 204. The Applicants refer to the following awards: Murphy
Exploration and Production Company International v. Republic of Ecuador, (CSID Case No. ARB/08/4, Award on
Jurisdiction, December 15, 2010 (AALA-57), in Memorial on Annulment, ff 174 to 178; Transban Investments Corp.
v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/24, Award, November 22, 2017 (AALA-11), in
Memorial on Annulment, {{] 179 and 180 and 200 to 203; Inversién y Gestién de Bienes, IGB, S.L. and IGB18 Las
Rozas, S.L. v. Kingdom of Spain, \CSID Case No. ARB/12/17, Decision on Jurisdiction, June 21, 2013 (AALA-7), in
Memorial on Annulment, {ff 182 to 184; Blue Bank International & Trust (Barbados) Ltd. v. Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/20, Award, April 26, 2017 (AALA-9), in Memorial on Annulment, {| 193 to
199; and Venoklim Holding B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/22, Award, April 3,
2015 (AALA-8), in Memorial on Annulment, {ff 185 to 192. Reply on Annulment, { 237. In their Reply on Annulment,
the Applicants also refer to the award in UP and C.D. Holding Internationale v. Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/35,
of October 9, 2018, as a further award that both confirms the Applicants’ arguments regarding the effects of the Notice
of Denunciation and contradicts the Award. See Reply on Annulment, {{f 254 to 265.

2 Memorial on Annulment, {| 204.

53 Memorial on Annulment, {| 205.

64.

65.

66.

67.

Applicants argue that, because it did not do either, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its

powers.**

The Applicants further argue that the Tribunal manifestly erred in establishing the facts,
disregarding evidence that confirmed that the Claimants had accepted Venezuela’s offer to
ICSID arbitration long before the Notice of Denunciation was even issued.*> Indeed,
according to the Applicants, they sent to the Respondent no fewer than 19 letters exercising
their substantive rights and expressly reserving their procedural rights under the BIT in
relation to this dispute; these letters were “unequivocal manifestations of the Applicants’
intention to submit the Dispute to ICSID arbitration in the event that the Respondent failed
to comply with its obligation under BIT Article 6 to pay ‘just compensation’ for the

expropriation of the Applicants’ investments.”°°

The Applicants add that, at that time, ICSID arbitration was the only arbitration forum
available to the Claimants and that, therefore, the only procedural right that the Claimants
could have been asserting and reserving at the time was the right to resort to ICSID

arbitration.°”

The Applicants stress that Venezuela’s own witnesses admitted in their statements and at
the Arbitration hearing that they knew about the Claimants’ intention to submit the dispute

to ICSID arbitration.**

The Applicants point out that this crucial question was disposed of by the Tribunal in a
footnote in which it summarily dismissed the Claimants’ argument because (i) it
contradicted the earlier position of the Claimants, (ii) it was raised late in the proceedings,
and (iii) the letters in question did not specifically refer to the ICSID Convention.*® The
Applicants contend that none of these reasons are valid. First, the Claimants only became

aware of the evidence and the concessions of the Respondent’s witnesses at the Arbitration

54 Memorial on Annulment, [ 205. See also 4{{ 206 to 226. Reply on Annulment, {{[ 266 to 291.
55 Memorial on Annulment, { 228. See also {ff 229 to 236.

56 Memorial on Annulment, 237. See also 4¥[ 238 to 245. Reply on Annulment, {| 293.

57 Memorial on Annulment, 246. Reply on Annulment, {{ 322.

58 Memorial on Annulment, 247. See also 4¥{ 248 to 250. Reply on Annulment, {| 293.

5° Memorial on Annulment, 251. Reply on Annulment, {{ 300.

17

68.

69.

hearing, and the Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief of June 6, 2016 (the “Post-Hearing
Brief’) was the first procedural opportunity they had to address it.°! Second, the
acceptance of Venezuela’s offer cannot be negated by the Claimants’ previous reliance on
their July 20, 2012 letter and in their Request for Arbitration of the same date (the “Request
62

for Arbitration’ Finally, there is no rule that requires investors to mention the ICSID

Convention when they accept the offer of ICSID arbitration.

The Applicants also contend that the Award must be annulled because the Tribunal
manifestly exceeded its powers by failing to apply the proper law. In particular, the
Tribunal acknowledged that Article 9 of the BIT was a core provision but failed to apply
it. The Tribunal also failed to apply Article 71 of the ICSID Convention because it
concluded that it was irrelevant for purposes of determining the effects of the Notice of
Denunciation.® Further, the Tribunal misinterpreted and misapplied Article 72 for the
reasons already set forth above: it “misinterpreted the express terms of Article 72 by
concluding that the words ‘consent [...] by one of them’ must refer to ‘mutual consent”,
and “based its Award on an impermissible, a contrario interpretation of its misreading of

Article 72.”

(2) Failure to State the Reasons

The Applicants submit that the Award should be annulled because of a failure to state
reasons. The Applicants understand that the legal standard for annulment under Article

52(1)(e) may be met in multiple ways. First, when the Tribunal fails to deal with an

© Post-Hearing Brief (Exhibit AA-40).

©! Memorial on Annulment, {ff 253 to 255. Reply on Annulment, {{{ 301 and 302. The Applicants stress that even
though the letters were already in the record before the Arbitration hearing, the Claimants could not have made their
argument without the confirmations given for the first time at the Arbitration hearing by Respondent’s witnesses,

because the oral evidence of such witness

 

“showed that there was—and had been—a ‘meeting of the minds’ as to

the meaning and significance of the Applicant’s letters”. Reply on Annulment, { 315. Additionally, the Applicants
argue that there is a difference between Mr Sarmiento’s witness statement and his oral testimony, since at the hearing
he “expressly confirmed that Venezuela ‘knew’ about the Applicants’ intention to submit the dispute to ICSID
arbitration.” Reply on Annulment, {{ 316.

© Memorial on Annulment, { 253.

© Memorial on Annulment, 257. Reply on Annulment, {{ 303.

© Memorial on Annulment, { 263. Reply on Annu
5 Memorial on Annulment, 271. Reply on Annu

ment, { 333.

H
H
Iment, 4 336.
H

© Memorial on Annulment, 272. Reply on Annulment, {{ 337.

18

outcome-determinative point defined as “a question that either has the potential of altering
the tribunal’s conclusions or is necessary to understand those conclusions." Second,
annulment under this ground may also be warranted when the award provides reasons but
they are insufficient or inadequate reasons (which are as bad as non-existent reasons).°*
Third, the award may also be annulled if it fails to address highly relevant evidence. The
relevance of the evidence may be determined from “an objective standpoint—based on the
impact it could have had on the outcome of the proceeding—or from a subjective one —

based on the importance that the parties place on such evidence.””°

70. According to the Applicants, the Award should be annulled because its failure to state
reasons meets the requirements for annulment set forth above. First, the Tribunal did not
engage and deal with the outcome-determinative question of the consent of the Claimants
before the date of the Notice of Denunciation evidenced in the oral testimony at the hearing.
Despite the fact that in their Post-Hearing Brief the Claimants explained that the
concessions by the Respondent’s witnesses meant that there was no factual basis for the
Respondent’s jurisdictional objection regarding the effects of its Notice of Denunciation,”!
the Tribunal “rejected the Applicants’ argument without analyzing the critical legal
significance of that oral testimony.””? Second, the evidence provided by the Respondent’ s
witnesses was highly relevant, both under an objective or a subjective standard. Yet, the
Tribunal did not even mention the crucial piece of oral evidence.” Third, the Tribunal did
not provide adequate and sufficient reasons for its finding that the Applicants’ letters did
not constitute consent to ICSID arbitration.”* The Tribunal should have “(a) set out the
rules governing consent under the BIT and the ICSID Convention; (b) analyse both the

content of the Letters and the circumstances surrounding their submission to the

© Memorial on Annulment, 282. Reply on Annulment, {[ 350.

8 Memorial on Annulment, 283. See also #{[ 284 to 287. Reply on Annulment, {| 362.
Memorial on Annulment, 288. Reply on Annulment, {[ 358.

7 Memorial on Annulment, { 290.

™! Memorial on Annulment, {| 287. See also Reply on Annulment, {ff 368 to 373.

7 Memorial on Annulment, 294.

73 Memorial on Annulment, { 297.

74 Memorial on Annulment, { 298. Reply on Annulment, {ff 382 to 385.

19

71.

72.

73.

Respondent; and (c) explain why in its opinion, the Letters failed to meet the applicable

legal standard. The Tribunal failed to do so.”"°

The Applicants conclude that “the Tribunal’s reasons cannot possibly constitute ‘a

reasonable basis for the solution arrived at.”’”®

RESPONDENT’S ARGUMENTS

qd) Nature and Scope of the Annulment Mechanism

The Respondent refers first to the nature and scope of annulment.’’ According to the
Respondent, annulment is not an appeal or a mechanism to correct alleged errors of fact or
law that a tribunal may have committed. Rather, it is a limited remedy to ensure the fairness
of the proceeding: “Jn sum, annulment is an extraordinary remedy established as an
exception to the finality of awards. Therefore, the grounds for annulment are exhaustive
and are aimed at guaranteeing the integrity of the tribunal, the proceedings, and the
award.”"* Based on the decisions of previous ICSID committees, the Respondent asserts
that annulment committees (a) accord a degree of deference to tribunals’ reasonable
decisions on jurisdiction,” (b) may not review a tribunal’s analysis of the facts or the
probative value assigned to the evidence on the record,*° (c) may not consider new
arguments or evidence not seen or heard by a tribunal,*! and (d) may not review an award
because it disagrees with the tribunal’s decision which identified and applied the applicable

2
law.*?

The Respondent then addresses the grounds for annulment alleged by the Applicants.

75 Memorial on Annulment, { 299.

% Memorial on Annulment, { 301, The quote is from Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates, ICSID Case
No. ARB/02/7, Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Application for Annulment of Mr Soufraki, June 5, 2007,
123 (hereinafter Soufraki).

7 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, ff 38 to 74.

8 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 54. See also Rejoinder on Annulment, 22.

9 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, f{ 55 to 57.

80 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {{[ 58 to 62.
8! Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {J 63 to 67.
82 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {ff 68 to 74.

20

74.

75.

76.

(2) Manifest Excess of Powers

The Respondent first argues that annulment committees, when dealing with manifest
excesses of power in matters of jurisdiction, have to pay due heed to the Kompetenz-
Kompetenz principle enshrined in Article 41 of the ICSID Convention.*? The Respondent
recognizes that this principle does not shield the Award from annulment under Article
52(1)(b), rather it favors a presumption of deference to the Tribunal.** As stated by the
Azurix annulment committee, “Jf [...] reasonable minds might differ as to whether or not
the tribunal has jurisdiction, that issue falls to be resolved definitively by the tribunal in
exercise of its power under Article 41 before the award is given, rather than by an ad hoc

committee under Article 52(1)(b) after the award has been given.”*>

The Respondent disputes the existence of a duty to adopt the same interpretation as

previous tribunals or to explain the reasons which compelled the tribunal to diverge from

 

them. The principle of stare decisis does not apply in international law.*° It does not apply
to the ICJ either and, in “the context of the ICSID Convention, the situation is even more
extreme since each arbitral tribunal constituted within the framework of the Convention is
an ad hoc tribunal which is constituted solely for the purpose of the relevant dispute, only
has competence over that particular dispute, and is not bound by the conclusions reached

by other tribunals constituted under the Convention.”®”

As regards excess of powers due to a failure to apply the applicable law, the Respondent
affirms that “a committee only has jurisdiction to analyze whether the tribunal acted within
its competence and is not competent to evaluate which is the most preferable interpretation
out of all possible interpretations of the applicable law.”*® The Respondent argues that the
Applicants simply disagree with the interpretation of the applicable law by the Tribunal,

but an annulment committee does not have the power to reinterpret the facts and legal

83 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, J 85.

* Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 89. See also Rejoinder on Annulment, #{{ 45 to 52.

85 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, 87, quoting Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/O1/12,
Decision on Annulment, September 1, 2009, {ff 67-68 (hereinafter Azurix).

8 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {{{ 100 to 105.
® Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {{ 101.

88 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 107.

21

77.

78.

79.

positions already discussed by the Tribunal.*® While the Respondent does not deny that
some committees have held that, in exceptional cases, a sufficiently egregious or flagrant
error of law could be equivalent to the non-application of the applicable law, these are
extreme cases that differ greatly from the mere disagreement regarding the criteria chosen

by the Tribunal that the Applicants claim in this case.°°

The Respondent then turns to the requirement that the excess of powers must be “manifest.”
The Respondent understands manifest as requiring an excess of power to be obvious,
extremely serious, and plain enough to not require an elaborate analysis of the text of the

award.?!

In applying the legal standard to the facts of the case, the Respondent claims that the
Tribunal applied the proper law in interpreting the BIT and the ICSID Convention. As
expressed by the Tribunal, the question to be answered is the effect of Venezuela’s
denunciation of the ICSID Convention on the consent to ICSID arbitration contained in the
BIT. The Respondent argues that it is undisputable that the jurisdiction of an ICSID tribunal
requires compliance not only with the BIT in question, but also with the ICSID Convention,

as stated by the Tribunal in the Award and recognized by the Applicants.”

The Respondent defends the distinction made by the Tribunal between Article 71 and 72
of the ICSID Convention. According to the Respondent, the Applicants are “unable to
understand the difference between the rights and obligations of Contracting States as
Contracting States under the Convention and the rights and obligations of a party to an
arbitration under the Convention.” Further, the Tribunal’ s analysis of Articles 71,72 and
25 of the Convention was carried out by the Tribunal in accordance with Article 31 of

VCLT; it does not contradict the customary international law on the consequences of

* Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {[ 109 to 113. See also Rejoinder on Annulment, {ff 53 and 58.
° Rejoinder on Annulment, 53.

°! Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {{ 114 to 123. See also Rejoinder on Annulment, {{ 32 to 44.
°2 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {[ 135 to 139. See also Rejoinder on Annulment, {{[ 85 to 87.
°3 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 155.

22

80.

81.

82.

83.

denunciation of multilateral treaties, and is consistent with the drafting history of the ICSID

Convention.”

The Respondent argues that the Applicants’ interpretation of Article 71 and Article 72 is

mutually inconsistent:

[Applicants] suggest, on the one hand, that the text of Article 72 of
the Convention should be ignored and that the six-month period
contained in Article 71 be deemed as a period in which consent may
be perfected. On the other hand, they propose an interpretation
whereby the consent referred to in Article 72 means unilateral
consent, which would allow any investor to accept an open offer to
arbitrate at any time. Both interpretations cannot be advanced
simultaneously as they are mutually inconsistent.°°

The Respondent claims that the argument a contrario developed in the Memorial on
Annulment on the basis of the Nicaragua v. Colombia case is inadmissible because it is a
new argument and, in any case, it is mistaken.°° Among other things, the Respondent
stresses that the present case does not feature key elements that were present in the
Nicaragua v. Colombia case, which “prevents the consideration that the ICJ’s decision

supports in any sense the [Applicants]’ appellatory claim.”*"

The Respondent reiterates that disregard of a precedent of a tribunal under the ICSID
Convention could never be a ground for annulment®®. The Respondent also disputes that
there is a consistent line of precedents or that the “Tribunal failed to state the reasons that

led it to depart from the alleged precedents on the matter.”°?

The Respondent argues that the Applicant’s claim regarding the alleged lack of application
of Article 9 of the BIT and Articles 71 and 72 of the Convention masks a mere

disagreement with the Tribunal’s interpretation relative to the applicable law. Further, the

° Rejoinder on Annulment, {¥{ 144 to 147.

°5 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 21 1. Rejoinder on Annulment, {{[ 150 to 168.

° Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {{{ 213 to 221. Rejoinder on Annulment, {| 169 to 197.
®? Rejoinder on Annulment, { 197.

°8 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 223. Rejoinder on Annulment, {{ 198 to 206.

% Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 227.

23

84.

85.

Respondent stresses that the Applicants have failed to show that the Tribunal’s
interpretation is untenable or unreasonable and therefore have failed to meet the high

standard required for this annulment ground to succeed. !°°

The Respondent also contests the assertion that the Tribunal did not accurately establish
the facts as regards the alleged acceptance of the offer to arbitrate the dispute before the
filing of the Request for Arbitration on July 20, 2012. The Respondent contends that
“Claimants’ mere disagreement with the way in which the Tribunal weighed the arguments
and the evidence on the record does not constitute valid grounds for seeking annulment of
the Award.” °! The Respondent points out that what is now characterized as a fundamental
issue was given short shrift throughout the proceeding, and was only briefly raised in the
Post-Hearing Brief.'°* In contrast, from the time of the Request for Arbitration the
Applicants asserted that they gave their consent when they filed the said Request. The
Respondent affirms that the “Claimants are asking the Committee to annul the Award
because the Tribunal established that the facts relating to their acceptance of the offer to

arbitrate took place just as Claimants stated during the original proceeding.”'

The Respondent points out that by raising this issue in the Post-Hearing Brief (which was
filed simultaneously with Respondent’s) the “Claimants deprived the Republic of the
possibility of presenting its own arguments in this respect and exercising its right of
defence before the Tribunal.” The Respondent denies that the argument could not have
been made before the Arbitration hearing because the oral testimony of Mr. Sarmiento was
known only at such hearing. The Respondent points out that “Mr. Sarmiento’s written
witness statement is virtually identical to the statement given during his examination at the
hearing in this regard.”'®> The Respondent observes that the written testimony of Mr.

Sarmiento had been available since the Rejoinder on the Merits and the letters were on the

10 Rejoinder on Annulment, {if 88, 92, 93, 96, 97 and 148.
©! Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 233.
2 Rejoinder on Annulment, {ff 224 and 225.

103

Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 245. See also Rejoinder on Annulment, {ff 215 to 220.

4 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 249.

105

Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 255.

24

record long before the Arbitration hearing.'°° The Respondent also points out that the
Applicants take a position on the admissibility of tardy jurisdictional arguments which
contradicts their position in the original phase of the proceeding. '®’ Furthermore, the letters
and the testimony of Messrs. Sarmiento and Pimentel at the hearing fail to refer specifically
to ICSID. The Respondent finds this omission significant since Article 9 of the BIT refers

to various fora and not only to ICSID.'°%

(3) Failure to State Reasons

86. The Respondent then turns to the argument of a failure by the Tribunal to state reasons.
The Respondent states, based on the decisions of prior ICSID annulment committees, that
this is a minimum requirement which is met “when the award allows the reader to follow
the tribunal’s reasoning from its legal and factual premises to the conclusion thereof.”!®

The Respondent cautions against using the criterion of insufficiency or inadequacy of the

reasons since it may lead a committee to review the merits of the tribunal’s statement of

reasons.'!° The Respondent contends that a tribunal does not need to comment on all the

parties’ arguments nor “fo give reasons for its reasons.”'"!

87. In applying the applicable standard to the facts of the case, the Respondent affirms that the
Applicants seek to recycle the argument of excess powers into the argument of a failure to
state reasons for not having adequately addressed an outcome-determinative issue: the
issue of the Claimants’ earlier acceptance of the Respondent’s offer in the BIT.'!? The
Respondent contends that the Tribunal dealt with this issue, as it has already been explained

by the Respondent to rebut the Applicants’ arguments of manifest excess of powers in

106 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 255. In its Rejoinder on Annulment, the Respondent also argues that if it were
true that the Claimants had expressed their consent to ICSID arbitration when sending the letters prior to the
arbitration, then they should have said so, rather than insisting that they had consented on July 20, 2012 with the filing
of the Request for Arbitration. Rejoinder on Annulment, {{] 231 to 234.

'°T Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 257.

 

08 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, | 267. See also Rejoinder on Annulment, { 235.

‘© Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 278, Rejoinder on Annulment, {| 244.

410 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 285.

"1 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, 292, citing TECO Guatemala Holdings, LLC v. Republic of Guatemala, ICSID
Case No. ARB/10/23, Decision on Annulment, April 5, 2016, { 257 (hereinafter TECO) (AALA-17). Rejoinder on
Annulment, { 246.

"2 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 295.

25

88.

89.

90.

91.

respect of similar facts. The Respondent affirms that the Applicants in effect request the
Committee to conduct the kind of analysis that blurs the distinction between an annulment

and an appeal.!!?

According to the Respondent, the Tribunal did not fail to consider highly relevant evidence.
In fact, it considered the evidence, namely, the testimony of Messrs. Sarmiento and
Pimentel at the hearing, but the Committee may not re-evaluate the evidence before the

Tribunal.!'+

RELIEF REQUESTED

The Applicants have requested that the Award be annulled in its entirety, and that they “be
reimbursed the entirety of the costs and the legal fees incurred by them in connection with

this annulment proceeding.”''°

The Respondent has requested that (i) the Applicants’ request be rejected in its entirety,
and (ii) the Applicants be ordered “to pay all costs and attorneys’ fees arising from this
proceeding, including charges for the use of the Centre’s facilities, the ad hoc Committee’s
costs and fees, as well as all legal expenses and fees incurred by the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela in connection with this annulment, with the corresponding application of

interest.” '!6

ANALYSIS OF THE COMMITTEE

Before engaging in this analysis, it will be useful to recall a few key dates for the proper
understanding of the reasoning of the Committee. Venezuela denounced the ICSID
Convention on January 24, 2012 by written notice addressed to its depositary. On July 23,
2012, ICSID received the Applicant’s Request for Arbitration dated July 20, 2012. In

43 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 296.
"4 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {i 209 and 315. Rejoinder on Annulment, {{ 248, 249 and 278 to 288.

115

Reply on Annulment, { 390.

46 Rejoinder on Annulment, { 298(b).

26

93.

accordance with Article 71 of the Convention, the denunciation took effect on

July 25, 2012.

NATURE AND SCOPE OF THE ANNULMENT MECHANISM

As noted in the ICSID Background Paper on Annulment of 2016 (“Background Paper’),
“assuring the finality of ICSID arbitration awards was a fundamental goal for the ICSID
system.”''7 Thus, annulment is an exceptional remedy limited to the five instances set forth
in Article 52 of the ICSID Convention. The exceptional character of the remedy has been
consistently recognized by annulment committees and it is not disputed by the Parties.
Similarly, annulment committees coincide in differentiating the annulment remedy from
an appeal. Annulment is a remedy “to uphold and strengthen the integrity of the ICSID
process.” ''® Tt does not entail a substantive review of the award. The Committee will return
to these general themes as needed in considering the grounds on which the Applicants have
based their request for annulment, namely, that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its

powers and the award failed to state the reasons on which it is based.

THE TRIBUNAL HAS MANIFESTLY EXCEEDED ITS POWERS
(1) Legal Standard

Article 52(1)(b) of the Convention provides as ground for annulment that “the Tribunal
has manifestly exceeded its powers.” On its plain meaning this sentence means that there
has to be an “excess” in how the Tribunal has exercised its powers and that this excess
must be “manifest.” By its ordinary meaning, “excess” means “more than the proper or
specified amount,” while “manifest” means obvious, readily perceived by the senses, and
easily understood or recognized by the mind.!!° This is the interpretation given to
“manifest” by most annulment committees. As noted in the Background Paper, while some

committees have interpreted “manifest” as requiring that “the excess be serious or material

417 Background Paper, {| 71.

48 Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/3, Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for Annulment of the Award rendered on August 20, 2007,
August 10, 2010,  247(i) (RALA-10).

'l° Definitions taken from the on-line Merriam-Webster Dictionary.

27

94.

95.

to the outcome of the case,” !?°

others have found a link between the two. Thus, the
Libananco annulment committee held: “While the term ‘manifest’ would in itself seem to
correspond to ‘obvious’ or ‘evident,’ it follows from the very nature of annulment as an
exceptional measure that it should not be resorted to unless the tribunal’s act or its failure
to act has had, or at least may have had, serious consequences for a party.”'?! The
Committee finds merit in this understanding of “manifest” in the context of the exceptional

nature of the annulment remedy.

The Parties disagree on whether the Committee should defer to the Tribunal in its decision
on jurisdiction on the grounds that the Tribunal has the power to determine its own
jurisdiction. The Respondent has relied on the Azurix annulment committee that held: “[i]f
[...] reasonable minds might differ as to whether or not the tribunal has jurisdiction, that
issue falls to be resolved definitively by the tribunal in exercise of its power under Article
41 before the award is given, rather than by an ad hoc committee under Article 52(1)(b)
after the award has been given.”'” Article 52(1)(b) does not distinguish between a
manifest excess of power in cases of decisions pertaining to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal
and other instances in which this may occur. The Committee would expect that faced with
that situation the requirement that the excess be manifest would assist a committee in

deciding whether the tribunal acted within the scope of its jurisdiction.

The Parties agree that a tribunal may exceed its powers by not applying the proper law, but
disagree on whether the erroneous application of the law may amount to a non-application
of the law and constitute an excess of powers. As the Respondent itself acknowledges,
some committees have held that a gross or egregious misapplication or misinterpretation
of the law may lead to annulment while others consider that this approach comes too close
to an appeal. The Committee recognizes that sometimes there exists a fine line between a
failure to apply the proper law and an erroneous application of the law.'?? With this in

mind, the Committee remains concerned not to step beyond its mandate and act as an appeal

20 Background Paper, {| 83.

"21 Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/8, Excerpts of Decision on
Annulment, May 22, 2013, 102 (AALA-103). See also Soufraki, 4 40.

22 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 87, quoting the Azurix, {| 67-68.

123

Background Paper, {| 93.

28

96.

97.

98.

judge when faced with a question of an egregious or gross misapplication of the law. Such
would, in the Committee’s view, risk it exceeding its own powers. Thus, in border line
situations, the Committee finds it appropriate to recall the limited and extraordinary nature

of the annulment remedy.

(2) Application of the Legal Standard to the Present Case

The Applicants argue that the Tribunal exceeded its powers because it manifestly failed to
exercise its jurisdiction. This contention is based on the treatment by the Tribunal of the
Applicants’ supposed notification of their consent to arbitrate prior to the Respondent’s
denunciation of the ICSID Convention, and on a gross misinterpretation and misapplication

of the BIT and the ICSID Convention.

The first leg of the Applicants’ argument questions the appreciation of the evidence before
the Tribunal on the timing of the Applicants’ consent. The Committee cannot substitute its
own appreciation of the facts for those of the Tribunal. The Applicants have argued that
an annulment committee must perform “an independent analysis’ of the ICSID
Convention, the Arbitration Rules and the particular facts of the case. The Applicants have
also argued that a jurisdictional excess of powers may require a finding that the Tribunal
wrongly established the relevant facts. There is no support in the case law for such
approach. On the contrary, annulment committees have been consistent in holding that the
nature of the annulment remedy “forbids an inquiry ... on mistakes in analyzing the
facts.” 4 Similarly, annulment committees cannot review the correctness of an award’s
findings on facts.'*> The role of an annulment committee is limited and should not second

guess the evaluation of evidence by the Tribunal.

The factual question argued by the Applicants is the date on which the Applicants
consented to arbitrate the dispute. In the Request for Arbitration, the Applicants have stated
that the date of their consent is July 20, 2012. Only in the Post-Hearing Brief did they argue

for an earlier date on the basis of 19 letters in which they reserved their rights under the

24 Joseph C. Lemire v. Ukraine, 1CSID Case No. ARB/06/18, Decision on Ukraine’s Application for Annulment of
the Award, July 8, 2013, 233 (RALA-68).

5 Joan Micula, Viorel Micula and others v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/20, Decision on Annulment, 122
(AALA-22).

29

99.

100.

BIT and of alleged concessions of the Respondent’s witnesses. The Tribunal dealt with this
matter in footnote 155 of the Award. The Applicants take exception to the Tribunal
disposing of this “critical question” in a footnote. !?° The Tribunal notes that the Applicants
themselves dealt with this matter in a single paragraph in their Post-Hearing Brief.!?’ It is
not disputed that the argument of the Applicants had not been made before. The Tribunal
further notes that the argument was late. The Applicants argue that jurisdictional arguments
can be made at any time. Jurisdictional arguments should be made as early in the

proceedings as possible!?®

and certainly not in the Post-Hearing Brief when the other party
has no chance to rebut them, and particularly when the argument contradicts the position
taken by the Applicants from the start of the proceeding. In any case, the appreciation of
the terms of the correspondence and the witnesses’ evidence was a matter for the Tribunal
and it is beyond the remit of the Committee to revise it now. As stated by the Caratube
annulment committee, “[t]he respect for tribunals’ factual findings is normally justified
because it is the tribunal who controlled the marshalling of evidence, and had the

opportunity of directly examining witnesses and experts.” '?°

The second ground adduced by the Applicants is that the Tribunal misinterpreted and
misapplied the law. There is no dispute as regards the applicable law but only on its
interpretation and application. The Tribunal determined that the core provisions relevant
to the jurisdictional proceedings are Article 9 of the BIT and Articles 71 and 72 of the

ICSID Convention, which the Committee reproduces here for convenience.
Article 9 of the BIT:

1. Disputes between one Contracting Party and a national of the
other Contracting Party concerning an obligation of the former
under this Agreement in relation to an investment of the latter, shall
at the request of the national concerned be submitted to the

'26 See heading of slide 42 of Applicant’s Opening Slides. In fact, as discussed below in paras. 121-122, the footnote

refers back to {220 of the Award in which the
arguments
to the tran

ibunal sets out in the “Claimants’ Position” section the Claimants’
oncerning the Respondent's witne: concessions. Further, footnote 111 in { 220 of the Award refers
ript from Day 3 of the Arbitration hearing in which the concessions apparently arose.

  
   
 

 

27 Post Hearing Brief, | 3 (Exhibit AA-40).
28 Arbitration Rule 41(1).

"2° Caratube International Oil Company LLP v. Republic of Kazakhstan, 1CSID Case No. ARB/08/12, Decision on
the Annulment Application of Caratube International Oil Company LLP, February 21, 2014, 4 158 (AALA-105).

30

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes, for
settlement by arbitration or conciliation under the Convention on
the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals
of other States opened for signature at Washington on 18 March
1965.

2. As long as the Republic of Venezuela has not become a
Contracting State of the Convention as mentioned in Paragraph 1
of this Article, disputes as referred to in that paragraph shall be

bmitted to the International Centre for Settl of In
Disputes under the Rules Governing the Additional Facility for the
Administration of Proceedings by the Secretariat of the Centre
(Additional Facility Rules).

3. The arbitral award shall be limited to determining whether there
is a breach by the Contracting Party concerned of its obligations
under this Agreement, whether such breach of obligations has
caused damages to the national concerned, and, if such is the case,
the amount of compensation.

4, Each Contracting Party hereby gives its unconditional consent to
the submission of disputes as referred to in Paragraph 1 of this
Article to international arbitration in accordance with the
provisions of this Article.

5. The arbitral award shall be based on:
- the law of the Contracting Party concerned;

- the provisions of this Agreement and other relevant Agreements
between the Contracting Parties;

- the provisions of special agreements relating to the investments;
- the general principles of international law; and

- such rules of law as may be agreed by the parties to the dispute.
101. Article 71 of the ICSID Convention:

Any Contracting State may denounce this Convention by written
notice to the depository of this Convention. The Denunciation shall
take effect six months after receipt of such notice.

102. Article 72 of the ICSID Convention:

Notice by a Contracting State pursuant to Articles 70 or 71 shall not
affect the rights or obligations under this Convention of that State
or of any of the constituent subdivisions or agencies or of any
national of that State arising out of consent to the jurisdiction of the

31

Centre given by one of them before such notice was received by the
depository.

103. The Tribunal dealt first with the issue of whether actions taken by the Respondent with
respect to the ICSID Convention affect the Respondent’s consent to arbitrate under Article
9 of the BIT. According to the Tribunal, this issue “concerns the legal relationship between
two international treaties rather than a question of treaty interpretation in respect of the
terms used in Article 9 of the BIT.”'*° The Tribunal then notes that consent to ICSID
arbitration has a different juridical character than consent to other forms of arbitration

because ICSID arbitration is regulated by a multilateral treaty. The Tribunal explains:

The ICSID Convention has its own provisions for determining how
and when it is to come into force, ... how and when a Contracting
State may withdraw from the treaty and no longer be bound by the
obligations thereunder. The state parties to a bilateral investment
treaty cannot, in that treaty, purport to amend their rights and
obligations under the ICSID Convention, a multilateral treaty.'*!

104. The Tribunal finds that the distinctions between the consent to ICSID arbitration and to

other forms of arbitration are reflected in the text of Article 9 itself, which in paragraph 2:

recognizes that such consent [to ICSID arbitration] cannot be
operational until Venezuela takes the necessary steps to become a
Contracting State under the ICSID Convention. The basic point is
that consent to ICSID arbitration in the BIT is obviously conditional
upon actions taken by the Contracting Parties to the BIT in their
capacities as Contracting States to the ICSID Convention. And
given that reality, the Contracting Parties to the BIT included an
alternative route ... arbitration under the ICSID Additional Facility
Rules.”

105. Based on this analysis, the Tribunal rejects the contention that the Respondent’s consent to
ICSID arbitration under Article 9(1) of the BIT is “impervious to Venezuela’s actions taken

in respect of its obligations under the ICSID Convention. ICSID arbitration is only

available if the conditions for access to ICSID arbitration in the investment treaty and the

80 Award, 257.
31 Award, | 258.
2 14., 4 260.

32

106.

107.

ICSID Convention have been satisfied. That is a proposition that is universally accepted

in the jurisprudence and is accepted by the parties in the present case.”'*3

The Committee recalls the standard discussed in paragraph 95 above. Leaving aside the
Committee’s views on whether the Tribunal’s interpretation is correct or not, the
Committee finds that the Tribunal’s interpretation of Article 9 of the BIT is reasonable and

tenable and, therefore, cannot amount to manifest excess of powers.

Then the Tribunal turns to Articles 71 and 72 of the ICSID Convention. According to the
Tribunal, Article 71 addresses Venezuela as a Contracting State and Article 72 as a
potential party in ICSID arbitrations. Hence, “[t]o adjudge whether Venezuela’s
denunciation of the ICSID Convention has any effect on its position as a party (or as a
potential party) to ICSID arbitrations, the Tribunal must, therefore, interpret and apply
Article 72 of the ICSID Convention.”'*4 The Tribunal proceeds to interpret the ordinary
meaning of the terms of Article 72 and refers to the principal interpretative disagreement
between the Parties that concerns the phrase “arising out of consent to the jurisdiction of
the Centre given by one of them.” The Tribunal reasons that “the ordinary meaning of
‘consent to the jurisdiction’ could encompass either interpretation proffered by the parties
because it is perfectly possible to use those words to mean the unilateral act of consenting
...or the multilateral result of consenting ...”'*> To decide between the two alternatives,
the Tribunal analyzes the phrase in question in the context of Article 72 and of other
provisions of the ICSID Convention. The Tribunal favors the interpretation of perfected
consent and explains the reasons why: first, it does not make sense to talk about unilateral
consent given by nationals of the Contracting State that could generate rights and
obligations under the ICSID Convention; second, even a Contracting State’s “rights and
obligations under the ICSID Convention as a party or potential party to ICSID arbitration

79136

only arise at the point of perfected consent; and third, in terms of the overall context of

the ICSID Convention, the jurisdiction of the Centre under Article 25(1) is founded upon

33 14. | 261, emphasis added.
414.9270.
85 14.9273.
36 14., 275.

33

108.

109.

perfected consent. The Tribunal also analyzes the phrase “given by one of them” because
of the emphasis placed on this phrase by the Applicants. It also considers Article 72 in the
context of Article 66(2). After it reaches its conclusion based on the ordinary meaning and
the context of Article 72, the Tribunal turns to the Applicants’ argument that the proffered

interpretation would be inconsistent with the object and purpose of the ICSID Convention.

The Tribunal finds that the Applicants’ argument does not support the Applicants’
interpretation of Article 72. The Tribunal explains why: First, “it would be very unusual
for an appeal to the object and purpose of a treaty to lead to an interpretation that is
fundamentally at odds with the ordinary meaning of terms in the context.”'*" Second, “the
Contracting States to the ICSID Convention have specifically agreed that a Contracting
State should have the right to denounce the treaty and they have sought to regulate that
right.”'*8 The Tribunal also considers the argument that the Applicants’ interpretation
should be preferred because, under such interpretation, the investors would not be surprised
by the Convention’s denunciation. The Tribunal explains that it is not its function to
eliminate any negative consequences that might flow from the denunciation of the ICSID
Convention. Withdrawal of consent is an eventuality in any adjudicating system founded

on consent.

At this point in its reasoning the Tribunal notes that it has “reached a firm conclusion on
the proper interpretation of Articles 71 and 72 of the ICSID Convention by resorting to the
general rule of interpretation in Article 31 of the VCLT.”'*° Although it considered it
unnecessary, the Tribunal also resorted to the travaux préparatoires for the ICSID
Convention because the Parties had made extensive references to them. In this respect, the
Tribunal observed that “whilst resort to the travaux préparatoires is not justified in
accordance with the threshold established by Article 32 of the VCLT, the insights that can
nevertheless be drawn from an examination of the travaux provide direct support for the

Tribunal’s interpretation of Articles 71 and 72 of the ICSID Convention.” \“°

871d, | 284.
38 Td. 9 285.
8914, 7291.
40 Td. 296.

34

110.

111.

112.

As in the case of Article 9 of the BIT, the Committee concludes that the Tribunal’s
interpretation of Articles 71 and 72 is well reasoned and grounded in the text of the ICSID
Convention by applying the general rule of interpretation in Article 31 of the VCLT.

Consequently, it does not constitute a manifest excess of powers on the part of the Tribunal.

The Applicants have argued that the Tribunal disregarded the decisions of other tribunals
which decided the same issue. It is well known that there is no stare decisis in international
law. Tribunals are independent from each other and not bound by other tribunals’ decisions.
The Committee concurs in that it is desirable to develop a jurisprudence constante by
consideration of precedents and explanation in what aspects they are similar or need to be
distinguished from the instant case. However, the standing of precedents is not at the level
of the applicable law. To ignore them just by itself would not be tantamount to an egregious
misapplication of the law. In any event, the Tribunal took into account and analyzed

previous decisions on the same issue, as explained in the next paragraph.

In fact, the Tribunal considered three of the awards of other tribunals brought to its attention
by the Parties.'*! Generally, the Tribunal commented that it was “less concerned about
recording instances where other tribunals have come to the same or different results and
more interested in confronting the reasons that have led tribunals to a different

“12 The Tribunal noted that the Tenaris tribunal decided that consent was

conclusion.
perfected before the Convention was denounced and therefore it was not relevant to the
issue discussed. As regards the other two cases (Blue Bank and Venoklim), they reached
opposite conclusions to that of the Tribunal. In analyzing those cases, the Tribunal found
that “[t]he only sustained judicial engagement with the interpretation of Articles 71 and 72
to date is to be found in the Separate Opinion of Mr Séderlund in Blue Bank.”'* The
Tribunal observed that the majority concluded in a single sentence that Article 72 was

irrelevant, while Mr. Sdderlund thought that “the Respondent’s invocation of Article 72 of

41 Jd,, { 297, referring to Venoklim Holding B.V. v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/22,

 

April 3, 2015, (Venoklim v. Venezuela); Tenaris S.A. and Talta - Trading e Marketing Sociedade Unipessoal

Lda. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/23, Award, December 12, 2016, (Tenaris v.

 

Venezuela); and Blue Bank I ional & Trust ( 5) Lid. v. jan Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case
No. ARB/12/20, Award and Separate Opinion, April 26, 2017 (Blue Bank v. Venezuela).

21d. | 298.

493 14. 298.

35

113.

114.

115.

116.

144 1g

the ICSID Convention requires analysis.”'+ The Tribunal goes on to consider arbitrator
Séderlund’s analysis and explains why it does not agree with him. The Committee finds
significant that the Tribunal in particular addressed the analysis that it found to reflect

“sustained judicial engagement” even when it was only a Separate Opinion.

To conclude, the Committee finds that the Tribunal did not exceed its powers by
determining that it had no jurisdiction whether on the basis of the facts or on the

interpretation of the applicable law.

THE AWARD FAILED TO STATE THE REASONS ON WHICH IT Is BASED
(1) Legal Standard

The Applicants agree with the Respondent’s statement in the Counter-Memorial on
Annulment that “the statement of reasons is an essential element of the awards issued by
tribunals constituted under the ICSID Convention’; it “ensures that the parties to
arbitration can understand the decisions entered by the tribunals and the reasons why
those decisions have been adopted, in order to ensure respect for the right to due process

and the right to defence.”'*

The Applicants argue that the Respondent unduly raises the threshold for annulment under
Article 52(1)(e), an argument disputed by the Respondent. The differences between the
Parties concern the extent to which a tribunal needs to address every argument advanced
by the Parties, to address highly relevant evidence, and to provide sufficient or adequate

reasons.

On the first point, the Parties seem to agree that tribunals are not required to deal with every
argument but they should address outcome-determinative arguments.'*° The Committee
recalls the explanation of the Libananco annulment committee: “[L]ack of consideration

of a question submitted to a tribunal could amount to a failure to state reasons if no reasons

., quoted in the Award at {[ 298.

45 Reply on Annulment, {| 348 quoting the Counter-Memorial on Annulment, 275.
46 Reply on Annulment, | 352.

36

are given by the tribunal for not addressing the question and such question would be

determinant for understanding the reasoning of the award.”\"

117. As regards the arguments on the need for a tribunal to address “highly relevant evidence,”
the Applicants explain that a tribunal does not need to address all pieces of evidence, but
“those pieces of evidence that the parties deem to be highly relevant to their case and, if it
finds them to be of no assistance, to set out the reasons for this conclusion.”'**® The
Respondent seems to agree, “[t]he [Applicants] have also conceded in their last
presentation that tribunals don’t have the obligation to analyze each piece of evidence
included in the proceedings.”

118. While the Tribunal should address highly relevant pieces of evidence, the question for the
Committee is the extent of its role in reviewing the Award and its factual underpinnings.
The Applicants have quoted with approval the Suez annulment decision statement that there
may be a failure to state reasons “only if there was a total failure to address evidence that
would have been ‘highly relevant’ to the Tribunal’s decision, i.e., evidence whose
consideration could have had a significant impact on the Award.” °° The Committee’s
concern on this matter is that it is not in the remit of the Committee to judge “the

admissibility of any evidence adduced and of its probative value,” a task reserved to the
Tribunal in the Arbitration Rules.'°! While the “total failure” to address evidence may be
so obvious that it may fit within the Committee’s purview, how the Tribunal appreciates

the probative value of the evidence would be beyond the Committee’s competence.

119. The third point discussed by the Parties relates to whether insufficiency or inadequacy of
reasons warrants the annulment of an award. The Respondent finds support in Vivendi I for

the proposition that, as a general rule and absent exceptional circumstances, insufficient

47 Quoted in Reply on Annulment, { 351.

448 Reply on Annulment, { 358, quoting TECO.

49 Rejoinder on Annulment, | 247.

'50 Reply on Annulment, { 360.

'5! According to Arbitration Rule 34(1): “The Tribunal shall be the judge of the admissibility of any evidence adduced
and of its probative value.”

37

120.

121.

reasons do not constitute a ground for annulment.!>? In turn, the Applicants recall that the
Vivendi I annulment committee explained that exceptional circumstances are present if the
“decision on a particular point essentially lacking in any expressed rationale” and “the
point [is] itself [...] necessary to the tribunal’s decision.” >? However, the Committee
recalls that the extent of insufficiency and inadequacy required to justify annulment on this
basis is a matter of debate. '!* In this respect, the MINE annulment committee held that the

“adequacy of the reasoning is not an appropriate standard of review.” !*>

The Respondent has relied on the MINE annulment committee to argue that the requirement
to state reasons is a minimum requirement that allows the reader to follow the reasoning of
the Tribunal as it progresses from point A to point B.'*° The Applicants have explained
that subsequent annulment committees have clarified the scope of the minimum
requirement and adduce as an example the decision of the Soufraki annulment
committee.!°’ While that committee may have clarified the meaning of minimum
requirement, it has not changed it in substance. Indeed, it refers to a total absence of
reasons, frivolous reasons, a failure to state reasons for a particular material point or

insufficient reasons to explain the result arrived at by the tribunal. !**

The Applicants take exception to the argument of the Respondent based on the decision in
TECO that a more nuanced approach is necessary when dealing with allegations of
insufficient and inadequate reasons. The Applicants point out that the TECO annulment
committee concluded that “insufficiency of reasons can lead to annulment [...] when a
tribunal did provide some explanations for its decision, but these are insufficient from a

logical point of view to justify the tribunal's conclusion.” Again, this is not substantially

'2 Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002, 65 (AALA-6).

'53 Quoted in the Reply on Annulment, {{ 362.
'S4 Background Paper, {| 106.

'88 Maritime International Nominees Establishment v. Republic of Guinea, ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4, Decision on
the Application by Guinea for Partial Annulment of the Arbitral Award dated January 6, 1988, December 14, 1989,
5.08 (hereinafter MINE) (AALA-14).

86 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 282.

'57 Reply on Annulment, { 364.

'58 Soufraki, { 126, cited in the Reply on Annulment, { 364.
'59 Quoted in the Reply on Annulment, {{ 366.

38

122.

123.

different from the holding of the MINE annulment committee. Indeed, if reasons are

“insufficient from a logical point of view,” they will not enable the reader “to follow how
the tribunal proceeded from Point A to Point B and eventually to its conclusion.” © In the
Committee’s view, the understanding of the standard developed by the MINE committee

is difficult to improve on.

(2) Application of the Legal Standard to the Present Case

The Applicants allege that the Tribunal failed to engage with the Applicants’ argument
regarding the oral testimony of two witnesses that confirmed, according to the Applicants,
that the Applicants had consented to ICSID arbitration before the Notice of Denunciation.
The Applicants clarified that they do not challenge the probative value given by the

Tribunal to the oral testimony of the two witnesses; rather, the Applicants’ “argument is
that the Tribunal completely disregarded that oral testimony without any analysis and
without explaining why it found it insufficient, unpersuasive or otherwise

unsatisfactory.” '®!

The Respondent argues that “[i]t becomes evident that the Tribunal pondered the argument
and expressed its conclusions on the matter, referring explicitly to the position of the
Claimants and the evidence that it considered relevant to make that decision.”' The
Respondent affirms that the correctness or persuasiveness of the reasoning of the Tribunal
is not relevant. The Respondent contests the Applicants’ argument that the Committee has
authority to assess the sufficiency or adequacy of the reasons. The Respondent adds that
the letters written to the Respondent and attached to the Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits
of July 15, 2016 (as Exhibits C-55 and C-58) are barely mentioned in subsequent
memorials of the Claimants and not one is characterized in those memorials as a letter of

acceptance of an offer of arbitration under the ICSID Convention.!°

160 MINE, 5.09.
'6! Reply on Annulment, {| 377.

162

163

Rejoinder on Annulment, {| 262.
Rejoinder on Annulment, {| 270.

39

124. The Committee notes that, on this point, the Award describes the Claimants’ position by
reference to the Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction of August 21, 2014: “[t]he Tribunal
has jurisdiction to hear the dispute in this case on the basis that at the time the Claimants

consented to ICSID jurisdiction on July 20, 2017 [sic], the Respondent was still an ICSID

Contracting State and its consent to arbitration in the BIT was extant.” '*

125. Then the Tribunal quotes in full the paragraph in the Post-Hearing Brief setting forth the

position of the Claimants in the arbitration proceeding:

Furthermore, in their Post Hearing Brief, the Claimants stated the
following: ‘at the Hearing, [...] the Respondent’s witnesses accepted
that, in 2011, long before the Respondent’s denunciation of the
ICSID Convention, the Claimants had notified the Respondent of
their intention to refer the dispute to arbitration under the BIT.’ The
Claimants submit that ‘that reference can be understood only as
consent to the jurisdiction of ICSID and of this Tribunal, with the
result that the Claimants and the Respondent consented to ICSID
arbitration prior to the Respondent’s denunciation,’ and that ‘the
contemporaneous record bears out the fact that the Claimants had
expressed their consent to ICSID arbitration repeatedly over the
course of late 2010 and early 2011."!>

126. As part of the Tribunal’s analysis, the Tribunal dismissed the new argument raised by the
Applicant’s in the Post-Hearing Brief in footnote 155 of the Award. According to the
Tribunal, (i) this point was raised very late, (ii) it contradicted the Claimants’ earlier
position that they consented on July 20, 2012, and (iii) the correspondence referred to by
the Claimants made no reference to the ICSID Convention. In dismissing the new
argument, the Tribunal cross-referred to the paragraph where the Tribunal copied the new
argument (para. 220), to the paragraphs of the Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits of July
15, 2016 where the Claimants had held their previous position (paras. 154 and 180), and to

14 Award, 219, citing the Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction of August 21, 2014, 117. The date in this
paragraph of the Award is incorrect. The correct date is July 20, 2012.

165 Award, { 220 The quotations within the text can be found in footnote 111 in Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, 3
citing the Arbitration hearing transcript (Tr. Day 3, 103:10-106:11, and Tr. Day 3, 292:1-5), and in footnote 112 in
the Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, {| 3, citing letter from OIdV to the Respondent dated November 8, 2010, p. 5,
exhibit C-55, and letter from OldV to the Respondent dated November 12, 2010, p. 4, exhibit C-58.

40

127.

128.

129.

130.

the exhibits where the letters of the Claimants to the Respondent may be found (C-55 and
C-58).1%

The new argument was founded on the acceptance by the Respondent’s witnesses that “the
Claimants had notified the Respondent of their intention to refer the dispute to arbitration
under the BIT.”'*" It is notable that the letters and the written witness statements were part
of the arbitration file since submission of the Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits of June
20, 2014, which means that the Claimants could have developed their position in their
Rejoinder on Jurisdiction of August 21, 2014. It is difficult for the Committee to discern
the significance given by the Applicants in this proceeding to the testimony of the witnesses
as compared to their written statements. It is evident that, even by the Claimants’ own
words, the Claimants had only notified the Respondent of their intention to refer the dispute

to arbitration.

As part of their contention that the Tribunal gave no reasons, the Applicants also emphasize
that the Tribunal did not even mention the oral testimony. The Committee observes that
paragraph 220 of the Award is based on the oral testimony. The quotations within that
paragraph are precisely from the transcripts of the hearing and the letters of the Claimants
to the Respondent. Thus, the Tribunal considered the new argument and justified its
rejection. In the view of the Committee, the reasoning in the Award allows the reader to

follow how the Tribunal reached its conclusion.

To conclude, the Committee finds that there is no merit in the Applicants’ claim that the

Award should be annulled for failure to state reasons.

Costs

Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention provides:

In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as
the parties otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the
parties in connection with the proceedings, and shall decide how
and by whom those expenses, the fees and expenses of the members

66 Award, footnote 155 to 251.
167 See 122 above.

4l

of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of the
Centre shall be paid. Such decision shall form part of the award.

131. This provision, together with Arbitration Rule 47(1)(j) (applicable to this proceeding under
Arbitration Rule 53), grants discretion to the Committee to determine the allocation of costs

it deems appropriate in the present proceeding.

132. The Committee has decided to reject the Application for Annulment and, accordingly, the
Applicant shall bear all fees and expenses of the Committee Members, and ICSID’s
administrative fees and expenses. On the other hand, while the alleged grounds for
annulment have been rejected by the Committee, they raised fundamental questions related
to the denunciation of the ICSID Convention by Venezuela which justify that each Party

shall bear all expenses incurred in connection with its own defense.

133. The costs of the arbitration, including the fees and expenses of the Committee, ICSID’s

administrative fees and direct expenses, amount to (in USD): 168

Committee’s fees and expenses

Andrés Rigo Sureda 75,242.50
Diego P. Fernandez Arroyo 44,250.00
Inka Hanefeld 37,621.05
ICSID’s administrative fees 84,000.00
Direct expenses (estimated)! 74,911.95
Total 316,025.50

134. The above costs have been paid out of the advances made by the Applicants. The remaining

balance shall be reimbursed to the Applicants.

168 The ICSID Secretariat will provide the parties with a detailed Financial Statement of the case account once all
invoices are received and the account is final.

169 This amount includes estimated charges relating to the dispatch of this Decision on Annulment (courier, printing
and copying).

42

VI.

135.

DECISION

For the reasons set forth above, the Committee decides as follows:
(1) To reject the Application for Annulment.

(2) Each Party shall bear its own costs and fees.

(3) The Applicants shall bear the costs of the annulment proceeding, including the fees

and expenses of the Committee and the costs of the Centre.

43

    

  

. Fernandez Artoyo ir. Inka een

Member of tha ad hoc Committee Member of the ad hoc Committee

Date: Yusu.2o AQ Date: NU Vern tol

Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda
President of the ad hoc Committee

Date (6 Ney. WI4

 

44

