INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE ARBITRATION PROCEEDING BETWEEN

FABRICA DE VIDRIOS Los ANDES, C.A. AND OWENS-ILLINOIS DE VENEZUELA, C.A.
CLAIMANTS

and

BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA
RESPONDENT

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/21

 

DECISION ON THE PROPOSAL TO DISQUALIFY
A MAJORITY OF THE TRIBUNAL

 

CHAIRMAN OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE COUNCIL
Dr. JIM YONG KIM

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Marisa Planells-Valero

Date: June 16, 2015

THE PARTIES’ REPRESENTATIVES

REPRESENTING THE CLAIMANTS:

MR. ROBERT VOLTERRA

MR. STEPHEN FIETTA

MR. PATRICIO GRANE

MR. GIORGIO MANDELLI

MR. ALVARO NISTAL

VOLTERRA FIETTA

1 FitzRoy SQUARE

LONDON W1T SHE

UNITED KINGDOM

AND

MR. José ANTONIO MUCI BoRJAS
ESCRITORIO MUCI-ABRAHAM & ASOCIADOS
EDIFICIO BANCO DE LARA, PISO 7, OFICINAS B-C
AVENIDA PRINCIPAL DE URBANIZACION LA
CASTELLANA

Caracas 1060, VENEZUELA

AND

MR. Lucas BASTIN

QUADRANT CHAMBERS

QUADRANT House

10 FLEET STREET

LONDON EC4Y 1AU

UNITED KINGDOM

REPRESENTING THE RESPONDENT:

Dr. REINALDO ENRIQUE MUNOZ PEDROZA
VICEPROCURADOR GENERAL DE LA REPUBLICA
PROCURADURIA GENERAL DE LA REPUBLICA
PASEO Los ILUSTRES C/C AV. LAZO MARTI
Ep. SEDE PROCURADURIA GENERAL DE LA
REPUBLICA, PISO 8
Urs. SANTA MONICA
CARACAS 1040
VENEZUELA
AND
Dr. OSVALDO CESAR GUGLIELMINO
Dr. GUILLERMO Moro
Dr. PABLO PARRILLA
GUGLIELMINO & ASOCIADOS
CERRITO 1320 — Piso 9
C1010ABB
BUENOS AIRES, ARGENTINA
AND
Dr. DIEGO BRIAN GosIs
175 SW 7TH STREET, SUITE 2110
MIAMI, FL 33130
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

CONTENTS

 

 

A. THE PARTIES 1
B. PROCEDURAL HISTORY 1
C. PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS REGARDING THE PROPOSAL TO DISQUALIFY MR.

MOURRE AND MR. FORTIER 5

 

1. Venezuela’s Proposal for Disqualification
i) Proposal to Disqualify Mr. Alexis Mourre
(ii) Proposal to Disqualify Mr. Yves Fortier.

 

2. Claimants’ Observations

 

 

i) Proposal to Disqualify Mr. Alexis Mourre

(ii) Proposal to Disqualify Mr. Yves Fortier.
EXPLANATIONS FURNISHED BY THE ARBITRATORS .........ccccccsessessssesteeeteseeteseene 9

E. DECISION BY THE CHAIRMAN

 

 

1. The proposed disqualification of Mr. Alexis Mourre ...........0c0ccccccceseeeee eset 12
2. The proposed disqualification of Mr. Yves Fortier... eee eeeeeeeeneeeeeee 12
F. CONCLUSIONS 14

 

iii

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/21

A. THE PARTIES

1. The Claimants are Fabrica de Vidrios Los Andes, C.A. and Owens-Illinois de Venezuela,
C.A., two companies incorporated under the laws of Venezuela, which are owned and controlled

by a Dutch corporation! (jointly, the “Claimants”.

2. The Respondent is the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (“Wenezuela” or the

“Respondent’).

B. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

3. On July 23, 2012, the Claimants submitted a Request for Arbitration against Venezuela to
the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”)
pursuant to Article 36 of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States
and Nationals of Other States (“ICSID Convention”). On August 10, 2012, the Secretary-General
of ICSID registered the Request for Arbitration in accordance with Article 36(3) of the ICSID

Convention.

4. The Tribunal was constituted on February 14, 2013, comprised of Professor Hi-Taek Shin,
a national of Korea, appointed as president pursuant to Article 38 of the ICSID Convention and
Rule 4(1) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“ICSID Arbitration
Rules”), Mr. L. Yves Fortier, a national of Canada, appointed by the Claimants, and Mr. Alexis

Mourre, a national of France, appointed by the Respondent.

5. On April 11, 2013, the Tribunal and the parties held a first session in Paris, France. During
the session a number of procedural matters were decided, including a schedule for pleadings. In
accordance with the schedule: (i) the Claimants filed a Memorial on the Merits on July 15, 2013;
(ii) Venezuela filed a request to address objections to jurisdiction as a preliminary matter on
August 16, 2013; (iii) Venezuela filed a Counter-Memorial on the Merits on December 20, 2013;
(iv) the Claimants filed a Reply on the Merits and a Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction on March

21, 2014; (v) Venezuela filed a Rejoinder on the Merits and a Reply on Jurisdiction on June 20,

' According to the July 2012 Request for Arbitration, the Claimants are controlled by OI European Group B.V.
(OIEG), a company incorporated under the laws of The Netherlands.
2 By Procedural Order No. 2 of September 23, 2013 the Tribunal declined Respondent’s request for bifurcation.

1

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/21

2014; and (vi) the Claimants filed a Rejoinder on Jurisdiction on August 21, 2014. A hearing on
jurisdiction and merits was scheduled to be held in Paris, from March 30 through April 3, 2015.

6. On March 4, 2015, the Secretary of the Tribunal conveyed the following message from

Mr. Mourre to the parties:

“As from May 2015, I will leave Castaldi Mourre & Partners to establish my own
individual arbitrator practice. I will also as from then have a consultancy agreement with
the law firm of Dechert LLP with the title of Special Counsel. At Dechert, I will only work
on specific matters on which Dechert will ask me to participate, and I will have no access
whatsoever to databases for matters other than those on which I will work directly. I will
have a fixed compensation from Dechert and will not share in its profits or costs. My
arbitrator’s work will therefore be completely separate from Dechert. As a consequence, I
do not consider me a Dechert lawyer for conflict purposes and I do not see Dechert’s
activities, except for the Dechert cases I work on, to be such as to cast any doubt on my
independence and impartiality.

1am however informing the parties, for the sake of transparency, that Dechert has within
the past year been adverse to the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and/or Petréleos de
Venezuela in six litigation matters that are entirely unrelated to the present arbitration. I
have no additional information on these cases and, for the avoidance of doubt, I of course
confirm that I will not participate in any manner in any work of Dechert with respect to
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Petroleos de Venezuela or any other entity related
to the Republic of Venezuela.”

7. On March 9, 2015, Venezuela advised that Mr. Mourre’s communication of March 4, 2015
cast serious doubts about his suitability as an arbitrator in any of the cases to which Venezuela was
a party, and asked for additional information concerning Mr. Mourre’s relationship with Dechert

LLP. Specifically, Venezuela requested:

(a) The date of commencement of the negotiations or talks between Mr. Mourre and
Dechert LLP, which led to the decision to become part of that firm under the terms
disclosed on 4 March 2015.

(b) The date when those negotiations or talks concluded and the agreement disclosed on 4
March 2015 was entered into.

(c) The particulars of the individuals who participated in those negotiations or talks
between Mr. Mourre and Dechert LLP, and the place or places where they were conducted.

(d) A list of the cases in which Dechert LLP acts as counsel or advisor in —domestic or
international— arbitration or court proceedings against Latin American States or their
instrumentalities, including details on the stage of the proceedings, the industry concerned,

2

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/21

the subject-matter of the case, the claimant and —in the case of arbitration proceedings—
the institution conducting the proceedings and the names of the members of the tribunal.

(e) A description of the functions that Mr. Mourre will carry out as from May of this year,
in his role as ‘Special Counsel’ at Dechert LLP.

(f) A list of the team of in-house attorneys and external advisors in which Mr. Mourre will
act as legal consultant within Dechert LLP, including the organizational chart on the basis
of which he will receive work requests and/or instructions.

(g) In the event that this has been discussed during or after his negotiations with Dechert
LLP, a list of the cases in which Mr. Mourre will participate, including the industries
concerned and the subject-matter of the proceedings.

8. On March 11, 2015, the Secretary of the Tribunal conveyed the following message from
Mr. Mourre to the parties, inviting their comments by March 16, 2015:

“\... acknowledge receipt of a communication dated March 9, 2015 from counsel for the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in this case. In this communication, the Bolivarian
Republic of V la requests additi dit
parties dated March 4, 2015, stating however that my future professional relationship with
Dechert LLP ‘is such as to generate conflicts of interest that are not compatible with the
requirements that an arbitrator must meet under the ICSID Convention’ (arbitrator’s
translation). In this regard, I can only confirm that my professional relationship with this
law firm — which will only start on May Irst — is not such as to generate any conflict since,
(i) my arbitrator’s work (including in this case) will be totally separated from Dechert,
(ii) I will not be a partner in Dechert and I will have no access whatsoever to their
databases, (iii) my relationship with Dechert will be limited to specific matters on which
Dechert will ask me to participate, and (iv) I will not have any involvement (and
information on) in the cases on which Dechert may act against the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela or related entities. Therefore, I am unable to provide any information relating
to cases in which Dechert may be acting against the Republic or related governmental
entities, since I don’t have that information and I don’t have access to it. I can only add
that the conversations that led to the establishment of this professional relationship were
informally conducted with Dr. Eduardo Silva Romero, with whom I have a longstanding
friendship, and were concluded shortly before I made my declaration. Based on this, I can
only confirm my total independence and impartiality. I however understand and respect
the position of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. In view of the importance attached
to all arbitrators having the full confidence of the parties, if the Republic still believes that
my statement is not compatible with my duties of independence and impartiality, I will have
no choice but to resign as arbitrator in this case....”

L information my ication to the

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/21

9. On March 13, 2015, Venezuela proposed the disqualification of Mr. Mourre and
Mr. Fortier on the basis that each of them lacked the requisite impartiality and independence under

Articles 14 and 57 of the ICSID Convention (the “Proposal’”).

10. On March 16, 2015, the Centre informed the parties that the proceeding had been
suspended until the Proposal was decided, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(6). The Centre

also established a procedural schedule for written submissions on the Proposal.

11. In addition, on March 16, 2015, following receipt of a copy of the Proposal, Mr. Mourre
submitted his resignation to the other members of the Tribunal and the Secretary-General of

ICSID. The ICSID Secretariat immediately communicated Mr. Mourre’s resignation to the parties.

12. Finally, also on March 16, 2015, the Claimants submitted comments to Mr. Mourre’s
disclosure of March 11, 2015. These were submitted before the parties had been notified of

Mr. Mourre’s resignation.

13. In accordance with the schedule, the Claimants submitted a Reply to the Proposal on March
24, 2015 (“Claimants’ Reply”). On March 30, 2015, Mr. Fortier furnished explanations pursuant
to ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(3).

14. On April 6, 2015, Venezuela requested a translation into Spanish of the Claimants’ Reply.
The Centre invited the Claimants to provide the translation by April 7, 2015, which the Claimants
did.

15. Both parties submitted additional comments to the Proposal on April 14, 2015
(“Additional Comments”).

16. On April 22, 2015, Mr. Fortier, having reviewed the Additional Comments, provided

further explanations.

17. On April 23, 2015, Venezuela requested an opportunity to comment on Mr. Fortier’s
communication of April 22, 2015. Both parties were invited to submit any final comments
concerning the Proposal by April 27, 2015, which comments were received by April 27, 2015. On

June 11, 2015, Venezuela submitted a further letter to the Centre in connection with the Proposal.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/21

The Centre invited the Claimants to provide comments on the letter by June 15, 2015, which the

Claimants did.

C. PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS REGARDING THE PROPOSAL TO
DISQUALIFY MR. MOURRE AND MR. FORTIER

1. Venezuela’s Proposal for Disqualification

18. Venezuela’s arguments on the proposal to disqualify Messrs. Mourre and Fortier were set
forth in its submissions of March 13, April 14 and 27, and June 11, 2015. These arguments are

summarized below.
(i) Proposal to Disqualify Mr. Alexis Mourre

19. According to Venezuela, Mr. Mourre’s communication of March 11, 2015 contained an
incomplete answer to Venezuela’s inquiries,’ and simply reiterated general statements made in his
letter of March 4, 2015.4 Venezuela asserts that an arbitrator must “investigate by all reasonable
means available to him the existence of situations of conflict of interest in any firm he or she
wishes to join and must disclose all available information as soon as he or she becomes aware of
it.”> In Venezuela’s view, Mr. Mourre’s explanations failed to provide sufficient details as to his

relationship with Dechert LLP,,° a firm that represents interests adverse to Venezuela.’

20. Venezuela raises potential similarities between cases against Venezuela where Dechert
LLP acts as counsel and those in which Mr. Mourre sits as an arbitrator.8 Venezuela claims that
“an independent third party would necessarily understand that it is impossible for Mr. Mourre to
decide issues with independent judgment in those cases ... [without] regard to the positive or

adverse consequences that his decisions may have on the interests of the firm for which he now

works.”

3 Venezuela’s Proposal for Disqualification of Arbitrators Alexis Mourre and Yves Fortier dated March 13, 2015
(“Proposal”) 6.

+ Proposal 12-13.

5 Proposal (14.

© Proposal 8-9.

7 Proposal 47, 13.

§ Proposal (16.

° Proposal {16; Venezuela’s Additional Comments 49.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/21

21. Finally, Venezuela claims that Mr. Mourre’s financial interest in the outcome of the cases
against Venezuela handled by Dechert LLP would not be reduced by the fact that he would receive

a fixed monetary compensation from that firm.!°

22. In Venezuela’s view, the relationship between Mr. Mourre and Dechert LLP is sufficient

to lead an impartial third party to reasonably doubt his impartiality and independence. !!
(ii) Proposal to Disqualify Mr. Yves Fortier

23. Venezuela notes that the law firms of Norton Rose!? and Macleod Dixon LLP agreed to a
merger in 2011, which became effective on January 1, 2012. This merger led Venezuela to propose
the disqualification of Mr. Fortier on October 5, 2011 in ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/30 (the “First
Conoco Challenge”)'> on the basis of: (a) Mr. Fortier’s long-standing relationship with Norton
Rose; and (b) Macleod Dixon’s repeat representation of interests adverse to Venezuela.'* Mr.
Fortier resigned from Norton Rose effective December 31, 2011, but Venezuela claims that it
remains unclear whether his “unofficial professional ties with [Norton Rose] were broken either

on or after that date” (emphasis added).

24. Venezuela states that it became aware that Mr. Fortier continued to “have strong
professional links with Norton Rose” on January 27, 2015, through press reports that highlighted
the participation of Mr. Martin J. Valasek, a Norton Rose partner, as assistant to the tribunal
presided over by Mr. Fortier in the Yukos v. Russian Federation arbitration. In Venezuela’s view,

this demonstrates an ongoing professional relationship between Mr. Fortier and Norton Rose.!°

Proposal (18.

4 Proposal (19.

2 Today Norton Rose Fulbright, following the merger of Norton Rose with Canada’s Ogilvy Renault LLP and
McLeod Dixon LLP and US Fulbright & Jaworski LLP (hereinafter, “Norton Rose”).

8 ConocoPhillips Petrozuata B.V., ConocoPhillips Hamaca B.V. and ConocoPhillips Gulf of Paria B.V. v. Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30) (“Conoco”). Venezuela proposed the disqualification of
Mr. Fortier in Conoco on October 5, 2011 (“the First Conoco Challenge”) and on March 11, 2014 (“the Second
Conoco Challenge”). Both disqualification proposals were rejected. On February 6, 2015, Venezuela filed a third
proposal for the disqualification of Mr. Fortier in Conoco (“the Third Conoco Challenge”). This latest proposal is
currently pending before the Chairman of ICSID Administrative Council.

4 Proposal §{126-27.

5. Proposal §]28-29. Venezuela’s Additional Comments 120-25.

 

6

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/21

25. On February 6, 2015, Venezuela filed a third disqualification proposal respecting
Mr. Fortier in Conoco (the “Third Conoco Challenge’). Venezuela argues that Mr. Fortier’s
alleged conflict of interest in Conoco [concerning Norton Rose] is similar to Mr. Mourre’s alleged
conflict of interest in this case [concerning Dechert LLP]. Venezuela submits that, given these
similarities, it became necessary to propose the disqualification of Mr. Fortier in the present case,
since Mr. Mourre’s eventual resignation would have been considered by Prof. Shin and Mr. Fortier
[who, in Venezuela’s view, is conflicted] under Article 56 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID
Arbitration Rule 8(2).'°

26. In addition, Venezuela: (a) notes that Mr. Fortier’s offices “are located in the reception area
of Norton Rose, at the same building, on the same floor [...] physical proximity [that] would make
an impartial observer assume that Mr. Fortier is in regular contact [with] Norton Rose;”!” (b)
alleges that Mr. Fortier still serves as Chairman Emeritus of Norton Rose, based on a hyperlink
that allegedly leads to Norton Rose’s website;!* (c) referring to the same hyperlink, notes the
existence of the email address yves.fortier@nortonrosefulbright.com, which must have been
created after December 2011, since the merger of Norton Rose and Fulbright & Jaworski only
became effective in June 2013; and (d) refers to Mr. Fortier’s public endorsement of the political

candidacy of Ms. Rachel Bendayan, a current Norton Rose lawyer.”°

27. Given these links, Venezuela alleges that, “any impartial third-party [would] have
reasonable and justifiable doubts on whether Mr. Fortier would decide the cases to which [...]

Venezuela is a party with independence and impartiality, as he will have to decide on issues [...]

which have a direct impact on the economic interests of [Norton Rose] and its clients.”?!

16 Proposal 23-24.

17 Proposal $30. Venezuela’s Additional Observations 26.

18 Venezuela’s Additional rvations (19.

19 Tbid. Venezuela attaches as Annex II a reference to the e-mail address of Mr. Yves Fortier, identified as
yves.fortier @ nortonrosefulbright.com.

2° Respondent’s letter dated April 27, 2015, page 5. Venezuela attaches as Annex VI a public statement made by
Mr. Fortier, as stated in Ms. Bendayan’s website.

21 Proposal 432.

°

 

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/21

2. Claimants’ Observations

28. The Claimants’ arguments on the proposal to disqualify Mr. Mourre and Mr. Fortier were
set forth in their submissions of March 24, April 14 and April 27, 2015. These arguments are

summarized below.
(i) Proposal to Disqualify Mr. Alexis Mourre

29. The Claimants submit that: (a) there has been no inappropriate non-disclosure by
Mr. Mourre;?2(b) M. Mourre made arrangements to ensure that his future relationship with
Dechert LLP would not subvert his integrity in these and other proceedings;”* and (c) nothing in
the facts disclosed by Mr. Mourre indicates an evident or obvious inability to exercise

independence or an appearance of lack of impartiality.*4

30. The Claimants conclude that, even if genuinely held, the subjective belief of the

Respondent cannot constitute a basis for disqualification.*>
(ii) Proposal to Disqualify Mr. Yves Fortier

31. The Claimants observe that “the Respondent has unambiguously recognized that the true
reason behind the challenge to Mr. Fortier was to prevent him from considering a potential

resignation from Mr. Mourre.”?°

According to the Claimants, this is not a valid ground for
disqualification under Article 57 of the ICSID Convention, nor are the Respondent’s previous

unsuccessful attempts to disqualify Mr. Fortier.”

32. The Claimants also note that Mr. Fortier informed the Conoco tribunal and parties in 2011
that he would continue working with members of Norton Rose on certain files in which he was
sitting as an arbitrator, and that the Conoco tribunal had rejected the First Conoco Challenge,

knowing that Mr. Fortier would continue to have a relationship with some members of Norton

2 Claimants’ Reply 43. Claimants’ Additional Observations 120.
3 Claimants’ Additional Observations {20.

2 Claimants’ Reply (38.

°5 Claimants’ Reply 144.

26 Claimants’ Additional Comments [1 1. Claimants’ Reply 947-48.
27 Claimants’ Reply 150.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/21

Rose.> In addition, the Claimants submit that the relationship between Messrs. Valasek and
Fortier cannot evidence a manifest lack of the requisite independence or impartiality of the latter

under Article 57 of the ICSID Convention.”

33. The Claimants further state that Venezuela has offered no explanation as to “why
Mr. Fortier’s choice of an office in proximity to the office of a law firm entirely uninvolved in this

case would undermine his ability to fulfill his role as arbitrator in these proceedings.”*°

34. Finally, the Claimants assert that “ICSID jurisprudence has confirmed consistently that
professional contacts between an arbitrator and legal counsel cannot, without more, be considered
grounds for automatic disqualification.” They conclude that Mr. Fortier’s relationship with Norton
Rose “cannot cast any plausible doubt on Mr. Fortier’s independence or impartiality, let alone
establish the ‘manifest’ lack of these qualities that is required for a challenge to succeed in ICSID

proceedings.”?!

D. EXPLANATIONS FURNISHED BY THE ARBITRATORS

35. Following Mr. Mourre’s resignation on March 16, 2015, he ceased to be a member of the

Tribunal and thus furnished no explanation.
36. By communication of March 30, 2015, Mr. Fortier declared the following:

“The Respondent in this arbitration has requested my disqualification in its letter of 13
March 2015 to the Secretary of the Tribunal.

I note that the Respondent has attached to its request as Annex I what it describes in
footnote 9 as the “Conoco Disqualification”, being a proposal for my disqualification also
on behalf of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in the ICSID Case of ConocoPhillips
Company and Others v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30
which is still pending. I am surprised to see this explicit reference to a proceeding which
I believe to be confidential. For your information, I have submitted explanations to my co-
arbitrators and the parties in that proceeding which I would be happy to provide to you if
you wish (subject to the parties’ consent).

28 Claimants’ Reply 452. Claimants’ Additional Comments {12 (ii).
2° Claimants’ Reply 154.
1
1

 

3 Claimants’ Reply 56. Claimants’ Additional Observations {12 (iii).
§ Claimants’ Reply 57. Claimants’ Additional Observations {13.

9

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/21

To assist you in considering the Respondent’s request, I offer the following explanations
in respect of the Respondent’s allegations which concern me (pages 11 to 15):

1. The Respondent alleges that after 31 December 2011, I have “continued to have strong
professional links with Norton Rose” (para. 28. See also paras. 29 and 32) and that I
“now serve as “Chairman Emeritus” of Norton Rose OR” (para. 26) (my emphasis).

This is wrong. I deny categorically that allegation of Respondent. It is a matter of
public record that I resigned as a partner of Norton Rose OR on 31 December 2011
and severed all of my professional links with that firm on that date. My profile
referenced in footnote 10 of the Respondent’s request is a CV which was published
some time in 2011 when I was still Chairman Emeritus of Norton Rose OR. For your
information, Norton Rose OR ceased to exist on 31 December 2011. If one visits the
website of Norton Rose Fulbright, http://www.nortonrosefulbright.com (as I have just
done), one sees no reference to L. Yves Fortier and this has been so since 1 January
2012. You may also wish to consult the website of Cabinet Yves Fortier at
hitp://www.yfortier.ca.

2. Referring to the Yukos v. Russia awards and the role that Mr. Martin Valasek fulfilled
as assistant to these tribunals, the Respondent alleges “that it shows the existence of a
current professional link between Mr. Fortier and [Norton Rose]” (para. 29).

With respect, the role that Mr. Valasek, a former colleague at Norton Rose OR,
continued to play as assistant to the Yukos tribunals after 31 December 2011 shows no
such thing.

It is a matter of public record that Mr. Valasek was appointed as assistant to the Yukos
Tribunals in 2005, with the consent of my co-arbitrators and the parties, and that he
served in that capacity for nearly 10 years until the Final Awards were issued on 18
July 2014.

After I resigned as a partner of Norton Rose OR LLP on 31 December 2011 in order
to pursue my career as an independent arbitrator and mediator, Mr. Valasek continued
to perform his duties as assistant to the Yukos tribunals until the Final Awards were
issued.

Whatever may have been written in recent press reports does not change the fact that,
after I January 2012 and until 18 July 2014, Mr. Valasek, in the Yukos arbitrations,
continued to assist the tribunals as he had done since 2005.

3. The Respondent alleges that my “current offices are located in the reception area of
Norton Rose, at the same building, on the same floor [...] and that this is in conflict
with the statements made by Mr. Fortier to the Republic when informing it about his
resignation from Norton Rose with a view to avoiding a previous disqualification”
(para. 30).

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/21

Place Ville Marie is the largest office building in Montreal. It has 41 floors and each
floor has four separate, distinct wings. There are more than ten law firms in this
building.

My Montreal office, since 1 January 2012, is situated in the North wing of the 28th
floor. The Montreal offices of Navigant Consulting are also in this wing. Norton Rose
Fulbright has a mail room (not a reception area which is on the 25th floor) in the South
wing and a cafeteria for its employees in the East wing. The West wing was leased very
recently to Tory’s LLP, a major Canadian law firm.

These facts are not in conflict with any other statement I may have made previously to
other counsel for the Republic in other disqualification proceedings.

I hope that these explanations will be of assistance to you as you consider the pending
proposal for my disqualification. I reiterate my profound conviction that I am, always
have been, and will remain able to exercise independent judgment in this arbitration.”

37. By communication of April 22, 2015, Mr. Fortier declared the following:

“I have now seen the English translation of the Respondent's “comments on [my]
comments of 30 March 2015” for which I thank the Respondent's counsel.

With your leave, I wish to clarify a few important facts in the Respondent’s comments:

In paragraph 19, the Respondent refers to and files as Annex II my alleged current
profile found through a web search engine such as Google (not through the current
Norton Rose Fulbright website, http:/wwww.nortonrosefulbright.com). In order to be
fair, [need to complete and clarify this Annex I by submitting (i) the full Google search
results page for “Yves Fortier Norton Rose Fulbright” (as Annex 1) and (ii) the second
search result on that page, being the announcement issued by Norton Rose OR on 21
October 2011 entitled “Revered international arbitrator, Yves Fortier, leaving Norton
Rose OR to establish independent practice” (as Annex 2).

To be clear, I reconfirm in its entirety the statement I made at paragraph number I of
my comments of 30 March 2015.

The email address, yves.fortier @nortonrosefulbright.com referred to in paragraph 19,
is not today, and has never been, active.

In paragraph 26, the Respondent refers to me as “a former Managing Partner”. In
fact, I have never been a “Managing Partner” of Norton Rose OR or any one of its
predecessor firms. I served as the non-executive Chairman of the firm from 1992 to
2009.”

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/21

E. DECISION BY THE CHAIRMAN
1. The proposed disqualification of Mr. Alexis Mourre

38. Mr. Mourre resigned from the Tribunal. As a result, it is no longer necessary to address

the proposal for his disqualification, which is accordingly dismissed.
2. The proposed disqualification of Mr. Yves Fortier

39. Proposals for the disqualification of an arbitrator under the ICSID Convention and Rules

must be submitted promptly. Arbitration Rule 9(1) reads as follows:

A party proposing the disqualification of an arbitrator pursuant to Article 57 of
the Convention shall promptly, and in any event before the proceeding is declared

closed, file its proposal with the Secretary-General, stating its reasons therefor.

40. The ICSID Convention and Rules do not specify a number of days within which a proposal
for disqualification must be filed. Accordingly the timeliness of a proposal must be determined

on a case-by-case basis.**

41. In this case, Venezuela filed the Proposal on March 13, 2015, following Mr. Mourre’s
disclosures of March 4 and March 11, 2015.

42. The Claimants argue that Venezuela did not file the Proposal promptly, and thereby waived
its right to seek Mr. Fortier’s disqualification under ICSID Arbitration Rule 27.** The Claimants

state that Venezuela learned of the basis for the Proposal as early as October 2011*#

and that, in
any event, should have been aware of the relationship between Messrs. Fortier and Valasek by

July 2014, when the Yukos award was made public.*°

43. Venezuela claims that the Proposal was filed promptly. It admits that it became aware of

Mr. Fortier’s alleged continued professional links with Norton Rose on January 27, 2015 through

82 See Conoco supra note 13, Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal of May 5, 2014 439,
footnote 26.

33 Claimants’ Reply 60. Claimants’ Additional Observations 16.

¥ Claimants’ Reply {{{61 and 68-69. Claimants’ Additional Observations 415.

35 Claimants’ Reply 470.

12

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/21

public media reports on the Yukos case.*° However, Venezuela claims that the promptness of this
disqualification proposal ought to be considered by looking at the specific circumstances that
motivated the proposal.*” Venezuela concedes that it knew all facts relevant to its proposal to
disqualify Mr. Fortier by January 2015, but argues that the relevant date to assess promptness of
the proposal should be set as March 11, 2015, when it realized Mr. Fortier would have had to

consider the resignation of Mr. Mourre.**

44, In this case, the latest fact on which the Proposal is based dates from January 27, 2015,

i.e. forty-five days prior to Venezuela’s filing of the Proposal.

45. Indeed, it is common ground that on February 6, 2015, Venezuela filed a proposal for the
disqualification of Mr. Fortier in Conoco based on the same facts invoked in this Proposal.*?
Nonetheless, Venezuela waited further thirty-five days to submit the Proposal in the present case,
and only filed the Proposal in this case when it became aware of the possibility of Mr. Mourre’s

resignation, a fact that has no bearing on Mr. Fortier’s reliability to exercise independent judgment.

46. In these circumstances, the disqualification proposal cannot be considered timely filed.

Therefore, the Proposal is rejected.

% Proposal {28. Venezuela’s Additional Observations {[35-36.
*7 Venezuela’s Additional Observations 139.

38 Supra 425. See also Proposal (24.

29 See Annex I of the Proposal.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/21

F. CONCLUSIONS

47. For the reasons set forth above, the Chairman decides as follows:

1. Respondent’s proposal to disqualify Mr. Alexis Mourre pursuant to Article 57 of

the ICSID Convention is dismissed;

2. Respondent’s proposal to disqualify Mr. Yves Fortier pursuant to Article 57 of the

ICSID Convention is rejected as untimely.

[Signed]

Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council

Dr. Jim Yong Kim

