INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Gabriel Resources Ltd. and Gabriel Resources (Jersey) Ltd.
v.

Romania

(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/31)

 

REASONED DECISION ON CLAIMANTS’ REQUEST FOR EMERGENCY
TEMPORARY PROVISIONAL MEASURES

Members of the Tribunal
Ms. Teresa Cheng SC, President of the Tribunal
Prof. Horacio A. Grigera Na6n, Arbitrator
Prof. Zachary Douglas QC, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Sara Marzal Yetano

 

October 21, 2016

Gabriel Resources Ltd. and Gabriel Resources (Jersey) Ltd. v. Romania
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/31)

 

Reasoned Decision on Claimants’ Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional Measures

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On July 21, 2015, the Center received a Request for Arbitration filed by the Claimants
against the Respondent (the “Request for Arbitration”). The Request for Arbitration
concerned the alleged expropriation and other violations by the Respondent of the
Agreement between the Government of Canada and the Government of Romania for the
Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments (the “Canada - Romania BIT”)
and the Agreement between the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the Government of Romania for the Promotion and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments (the “UK - Romania BIT”), in relation to Claimants’ alleged
investment in a mining project in Romania through their Romanian Subsidiary Rosia
Montana Gold Corporation S.A. (“RMGC”).

The Request for Arbitration was registered by ICSID’s Secretary-General on July 30,
2016 pursuant to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention.

On June 16, 2016, Claimants filed a Request for Provisional Measures (the “First
Request for Provisional Measures”). In their First Request for Provisional Measures
the Claimants requested the Tribunal to recommend that Respondent grant Claimants
unrestricted access to and use of certain confidential and classified documents for the
purposes of this arbitration. In a cover letter of the same date, Claimants also requested
that the time limits for the Parties to present observations on the First Request for
Provisional Measure be fixed by the Tribunal once constituted, and not by the Secretary-
General pursuant to paragraph 5 of ICSID Arbitration Rule 39.

On June 21, 2016, the Tribunal was constituted in accordance with Article 37(2)(a) of the
ICSID Convention. Its members are: Teresa Cheng (Chinese), President, appointed by
the Secretary-General pursuant to the parties’ agreement, Horacio Grigera Na6én
(Argentine), appointed by the Claimants; and Zachary Douglas (Australian), appointed by
the Respondent.

On July 18, 2016, the Centre received a letter from the Center for International
Environmental Law, Client Earth and the European Center for Constitutional and Human
Rights on behalf of the organizations Alburnos Maior, Greenpeace CEE Romania and the
Independent Centre for the Development of Environmental Resources (the “Requesting
Organizations”) (hereinafter, the “July 18, 2016 letter”). In the July 18, 2016 letter, the
Requesting Organizations expressed their interest in exploring amicus curiae
participation in the arbitration proceeding pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 37 and
requested “the Tribunal to: (i) make available to the signing organizations the documents
submitted to, or issued by, the Tribunal; and (ii) indicate to the signing organizations the
opportune time to request leave for amicus curiae intervention”.

On July 20, 2016, the Tribunal invited: (i) the Respondent to file observations on the First
Request for Provisional Measures by August 3, 2016; (ii) the Claimants to file their
response to Respondent’s observations within the two following weeks; and (iii) the

Gabriel Resources Ltd. and Gabriel Resources (Jersey) Ltd. v. Romania
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/31)

 

Reasoned Decision on Claimants’ Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional Measures

Respondent to file any further observations it may have to the First Request for
Provisional Measures within the two following weeks.

On July 22, 2016, the Tribunal invited the Parties to simultaneously file on August 5,
2016 their observations on the two requests made on behalf of the Requesting
Organizations in the July 18, 2016 letter.

On July 28, 2016, the Claimants submitted a Second Request for Provisional Measures
(the “Second Request for Provisional Measures”) that included a Request for
Emergency Temporary Provisional Measures pending the determination of this Second
Request for Provisional Measures (the “Request for Emergency Temporary
Provisional Measures”). In their Second Request for Provisional Measures, Claimants
request the Tribunal to recommend Respondent:

(a) a series of measures related to the documents and information obtained by two
divisions of Romania’s National Agency for the Fiscal Administration (““ANAF”)
as a result of two investigations commenced on RMGC; and

(b) to refrain from enforcing or taking any action in connection with a VAT
assessment served by ANAF on RMGC on July 7, 2016, in the principal amount
of approximately USD 6.7 million (the “WAT Assessment”) pending the
resolution of RMGC’s administrative and judicial challenge of such VAT
Assessment.

In their Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional Measures, Claimants also
requested the Tribunal to recommend Respondent to refrain from taking any measures of
enforcement of the VAT Assessment and any associated interest and penalties pending
determination by the Tribunal of the Second Request for Provisional Measures.

On August 3, 2016, the Tribunal invited Respondent’s comments on the Claimants’
Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional Measures by August 10, 2016. The
Tribunal also invited: (i) the Respondent to file observations on the Claimants’ Second
Request for Provisional Measures by April 17, 2011; (ii) the Claimants to file
observations in reply by August 24, 2016; and (iii) the Respondent to file observations by
way of rejoinder by August 31, 2016.

On that same date, the Respondent submitted its observations to Claimants’ First Request
for Provisional Measures.

On August 5, 2016, both Parties submitted their observations to the two requests made by
the Requesting Organizations in the July 18, 2016 letter.

On August 10, 2016, Respondent submitted its comments on Claimants’ Request for
Emergency Temporary Provisional Measures requesting that it be dismissed for the

reasons stated in that submission.

On August 11, 2016, Claimants sent a letter to the Tribunal in which, among other things,

Gabriel Resources Ltd. and Gabriel Resources (Jersey) Ltd. v. Romania
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/31)

 

20.

21.

Reasoned Decision on Claimants’ Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional Measures

they informed the Tribunal of recent developments relating to the enforcement of the
VAT Assessment and they requested the opportunity to address their Request for
Emergency Temporary Provisional Measures during the first session of the Tribunal to be
held the next day.

On August 12, 2016, the Tribunal held its first session by teleconference. During the first
session, the Parties presented their views on (i) the procedural items included in the
Tribunal’s draft Procedural Order No. 1, which had been circulated by the Tribunal’s
Secretary on July 27, 2016; (ii) on Claimants’ Request for Emergency Temporary
Provisional Measures and on (iii) the two requests made by the Requesting Organizations
in the July 18, 2016 letter.

On that same date and after the first session was finalized, the Claimants submitted a
letter with further observations on their Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional
Measures.

On August 14, 2016 both Parties submitted letters with further observations on the
Request for Temporary Provisional Measures.

By letter of August 19, 2016, the Tribunal informed the Parties that the Request for
Emergency Temporary Provisional Measures was rejected. The Tribunal indicated that
they had decided to communicate their Decision to the Parties, with the full reasons for
that Decision to follow as soon as possible, in light of Claimants’ allegations concerning
RMGC’s need to post a guarantee by August 25, 2016.

The present document includes the reasons of the Decision on the Request for Emergency
Temporary Provisional Measures issued by the Tribunal on August 19, 2016, and the
Tribunal’s decision on costs.

SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

Claimants argue that the VAT Assessment against RMGC is “groundless”, contrary to
ANAF’s previous practice, made “in manifest disregard and violation of Romanian Law”
and “motivated by the fact of this arbitration” and Claimants claim against Respondent.!
The enforcement of the VAT Assessment would allegedly put RMGC in an imminent
tisk of having its mining license annulled, being placed into insolvency and bankruptcy
and liquidation shortly thereafter.? Furthermore, in this process, Claimants “also
potentially would lose access to RMGC’s books and records, with serious prejudice to its
ability to present its claim in this arbitration.”*

' Claimants’ Second Request for Provisional Measures and Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional

Measu

 

of July 28, 2016, 419-22.

2 Claimants’ Second Request for Provisional Measures and Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional
Measures of July 28, 2016, 9127-31.

3 Claimants’ Second Request for Provisional Measures and Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional
Measures of July 28, 2016, (32.

Gabriel Resources Ltd. and Gabriel Resources (Jersey) Ltd. v. Romania
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/31)
Reasoned Decision on Claimants’ Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional Measures

ee

a
| For

Claimants, this means that unless they divert ‘

to secure the abusive VAT Assessment,” the State will “take RMGC, its assets and

properties, thus exacerbating the dispute and impairing Gabriel’s ability to present its

case in this forum.”>

22. Claimants note that RMGC must post the guarantee xs
_<<e ces
the Tribunal would be in a position to rule on Claimants’ Second Request for Provisional
Measures. It is for this reason that Claimants seek, as an emergency temporary
provisional measure, that the Tribunal recommend that Respondent refrain from taking
any measures of enforcement of the VAT Assessment and any associated interest and
penalties pending the determination by the Tribunal of their Second Request for
Provisional Measures.”

23. The Respondent, inter alia, asserts that:

(a) neither the ICSID Convention nor the ICSID Rules provide a basis for the
issuance of emergency relief pending the determination of a request for
provisional measures;®

(b) Claimants have not demonstrated that Romanian authorities rendered the VAT
Assessment in violation of the applicable Romanian law or that the conclusions
contained therein are contrary to the applicable Romanian law;?

(c) the two investigations allegedly carried out by ANAF, as well as the VAT
Assessment, even if enforced against RMGC, would not aggravate the dispute,
since they are entirely unrelated to the claims in the arbitration and Article XII of
the Canada — Romania BIT specifically excludes any claims, including request for
interim relief, arising out of taxation measures;!°

(d) the two investigations, as well as the VAT Assessment, even if enforced against

+ Claimants’ Second Request for Provisional Measures and Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional
Measures of July 28, 2016, 18.

5 Claimants’ Second Request for Provisional Measures and Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional
Measures of July 28, 2016, (50.

© Claimants’ letter of August 11, 2016:

7 Claimants’ Second Request for Provisional Measures and Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional
Measures of July 28, 2016, 489.

® Respondent’s Comments on Claimants’ Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional Measures of August 10,
2016, 1922-29.

° Respondent’s Comments on Claimants’ Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional Measures of August 10,
2016, (19-11.

© Respondent’s Comments on Claimants’ Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional Measures of August 10,
2016, 131-46.

Gabriel Resources Ltd. and Gabriel Resources (Jersey) Ltd. v. Romania
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/31)
Reasoned Decision on Claimants’ Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional Measures

 

RMGC, also would not threaten the procedural integrity of the arbitration and
would certainly fail to justify an order of “emergency measures”;!!

(e) Article XIII(8) of the Canada — Romania BIT expressly excludes interim
enforcement of the alleged rights under the BIT, which necessarily also
encompasses emergency relief;!? and

(f) the Claimants’ request for emergency relief does not meet the test for granting
ordinary provisional measures, primarily because the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction
to issue the relief sought and because the Claimants’ rights are not in peril since,
among other reasons, even if Claimants are required to transfer the
HE. that amount is not significant as compared to the Claimants’ financial

resources. !

ANALYSIS

24. The Tribunal has issued its decision to dismiss the Request for Emergency Temporary
Provisional Measures by the letter dated August 19, 2016 from ICSID.

25. The Tribunal sets out the reasons for the decision made below.

26. The power to grant provisional measures is set out in Article 47 of the ICSID Convention
and ICSID Arbitration Rule 39.

27. The Claimants have set out the criteria that have to be met before a provisional measure
is to be granted.'*

28. The application the Tribunal is considering is the Claimants’ request for an order of
emergency temporary provisional measure “prohibiting the Respondent from taking any
such enforcement action before the Tribunal rules on the Claimants’ request [for the
provisional measures set out in paragraph 90 of the Second Request for Provisional

Measures]”.!>

29. The Tribunal is preliminarily of the view that it has the power to order emergency
temporary provisional measures if the appropriate criteria are met. However for reasons
that will be apparent below there is no need to make a decision on this particular issue at
this stage.

4! Respondent’s Comments on Claimants’ Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional Measures of August 10,
2016, 1947-56.

2 Respondent’s Comments on Claimants’ Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional Measures of August 10,
2016, 1957-63.

5 Respondent’s Comments on Claimants’ Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional Measures of August 10,
2016, 1964-79
4 Claimants’ First Request for Provisional Measures of June 16, 2016, (9113-16.

'5 Claimants’ Second Request for Provisional Measures and Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional
Measures of July 28, 2016, (84.

 

    

Gabriel Resources Ltd. and Gabriel Resources (Jersey) Ltd. v. Romania
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/31)

 

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

Reasoned Decision on Claimants’ Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional Measures

The basis for the heightened urgency for the emergency temporary provisional measure is
that the VAT Assessment would be enforced on or before August 30, 2016!° and in order
for assets of RMGC to be seized, the Claimants will have to post a guarantee yay

er rE
=

; | The Tribunal has been informed that the guarantee that may have to be

posted is at least in the order ay

Respondent submitted that the application relating to Gabriel Resources Ltd. should be
dismissed in the light of the prohibition in Article XII of the Canada — Romania BIT. If
the Respondent is right on this then, Respondent says, the application should be
dismissed vis-a-vis Gabriel Resources Ltd.

Claimants contend that the application is made on behalf of Gabriel Resources (Jersey)
Ltd. as well and, as there is no such restriction under the UK — Romania BIT, the order
should be granted nonetheless as both Claimants are to be affected by the enforcement of
the VAT Assessment. Further there is little prejudice to the Respondent as all that is
being sought for is for the enforcement measures to be delayed for a few weeks pending
the resolution of the Second Request for Provisional Measures.

Respondent points out that there is no evidence that the VAT Assessment is not in
accordance with Romania law or inappropriate or that it is related to the claims in this
arbitration. Moreover, it has not been shown that the Claimants could not provide a bond
or guarantee as alternative to the enforcement measures.

After the First Session held on August 12, 2016, Claimants and Respondent have
provided further information on this matter by letters dated August 14 and 15, 2016. In
particular the Respondent pointed out that Gabriel Resources Ltd. should not be allowed
to “obtain a free ride on the back of the terms of the UK-Romania BIT.”!®

At the time of this application, further submissions were to be filed in relation to the
request for provisional measure. The Tribunal found that it was not in a position at the
time when considering the Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional Measures to
come to any view in the absence of the full set of submissions to be filed by the Parties.

The real question for the Tribunal at the stage of the Request for Emergency Temporary
Provisional Measures is whether the urgency of the matter as explained by the Claimants
justify an emergency temporary provisional measure pending the final decision on the
Second Request for Provisional Measures. The Tribunal is of the view that the
heightened test of urgency is not met.

First, there is insufficient evidence for the Tribunal to conclude that the VAT Assessment
is not in accordance with Romania law.

'6 Claimants’ Second Request for Provisional Measures and Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional
Measures of July 28, 2016, (84.

"7 Claimants’ letter of August 11, 2016.

'8 Respondent's letter of August 14, 2016.

Gabriel Resources Ltd. and Gabriel Resources (Jersey) Ltd. v. Romania
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/31)

 

Reasoned Decision on Claimants’ Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional Measures

38. Secondly, the submissions received as at the date of the decision dated August 19, 2016
are incomplete and are not sufficient for the Tribunal to conclude one way or another as
to the intent or purpose of ANAF’s actions complained of.

39. Thirdly, there is force in the submission of the Respondent that there is no adequate
evidence to show that the Claimants will be in difficulty in putting up the guarantee.
Such guarantee once provided would, according to the Claimants’ own submission, be
able to suspend the enforcement measures that may be taken by ANAF. The Tribunal is
of the view that the economic burden does not appear to be insurmountable and that no
irreparable harm will be caused to the Claimants in furnishing the guarantee in question.

40. Fourthly, the Tribunal notes that, at the time, there are procedures that are being pursued
for the VAT Assessment to be challenged.

Al. Lastly, as a matter of discretion, balancing the interests of the Parties as currently
pleaded, in particular the prejudice that may be suffered by the respective Parties and the
right of the State to enforce its domestic laws, the Tribunal is of the view that the
emergency temporary provisional measure requested should not be granted.

42. Having said that, the Tribunal will be assisted if the Parties could continue to update it of
the progress of the matter and would expect any new development to be highlighted in
the further two rounds of submissions to be made.

COSTS
43. The Tribunal is of the view that costs should be reserved for determination at a later date.

DECISION

44, As indicated in the Secretariat’s letter of August 19, 2016, the Tribunal, after careful
consideration, unanimously decides as follows:

(a) The Claimants’ Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional Measures is
denied;

(b) Either party may bring to the Tribunal’s attention any new, relevant, facts that
fundamentally change the current circumstances; and

(c) Costs are reserved to be determined at a later date.

Gabriel Resources Ltd. and Gabriel Resources (Jersey) Ltd. v. Romania
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/31)

 

Reasoned Decision on Claimants’ Request for Emergency Temporary Provisional Measures

 

Ms. Teresa Cheng SC Prof. Horacio Grigera Na6n Prof. Zachary Douglas QC
President of the Tribunal Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: October 21, 2016 Date: October 21, 2016 Date: October 21, 2016

