In proceedings pursuant to NAFTA Chapter 11 and the

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules:

BETWEEN

GAMI INVESTMENTS, INC.

And

Claimant

THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED MEXICAN STATES

Respondent

FINAL AWARD

15 November 2004

Before the Tribunal comprising:

Representing the Claimant:

Weil Gotshal & Manges LLP
Charles E. Roh, Jr.

Adam P. Strochak

J. Sloane Strickler

Alicia Cate

SAI Abogados

Guillermo Aguilar Alvarez

Lucia Ojeda

Elsa Ortega

Itziar Esparza

W. Michael Reisman
Julio Lacarte Muré
Jan Paulsson

Representing the Respondent:
Consultor juridico de los Estados Unidos
Mexicanos
Hugo Perezcano Diaz
Secretaria de Economia
Luis Gonzalez Garcia
Thomas & Partners
J. Cameron Mowatt
Gregory A. Tereposky
Shaw Pittmann LLP
Stephan E. Becker
Sanjay Mullick

Secretary to the Tribunal:
Zachary Douglas

Formal seat of the arbitration: Vancouver

ar FY

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

THE PARTIES. 1
THE TRIBUNAL AND THE PROCEDURE .......sssssesssesesseeeree 2
FACTUAL BACKGROUND........ccssssssssssssseseeeeetetetsesssenessesensee 7
THE CLAIMS .......scssssssssssssscseseseseessescsnsesnsesssesnseseseseesacenaneaees 10
JURISDICTION AND STANDING.......ccsssssssssssssesssessesssensees 12
MALADMINISTRATION ......ccsscsssssssssssessssssseseenseesseeseeseseesees 19
6(A) _ Factual bases of GAMI’s complaint... 19

(@) ~~ The regulatory framework..........sssssssseseeeeeee 19

(ii) Alleged failures of implementation
and enforceMent........csesscsssesssseseeeseseeeseeeeeees 25

6(B) Minimum standard of treatment: GAMI’s
Claim under Article 1105........ccsesesessseeteeseseeseseeesseeee 31

6(C) Discrimination: GAMI’s claim under
Article 1102 .

 

 

EXPROPRIATION .......ecsssssssseesesessesesessrsesessssrseensssesseeseescenenes 45
COSTS 52
DECISION 53

 

1, THE PARTIES

1 GAMI Investments Inc. (“GAMI” or “the Claimant”) is a
US investment corporation created in 1986 under the laws of
Delaware. Its head office is in Las Vegas. It is a wholly-owned
subsidiary of another US company named Great American
Management and Investments Inc. GAMI owns 14.18% of the
shares of Grupo Azucarero México SA de CV (“GAM”). GAM is
a Mexican holding company whose remaining shareholders are
Mexican. Its dominant shareholder is Mr Juan Gallardo
Thurlow. He owns or controls 64.2% of GAM’s shares. The
similarity in names of GAMI and GAM is coincidental.

2. The Respondent is the Government of the United
Mexican States (“Mexico” or “the Respondent”). Mexico is a
Party to the North American Free Trade Agreement (“NAFTA”).

2. THE TRIBUNAL AND THE PROCEDURE

3. GAMI elected to proceed under the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules of 1976 (as modified by Section B of NAFTA
Chapter 11) by exercising the option available to it under
NAFTA Article 1120.

GAMI appointed Professor Michael Reisman as
arbitrator. | Mexico appointed Mr Julio Lacarte Miro as
arbitrator. The Parties jointly appointed Mr Jan Paulsson as
presiding arbitrator. The Tribunal was fully constituted on
2 October 2002. The arbitrators were assisted by Mr Zachary
Douglas as the Tribunal’s administrative secretary.

5. The Parties did not agree on the choice of a formal seat
of the arbitration. The Tribunal considered their submissions in
this respect and selected Vancouver. The Parties agreed as a
matter of convenience that hearings would be conducted in
Washington DC.

6. The Tribunal sees no need to burden the text of this
Award with a recital of correspondence with counsel. Nor is it
necessary to set out the content of procedural orders. They have
all been reduced to writing. Suffice it to say that the Parties
explicitly confirmed that no unresolved procedural issues were
extant as of the end of the Final Hearings.

. Mexico raised jurisdictional objections. They were the
subject of a special hearing on 17 September 2003 (“the Hearing
on Jurisdiction”) in the course of which counsel addressed the
Tribunal and answered questions put to them by the arbitrators.
No witnesses were heard. Representatives of the Governments
of Canada and the United States of America were present. In
light of the submissions the Tribunal decided to join the
jurisdictional issues to the merits.

8. On 20February 2004 the disputing Parties were
informed of a Sentencia handed down by the Mexican Tribunal
Colegiado. This judgment annulled the expropriation of three
sugar mills owned by GAM. On 27 February 2004 Mexico
represented to the Tribunal in writing that the Sentencia was
unappealable and would be executed by the Federal
Government. The three mills would thus be returned to GAM.
The expropriation of GAM’s two remaining mills had not been
challenged. Mexico’s letter to the Tribunal represented: “Los
trdmites para el pago de la indemnizacién por la expropiacién
de los otros dos ingenios también estdn en curso.” (“The
formalities for payment of the indemnity for the expropriation
of the two other mills are also in progress.”)

9. The hearings on the merits were held on 29 and
30 March and 1 April 2004 (“the Final Hearings”). The
following witnesses testified before the Tribunal:

- Alberto Santos (Witness for the Claimant;
Chairman of Ingenios Santos S.A. de C.V. and
former President of the CNIAA);

- Juan Cortina (Witness for the Claimant; Chairman
and Chief Executive Officer of GAM);

- José Manuel Tapia (Witness for the Respondent;
official of the Ministry of Agriculture with
responsibility for expropriated mills);

- Fausto Garcfa of F. Garcfa Asociados (Valuation
Expert for the Respondent; author of a report on
the valuation of GAM and the minority interest
held by GAMI);

- José Pinto Mazal (Witness for the Respondent;
Director of Beta San Miguel S.A. de C.V. and an
official of the CNIAA).

Each of them had submitted written statements. Statements
had also been produced by the following witnesses who were
not called to answer questions:

Timothy H. Hart & Brent C. Kaczmarek (Valuation
Experts for the Claimant; authors of the Navigant
Consulting report on the valuation of GAM and the
minority interest held by GAMI);

Luis Ramiro Garcia Chavez (Expert for the
Respondent; Professor of the Autonomous
University of Chapingo and author of an analysis
of the cane sugar industry in Mexico);

Mark Alan Radzik (Witness for the Claimant;
Managing Director of the GAMI affiliate Equity
Group Investments);

Pedro Adalberto Gonzalez Hernandez (Witness for
the Respondent; Director of Industrias basicas of
the Ministry of the Economy);

Ulises Schmill Ordéfiez (Legal Expert for the
Claimant; former Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court of Mexico and author of an Opinion on legal
aspects of the Mexican Government’s regulation of
the sugar industry);

Andrés Antonius Gonzalez (Expert for the
Claimant; former Technical Secretary to the
Mexican Inter-Ministerial Working Group on
Sugar and author of a report on the Mexican Sugar
Industry);

Dario Oscos Coria (Legal Expert for the Claimant;
Professor of Bankruptcy and Procedural Law and
author of an opinion on the Suspensién de Pagos
Proceeding in Mexico);

Jose Cruz Romero Romero (Witness for the
Claimant; an accountant and sometime Asesor
General to the Unién Nacional de Productores de
Cana de Azucar);

Carlos Sempé Minvielle (Legal Expert for the
Respondent; former Judge of the Supreme Court

of Mexico and former consultant to the Presidency
and author of an opinion on legal aspects of the
regulation of the sugar industry).

10. The principal written submissions referred to in this
Award are the following:

- GAMI’s Statement of Claim dated (“SoC”)
10 February 2003

- Mexico’s Escrito de Contestacién (“EdC”)
dated 24 November 2003

-  GAMI’s Reply dated 5 July 2004 (“Reply”)

- Mexico’s Escrito de Diiplica dated _—_(“Diiplica”)
11 March 2004

- GAMI’s Post-hearing Brief dated (“Post-

24 May 2004 hearing
Brief”)
- Mexico’s Escrito posterior a la (‘Escrito
audiencia dated 24 May 2004 posterior”)

- GAMI’s Rebuttal Post-hearing Brief (“Rebuttal”)
dated 4 June 2004

- Mexico's Réplica al escrito de GAMI (“Réplica
posterior a la audiencia dated posterior”)
4 June 2004

1. The Tribunal provided Canada and the United States of
America the opportunity to file written submissions in
accordance with NAFTA Article 1128 both before and after the
Hearing on Jurisdiction and the Final Hearings. The United
States of America exercised its right under Article 1128 by filing
a submission on questions of jurisdiction before the Hearing on

Jurisdiction. Neither of these two NAFTA Parties filed
submissions on the merits. Both sent representatives to the
Hearing on Jurisdiction and the Final Hearings in Washington.

3. FACTUAL BACKGROUND

12. GAM and its predecessors acquired sugar mills from the
Government of Mexico in the late 1980s and early 1990s in the
context of a privatisation programme. By 1997 GAM’s primary
operations consisted of five mills:

- Tala

- Lazaro Cardenas
- San Pedro

- San Francisco

- Benito Juarez

The first four produced standard sugar. Benito Juarez produced
mostly refined sugar. In 2001 GAM was Mexico’s fourth largest
sugar producer. Its output represented 8.81% of Mexico’s total
production during the 2000/2001 harvest.

13. In December 1996 GAMI purchased a block of GAM
shares sold by private placement at a cost of US$ 25 million. In
October 1997 GAMI paid a further US$ 5 million to acquire
additional GAM shares on the occasion of a public offering. In
December 1998 GAMI received another tranche of shares
pursuant to a term of the original private placement conditions.
These three tranches represented a total holding of 14.18% of
GAM’s common shares. GAMI enjoyed a contractual right to
designate three members of GAM’s Board of Directors.

14. GAM’s Chairman and CEO since September 2001 is
Mr Juan Cortina. He testified that when he assumed those
functions GAM’s position among Mexico’s largest sugar
producers was in part the result of investments in the
approximate amount of US$ 42 million. Approximately
US$ 13.7 million thereof was expended in the years 1998-2000.

15. GAM had a packaging subsidiary (Proveedora de
Alimentos México SA de CV). GAM also had three separate
service companies. None of these four entities owned
significant assets.

16. Mr Cortina testified that the Government failed in a
number of ways to fulfil its regulatory functions under the
regime established pursuant to the so-called Sugarcane Decree
of 1991. (It was amended in 1993 and affected by ministerial
acuerdos.) Export requirements were not enforced. The
establishment of production ceilings were required by law but
never materialised. Sugar was dumped on the domestic market.
Mills were caught between low prices for their product and the
regulated high cost of their primary raw material (sugarcane).
The entire industry experienced a crisis beginning in 1999. The
result for GAM was a filing for suspensién de pagos (suspension
of payments) on 9 May 2000. This judicial procedure was
intended to allow the restructuring of GAM’s debt and its
avoidance of bankruptcy.

17. 22 sugar mills were formally expropriated by a decree
published on 3 September 2001 (“the Expropriation Decree”).
They included all five of GAMI’s mills. 34 other mills were left
in private hands. The Expropriation Decree recited that it had
been enacted on grounds of public purpose identified in the Ley
de Expropiacion of 1997 (“the Expropriation Law”).

18. GAM forthwith challenged the constitutionality of the
Expropriation Law and the Expropriation Decree by means of
amparo proceedings before the relevant Mexican
administrative courts. Soon thereafter Mr Cortina withdrew the
amparos relating to San Pedro and San Francisco. He states
that the assets of each of the three other mills exceeded its
liabilities as of 30 September 2001.

19. Other mill owners also brought amparo proceedings.
In October 2002 one such action resulted in a ruling of
invalidity of the expropriation of a mill owned by Consorcio

Azucarero Caze SA de CV. In January 2003 the Grupo
Machado obtained a similar judgment.

20. On 9 February 2004 the Tribunal Colegiado en Materia
Administrativa del Primer Circuito rendered a 600-page
Sentencia de Amparo en Revision (the “Sentencia”) in favour of
GAM. It held the Expropriation Decree to be unlawful and
therefore ineffective as to the three mills.

21. The Parties have confirmed in writing their
understanding that the Sentencia is unappealable.

22. The practical consequences with respect to the mills
were set out in Mexico’s letter to the Tribunal of 27 February
2004 (see Paragraph 8 supra).

4. THE CLAIMS

23. A fundamental feature of GAMI’s claims is that they are
derivative. GAMI does not claim that Mexican governmental
measures were directed against its shareholding in GAM. Its
grievance is that the value of its shareholding was adversely
affected by measures which caused GAM’s business to suffer.
Another fundamental aspect of the case is that GAMI cannot
invoke contractual commitments by Mexico. Neither GAM nor
GAMI had contracts with the Government. GAMI therefore
cannot say that its investment decision was predicated on
contractual promises to establish or maintain a certain regime
for its investment. There is by definition no need to consider
contractual intentions in the sense of a meeting of the minds
between government and investor. What GAMI must rely on is
NAFTA as a means by which Mexico’s conduct in the context of
its regulatory framework might be subject to international legal
review.

24. GAMI’s Statement of Claim identified Mexico’s alleged
breaches as the following:

(A) Failing to accord GAMI’s investment “fair and
equitable treatment and full protection and security in
accordance with international law” as required by
NAFTA Article 1105. GAMI criticises Mexico for
“arbitrary conduct with respect to implementation and
application of Mexico’s sugar regime” and “arbitrary
and discriminatory expropriation of GAM’s sugar
mills.”

(B) “Treating GAMI and its investments less favourably
than it treated Mexican investors and_ their
investments in like circumstances” as forbidden by
NAFTA Article 1102. GAMI criticises Mexico for
“expropriating the sugar mills of GAM when investors
in other sugar mill-owning enterprises in like

-10-

circumstances did not have their sugar mills
expropriated” and “requiring GAM to fulfil its export
requirements while not also requiring other
investments in like circumstances to fulfil their
requirements.”

(C) Violating NAFTA Article 1110 which protects investors
against wrongful expropriation. GAMI criticises
Mexico for “indirectly expropriating GAMI’s share in
GAM in a manner inconsistent with the requirements of
Article 1110.”

25. The Tribunal accepts GAMI’s logic in first presenting
the claim under Article 1105. This approach allows a broad
examination of the facts to determine whether there was a
violation of minimum international standards in general. That
background will conveniently set the stage for the more
narrowly focused examination of the allegation of
discrimination.

-u-

5. JURISDICTION AND STANDING

26. GAMI is an “investor of a Party” as described in NAFTA
Article 1139. GAMI’s 14.18% equity interest in GAM is an
“investment” under the same Article. GAMI alleges that Mexico
has breached obligations under Section A of NAFTA Chapter 11.
GAMI claims it has suffered loss or damage in consequence
thereof.

27. The disputing Parties have devoted considerable efforts
to the issue whether GAMI is entitled to claim on account of its
derivative prejudice as a shareholder. The heart of this debate
is whether governmental acts or omissions that adversely affect
GAM may be pleaded as breaches of NAFTA because they had
the result of reducing the value of GAMI’s stake in GAM.

28. Mexico did not formally seize GAMI’s shares in GAM.
GAMI argues instead that Mexico’s expropriation of GAM’s five
mills rendered GAMI’s investment virtually worthless because
the mills were substantially all of GAM’s productive assets.
Chapter 11 does not require a claimant shareholder to be a
majority or controlling owner for his investment to qualify for
protection. GAMI argues: “If it were possible for a state to
escape liability to foreign shareholders by the simple expedient
of seizing the assets without seizing the shares, then the
protections of Article 1110 would be illusory for any investor ina
corporation.” GAMI invokes AIG v. Iran‘ where the claimant
was awarded damages for a 35% interest in an Iranian
insurance corporation. GAMI also relies on Liamco v. Libya?
where compensation was ordered following nationalisation of a
25.5% interest in three oil concessions.

1 4 IRAN-US CLAIMS TRIBUNAL REPORTS 96 (1983)
20 ILM 1 (1977).

we

-12-

29. The United States in its written observation before this
Tribunal accepts that Article 1116 entitles minority shareholders
to bring a claim for loss or damage on their own behalf. It
argues however that Article 1116 does not reflect “an intent to
derogate from the rule that shareholders may assert claims only
for injuries to their interests and not for injuries to the
corporation.” It refers to Barcelona Traction3 as authority for
the rule. It cites a US Statement of Administrative Action from
1993 as evidence that “at least one of the Parties” to NAFTA
understood Article 1116 to cover only direct injury to an investor
while Article 1117 envisages injury caused to a local corporation
owned or controlled by an investor.

30. The Tribunal however does not accept that Barcelona
Traction established a rule that must be extended beyond the
issue of the right of espousal by diplomatic protection. The ICJ
itself accepted in ELSI4 that US shareholders of an Italian
corporate entity could seise the international jurisdiction when
seeking to hold Italy liable for alleged violation of a treaty by
way of measures imposed on that entity.

31. The ICSID Tribunal in the Goetz case stated:

“.. le Tribunal observe que la jurisprudence
antérieure du CIRDI ne limite pas la qualité
pour agir aux seules personnes morales
directement visées par les mesures litigieuses
mais l’étend aux actionnaires de ces personnes,
qui sont les véritables investisseurs.”5

That tribunal included a former President of the ICJ.

32. The annulment committee in Vivendi was more explicit
in explaining that:

“it cannot be argued that CGE did not have an
‘investment’ in CAA from the date of the
conclusion of the Concession Contract, or that
it was not an ‘investor’ in respect of its own
shareholding, whether or not it had overall

3 ICJ REPORTS 3 (1970).
4 ICJ REPORTS 15 (1989).
5 6 ICSID REPoRTs 3, at para. 89 (1999).

-13-

control of CAA. Whatever the extent of its
investment may have been, it was entitled to
invoke the BIT in respect of conduct alleged to
constitute a breach ....”6

33. The Tribunal does not accept that directness for the
purposes of NAFTA Article 1116 is a matter of form. The fact
that a host state does not explicitly interfere with share
ownership is not decisive. The issue is rather whether a breach
of NAFTA leads with sufficient directness to loss or damage in
respect of a given investment. Whether GAM can establish such
a prejudice is a matter to be examined on the merits.
Uncertainty in this regard is not an obstacle to jurisdiction.

34. The classification of alleged breaches described in
Section 4 are dictated by the relevant NAFTA Articles. It would
be artificial to consider the factual bases for the alleged
breaches under these headings. The relevant factual
propositions being advanced by GAMI are more readily
understood as follows:

- Mexico was guilty of maladministration in regulating
the sugar industry. How this purportedly amounted to
alleged violations of Articles 1105 and 1102 is obvious.
GAMI alleges that the maladministration also resulted
in a breach of Article 1110 because it was so egregious as
to be tantamount to expropriating GAMI’s investment
in GAM.

- Mexico wrongfully expropriated GAM’s mills. This is
pleaded as a breach of Article 1105 in regard to GAMI.
The de jure expropriation is also invoked as part of the
factual circumstances which GAMI argues must lead to
the conclusion that it was the victim of governmental
conduct tantamount to expropriation of its
shareholding in GAM under Article 1110.

35. The distinction between the alleged de facto
expropriation of GAMI’s shares in GAM and the de jure
expropriation of GAM’s five mills is critical, | GAMI’s
shareholding was never expropriated as such. GAMI contends
that Mexico’s conduct impaired the value of its shareholding to

6 6 ICSID REPORTS 340 (2002).

-14-

such an extent that it must be deemed tantamount to
expropriation. The mills were expropriated by a formal Decree.
Yet the Mexican courts have neutralised its effect with respect to
the three mills that ultimately remained the object of GAM’s
amparo. The Mexican Government has assured the Tribunal
that it will give such compensation as required by Mexican law
with respect to GAM’s two other expropriated mills. All this was
achieved at the initiative of the owner of the mills: GAM.

36. The Tribunal therefore faces important questions with
respect to two sets of relationships. The first is that of GAM and
GAMI. The second is that of the Mexican judiciary and the
NAFTA Tribunal.

37. NAFTA Article 1117 would have allowed GAMI as a
100% shareholder of GAM to seek relief for alleged breaches of
the treaty by Mexico. GAMI would not have been required to
cause GAM to seek relief before the Mexican courts. It has been
shown above that the fact that GAMI is only a minority
shareholder does not affect its right to seek the international
arbitral remedy. Does this conclusion need to be reconsidered
because of the initiatives of other shareholders in GAM? The
owners of the other 85.82% shares might for reasons of their
own have chosen not to cause GAM to seek relief before the
Mexican courts. (They might simply have been defeatists. Or
they might have made their separate peace with the
Government and abandoned any complaint in return for
offsetting benefits.) That would not disentitle GAMI.

38. It is difficult to see why GAMI’s position under NAFTA
should be impaired because the controlling shareholder caused
GAM to seek redress in the Mexican courts:

(A) Clearly GAMI would not lose its rights if the outcome
had been that the local courts upheld the expropriation
and fixed a derisory amount of compensation. It is in
the very nature of NAFTA to create a regime in which a
foreigner’s entitlements do not necessarily coincide with
those of a citizen even with respect to ownership of
identical types of assets:

“[It] not infrequently happens that under the
rules of international law applied to
controversies of an international aspect a
nation is required to accord to aliens broader

-15-

oo

(B)

and more liberal treatment than it accords to
its own citizens under its municipal laws ...
The citizens of a nation may enjoy many rights
which are withheld from aliens, and
conversely, under international law, aliens
may enjoy rights and remedies which the
nation does not accord to its own citizens.”

This passage is from the Hopkins case.7_ (Hopkins
complained of non-payment of postal money orders he
had purchased from the Mexican government. The
latter answered unsuccessfully that obligations of the
preceding government had been nullified by decree.)
Many other similar passages may be found in the
authorities and the literature. The sentences from
Hopkins have been chosen because they were referred
to in S.D.Myers.8 (That award was transparent
whenever the tribunal was not unanimous. No
reservation was expressed with respect to the reliance
on Hopkins.)

Nor indeed does the position change when one reaches
the problem in the present case: the expropriation is
rescinded by the national courts but the minority
investor remains unsatisfied. In the wake of the
Sentencia the majority shareholders may be content or
disabused. They may have complaints about incidental
losses caused by the wrongful expropriation
notwithstanding its reversal. They may be dissatisfied
with the compensation to be offered on account of the
two mills whose expropriation was unchallenged. They
may be sanguine or apprehensive about Mexican
judicial acceptance of such complaints. But this is the
relief that is available to them. They are Mexican
nationals and do not have standing under Chapter 11 of
NAFTA. GAMI however is entitled to seek international
relief from a NAFTA Tribunal on account of a wrongful
expropriation. It is difficult to see why GAMI’s claim
should founder because the Mexican courts have agreed
with GAMI’s thesis. GAMI did not put its thesis to
those courts. GAMI pursued an international action
which it was entitled to bring.

US-Mexican Claims Commission, IV UNRIAA 41, at 47 (1926).
First Partial Award of 13 November 2000, 8 ICSID REPORTS
(forthcoming), at para. 260 (2000).

-16-

39. As the Umpire put it in the Selwyn case decided in 1903
by the British-Venezuelan Commission:

“International arbitration is not affected
jurisdictionally by the fact that the same
question is in the courts of one of the nations.
Such international tribunal has power to act
without reference thereto, and if judgment has
been pronounced by such court, to disregard
the same so far as it affects the indemnity to
the individual, and has power to make an
award in addition thereto or in aid thereof as
in the given case justice may require.

Within the limits prescribed by the convention
constituting it the parties have created a
tribunal superior to the local courts.”9

40. This century-old holding was itself based on venerable
authority. The Jay Treaty of 1794 between the US and Great
Britain was concluded to resolve acute controversies in the wake
of the American Revolution. International commissions were
established to rule on claims brought by individuals. Some such
claims involved citizens of one country dissatisfied with their
treatment by the courts of the other. The British commissioners
took the view that the decisions of English courts were final.
The US commissioners were able to secure a majority decision
to the contrary. One of them (William Pinckney) put it as
follows in The Betsy (1797):

“neither the United States nor the claimants its
citizens are bound to take for just the sentence
of the lords, if in fact it is not so; ... the
affirmance of an illegal condemnation, so far
from legitimating the wrong done by the
original seizure and precluding the neutral
from seeking reparation for it against the
British nation, is peculiarly that very act which
consummates the wrong and _ indisputably
perfects the neutral’s right of demanding that

9 J.H. Ralston, VENEZUELAN ARBITRATIONS OF 1903, p.322, at 327
(1904).

-17-

reparation through the medium of his own
government.”°

89 years later Francis Wharton wrote that this “is now accepted
law.”" The Umpire in Selwyn expressly relied on this statement
by Wharton.

41. It was for the Mexican courts to rule on the licitness of
the expropriation as a matter of Mexican law. The present
Tribunal defers to the Sentencia as an authoritative expression
of national law. The present Tribunal will moreover give
respectful consideration to the Sentencia insofar as it applies
norms congruent with those of NAFTA. International tribunals
are properly reluctant to conclude that national law contradicts
international law. But ultimately each jurisdiction is
responsible for the application of the law under which it
exercises its mandate. It was for the Mexican courts to
determine whether the expropriation was legitimate under
Mexican law. It is for the present Tribunal to judge whether
there have been breaches of international law by any agency of
the Mexican government. A fundamental postulate in applying
NAFTA is that enshrined in Article 27 of the Vienna Convention
on the Law of Treaties: “A party may not invoke the provisions
of its own internal law as justification for its failure to perform a
treaty.” Whether such national laws have been upheld by
national courts is ultimately of no moment in this regard.

42. A serious jurisdictional impediment would loom if
GAMI’s claim for breach of Article 1105 had been based solely
on the allegedly “arbitrary and discriminatory expropriation of
GAM’s sugar mills.” GAMI cannot plead for GAM. But GAMI’s
Article 1105 claim has another distinct factual basis; see
Paragraph 24(A) supra. GAML is entitled to raise it.

43. The Tribunal has jurisdiction with respect to all of
GAMI’s claims.

10 J.B. Moore, HISTORY AND DIGEST OF INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATIONS TO
WHICH THE UNTTED STATES HAS BEEN ParTY 3184 (1898).
u A DIGEST OF THE INTERNATIONAL LAW OF THE UNITED STATES, Vol. 2,

Sec. 242 (1886).

-18-

6. MALADMINISTRATION
6(A) Factual bases of GAMI’s complaint

. GAMI asserts that Mexico’s maladministration resulted
in both a denial of national treatment and in a breach of
international minimum standards.

@ The regulatory framework

45. Agricultural economics tend to be complex. The
Mexican sugar industry is characterised by special complicating
factors. The productive life of sugarcane is 4-8 years. Farmers
(cafieros) are understandably disinclined to convert their fields
to other crops early in the cycle. The supply of sugarcane
therefore responds slowly to the market. Sugarcane is
processed optimally within 24 hours of harvesting. (48 hours is
a maximum given the loss of sucrose.) Mills must therefore be
readily accessible. Cafieros cannot operate without mills in
proximity. Once a mill is constructed it depends on input from
cafieros in the area. Mr Antonius estimates that the price paid
for sugarcane accounts for 70% of the costs of a mill. GAMI
describes this as “a relationship of mutual dependence.”
Mr Antonius strikingly speaks of a “bilateral monopoly.”

46. The industry has a considerable political dimension.
Harvesting is labour-intensive. The start-up costs of mills are
high. Mr Antonius writes that 30,000 workers are employed in
sugar mills. Ten times that number work in the fields as
growers and cutters. The industry has a particular historical
resonance in Mexico. Sugar was introduced by Cortés four
centuries ago. Much private wealth in 19th Century Mexico
came from large plantations. Zapata and his revolutionary
army were cafieros. The Mexican Constitution long prohibited
corporate ownership and leasing of agricultural land.
Sugarcane today is grown on thousands of small plots. The

-19-

trend is not toward concentration. Mexico explains that in 1970
fields smaller than 8 hectares represented 50% of the total
surface of canefields. In 2000/2001 that proportion grew to
66%. Mexico states that 91% of the country’s cafieros work on
such fields.

47. Against this background it is not surprising that this
Mexican industry has a long tradition of state intervention.
Mexico is however far from unique in this regard.
Mr Antonius’s description is worth quoting:

“The world sugar industry is also one of the
most economically distorted, almost
notoriously so. In both developed and
developing economies one finds evidence of
widespread government intervention in the
sector. A very important component of this
intervention is protection through trade
barriers and quotas, but it also extends to
encompass subsidies, production controls, and
a series of additional fiscal and legal incentives
or restraints. These policies greatly isolate the
industry from price signals. These practices of
protection have also resulted in the sugar
industry being one of the most politicised in
most economies, as the various interest groups
linked to the industry constantly pressure their
governments in an attempt to maximize their
benefits.”

48. Mexico does not disagree with GAMI’s expert in this
respect. Indeed it considers that GAMI understates the
magnitude of the “enormous distortions” on the world market.
More than 120 countries produce sugar. About 70% of
worldwide sales are made at regulated prices. Subsidised
domestic prices encourage overproduction which in turn leads
to dumping. National regulators and international trade
negotiators intervene with unpredictable aggregate effects. The
availability of substitute products and the evolution of
consumer purchasing power play their part. The weather does
the rest. Mexico cites these figures (US$ per pound) to reflect
the volatility and crisis of the relevant period:

-20-

1996 2000

Refined sugar 17.40 c 9.10 c
Raw sugar 12.40¢ 7.53 ¢
Refining margin 5.01¢ 1.57¢

The last figure shrank to 0.55 c in the first quarter of 2001.

49. GAMI suggests that countries which are net importers
of sweeteners can support domestic prices by limiting imports.
Mexico is not in that position. Its production is higher than
domestic demand. Import restrictions are insufficient to
sustain high prices. Domestic supply may be controlled by
regulating producers in two ways: restricting production or
requiring export. Mexico answers that the experience of the US
proves that import restrictions alone are insufficient to ensure
the maintenance of price levels. The government does not seek
to reduce excess production by mandatory production limits or
export requirements. The government's policy is rather to seek
consensus with industrialists and cafieros.

50. Exports to the US are attractive for Mexican sugar
producers. Prices there have generally been higher than in
Mexico. But the US imposes national quotas for its imports. Its
market therefore offers a limited solution. The remaining world
market is unattractive. The emergence of other sweeteners and
gluts attributable to subsidies have driven the world price down
below Mexican prices. None of this is disputed.

51. The Mexican Government took over most of the
country’s mills in the 1970s when they defaulted on debts owed
to the government. GAMI states that their insolvency was to a
significant degree caused by the government’s “deliberate”
imposition of high input prices to benefit the cafieros and low
output prices to satisfy consumers. Mexico asserts as a
worldwide phenomenon that:

“Los gobiernos con frecuencia intervienen para
apoyar los precios de los productores agricolas
— ie. los productores de azticar de caria y de
remolacha. Estos programas con frecuencia
tienen efectos adversos sobre los procesadores
de esas materias primas.”

-21-

(‘Governments frequently intervene to support
the prices of agricultural producers — i.e. the
producers of sugar cane and sugar beet. These
programmes frequently have adverse effects
on those who process these raw materials.”)

52. Ten years later a privatisation programme was
implemented. For the sugar industry the relevant legal
framework became the Sugarcane Decree of 31 May 1991. This
Decree declared all phases of the sugarcane industry — from
planting to refining — to be of public interest. It specifically
fixed new rules for the supply of sugarcane to the mills.

53- The Sugarcane Decree was to be implemented by an
entity established under the name Comité de la Agroindustria
Azucarera (“CAA”). The CAA is chaired by the Secretaria de
Agricultura. The Secretaria de Economia also participates.
(The latter was previously known as the Secretaria de Comercio
y Fomento Industrial or SECOFI. It will be referred to in this
award by its current name.) The caferos have two
representatives on the CAA. So do the mills.

54. So-called Comités de Produccién Cafiera de los
Ingenios del Pais (“Comités”) were also established by the
Sugarcane Decree. Each of these local bodies includes the
leader of the relevant organisation of cafieros as well as the
manager of the mill. The Comités record the minutes (acta) at
the end of the campaign. The Government is not represented in
the Comités.

55- Article 7 of the Sugarcane Decree designated the Junta
de Conciliacién y Arbitraje de Controversias Azucareras
(“JCACA”) as the competent authority to resolve economic
disputes between cajieros and mills. This organ is tripartite in
the manner of the CAA.

56. The Sugarcane Decree declared inter alia that:

“it is necessary to promote the [sugar] industry
by giving economic certainty to the different
sectors that participate in production thereof,
such that said production be profitable, and
also be able to foment its own growth.

-22-

That it is necessary for trade policies to allow
for a permanent sugar supply, thus it is
prudent to link the price of sugarcane to that of
sugar so as to ensure equity to all participants
in the production chain.”

57. The words emphasised in this quotation contain the
seeds of discord. GAMI contends that the objectives they
identify “require the directions of the Government, either
directly or through the CAA that it controls.” Mexico sharply
disagrees. It says the Sugarcane Decree is consensus-driven.
The Government attempts to mediate but does not dictate
outcomes.

58. The Sugarcane Decree provided that 54% of the price of
sugar would be paid to cafieros for the sugarcane. (This
percentage was increased to 57% in 1993 by an amendment to
the Decree.) If there was no official bulk price for sugar it would
be as determined by the CAA. Mills were required to purchase
all sugarcane output from designated areas.

59. An Acuerdo issued on 25March 1997 (the “1997
Acuerdo”) purported to establish the manner of determining a
national reference price for sugarcane. It was a weighted
average of prices received for the semi-refined estandar sugar
in the domestic and export markets. Increased sales on the low
world market would in theory reduce the reference price. They
would dissuade the cafieros from continuously increasing
production. The Acuerdo envisaged that the reference price
would be fixed at the beginning of the campaign and be in
vigour from October 1st each year to September 30* the next.
(The harvest season generally runs from November to June.)
The calculation involved expected domestic and international
sales. At the end of each campaign an adjustment would be
made in light of actual figures. These were to be established by
the Comité for each mill. Underpayments to the cayieros would
be topped up by the mill and overpayments returned. Mexico’s
position is that a mill which received prices inferior to the
reference price had the means of adjusting the latter within its
Comité. Its failure to do so cannot be attributable to the
Government.

60. GAMI describes the Acuerdo as a “government measure
. at the Ministerial level.” Mexico refers to it as the

-23-

manifestation of a consensus within the CAA about reglas and
disposiciones to implement the Sugarcane Decree.

61. GAMI avers that the 1997 Acuerdo also established the
principle that mills must comply with export quotas set by the
Secretaria de Economia. Mills failing to do so were to pay a
penalty. It was substantial: 2.5 times the significant and
variable difference between Mexican and world prices. This
differential was simply to be multiplied by the export deficit to
derive the amount of the penalty.

62. Mexico denies that the Acuerdo created a legal
obligation to satisfy export quotas. The penalty was
convencionalmente acordada. The Government was not
responsible for implementing it by coercion. The Acuerdo did
not give the relevant Secretarias authority to pronounce either
of the two possible administrative sanctions: fines or arresto
administrativo. The Sugarcane Decree empowered the JCACA
to resolve all economic disputes between industrialists and
cafieros — or between mills inter se. The Government had no
means of intervening if the cafieros did not ask for upward
adjustments when the export ratio fell short. This was a matter
for the relevant Comité or if necessary the JCACA. The task of
computing the quota for individual mills fell to the Camara
Nacional de las Industrias Azucarera y Alcoholera (CNIAA)
under a Procedimiento issued on 29 January 1997. Almost all
industrialists subscribed to this Procedimiento. Mr Gallardo
signed on behalf of GAM.

63. On 31 March 1998 this regime was complemented by
another Acuerdo (the “1998 Acuerdo”). It provided production
ceilings for mills. Overproduction was to be penalised.
Underproduction was to be rewarded. Annual ceilings were to
be established for each mill before October each year by the
Secretaries of Agriculture and Economy (having regard to the
views of the CAA). Mexico points to an agreement dated
10 June 1998 between CNIAA and two cafiero unions to the
effect that those entities would ask the two Secretarias to
establish a produccién base for each mill.

64. The 1998 Acuerdo contemplated that production
ceilings would be established by reference to the 97/98
campaign. The actual production during that campaign turned
out to have been underestimated. Mexico affirms that it
therefore became necessary to find a more precise method.

-24-

Meanwhile the levels were not established. This led to an
Acuerdo of 2000 pursuant to which production levels were set
in proportion to the number of hectares of sugarcane fields that
corresponded to each mill.

(ii) Alleged failures of implementation and
enforcement

65. GAM asserts that Mexico “flagrantly and systematically
failed to implement and enforce the law.” It used unrealistic
estimates to inflate the reference price for sugarcane. The
export requirements were simply never enforced. Production
ceilings were not even set. The result was ruinous for GAM’s
mills. The domestic price of sugar declined. The cost of
sugarcane increased. Finally the cost of production exceeded
the price of the sugar produced.

66. GAMI summarises the “disastrous effect” of Mexico’s
alleged failures of implementation and enforcement in dramatic
figures. GAM’s average blended price decreased by 13.2% from
1997 to 2000. Yet the cost of sugarcane rose by 38.8%. GAM’s
operating profits of M$ 368 million in 1996 were transformed
to an operating loss of M$ 302 million in 2000.

67. GAMI described the thrust of Mr Pinto’s testimony as a
confirmation that “Mexico’s abdication of its responsibilities
was a primary cause of the market disorder that eroded the
value of GAMI’s investment prior to the expropriation.” Mexico
sharply objects that Mr Pinto said no such thing. He referred to
a number of factors. They included imports of fructose as well
as a failure to obtain “deserved” quota levels from the US.

68. The first of the three general areas in which
GAMI alleges that Mexico fell short of its legal duties
relates to the reference price and its adjustment. The
1997 Acuerdo (see Paragraph 59 above) was intended to
establish a mechanism for determining a national reference
price for sugarcane as a weighted average of domestic and
export prices for semi-refined sugar. GAMI contends that this
system required that the Government communicate prices at
the end of each harvest as captured by its Sistema
Automatizado Aduanero Integral. Its failure to do so
prevented any adjustment of the price of sugarcane. GAM’s
mills were therefore “forced to overpay” during four consecutive
years.

-25-

69. Manifestly the 1997 Acuerdo’s announced objective
failed to materialise. It is also quite evident that the
Government’s performance was lacking. No explanation for this
failure has been provided by Mexico. Its defence has rather
been to deny that it had a clear obligation. Alternatively Mexico
argues that its passivity was not prejudicial. The mills and their
national Chamber (the CNIAA) had access to the required
information in a timely manner. GAMI retorts that there is no
proof to this effect. Moreover Mexico’s contention is no defence
to GAMI’s challenge that Mexico failed to respect its legal
obligation to provide this information.

70. The second general area relates to export
requirements. To require all mills to comply with export
quotas would alleviate pressure on domestic prices. (See
Paragraphs 49 and 61 above.) To fail to do so across the board
would distort competition among mills. GAMI alleges that the
Government badly neglected to ensure compliance as it was
legally obliged to do. It did not monitor and establish the level
of compliance by individual mills with their export quotas.
Delinquent mills were not penalised by JCACA — which GAMI
describes as a “Government-controlled body.”

71. Mexico answers that the mill industry itself was to a
significant degree responsible for resolving the problem. It
should have done so through the JCACA — which Mexico insists
is a tripartite entity intended to promote consensus rather than
to function as a governmental organ. It may have been the case
that some mills ignored their export quotas. But then GAM
should have pursued the violators. Instead it sought to
“frustrate” the functioning of JCACA by challenging its
jurisdiction when cafieros filed actions demanding information
from the mills. Indeed Mexico wonders why GAM and its
compliant allies within the CNIAA did not move to discipline or
indeed exclude from that Chamber members whose delinquency
was so obviously tantamount to unfair competition.

72. GAMI points out that two mills actually operated by the
Government also failed to comply with export requirements.
This set a poor example which GAMI says “caused further non-
compliance.” Mexico answers that these mills were not in fact
owned by the Government. They were bankrupt and run by a
public fideicomiso (trustee). GAMI characterises this answer as
“hyper-technical.” It argues that the Government had “ample
authority to cause Santa Rosalia and La Joya to comply with
their export requirements had it wished to do so.”

-26-

73. Once again the failure of the 1997 Acuerdo is evident. If
Mexico had an obligation to achieve effective implementation
its failure seems clear. Such is the thrust of Lic. Schmill’s legal
opinion. But the conclusion is less clear if the test of
responsibility involves subjective elements: an intentional or
irresponsible disregard for the success of the regulatory regime.
The Tribunal’s legal analysis will be developed in due course.
The immediate inquiry concerns the causes of the failure of the
envisaged export quota scheme.

74. GAMI argues that Article 7 of the 1997 Acuerdo created
a “legal obligation” for the Government to issue a determination
of each mill’s level of compliance with its export obligations.
Mexico sharply rejects this as an unjustified reading of the text
of the Acuerdo. The individual Comités are in fact charged with
this task. Mexico refers to more than 400 recorded instances of
actas from various Comités without any request for
confirmation by the Government of the information put forward
within the concerned Comité. It would be up to the JCACA to
resolve any difference within a particular Comité. The
Government’s role was to provide (proporcionar) information.
Mexico insists that this was done — “completely and diligently”
~ at the request of the JCACA and the carieros.

75. The present Tribunal is presented with a series of
propositions which the parties have debated at length. Did the
setting of quotas require consultations? Did the mills take
sufficient initiatives? Should their national Chamber have done
more to police its members? Is the JCACA to be deemed an
organ of the Government? Did the mills seek to hamstring the
JCACA in 1999? What difference did it make? Did the JCACA
and the various comités function as intended? If not was the
Government obliged to devise and make effective alternative
mechanisms to achieve the defined objectives? Had the mills
changed their attitude toward the JCACA by 2000 and 2001?
Was GAM in particular entitled (no matter what it may have
done on an informal or political level) to maintain formal
passivity and nevertheless hold the Government to an obligation
of effective implementation? Was any redress available to
GAM in its position as an indirectly affected party?

76. There are doubtless answers to these questions under
Mexican law. Whether this Tribunal may and should provide
such answers is another matter. At this juncture it suffices for
the Tribunal to observe that the Mexican regulatory regime did
not contain an unambiguous affirmation to the effect that the

-27-

Government shall announce annually individual export quotas
for all mills and shall promptly enforce any non-compliance.
The questions identified in Paragraph 75 demonstrate that the
regulatory regime was far more complex. The Tribunal holds
that a foreign investor contemplating this regime could not have
acted on the certain expectation that it had the import of the
italicised words.

77. A confirmation of this conclusion is to be found when
one reflects on Mexico’s account of the initiatives it claims to
have taken in support of sugar exports. Mexico’s Escrito
posterior describes seven categories of such initiatives:

(a) In 1998 Mexico sought redress against the USA under
NAFTA Article 20 with a view to establishing access of
Mexican surpluses to the US market. This initiative was
frustrated by the US’s refusal to empanel a tribunal.
GAMI retorts that this action “does not address
compliance by individual mills with the 1997 Acuerdo.”

(b) In 1995 Mexico acceded to a request by the owners of
sugar mills to eliminate official prices. GAMI retorts
that this measure was irrelevant to the export
requirement instituted two years later.

(c) The Government granted subsidies to allow for the
stocking of 600,000 tonnes of sugar. Only mills having
respected the export requirements were allowed to
benefit from these subsidies. GAMI retorts that these
subsidies were offset by a Government-mandated
increase in the price of sugarcane during three
consecutive harvests from October 1997.

(d) Mexico acceded to a request by mill-owners to launch
an antidumping investigation with respect to fructose
originating in the US. This resulted in the imposition of
compensatory quotas. GAMI retorts that this is
irrelevant; proper implementation of the 1997 Acuerdo
“would result in automatic and balanced adjustments to
changing conditions” such as decreases in sugar
consumption due to conversion to fructose.

(e) Mexico put into place a debt restructuring programme.
GAM benefited therefrom in that it was given a low-

-28-

interest credit facility which enabled it to buy back a
portion of its dollar-denominated foreign debt. GAMI
retorts that this was no favour. GAM ultimately raised
capital from the US public debt market to prepay loans
from the Mexican development credit organism (FINA).

(f) Mexico fulfilled its role within the CAA. It used its two
seats (of the total of six) to seek consensus with the
cafieros and the mills. The record shows that the CAA
always acted by more than consensus: unanimity.
Pursuant to the Sugarcane Decree the CAA developed
the regime which ultimately took the form of the
Acuerdos of 1997 (as amended in 1998) and 2000. The
CAA’s constant purpose was to come to grips with the
problem of excess production. GAMI retorts that the
Acuerdos on their face were issued by the Government
alone. Above all the problem was not to issue
regulations but to enforce them.

(g) “One of the ways” in which Mexico sought to promote
compliance with export quotas was to limit access to the
export quota to the high-price US market established
under NAFTA to those mills that had complied with
their general export quotas. GAMI retorts that this was
meaningless because the US quota was very small.

78. Thus each of Mexico's arguments meets a
counterargument by GAMI. Some of GAMI’s rebuttals pertain
to a lack of logical connection with the particular regulatory
mechanism which it insists Mexico had a legal duty to
implement and enforce. Other objections relate to a lack of
causal connection. Yet others are part of a macroeconomic
debate. All of GAMI’s counterarguments might be ultimately
valid. Yet the record shows that Mexico in many ways and over
the course of many years sought to address the problem of
excess production. It is by no means established that Mexico
repudiated or arbitrarily ignored its own regulations. What
GAMI has succeeded in demonstrating is that Mexico failed to
make the 1997 Acuerdo a reality. The consequences of these
findings will be addressed when the Tribunal turns to determine
whether international liability on Mexico’s part has been
established.

79. A major bone of contention in this case concerns
Mexico’s alleged failure to take action against the CAZE group

-29-

of mills. GAMI writes that “Mexico does not deny that it was
aware of CAZE’s fraud as early as October of 1999.” GAMI
refers to the alleged falsification of documents to demonstrate
ostensible compliance with export requirements. Mexico
emphatically rejects this assertion. The Secretaria de
Economia had doubtless received a letter from Mr Santos (as
President of the CNIAA) dated 29 October 1999 calling
attention to the position of CAZE. But this letter spoke of
“serious irregularities” which “create a presumption” that the
declared volumes of exports were not true. He called on the
Secretaria to take the “necessary action” to determine who was
responsible for this “regrettable” (lamentable) state of affairs.
He noted that the CNIAA itself had asked CAZE to give a
detailed account of the irregularities. He wrote a follow-up
letter on 14 December 1999 which reiterated the elements
summarised above. He added that CAZE “has initiated its
internal investigation ...; its results will in due course be
brought to [your] attention.” Mexico observes that this was far
from proof of a fraud. To the contrary the CNIAA ultimately
took no action against CAZE.

80. GAMI suggests that Mexican officials had arbitrarily (or
possibly by favouritism) decided not to pursue CAZE.
Mr Santos testified that he had been told by public officials that
“the case was closed” and should be forgotten. This is a serious
accusation. It cannot be given credence in the absence of
evidence. There is only Mr Santos’s recollection. He may have
misunderstood. His memory may be faulty. And if he were
right it is difficult to avoid reflecting that his own stance as the
leader of an important industrial organisation was
uncourageous given his own views that the matter had “graves
implicaciones a toda la industria” (letter of 27 October 1999).
GAMI has criticised Mexico for failing to “intervene in a timely
manner to protect the public interest that had been harmed by
CAZE.” Mexico retorts ironically that GAMI apparently believes
that the invocation of the public interest suffices for “executive
branches of the governments of the world to take ad hoc
initiatives even in the absence of any request by affected parties
— and even contrary to their will.”

81. The third and final general area of alleged
maladministration concerns production limits. GAMI
asserts that the 1998 Acuerdo required the Government to
perform this function. The CAA’s advisory role did not justify
that the Government “abdicate its legal duty to act in the
absence of consensus.” Moreover the 2000 Acuerdo created a
legal obligation to issue rules for the production controls.

-30-

Mexico’s failure to do so made it impossible to apply and
enforce the 2000 Acuerdo.

82. Mexico takes exception to the following passage in
GAMI’s Post-Hearing Brief:

“There is no question that the 1998 Acuerdo
required the Government to determine per mill
base production levels starting with the 1997-
1998 harvest... Chief Justice Schmill’s
testimony that the Government was under a
legal obligation to act stands unchallenged...”

Mexico insists that Lic. Schmill said no more than that
produccion base levels set by the authorities for individual mills
would be obligatory. This is not the same as saying that Mexico
violated the 1998 Acuerdo because it did not define such levels
for the 1998/99 harvest. Mexico’s position is that both mill
owners and cafieros agreed that the methodology of the 1998
Acuerdo was inadequate. It was therefore agreed with the
Government to seek a new methodology. The result was a
decision that the methodology of the 2000 Acuerdo would be
based on the number of cultivated hectares corresponding to
each mill. This was an “objective datum.” (The previous
reference to volumes produced during the 1997-98 harvest had
resulted in an underestimation.) Each mill as well as the
CNIAA itself thus knew what the point of reference would be.
Mr Santos (as President of the CNIAA) explicitly acknowledged
it as the product of an agreement which would be applied as of
the 2000/01 harvest. The 2000 Acuerdo does not require that
the levels be published. They are simply made available in the
offices of the Secretaria de Economia and the CAA. GAM never
asked for written or “official” confirmation.

6(B) Minimum standard of treatment: GAMI’s claim
under Article 1105

83. One cannot fail to observe that GAMI’s complaint of
alleged unfair and inequitable treatment is not connected with a
demonstration of specific and quantifiable prejudice. Mexico’s
alleged wrongdoing would doubtless have resulted in some
short-term decline in the value of its shares in GAM. (There
would have been no loss of dividends: GAM’s business strategy
has never been to distribute earnings to shareholders.) The
ultimate duration of this unspecified decline in value is

-31-

uncertain. It was bound to be reversed to some degree by the
return of the three wrongfully expropriated mills and by the
prospect of compensation for the two others (the expropriation
of which GAM did not challenge). Above all there is consensus
as to the positive effect of the more vigorous application of
Mexico’s Sugar Program.

84. GAMI did not attempt to prove or even present a
theoretical financial analysis of what the short-term decline
might have been. GAMI rather proceeds on the basis that the
entire value of its investment has been destroyed. This is
demonstrably untrue. GAMI’s shareholding in GAM remains
intact. GAM’s principal productive assets have either been
restored to it or are the subject of negotiations to determine
compensation. The sugar industry is now operating on a better
footing. Mr Pinto testified that a tax on soft drinks sweetened
by fructose “has turned out to be a very beneficial measure for
the Mexican sugar industry.” GAM has declared itself to be
optimistic for the future. Counsel for GAMI declared flatly in
final oral submissions that “the system is working now.”
GAMI’s failure to make good on its claim of total destruction
will be dealt with in detail below when examining its claim of
expropriation. But also with respect to the Article 1105 claim it
must be noted that GAMI has not sought to quantify the alleged
prejudice arising from particular alleged acts or omissions.

85. GAMI’s approach seems to be all or nothing. But no
credible cause-and-effect analysis can lay the totality of GAMI’s
disappointments as an investor at the feet of the Mexican
Government. Both sides agree that the economics of sugar are
highly distorted and subject to powerful international market
forces. No one has suggested that NAFTA entitles an investor to
act on the basis that a regulatory scheme constitutes a
guarantee of economic success. GAMI can assert only that
maladministration of the Sugar Program caused it some
prejudice. But the prejudice must be particularised and
quantified. GAMI has not done so. The Tribunal does not know
if such a demonstration would even be possible in the
circumstances given the problem of timing. There are years
when the sun shines on the sugar industry. In Mexico in
particular the industry has had its ups and downs. Recent
developments have apparently been positive. GAMI
presumably benefits from them. Absent a complete destruction
of its investment GAMI has not identified a particular point in
time when a metaphorical snapshot of its prejudice should be
taken. It may be that such a demonstration is impossible in this
case. At any rate the Tribunal would have been in no position to

-32-

award damages even if it had found a violation of Article 1105.
The Tribunal will nevertheless explain its conclusion that GAMI
also failed to establish its claim in principle under Article 1105.

86. GAMI has comprehensively demonstrated that the
regulations which it refers to as “the Mexican Sugar Program”
were not carried out in accordance with their terms. GAMI
refers to “legal obligations” incumbent upon the Government
under that regulatory scheme. It relies on an impressive legal
opinion by a former Chief Justice of Mexico (Lic. Schmill) to the
effect that the Government has a duty “to intervene directly and
permanently” to ensure the effective implementation of decrees
it has promulgated.

87. The three broad instances of failure of implementation
and enforcement have been described in Section 6(A)(ii) above.
The present Tribunal does not doubt that the fulfilment of the
overarching regulatory objectives in question (reference
price/export requirements/production controls) would in a very
significant way have improved GAM’s prospects and those of its
shareholders. The Sugar Program has more recently been
implemented with considerable success. The industry as a
whole has enjoyed a revival even without the desired access to
the US market.

88. GAMI contends that Mexico’s failure to implement and
enforce its laws was flagrant and arbitrary. GAMI submits that
Mexico has thus infringed the standard articulated in Técnicas
Medioambiente Tecmed as follows:

“The Arbitral Tribunal considers that this [fair
and equitable treatment] provision of the
Agreement, in light of the good faith principle
established by international law, requires the
Contracting Parties to provide to international
investments treatment that does not affect the
basic expectations that were taken into account
by the foreign investor to make the investment.
The foreign investor expects the host State to
act in a consistent manner, free from
ambiguity and totally transparently in its
relations with the foreign investor, so that it
may know beforehand any and all rules and
regulations that will govern its investments, as
well as the goals of the relevant policies and

-33-

administrative practices or directives, to be
able to plan its investment and comply with
such regulations. Any and all State actions
conforming to such criteria should relate not
only to the guidelines, directives or
requirements issued, or the resolutions
approved thereunder, but also to the goals
underlying such regulations. The foreign
investor also expects the host State to act
consistently, i.e. without arbitrarily revoking
any preexisting decisions or permits issued by
the State that were relied upon by the investor
to assume its commitments as well as to plan
and launch its commercial and_ business
activities.”!2

89. GAMI considers that the terms articulated in the
subsequent Waste Management II award suggest greater
leniency in assessing state behaviour under Article 1105.
(Técnicas Medioambiente Tecmed was not a NAFTA case. It
arose under the Spain/Mexico BIT which provides that each
state party “shall guarantee fair and equitable treatment” to
investors of the other state party.) GAMI submits that its
grievance nevertheless satisfies the requirements articulated in
that award. It quotes Waste Management II with the following
added emphasis:

“Taken together, the S.D. Myers, Mondev, ADF
and Loewen cases suggest that the minimum
standard of treatment of fair and equitable
treatment is infringed by conduct attributable
to the State and harmful to the claimant if the
conduct is arbitra rossly unfair, unjust or
idiosyncratic, is discriminatory _and_exposes
the claimant to sectional or racial prejudice, or
involves a lack of due process leading to an
outcome which offends judicial propriety — as
might be the case with a manifest failure of
natural justice in judicial proceedings or a
complete lack of transparency and candour in
an_administrative process. In applying this
standard it is relevant that the treatment is in

breach of representations made by the host

12 Award of 29May 2003, 10 ICSID Reports (forthcoming) at
para. 154.

-34-

State which were reasonably relied on by the

claimant,”3

90. Mexico does not question this synthesis as such. It
rather insists that this Tribunal does not have the mandate to
control the application of national law by national authorities.

91. This contention misconceives the role of international
law in the context of the protection of foreign investment.
International law does not appraise the content of a regulatory
programme extant before an investor decides to commit. The
inquiry is whether the state abided by or implemented that
programme. It is in this sense that a government’s failure to
implement or abide by its own law in a manner adversely
affecting a foreign investor may but will not necessarily lead to a
violation of Article1105. Much depends on context. The
imposition of a new licence requirement may for example be
viewed quite differently if it appears on a blank slate or if it is an
arbitrary repudiation of a preexisting licensing regime upon
which a foreign investor has demonstrably relied.

92. The relevant international obligation is expressed in
Article 1105(1) as follows:

“Each Party shall accord to investments of
investors of another Party treatment in
accordance with international law, including
fair and equitable treatment and _ full
protection and security.”'4

The challenging task for this Tribunal is to apply these
abstractions. It is necessary first to enquire how they relate to
compliance with national law.

13 Para. 98.

14 The NAFTA Free Trade Commission issued Notes of Interpretation
of Certain Chapter 11 Provisions in July 2001. These Notes state that
Article 1105 is not intended to require treatment of aliens “beyond
that which is required by the customary international law minimum
standard.” They also state that the determination that there has
been a breach of another treaty obligation does not of itself establish
a breach of Article 1105. GAMI says that its claims in this case
“satisfy the standard set forth in the interpretation.” It therefore
deems it unnecessary to question whether the Notes constitute “a
proper exercise of the interpretive power in Article 1131.”

-35-

93. To repeat: NAFTA arbitrators have no mandate to
evaluate laws and regulations that predate the decision of a
foreigner to invest. The present Tribunal endorses and adopts
the following passages from S.D. Myers:

“When interpreting and applying _ the
‘minimum standard’, a Chapter 11 tribunal
does not have an open-ended mandate to
second-guess government decision-making.
Governments have to make many potentially
controversial choices. In doing so, they may
appear to have made mistakes, to have
misjudged the facts, proceeded on the basis of a
misguided economic or sociological theory,
placed too much emphasis on some social
values over others and adopted solutions that
are ultimately ineffective or counterproductive.
The ordinary remedy, if there were one, for
errors in modern governments is through
internal political and legal processes, including
elections.”5

94. The duty of NAFTA tribunals is rather to appraise
whether and how preexisting laws and regulations are applied
to the foreign investor. It is no excuse that regulation is costly.
Nor does a dearth of able administrators or a deficient culture of
compliance provide a defence. Such is the challenge of
governance that confronts every country. Breaches of NAFTA
are assuredly not to be excused on the grounds that a
government’s compliance with its own law may be difficult.
Each NAFTA Party must to the contrary accept liability if its
officials fail to implement or implement regulations in a
discriminatory or arbitrary fashion.

95. The ICSID tribunal in Waste Management II made
what it called a “survey” of standards of review applied by
international tribunals dealing with complaints under Article
1105. It observed the emergence of a “general standard for
Article 1105.”!6 It noted that a violation does not require proof
of “the kind of outrageous treatment referred to in the Neer
case.”17 Neer envisaged conduct that amounted to an “outrage,

15 First Partial Award, op. cit., note 8, para. 261.
16 Award of 24 April 2004, 10 ICSID Reports (forthcoming) at
para. 98.

7 Ibid. para. 93.

- 36-

to bad faith, to wilful neglect of duty, or to an insufficiency of
governmental action so far short of international standards that
any reasonable and impartial man would readily recognize its
insufficiency.”*8 Neer was decided more than half a century
before NAFTA saw the light of day. The ADF award observed
that customary international law as reflected in Article 1105 is
“constantly in a process of development.” The standard which
emerged from the Waste Management II tribunal’s study has
been properly identified by GAMI and is reproduced in
Paragraph 89 above. GAMI contends that its claim satisfies this
standard.

96. The award in Waste Management II goes on to say:
“Evidently the standard is to some extent a flexible one which
must be adapted to the circumstances of each case.” The
arbitrators concluded that the acknowledged failure to fulfil
contractual obligations did not suffice to create liability under
Article 1105.19 This non-performance was balanced against the
authorities’ attempts to achieve the objectives of the concession.
The tribunal was not persuaded that the record as a whole
proved a breach of international law.

97. Four implications of Waste Management II are salient
even at the level of generality reflected in the passages quoted
above. (1) The failure to fulfil the objectives of administrative
regulations without more does not necessarily rise to a breach of
international law. (2) A failure to satisfy requirements of
national law does not necessarily violate international law. (3)
Proof of a good faith effort by the Government to achieve the
objectives of its laws and regulations may counter-balance
instances of disregard of legal or regulatory requirements. (4)
The record as a whole — not isolated events — determines
whether there has been a breach of international law. It is in
this light that GAMI’s allegations with respect to Article 1105
fall to be examined.

98. GAMI recognises that NAFTA tribunals have taken the
view expressed as follows in ADF v. USA:

“[SJomething more than simple illegality or
lack of authority under the domestic law of a
State is necessary to render an act or measure

18 L.F. Neer v. Mexico, 1927 AJIL 555 at 556.
19 Op. cit. n. 16, at para. 109.

-37-

inconsistent with the customary international
law requirements of Article 1105(1), even under
the Investor's view of that Article,”2°

GAMI argues that the requirement of “something more” is met
as follows:

“Mexico’s conduct in this case is far more
egregious than a simple or isolated failure to
follow some provision of the Sugarcane Decree.
Mexico’s actions and failures to act
individually and cumulatively undermined the
fundamental balance of the sugar laws,
effectively turning GAMI’s investment in GAM
into a large contribution for the benefit of
cafieros, and the Mexican Government itself,
and those mills that were left unexpropriated.
This is precisely what NAFTA prohibits. Such
conduct is arbitrary, grossly unfair and far
below the minimum standard required under
Article 1105 and international law. ... [Mexico]
arbitrarily and discriminatorily implemented
certain aspects of the law and capriciously
refused to implement and enforce others,
thereby substantially destroying GAMI’s
investment.”

99. The factual and legal components of this argument
must be examined. The proposition that GAMI’s investment
was destroyed is plainly not proven. GAM still exists. Its chief
executive officer testified that GAM is recovering and he is
“optimistic.” Nor can it be accepted that GAM’s difficulties were
due entirely to Mexico’s alleged failure to implement the Sugar
Program. GAMI’s argument is not that its investment would
have been profitable but for Mexico’s non-feasance. It is quite
evident that this is not what GAMI believed at the time. Its
Form 20-F Annual Report to the US Securities Exchange
Commission for the year 1999 stated:

“There can be no assurance that the Company
will be able to maintain sales at generally
prevailing market prices for sugar in Mexico
without discounts and that sufficient exports

20 6 ICSID REPORTS 470, at para. 190 (2003).

-38-

will take place in order to assure a domestic
market balance.”

100. The key question is the extent to which an investor may
rely on the implementation by the host state of laws in place
before its investment is made. What efforts by a government to
implement its regulatory programme suffice to fulfil the
international standards requirement of Article 1105? Waste
Management IT involved contractual undertakings between a
governmental authority and the investor. No such undertakings
may be invoked by GAMI. Some elements of the analysis in
Waste Management II are nevertheless instructive.

101. The investor in Waste Management II adduced
evidence which made it “clear that the City failed in a number of
respects to fulfil its contractual obligations to Claimant.”2! The
investor’s contractual claims could be brought before the
Mexican courts. Indeed as contractual claims they could be
brought nowhere else given the relevant jurisdictional
provisions. Yet claims of breaches of NAFTA could be brought
to arbitration under Chapter 11 without the need to exhaust
local remedies. The problem in Waste Management II was
therefore to identify the types of interference with contractual
rights that could rise to the level of a breach of international
obligations. The tribunal noted that in itself “even the
persistent non-payment of debts by a municipality is not to be
equated with a violation of Article 1105.”22 Otherwise “Chapter
11 would become a mechanism of equal resort for debt
collections and analogous purposes in respect of all public
(including municipal) contracts, which does not seem to be its
purpose.”23 Something more was required. The conduct giving
rise to the complaint does not violate Article 1105 as long as it
does not “amount to an outright and unjustified repudiation of
the transaction” and “some remedy is open to the creditor to
address the problem.”24

102. Something akin to this sequence of propositions is
extant in the present case.

21 Op. cit. n. 16, at para. 109.

22 Para. 115.

23 Para. 116.

24 Para. 115. This leaves open the issue of denial of justice. Such a

claim was raised in Waste Management II but rejected. No such
claim arises in the present case.

-39-

103. | GAMI has demonstrated clear instances of failures to
implement important elements of Mexican regulations. It has
adduced eminent evidence to the effect that the Mexican
government is constitutionally required to give effect to its
regulations. Claims of maladministration may be brought
before the Mexican courts. Indeed as breaches of Mexican
administrative law they could be brought nowhere else. Yet
GAMI’s claims of breaches of NAFTA may be brought before
this Tribunal under Chapter 11 without the need to exhaust local
remedies, The problem is therefore to identify the type of
maladministration that could rise to the level of a breach of
international obligations. A claim of maladministration would
likely violate Article 1105 if it amounted to an “outright and
unjustified repudiation” of the relevant regulations. There may
be situations where even lesser failures would suffice to trigger
Article 1105. It is the record as a whole — not dramatic incidents
in isolation - which determines whether a breach of
international law has occurred.

104.  GAMI has not been able to show anything approaching
“outright and unjustified repudiation” of the relevant
regulations. The Sugarcane Decree and its related measures
certainly did not operate in accordance with their terms. But
there is no evidence that Mexico set its face against
implementation. There is no reason to doubt that Mexico would
have preferred that all participants in the industry would find
prosperity in the economic equilibrium conceived by the
regulators. The Mexican authorities might have acted with
greater initiative and perseverance. But it is not certain that the
Mexican government was the sole and critical actor. There are
unexplained questions with respect to the ultimate
responsibility for the “consultations” which were to take place
within the Comités and the JCACA. The same is true with
respect to the apparent passivity of the CNIAA.

105. Would something less than repudiation still be
actionable under Article 1105? What about an egregious failure
to regulate? Might it be said that Mexico refused to hold
feckless administrators to account for failure to carry out their
assigned task? GAMI’s thesis is not that Article 1105 requires
Mexico to conceive and implement a successful regime of
regulations for the sugar industry. Mr Roh rather put it as
follows:

“... having chosen to create a sugar program,
Mexico must abide by it and cannot arbitrarily

-40-

apply some of its elements to reward some
groups at the severe pain of others.”

GAMI understandably places much relevance on Lic. Schmill’s
statement to the effect that “tratandose de une actividad de
interés publico, el Gobierno necesitaba intervenir de manera
directa y permanente para hacer cumplir los objetivos del
Decreto de 1991, sus modificaciones de 1993 y los Acuerdos de
1997, 1998 y 2000” (“as this concerned an activity de interés
publico, the government had the duty to intervene in a direct
and permanent manner to cause the objectives of the 1991
Decree to be fulfilled, along with its modifications in 1993 and
the Acuerdos of 1997, 1998 and 2000”).

106. GAMI argues that it relied on this proposition.
Mr Aguilar forcefully outlined governmental shortcomings. He
insisted that there was no valid explanation for the
Government’s failure to provide the data necessary for the
adjustment of the reference price pursuant to the 1997 Acuerdo.
He said that the CAA could hardly be faulted for not having
generated timely base production levels when the Government
waited for 21 months before convening the CAA. He opined
that it would have been “futile” for aggrieved mills to go before
the JCACA given that it “depended on government data and
initiative.”

107. _ Did Mexico indeed refuse to implement regulations in
accordance with their terms? Or has GAMI overstated the
import of those terms?

108. The record shows that Mexico failed to implement key
struts of its Sugar Program notwithstanding its duties as
explained by Lic. Schmill. GAMI alleges an abject failure to
implement a regulatory program indispensable for the viability
of foreign investments that had relied upon it. GAMI urges that
in law this is no different from a violation by the government of
the rules of that program. Both action and inaction may fall
below the international standard. So far the Arbitral Tribunal is
prepared to accept GAMI’s proposition. But a critical step at
this stage of the analysis is whether the specific failures of the
Sugar Program are attributable to the government. It is on this
point that the Tribunal concludes GAMI has not made its case.

109. The preamble of the 1997 Acuerdo refers to the
objective of the Sugarcane Decree to augment the participation

-41-

of the social and private sectors (i.e. labour and industry) “como
responsables de la produccién nacional de azticar.” It also
refers to the authorisation given to the CAA to draw up “rules,
definitions, and provisions” (“reglas, definiciones y
disposiciones”) to enhance the competitiveness of sugar
production. The Acuerdo itself contains sophisticated formulae.
Yet anyone can see that the expected national consumption and
production are key elements (Ce and Qu in the formula). These
were to be determined by the Secretaria de Comercio and other
relevant government officials after having considered:

“la opinién de la Secretaria de Agricultura,
Ganaderia y Desarrollo Rural, de Financiera
Nacional Azucarera S.N.C. del Comité de la
Agroindustria Azucarera, de la Cdmara
Nacional de las Industrias Azucarera y
Alcoholera, de la Unién Nacional de
Productores de Cama de Aztcar de la
Confederacién Nacional Campesina y de la
Unién Nacional de Caferos de la
Confederacién Nacional de la Pequeiia
Propiedad.”

110. ‘In sum: the regulatory regime was structured on the
premise of broad consultations and cooperation. The
intervention of the private sector was explicitly called for. An
explicit role was reserved for the unions. The Mexican
government was not the only actor in important aspects of the
Sugar Program. GAMI says the Government could have forced
the issue to ensure that the consultations took place. GAMI’s
closing oral arguments sought to build on a declaration by the
Secretaria de Agricultura to the effect that the industry “debe
estar adecuadamente supervisada por el Estado.” But the
argument turns against GAMI. The distinction between
“adequate supervision” and “effective implementation” is hardly
subtle. There are certainly arguments on both sides. The
debate is complex. For an international tribunal the relevant
conclusion is simply that GAMI has not shown that the
government's self-assigned duty in the regulatory regime was
simple and unequivocal. It is impossible to conclude that the
failures in the Sugar Program were both directly attributable to
the government and directly causative of GAMI’s alleged injury.

-42-

6(C) Discrimination: GAMI’s claim under Article
1102

111. The core of the relevant principle of national treatment
is expressed in NAFTA Article 1102(2) as follows:

“Each Party shall accord to investments of
investors of another Party treatment no less
favorable than it accords, in like
circumstances, to its own investors, with
respect to the establishment, acquisition,
expansion, management, conduct, operation,
and sale or other disposition of investments.”

112. _ The issue in the present case pertains to a programme
of nationalisations which assuredly affected different Mexican
companies differently. Only some sugar mills were
expropriated. Some mills that were expropriated belonged to
Mexican corporations which had no foreign shareholders. The
issue inherent in GAMI’s claim is therefore whether it follows
that GAM’s mills could not be expropriated without violating
NAFTA Article 1102 simply because GAM has US minority
shareholders. The answer to this question is no.

113. GAMI argues that the Tribunal “need look no further
than the testimony of Mr Pinto” as evidence of a violation of
Article 1102. GAMI specifically refers to Mr Pinto’s account of
the disparate treatment of GAM and BSM:

“Can there be any doubt that GAM and BSM
were in like circumstances? Each had five
mills. Each was operating at a loss. Each had
to defer payments to its cane growers, and
each secured its debt with pledges of sugar
inventories.

Likewise, can there be any doubt that the two
companies, and thus their shareholders, were
treated differently? BSM and its shareholders
retained their mills and have profited greatly
from the recovery of sugar prices. GAM and
its shareholders were deprived not only of their
property but also the opportunity to benefit
from the reordering of the market, reordering

-43-

that Mr Pinto himself concedes was driven by
the reestablishment of export compliance.

Furthermore, Mr Pinto concedes that GAM’s
balance sheet was no better or no worse than
BSM’s — just different.”

114. The Arbitral Tribunal has not been persuaded that
GAM’s circumstances were demonstrably so “like” those of non-
expropriated mill owners that it was wrong to treat GAM
differently. Mexico determined that nearly half of the mills in
the country should be expropriated in the public interest. The
Teason was not that they were prosperous and the Government
was greedy. To the contrary: Mexico perceived that mills
operating in conditions of effective insolvency needed public
participation in the interest of the national economy in a broad
sense. The Government may have been misguided. That is a
matter of policy and politics. The Government may have been
clumsy in its analysis of the relevant criteria for the cutoff line
between candidates and non-candidates for expropriation. Its
understanding of corporate finance may have been deficient.
But ineffectiveness is not discrimination. The arbitrators are
satisfied that a reason exists for the measure which was not
itself discriminatory. That measure was plausibly connected
with a legitimate goal of policy (ensuring that the sugar industry
was in the hands of solvent enterprises) and was applied neither
in a discriminatory manner nor as a disguised barrier to equal
opportunity.

115. The Arbitral Tribunal ultimately accepts (as
Mr Perezcano put it in his oral summation) that GAMI has
failed to demonstrate that the measures it invokes “resulted
from or have any connection to GAMI's participation in GAM;
nor were they geared towards treating GAM in a different mode
because of GAMI’s participation in their social capital.” In the
circumstances of this derivative claim that defence is decisive.
It is not conceivable that a Mexican corporation becomes
entitled to the anti-discrimination protections of international
law by virtue of the sole fact that a foreigner buys a share of it.

-44-

7. EXPROPRIATION

116. | A consequence of GAMI’s independent right of action
under NAFTA may be illustrated by a hypothetical example.
The notional compensation of GAM by Mexico in an amount
representing M$ 100 per share would not in principle disentitle
GAMI from asking the NAFTA Tribunal for an additional
amount representing an additional M$ 50 per share. But the
theory gives rise to a number of practical difficulties. One might
imagine a perfect world in which a national court of last
recourse sits down with a NAFTA tribunal incapable of
reviewable error to discharge their respective responsibilities.
This could be done quite logically. The Mexican court could
order payment to GAM based on an evaluation of the five
expropriated mills. As a matter of mathematics that evaluation
might represent M$ 100 per share of all shares of GAM. At the
same time the NAFTA tribunal might find that a higher level of
compensation was mandated and thus order a top-up to GAMI
of M$ 50 per share proportionate to its 14.18% shareholding.
This would be a graphic illustration of the value to GAMI of its
entitlement to a direct international remedy beyond its indirect
benefit from the national remedy obtained by GAM. A state
cannot avoid international responsibility by arguing that the
foreigner must content himself with whatever compensation has
been decreed by national authorities.

117. This scenario is of course a fantasy. It is factually
implausible. It lacks legal foundation. The Tribunal is aware of
no procedural basis on which such coordination could take
place. And the Sentencia itself plausibly rejects the right of
shareholders to challenge the expropriation on the substantive
ground that the protected interest is that of the corporate owner
of the expropriated assets.

118. The scenario also lacks commercial credibility. On what
basis could one rationally conclude that the payment to GAMI
should be reduced to account for the payment to GAM? It is an

-45-

acknowledged fact that GAM has never paid a dividend to its
shareholders. Why should GAMI’s recovery be debited on
account of a payment to GAM which is perhaps utterly unlikely
to find its way to the pockets of its shareholders?

119. The overwhelming implausibility of a simultaneous
resolution of the problem by national and international
jurisdictions impels consideration of the practically certain
scenario of unsynchronised resolution.

120. It is sufficient to consider the hypothesis that a NAFTA
tribunal were to order payment to GAMI before the Mexican
courts render their final decision. One might adapt the
hypothetical example given in Paragraph 116 above. GAMI
would thus have received M$ 150 per share. (There would have
been no prior offsetting Mexican recovery.) What effect should
the Mexican courts now give to the NAFTA award? How could
GAM’s recovery be reduced because of the payment to GAMI?
GAM is the owner of the expropriated assets. It has never paid
dividends. It would have been most unlikely to distribute
revenues in the amount recovered by GAMI. At any rate such a
decision would have required due deliberation of GAM’s
corporate organs. Creditors would come first. And other
shareholders would have an equal right to the distribution.
GAM would obviously say that it is the expropriated owner and
that its compensatable loss under Mexican law could not be
diminished by the amount paid to one of its shareholders.

121. These difficulties are attributable to the derivative
nature of GAMI’s claim. They can quickly transport the analysis
onto a fragile limb. It is necessary to revert to basic
propositions.

122. GAM ’s title to its five productive assets was lost in 2001
by an act of expropriation. The Mexican courts have held that
the Expropriation Decree was not compliant with Mexican law.
It is likely that it was therefore also non-compliant with NAFTA
since the requirements of Mexican law coincide to a significant
degree with those of NAFTA. But GAM cannot be a NAFTA
claimant. Mexico has represented to this Tribunal that it is in
the process of returning the three mills affected by the
Sentencia to GAM (see Paragraph 8 supra). The wrongful
expropriation of those mills may have caused prejudice to GAM
notwithstanding their reversal. That prejudice may be
remedied by Mexican authorities. The expropriation of the two

- 46-

other mills was ultimately not challenged by GAM. It is
therefore definitive. The Mexican Constitution requires that
compensation be paid. Mexico has represented to this Tribunal
that “the formalities for payment of indemnity on account of the
expropriation of the other two mills are also in progress” (see
Paragraph 8 supra).

123. _ GAMI’s shares in GAM have not been expropriated.
GAMI must therefore say that its investment in GAM has
suffered something tantamount to expropriation. This question
arises prior to any analysis of quantum. It relates to the
substantive determination of a breach. Some precedents
involve a full deprivation of the benefit of the relevant property
rights. Starrett Housing? referred to rights rendered “useless.”
Santa Elena held that an expropriatory effect is “to deprive the
owner of title, possession or access to the benefit and economic
use” of the property. The tribunals in those cases were not
required to determine whether legal protections were also
extant in cases of partial deprivation of use or benefit. That
issue has been addressed by a number of NAFTA tribunals.

124. S.D.Myers held that a temporary discriminatory
regulation which eliminated the claimant’s competitive
advantage in a particular market was not expropriatory.
(Redress was given on other grounds.) The tribunal added this
dictum: “it may be that, in some contexts and circumstances, it
would be appropriate to view a deprivation as amounting to an
expropriation, even if it were partial or temporary.”27 It did not
explain what those contexts and circumstances might be.

125. The Pope & Talbot tribunal noted?¢ that the claimant in
that case had “conceded, correctly, that under international law,
expropriation requires a substantial deprivation.” It appears
however that that tribunal viewed the requirement as stricter
than that. The tribunal’s own test was “whether that
interference is sufficiently restrictive to support a conclusion
that the property has been ‘taken’ from its owner.” It concluded
that a diminution of the profits of the corporate claimant due to
restrictions on selling softwood lumber from British Columbia
to the US did not satisfy this test. The award explicitly states

25 4 IRAN-US CLAIMS TRIBUNAL REPORTS 122.

26 Award of 17 February 2000, 5 ICSID REPORTS 153, at para. 77; 39
ILM 1317, at 1329 (2000).

27 First Partial Award, op. cit., para. 283.

28 Para. 102.

-47-

that “an impairment of economic value” is tantamount to
expropriation only if the degree of impairment is equivalent to
expropriation.29

126. Should Pope & Talbot be understood to mean that
property is taken only if it is so affected in its entirety? That
question cannot be answered properly before asking: what
property? The taking of 50 acres of a farm is equally
expropriatory whether that is the whole farm or just a fraction.
The notion must be understood as this: the affected property
must be impaired to such an extent that it must be seen as
“taken.”

127. | GAM’s own case would thus not have been affected in
principle if only one mill had been expropriated. GAM’s
property rights in that single mill would have been “taken”
because GAM was formally dispossessed of those rights.
(Indeed GAM’s success in the Sentencia was not impaired by its
decision to abandon the complaint with respect to two of the
five mills.)

128. But this Tribunal is not seised by GAM. GAMI’s case is
more difficult. The notions developed by Pope & Talbot may
suggest that the “impairment” of the value of its property (i.e.
GAMI’s shares in GAM) would not be equivalent to a “taking” of
that property if only one of five equally valuable GAM mills had
been expropriated without compensation. The impairment
might on the other hand have been total if that single mill was
the only one having a positive value. (GAMI may thus be right
in dismissing as irrelevant GAM’s decision not to challenge the
expropriation of the San Francisco and San Pedro mills.)

129. The position then is this: GAMI is entitled to invoke the
protection of Article 1110 if its property rights (the value of its
shares in GAM) were taken by conduct in breach of NAFTA.
GAMI argues that such conduct was manifest in the
Expropriation Decree. This Tribunal finds it likely that the
Expropriation Decree was inconsistent with the norms of
NAFTA. But Mexican conduct inconsistent with the norms of
NAFTA is only a breach of NAFTA if it affects interests
protected by NAFTA. GAMI’s investment in GAM is protected
by Article 1110 only if its shareholding was “taken.”

29 Para. 104, at footnote 86.

- 48-

130. It would in the first of these two hypotheses be
disturbing to conclude that GAMI could recover only if it had
taken a 14.18% participation in each of the five separate
subsidiaries which owned the mills. That would be formalistic
to a degree which could not easily be reconciled with the
objectives of NAFTA. It is true that neither Pope & Talbot nor
S.D. Myers delivered an extended analysis of Article 1110. Their
brief discussion of Article 1110 is inconclusive with respect to a
number of unanalysed hypotheses. Each award granted relief to
the claimants on other grounds. Their references to Article 1110
may therefore be considered obiter dicta.

131. Other NAFTA awards have given support for the
proposition that partial destruction of the value may be
tantamount to expropriation. Thus the ICSID tribunal in
Metalclad stated:

“« expropriation under NAFTA includes not
only open, deliberate and acknowledged
takings of property, such as outright seizure or
formal or obligatory transfer of title in favour
of the host State, but also covert or incidental
interference with the use of property which has
the effect of depriving the owner, in whole or in
significant part, of the use or reasonably-to-be-
expected economic benefit of property even if

not necessarily to the obvious benefit of the
host State.”3°

The Supreme Court of British Columbia set aside part of the
Metalclad award. The Court concluded that the arbitrators
exceeded their mandate when interpreting Article 1105 as
including a duty of transparency. But the passage quoted above
was undisturbed. The Court explicitly held:

“There is no ground under s.34 of the
International Commercial Arbitration Act to
set aside the Award as it relates to the
conclusion of the Tribunal that the issuance of
the Ecological Decree amounted to an

30 5 ICSID REPorTS 230 (emphasis added).

-49-

expropriation of the Site without
compensation.”3!

Similarly the ICSID award in Santa Elena cited with approval
the following phrase from Tippets as a test of expropriatory
effect:

“Whenever events demonstrate that the owner
was deprived of fundamental rights of
ownership and it appears that this deprivation
is not merely ephemeral.”3?

The Santa Elena tribunal then went on to say that a
governmental measure may constitute a taking if it “effectively
freezes or blights the possibility for the owner reasonably to
exploit the economic potential of the property.”33

132. But this Tribunal need not decide whether partial
destruction of shareholding interests may be tantamount to
expropriation. It would in any case be necessary to assess the
value of shareholdings in GAM at the time of the Expropriation
Decree. GAM was and remains in the hands of its owners. Its
principal assets had been taken. But Mexican law gave it
substantial protections. GAM could sue for the reversal of the
taking. Or it could accept the taking and claim for
compensation. (GAM has of course successfully obtained the
return of three mills and is awaiting compensation for the other
two. It would seem difficult to suggest that GAM has been
unduly passive in protecting its rights. Such a case could
naturally be imagined. The minority shareholder might then
have no effective means of initiating remedial action on behalf
of the company. But that would have to be proved.) GAMI may
have had subjective apprehensions that Mexican judicial
remedies would be insufficient. But this Tribunal can only act
on the basis of objective findings justified by evidence that
GAM’s value as an enterprise had been destroyed or impaired.

133. | With knowledge of the magnitude of diminution one
might be in a position to consider whether a line is to be drawn
beyond which the loss is so great as to constitute a taking. But

3t Ibid. 260.
32 6 IRAN-US CLAIMS TRIBUNAL REPORTS 219, 226 (1986).
33 5 ICSID REPORTS 172, at para. 76.

-50-

GAMI has staked its case on the proposition that the wrong
done to it did in fact destroy the whole value of its investment.
GAMI seeks to lend credibility to its posture by agreeing to
relinquish its shares in GAM as a condition of the award it
seeks. It suggests that any residual value is therefore of no
moment. This posture is untenable. The Tribunal cannot be
indifferent to the true effect on the value of the investment of
the allegedly wrongful act. GAMI has neglected to give any
weight to the remedies available to GAM. Assessment of their
effect on the value of GAMI’s investment is a precondition to a
finding that it was taken. GAMI has not proved that its
investment was expropriated for the purposes of Article 1110.

-51-

8. COSTS

134. | The Tribunal wishes to record its appreciation for the
thorough professionalism with which each side has presented
its case. The Parties’ well-organised arguments and
constructive attitude with respect to matters of procedure have
been of great assistance to the Tribunal. They have
demonstrated that courteousness is compatible with
determined advocacy.

135. The claims fail. The Tribunal nevertheless finds it
equitable that each side should bear its costs. There are two
main reasons for not giving Mexico any recovery in this respect.
The first is that Mexico raised an unsuccessful jurisdictional
objection which became a major feature of the proceedings.
Mexico insisted against GAMI’s wishes that its objections be
heard separately. The costs associated with that special hearing
were significant. The second is that GAMI’s grievance must be
considered as serious. It raised disquieting questions with
respect to regulatory acts and omissions.

136. The arbitrators have broad discretion under the
UNCITRAL Rules with respect to the allocation of costs. They
deem it appropriate to make no award of costs. Each Party shall
bear its own expenditures. The amounts paid to the Tribunal on
account of its fees and expenses are divided equally.

~52-

9. DECISION

137. For the reasons stated above the Tribunal hereby
unanimously declares that it has jurisdiction over the claims
and dismisses them in their entirety. All contentions to the
contrary are rejected. There is no award of costs.

Done on / November 2004 in equally authoritative English and

Spanish versions.
pA. fork ff Muto!

Julio Lacarte Muré W! Michael Reisman

fla

Jan Paulsson

-53-

