INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.
IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN

GARANTI Koza LLP
(Claimant)

and

TURKMENISTAN
(Respondent)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/20)

 

DECISION ON
THE OBJECTION TO JURISDICTION
FOR LACK OF CONSENT

 

Tribunal
John M. Townsend, President
George Constantine Lambrou, Arbitrator
Laurence Boisson de Chazournes, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Marco Tulio Montafiés-Rumayor

Representing the Claimant

Mr. Tevfik Gur

Mr. Serkan Yildirim
Ms. Giilcin Kéker
GUR law firm

Mr. John Savage
Ms. Elodie Dulac
King & Spalding LLP

Representing the Respondent

Mr. Peter Wolrich

Mr. Ali R. Giirsel

Ms. Claudia Frutos-Peterson

Ms. Sabrina Ainouz

Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Ms. Giilperi YGriiker

Ms. Berin Hikmet
Giirel Yoriiker Law Offices

Date: July 3, 2013

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FREQUENTLY USED ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS .......c:ccccessesessessesssessesseeeeseesees ii
I. BACKGROUND 1
A. The Dispute 1
B. The Tribunal 2
Cc. Objections to Jurisdiction 3
I. ANALYSIS 7
A. The Objection to Jurisdiction for Lack of Consent..........cc ccc eeseneeeseteeeeteeees 7
B The U.K.-Turkmeni BIT. 9
Cc The Requirement of State Consent to Arbitration .....0.0.0.0 cece 11
D Has Turkmenistan Consented to Arbitration? ............cccscscsceteseeteseeteseeeseeeeeenes 13
E. What Kind of Arbitration? 16
F. The Most Favored Nation Clause
1. MEN Clauses and Arbitration Provisions ...........ccccccsseeeteseeteseeteseeeseene 20
2. Does an MEN Clause Create Rights? ....0.0.0..ccecesesesee eee eeeeeeneneneeeneee 23
3. General vs. Specific L 24
4. Effet Utile 25
5. Contemporaneity 27
6. Interpretation of Article 3(3).......ccccc cece essen neneeeeeeeee este eeeeneneneeeeneee 28
G. Application of the MFN Clause to the Arbitration Article... eee 32
1. May Consent to ICSID Arbitration Be Provided Via an MFN
Clause? 33
2. Does the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT Provide Less Favorable
Treatment than the Switzerland-Turkmenistan BIT? ..........0ccceeeeeeee 39
II. COSTS AT
IV. DECISION. 48

 

FREQUENTLY USED ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

BIT

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial

Decision

ECT
Garanti Koza or the Claimant

ICC Arbitration

ICSID or the Centre

ICSID Arbitration

ICSID Convention

ICSID Rules

MFN
Request

Respondent’s Memorial

Respondent’s Reply

Switzerland-Turkmenistan BIT or
Switzerland BIT

Turkmenistan or the Respondent

Bilateral Investment Treaty

Counter-Memorial on the Objection to Jurisdiction
for Lack of Consent of January 11, 2013

Decision of the Tribunal on the Objection to
Jurisdiction for Lack of Consent

Energy Charter Treaty of 1994
Garanti Koza LLP

Arbitration conducted under the Rules of the
International Chamber of Commerce

International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes

Arbitration conducted under the ICSID Rules
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
Between States and Nationals of Other States of

March 18, 1965

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings

Most Favored Nation
Request for Arbitration of May 18, 2011

Memorial on the Objection to Jurisdiction for Lack of
Consent of November 30, 2012

Reply on the Objection to Jurisdiction for Lack of
Consent of February 22, 2013

Accord entre le Conseil federal suisse et le
Gouvernement du Turkménistan concernant la
promotion et la protection réciproque des
investissements

Turkmenistan

U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT or U.K. BIT or
the BIT

UNCITRAL

UNCITRAL Arbitration

UNCITRAL Rules

Vienna Convention

Agreement for the Promotion and Protection of
Investments concluded between the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
Government of Turkmenistan

United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law

Arbitration conducted under the UNCITRAL Rules

Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of 1969

iii

I. BACKGROUND
A. The Dispute
1. The Claimant, Garanti Koza LLP (“Garanti Koza” or the “Claimant’’), a limited
liability company incorporated in the United Kingdom, submitted a Request for Arbitration (the
“Request”) dated May 18, 2011 to the Secretary-General of the International Centre for the
Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) on May 19, 2011. In that Request,
Garanti Koza demanded institution of arbitration proceedings against Turkmenistan
(“Turkmenistan” or the “Respondent’”) under the terms of a bi-lateral investment treaty (a “BIT’’)
entitled Agreement between the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the Government of Turkmenistan for the Promotion and Protection of
Investments which entered into force on February 9, 1995 (the “U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT” or
“U.K. BIT” or “the BIT”). Garanti Koza supplemented its Request by letters dated July 4, 11, 13
and 19, 2011. The Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Claimant’s Request on July 20,
2011.
2. According to the Claimant’s Request for Arbitration:

The present dispute arises out of the investments on the 28 highway

bridges and overpasses in Turkmenistan. A contract regarding the

investments in Turkmenistan numbered 01/2008 and dated 18.03.2008 for

the lump sum price of USD 100.000.000 (“Contract”) was entered into by

and between State Concern Turkmenautoyollari as the owner and Garanti

Koza LLP as the contractor for the execution of the projection,

construction, and installation works of 28 highway bridges and
overpasses.

kK

(1) In breach of its obligations, by using the state power, the Respondent
has avoided to make the payments it has undertook to pay, tried to change
the contract regarding the investment which is established as a lump sum
price contract into unit price contract, made requests which contradict with
its rights and obligations, tried to change the terms and conditions of the
Contract to the favor of the Respondent and tried to prevent the

continuation of the works in various ways, thus did not fulfill its
obligations.

(2) Garanti Koza LLP suffered losses and damages as a consequence of
the Respondent’s intention to confiscate the assets and investments of
Garanti Koza LLP by not performing its related obligations and attempt to
undermine the investment.

3. The Respondent summarizes the dispute between the parties in somewhat
different terms:

On March 18, 2008, Garanti Koza LLP, a U.K.-registered entity controlled
by the Turkish company Garanti Koza Insaat Sanayi ve Tikaret A.S., and
Turkmenavtoyollary, the highway authority, concluded a construction
contract for the design and construction of 28 highway bridges and
overpasses on the Mary-Turkmenabad highway in Turkmenistan (the
“Contract’”). In 2009, Garanti Koza LLP suspended all the works under
the Contract with Turkmenavtoyollary. The parties to the Contract
exchanged their views on the dispute related to the performance of the
Contract by correspondence and in person, but this did not result in a
resolution of the dispute. On February 22, 2010, Turkmenavtoyollary
invoked termination of the Contract under Article 17 of the Contract
Conditions, in view of the Contractor’s failure to complete the work on
time and failure to resume works for a prolonged period of time.”

B. The Tribunal
4. The Arbitral Tribunal was constituted in accordance with Articles 37(2)(b) and 38
of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of
Other States (“ICSID Convention’):
e The Claimant appointed Mr. George Constantine Lambrou of Athens, Greece as an
arbitrator on September 26, 2011. Mr. Lambrou accepted his appointment on October 7,

2011.

' Request for Arbitration, p. 3.

Respondent’s Memorial, 13.

e The Respondent appointed Professor Laurence Boisson de Chazournes of Geneva,
Switzerland as an arbitrator on October 18, 2011. Prof. Boisson de Chazournes accepted
her appointment on October 26, 2011.

e The Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council appointed Mr. John M. Townsend of
Washington, D.C., U.S.A., as President of the Tribunal on April 10, 2012. Mr. Townsend
accepted his appointment on April 13, 2012.

Mr. Marco Tulio Montafiés-Rumayor, Legal Counsel to ICSID, was appointed to act as Secretary
to the Tribunal.

5. The Tribunal was formally constituted on April 13, 2012. The members of the
Tribunal submitted their signed declarations in accordance with Rule 6(2) of the ICSID Rules of
Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“ICSID Rules”) and copies of those declarations were
distributed to the parties by the Secretary.>

6. After postponements made at the request of the parties, a first session of the
Tribunal with the parties was held in Washington, D.C. on October 19, 2012 (the “First
Session”). At the First Session, the parties confirmed that the Tribunal was properly constituted
and that neither party had any objection to the appointment of any member of the Tribunal.*

Cc. Objections to Jurisdiction

7. In response to a request for comments on a proposed agenda for the First Session,
the Respondent informed the Tribunal that the “Respondent has objections to jurisdiction that are
separate and distinct from the merits and warrant bifurcation.”> In response to a request from the

Tribunal for a more specific description of its objections to jurisdiction, the Respondent sent a

3 Procedural Order No. 1, 2.1, 2.2.
4 Procedural Order No. 1, 2.1.

letter to the Tribunal on September 5, 2012 specifying two grounds upon which it objected to
jurisdiction:

Respondent hereby informs the Tribunal that it intends to assert
jurisdictional objections on the following grounds: (i) Turkmenistan did
not consent to ICSID jurisdiction under the Agreement between the United
Kingdom and Turkmenistan for the Protection and Promotion of
Investments (“U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT’) and (ii) most of the claims
brought by Claimant are contractual in nature and therefore not within the
jurisdiction of this Tribunal.

First, the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to decide the merits of
this dispute due to the lack of Turkmenistan’s consent to ICSID arbitration
under Article 8 of the UK-Turkmenistan BIT. The BIT specifically
requires that in order for a dispute to be submitted to ICSID, an agreement
to ICSID arbitration between the investor and the BIT’s Contracting Party
must exist. Respondent respectfully submits that in the absence of
Turkmenistan’s consent to submit this dispute to ICSID, this Tribunal
does not have jurisdiction over the claims brought by Claimant.

Claimant has attempted to import into the UK-Turkmenistan BIT
an alleged consent by Turkmenistan to ICSID arbitration contained in
another BIT. Claimant’s reliance on Article 3 of the UK-Turkmenistan
BIT to bypass the essential requirement of the State’s consent to ICSID
arbitration is to no avail. That consent cannot be imported from a different
BIT when Turkmenistan manifestly did not give such consent in the basic
BIT. As is clear from the wording of Article 8 of the UK Turkmenistan
BIT, the Contracting Parties expressly agreed that there could be no ICSID
arbitration of a dispute in the absence of a specific agreement between the
investor and the Contracting Party to submit the dispute to ICSID.

 

Secondly, it is clear that most of Claimant’s claims are contractual
in nature. They arise under the Contract concluded between Garanti Koza
LLP and Turkmenavtoyollary, by which the Claimant agreed to resolve
disputes “of any kind” pursuant to the dispute-resolution mechanism of
Article 21 of the Contract Conditions. The dispute-resolution mechanism
agreed to by the Claimant provided for the jurisdiction of the Arbitration
Court of Turkmenistan, with a possibility of subsequent submission of the
dispute to an arbitral tribunal in The Hague. The Claimant has invoked the
mechanism under the BIT in order to avoid the dispute resolution
mechanism provided for in the Contract, as Turkmenistan will show.°

(Footnote continued from previous page)
Comments of the Respondent on the proposed agenda for the First Session, June 25, 2012.
Letter from Counsel for the Respondent to the Tribunal, September 5, 2012 (emphasis in original).

8. At the First Session on October 19, 2012, the parties agreed, without prejudice to
the Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction, that this proceeding would be conducted in
accordance with the ICSID Arbitration Rules in force as of April 10, 2006, at the seat of the
Centre in Washington, D.C.’

9. Also at the First Session, it was agreed pursuant to ICSID Rule 41(4) that the
Respondent’s first objection to jurisdiction (that Turkmenistan did not consent to ICSID
jurisdiction) would be considered as a preliminary matter on an accelerated schedule, while the
Respondent’s second objection to jurisdiction (that most of the claims brought by the Claimant
are contractual in nature) would be considered together with the merits of the dispute, if the
Tribunal were to reach the merits. Pursuant to the schedule established at the First Session and
incorporated into Procedural Order No. 1,° the Respondent submitted its Memorial on the
Objection to Jurisdiction for Lack of Consent (“Respondent’s Memorial”) on November 30,
2012. The Claimant submitted its Counter-Memorial on the Objection to Jurisdiction for Lack of
Consent (“Claimant’s Counter-Memorial”) on January 11, 2013. And the Respondent submitted
its Reply on the Objection to Jurisdiction for Lack of Consent (“Respondent’s Reply”) on
February 22, 2013. The Claimant waived its right to submit a rejoinder in the interest of

compressing the schedule.®

Procedural Order No. 1, {]4.1, 9.1.
Procedural Order No. 1, 12.1.
Procedural Order No. 1, 12.1.

8

10. On March 11, 2013, a hearing was held at the seat of the Centre in Washington,
D.C., to hear argument on the Respondent’s Objection to Jurisdiction for Lack of Consent. The
following persons attended that hearing:
For the Claimant:

Mr. John Savage, King & Spalding LLP

Ms. Elodie Dulac, King & Spalding LLP

Mr. Serkan Yildrim, GUR Law Firm

Ms. Giilcin Kéker, GUR Law Firm

Mr. Murat Isikustun, Vice President Finance and Administration, Garanti Koza LLP
For the Respondent:

Mr. Peter M. Wolrich, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Mr. Ali R. Gursel, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Ms. Claudia Frutos-Peterson, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Ms. Sabrina A. Ainouz, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Mr. Ali Topalogu, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Ms. Giilperi Yoriiker, Yurttutan Gurel YGriiker

Ms. Berin Hikmet, Yurttutan Gurel Yoriiker
The Tribunal:

Mr. John M. Townsend, President

Professor Laurence Boisson de Chazournes, Arbitrator

Mr. George Constantine Lambrou, Arbitrator

ICSID Secretariat:

Mr. Marco Tulio Montafiés-Rumayor, Secretary of the Tribunal

Mr. William Prewett, court reporter, also attended the hearing and made a transcript of the
proceedings. 10
11. At the conclusion of the hearing on March 11, 2013, the Tribunal took the

Respondent’s Objection to Jurisdiction for Lack of Consent under advisement.

10 That transcript is cited in this Decision as “Hearing Tr. _.”

12. This Decision on the Objection to Jurisdiction for Lack of Consent (the
“Decision”) sets forth an analysis of the issues presented by the Respondent’s first objection to
jurisdiction and the reasons for which a majority of the members of the Tribunal ultimately
rejects that objection and concludes that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear this dispute.
Professor Boisson de Chazournes disagrees with the analysis set forth in this Decision and with
the conclusions reached by the majority, for reasons explained in her Dissenting Opinion (the

“Dissenting Opinion”).

Il. ANALYSIS

A. The Objection to Jurisdiction for Lack of Consent

13. The parties’ respective positions as to whether Turkmenistan has consented to
participate in an arbitration conducted under the ICSID Rules (“ICSID Arbitration”) for the
purpose of resolving the claims advanced against it by the Claimant may be summarized very
simply at the outset. The arguments advanced by each party in support of its position are more
complex, and will be considered in the body of this Decision.

14. The Respondent’s first objection to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, which is the

1

only one to be addressed in this Decision,! may be stated in the most summary form as

follows:
e Turkmenistan has not consented or agreed, in the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT or otherwise,

to participate with this Claimant in an ICSID Arbitration.

'| The Respondent's second objection to the jurisdiction of this Tribunal was expressly reserved. Respondent’s

Memorial, {{[1, 72.

12 See Respondent’s Memorial, {{{6-7-

e Rather, the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT contains Turkmenistan’s consent only to participate
in international arbitration under the Rules (“UNCITRAL Rules’) of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law (“UNCITRAL” and “UNCITRAL Arbitration”),
unless Turkmenistan agrees with a claimant to refer a specific claim to ICSID
Arbitration, which it has not done in this case.!?

e Turkmenistan’s consent to submit this dispute to ICSID Arbitration may not be created
by operation of the most favored nation (“MFN”’) clause of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT.

e This ICSID Tribunal therefore lacks jurisdiction to hear the Claimant’s claims.

15. The Claimant’s argument that this Tribunal does have jurisdiction may be stated

in equally summary form as follows: 4

e The MEN clause of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT assures the Claimant of treatment no less
favorable than Turkmenistan accords to nationals or companies of any third State.

e Turkmenistan has consented, in its BITs with Switzerland, France, Turkey, and India, and
in the Energy Charter Treaty (“ECT”), to either ICSID Arbitration or UNCITRAL
Arbitration, at the election of the investor, with nationals or companies of those States.

e A treaty that consents to ICSID Arbitration is more favorable to an investor than one that
does not, or, alternatively, a treaty that provides a choice between UNCITRAL
Arbitration and ICSID Arbitration is more favorable to an investor than one that does not.

e Therefore, Turkmenistan’s consent to ICSID Arbitration is established by operation of

the MEN clause of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT.

The U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT provides for the application of the UNCITRAL Rules “as then in force.” BIT, Art.
8(2). The current UNCITRAL Rules came into effect on August 15, 2010, after the date of the Claimant’s
notification of the dispute to Turkmenistan, but before the date of the Request for Arbitration.

See Claimant’s Counter-Memorial, (2-3.

B. The U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT

16. The starting point for deciding whether this ICSID Tribunal has jurisdiction to
hear the dispute between the Claimant and the Respondent is the text of the BIT under which the
claim is brought. As the tribunal in Daimler v. Argentina explained:

BITs constitute an exercise of sovereignty by which States strike a delicate
balance among their various internal policy considerations. For this
reason, the Tribunal must take care not to allow any presuppositions
concerning the types of international law mechanisms (including dispute
resolution clauses) that may best protect and promote investment to carry
it beyond the bounds of the framework agreed upon by the contracting
state parties. It is for States to decide how best to protect and promote
investment. The texts of the treaties they conclude are the definitive guide
as to how they have chosen to do so.!5

17. Article 8 of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT deals with “Settlement of Disputes
between an Investor and a Host State.” It provides:

qd) Disputes between a national or company of one Contracting Party
and the other Contracting Party concerning an obligation of the latter
under this Agreement in relation to an investment of the former which
have not been amicably settled shall, after a period of four [months] from
written notification of a claim, be submitted to international arbitration if
the national or company concerned so wishes.'®

(2) Where the dispute is referred to international arbitration, the
national or company and the Contracting Party concerned in the dispute
may agree to refer the dispute either to:

(a) the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes
(having regard to the provisions, where applicable, of the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between

Daimler Financial Services AG v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/1, Award of August 22, 2012
(hereinafter “Daimler v. Argentina”) 164.
The bracketed word “[months]” does not appear in the text of Article 8(1) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT
published by the United Kingdom in its Treaty Series No. 47 (2003), which was submitted by the Claimant
(with its Request for Arbitration) and also by the Respondent (with its Memorial on Jurisdiction) as Exhibits C-
4, and R-4, respectively, and used by both parties. The Tribunal has supplied the word, because the text makes
no e without it and it appears to have been inadvertently omitted. The context in which Article 8(1) appears
also supports that reading, because of the appearance of the phrase “four months” in the final sentence of
Article 8(2). The signature page of the BIT states that it was done in the English and Russian languages, with a
text in the Turkmen language to be certified in due course, and that the English text would prevail in case of
divergence. No other version of the BIT was submitted by either party.

 

 

States and Nationals of other States, opened for signature at
Washington DC on 18 March 1965 and the Additional Facility for
the Administration of Conciliation, Arbitration and Fact-Finding
Proceedings); or

(b) the Court of Arbitration of the International Chamber of
Commerce; or

(c) an international arbitrator or ad hoc arbitration tribunal to be
appointed by a special agreement or established under the
Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law.

Tf after a period of four months from written notification of the claim there
is no agreement to one of the above alternative procedures, the dispute
shall at the request in writing of the national or company concerned be
submitted to arbitration under the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law as then in force. The parties to
the dispute may agree in writing to modify these Rules.

18. Garanti Koza sent the Notification of the dispute required by Article 8(1) of the
U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT to the Government of Turkmenistan on June 25, 2010.'7

19. Article 3 of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT deals with “National Treatment and
Most-favoured-nation Provisions” and provides:

qd) Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject investments
or returns of nationals or companies of the other Contracting Party to
treatment less favourable than that which it accords to investments or
returns of its own nationals or companies or to investments or returns of
nationals or companies of any third State.

(2) Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject nationals or
companies of the other Contracting Party, as regards their management,
maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of their investments, to treatment
less favourable than that which it accords to its own nationals or
companies or to nationals or companies of any third State.

(3) For the avoidance of doubt it is confirmed that the treatment

provided for in paragraphs (1) and (2) above shall apply to the provisions
of Articles 1 to 11 of this Agreement.

‘7 Respondent’s Memorial, 4.

10

20. It is common ground between the parties that the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT,
including Articles 3 and 8 of the BIT, is to be interpreted in accordance with Article 31 of the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (“Vienna Convention”). !® That is, the U.K.-

Turkmenistan BIT is to “be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to

be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose.”!”

Supplementary means of interpretation are to be resorted to only as permitted by Article 32 of
the Vienna Convention.
Cc. The Requirement of State Consent to Arbitration

21. “TQ]uestions concerning the consent of the parties to jurisdiction, in the context of

v2

a BIT arbitration, are generally governed by international law. ° Few propositions are as well

established in international law as that “a State may not be compelled to submit its disputes to

21

arbitration without its consent. The tribunal in Teinver v. Argentina called it a “fundamental

192:

requirement” that ‘‘a State Party consent to jurisdiction. > It is equally accepted that a State’s

consent is not to be presumed, but must be established by an express declaration or by actions
that demonstrate consent.”
22. Some arbitration tribunals have followed Plama v. Bulgaria in grafting onto the

requirement that the State must consent to arbitration the corollary that the State’s consent must

Hearing Tr. 28, 101. The Vienna Convention entered into force on January 27, 1980. See United Nations,
Treaty Series, vol. 1155, p. 331.

VIENNA CONVENTION, Article 31.1.

Christopher F. Dugan, et al., Investor-State Arbitration, 208 (2008).

Ambatielos Case (Greece v. United Kingdom) Merits: Obligation to Arbitrate, Judgment of May 19, 1953
(LC.J.REPORTS 1953) p. 19; See also, Status of Eastern Carelia, Advisory Opinion of July 23, 1923 (P.C.1J.
SERIES B, No. 5) p. 27 (“Il est bien établi en droit international qu’aucun Etat ne saurait étre obligé de
soumettre ses différends avec les autres Etats soit a la médiation, soit a l’arbitrage, soit enfin a n’importe quel
procédé de solution pacifique, sans son consentement”).

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID
Case No. ARB/09/1, Decision on Jurisdiction of December 21, 2012 (hereinafter “Teinver v. Argentina”) {176.
Daimler v. Argentina 175.

20
21

be “clear and unambiguous.” This Tribunal finds no basis in the Vienna Convention for
imposing such a standard onto the interpretation of the terms of a treaty.?° Rather, this Tribunal
agrees with the tribunal in Suez and Interagua v. Argentina “that dispute resolution provisions

are subject to interpretation like any other provisions of a treaty, neither more restrictive nor

more liberal.””°

23. Judge Higgins explained in the Oil Platforms Case:

It is clear from the jurisprudence of the Permanent Court and of the
International Court that there is no rule that requires a restrictive
interpretation of compromissory clauses... The Court has no judicial
policy of being either liberal or strict in deciding the scope of
compromissory clauses; they are judicial decisions like any other.7”

The same point was made by the tribunal in National Grid v. Argentina:

As regards the intention of the parties, the approach of the Vienna
Convention and the ICJ is that “what matters is the intention of the parties
as expressed in the text, which is the best guide to the more recent
common intention of the parties.” The convention does not establish a
different rule of interpretation for different clauses. The same rule of

Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction of
February 8, 2005 (hereinafter “Plama v. Bulgaria”) 198. The tribunal in Plama v. Bulgaria cited no authority
for this proposition, although it called it a “well-established principle.” Id. See also Telenor Mobile
Communications A.S. v. Republic of Hungary, 1CSID Case No. ARB/04/15, Award of September 13, 2006
(hereinafter “Telenor v. Hungary”) 90; Vladimir Berschader and Moise Berschader v. The Russian
Federation, SCC Case No. 080/2004, Award of August 21, 2006 (hereinafter “Berschader v. Russia”) (181;
Wintershall Aktiengesellschaft v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/04/14, Award of December 8, 2008
(hereinafter “Wintershall v. Argentina”) 4167.

As noted above, the parties are in agreement that the Tribunal should interpret the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT in
accordance with the Vienna Convention.

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and Interagua Servicios Integrales del Agua S.A. v.
Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/17 (formerly Aguas Provinciales de Santa Fe S.A, Suez, Sociedad
General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A. and Interagua Servicios Integrales del Agua, S.A.), Decision on
Jurisdiction of May 16, 2006 (hereinafter “Suez and Interagua v. Argentina”) 464. See Mondev International
Ltd. v. United States of America, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2, Award of October 11, 2002 943; Suez,
Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. y Vivendi Universal S.A v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/19 and AWG Group Ltd. v. Argentine Republic, UNCITRAL Case, Decision on Jurisdiction of August
3, 2006 (hereinafter “Suez and Vivendi v. Argentina”) 65; Austrian Airlines v. The Slovak Republic,
UNCITRAL Case, Award of October 9, 2009 (hereinafter “Austrian Airlines v. Slovakia”) (120. See also
Hearing Tr. 102.

Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States of America), Preliminary Objections, Judgment of
December 12, 1996, Separate Opinion of Judge Higgins (1.C.J. REPORTS, 1996), p. 857, 1 35.

interpretation applies to all provisions of a treaty, be they dispute
resolution clauses or MEN clauses. **

The tribunal in Austrian Airlines v. Slovakia agreed:

[T]he Tribunal does not consider that provisions that embody a State’s
consent to arbitration must be strictly interpreted. This view, which was
adopted by the tribunals in Plama v. Bulgaria, Telenor v. Hungary,
Bershader v. Russia and Wintershall v. Argentina, is not an accurate
reflection of international law on this matter.”

D. Has Turkmenistan Consented to Arbitration?

24. We confront in this case the question whether Turkmenistan has consented to
participate in ICSID Arbitration with the Claimant. Under the ICSID Convention, to which
specific reference is made in Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT, a consent to ICSID
Arbitration must be expressed in writing:

The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising
directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State * * * and a
national of another Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute
consent in writing to submit to the Centre. When the parties have given
their consent, no party may withdraw its consent unilaterally.*”

But neither the ICSID Convention nor any other authority of which this Tribunal is aware
requires that the State’s consent to arbitration be expressed in a particular form or in a single
article, or even in a single instrument or treaty.*!

25. In examining the text and structure of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT, the majority of

the Tribunal approaches the question of whether Turkmenistan has consented to participate in
8 National Grid ple v. Argentine Republic, UNCITRAL Case, Decision on Jurisdiction of June 20, 2006
(hereinafter “National Grid v. Argentina”) {80.

Austrian Airlines v. Slovakia (119.

ICSID CONVENTION Article 25(1) (emphasis added).

C. Schreuer, UNCTAD COURSE ON DISPUTE SETTLEMENT — INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF
INVESTMENT DISPUTE, 2.3 CONSENT TO ARBITRATION (United Nations, 2003) p. 5 (“Under the Convention,
consent must be in writing. But there is no particular form in which this must be done”); Renta 4 S.V.S.A,
Ahorro Corporacién Emergentes F.1., Ahorro Corporacién E. do F.1., Rovime ‘ Ss SICAV S.A.,
Quasar de Valors SICAV S.A., Orgor de Valores SICAV S.A., GBI 9000 SICAV S.A. v. The Russian Federation,
SCC No. 24/2007, Award on Preliminary Objections of March 20, 2009 (hereinafter “Renta 4 v. Russia”) [82
(‘There is no rule that the entirety of arbitration agreements must be contained in a single article of an
instrument.”).

 

ICSID Arbitration in two steps, corresponding to the organization of the relevant article of the
U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT, Article 8. Because Article 8(1) deals with Turkmenistan’s consent to
participate in international arbitration with U.K. investors and the conditions attached to that
consent, and Article 8(2) deals with the arbitration systems that may be used if the conditions of
Article 8(1) are met, we look first at whether Turkmenistan has consented to participate in
international arbitration at all, and second at whether it has agreed to ICSID Arbitration.

26. The answer to whether Turkmenistan has consented to participate in any kind of
arbitration with a U.K. claimant such as Garanti Koza may be found in Article 8(1) of the U.K.-
Turkmenistan BIT. Article 8(1) provides:

Disputes between a national or company of one Contracting Party and the
other Contracting Party concerning an obligation of the latter under this
Agreement in relation to an investment of the former which have not been
amicably settled shall, after a period of four [months] from written
notification of a claim, be submitted to international arbitration if the
national or company concerned so wishes. 2

27. In Article 8(1), Turkmenistan consents to participate in international arbitration to
resolve disputes with U.K. investors, subject only to three conditions, all of which are met in this
case:

a. The first condition is that the investor “so wishes.” It is uncontested that the investor in
this case wishes to submit its claim to international arbitration.

b. The second condition is that the dispute shall not have been settled within four months of
written notification of the claim. It is also uncontested that the Claimant’s claim was not
settled within four months of written notification of the claim to Turkmenistan.

c. The third condition is that the dispute must concern an obligation of Turkmenistan under

the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT. The Respondent has advised the Tribunal that it will argue,

°2U,K.-TURKMENISTAN BIT Art. 8(1) (emphasis added).

if this arbitration reaches the merits, that most of the Claimant’s claims are contractual in

nature, and therefore do not arise under the BIT.** For purposes of determining whether

we have jurisdiction to hear the claims, however, we accept (for this purpose only) the

Claimant’s pleading that its claims arise under the BIT, because the question of whether

the Claimant has actually stated a claim under the BIT has been reserved for the merits

phase of the proceeding. M

28. Article 8(1) provides that a claim that meets the three conditions specified in that
article “shall... be submitted to international arbitration.”*° The use of the auxiliary verb “shall”
makes that statement mandatory. As the tribunal in Wintershall v. Argentina put it, “[t]he use of
the word ‘shall’ [...] is itself indicative of an ‘obligation’ — not simply a choice or option. The
word ‘shall’ in treaty terminology means that what is provided for is legally binding.”*°

29. Article 8(1) thus appears to a majority of the Tribunal to establish unequivocally
Turkmenistan’s consent to submit disputes with U.K. investors to international arbitration. That
consent satisfies the fundamental condition that the State must have consented to participate in
arbitration before it may be required to do so. What Professor Stern calls the ratione voluntatis
is thus established with regard to Turkmenistan’s participation in international arbitration with a
U.K. investor.*” Turkmenistan has consented to arbitrate disputes with U.K. investors arising out
of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT.

30. Article 8(1) does not, however, tell us whether Turkmenistan has agreed to

participate in ICSID Arbitration with a U.K. investor, because Article 8(1) contains no

Letter from Counsel for the Respondent to the Tribunal, September 5, 2012.
Procedural Order No. 1, 12.2.
U.K.-TURKMENISTAN BIT Art. 8(1) (emphasis added).
Wintershall v. Argentina {119 (emphasis in original).
See Impregilo S.p.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/17, Concurring and Dissenting Opinion of
Professor Brigitte Stern {78.

information about what kind of international arbitration Turkmenistan has consented to engage
in. As the particular BIT before us is structured, the State Parties’ consent to participate in
international arbitration is expressed in the first section of Article 8, while the type of arbitration
to which a dispute may be referred is dealt with in the second section of Article 8. To find what
kind of arbitration an investor may avail itself of, we must look at Article 8(2).
E. What Kind of Arbitration?

31. While the Dissenting Opinion finds that “[c]onsent to arbitration is specifically
dealt with in Article 8(2) when a foreign investor envisages having recourse to a specific

arbitration venue,”?®

in addition to Article 8(1), we find in Article 8(2) only a menu of options
concerning the arbitration process, and a default selection. Consent, as explained in the
preceding section, is granted in Article 8(1) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT. Article 8(2) begins
“Where the dispute is referred to international arbitration,” indicating that Article 8(2) only
comes into play after the determination has been made, under the provisions of Article 8(1), to
refer the dispute to arbitration.

32. Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT (quoted in full in paragraph 17, above)
addresses specifically the kinds of arbitration available to a U.K. investor who wishes to take
advantage of the offer of international arbitration made by Turkmenistan in Article 8(1). It does
so in two steps. The first part of Article 8(2) identifies three types of arbitration to which an
investor with a claim and Turkmenistan together “may agree to refer the dispute” (emphasis
added). These are:

(a) ICSID Arbitration;

(b) Arbitration under the auspices of the Court of Arbitration of the International

Chamber of Commerce (“ICC Arbitration”); or

Dissenting Opinion 422.

(c) UNCITRAL Arbitration.

33. The second part of Article 8(2) provides that, if “there is no agreement to one of
the above alternative procedures” after four months, “the dispute shall at the request in writing of
the [investor] be submitted to arbitration under” the UNCITRAL Rules.”

34. The Respondent argues that Article 8(2) is modeled on the “alternative” version
of Article 8 of the 1991 U.K. Model BIT, which was in effect when the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT
was signed in 1995.*° The “preferred” version of Article 8 in the U.K. Model BIT, in contrast,
provided that “[e]ach Contracting Party hereby consents to submit to the International Centre for
the Settlement of Investment Disputes” any legal dispute with an investor of the other party.*!
The Respondent argues that the selection of the alternative version, rather than the preferred
version, reflects a choice by the parties to the BIT not to agree to ICSID Arbitration.”

35. The Claimant counters that the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT does not exclude ICSID
Arbitration, either in the text of Article 8 or in the exclusions from the scope of the MFN clause
listed in Article 7. Indeed, the Claimant argues, Article 8 identifies ICSID Arbitration as one
possible alternative that may under certain conditions be available to investors.“*

36. If the Tribunal found Article 8(2) to be ambiguous or obscure, Article 32 of the
Vienna Convention would permit us to consider supplementary means of interpretation, and the
model BIT from which the parties evidently derived the text of Article 8(2) would be among the

“circumstances of [the] conclusion” of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT that could be considered in

U.K.-TURKMENISTAN BIT Art. 8(2) (emphasis added).
Respondent’s Memorial, pp. 14-15; Hearing Tr. 11-12.
Respondent’s Memorial, p. 15.

Respondent’s Memorial, pp. 15-16; Respondent’s Reply, p. 29.
Hearing Tr. 98-100, 105.

“Id.

interpreting that article.* But the Tribunal finds no ambiguity in Article 8(2). The ordinary
meaning of the words of that article is that Turkmenistan expressed in the BIT its willingness to
consider three possible kinds of arbitration whenever it was notified by a U.K. investor of a
claim under the BIT -- ICSID Arbitration, ICC Arbitration, and UNCITRAL Arbitration. Article
8(2) is equally clear that the fall-back option, failing a case-specific agreement to use one of the
first two kinds of arbitration, is UNCITRAL Arbitration. Vattel’s First Maxim (“It is not
allowable to interpret what has no need of interpretation”) counsels that we accept that these
words mean what they say.*©

37. The ordinary meaning of Article 8 is thus that Turkmenistan consented in Article
8(1) to submit disputes with a U.K. investor arising under the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT to
international arbitration. However, unless Turkmenistan reaches an agreement with such an
investor to submit a particular dispute to either ICSID or ICC arbitration, Article 8(2) restricts

7

the investor to submitting the dispute to UNCITRAL arbitration.*” On the latter point, the

majority agrees with the Dissenting Opinion, although we reach that conclusion by a different
route.
38. Within the four corners of Article 8 of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT, therefore, the

majority of the Tribunal finds that Turkmenistan has consented to international arbitration with

VIENNA CONVENTION Art. 32.

Emer Vattel, The Law of Nations (1758; Liberty Fund edition 2008) §263. Of course, Article 32 of the Vienna
Convention would allow the model BIT to be used for the purpose of confirming the ordinary meaning of these
words.

The tribunal in Biwater reached a similar conclusion interpreting a similarly-phrased treaty provision. Biwater
Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22, Award of July 24, 2008
(hereinafter “Biwater v. Tanzania”) 1331. The Biwater tribunal relied in part on the statement of Dolzer &
Stevens that:

 

 

required
Dolzer & Stevens, Bilateral Investment Treaties, pp. 132-134. See Respondent’s Memorial, (137-40.

U.K. investors, but not to ICSID Arbitration. Turkmenistan has simply expressed its willingness
to consider ICSID arbitration as one of three options, and only on a case by case basis. The
Respondent states that the Claimant “never obtained or even sought Turkmenistan’s agreement

748 and the Claimant

to refer [this] dispute to ICSID arbitration, as required under Article 8(2),
does not take issue with that statement.”

39. Nevertheless, Article 8 may not be interpreted in isolation from the other
provisions of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT, because the BIT must be read as a whole. The
Claimant rests its argument that this ICSID Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear this arbitration
squarely on the proposition that Turkmenistan has consented to ICSID Arbitration of disputes
with investors of third states, specifically investors of Switzerland, France, Turkey, and India in
Turkmenistan’s BITs with those states, and in the ECT, to which Turkmenistan is a party. » The
Claimant argues that it is entitled “to import the more favourable dispute resolution provisions”
of those treaties into the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT by operation of the MEN clause in Article 3 of
the BIT, because Turkmenistan’s consent to ICSID Arbitration with Swiss, French, Turkish, and
Indian investors, and in the ECT, provides more favorable treatment to those investors and to
claimants under the ECT than Article 8 provides to U.K. investors.°! We therefore turn to

Article 3 of the BIT and whether it may be used for that purpose.

Respondent’s Memorial, 4.

The Respondent also notes that the Claimant sent a letter to ICSID, after the ICSID Secretariat raised questions
about the request for arbitration and before the Secretariat had registered that request, in which the Claimant
asked the Secretary General “to ask the Respondent Turkmenistan to confirm its consent to the arbitration
proceedings to be held before ICSID.” Respondent’s Memorial, 129.

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial, {{{61-63; Hearing Tr. 109.

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial, p. 13.

 

F. The Most Favored Nation Clause
1. MEN Clauses and Arbitration Provisions

40. This Tribunal is well aware that, in embarking on the consideration of whether the
MEN clause of a BIT may be used to vary the terms of the investor-state arbitration article of the
same BIT, we are venturing into a fiercely contested no-man’s land in international law. The
issues of textual interpretation, legal theory, and public policy that this question presents have
been ably and exhaustively explored by more than twenty tribunals, and have been expounded in
decisions and dissents authored by some of the most eminent authorities on international law and
investment arbitration.

Al. By this Tribunal’s count, there is a fairly even split between the number of

tribunals that have applied the MFN clause of a BIT to vary its dispute resolution provisions,”

54

and the number that have declined to do so.°” We recognize that decisions of other arbitral

Compare, e.g., Renta 4. v. Russia, Award on Preliminary Objections (by Majority) and Separate Opinion of

Judge Charles N. Brower, with Impregilo v. Argentina, Award (by Majority) and Concurring and Dissenting
Opinion of Professor Brigitte Stern.
Tribunals applying an MEN clause for this purpose include those in: Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. The Kingdom
of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Decision of the Tribunal on Objection to Jurisdiction of January 25, 2000
(hereinafter “Maffezini v. Spain”) 454-64; MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile,
ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/7, Award of May 25, 2004 (hereinafter “MTD Chile S.A. v. Chile”) {[100-104;
Siemens A.G. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8, Decision on Jurisdiction of August 3, 2004
(hereinafter “Siemens v. Argentina”) {§102-105; Camuzzi International S.A. v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case
No. ARB/03/7, Decisién del Tribunal de Arbitraje sobre Excepciones a la Jurisdiccién of June 10, 2005
(hereinafter “Camuzzi v. Argentina”) §[16-17; Gas Natural SDG, S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/10, Decision of the Tribunal on Preliminary Questions on Jurisdiction of June 17, 2005 (hereinafter
“Gas Natural v. Argentina”) 29-31; Suez and Interagua v. Argentina 952-66; National Grid v. Argentina
9179-94; Suez and Vivendi v. Argentina 52-68; RosInvestCo U.K. Ltd. v. The Russian Federation, SCC Case
No. V079/2005, Award on Jurisdiction of October 1, 2007 (hereinafter “RosInvestCo v. Russia”) {{[124-139;
Impregilo S.p.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/17, Award of June 21, 2011 (hereinafter
“Impregilo y. Argentina”) 79-108; Hochtief AG v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/31,
Decision on Jurisdiction of October 24, 2011 (hereinafter “Hochtief v. Argentina”) (959-75; Teinver v.
Argentina 9[59-186.
Tribunals refusing to apply an MEN clause for this purpose include those in: Técnicas Medioambientales
Tecmed, S.A. v. The United Mexican States, \CSID Case No. ARB (AF)/00/2, Award of May 29, 2003
(hereinafter “Tecmed v. Mexico”) (69-74; Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. The Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/13, Decision on Jurisdiction of November 9, 2004 (hereinafter
“Salini v. Jordan”) 9103-119; Plama v. Bulgaria 9183-227; Berschader v. Russia J§159-206; Telenor v.
Hungary {§90-101; Wintershall v. Argentina 160-167; Renta 4 v. Russia (77-119; Tza Yap Shum v. Republic
of Peru, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/6, Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence of June 19, 2009 9¥199-216;
(Footnote continued on next page)

 

 

 

tribunals, interpreting other BITs, have no binding authority on this Tribunal. But we have found
the analysis in many of these awards helpful in framing the question before us, and indeed both
parties have relied on these decisions in making their arguments. And the fact that so many
arbitrators with such a collective wealth of experience in international law and investment
arbitration have been unable to reach a consensus on the subject certainly counsels caution in
approaching it.>
42. Fortunately, perhaps, the present case does not require this Tribunal to take a

position on the policy issues implicated in deciding whether an MEN clause ought to be applied
to the investor-state arbitration article of a BIT. As Dolzer and Schreuer have observed, “much
will depend on the wording of the particular MFN clause.”*° In the BIT before us, we find the
answer to whether the MFN clause (Article 3) should be applied to the investor-state arbitration
article (Article 8) in the specific language of Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT. That
article reads:

(3) For the avoidance of doubt it is confirmed that the treatment

provided for in paragraphs (1) and (2) above shall apply to the provisions

of Articles 1 to 11 of this Agreement.””
Article 8 of the BIT, of course, is among “the provisions of Articles 1 to 11” to which Article
3(3) states that the MEN provisions of Articles 3(1) and 3(2) shall apply. As noted above (28),
the use of the word “shall” makes that statement mandatory.

43. Both parties agree that Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT has its origin in

the 1991 U.K. Model BIT.* Both parties also agree that, of the more than twenty tribunals to

(Footnote continued from previous page)
Austrian Airlines v. Slovakia {§92-140; ICS Inspection and Control Services Limited (United Kingdom) v. The
Republic of Argentina, UNCITRAL, PCA Case No. 2010-9, Award on Jurisdiction of February 10, 2012
(hereinafter “/CS v. Argentina”) 9274-313; Daimler v. Argentina 4205-278.
See Renta 4 y. Russia $94 (“What can be said with confidence is that a jurisprudence constante of general
applicability is not yet firmly established.”).
R. Dolzer and C. Schreuer, Principles of International Investment Law, p. 257 (Oxford 2008).
U.K.-TURKMENISTAN BIT Art. 3(3) (emphasis added).

have considered the effect of an MEN clause on the investor-state arbitration article of a BIT,
this Tribunal is the first to be called upon to interpret an MFN clause containing the language of
Article 3(3).?

44. The language of the U.K. Model BIT adopted in Article 3(3) of the U.K.-
Turkmenistan BIT has not escaped previous attention, however. It has been held up for
comparison by arbitrators faced with different wording in other BITs as an example of how State
parties to a BIT could make it clear that the MFN clause applies to the investor-state arbitration
provision, if they chose to do so. For example, the Plama v. Bulgaria tribunal stated:

Rather, the intention to incorporate dispute settlement provisions must be
clearly and unambiguously expressed. This is, for example, the case with
the U.K. Model BIT, which provides in its Article 3(3):

For avoidance of doubt, it is confirmed that the treatment

provided for in paragraphs (1) and (2) above shall apply to

the provisions of Articles I to 11 of this Agreement.
Articles 8 and 9 of the U.K. Model BIT provide for dispute settlement.
The drafters of the U.K. Model BIT rightly noted that there could be doubt
and expressly neutralized that doubt.”

45. Professor Stern, in her thorough exposition of “why, in principle, an MFN clause
cannot import, in part or in toto, a dispute settlement mechanism from a third party BIT into the
BIT which is the basic treaty applicable to the dispute,” explicitly carved out of her discussion
treaties with the language found in Article 3(3) of the U.K. Model BIT:

Naturally, an important caveat has to be presented here. The

interpretation of the MFN clause is only necessary when the intention of
the parties concerning its applicability or inapplicability to the dispute

(Footnote continued from previous page)
Claimant's Counter-Memorial, p. 14; Respondent’s Reply, p. 30; Hearing Tr. 12, 16.
Hearing Tr. 72; Claimant’s Counter-Memorial, 168.
Plama v. Bulgaria 204; to the same effect see Berschader v. Russia {179. See also E. Gaillard, “Establishing
Jurisdiction through a Most-Favored-Nation Clause,” New York Law Journal, July 2, 2005, p. 9, Exhibit CL-22.
(“Equally, when the contracting parties have expressly included dispute settlement arrangements in the scope of
an MEN clause, such intention must be given effect.”).

settlement mechanism is not expressly stated or clearly ascertained. It is
quite evident that if there is an MEN clause expressly including the dispute
settlement procedures or expressly excluding them, there is no need for an
interpretation.

There are indeed cases where the parties expressly state that the MFN
clause applies to the dispute settlement mechanism. This has been done,
for example, by the drafters of the U.K. Model BIT, who have provided in
Article 3(3) that “for avoidance of doubt” MEN treatment shall apply to
certain specified provisions of the BIT including the dispute settlement
provision.°!

46. The Respondent points out that neither the Plama v. Bulgaria tribunal, nor
Professor Stern in the dissent discussed above, was called upon to consider the implications of
the parties to a BIT having selected the alternative version of Article 8 of the U.K. Model BIT in
preference to the preferred version of that article. The selection of the alternative version,
rather than the preferred version, is indeed suggestive of a reluctance to agree in advance to
ICSID Arbitration. But as we have already stated, we do not find the meaning of Article 8 of the
U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT to be uncertain, and the choice of one version of Article 8 in preference
to another does not appear to us to provide any sound basis for failing to apply Article 3(3).

2. Does an MEN Clause Create Rights?

47. The Respondent argues that rights which do not exist under the basic treaty
cannot be created by operation of an MFN clause, but that MFN clauses are rather designed only
to improve the implementation of rights already granted under the basic treaty through “the
importation of more favourable conditions of exercise of such rights.”

48. The Claimant argues that the use of an MFN clause to establish the State’s

consent to ICSID Arbitration is simply a particular example of using an MFN clause to import

Impregilo S.p.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/O7/17, Concurring and Dissenting Opinion of
Professor Brigitte Stern (17-18.

© Hearing Tr. 66-67, 163-164.

Respondent’s Reply, (21.

into a treaty a right that the treaty does not otherwise provide. The Claimant quotes Professor

Schreuer to this effect:
The argument that the MFN clause is inapplicable in cases where the basic
treaty limits or refrains from granting consent, since the parties’ intention
in that respect is clear, is not convincing. An MFN clause is not a rule of
interpretation that comes into play only where the wording of the basic
treaty leaves room for doubt. It is intended to endow its beneficiary with
rights that are additional to the rights contained in the basic treaty. The
meaning of an MFN clause is that whoever is entitled to rely on it be
granted rights accruing from a third party treaty even if these rights clearly
go beyond the basic treaty.

49. The majority of the Tribunal finds it unnecessary to try to resolve whether rights
may be created by an MFN clause, although Professor Schreuer is persuasive and other tribunals
have had no difficulty in extending rights via an MFN. clause.™ First, to the extent that access to
international arbitration may be considered a “right” of a complaining investor, such access is
already accorded to U.K. investors under Article 8(1) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT, so there is
no need to resort to the MEN clause to create it. Second, the MFN clause of the particular BIT
before us frames the question in terms of “treatment,” not of “rights.” We are therefore
concerned only with whether Turkmenistan has accorded to investors of third states, or their
investments, treatment more favorable than it accords to U.K. investors or their investments.

3. General vs. Specific Language
50. The Respondent argues that the MFN clause of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT

should not be applied to Article 8, because the “general” language of Article 3(3) to the effect

that paragraphs (1) and (2) of Article 3 “shall apply to the provisions of Articles 1 to 11” should

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial, [38.

See C. Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention — A Commentary, Cambridge University Press, 2na ed., 2009, p.
248 (Exhibit C-19)(emphasis added); Claimant’s Counter-Memorial, (38.

E.g. Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/03/29, Award of August 27, 2009 ¥{ 157-160.

give way to the more “specific” language of Article 8 about the availability only of UNCITRAL
Arbitration unless there is a case-specific agreement to a different form of arbitration.”

51. That the MFN clause is broadly worded, while the dispute resolution clause is by
comparison specific, does not appear to the majority of this Tribunal to bar the application of one
to the other. It is in the nature of MFN clauses to be general, because such clauses are intended
to apply to a variety of provisions of numerous treaties that may be more or less favorable to the
person or entity protected by the MFN clause than the corresponding clause of the base treaty.
Indeed, Article 3(3) states that the MFN clauses of the BIT are to be applied to eleven articles of
that treaty, each of which might be compared with similar provisions in other BITs entered into
by the U.K. or Turkmenistan, some of which did not exist at the time the U.K. -Turkmenistan
BIT was entered into. As the UNCTAD paper on Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment observes,
“t]he treatment refers to all measures applying specifically to foreign investors (investment-
specific measures) or to measures of general application that regulate the economic and business
activity of the investor and his investment throughout the duration of the investment.”® In the
words of the Siemens v. Argentina tribunal, “In fact, the purpose of the MFN clause is to
eliminate the effect of specially negotiated provisions unless they have been excepted.”

4, Effet Utile
52. Nor is the majority of the Tribunal convinced by the Respondent’s argument that

application of the MEN clause to the dispute resolution provision of the BIT would deprive the

°7 Respondent's Reply, {{f 30-31.

UNCTAD, MOostT-FAVOURED-NATION TREATMENT (UNCTAD Series on Issues in International Investment
Agreements II 2010) (“UNCTAD MEN Paper”), p. 16.

Siemens v. Argentina (106. See RosInvestCo v. Russia {131 (“While indeed the application of the MFN clause:
of Article 3 widens the scope of Article 8 and thus is in conflict to its limitation, this is a normal result of the
application of MFN clauses, the very character and intention of which is that protection not accepted in one
treaty is widened by transferring the protection accorded in another treaty.”).

 
 

 

latter of effet utile.” This would occur, the Respondent argues, because, when the U.K.-
Turkmenistan BIT was signed in 1995, the U.K. was already a party to other treaties that
provided for ICSID Arbitration. If the MFN clause can be used as the Claimant seeks to use it,
the Respondent argues, Article 8(2) would have been a nullity from inception, because the MFN
clause could always have displaced its provisions in favor of a clause from a treaty providing for
ICSID Arbitration.”

53. The Claimant responds that no Turkmenistan BIT had entered into force in 1995
other than the China-Turkmenistan BIT, which did not provide for ICSID Arbitration.” The
China BIT was Turkmenistan’s first to enter into force, and the U.K. BIT was Turkmenistan’s
second, according to UNCTAD’s list of BITs to which Turkmenistan is a party.” There was
thus no more favorable Turkmenistan treaty in force at the time the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT
became effective. The Respondent argues that some U.K. treaties that provided for ICSID
Arbitration did precede the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT: The U.K.-Barbados BIT entered into effect
in 1993, the U.K.-Peru BIT in 1994, the U.K.-Belarus BIT in 1994. The existence of those
treaties may have made the effect of Article 3(3) on the United Kingdom uncertain, but it had no
effect on the impact of that article on Turkmenistan. The Claimant also points out that, in any
event, an investor always has the right to avail itself of Article 8(2) if it is content with
UNCITRAL Atbitration.”*

54. In this connection, it seems significant to the majority of the Tribunal that it is in

the nature of an MFN clause to be used to displace a treaty provision deemed less favorable in

7 Hearing Tr. 30-31.

™ Hearing Tr. 30-33.

Hearing Tr. 144-145.

Exhibit CL-44 (UNCTAD list of Turkmenistan BITs).
Hearing Tr. 165-166.

Hearing Tr. 146.

favor of another clause, from another treaty, deemed more favorable. The MEN clause itself
would be deprived of effet utile if it could never be used to override another provision of the
treaty. Certainly, the principle of ejusdem generis restricts the application of an MFN clause to
the displacement of clauses dealing with the same subject matter in other treaties of the same
nature.”° But that principle is not offended by the use of an MEN clause to displace a provision
from the dispute resolution article of one bilateral investment treaty with a corresponding

provision from the dispute resolution article of another bilateral investment treaty signed by the

same State.
5. Contemporaneity
55. The Respondent argues that the principle of “contemporaneity” prevents

application of the MEN clause to the dispute resolution provisions of the BIT.” That principle,
the Respondent argues, requires the Tribunal to look at the situation of the State parties at the
time the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT was executed, in 1995, and to determine whether the State
parties could have contemplated “even the possibility of importing consent via an MEN clause
from another treaty.””* Prior to the Maffezini v. Spain decision in 2000, the Respondent argues,
such an idea was “utterly unheard of.”

56. The Claimant responds that, where the words of a treaty are not ambiguous, there
is no occasion under the Vienna Convention to look beyond the terms of the treaty to discern the

intentions of the parties. To the extent that contemporaneity is relevant, the Claimant adds, the

Bahrain-Turkmenistan BIT, signed in 2011, contains an MFN clause that applies broadly to the

  

See Draft Articles on Most-Favoured-Nation Clauses, with Commentaries, text adopted by the International
Law Commission at its thirtieth session, Yearbook of the International Law Commission, 1978, vol. II, Part
Two, p. 30, (910-11 (hereinafter “/LC Draft Articles on MFN Clauses”).

7 Hearing Tr. 50.

Hearing Tr. 51.

Id. Of course, under this line of reasoning, the Maffezini v. Spain case could not have been decided as it was,
because no previous decision under a BIT had applied an MFN clause to the investor-state arbitration article.

   

dispute resolution provision, *° so there is no reason to believe that Maffezini v. Spain and the
intervening decisions following Maffezini v. Spain had any effect on Turkmenistan’s treaty
practice.*!

57. The majority of the Tribunal concludes that the principle of contemporaneity does
not bar the application of Article 3 to Article 8. The best indication of the intentions of the State
parties to the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT is the text of the treaty they signed. Article 3(3) provides
unequivocally that Article 3 “shall apply” to Article 8. Whatever the authors of the text may
have foreseen, their intentions, as expressed in the text of the treaty, seem to this Tribunal to be
clear.*?

6. Interpretation of Article 3(3)

58. The wording of Article 3(3) indisputably presents some interpretive difficulties.
For example, Article 7 of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT, headed “Exceptions,” carves out of the
MEN treatment provided by the BIT the benefits that may be provided by any existing or future

83 Yet Article 7 is one of the articles included in

customs union or taxation treaty or legislation.
“Articles 1 to 11,” to which the MEN clause is made applicable by Article 3(3). It would be
challenging to apply a guarantee of most favored nation treatment to an article enumerating the
exceptions to most favored nation treatment, but fortunately this Tribunal is not called upon to do
so. While recognizing the difficulty of applying Article 3 to all of the first eleven articles of the
BIT, we are confronted in this case only with how to apply it to Article 8.

59. Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT states that the treatment provided for

in Articles 3(1) and 3(2) shall apply to a range of articles that includes Article 8. The treatment

8 The Bahrain BIT (Exhibit CL-43) provides that “Unl
Article 3.1 and 3.2 herein shall apply to the whole of

S! Hearing Tr. 150-152.

See Renta 4 v. Russia {118 (“The Treaty must be taken as it is written.”).

See Hearing Tr. 208-210.

specifically excepted, [MFN] treatment provided for in
is Agreement.”

 

 

provided for in Articles 3(1) and 3(2) includes most favored nation treatment. As noted above
({ 28), the words “shall apply” appear to the majority of this Tribunal to be intended to require
the application of the one to the other, not merely to permit it. These terms of the BIT, like all
terms of a treaty, are to be given effect.

60. The Dissenting Opinion reads into the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT two conditions
that neither side has advanced and that the majority of the Tribunal is unable to find in the text of
the treaty. First, the Dissenting Opinion would require Articles 3 and 8 of the BIT to be applied
in a particular sequence. As the Dissenting Opinion sees it, “to give effect to the MFN clause
contained in Article 3(3), the foreign investor must first be in a dispute settlement relationship
with the host state.”** Under this reasoning, an investor’s right to MFN treatment under Article
3 does not come into being until the investor has commenced an arbitration proceeding under
Article 8. It necessarily follows, if that is the case, that an investor cannot commence an ICSID
Arbitration or an ICC Arbitration unless the state has specifically agreed to do so. The second
condition that the Dissenting Opinion reads into the BIT follows logically from the first: “[i]n
that sense, the application of Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT is subordinated or
conditioned to the prior application of Article 8(2) [8

6l. The majority of the Tribunal finds no basis in the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT for
conditioning the rights enjoyed by an investor under the BIT on the temporal sequence in which
the investor asserts those rights. A U.K. investor with an investment in Turkmenistan enjoys
rights under the BIT simply by virtue of having made that investment.*° No action on the
investor’s part other than the making of the investment is required to vest the investor with those

rights. And the protection of the MEN clause applies to such an investor from the moment that

§ Dissenting Opinion {40 (emphasis in original).

Id. 941.

the host State accords more favorable treatment to an investor from a third state. As the
International Law Commission puts it:
The right of the beneficiary State, for itself or for the benefit of persons or
things in a determined relationship with it, to most-favoured-nation
treatment under a most-favoured-nation clause * * * arises at the moment
when the relevant treatment is extended by the granting State to a third
state or to persons or things in the same relationship with that third State.*”
Dolzer and Schreuer explain:
“The [MEN] clause may not have any practical significance if the state
concerned fails to grant any relevant benefit to a third party. However, as
soon as the state does confer a relevant benefit, it is automatically
extended to the state that benefits from the MEN clause.”**

62. The protection of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT includes the access to international
arbitration to which the sovereign parties consented in Article 8(1), and also the right to
treatment no less favorable than that accorded to nationals of third countries provided by Article
3. Nothing in the text of the treaty requires an investor to commence an arbitration before
claiming its rights under the MEN clause, or subordinates the MEN clause to the investor-state
arbitration provision. To the contrary, the BIT provides that the MFN clause “shall apply” to the
investor-state arbitration article. The majority of the Tribunal therefore concludes that nothing in
the BIT prevents an investor from simultaneously invoking the right to international arbitration

provided by the BIT and invoking the MFN clause to obtain the benefit of a more favorable

arbitration process provided by another treaty to nationals or companies of a third country.

(Footnote continued from previous page)
Indeed, the BIT provides that “the term ‘investment’ includes all investments, whether made before or after the
date of entry into force of this Agreement.” U.K.-TURKMENISTAN BIT Art. 1(a).
87 ILC Draft Articles on MFN Clauses, Article 20(1) (2005). The Switzerland-Turkmenistan BIT entered into
force in April 2009.
R. Dolzer and C. Schreuer, Principles of International Investment Law, p. 186 (Oxford 2008) (emphasis added).

63. All of the words of a treaty are to be interpreted together, in good faith and in the
context of the object and purpose of the treaty.*” The object and purpose of the U.K.-
Turkmenistan BIT, as expressed in its preamble, is “to create favourable conditions for greater

investment.””°

Assuring a prospective investor that neither he nor his investment will be
subjected to treatment less favorable than the treatment accorded to investors from third
countries and their investments, insofar as the process available to resolve any disputes with the
host country that may arise under the BIT is concerned, certainly seems to create a favorable
condition for investment by the investor so protected. The RosInvestCo v. Russsia tribunal
explained that “the submission to arbitration forms a highly relevant part of the corresponding
protection for the investor by granting him, in case of interference with his ‘use’ and
‘enjoyment,’ procedural options of obvious and great significance.””! As the Hochtief v.
Argentina tribunal observed, “the right to enforcement is an essential component of [the]
property rights.”°?

64. The majority of this Tribunal is therefore satisfied that the ordinary meaning of
the words of Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT, read in light of the object and purpose
of the BIT, requires that the MFN clause be applied to Article 8, the investor-state arbitration
provision. We turn next to what consequences follow from so applying those terms, or, as the

Respondent phrases it, “how Article 8 and Article 3 work together.”*

See VIENNA CONVENTION, Art. 31.1.

U.K.-TURKMENISTAN BIT, Preamble.

RosInvestCo v. Russia {130 (emphasis in original). The RosInvestCo case was brought under the rules of the
Stockholm Chamber.

Hochtief v. Argentina 67.

Hearing Tr. 158.

G. Application of the MFN Clause to the Arbitration Article

65. Article 3 of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT contains two most-favored-nation
protections, one applicable to nationals or companies of the other contracting party, and one
applicable to the investments of such nationals or companies:

e Article 3(1) of the BIT contains Turkmenistan’s undertaking not to “subject investments
or returns of nationals or companies of the [U.K.] to treatment less favourable than that
which it accords * * * to investments or returns of nationals or companies of any third
state;” and

e Article 3(2) of the BIT contains Turkmenistan’s undertaking not to “subject nationals or
companies of the [U.K.], as regards their management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or
disposal of their investments, to treatment less favourable than that which it accords * * *
to nationals or companies of any third state.”

66. The Claimant invokes the protection of both Article 3(1) and Article 3(2).°4
While the Claimant asks the Tribunal to apply those MEN clauses to give it the benefit of the
dispute resolution clauses of Turkmenistan’s BITs with Switzerland, France, Turkey, and India,
and the ECT, the Claimant focuses on the Switzerland-Turkmenistan BIT. 95 Following the
Claimant’s example, the Tribunal will therefore focus on the Switzerland-Turkmenistan BIT as

containing the provisions that the Claimant deems more favorable. °® Our resolution of the issue

Hearing Tr. 107.
See Claimant's Counter-Memorial, 59. The Switzerland, France, and Turkey BITs with Turkmenistan all
condition the offer of ICSID Arbitration on the contracting parties to the BIT being parties to the ICSID
Convention, but all of the States concerned are now parties to that Convention.
The dispute resolution provisions of Turkmenistan’s BITs with Switzerland, France, and Turkey, insofar as the
Claimant seeks to rely upon them, are substantially identical. Compare Accord entre le Conseil federal suisse et
le Gouvernement du Turkméni: concernant la ion et la des ii (the
“Switzerland-Turkmenistan BIT”) (date of entry into force: April 2, 2009), Exhibit CL-24; Accord entre le
Gouvernement de la République Francaise et le Gouvernement du Turkmenistan sur l’encouragement et la
protection réciproque des investissements (entry into force: May 2, 1996), Exhibit CL-28; Agreement between
the Republic of Turkey and Turkmenistan Concerning the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments
(Footnote continued on next page)

 

before us on the basis of the provisions of the Switzerland-Turkmenistan BIT makes examination
of the other treaties relied upon by the Claimant unnecessary.

67. The discussion in the preceding section of this Decision explains the conclusion
of the majority of the Tribunal that Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT requires the
Tribunal to apply Articles 3(1) and 3(2) of the BIT to Article 8. Two questions nevertheless
remain:

e First, is there something different about the selection of a particular system of arbitration
and the rules that accompany it, as opposed to the interposition of a condition, such as a
waiting period, that permits the application of an MEN clause to the latter, but not to the
former?

e And, second, do the provisions of Article 8 of the BIT provide “less favourable”
treatment to U.K. investors (as regards their management, maintenance, use, enjoyment
or disposal of their investments), or to their investments, than the corresponding articles
of the Switzerland-Turkmenistan BIT provide to Swiss investors, or their investments?

1. May Consent to ICSID Arbitration Be Provided Via an MFN Clause?

68. The provision of the Switzerland-Turkmenistan BIT on which the Claimant relies
is Article 8 of that treaty, which provides:

1. For the purpose of solving disputes with respect to investments
between a Contracting Party and an investor of the other
Contracting Party, consultations will take place between the parties
concerned.

2. If these consultations do not result in a solution within six months

from the date of request for consultations, the investor may submit
the dispute for settlement to:

(Footnote continued from previous page)
(entry into force: March 13, 1997), Exhibit CL-25. Turkmenistan’s BIT with India and the ECT contain more

complex provisions.

(a) the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (ICSID) provided for by the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of other States, opened for signature at
Washington, on March 18, 1965; or

b) an ad hoc-arbitral tribunal which, unless otherwise agreed
upon by the parties to the dispute, shall be established
under the arbitration rules of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL).

3. Each Contracting Party hereby consents to the submission of an
investment dispute to conciliation or international arbitration.”

69. Specifically, the Claimant seeks to apply the MEN provisions of Articles 3(1) and
3(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT to give it the benefit of what it considers to be the more
favorable treatment accorded by Turkmenistan to Swiss investors in Article 8(2) of the
Switzerland-Turkmenistan BIT, insofar as a Swiss investor may choose to submit a dispute that
cannot be resolved within six months of consultations with Turkmenistan either to ICSID
Arbitration or to UNCITRAL Arbitration. As the Dissenting Opinion puts it, “because of the
MEN provision contained in Article 3 of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT and its application to

dispute settlement issues, a foreign investor of British nationality can invoke more favourable

dispute settlement provisions embodied in other BITs concluded by Turkmenistan.”

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial, {59; Exhibit CL-24 (Unofficial translation). The French original of Article 8
reads: “(1) Afin de trouver une solution aux différends relatifs a des investissements entre une Partie
Contractante et un investisseur de l'autre Partie Contractante, des consultations auront lieu entre les parties
concernées. (2) Si ces consultations n’apportent pas de solution dans les six mois & compter de la demande de
les engager, V’investisseur pourra soumettre le différend pour réglement: (a) au Centre international pour le
réglement des différends relatifs aux investissements (CIRDI), institué par la Convention pour le réglement des
différends relatifs aux investissements entre Etats et ressortissants d'autres Etats ouverte a la signature a
Washington le 18 mars 1965, ou (b) & un tribunal arbitral ad hoc qui, & moins que les parties au différend n’en
disposent autrement, sera constitué conformément au réglement d’arbitrage de la Commission des Nations
Unies pour le droit commercial international(CNUDCI). (3) Chaque Partie Contractante donne son
consentement & la soumission a la conciliation ou a l’arbitrage internationaux de tout différend relatif a un
investissement”).

Dissenting Opinion 438.

 
  

70. The Respondent argues that, while an MFN clause may possibly be used to
overcome a qualifying condition, such as a waiting period, in the dispute resolution clause of a
BIT, as was the case in Maffezini v. Spain, it may not be used to “import” the State’s “consent to
a different arbitration system” from one treaty into another.” The Respondent cites statements
from both Maffezini v. Spain and Plama v. Bulgaria to this effect:

[I]f the agreement provides for a particular arbitration forum, such as
ICSID, for example, this option cannot be changed by invoking the [MFN]
clause in order to refer the dispute to a different system of arbitration . . .
because these very specific provisions reflect the precise will of the
contracting parties. 00

It is also not evident that when parties have agreed in a particular BIT on a
specific dispute resolution mechanism, . . . their agreement to most
favored nation treatment means that they intended that, by operation of the
MEN clause, their specific agreement on such a dispute settlement
mechanism could be replaced by a totally different dispute resolution
mechanism (ICSID arbitration). It is one thing to add to the treatment
provided in one treaty more favorable treatment provided elsewhere. It is
quite another thing to replace a procedure specifically negotiated by
parties with an entirely different mechanism. tol

71. Indeed, the Respondent argues that, because no investor has previously tried to
use an MFN clause for that purpose, this Tribunal would be the first tribunal to do so if we were
to agree with the Claimant.'

72. The Claimant takes issue with the proposition that no tribunal has ever used an
MEN clause to import consent to ICSID Arbitration from one instrument to another by pointing

3

out that this is effectively what the tribunal did in C.S.O.B. v. Slovakia.’ In that case, The

Czech and Slovak Republics, prior to their separation, had signed a BIT that gave an investor of

Respondent’s Memorial, 57; Hearing Tr. 58.

10 Maffezini v. Spain 63.

101 Plama v. Bulgaria 4209.

1 Hearing Tr. 59-61.

13 Ceskoslovenska obchodni banka, a.s. v. Slovak Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/97/4, Decision of the Tribunal
on Objections to Jurisdiction of May 24, 1999 (hereinafter “C.S.0.B. v. Slovakia”).

one State the right to elect ICSID Arbitration of a dispute with the other State, but the Slovak
Republic argued that the BIT had never entered into force as between the State parties. !°* The
tribunal found that “the uncertainties relating to the entry into force of the BIT prevent that
instrument from providing a sound basis upon which to found the parties’ consent to ICSID

jurisdiction.” 105

However, the parties to the C.S.0.B. v. Slovakia arbitration had signed a
“Consolidation Agreement” which made reference to the BIT, and the tribunal found that:
In the absence of a separate dispute resolution provision, the reference to
the BIT satisfies the requirement that international arbitration, as specified
in its Article 8, is the agreed dispute resolution mechanism. 106
73. While the facts of C.S.0.B. v. Slovakia are unique, the majority of this Tribunal is
inclined to agree with the Claimant that importation of a provision for ICSID Arbitration from
one treaty to another by operation of the MEN clause of a treaty should not be considered
conceptually more difficult than the incorporation by reference into a contract of a provision for
ICSID Arbitration from a treaty that has not entered into force. In either case, the consent to
ICSID Arbitration is written in one instrument and imported into another by virtue of a provision
in the latter instrument to which the State has agreed. The State has expressed its consent to
ICSID Arbitration, in writing, in one instrument, and has agreed in a second instrument to look,
under certain conditions, to the terms of the first instrument. Whether looking to the terms of the
first instrument is accomplished by means of an incorporation by reference or an MFN clause
does not appear to be a material distinction.
74. The Dissenting Opinion finds C.S.0.B. v. Slovakia inapposite, because the
agreement containing the reference to the draft BIT in C.S.O.B. v. Slovakia was signed by both

parties to the arbitration, thus supplying a separate agreement to ICSID arbitration (by virtue of

104 C.S.0.B. v. Slovakia 4.
5 1d. 443.
16 1d. 454.

the incorporation by reference) between the host state and the claimant. We would agree with
this distinction, if the purpose of looking to the Switzerland-Turkmenistan BIT was to supply the
missing case-specific consent to submit this particular dispute to ICSID Arbitration required by
Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT. But the MFN provision of the U.K.-Turkmenistan
BIT effectively replaces Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT with Article 8(2) of the
Switzerland-Turkmenistan BIT, which requires no such case-specific consent. In the U.K. BIT,
the sovereign parties agreed that their respective investors would have the benefits of more
favorable provisions of other provisions in other treaties, and specified in Article 3(3) that the
investor-state provisions of the BIT were included within the ambit of this protection. Once the
requirements of Article 8(2) of the U.K. BIT are displaced by those of Article 8(2) of the
Switzerland BIT, it is sufficient that the investor have complied with the requirements of that
provision of the Switzerland BIT.

75. In any event, the essential consent of the State -- the consent to resolve disputes
with U.K. investors by means of international arbitration -- does not in this case need to be
imported by operation of the MEN clause, because that consent is contained in Article 8(1) of the
BIT. The consent of Switzerland and Turkmenistan to submit disputes between each of them
and investors of the other to international arbitration is similarly contained in a separate
paragraph of the Switzerland-Turkmenistan BIT, Article 8(3) of that treaty. There is no need for
the Claimant to seek to import that consent into the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT, because Article
8(1) of the U.K. BIT already achieves the same result.

76. The only provision of the Switzerland-Turkmenistan BIT to which the Claimant
needs the MEN clause to apply is the provision of Article 8(2) of the Switzerland BIT that
provides a Swiss investor a choice between ICSID Arbitration and UNCITRAL Arbitration,

which the Claimant argues to be more favorable than the corresponding provision of Article 8(2)

of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT, which restricts a U.K. investor to UNCITRAL Arbitration. Such
an application to Article 8(2) is consistent with the International Law Commission’s observation
that the beneficiary of an MFN clause not only has “an ‘either/or’ choice, but might also be in a
position to opt for the cumulative enjoyment of all, some, or parts of the various treatments
concerned.”!°”

77. The Respondent argues that Article 8(2) requires a specific agreement between
the Claimant and Turkmenistan to submit a dispute to ICSID Arbitration. Article 3, the
Respondent argues, is an agreement between Turkmenistan and the United Kingdom, and cannot

satisfy the requirement of an agreement between the Claimant and Turkmenistan. '°*

But, as
noted above, the effect of the MFN clause is not to satisfy the requirements of Article 8(2), but to
replace those requirements with a more favorable provision from another treaty, in this case
Article 8(2) of the Switzerland-Turkmenistan BIT, which does not require a separate agreement
between the Claimant and Turkmenistan in order to commence an ICSID Arbitration. We adopt
the observation of the Renta 4 v. Russia tribunal that:

It is not convincing for a State to argue in general terms that it accepted a

particular “system of arbitration” with respect to nationals of one country

but did not so consent with respect to nationals of another. The extension

of commitments is in the very nature of MFN clauses.!”

78. The Dissenting Opinion asserts that “[i]t would involve a forum shopping

attitude,” “running against the fundamental principles of international adjudication,” to bypass
the consent requirement. !!° But the consent requirement is not bypassed by this interpretation:

Turkmenistan consented to international arbitration in Article 8(1) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan

BIT, and the State Parties to the BIT opened the door to a search by a U.K. investor for more

107 ILC Draft Articles on MFN Clauses, Article 19, Comment 9 (2005).
108 Hearing Tr. 159-161.

109 Renta 4 v. Russia 92.

10 Dissenting Opinion 163.

favorable terms in treaties entered into by Turkmenistan with other states by choosing to make
the MEN clause of the BIT applicable to the investor-state arbitration provisions. It is the State
Parties to the BIT, not the present Tribunal, that decided that the MFN clause should apply to the
investor-state arbitration article. As Professor Schreuer explains in the passage quoted above
(paragraph 48), the rights provided by MFN clauses are additional to the rights provided in the
basic BIT.'"!

79. The majority of the Tribunal concludes that, where Turkmenistan: (a) has
expressly consented in the basic U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT to submit investment disputes with
U.K. investors to international arbitration, (b) has provided in the same BIT that U.K. investors
and their investments will not be subjected to treatment less favorable than that accorded to
investors of other States or their investments, (c) has expressly provided that the MFN treatment
so accorded “shall apply” to the dispute resolution provision of the BIT, and (d) has provided
investors of third States, specifically Switzerland, with an unrestricted choice between ICSID
Arbitration and UNCITRAL Arbitration, there is no reason why Turkmenistan’s consent to
ICSID Arbitration in its BIT with Switzerland may not be relied upon by a U.K. investor, if the
provision for ICSID Arbitration or an unrestricted choice between ICSID Arbitration and
UNCITRAL Arbitration provides treatment more favorable to the investor than the treatment
provided by the base treaty.

2. Does the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT Provide Less Favorable Treatment than
the Switzerland-Turkmenistan BIT?

80. ‘We turn next to whether the treatment accorded by Turkmenistan to Swiss
investors and their investments is more favorable than the treatment accorded to U.K. investors

and their investments by the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT insofar as the type of arbitration made

"1 ©. Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention — A Commentary, p. 248.

available is concerned. The Claimant describes “whether the treatment [the Claimant] seek[s] to
incorporate is more favorable than the treatment in the basic treaty” as “the only legitimate
question” that this Tribunal has to answer. m2

81. The dispute resolution provisions of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT differ in two
principal respects from those of the BIT between Turkmenistan and Switzerland:

e The U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT requires a waiting period of four months, while the

Switzerland-Turkmenistan BIT requires a waiting period of six months.

e The U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT permits an investor making a claim to commence an
arbitration only under the UNCITRAL Rules, unless Turkmenistan agrees on a case-by-

case basis to ICSID or ICC arbitration, while the Switzerland BIT provides an investor a

free choice between ICSID Arbitration and UNCITRAL Arbitration.

82. Neither party has argued that the difference between the four-month waiting
period under the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT and the six-month waiting period under the
Switzerland-Turkmenistan BIT has any significance. In any event, more than six months elapsed
between the Claimant’s Notification of its claim to Turkmenistan on June 25, 2010 and the filing
of its Request for Arbitration on May 19, 2011, so the Claimant has satisfied the waiting
requirement under either treaty.

83. The Claimant argues that Article 8 of the Switzerland-Turkmenistan BIT contains
“more favourable dispute resolution provisions than that found in” the U.K.-Turkmenistan
BIT,!? for two reasons:

(a) a treaty that provides the State’s consent to ICSID Arbitration is more favorable to an

investor than one that does not; M4

"2" Hearing Tr. 111.
"3" Claimant's Counter-Memorial, (58.

40

(b) and, in any event, a treaty that provides an investor the choice between ICSID

Arbitration and UNCITRAL Arbitration is more favorable to an investor than one that

provides no choice. |'°

84. The Respondent argues that, to prevail, the Claimant must establish that ICSID
Arbitration is objectively more favorable than UNCITRAL Arbitration, not merely that the
Claimant prefers it. "6 The Respondent also argues that no arbitral tribunal has ever reached the
conclusion urged by the Claimant. i

85. The Claimant disputes that there is any basis in international law for the

8

“objective” standard advocated by the Respondent.'! Rather, the Claimant argues that the

Tribunal should defer to the Claimant’s view that ICSID Arbitration is more favorable than
UNCITRAL Arbitration, because “we know what is best for us, especially if the tribunal thinks

that objectively it may be more difficult to assess whether one treatment is more favorable than

another.”!!°

86. Even if the Tribunal adopts an “objective” standard, the Claimant argues, it
should find that ICSID Arbitration is more favorable to investors than UNCITRAL Arbitration,
because (a) ICSID Arbitration is institutional arbitration, (b) ICSID is specialized in investor-
State disputes, (c) ICSID Arbitration is insulated from interference by courts at the seat of the

arbitration, (d) a decision in favor of jurisdiction may not be challenged until after the final

(Footnote continued from previous page)

14 Td, 495.

"5 1d. 496.

‘6 The Respondent relies on the UNCTAD MEN Paper and Daimler v. Argentina for the proposition that the
determination of whether one treaty provision is more or less favorable than another must derive “from an
objective appreciation of the text of the treaty,” and not “from the subjective perceptions of individual
claimants.” Hearing Tr. 70-71, quoting Daimler v. Argentina 9245-246. See Respondent's Memorial, 165;
Respondent's Reply, {{74-75.

"7 Hearing Tr. 72.

"8 Hearing Tr. 112-113.

"9 Hearing Tr. 111-112.

4

award, (e) local courts are not involved in enforcement or review of ICSID awards, and (f) there

is no uncertainty about the seat of arbitration, as there is in UNCITRAL Arbitration. !7°

87. The Respondent, in arguing that ICSID Arbitration is not objectively more
favorable than UNCITRAL Arbitration, points to the risk of annulment of awards in ICSID

Arbitration and to the availability of the New York Convention to enforce UNCITRAL

1

awards.” Principally, however, the Respondent relies on studies by commentators who have

reviewed the features of each system and have concluded that neither system is inherently better
than the other. |?”

88. The UNCTAD MEN Paper defines the appropriate standard for applying an MFN
clause differently from the formulation put forward by either party, but in terms that this
Tribunal finds pertinent. “The MFN Treatment provision,” the UNCTAD MEN Paper states, “is
a relative standard, which means that it implies a comparative test.” MFN treatment, that paper
continues, “requires a comparison as well as the finding of more favourable treatment granted to
investors of a given nationality as opposed to the investors covered by the basic treaty.” But a

finding of an alleged breach “calls not only for the finding of an objective difference in treatment

120 Hearing Tr. 115-116.

21 Respondent's Reply, 76-81; Hearing Tr. 73. The Respondent informed the Tribunal that, of five currently
pending cases against Turkmenistan brought under BITs that provide the claimant with a choice between ICSID
Arbitration and UNCITRAL Arbitration, three were brought at ICSID and two under the UNCITRAL Rules.
Hearing Tr. 169. These figures would appear to weigh against describing either system as inherently and
objectively more favorable to an investor than the other.

22 Respondent's Reply, {I[82-84; Hearing Tr. 74; See Freya Baetens, Enforcement of Arbitral Awards: “To ICSID
or Not to ICSID” Is Not the Question, in L.A. Laird, T.J. Weiler, eds., Investment Treaty Arbitration and
International Law, Vol. 5, (Juris 2012) (), p. 212; Gaetan Verhoosel, Annulment and Enforcement Review of
Treaty Awards: To ICSID or Not to ICSID, in Albert Jan van den Berg, ed., 50 Years of the New York
Convention: ICCA International Arbitration Conference, ICCA Congress Series, 2009 Dublin Vol. 14 (Kluwer
Law International 2009) (“Verhoosel, Annulment and Enforcement Review of Treaty Awards); Stephen Jagusch
and Jeffrey Sullivan, A Comparison of ICSID and UNCITRAL Arbitration: Areas of Divergence and Concern in
THE BACKLASH AGAINST INVESTMENT ARBITRATION (Michael Waibel, Asha Kaushal, et al., eds.,
2010, p. 109 (“These systems are similar on many levels, but they also diverge in certain fundamental areas.
Neither system is perfect, particularly in relation to transparency and the review of awards.”), p. 314 (“Jagusch
& Sullivan, A Comparison of ICSID and UNCITRAL Arbitration”); Respondent’ s Reply, (78-84.

42

between two foreign investors, but also for a competitive disadvantage directly stemming from
this difference in the treatment.”!”3

89. The Tribunal finds itself in agreement with the Respondent that ICSID Arbitration
cannot be described as objectively more favorable to investors than UNCITRAL Arbitration.
Each system has its advantages and disadvantages, as the comparisons made by both parties
illustrate. ICSID does indeed offer the advantages of administration by experienced
professionals on behalf of a specialized institution. It also offers the considerable advantage of
freedom from interference by courts at the seat of the arbitration, the perils of which are
illustrated by the recent decision of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia Circuit in The Republic of Argentina v. BG Group ple.'* But at least one learned
commentator has applauded the role of national courts “in annulment proceedings where indeed
they have come to provide, with few exceptions, a guarantee of stability and legal certainty not
always found in some recent decisions of ICSID annulment committees.”!?° ICSID Arbitration
has also been criticized for the overuse by unsuccessful parties of the annulment procedure
provided by Chapter VII of the ICSID Rules,'° and some parties favor the greater flexibility
offered by the UNCITRAL Rules.

90. Acknowledging the difficulty of establishing that ICSID Arbitration is objectively

more favorable to an investor than UNCITRAL Arbitration for all purposes, the Claimant’s

'23 UNCTAD MEN Paper, pp. 23-24.

4 665 F.3d 1363 (D.C. Cir. 2012). The United States Supreme Court granted BG Group’s petition for a writ of
certiorari to review that decision on June 10, 2013. 2013 WL 2459615 (Mem).

Francisco Orrego Vicuiia, “Reports of [Maffezini’s] demise have been greatly exaggerated,” Journal of
International Dispute Settlement Vol. 3, No. 2, p. 308 (2012).

See Jagusch & Sullivan, A Comparison of ICSID and UNCITRAL Arbitration; Verhoosel, Annulment and
Enforcement Review of Treaty Awards.

12

4B

principal argument is that it is more favorable to have a choice between the two than not to have
achoice.'”” This argument finds support in the decisions of other tribunals.

91. In Impregilo v. Argentina, for example, the tribunal concluded, in the context of a
choice between resorting to domestic courts and international arbitration, that “a system that
gives a choice is more favorable to the investor than a system that gives no choice.”!8 The
Hochtief v. Argentina tribunal agreed: “whatever the substantive merits of litigation and of
arbitration, it is always more favourable to have the choice as to which to employ than it is not to
have that choice.”'” Similarly, the tribunal in Renta 4 v. Russia, while ultimately declining to
apply the MFN clause of the particular BIT before it to the arbitration clause, because of the
specific language of that treaty, stated that, “[h]aving options may be thought to be more
‘favoured’ for MFN purposes than not having them.”'° And in the specific context of a choice
between ICSID Arbitration and ad hoc arbitration (such as UNCITRAL Arbitration), the Plama
v. Bulgaria tribunal stated that, “[t]he Tribunal is inclined to agree with the Claimant that in this
particular case, a choice is better than no choice.” 7!

92. The Respondent characterizes the “choice” argument as bootstrapping, reasoning
that if one system is not objectively more favorable than the other, having a choice between the
systems cannot be more favorable than accepting the system selected in the base treaty.' As

noted above, the Tribunal agrees that neither ICSID Arbitration nor UNCITRAL Arbitration may

127
12
12

Hearing Tr. 113.

Impregilo v. Argentina 4101.
Hochtief v. Argentina {100.
130° Renta 4 v. Russia 92.
Plama v. Bulgaria (208.
Hearing Tr. 79.

132

44

be described as objectively more favorable than the other. At the same time, however, those two
systems of arbitration are indisputably different from each other. 183

93. Article 3(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT contains Turkmenistan’s undertaking
not to subject U.K. companies, as regards their management, use, enjoyment, and disposal of
their investments in the territory of Turkmenistan, “to treatment less favourable” than it accords
to companies of any third state. Article 3(3) of the BIT explicitly makes that undertaking
applicable to the dispute resolution provisions of the BIT set forth in Article 8.

94. Where BIT “A” provides an investor with the option of selecting, as between two
different systems of arbitration, the one that appears to that investor most favorable to the
presentation of the particular claim that investor wishes to pursue with regard to an investment
protected by the BIT, and BIT “B” restricts investors covered by that treaty to bringing a claim
under only one of those systems of arbitration unless the State concerned agrees to the use of
another system for the particular dispute, it appears to the majority of this Tribunal that investors
under BIT “A” have been accorded more favorable treatment, as regards their management, use,
enjoyment, and disposal of their investments, than investors under BIT “B.” Indeed, depending
on the circumstances, investors making a claim under BIT “B” may be said to be at a competitive
disadvantage compared to investors claiming under BIT “A.”

95. Turkmenistan accords to Swiss investors a choice between bringing a claim under
Turkmenistan’s BIT with Switzerland in an ICSID Arbitration and bringing such a claim in an
UNCITRAL Abbitration. The tribunal in National Grid v. Argentina found that Argentina’s
agreement in its BIT with the United States that investors could resort to arbitration without first

resorting to the Argentine courts was an aspect of its “treatment” of investors subject to the MFN

83 Indeed, if there were no difference between them, the Tribunal would probably not have been called upon to

decide the present Objection to Jurisdiction for Lack of Consent.

45

clause of the Argentina-U.K. BIT.'™ The restriction imposed by Turkmenistan on U.K.
investors, insofar as the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT limits them to bringing claims under the BIT
only in an UNCITRAL Arbitration, is similarly a form of treatment, and is less favorable than
the treatment accorded by Turkmenistan to Swiss investors.

96. The Claimant, as a U.K. investor, is thus entitled by the MFN provisions of
Article 3 of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT to avail itself of the more favorable treatment accorded
by Turkmenistan to investors of Switzerland under Turkmenistan’s BIT with that country, and
specifically to avail itself of the provision of that BIT in which Turkmenistan agrees to resolve
disputes with Swiss investors in an ICSID Arbitration or an UNCITRAL Apbitration, at the
election of the investor. The Claimant here has availed itself of that more favorable treatment by
commencing an ICSID Arbitration. In light of this finding, it is not necessary to consider
Turkmenistan’s BITs with France, Turkey, and India, nor the ECT.

97. The majority of the Tribunal therefore finds, without prejudice to the
Respondent’s second objection to jurisdiction (which it reserves for the next stage of this

proceeding), that it has jurisdiction, as an ICSID tribunal, to hear the Claimant’s claims.

14 National Grid v. Argentina 93. See also RosInvestCo y. Russia {130 (“the submission to arbitration forms a
highly relevant part of the corresponding protection for the investor”).

46

II. COSTS
98. Both parties have asked for an award of costs. The Respondent has asked for all
costs related to this arbitration, including its legal fees.'*° The Claimant has asked for all costs
associated with the Respondent’s Objection to Jurisdiction for Lack of Consent.'*°
99. The Tribunal reserves all questions of costs until the conclusion of this

proceeding.

185 Respondent’s Memorial, 71.

‘86 Claimant's Counter-Memorial, {105(ii).

47

IV. DECISION

100. For the reasons set forth above, the Tribunal decides as follows:

a. The Respondent’s Objection to Jurisdiction for Lack of Consent is rejected.
b. The Tribunal will proceed to a consideration of the merits of the Claimant’s
claim, to which it will join the Respondent’s second objection to jurisdiction, on a

schedule to be established after consultation with the parties.

 

c. All questions of costs are reserved.
[signed] [signed]
George Constantine Lambrou Laurence Boisson de Chazournes
Arbitrator Arbitrator
(with the attached Dissenting Opinion)
[signed]

John M. Townsend
President of the Tribunal

48

