INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN

GARANTI Koza LLP
(Claimant)

and

TURKMENISTAN
(Respondent)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/20)

 

DISSENTING OPINION

 

By
Laurence Boisson de Chazournes
Arbitrator

Date: 3 July 2013

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

Introduction 1
I. Which guidance is offered by the customary rules of treaty interpretation as codified in the
VCLT? 5
IL. Interpretation of Article 8 of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT in light of the customary rules of
treaty interpretation 7

A. Relationship between Article 8(1) and Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT.............. 7
B. The ordinary meaning of Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT uu... 10

Ill. The ordinary meaning of Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT in light of the customary
tules of treaty interpretation 16
IV. The formal requirement(s) governing consent under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention ..20
V. Would the MEN clause of Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT permit the Tribunal to
find jurisdiction on the basis of another BIT regardless of the absence of consent to ICSID
arbitration under Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turk: i BIT? 23

Conclusion 31

Dissenting Opinion

Introduction

1. From the outset, I would like to point out that the present Dissenting Opinion does not
have the objective of dealing with the effect of most-favoured-nation (hereinafter
“MEN”) clauses on investment arbitration provisions of bilateral investment treaties
(‘BITs”), and more specifically their effect on dispute settlement provisions. The
applicable treaty in casu — the 1995 Agreement between the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Government of Turkmenistan for
the Promotion and Protection of Investments (hereinafter, the “U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT”)

— deals explicitly with this issue.

2. My Dissenting Opinion deals with the Respondent’s first objection to jurisdiction in the
present case, i.e. the objection for lack of consent. Throughout the jurisdictional phase
and during exchanges with my esteemed colleagues, I have always kept in mind the need
to preserve the exact balance of rights and obligations negotiated in the U.K.-
Turkmenistan BIT. Such a concern stems from the desire to ensure that the rights and

legal interests of both disputing parties are unaltered. !

3. Thave reflected at length on whether it is possible to support the decision of the majority
(hereinafter “the Decision”). However, the importance of the issues as I see them is such
that I have felt impelled to dissent, in particular from the finding of my colleagues that
the Tribunal “has jurisdiction, as an ICSID tribunal, to hear the Claimant’s claims”.? I
cannot agree with the reasoning and arguments on which this finding is based. The

reasons for my dissent are set forth below.

4. The objective of my Dissenting Opinion is to determine the conditions for resorting to

' Recently, the International Court of Justice (ICJ) recalled the necessity and importance not to “alter the limits of a
[court]’s judicial function”, see Frontier Dispute (Burkina Faso/Niger), Judgment of 16 April 2013, para. 46,
available at www.icj-cij.org.

? The Decision, para. 97.

ICSID arbitration under Article 8 of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT, and whether or not
consent to ICSID arbitration can be established via the MEN clause contained in Article
3(3) of the same BIT. There is no doubt that these are the two provisions at stake at the
present stage of the proceedings and that form the real legal dispute between the parties.
A tribunal has a duty “to isolate the real issue in the case”.>

5. It is crucial to stress from the outset a fundamental legal safeguard governing the issue of
consent before international courts and tribunals, in general, and ICSID tribunals in
particular: consent to jurisdiction in international adjudication must always be
established. First, this is a necessary prerequisite to the exercise of the international
judicial function. The principle of compétence de la compétence as defined under general
international law, and under Article 41 of the ICSID Convention, empowers an arbitral
tribunal or any other international court to determine proprio motu the extent and limits
of its jurisdiction. At the same time, the principle of compétence de la compétence
requires an arbitral tribunal or any other international court to establish the extent and
limits of its jurisdiction objectively, i.e., on the basis of the title of jurisdiction that is

conferred to the said tribunal, and not to go beyond it.

6. The trust and confidence in third-party adjudication is dependent on the respect by
international courts and tribunals of the limits to the jurisdiction conferred upon them.
Tribunals should not create a de facto system of compulsory jurisdiction, which in the
present stage of positive international law remains the exception. The international legal
order still rests largely on a system of facultative jurisdiction, and because of that
essential characteristic, a tribunal should never attempt to impose its jurisdiction and
adjudicate the merits of a dispute when the parties have not consented to its jurisdiction.
The ICSID arbitration system is not an exception to that approach. BITs were never
concluded by sovereign states with the idea that a third-party adjudicator would then

empower himself or herself with the authority to embark on ‘consent shopping’.

> Nuclear Tests (Australia v. France), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1974, p. 262, para. 29: “[...] it is the Court’s duty to
isolate the real issue in the case and to identify the object of the claim. It has never been contested that the Court is
entitled to interpret the submissions of the parties, and in fact is bound to do so; this is one of the attributes of its
judicial functions”.

7. The MEN clause regardless of its formulation in a BIT does not vest such authority in a
tribunal. The interpretation of MFN clauses is mutatis mutandis subject to the principle of
consent’ as enshrined both in general international law as well as in treaty law (the ICSID
Convention in the context of the present dispute). It would create a dangerous precedent
to formulate new approaches that go against these fundamental rules and principles of

international adjudication.>

8. Despite the repetitive use of the verb “import” by both the Claimant and the Respondent,
the Tribunal should not be misled and consider that the question in the present arbitration
is whether consent can be imported from one treaty to another treaty. I consider that the
real question that the Tribunal should address first and foremost is whether consent to
ICSID arbitration is or is not established under the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT. Indeed, such
consent exists or does not exist, and cannot be based on presumptions. Lack of consent
cannot be remedied by the so-called ‘import’ of consent. As indicated by the International
Court of Justice (ICJ), the jurisdiction of international courts and tribunals, including
ICSID tribunals, “is based on the consent of the parties and is confined to the extent
accepted by them”.° Well-established principles governing the interpretation of titles of
jurisdiction as formulated by the ICJ should guide the interpretation of dispute settlement

provisions under the ICSID Convention and BITs. 7

4 See, e.g., Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A., and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A. v.
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17, Decision on Jurisdiction of 16 May 2006, para 59: “the Tribunal
finds no reason for interpreting the most-favored-nation treatment clause any differently from any other clause in the
Argentina-Spain BIT” (hereinafter “/nteragua v. Argentina”).

> See, e.g., Ch. De Visscher, Theory and Reality in Public International Law, Princeton, New Jersey, 1968, pp. 395-
396: “The judge is not asked to penetrate the intimate designs of the contracting parties; he is expected to discover
by the means at his disposal that part of their intentions that external signs reveal. Now the words freely chosen by
the parties are par excellence or at least primarily the instrument of this externalization. This, in turn, is a security
factor. The security that the treaty affords the contracting parties is measured by its capacity to withstand pressures
that might be brought to promote changes. Of this fundamental contractual guarantee the text, the common work of
the parties, is the essential instrument [...] What the Court does not allow is that in the course of interpretation the
text should be prematurely eclipsed by a teleological scrutiny that might distort its meaning. Such precipitate
reasoning may result in sacrificing respect for the text to subjective considerations."

© Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo (New Application: 2002) (Democratic Republic of the Congo v.
Rwanda), 1.C.J. Reports 2006, p. 39, para. 88; See also Case Concerning mutual assistance in criminal matters
(Djibouti v. France), 1.C.J. Reports 2008, p. 204, para. 62.

T It is well recognized that the drafters of the ICSID Convention heavily relied on the Statute and Rules of the ICJ
when negotiating the ICSID Convention. See, e.g., G. Kaufmann-Kohler, “Foreword” in A. R. Parra, The History of
ICSID, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2012, p. viii. See also, A. R. Parra, ibid., pp. 51-53.

 

9. The present Dissenting Opinion will avoid repeating the positions of the Respondent and
the Claimant that have been already presented exhaustively in their respective written
submissions and during the hearing. I will first describe briefly the approach to
interpretation that should guide the Tribunal in light of the customary rules of treaty
interpretation as codified in Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties (1969) (hereinafter, the *VCLT’)$ (I). Second, I will interpret Article 8 of the
U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT (II). At that level, the aim will be to analyze the relationship
between Article 8(1) and Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT as well as to
demonstrate that the real issue in the present dispute is whether consent can be
established under Article 8(2) rather than on Article 8(1), as the majority has incorrectly
tried to put it. Afterwards, I will focus on the ordinary meaning of Article 3(3) under the
customary rules of treaty interpretation (III). Subsequently, I will briefly deal with the
formal requirement(s) governing consent under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention,
which are essential for the proper functioning of ICSID and other arbitral mechanisms
(IV). Finally, assuming that the MFN clause of Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan
BIT finds application in the present dispute, I will enquire whether the MFN clause

permits the Tribunal to find jurisdiction on the basis of another BIT (or other BITs) to

§ Article 31 (“General rule of interpretation”) reads as follows:

“1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the
treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose.

2. The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall comprise, in addition to the text, including its
preamble and annexes:

(a) any agreement relating to the treaty which was made between all the parties in connection with the conclusion of
the treaty;

(b) any instrument which was made by one or more parties in connection with the conclusion of the treaty and
accepted by the other parties as an instrument related to the treaty.

3. There shall be taken into account, together with the context:

(a) any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the interpretation of the treaty or the application of its
provisions
(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which establishes the agreement of the parties regarding
its interpretation;

(c) any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between the parties.

4. A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the parties so intended.”

Article 32 (“Supplementary means of interpretation’) state
“Recourse may be had to supplementary means of interpretation, including the preparatory work of the treaty and
the circumstances of its conclusion, in order to confirm the meaning resulting from the application of article 31, or to
determine the meaning when the interpretation according to article 31:

(a) leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; or

(b) leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.”

 

 

which Turkmenistan is a party, if consent to ICSID jurisdiction is not given or established

under Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT (V).

I. Which guidance is offered by the customary rules of treaty interpretation as codified in

the VCLT?

10. Under the customary rules of treaty interpretation, the Tribunal should essentially be
guided by the general rule of interpretation contained in Article 31 of the VCLT when
interpreting the scope of consent under Article 8 and the meaning of Article 3(3) of the
U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT.° The stated general rule of interpretation can be summarized as
follows: the text must always be taken as the starting point.'° As such, no doctrine of
restrictive or extensive interpretation of the text of the treaty should prevail.'!

Interpretation of the text should be based on an “ex ante neutral approach”. R

11. As explained by an arbitral tribunal constituted under the auspices of the Permanent
Court of Arbitration (PCA), the rule of interpretation under Article 31 of the VCLT
“should be viewed as forming an integral whole, the constituent elements of which
cannot be separated”. '° The same tribunal also explained that “all the elements of the
general rule of interpretation provide the basis for establishing the common will and
intention of the parties by objective and rational means”.'* But most importantly, the

tribunal, following the practice of the ICJ in that respect, emphasized the following point:

[T]he “text of the treaty” is a notion distinct from, and broader than, the
notion of “terms”. Relying on the text does not mean relying solely, or

° See, e.g., Romak S.A. (Switzerland) and the Republic of Uzbekistan, Award of 26 November 2009, paras. 169, 172
and 241.

'° Territorial Dispute (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya/Chad), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1994, pp. 21-22, para. 41;
Permanent Court of Arbitration, In the Arbitration regarding the Iron Rhine (“Ijzeren Rijn”) Railway between The
Kingdom of Belgium and The Kingdom of The Netherlands, Award of the Arbitral Tribunal, 24 May 2005, para. 47.
" Austrian Airlines v. Slovak Republic, UNCITRAL Case, Award of 20 October 2009, paras. 119-121 (hereinafter
“Austrian Airlines v. Slovakia"); Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of America, ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/99/2, Award of 11 October 2001, para. 43.

"? Daimler Financial Services AG v. Argentine Republic, (CSID Case No. ARB/05/1, Award of 22 August 2012,
para. 171 (hereinafter “Daimler v. Argentina’).

'5 Permanent Court of Arbitration, Case concerning the Auditing Accounts between the Kingdom of The Netherlands
and the French Republic pursuant to the Additional Protocol of 25 September 1991 to the Convention on the
Protection of the Rhine against Pollution by Chlorides, Arbitral Award of 12 March 2004, para. 62 (emphasis
added).

“id.

 

mainly, on the ordinary meaning of the terms. Such a solution would
effectively ignore the references to good faith, the context, and the object and
purpose of the treaty. The ordinary meaning of the terms is even itself
determined as a function of the context, object and purpose of the treaty.
Lastly, as paragraph 2 of Article 31 of the Vienna Convention provides, the
text of the treaty (including the preamble and annexes) is itself part of the
context for the purposes of interpretation.'*

12. It appears from the above quoted paragraph that the interpretation of the ordinary terms
of a provision such as Article 8 of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT must take into account the
whole text of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT and not be limited to the terms embodied in
Article 8. The same logic applies to the interpretation of Article 3(3) of the U.K.-
Turkmenistan BIT. The interpretation of the terms of Article 3(3) must take into account
the whole text of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT and, thus, be read in light of Article 8 of the
U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT. It is not possible under customary rules of treaty interpretation,
as reflected in Article 31 of the VCLT, to isolate the interpretation of Article 8 from the
interpretation of Article 3(3) or vice versa.'° The proper interpretation must give meaning
and effect to both provisions, and not be an interpretation that would exclude one
provision and render it meaningless while conferring a broad meaning and effect on the
other provision.'” The “terms” of Article 3 of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT, and in
particular of Article 3(3), do not have a legal existence of their own that would compel
this Tribunal to ignore the context of the BIT and its object and purpose. As a result, the

“terms” of Article 3(3) cannot be used to completely override another provision of the

'5 Td. at para. 63.

'© The fact that both parties have not advanced this approach to interpretation is no reason not to apply it, since it is a
normal approach to treaty interpretation that the Tribunal can and should apply. Moreover, the legal maxim jura
novit curia applies. As stressed by the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in the Fisheries jurisdiction cases, for
instance, “[...] an international judicial organ, is deemed to take judicial notice of international law and is therefore
required [...] to consider on its own initiative all rules of international law which may be relevant to the settlement
of the dispute” (see Fisheries Jurisdiction (Federal Republic of Germany v. Iceland), Merits, Judgment, L.C.J.
Reports 1974, p. 181, para. 18).

" See, e.g., United States — Standards for Reformulated and Conventional Gasoline: “[a]n interpreter is not free to
adopt a reading that would result in reducing whole clauses or paragraphs of a treaty to redundancy or inutility”,
Report of the WTO Appellate Body, adopted 20 May 1996, W7/DS2/AB/R, p. 23. This statement is quoted with
approval in Japan — Taxes on Alcoholic Beverages, report of the WTO Appellate Body, adopted 1 November 1996,
WT/DS8/AB/R, WT/DS10/AB/R, WT/DS11/AB/R, p. 12 and in Brazil — Export Financing Programme for Aircraft,
Report of the WTO Appellate Body, adopted 20 August 1999, WT/DS46/AB/R, footnote 110. See also, Brazil —
Export Financing Programme for Aircraft — Recourse to Arbitration by Brazil under Article 22.6 of the DSU and
Article 4.11 of the SCM Agreement — Decision by the Arbitrators, 28 August 2000, footnote 17: “We therefore read
these provisions as a whole and give a useful meaning to all, in application of the principle of effective interpretation
(ut res magis valeat quam pereat)”.

 

U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT, including Article 8.

13. As a general rule, if after an examination of the terms of Article 8 and/or of Article 3(3),
their meaning remains ambiguous or obscure, or leads to a result which is manifestly
absurd or unreasonable, recourse can be had to supplementary means of treaty
interpretation (Article 32 of the VCLT) such as the preparatory work or the
circumstances of the conclusion of the BIT.'* The supplementary means can also be
referred to in order to confirm the interpretation of the ordinary meaning of the texts of
Article 8 and/or of Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT under Article 31 of the
VCLT." In the context of the present Dissenting Opinion, supplementary means of treaty
interpretation will be referred to in order to confirm, in particular, the interpretation of the

ordinary meaning of the text of Article 8 of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT.

II. Interpretation of Article 8 of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT in light of the customary rules
of treaty interpretation

A. Relationship between Article 8(1) and Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT
14. Article 8(1) is inseparable of Article 8(2). Article 8(1) reads as follows:

Disputes between a national or company of one Contracting Party and the
other Contracting Party concerning an obligation of the latter under this
Agreement in relation to an investment of the former which have not been
amicably settled shall, after a period of four [months] from written
notification of a claim, be submitted to international arbitration if the
national or company concerned so wishes.

18 « [J the first duty of a tribunal which is called upon to interpret and apply the provisions of a treaty, is to

endeavour to give effect to them in their natural and ordinary meaning in the context in which they occur. If the
relevant words in their natural and ordinary meaning make sense in their context, that is an end of the matter. If, on
the other hand, the words in their natural and ordinary meaning are ambiguous or lead to an unreasonable result,
then and then only, must the Court, by resort to other methods of interpretation, seek to ascertain what the parties
really did mean when they used these words”, see Competence of the General Assembly for the Admission of a State
to the United Nations, Advisory Opinion, I.C.J. Reports 1950, p. 8.

'° See also, Air Services Agreement of 27 March 1946 between the United States of America and France, Award of
9 December 1978, United Nations Reports of International Arbitral Awards, vol. 14, p. 434, para. 44, p. 440, para.
66, p. 441, para. 69; Territorial Dispute (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya/Chad), Judgment, 1.C.J. Reports 1994, pp, 27-28,
para. 55; Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States of America), Preliminary Objections, I.C.J.
Reports 1996 (II), p. 812, para. 23; Maritime Delimitation and Territorial Questions between Qatar and Bahrain
(Qatar v. Bahrain), Jurisdiction and Admissibility, LC.J. Reports 1995, p. 21, para. 40; Sovereignty over Pulau
Ligitan and Pulau Sipadan (Indonesia/Malaysia), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2002, p. 653, para. 53; Application of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Georgia v. Russian
Federation), Preliminary Objections, Judgment of | April 2011, para. 142.

 

1S.

Article 8(2) of the BIT reads as follows:

Where the dispute is referred to international arbitration, the national or
company and the Contracting Party concerned in the dispute may agree to
refer the dispute either to:

(a) the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes
(having regard to the provisions, where applicable, of the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other
States, opened for signature at Washington DC on 18 March 1965 and the
Additional Facility for the Administration of Conciliation, Arbitration and
Fact-Finding Proceedings); or

(b) the Court of Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce; or

(c) an international arbitrator or ad hoc arbitration tribunal to be appointed
by a special agreement or established under the Arbitration Rules of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law.

If after a period of four months from written notification of the claim there is
no agreement to one of the above alternative procedures, the dispute shall at
the request in writing of the national or company concerned be submitted to
arbitration under the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law as then in force. The parties to the dispute may
agree in writing to modify these Rules.

The majority has persisted in considering that Article 8(1) deals with “Turkmenistan’s
consent to participate in international arbitration with U.K. investors and the conditions

attached to that consent” ”°

, and that Article 8(2) deals with “the arbitration systems that
may be used if the conditions of Article 8(1) are met”.?! Contrary to the interpretation of
the majority, Article 8 of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT does not divide the question of
consent to participate in ICSID Arbitration into two parts. Elementary rules of treaty
interpretation invite to interpret Article 8 as a whole and not as composed of segmented
and fragmented provisions as the majority has chosen to do. The whole mechanism of
Article 8 relates to consent to international arbitration. Article 8(1) does not invite the
Tribunal to look first at whether the host state has consented to participate in international
arbitration at all (under Article 8(1)), and second, at whether it has agreed to ICSID

arbitration (under Article 8(2)). Such an approach is not grounded in a proper application

°° The Decision, para. 25.

Td.

20.

of the customary rules of treaty interpretation because it would deprive Article 8(1) of its

real function and make Article 8(2) redundant.

Article 8(1) formulates the rule according to which if, after a period of four months, no
amicable settlement can be reached between the foreign investor and the host state, the
former can submit the dispute to international arbitration. The majority considers that

consent is granted in Article 8(1).2

The legal purpose of Article 8(1) is to fix pre-conditions or what is commonly referred to
as ‘conditions precedent’ to international arbitration, i.e., negotiations during four
months. There lies the ratio legis of Article 8(1). It is meant to govern the pre-conditions
of consent to arbitration under Article 8 of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT. In other words,
Article 8(1) contains, subject to the condition of four months of negotiations, consent in
principle to international arbitration, and such consent in principle must still be read in
light of the further specific conditions governing consent to arbitration by virtue of

Article 8(2).

Articles 8(1) and 8(2) are two sides of the same coin. The coin — Article 8 — encompasses
the provisions governing consent to international arbitration under the U.K.-
Turkmenistan BIT. One side of the coin — Article 8(1) — shows the general pre-
condition(s) under which a foreign investor can initiate international arbitration against
the host state; the other side — Article 8(2) — fixes the strict conditions under which the
foreign investor can pursue one specific venue of international arbitration (e.g., ICSID

arbitration) rather than another (e.g. UNCITRAL arbitration).

I find it difficult to subscribe to the point of view of the majority according to which
“Article 8(2) [is] only a menu of options concerning the arbitration process, and a default
selection’. As Article 8(1), Article 8(2) also embodies consent to international
arbitration. Chronologically and logically, Article 8(2) becomes mandatorily applicable

after it is proved (or has been proven that) that the requirement of negotiations during

2 Td.at para. 31.

3 Id.

21.

Td.

four months has been fulfilled under Article 8(1). This is where the analysis of Article
8(1) should stop and where the analysis under Article 8(2) should start. The majority has
chosen to focus on Article 8(1) in order to justify its approach and to find jurisdiction in
the present case. With all due respect for my colleagues, I believe that the Decision has
used Article 8(1) as a means to achieve an end that it could not easily achieve by
acknowledging that consent to arbitration is contained in Article 8(2). The focus should
have been on Article 8(2), which is the true subject-matter of the dispute at this
jurisdictional phase. The objection to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal that was raised by
the Respondent is an objection for lack of consent under Article 8(2). Nothing less,
nothing more. The remainder of my opinion will thus only deal with Article 8(2). I will
now analyze the position of the majority according to which Article 8(2) does not

encompass consent to arbitration.

. The ordinary meaning of Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT

The majority states in its Decision that because Article 8(2) begins with “Where the
dispute is referred to international arbitration,” this indicates that “Article 8(2) only
comes into play after the determination has been made, under the provisions of Article
8(1), to refer the dispute to arbitration”.* The position of the majority shows a
misperception of the ordinary meaning of the terms contained in Article 8(2). The phrase
“Where the dispute is referred to international arbitration,” does not imply at all that
Article 8(2) does not deal with consent to arbitration. The said phrase relates specifically
to the initiation of international arbitration under the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT and simply
confirms that under Article 8(2) — like in many other BITs — it is the foreign investor that
initiates investment arbitration. In this respect, there is a cause-and-effect relationship
between the last part of Article 8(1) (“disputes shall [...] be submitted to international
arbitration if the national or company concerned so wishes’) and the beginning of Article
8(2) (“Where the dispute is referred to international arbitration”). In other words, if the
foreign investor ‘wishes’, he can choose (to initiate) international arbitration to settle his

dispute with the host state. However — and this is where I strongly disagree with the

22.

23.

majority — the power of initiation (or choice to have recourse to investment arbitration) is
not tantamount to consent to arbitration. The initiation of investment arbitration by the
foreign investor in a specific arbitration forum is still conditioned to the consent from the
host state under Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT. That is why Article 8(2),
next to the preceding paragraph of that article, also covers without any doubt, consent to

international arbitration.

The wording of Article 8(2) is clear and confirms that consent to arbitration is
specifically dealt with in Article 8(2) when a foreign investor envisages having recourse
to a specific arbitration venue. Article 8(2) states that “the national or company and the
Contracting Party concerned in the dispute may agree to refer the dispute either to the
International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes [...] or the Court of
Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce or an international arbitrator or ad
hoc arbitration tribunal to be appointed by a special agreement or established under the
Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law”
(emphasis added). The phrase “may agree to refer the dispute” demonstrates that Article
8(2) governs consent to arbitration when it comes to specific venues of arbitration. A
similar wording can be found in Article 36(1) of the Statute of the International Court of
Justice (ICJ). Article 36(1) provides that “The jurisdiction of the Court comprises all
cases which the parties refer to if’. This provision is found in the part of the Statute
dealing with the jurisdiction of the ICJ, i.e. the part governing ways of consenting to the
jurisdiction of the Court. Why would a provision which affords the parties the possibility
to agree to refer the dispute to the ICJ be considered a provision dealing with consent to
jurisdiction while, on the other hand, a provision affording the possibility to agree to refer
disputes to arbitration under the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT, would not be qualified as

relating to consent to arbitration?

Let us have a closer look at the mechanism of Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT.
Article 8(2) offers, three options to settle a dispute between a foreign investor and a host
state arising out of the said BIT. The dispute can be settled under ICSID arbitration

(option 1), ICC arbitration (option 2) or UNCITRAL arbitration (option 3).

24.

25.

26.

However, for one of these options to be used by a foreign investor both the foreign
investor and the host state must have previously agreed to refer the dispute to one of
those three fora. The conditions for such previous agreement will vary depending upon
which of the dispute settlement procedures is selected. Article 8(2) clearly states that in
order to refer the dispute to international arbitration, “the national or company and the
Contracting Party” concerned by the investment dispute “may agree” to settle the dispute
under one of the above-identified options (italics added). Therefore, ICSID arbitration
under the ordinary meaning of Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT can only be

used by the foreign investor if it has mutually agreed with the respondent state to do so.

It cannot be assumed that ‘and’ means ‘or’ in the context of Article 8(2) of the U.K.-
Turkmenistan BIT. Nothing suggests that the Tribunal should depart from the ordinary
meaning of the word ‘and’ which means ‘together with’ or ‘along with’ — i.e., the foreign
investor ‘together with’ the state concerned. Moreover, the expression ‘may agree’
implies that the foreign investor is not granted with “an immediate right to resort to
ICSID arbitration””> under Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT. Assent of both the
foreign investor and the host state concerned is necessary for ICSID arbitration to be
triggered. A similar wording (“as may be mutually agreed by the parties”) in the context
of a national investment legislation has been interpreted as meaning that a “subsequent
agreement between the parties is required””® for ICSID arbitration to be initiated by a

foreign investor.

This reading of Article 8(2) is confirmed by the fact that Article 8(2) itself provides that,
“if after a period of four months from written notification of the claim there is no
agreement” (italics added) to use one of the three options “the dispute shall at the request
in writing of the national or company concerned be submitted to arbitration” (italics
added) under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. Such wording clearly indicates that a
mutual agreement is needed for ICSID arbitration to be initiated by the foreign investor.

When an agreement cannot be reached between the foreign investor and the state

°S Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22), Award of 24 July
2008, para. 331 (hereinafter “Biwater v. Tanzania”).
6 Td. at para. 329 (emphasis added).

concerned, only arbitration under UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules can be used by the

foreign investor, not ICSID arbitration or ICC arbitration. The verb ‘shall’ illustrates

that rationale. It shows that the only type of arbitration for which a subsequent or mutual
agreement between the foreign investor and the state concerned is not needed under

Article 8(2) — after four months of notification of the claim — is UNCITRAL ad hoc

arbitration. Article 8(2) is clear in its literal meaning and its intended effect.7”

27. If the language of Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT were not to be interpreted
in the light of its ordinary meaning, there would be a risk of depriving the final part of
Article 8(2) (“if after a period of four months ... under the Arbitration Rules of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law”) of its effet utile (ut res magis
valeat quam pereat). This principle of effectiveness must be taken into account when
interpreting a BIT or specific provision(s) of a BIT under Article 31 of the VCLT. Not
only has the ICJ acknowledged that “the principle of effectiveness [...] has an important
role in the law of treaties”, but also some arbitral tribunals have recognized that “[i]t is
a cardinal rule of the interpretation of treaties that each and every operative clause of a
treaty is to be interpreted as meaningful rather than meaningless”.””

28. As indicated above (see para. 13 of the present Opinion), the ordinary meaning of Article
8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT can be confirmed by taking into account the
circumstances of the conclusion of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT. This method of treaty
interpretation is based on Article 32 of the VCLT, which also reflects customary

international law.

*7 In the same sense, see Corfu Channel (United Kingdom v. Albania), Merits, Judgment, I1.C.J. Reports 1949, p. 24;
see also Territorial Dispute (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya/Chad), Judgment, 1.C.J. Reports 1994, p. 25, para. 51.

°8 Fisheries Jurisdiction (Spain v. Canada). 1.C.J. Reports 1998, p. 455, para. 52. See also, Advisory opinion of 21
June 1971 on the Legal consequences for States of the continued presence of South Africa in Namibia (South West
Africa), ICJ Reports 1971, p. 35, para. 66; Border and transborder armed actions (Nicaragua v. Honduras),
Judgment of 20 December 1988, JCJ Reports 1998, p. 89, para. 46. See also, H. Lauterpacht, The Development of
International Law by the International Court, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1982, pp. 227-230.

° Eureko BV v. Republic of Poland, Partial Award (by Majority) of 19 August 2005, para. 248; See also, Pan
American Energy LLC and BP Argentina Exploration Company v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/13,
Decision on Preliminary Objections of 27 July 2006, para. 132 and Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v.
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, CSID Case No. ARB/02/13, Decision on Jurisdictionof 29 November 2004, para.

5.

13

29. The U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT was negotiated and concluded following the adoption of the
1991 U.K. Model BIT.” The said Model BIT set forth two approaches to Article 8. One
approach called the ‘preferred’ version of Article 8 contained a direct consent to ICSID
arbitration without the need of a prior agreement between the foreign investor and the
host state (“Each Contracting Party hereby consents to submit to the International Centre
for the Settlement of Investment Disputes...”). The other approach, named the
‘alternative’ version, required a subsequent agreement by the parties to submit their
dispute to ICSID. Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT embodies the ‘alternative’
version. If a different interpretation were adopted, this would obviously change the nature
of the intent of Turkmenistan and the U.K. It would also go against the ordinary meaning
of Article 8(2) as it appears from the text of the provision itself as well as the

circumstances of the conclusion of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT.

30. The circumstances of the adoption of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT confirm the intent of
the Parties and the ordinary meaning to be given to Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan
BIT in light of its context and object and purpose. Both U.K. and Turkmenistan have
made the choice to opt for the ‘alternative’ version and that choice has to be given full
effect by the Tribunal in the present case. Putting aside their choice (i.e., for the
‘alternative version’) would be tantamount to imposing on them an approach other than
the one they negotiated and agreed to be bound by. However, restrictions to the
sovereignty of states cannot be presumed — even through the application of an MFN
clause.*! When states consent to the jurisdiction of an international court or tribunal, such
as ICSID tribunals, they agree to restrict their sovereignty in a specific context. This is
one of the very raisons d’étre of international adjudication: the acceptance by states to

relinquish part of their sovereignty and submit to the judgment of third-party

* See Ex. R-7, 1991 U.K. Model BIT, International Investment Instruments: A Compendium, UNCTAD/DTCI/30
(Vol. IID).
3! See Daimler v. Argentina, Award of 22 August 2012, para. 168: “all international treaties — whether bilateral,
plurilateral or multilateral — are essentially expressions of the contracting states’ consent to be bound by particular
legal norms. They encapsulate voluntarily accepted restraints upon the universally recognized principle of state
sovereignty. Consent is therefore the cornerstone of all international treaty commitments, at least insofar as those
i exceed the mini of customary i ional law. The primacy of the principle of
consent runs through all types of treaty commitments entered into by states. There is no distinction between
substantive treatment provisions, MFN clauses, dispute resolution clauses, or otherwise. All are equally valid and
equally binding to the full extent of the contracting State parties’ consent” (emphasis added).

31.

32.

33.

adjudicators. Therefore, consent to ICSID arbitration in a case such as this cannot be
construed, when in reality a state has not consented to ICSID arbitration, but has instead
opted for the approach of the ‘alternative’ U.K. model of BITs which excludes ICSID

arbitration unless consented to by both parties.

The tribunal in Daimler v. Argentina has particularly insisted on the aforementioned

aspects and its cautious approach deserves to be quoted here:

[...] as international treaties, BITs constitute an exercise of sovereignty by
which States strike a delicate balance among their various internal policy
considerations. For this reason, the Tribunal must take care not to allow any
presuppositions concerning the types of international law mechanisms
(including dispute resolution clauses) that may best protect and promote
investment to carry it beyond the bounds of the framework agreed upon by
the contracting state parties. It is for States to decide how best to protect and
promote investment. The texts of the treaties they conclude are the definitive
guide as to how they have chosen to do so.”

Thus, the choice of the ‘alternative’ model should govern the understanding and

interpretation of the scope of application of Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT.

The U.K. would not have adopted two models of BITs if it had considered that the two
models would lead to the same result. Moreover, the U.K.’s BIT treaty practice is quite
varied with respect to its dispute settlement commitments. This stresses the importance of

the choices made by the negotiators in each specific case.

The disputes which have been brought in the context of BITs concluded by the U.K. with
other countries always followed the arbitration procedures as foreseen in the concerned
BITs. A most recent example is Oxus Gold v. Uzbekistan. The dispute arose out of the
U.K.-Uzbekistan BIT which also encompasses the ‘alternative’ version of the U.K.
Model BIT. The Claimant accordingly brought the dispute under the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, as there was no agreement between the two parties to bring the dispute

to another forum, such as ICSID.*

*» Daimler v. Argentina, Award of 22 August 2012, paras. 164 (emphasis added).

3 In the Matter of arbitration under the UNCITRAL between Oxus Gold PLC v. Republic of Uzbekistan, The State
Committee of Uzbekistan for geology & mineral resources, and Na voi Mining & Mettalurgical Kombinat, Notice of
Arbitration, Oral hearings, Claimant, p.154.

34.

Having thus clarified aspects of the interpretation of Article 8(2) of the U.K.-
Turkmenistan BIT under Articles 31 and 32 of the VCLT, the present opinion turns to

establishing the ordinary meaning of Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT.

Ill. The ordinary meaning of Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT in light of the
customary rules of treaty interpretation

35.

36.

37.

Article 3 of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT reads as follows:

Article 3

National Treatment and Most-favoured-nation Provisions
(1) Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject investments or
returns of nationals or companies of the other Contracting Party to treatment
less favourable than that which it accords to investments or returns of its own
nationals or companies or to investments or returns of nationals or companies
of any third State.
(2) Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject nationals or
companies of the other Contracting Party, as regards their management,
maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of their investments, to treatment
less favourable than that which it accords to its own nationals or companies
or to nationals or companies of any third State.
(3) For the avoidance of doubt it is confirmed that the treatment provided for
in paragraphs (1) and (2) above shall apply to the provisions of Articles 1 to
11 of this Agreement.

Article 3 encompasses the national treatment obligation and the most-favoured nation
(MEN) principle. As such, Article 3 reflects a common substantive standard that is found
in the vast majority of BITs. What differentiates Article 3 from many provisions of BITs
dealing with the national treatment obligation and the MEN principle is that it addresses
specifically and explicitly the scope of its application within the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT.
Indeed, Article 3(3) of the said BIT specifies:

For the avoidance of doubt it is confirmed that the treatment provided for in

paragraphs (1) and (2) above shall apply to the provisions of Articles 1 to 11

of this Agreement. (italics added)
During the last decade, much controversy has arisen with respect to MFN provisions
contained in BITs. One of the major aspects of this controversy before investment arbitral
tribunals is whether MEN provisions apply to dispute settlement provisions of BITs. The

U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT clearly prevents such a controversy from arising before an

16

38.

39.

arbitral tribunal that has jurisdiction to deal with disputes under the said BIT. Indeed, the
wording of Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT shows that the MEN principle
applies to dispute settlement provisions of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT, thus including

Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT.

It is not within the ambit of the present dissenting opinion to give a detailed analysis of
MEN provisions and their meaning under general international law. It is sufficient to
recall that the function of an MFN provision is to guarantee balanced and coherent treaty
relations between the members of the international community. More specifically, what
an MEN provision allows in the context of BITs is the following: to extend treatment of
foreign investors that is more favourable under a BIT to treatment of foreign investors
that is less favourable under other BITs. Therefore, because of the MFN provision
contained in Article 3 of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT and its application to dispute
settlement issues, a foreign investor of British nationality can invoke more favourable
dispute settlement provisions embodied in other BITs concluded by Turkmenistan. Since
Article 3(3) is part of a whole, i.e., the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT, it is necessary to read
and interpret its terms in light of the other provisions of the BIT (the context of the BIT)

and, especially, Article 8(2).

The issue in the present dispute is the relationship between Article 3(3) and Article 8(2)
of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT. As previously explained, the interpretation of the
ordinary meaning of Article 3(3) cannot be isolated from the mechanism set forth in
Article 8(2) (see paragraph 12 above). This approach was also adopted by the tribunal in
Austrian Airlines v. Slovakia. Indeed, when dealing with the MEN clause contained in
Article 3(1) of the Austria-Slovakia BIT, the tribunal found that it “must therefore look to
the context of Article 3(1) as well as to the other elements relevant for its interpretation.
Starting with the context, Article 3(1) must be viewed for present purposes in
combination with Article 3(2) as well as with the treaty provision that deal with dispute
settlement, i.e. Articles 8 and 4(4) and 4(5y.4 The tribunal even went further and

specified that “[w]hat the Tribunal must examine is whether the Treaty provides for

* Austrian Airlines v. Slovak Republic, UNCITRAL Case, Award of 9 October 2009, para. 127.

40.

Al.

42.

exceptions to the application of the MFN clause, and more specifically, whether the
provisions governing access to arbitration under the Treaty are to be regarded as a
limitation to the scope of the MFN clause”.*> In my view, there is, thus, no doubt that the
relationship between Article 3(3) and Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT is one

that should have been dealt with by the majority in the present instance.

Relationship between Article 3(3) and Article 8(2). To give effect to the MFN clause
contained in Article 3(3), the foreign investor must first be in a dispute settlement
relationship with the host state. A problem of treatment can only arise when the foreign
investor is treated in a certain way while entertaining a specific relationship with the host
state. If there is no relationship between the host state and the foreign investor, the
question of more or less favourable treatment is not at stake and thus, the MEN principle
does not apply. The so-called ‘choice’ that supposedly derives from an MEN provision
and which has been extensively used by the majority to justify its approach in casu, does
not come into play if a problem of treatment cannot be identified under the U.K.-

Turkmenistan BIT.

In other words, the so-called ‘right’ to a more favourable treatment under Article 3(3) of
the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT can only be exercised if the foreign investor and the host
state are subject to a dispute settlement relationship under one of the dispute settlement
options that are provided in Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT. In that sense, the
application of Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT is subordinated or conditioned

to the prior application of Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT.

As indicated above (see para. 23), Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT offers three
options to settle a dispute between a foreign investor and a state arising out of the said
BIT. The dispute can be settled under the ICSID Convention (option 1), or by the ICC
Court of Arbitration (option 2), or else under UNCITRAL arbitration (option 3). For the
Claimant to benefit from more favourable treatment under other BITs concluded by
Turkmenistan, one of these options of dispute settlement must first be deemed applicable.

For an option to be deemed applicable, prior and strict compliance with the conditions

* Austrian Airlines v. Slovakia, UNCITRAL Case, Award of 9 October 2009, para. 131.

prescribed by Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT is necessary.

43. Option 1 — ICSID arbitration — is only deemed applicable under Article 8(2) of the U.K.-
Turkmenistan BIT if the foreign investor has mutually agreed with the respondent state to
have recourse to ICSID arbitration. As long as such a mutual agreement is not
established, an issue of treatment — and even less of MFN — does not arise under Option 1
(ICSID arbitration). The MEN principle can, thus, only apply with respect to ICSID
arbitration if there is a mutual agreement between the foreign investor and the host state
to settle the investment dispute through ICSID arbitration. If such a mutual agreement is
established, then Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT applies and a claimant in a
dispute may be in a position to invoke more favourable ICSID arbitration provisions
contained in other BITs concluded by Turkmenistan. In the absence of a mutual
agreement to ICSID arbitration, a claimant will not be in a position to invoke more
favourable treatment under Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT with respect to

ICSID arbitration under other BITs concluded by Turkmenistan. *°

44, Here, there is simply no issue of treatment under ICSID arbitration that arises, since
ICSID arbitration is deemed inexistent in the absence of a mutual agreement. This is the
reasonable ordinary meaning that can be given to Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan
BIT under customary rules of treaty interpretation. This gives effet utile to the wording of
both Article 3(3) and Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT.”” In this context,
attention can be given to the approach of the Tza Yap Shum v. Peru tribunal, which went
in the direction of both conferring full effet utile to the wording of a dispute settlement

clause in a BIT and reading treaties as a whole (rather than as mere assemblage of

*° Tt might be argued, and indeed is argued by Claimant, that in the present case "treatment" is established at least at
the minimum level of the UNCITRAL rules without consent of Turkmenistan. On the basis of that "treatment",
Claimant could seek the ICSID level of treatment — assuming that, for the sake of argument, it is more favourable
than UNCITRAL treatment. As I have demonstrated above, this cannot be achieved within the framework of the
U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT, as it would circumvent the precondition of mutual consent for ICSID arbitration. As to the
argument that this could be based on another BIT in which Turkmenistan would have consented to ICSID arbitration
without the need for mutual agreement, this question is dealt with in detail in Chapter V below.

57 As explained by the International Court of Justice (ICJ): “The principle of interpretation expressed in the maxim:
Ut res magis valeat quam pereat, often referred to as the rule of effectiveness, cannot justify the Court in attributing
to the provisions for the settlement of disputes [...] a meaning which would be contrary to their letter and spirit”; see
Interpretation of Peace Treaties (second phase),

Advisory Opinion: LC. J. Reports 1950, p. 229.

 

separate provisions).**

45. Let us now turn to the formal requirement(s) that govern consent under Article 25(1) of

the ICSID Convention.

IV. The formal requirement(s) governing consent under Article 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention

46. Consent is a necessary prerequisite for ICSID arbitration.” It is the “cornerstone” of

ICSID jurisdiction. Without consent, no ICSID arbitration can take place.

47. Article 25 of the ICSID Convention requires that the parties to the dispute “consent in
writing” to submit that dispute to the Centre. Under Article 25, consent in writing is thus
necessary, but the text does not give any further indication about either the manner or
timing of such consent or the way in which it must be interpreted. There is no
requirement that such consent be contained in a single article of a treaty or in a single
treaty.“° Consent to ICSID arbitration can be identified in a treaty, in a national
investment law or in a contract. Nevertheless, an idea of implicit consent is not
admissible in the ICSID system. Whatever the instrument in which consent to ICSID

arbitration is embodied, consent must be given in writing.

48. The ICSID Convention is crystal-clear. Consent is a prerequisite and if it is not

established, no jurisdiction can be exercised by an ICSID tribunal. There is no need to

vl

embark on a discussion whether consent must be “clear and unambiguous,” or whether

dispute settlement provisions or so-called compromissory clauses must be interpreted in a

* Tza Yap Shum v. Republic of Peru, 1CSID Case No. ARB/O7/6, Decision on Jurisdictionof 19 June 2009, para.
216 (hereinafter “Tza Yap Shum v. Peru”).

* See preamble of the ICSID Convention: “Declaring that no Contracting State shall by the mere fact of its
ratification, acceptance or approval of this Convention and without its consent be deemed to be under any obligation
to submit any particular dispute to conciliation or arbitration [...]”.

*° Ceskoslovenska obchodni banka, a.s. v. Slovak Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4, Decision of the Tribunal on
Objections to Jurisdictionof 24 May 1999, para. 55 (hereinafter “C.S.O.B. v. Slovakia”). See also, Renta 4 v. Russia,
SCC Case No. Arbitration V (024/2007), Award on Preliminary Objections, 20 March 2009, para. 82.

+! Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction of 8
February 2005, para. 198 (hereinafter “Plama v. Bulgaria”). See, e.g. Telenor Mobile Communications A.S. v.
Republic of Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/15, Award of 13 September 2006, para. 90; Vladimir Berschader
and Moise Berschander v. Russian Federation, SCC Case No. 080/2004, Award of 21 August 2006, para.181;
Wintershall Aktiengesellschaft v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/04/14, Award of 8 December 2008,
para. 167 (hereinafter “Wintershall v. Argentina”).

20

restrictive or liberal manner.” Indeed, as stressed by Judge Rosalyn Higgins, “[i]t is clear
from the jurisprudence of the Permanent Court and of the International Court that there is
no rule that requires a restrictive interpretation of compromissory clauses,” and there is

no doubt that the ICJ “has no judicial policy of being either liberal or strict in deciding

the scope of compromissory clauses; they are judicial decisions like any other”.

49. Nevertheless — and I consider that this is what should have guided the majority in the
present dispute — the ICJ has been constant and strict in recalling that its jurisdiction “is
based on the consent of States under the conditions expressed [in the relevant treaties]”
(emphasis added).* The same rationale applies to the jurisdiction of ICSID tribunals
under the ICSID Convention. The ICJ has also been consistent in recalling that the
consent allowing for the Court to assume jurisdiction “must be certain”. The same
principle applies for consent to ICSID arbitration. Lastly, the ICJ has consistently
emphasized that “whatever the basis of consent, the attitude of the respondent State must
be capable of being regarded as ‘an unequivocal indication’ of the desire of that State to
accept the Court’s jurisdiction in a ‘voluntary and indisputable’ manner” (emphasis
added).“° Once again, the same rationale applies to consent to ICSID arbitration. These
are the parameters that the Tribunal in the present case should take into account. The

tribunal in National Grid v. Argentina did not go in a different direction when it stated

® Interagua v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction of 16 May 2006, para. 64. See also, Mondev International Ltd. v.
United States of America, 1CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2, Award of 11 October 2002, para. 43; Suez, Sociedad
General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/19, and AWG Group Ltd., UNCITRAL Case, Decision on Jurisdiction of 3 August 2006, para. 65; Austrian
Airlines v. Slovakia, UNCITRAL Case, Award of 9 October 2009, para. 20.

* Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States of America), Preliminary Objections, Judgment of 12
December 1996, Separate Opinion of Judge Higgins, I.C.J. Reports 1996, p. 857, para. 35.

* Case Concerning mutual assistance in criminal matters (Djibouti v. France), 1.C.J. Reports, 2008, p. 203, para.
60.

45 Td. at p. 204, para. 62.

* Case Concerning mutual assistance in criminal matters (Djibouti v. France), I.C.J. Reports, 2008, p. 203, para. 62
(emphasis added); Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo (New Application: 2002) (Democratic Republic of
the Congo v. Rwanda), Jurisdiction and Admissibility, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2006, p. 18; see also Corfu Channel
(United Kingdom v. Albania), Preliminary Objection, Judgment, 1948, I.C.J. Reports 1947-1948, p. 27; Application
of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and Herzegovina v.
Yugoslavia), Preliminary Objections, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1996 (II), pp. 620-621, para. 40; Rights of Minorities
in Upper Silesia (Minority Schools), Judgment No. 12, 1928, P-C.LJ., Series A, No. 15, p. 24; Anglo-Iranian Oil Co.
(United Kingdom v. Iran), Preliminary Objection, Judgment, 1.C.J. Reports 1952, pp. 113-114; Monetary Gold
Removed from Rome in 1943 (Italy v. France, United Kingdom and United States of America), Judgment, I.C.J.
Reports 1954, p. 30

21

50.

51.

52.

that “what matters is the intention of the parties as expressed in the text?”

No international court or tribunal, including ICSID tribunals, has challenged or contested
those fundamental characteristics of consent to jurisdiction. The RosInvest v. Russia
award — which remains a unique case with respect to the interpretation and application of
the MEN clause — did not go as far as saying that consent to arbitration under a specific
forum could be imported from one BIT to another BIT when consent to that specific

arbitration forum under the latter had not been established. “*

In casu, it is clear that no mutual agreement in writing was reached between Garanti
Koza and Turkmenistan to submit the dispute to ICSID arbitration. As explained above,
no consent to ICSID arbitration can be found under Article 8(2) of the U.K.-
Turkmenistan BIT. Since consent to ICSID arbitration cannot be identified, Article 3.3 on
MEN treatment is not applicable.” The fact that Article 8(1) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan
BIT refers to “international arbitration” cannot be invoked to circumvent Article 8(2). It
also cannot be invoked to deduce a so-called ‘choice’ of the foreign investor under
Article 3(3) to circumvent Article 8(2) and to decide which international arbitration

procedure would be more favourable.

However, and in light of the arguments presented by the Claimant (as accepted by the
majority), let us assume that the MFN clause contained in Article 3(3) of the U.K.-
Turkmenistan BIT is applicable. It remains to be determined whether consent to ICSID
arbitration could allegedly be established in the present case through the operation of the
MEN clause, despite the absence of consent under Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan
BIT. In other words, the issue is whether consent to ICSID arbitration can be established
from an MFN clause read together with an ICSID arbitration clause contained in another
treaty, that neither finds direct application in the present case nor has been precisely

identified by the Claimant in its request for arbitration.

47 National Grid P.1.C. v. Argentine Republic, UNCITRAL Case, Award of 3 November 2008, para. 80 (hereinafter
“National Grid v. Argentina”).

“8 RosInvestCo. U.K. v. Russia, Arbitration under Stockholm Chamber of Commerce, Award on Jurisdiction of
October 2007, paras. 128-130 (hereinafter “Ros Invest v. Russia”).

* FE. Orrego-Vicufia, “Reports of (Maffezini’s) demise have been greatly exaggerated”, Journal of International
Dispute Settlement, vol. 3, n° 2, 2012, p. 302.

22

V. Would the MFN clause of Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT permit the
Tribunal to find jurisdiction on the basis of another BIT regardless of the absence of
consent to ICSID arbitration under Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT?

53.

54.

55.

56.

Both the Respondent and the Claimant cited several authorities to support their arguments
against or in favour of finding consent to ICSID arbitration through the MFN clause

embodied in Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT.

Article 3(3), in its relevant part, reads as follows:

For the avoidance of doubt it is confirmed that the treatment provided for in

paragraphs (1) and (2) above shall apply to the provisions of Articles 1 to 11

of this Agreement.
Article 8 of the BIT is the investor-state dispute resolution provision. As it falls within
Articles 1 to 11 of the BIT, it is thus covered by the MEN clause of Article 3. However,
does it provide a foreign investor with a right to ‘import’ from other Turkmenistan
investment treaties a “more favourable treatment” with respect to dispute resolution,

including the arbitration forum?

From the Claimant’s standpoint, consent to ICSID arbitration can be provided by an
MEN clause read together with the dispute resolution clause of another investment treaty
concluded by the host state. This is a novel approach. Indeed, the Claimant is not
suggesting that the MEN clause contained in Article 3(3) of the U.K Turkmenistan BIT
would allow for less stringent conditions for recourse to international arbitration in a
specific forum. What the Claimant is suggesting is that the said MFN clause authorizes a
foreign investor to import consent to ICSID arbitration from any other treaty to which
Turkmenistan has consented to ICSID arbitration. More than raising issues of
interpretation, this argument relates to the very foundations of the system of ICSID
arbitration. In other words, can an MEN clause serve as a basis to establish consent to
ICSID arbitration when such consent was not given in the treaty embodying the said

MEN clause?

At the outset, one could question the admissibility per se of the claim. The Claimant has

23

57.

58.

59.

made no real ‘offer to arbitrate’ under ICSID™ and, thus, no ‘meeting of the minds’ about
arbitration under ICSID between the foreign investor and the host state under ICSID was

even possible.

Neither the interpretation of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT nor investment law practice can
lead one to think that the MEN clause contained in Article 3(3) of the U.K-Turkmenistan
BIT allows the Tribunal to endorse a reasoning according to which it is possible for an
MEN clause to incorporate by reference an agreement to arbitrate from another treaty if it

was not prima facie the intention of the Parties to the BIT.

The Claimant refers, inter alia, to the dissenting opinion of Brigitte Stern in Impregilo v.
Argentina in support of its argument. If this opinion is examined in its entirety, it will
show that the dissenting opinion does not state what the Claimant believes it states. The
Claimant makes reference to the following passages of the dissenting opinion:

Naturally, an important caveat has to be presented here. The interpretation of
the MPN clause is only necessary when the intention of the parties
concerning its applicability or inapplicability to the dispute settlement
mechanism is not expressly stated or clearly ascertained. It is quite evident
that if there is an MFN clause expressly including the dispute settlement
procedures or expressly excluding them, there is no need for an
interpretation.

There are indeed cases where the parties expressly state that the MFN clause
applies to the dispute settlement mechanism. This has been done, for
example, by the drafters of the U.K. Model BIT, who have provided in
Article 3(3) that “for avoidance of doubt MFN treatment shall apply to
certain specified provisions of the BIT including the dispute settlement
provision”.*!

However, in Brigitte Stern’s dissenting opinion, the main contention was that the MFN
could not apply to the conditions of access to dispute settlement (as the condition ratione

voluntatis could not be modified). The question of the extension of the scope of a right

was not discussed. Brigitte Stern emphasized that if the conditions surrounding the

*° Tt is important to stress that the Claimant asked the Tribunal to apply more favourable dispute resolution clauses
of Turkmenistan’s BITs with Switzerland, France, Turkey, and India, and the ECT. However, the Claimant did not
specify which BIT had to be applied in the present instance and, most of all, did not even mention those BITs in its
request of arbitration.

5! Impregilo S.p.A. v. Argentina Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/17, Concurring and Dissenting Opinion of
Professor Brigitte Stern of 21 June 2011, paras. 17-18 (hereinafter “Impregilo v. Argentina”).

24

60.

consent as required in the basic treaty were not met, no right to arbitration exists and
therefore no right can be modified by the MEN clause, and in particular the scope of the
right to arbitrate. On the question of whether or not the MEN clause applies to dispute
settlement provisions in a BIT, Brigitte Stern stated clearly:

[It] cannot change the conditions ratione personae, ratione materiae, and
ratione temporis [...] it must be equally true that an MFN clause cannot
change the condition ratione voluntatis, which is a qualifying condition for
the enjoyment of the jurisdictional rights open for the protection of
substantial rights.

L.]

In other words, before a provision relating to the dispute settlement
mechanism can be imported into the basic treaty, the right to international
arbitration — here ICSID arbitration — has to be capable of coming into
existence for the foreign investor under the basic treaty, in other words the
existence of this right is conditioned on the fulfillment of all the necessary
conditions for such jurisdiction, the conditions ratione personae, ratione
materiae, and ratione temporis as well as a supplementary condition relating
to the scope of the State’s consent to such jurisdiction, the condition ratione
voluntatis.

L.]

As long as the qualifying conditions expressed by the State in order to give
its consent are not fulfilled, there is no consent, in other words no access of
the foreign investor to the jurisdictional treatment granted by ICSID
arbitration. An MEN clause cannot enlarge the scope of the basic treaty’s
right to international arbitration, it cannot be used to grant access to
international arbitration when this is not possible under the conditions
provided for in the basic treaty.

The same concerns were already addressed by the Maffezini v. Spain tribunal. The
reasoning of the Mafezzini v. Spain tribunal is worth noting as the tribunal acted in
assuming that the MFN provision should find application with respect to dispute
settlement, i.e., as if the concerned treaty contained a provision similar to Article 3(3) of
the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT. The tribunal stressed that “there are some important limits

that ought to be kept in mind”?

when dealing with an MEN clause. As stated by the same
tribunal, one of those limits is that an MFN clause cannot provide for a particular
arbitration forum (e.g., ICSID), if this option was not foreseen, or not initially permitted

without the prior fulfillment of conditions in the treaty incorporating the said MFN

* Td. at paras. 78-80.
* Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Decision of the Tribunal on
Objections to Jurisdictionof 25 January 2000, para. 62 (hereinafter “Maffezini v. Spain”).

25

61.

62.

clause.™ In other words, the Maffezini v. Spain tribunal concluded that one system of
arbitration cannot be replaced by another. Noting the potential disruption of the
international arbitral system, the Maffezini v. Spain tribunal held:

[Third,] if the agreement provides for a particular arbitration forum, such as

ICSID, for example, this option cannot be changed by invoking the clause, in

order to refer the dispute to a different system of arbitration.”
In paraphrasing the Maffezini v. Spain decision, it could be said that if the agreement
provides for a particular arbitration forum, such as UNCITRAL, this option cannot be
changed by invoking the clause in order to refer the dispute to a different system of

arbitration, such as ICSID.

In line with what the Maffezini v. Spain tribunal held, no investment award or decision
has since then decided that an MEN provision would allow the import of consent to
ICSID arbitration from another treaty. This possibility cannot even be deduced from the
RosInvest v. Russia award. The role of the MFN clause is not to substitute for a lack of
consent, but to ensure that the consent given is implemented in the most favourable
manner to the individual investor entitled to protection, as compared to the treatment
given to other such individuals in treaties with third countries.°° The National Grid v.
Argentina tribunal correctly noted that an MFN clause is not a basis for creating consent

to ICSID arbitration when none exists.””

In conclusion, the MFN clause embodied in Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT
cannot bypass the requirement of consent to ICSID arbitration. This is undeniable. If the
requirement of consent to ICSID arbitration, as stipulated in Article 8 of the U.K.-
Turkmenistan BIT, as well as in the ICSID Convention itself, could easily be put aside
because of the interplay of MFN clauses, there would be a threat to the entire system of
investor-state arbitration. BITs providing for ICSID jurisdiction should abide by the

ICSID Convention. Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT stresses this point when it

™ Td. at paras. 62-63.

° Td. at para. 63.

°° F. Orrego-Vicufia, “Reports of (Maffezini’s) demise have been greatly exaggerated”, Journal of International
Dispute Settlement, vol. 3, n° 2, 2012, p. 303.

*7 National Grid v. Argentina, UNCITRAL Case, Decision on Jurisdictionof 20 June 2006, para. 92.

26

63.

64.

65.

provides for the need to “having regard to the provisions, where applicable of the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of

other States [...]”.

Granting Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT such extensive effect as to allow for
consent to ICSID through incorporation by reference in the frame of a treaty that does not
allow this, would have the effect of “replac[ing] a procedure specifically negotiated by

758 or “system of arbitration”.©° It would

parties with an entirely different mechanism’
involve a forum-shopping attitude that bypasses the consent requirement of the
Respondent while running against the fundamental principles of international

adjudication.

The literal and ordinary meaning of Article 8(2) has to be given full effect to determine
whether or not consent to ICSID arbitration exists. Any other interpretation would lead to
an artificial construction. Under Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT, consent to
ICSID arbitration can only derive from a mutual agreement between the foreign investor
and the host state. If there is no such mutual agreement, then there is no consent to ICSID
arbitration. No attempt to establish consent to ICSID arbitration under an MEN clause is
possible, since it will have the perverse effect of replacing actual non-consent by virtual
consent. That would go against the fundamental pillars of the law of treaties (principle of

consent, pacta sunt servanda, etc.) as well as against the pillars of the ICSID system.

The Claimant contends that “there is no obstacle of ‘form’ preventing a tribunal from
finding that Turkmenistan has consented to arbitration through an MEN clause, provided
the text of the clause allows for the incorporation by reference of an arbitration
agreement”. Rather than mere obstacle(s) of form, there are ‘procedural’ and
‘substantive’ impediments that would definitely preclude the Tribunal from granting to
Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT an effect that it does not and was never

supposed to produce in the context of the said BIT. The ejusdem generis rule — which is

°8 Plama v. Bulgaria, Decision on Jurisdiction of 8 February 2005, para. 209.
°° Wintershall v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/14, Award of 8 December 2008, para. 176.
© Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 39.

27

considered a general principle of international law®! — dictates such a cautious attitude.

66. As explained by the International Law Commission (ILC) in its Commentary on the Draft
Articles on MFN Clauses:

No writer would deny the validity of the ejusdem generis rule which, for the
purposes of the most-favoured-nation clause, derives from its very nature. It
is generally admitted that a clause conferring most-favoured-nation rights in
respect of a certain matter, or class of matter, can attract the rights conferred
by other treaties (or unilateral acts) only in regard to the same matter or class
of matter. The effect of the most-favoured-nation process is, by means of the
provisions of one treaty, to attract those of another. Unless this process is
strictly confined to cases where there is a substantial identity between the
subject-matter of the two sets of clauses concerned, the result in a number of
cases may be to impose upon the granting State obligations it never
contemplated. Thus the rule follows clearly from the general principles of
treaty interpretation. States cannot be regarded as being bound beyond the
obligations they have undertaken.”

67. The subject-matter of Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT sets forth non-consent
to ICSID arbitration if there is no specific agreement between the parties. The subject-
matter of the dispute settlement clauses embodied in other BITs concluded by
Turkmenistan and allegedly — albeit without relying specifically on one of them —
invoked by the Claimant provides for consent to ICSID arbitration. In accordance with
the ejusdem generis rule, the MFN clause under Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan
BIT cannot be interpreted as allowing to “attract rights [to ICSID arbitration] conferred
by other treaties” (i.e., the automatic right to resort to ICSID arbitration) when the

subject-matter — not to say the very object and purpose — of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT

°' Draft Articles on Most-Favoured-Nation Clauses, with Commentaries, text adopted by the International Law
Commission at its thirtieth session, Yearbook of the International Law Commission, 1978, vol. Il, Part Two, p. 27.
See also Report of the International Law Commission Study Group on MEN: “The Study Group affirmed the
general understanding that the source of the right to MFN treatment was the basic treaty and not the third-party
treaty; MEN clauses were not an exception to the privity rule in treaty interpretation. It also recognized that the key
question in the investment decisions concerning MFN seemed to be how the scope of the right to MFN treatment
was to be determined, that is to say what expressly or impliedly fell “within the limits of the subject-matter of the
clause”” (italics added). See The Most-Favoured-Nation-Clause, Report of the International Law Com: ion (26
April-3 June and 4 July-12 August 2011), General Assembly Official Records, Sixty-third session, A/66/10, p. 287,
para. 355, available at: http://untreaty.un.org/ilc/reports/201 1/201 1report.htm.

© Draft Articles on Most-Favoured-Nation Clauses, with Commentaries, text adopted by the International Law
Commission at its thirtieth session, Yearbook of the International Law Commission, 1978, vol. II, Part Two, p. 30,
paras. 10-11 (emphasis added).

® Daimler v. Argentina, Award of 22 August 2012, para. 175. The tribunal considers that non-consent to ICSID
arbitration is the default rule and that consent to ICSID arbitration is the exception.

 

 

28

is exactly to deny such rights to ICSID arbitration in the absence of mutual agreement.

68. The absence of a mutual agreement to ICSID arbitration is the main impediment for this
Tribunal to exercise its jurisdiction. It is this absence of a mutual agreement that prevents
the ‘import’ of ICSID arbitration into a treaty that does not provide for ICSID arbitration.
In this context, there is a need to address the misleading parallel that the Claimant —
followed in this regard by the majority in the present instance — has attempted to draw
between this dispute and C.S.0.B. v. Slovakia. According to the Claimant, incorporation
by reference of an ICSID arbitration provision from one treaty to another by operation of
an MEN clause is similar to incorporation into a contract by reference to an ICSID

arbitration provision contained in a treaty that has not entered into force.

69. In contrast to what the majority claims, C.S.0.B. v. Slovakia is neither about the
applicability of an MEN provision to the dispute settlement provisions of a BIT nor about
the possibility to ‘import’ consent to ICSID arbitration or to ‘create’ consent to ICSID
arbitration when such consent is not established. The C.S.0.B. v. Slovakia decision
confirms that, without consent to ICSID arbitration, no jurisdiction can be exercised by
an ICSID tribunal. In C.S.0.B. v. Slovakia, the tribunal found that there was consent to
ICSID arbitration,” because the so-called ‘Consolidation Agreement” concluded
between the Claimant and the Slovak Republic made explicit reference to the BIT
concluded between the Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic, which in turn embodied
consent to ICSID arbitration. Thus, both the foreign investor and the host state agreed (by

virtue of the ‘Consolidation Agreement’) that disputes would be submitted to ICSID

See also a similar point of view in the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company case, where the Court, dealing with an issue of
MEN, stated: “In order that the United Kingdom may enjoy the benefit of any treaty concluded by Iran with a third
party by virtue of a most-favoured-nation clause contained in a treaty concluded by the United Kingdom with Iran,
the United Kingdom must be in a position to invoke the latter treaty. The treaty containing the most favoured-nation
clause is the basic treaty upon which the U.K. must rely. It is this treaty which establishes the juridical link between
the United Kingdom and a third-party treaty and confers upon that State the rights enjoyed by the third party. A third
party treaty, independent of and isolated from the basic treaty, cannot produce any legal effect as between the United
Kingdom and Iran: it is res inter alios acta”, Anglo-Iranian Oil Co. case (jurisdiction), Judgment of July 22nd,
1952: L.C.J. Reports 1952, p. 109.

5 Claimant’s Counter-Memorial, paras. 31-32.

°° C.S.0.B. v. Slovakia, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction of 24
May 1999, para. 59.

29

70.

regardless of the ratification or entry into force of the BIT.” To put it simply, there was a
mutual agreement between the foreign investor and the host state to have recourse to
ICSID arbitration. Such mutual agreement is exactly what is lacking in the present case.
There is no mutual agreement between the Claimant and Turkmenistan to have recourse

to ICSID arbitration as required by Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT.

The C.S.O.B. v. Slovakia decision cannot be used to justify the ‘importation’ of consent
to ICSID arbitration in a BIT that only provides for such consent under very specific
conditions. Had there not been a mutual agreement to have recourse to ICSID arbitration
(i.e., the absence of an investment contract explicitly incorporating the BIT between the
Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic), the C.S.O.B. v. Slovakia tribunal would have
found that it had no jurisdiction.* This is the approach that should have been retained by
the majority in the present case. An MFN clause in a BIT — even written in the same
terms as Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT — does not constitute consent to
ICSID arbitration and does not imply incorporation of consent to ICSID arbitration by
reference. An investment agreement or contract such as the ‘Consolidation Agreement’ in
C.S.0.B. v. Slovakia is a proper means of establishing consent to ICSID arbitration. An
MEN clause is not; it has neither the object and purpose nor the function of establishing
jurisdiction. To use by analogy the language of the C.S.O.B. v. Slovakia tribunal, an MFN

169

clause is not a “form of acceptance through which “ICSID jurisdiction can be

satisfied”.”°

© Td. at paras. 52-54.
°8 Td. at para. 55.

oT

10 1.

id. at para. 44.

30

Conclusions

71. In light of the aforementioned points, I conclude as follows:

i) Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT does not provide for ICSID arbitration
in the absence of a mutual agreement between the foreign investor and the host

state;

ii) There is no mutual agreement in writing between this Claimant and Turkmenistan
to resort to ICSID arbitration. As such, the requirement of consent in writing

under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention is not met;

iii) The MEN clause under Article 3(3) does not apply with respect to ICSID
arbitration when the conditions to have recourse to ICSID arbitration under
Article 8(2) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT are not fulfilled. As a matter of fact,
Article 8(2) explicitly states that the requirements of the ICSID Convention have
to be fulfilled;

iv) Without mutual agreement between the Claimant and the Respondent, only
UNCITRAL ad hoc arbitration is available to the Claimant under Article 8(2) of
the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT, and not ICSID arbitration;

v) The MEN clause contained in Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT cannot
be interpreted as allowing the ‘import’ of consent to ICSID arbitration to a treaty

regime that does not contain such consent;

vi) No tribunal has concluded that an MEN clause could be used to ‘import’ consent

to ICSID arbitration or to international arbitration;71

7 Not even the RosInvest v. Russia tribunal. See, Rosinvest v. Russia, Arbitration under Stockholm Chamber of
Commerce, Award on Jurisdiction of October 2007.

31

vii)  Arbitral tribunals have exercised great caution when alluding to the possibility of
importing consent through an MFN clause.?2 The commentaries dealing with

U.K. Model BITs has never envisaged the plausibility of this scenario.73

In the light of the above, I do not reach the question of how the MFN clause should be

applied because in my view, it is not even applicable in the present case.

[signed]

Laurence Boisson de Chazournes

® See Maffezini v. Spain, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction of 25 January 2000, paras. 62-63;
Plama v. Bulgaria, Decision on Jurisdiction of 8 February 2005, para. 207; RosInvest. v. Russia, Arbitration under
Stockholm Chamber of Commerce, Award on Jurisdiction of October 2007, paras. 129-130. See also, with more
general terms, National Grid v. Argentina, UNCITRAL Case, Decision on Jurisdiction of 20 June 2006, para. 92.

™ See Ch. Brown, and A. Sheppard, in Ch. Brown (ed.), Commentaries on Selected Model Investment Treaties,
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2013, pp. 727-730; see also, J. Harrison, “The Protection of Foreign Investment”
(United Kingdom National Report), XVIII International Congress of Comparative Law Washington, 2010, Section
IV. A, p. 8.

32

