ICSID CASE NO. ARB/08/16

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

GEA Group AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT
Claimant

and

UKRAINE

Respondent

AWARD

ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL
Professor Albert Jan van den Berg, President
Mr Toby Landau QC, Arbitrator
Professor Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms Aissatou Diop

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 31 March 2011

Representing GEA Group
Aktiengesellschaft:

Mr Barton Legum

Ms Brenda Horrigan

Ms Anne-Sophie Dufétre

Mr Gauthier Vannieuwenhuyse
SCP SALANS & ASSOCIES

5, boulevard Malesherbes
75008 Paris

France

and

Mr George Burn

SALANS LLP

Millennium Bridge House
2 Lambeth Hill

London EC4V 4AJ
United Kingdom

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/08/16

Representing Ukraine:

Mr Sebastian Seelmann-Eggebert
Mr Jan Erik Spangenberg
LATHAM & WATKINS LLP
Warburgstrasse 50

20354 Hamburg

Germany

and

Mr Robert Volterra (until 28 February 2011)
Mr Charles Claypoole

Mr Hussein Haeri

Ms Michelle Bradfield

LATHAM & WATKINS LLP

99 Bishopsgate

London EC2M 3XF

United Kingdom

and

Mr Serhii Sviriba

Mr Dmytro Marchukov
MAGISTERS

38 Volodynyrska
Kyiv, 01034

Ukraine

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

 

 

Table of Contents
L THE PARTIE: 4
Il. PROCEDURE 5
Ill. | FACTUAL BACKGROUND. 9

 

IV. SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS AND RELIEF SOUGHT...
A. GEA’s Position
B. Ukraine’s Position 23
V. _ INTRODUCTION TO THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS
VI. JURISDICTION.
A. The Parties’ Positions
B. The Tribunal’s Analysis
(1) Does GEA Have Standing?..
(2) Did GEA Make an Investment? .
(3) Did the Alleged Violations Occur Before the Alleged Investment.
VII. LIABILITY

 

 

 

 

 

 

A. Expropriation
(1) _ The Parties’ Position:
(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis
B. Full Protection and Securit
(1) _ The Parties’ Position:
(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis...
Cc. Fair and Equitable Treatment
(1) _ The Parties’ Position:
(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis
D. Arbitrary and Discriminatory Measures
(1) _ The Parties’ Position:
(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis...
E. National Treatment and Most-Favoured Nation Treatment ..
(1) _ The Parties’ Position:
(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis...
F. dh to Obli
(1) _ The Parties’ Position:
(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis...
VIII. DAMAGES
IX. Costs
x. DECISIONS 100

 

 
   
  

 

 

 

 

 

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

THE PARTIES
Claimant:

GEA Group Aktiengesellschaft
Dorstener Strasse 484

44809 Bochum

Germany

hereinafter referred to as “GEA” or the “Claimant.”

GEA is a company incorporated under the laws of Germany, and is represented in this
arbitration by Mr Barton Legum, Ms Brenda Horrigan, Ms Anne-Sophie Dufétre, Mr

Gauthier Vannieuwenhuyse, and Mr George Burn, of the law firm Salans.

Respondent:

Ukraine

c/o Ministry of Justice of Ukraine
13, Horodetskogo Street

Kyiv 01001

Ukraine

hereinafter referred to as “Ukraine” or the “Respondent.”

Ukraine is represented in this arbitration by Mr Sebastian Seelmann-Eggebert, Mr
Charles Claypoole, Mr Jan Erik Spangenberg, Mr Robert Volterra (until 28 February
2011), Mr Hussein Haeri and Ms Michelle Bradfield, of the law firm Latham &
Watkins; and Mr Serhii Sviriba and Mr Dmytro Marchukov of the law firm

Magisters.

The Claimant and the Respondent are hereinafter collectively referred to as the

“Parties.”

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

PROCEDURE

On 24 October 2008, GEA filed a Request for Arbitration (the “Request” or “RfA”)
against Ukraine with the Acting Secretary-General of the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”). The Request was
filed pursuant to Article 13(2) of the Agreement between the Federal Republic of
Germany and Ukraine on the Promotion and Mutual Protection of Investments, dated
15 February 1993 (the “BIT’) and pursuant to the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States, dated 14 October

1966 (the “ICSID Convention”).

According to the Request, the dispute arose from the Claimant’s alleged investment
in Ukraine in the form of capital loans to a former state-owned entity, or kombinat,
known as OJSC Oriana (“Oriana”). The Claimant alleges that Ukraine violated its

rights under the BIT in connection with that investment.

On 21 November 2008, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID registered the
Request.

By letter of 11 December 2008, the Claimant invoked Article 11(2) of the BIT. That
Article provides that the appointment mechanism for members of arbitral tribunals
applicable in State-to-State disputes, set forth in Article 10(3) —10(5) of the BIT, shall
be applied by analogy to investor-State disputes. Article 10(3) provides that each
Party “shall appoint one member [of the tribunal] and these two members shall agree
on a national of a third state to serve as the tribunal’s chairman, who shall then be

appointed [by the Parties].”

By letter of 5 January 2009, the Claimant informed the Centre that it was appointing

Mr Toby Landau, QC, a national of the United Kingdom, as arbitrator in this case.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

On 21 January 2009, the Centre sought Mr Landau’s acceptance of his appointment
after clarifying its understanding of the Parties’ agreement on the method of
constituting the Tribunal. On 17 February 2009, the Respondent advised ICSID that
it was appointing Professor Brigitte Stern, a national of France, as arbitrator. On 19
March 2009, the Parties notified ICSID that they had agreed to appoint Professor

Albert Jan van den Berg, a national of The Netherlands, as President of the Tribunal.

On 20 March 2009, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID notified the Parties that
the Tribunal was deemed to have been constituted, and the proceedings to have
commenced, on that day. Further, the Tribunal and the Parties were informed that Ms

Aissatou Diop would serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

On 12 May 2009, the Tribunal held its first session at the World Bank’s offices in
Paris. A procedural calendar was established for the conduct of the remainder of the
proceedings. The Parties were unable to agree whether, in the event of the
Respondent’s raising preliminary objections, the proceedings should be bifurcated.
The Respondent sought bifurcation in those circumstances. The Tribunal set two
timetables, one to apply in the event that preliminary objections were raised, and the
other to apply in the event that no such objections were raised. In the case of the
former timetable, the Tribunal indicated that it would make the decision whether to

bifurcate when such preliminary objections were received.

On 1 July 2009, the Claimant filed its Memorial, along with exhibits, legal authorities
and the witness statements of Dr Manfred Déss, Dr Detlef B. Kriiger, Dr Harald

Rieger and Dr Klaus-Peter Kissler.

On 12 October 2009, the Respondent informed the Tribunal that the Parties had
reached an agreement on the timetable to be followed in the remainder of the
proceedings, and that the Parties had agreed that if the Respondent were to raise

preliminary objections, such objections would be joined to the merits of the case.

20.

21.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

The content of the letter was confirmed on the same date by the Claimant.

On 15 October 2009, the Secretary of the Tribunal informed the Parties that the

Tribunal accepted the Parties’ revised timetable.

On 11 January 2010, the Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial, along with exhibits

and legal authorities.

Thereafter, the Parties made their respective requests for production of documents,
and filed objections and replies thereto. On 19 February 2010, the Tribunal issued
Procedural Order No. | containing its rulings on each Party’s document production

requests.

On 22 February 2010, the Respondent sent to the ICSID Secretariat copies of
supplementary materials relating to certain of the exhibits to the Respondent’s

Counter-Memorial.

On 23 February 2010, the Claimant sought from the Tribunal clarification of
Procedural Order No. 1. The Claimant queried the Tribunal’s ruling on certain of the
Respondent’s document requests. In its objections to those requests, the Claimant
had stated that it would produce the requested documents if the Respondent produced
corresponding documents. The Claimant asked whether the Tribunal’s granting of
the Respondent’s requests should be read as requiring the Respondent to produce the

corresponding documents referred to by the Claimant.

On 24 February 2010, the Respondent wrote to the Tribunal stating its understanding
that Procedural Order No. 1 was not ambiguous, and that the Tribunal’s granting of
certain of the Respondent’s requests did not require production of “corresponding

documents” referred to by the Claimant.

Also on 24 February 2010, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2, confirming

that in granting certain of the Respondent’s document requests, the Tribunal did not

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

intend to grant the Claimant’s requests for “corresponding documents.”

The same day, the Claimant sent to the ICSID Secretariat supplementary materials

relating to certain of the exhibits to the Claimant’s Memorial.
On 15 April 2010, the Claimant filed its Reply, along with exhibits.

On 15 June 2010, the Respondent filed its Rejoinder, along with legal authorities and

exhibits, as well as the witness statement of Mr Oleksiy Golubov.

On 22 June 2010, the Parties provided notification of the witnesses to be examined at

the hearing.

Also on 22 June 2010, a pre-hearing telephone conference was held to discuss certain

final procedural and logistical issues in advance of the hearing.
The hearing was held from 5 to 9 July 2010 at the World Bank’s offices in Paris.
On 29 October 2010, the Parties exchanged their respective Submissions on Costs.

On 15 November 2010, the Respondent provided its Comments on the Claimant’s

Submission on Costs.

On 25 November 2010, the Claimant provided its response to the Respondent’s

Comments on the Claimant’s Submission on Costs.

References. In this Award, the Tribunal adopts the following method of citation:

. “Request” or “RfA” refer to GEA’s 24 October 2008 Request for Arbitration;

. “Memorial” refers to GEA’s 1 July 2009 Memorial;

. “Counter-Memorial” refers to Ukraine’s 11 January 2010 Counter-Memorial;

Ill.

32.

33.

34.

35.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

. “Reply” refers to GEA’s 15 April 2010 Reply;
. “Rejoinder” refers to Ukraine’s 15 June 2010 Rejoinder;

. “Tr.” refers to the Transcript made of the 5 — 9 July 2010 hearing (e.g.: “Tr.
1/p. 1” means Day | at page 1);

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

The factual background to this dispute is divided into five parts, which the Tribunal
will set out in the following order: (i) the companies involved; (ii) the initial business
with Oriana; (iii) the later agreements made with Oriana; (iv) the ICC arbitration

against Oriana; and (v) the attempts to collect on the ICC award against Oriana.

(i) The Companies Involved. GEA was founded in 1881 as Metallgesellschaft AG
(“Metallgesellschaft”). In 2000, it changed its name to “MG Technologies AG”!
and in 2005 it adopted its present name, GEA Group Aktiengesellschaft (“GEA”).

On 2 November 1995, Kléckner & Co Aktiengesellschaft (“Old Kléckner’) spun off
its chemical business to Kléckner Chemiehandel GmbH (“KCH”).3

On 17 November 1995, a company called Kléckner & Co Handel — another member
of the Kléckner Group — was transformed from a GmbH to an Aktiengesellschaft, or

AG.

' The Tribunal notes that the name of “MG Technologies AG” is officially all in lower case
letters. However, for ease of reading, the Tribunal has decided to capitalise this name in this Award,
as well as all other companies whose names are officially expressed in lower case letters.

2 C-0036.

5 C-0038; C-0155; R-0003; R-0004.

‘ C-0152.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

On 24 November 1995, Old Klockner was merged into another company and thereby
ceased to exist as a separate entity.> Old Kléckner was deleted from the commercial

register in Germany as of that date.°

On 6 December 1995, Kléckner & Co Handel Aktiengesellschaft changed its name to
Kléckner & Co Aktiengesellschaft (“New Kléckner’).”

By agreement dated 5 December 1997, GEA’s wholly-owned subsidiary, “MG Trade
Services,” acquired all the shares of KCH from SF Beteiligungs-GmbH. SF

Beteiligungs-GmbH was, in turn, a wholly-owned subsidiary of New Kléckner.®

On 15 August 2000, “MG Trade Services AG” changed its name to “Solvadis AG.”
KCH, in turn, was renamed “Solvadis International GmbH” (‘Solvadis
International”) on 27 October 2000.'° On 22 October 2003, Solvadis International
merged into “Solvadis Chemag AG” and thereby ceased to exist as a separate legal

entity. "

By agreement dated 28 June 2004, Solvadis Chemag AG (formerly KCH) assigned
all of its rights deriving from its business with Oriana (more on Oriana below) as well
as all rights in the underlying transactions to MG Technologies AG which, as

mentioned in {| 33 above, became GEA in 2005. 1

R-0003.
° R-0003.
C-0152.
s C-0152; C-0153.
R-0002.
" C-0038; R-0004.
4 ©-0035 R-0004.
> ©0002.

Al.

42.

43.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

At around the same time, the merged entity, Solvadis Chemag AG, was sold to

Chemdis Limited.’

By way of summary, for the period 1995 — 1997, the corporate structures described

above were as follows:

Metallgesellschafi, later known as MG
New Kliickner Technologies AG, later known as GEA

MG Trade Services

         

KCH shares
1997

Old Klickner

‘Chemical business
1995

For the period 2000 — 2004, this diagram evolved as follows:

AS q
Metallgesellschaft, later known as MG Staiehte
Technologies AG, later known as GEA ens

LN June 2004

 
   
   

Sale
June 2004

     
 

later known as
International Chemag AG

 

KCH merges
2003

8 €-0042; R-0025.

44.

4S.

46.

47.

48.

49.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

(ii) The Initial Business with Oriana. On 13 December 1995, New Klockner and the
Ukrainian kombinat Oriana entered into an agreement under which New Kléckner
would provide Oriana each year with 200,000 tons of naphtha fuel for conversion (the

“Conversion Contract”).'*

Over the course of 1996 — 1998, Oriana and KCH, as a subsidiary of New Klockner,

entered into 147 (out of a total of 154) amendments to the Conversion Contract. !°

In December 1997, an individual responsible for periodically inspecting work at the

Oriana plant, Dr Vsevolod Chperoun, was shot in the kneecap. 6

According to the Claimant, in the months following the shooting, discrepancies were
discovered between the quantity of raw materials shipped to Oriana and the quantity
of finished products. An audit report in July 1998 identified that more than 125,000

metric tons of finished products were missing (the “Products”). 0

In the meantime, Oriana contracted with a German company, Linde AG, to build a
polyethylene plant for approximately DM 250,000,000. The purchase price was
largely financed by Bayerische Vereinsbank AG (“BV”), a German bank.

During July and August 1998, correspondence was exchanged, and discussions took
place, between representatives of KCH/Kléckner, Oriana and the Ukrainian and
German Governments concerning, among other things, the alleged

: ue a8
misappropriation.

4 €-0006.
8 C0156.
te Memorial, {{ 49; Rejoinder, 53.
R041.

8 See, e.g., C-0011; C-0012; C-0013; C-0065; C-0078.

50.

51.

52.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

At around the same time, bankruptcy proceedings were initiated against Oriana by a
Canadian-owned company, Shelton.'? From October 1998 to July 1999, Shelton

assumed management of Oriana.”

(iii) The Later Agreements with Oriana. Ultimately, on 7 August 1998, Oriana and
KCH signed a settlement agreement, pursuant to which Oriana acknowledged, among
other things, that it was indebted to KCH for the difference in value between the
products that should have been delivered under the Conversion Contract, and the
products actually delivered, or currently available to be delivered (the “Settlement
Agreement”). The Settlement Agreement provided that KCH and Oriana would
agree the value of the shortfall and that any disputes arising out of the Settlement

Agreement would be referred to arbitration under the ICC Rules in Vienna, Austria.”!

On 29 September 1998, Oriana and KCH negotiated and signed an agreement
pursuant to which Oriana agreed to pay “at least USD 27.6 million” to KCH (the
“Repayment Agreement”).”” The Repayment Agreement provided that the final
amount to be paid by Oriana to KCH would be assessed by 30 September 1998. Of
the approximately USD 27.6 million referred to as the minimum amount to be paid,
USD 21 million related to “Undelivered Products.””> The amounts owing were in
principle to be paid as finished products, rather than cash, although payments in cash

“ 9924
were “not excluded.

"©0077.

2 R-0019; C-0096.
1 C0015.

2 C0018.

8 Id.

4 Id.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

Like the Settlement Agreement, the Repayment Agreement provided for dispute

resolution by ICC arbitration in Vienna.”>

The Repayment Agreement was signed by Drs Kriiger and Schéber for KCH, and by
Messrs Sljuzar, Gabel and Haber for Oriana. The authority of Messrs Sljuzar, Gabel
and Haber to enter into the Repayment Agreement on behalf of Oriana is disputed by
the Respondent, and whether the Repayment Agreement was validly executed by
those persons is a matter of dispute between the Parties (discussed in J] 58 — 61

below).”°

The Repayment Agreement provided for four pledge agreements over Oriana’s assets
to secure Oriana’s indebtedness. According to the Claimant, three of those pledge
agreements were concluded.”” However, the fourth pledge agreement, relating to
fixed assets, was never entered into. Its execution required the approval of the State

Property Fund of Ukraine, which approval was not given.

(iv) The ICC Arbitration against Oriana. Between late 1998 and mid-2001, further
attempts were made to resolve the dispute between KCH and Oriana. Oriana was
restructured and certain of its assets spun off into a joint venture with Lukoil
Petroleum. There were also further developments in bankruptcy proceedings brought

against Oriana by a certain Pryvatbank.

On 27 June 2001, KCH (by then renamed as Solvadis International) commenced an
ICC arbitration against Oriana pursuant to the arbitration clause in the Repayment

Agreement.

sg
26 Rejoinder, {J 79 — 84. In this Section, Respondent also disputes the validity of the execution of
the Settlement Agreement, for the same reasons.

7 Memorial, {{ 73.

* C0018.

58.

59.

60.

61.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

Although it did not participate fully in the arbitration, Oriana challenged the
tribunal’s jurisdiction, alleging that the Repayment Agreement had not been validly
executed. Oriana also disputed Solvadis International’s case on the merits. The

tribunal observed in its award of 25 November 2002 as follows:””

The parties to this arbitration have submitted pleadings and numerous
documents and an expert opinion in support of their respective arguments.
Although Respondent did not participate in the proceedings as foreseen
by the Rules, Respondent’s arguments were brought forward in their
undated letter to the Chairman (received on January 25, 2002), in a
submission addressed to the ICC, dated April 30, 2002 and a letter to the
Chairman dated September 25, 2002 and were duly considered in this
arbitration. Respondent was granted all possibilities to present its case.

Oriana’s challenge to jurisdiction was unsuccessful, and the tribunal declared that it

had jurisdiction to hear the dispute.

The tribunal found as a fact that Mr Sljuzar was the President of Oriana as at the date
of signing the Repayment Agreement based on the evidence of witnesses concerning
the manner in which Mr Sljuzar was introduced to them, the fact that Oriana
subsequently sealed documents signed by Mr Sljuzar without correcting the
designation “President,” and the fact that contracts signed by Mr Sljuzar as President
were also signed by Messrs Gabel and Haber without objection being raised by the

latter two.*°

In light of this, the tribunal determined that “pursuant to Art. 8.4.5 of Respondent’s
statutes (Exhibits C 48, 48a) [Mr Sljuzar] therefore was empowered to represent the

company, without needing special authorisation by the supervisory board, the

yl

shareholders assembly or any other body. Further, the tribunal stated that “[t]he

* ©0028.

0 ag
Md.

62.

63.

64.

65.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

president also has the power to authorise a vice president (Mr Haber, Mr Gabel) to

represent the company in negotiations or to conclude contracts.”*

The tribunal’s award of 25 November 2002 was largely in favour of Solvadis
International. The tribunal awarded Solvadis International USD 30,381,661.44 as
primary compensation, plus 3% interest per annum from 28 December 2000, USD

273,000 in arbitration costs and EUR 141,689.38 in legal fees and expenses.

(v) The Attempts to Collect on the Award against Oriana. On 11 March 2003,
Solvadis International (formerly KCH) requested recognition and enforcement of the

ICC Award before the Appellate Court of the Ivano-Frankivsk Region.

On 23 April 2003, Oriana submitted objections to Solvadis International’s request for

recognition and enforcement™, to which Solvadis International replied.*°

On 28 May 2003, the Appellate Court rejected Solvadis International’s request for
recognition and enforcement.*° The Appellate Court found the Repayment
Agreement was invalid as it had been concluded by unauthorised persons. The

Appellate Court stated in its reasoning as follows:

Considering the case, the court ascertained that the [Repayment
Agreement] was concluded and signed in contradiction to the Ukrainian
effective legislation by the representatives of OJSC “Oriana” without duly
authorized powers. The court came to such conclusion basing on the
following grounds.

2 Id.
C-O115.
4 CO118.
C-0119.
C-0120.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

Article 6 of the Law of Ukraine “On Foreign Economic Activity”
provides for: on behalf of legal entities - subjects of foreign economic
activities, a foreign economic agreement (contract) shall be signed by two
persons: a person who has this right according to his position under the
statutory documents and a person having a power of attorney, signed by a
head of foreign economic entity.

The Charter of the OJSC “Oriana” establishes that only [the] Chairman of
the Board (president) has the right without the power of attorney to carry
out actions on behalf of Company. The Charter does not provide the other
members of the Board with the right to represent the company.

It is found out that the Agreement for Repayment of Debts dated
29.09.1998 was signed on behalf of OJSC “Oriana” by three
representatives: Mr Sljusar, Mr Haber and Mr Gabel. It is also set out that
Mr Sljusar held the post of Chairman of Board of OJSC “Oriana.”

According to the Order of State Property Fund of Ukraine No.2073 dated
November 3, 1998 this post was held by Mr Chernik and not by Mr
Sljusar.

Besides, the two other person[s] - Mr Haber and Mr Gabel were not duly
authorized for the conclusion of the mentioned agreement.

Taking into account the above-mentioned circumstances the Court of
Appeal considers the Agreement for Repayment of Debts dated
29.09.1998 to be invalid pursuant to the article 48 of the Civil Code of
Ukraine, since it was concluded by unauthorized persons in contradiction
to the procedure, established by the Law of Ukraine “On Foreign
Economic Activity” and by the foundation documents of the OJSC
“Oriana.”

Thus the case had to be the subject to final regulation at the International
Commercial Arbitration Court at Ukrainian Chamber of Commerce and
Industry in Kiev, Ukraine, but not at the International Court of Arbitration

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

of the International Chamber of Commerce in Vienna, as it was provided
by the original Conversion Agreement dated 13.12.1995.*7

On 25 June 2003, Solvadis International filed a cassation complaint with the Supreme

Court of Ukraine.*
On 15 April 2004, the Supreme Court of Ukraine rejected the cassation complaint.”

While the enforcement proceedings were underway, Solvadis International also
attempted to claim under the ICC award in bankruptcy proceedings brought by
Pryvatbank against Oriana in 2002. On 4 February 2003, Solvadis International filed
a claim in the bankruptcy based on the ICC Award. That claim provided, in part, as

follows:*°

Creditor’s claims of the company “Solvadis International GmbH” are
confirmed (attested) by the Arbitral Award of the International Court of
Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce, rendered in
Vienna, Austria in case No 11645/DK on November 25, 2002 (hereinafter
referred to as the “Arbitral Award”) in accordance with arbitration clause,
agreed by the parties (duly legalized copy of the Arbitral Award with
notary certified translation into Ukrainian is contained in Annex No 3
thereto). According to the Arbitral Award the Debtor - open joint stock
company “Oraina” [sic] shall pay to “Solvadis International GmbH”:

According to the Arbitral Award the creditor's claims against open joint
stock company “Oriana” are based on the Conversion Contract No 804-
276-05473160/79-299 as of December 13, 1995, numerous annexes
thereto, Settlement Agreement as of August 7, 1998, Agreement for

vd.

C-0121.
C-0125.
“C0126.

69.

70.

71.

72.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

Repayment of Debts as of September 29, 1998, as well as other
documents submitted upon the International Court of Arbitration.

The above-mentioned Arbitral Award clearly confirms the indebtedness
of open joint stock company “Oriana” before the company “Solvadis
International GmbH.” The facts, established therein do not require further
examining and proving under Article 35 of the Commercial Procedural
Code of Ukraine. Pursuant to Article 35 of the said Code: “The facts,
established by judgement of commercial court (other authority competent
to resolve disputes) in one litigation, are not subject to proving in another
litigation involving the same parties.”

On 25 November 2003, the Commercial Court of the Ivano-Frankivsk Region

dismissed Solvadis International’s claim on the basis that the Ivano-Frankivsk

Appellate Court had refused enforcement of the ICC Award on 28 May 2003.4!

On 6 February 2004, Solvadis International appealed the decision of the Commercial
Court of Ivano-Frankivsk to the Appellate Commercial Court of Lviv, arguing,
among other things, that the judgment of the Appellate Court dated 28 May 2003
refusing recognition and enforcement of the ICC Award was not final, and that the

Commercial Court’s finding to the contrary was itself contrary to law.”

On 15 March 2004, the Appellate Commercial Court of Lviv affirmed the judgment

of the Commercial Court of Ivano-Frankivsk.?

On 14 April 2004, Solvadis International filed a cassation complaint with the Highest

Commercial Court of Ukraine.“

C-0130.
2 C0131.
8 C0132.
“C0133.

723.

74.

75.

76.

77.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

On 25 August 2004, the Highest Commercial Court of Ukraine allowed the cassation
complaint, cancelling the judgments of the Appellate Commercial Court of Lviv and

the Commercial Court of Ivano-Frankivsk.*°

On 30 September 2004, Oriana filed a cassation complaint against the judgment of
the Highest Commercial Court of Ukraine with the Supreme Court of Ukraine.*® It
appears that, on 11 November 2004, the Supreme Court of Ukraine rejected this

complaint.”

On 17 March 2005, Solvadis Chemag AG (by then named Solvadis GmbH), as
claimed successor to Solvadis International, filed a “Creditor’s Explanation of
monetary claims in the bankruptcy case No. B-11/283” (the Oriana bankruptcy) with

the Commercial Court of Ivano-Frankivsk.**
Oriana filed objections to what it described as Solvadis International’s claims.”

On 15 April 2005, the Commercial Court of Ivano-Frankivsk issued its judgment on
Solvadis Chemag AG’s claim, having accepted the application to allow Solvadis
Chemag AG to substitute for Solvadis International as creditor. The Commercial
Court noted that it had heard Solvadis Chemag AG’s claim as a result of the 25
August 2004 judgment of the Highest Commercial Court of Ukraine remanding the

matter to it.”

C-0134.
C-0135.
C-0136.
C-0137.
“C0138.
©0140.

20

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

The Commercial Court of Ivano-Frankivsk rejected Solvadis’ repayment claim on the
basis that it had been filed outside the statutory limitation period, and the ICC Award
did not toll that period “since that decision was not properly legalized in Ukraine, and

it therefore has no entitling legal force.”*!

On 25 April 2005, Solvadis Chemag AG appealed the decision of the Commercial
Court of Ivano-Frankivsk to the Lviv Appellate Commercial Court. In its appeal,
Solvadis Chemag AG stated that the running of the limitation period against it had
been suspended by the filing of arbitration proceedings on 27 June 2001, and that the

court had wrongly held that this was not the case.”

Solvadis Chemag AG also suggested that the ruling of the Commercial Court of
Ivano-Frankivsk had been based in part on that court’s view that it had not filed its
claim in time vis-a-vis the publication date of the bankruptcy announcement — that is,
within 30 days. Solvadis Chemag AG’s position was that as its original claim had

been filed on 4 February 2003, it was filed in time.

On 22 June 2005, the Lviv Appellate Commercial Court agreed with the reasoning of

the Commercial Court of Ivano-Frankivsk, and rejected Solvadis Chemag AG’s
1.4

appeal
The Lviv Appellate Commercial Court further noted that Solvadis Chemag AG had
not filed in support of its original claim “primary documents that would prove the

existence of the debt . . . except the base refining agreement and addenda thereto.”*°

Td.
* Coll.
8 Id.
“C0143.
8 Id.

21

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

On 15 July 2005, Solvadis Chemag AG applied for cassation of the Lviv Appellate
Commercial Court judgment and the Commercial Court of Ivano-Frankivsk judgment
to the Superior Commercial Court of Ukraine. Solvadis Chemag AG challenged as
contrary to law the findings that the limitation period had expired prior to the filing of
its claim against Oriana and that it had not filed primary documents proving the

existence of the debt owed.*°

On 30 November 2005, the Superior Commercial Court of Ukraine dismissed
Solvadis Chemag AG’s cassation complaint, and Solvadis International’s final appeal
in the bankruptcy proceedings was rejected by the Superior Commercial Court of

Ukraine on 30 November 2005.°”

The foregoing has led GEA to file the present arbitration. An overview of GEA’s

position, and Ukraine’s response thereto, is set out in the following section.

SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS AND RELIEF SOUGHT
A.  GEA’s Position

The Claimant’s position is that the Respondent failed to honour its “repeated
promises” to ensure that GEA would be paid for its Products, and has taken “multiple

steps” in intervening years to ensure that no compensation would be paid.**

In { 361 of its Reply, GEA asks the Tribunal to make the following award in its

favour:

* C0144.

c-0145.
Memorial, {| 6.

37

22

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

(i) Declaring that Ukraine has breached its obligations under the Treaty
owed to GEA and its investments;

(ii) Ordering Ukraine to pay damages to GEA in the principal amounts of
USD 30,654,661.44 and EUR 141,689.38;

(iii) Ordering Ukraine to pay interest on that amount at the LIBOR three-
month US Dollar rate plus 5 percent (or at such other rate as the Tribunal
deems to be appropriate) from January 1, 1999, compounded monthly
until the date of the award;

(iv) Ordering Ukraine to pay the costs of this arbitration, including all
fees and expenses of the Tribunal and the legal costs incurred by GEA in
this arbitration;

(v) Ordering Ukraine to pay interest at that same interest rate,
compounded monthly, on all amounts awarded until the full payment
thereof; and

(vi) Ordering such other and further relief as this Tribunal deems just and
proper.

B. Ukraine’s Position
88. The Respondent denies the Claimant’s claims in their entirety.
89. In J 447 of its Rejoinder, the Respondent asks the Tribunal to:

(i) dismiss all of the Claimant’s claims as inadmissible for lack of
jurisdiction;

in the alternative,
dismiss all of the Claimant’s claims as unfounded;
in the alternative,

reject the Claimant’s claim for damages.

23

90.

VI.

91.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

(ii) order the Claimant to bear the costs of this arbitration, including all
fees and expenses of the Tribunal as well as the Respondent’s reasonable
costs (including but not limited too [sic] its reasonable legal fees and
expenses), payable forthwith.

INTRODUCTION TO THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

The Tribunal has carefully reviewed the pleadings, evidence and legal authorities
submitted by the Parties and has relied exclusively on those in the analysis below.
This applies in particular to legal authorities, as the Tribunal adheres to the principle
that it should remain within the confines of the debate between the Parties. Thus, this
Award is a decision in the dispute as pleaded between the Parties, and the Tribunal

will not address arguments that have not been raised by them.

JURISDICTION
A. The Parties’ Positions

Ukraine argues that this Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to hear the case brought by the
Claimant because (i) the alleged investment vested not in KCH but in Klockner,”?
which the Claimant never acquired, (ii) the Claimant did not make an “investment” in

Ukraine under the BIT or the ICSID Convention and, in any event, (iii) any alleged

* The Tribunal notes that for much of the proceedings, it was not clear that there were two

Klockner entities with the same name. It was ultimately clarified that, despite their identical names,
there was a difference between Old Kléckner and New Klockner (see {f 33 — 37 supra). However, as
this difference was only clarified at the hearing, the Parties’ submissions just refer to “Kléckner,”
without differentiating between “Old” and “New.” Accordingly, when setting forth the Parties’
positions, the Tribunal maintains the reference to “Kléckner.” The Tribunal will differentiate between
“Old” and “New” in its discussion, as necessary.

24

92.

93.

94.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

BIT violations occurred before the alleged investment was made, and (iv) any claims

against Ukraine for breach of the BIT now belong to Chemdis and not the Claimant.

GEA disagrees and submits that it did indeed acquire rights to the investment under
the Conversion Contract (i) by virtue of its indirect control of KCH at the time of the
BIT violations and (ii) as successor-in-interest to KCH.°! GEA also submits that it
made an investment in Ukraine “under any applicable test,” whether under the ICSID
Convention or the BIT™, and that the dispute “meets the temporal requirements of the

ICSID Convention and the Treaty.”

B. The Tribunal’s Analysis

In light of the Parties’ positions set forth above, the Tribunal must determine (1)
whether GEA has standing to bring claims in this arbitration, (2) whether GEA made
an “investment” in Ukraine, and (3) whether the alleged BIT violations occurred
before GEA made any investment in Ukraine, which issues the Tribunal will now

address in that order.

(1) Does GEA Have Standing?

Ukraine objects to GEA’s standing in this arbitration on two grounds, namely that (i)
the Conversion Contract, as the core of the alleged investment, vested not in KCH but
in Kléckner, and (ii) any claims against Ukraine now belong to Chemdis Limited and

not the Claimant.

oo Counter-Memorial, J 113.

ot Reply, 131.
oe Reply, 42.
“8 Reply, { 83.

25

95.

96.

97.

98.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

(i) Vesting of the Conversion Contract. The Tribunal first addresses whether the
Conversion Contract, as the core of the alleged investment, vested not in KCH but in

Kléckner.

Ukraine alleges that extracts from the commercial register reveal that the spin-off of
Kléckner’s chemical business to KCH occurred on 29 May 1995, prior to Kléckner’s
entry into the Conversion Contract, and thus that the spin-off cannot have included
any rights pertaining to the Conversion Contract.“ Further, Ukraine states that there
is no evidence that KCH replaced Klockner as a party to the Conversion Contract at

any time such as to validly acquire rights thereunder.”

GEA rejects the allegation that KCH acquired no such rights at the time Kléckner
spun off its chemical assets to KCH in 1995.°° GEA argues that Ukraine’s argument
is “contrary to the conduct and understanding of all of the actors involved at the time,
as reflected in contemporaneous documents.”*” Specifically, GEA points to almost
150 amendments to the Conversion Contract executed between KCH and Oriana, and
contends that “KCH itself was a party to these additional agreements and
amendments, which were all valid and binding on the parties” (emphasis in the

original).*

In addition, GEA argues that KCH was identified as Klockner’s successor to the

Conversion Contract in the Settlement Agreement and in the protocol signed after a

Counter-Memorial, {{[ 27 — 28; Rejoinder, J 121.
6s Rejoinder, {| 125.

0 Reply, { 30.

o Reply, { 30.

6s Reply, ¥ 32.

26

99.

100.

101.

102.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

meeting on 13 August 1998”, and that Ukrainian officials at various times

acknowledged KCH’s rights deriving from the Conversion Contract.”

For the reasons that follow, the Tribunal agrees with the Claimant that the alleged

investment — the Conversion Contract — vested in KCH.

The Tribunal notes that it was clarified over the course of the hearing that it was Old
Klockner that spun off its chemical business to KCH before merging into another
company (Bayernwerk Aktiengesellschaft), whereas it was New Klockner that

entered into the Conversion Contract with Oriana.”!

While it is true that there is no one particular document in the record that states
outright that KCH acquired rights from New Kléckner under the Conversion
Contract, the evidence adduced over the course of the proceedings, taken together,

leads to the conclusion that it did indeed acquire such rights.

First, in Article 3.3 of the Settlement Agreement, Oriana expressly acknowledged that
KCH was a party to the Conversion Contract, and that Oriana was indebted to KCH

thereunder:

Oriana hereby reconfirms and agrees that KCH is a party to the
Conversion Contract as successor to Kloeckner & Co. Aktiengesellschaft

with which Oriana initially concluded the Conversion Contract.
Oriana hereby agrees that KCH acquired all of the rights and benefits, and
assumed all of the obligations and liabilities, which were initially
provided in the Conversion Contract for [Kloeckner & Co.
Aktiengesellschaft].’”

° Reply, {ff 33 — 34.
70 Reply, 1 36.
Chronology and Companies Involved (part 1), distributed at the hearing.
n
C-0015.

27

103.

104.

105.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

Second, on 13 August 1998, representatives of, among others, Ukraine, Oriana and
KCH’s parent company met to discuss the “state of cooperation” between Oriana and
KCH in light of Oriana’s “indebtedness to KCH.” The results of that meeting were
recorded in a protocol of the same date, in which it was recorded that Oriana’s
indebtedness to KCH arose “under the above specified Contract for the Conversion of

Raw Materials,” i.e., the Conversion Contract.”

Third, on 27 August 1998, representatives of, among others, Ukraine, Germany,
Oriana and KCH’s parent company met to discuss the relationship between Oriana
and KCH (see generally { 49 above). This meeting was recorded in a protocol of the
same date, in which KCH’s rights under the Conversion Contract were
acknowledged. For example, Dr Rieger noted “the problem of missing raw materials
and products and the insoluble connection between the KCH/Oriana agreement and
the ability of Oriana to repay the BV loan,” and Vice Minister President Tyhypko
noted that “although KCH could break away from Oriana, it would have to write off

the DM 40 million from the missing raw materials and products.””4

Finally, it is undisputed that KCH entered into 147 out of a total of 154 amendments
to the Conversion Contract.” Article 11.4 of the Conversion Contract provides that
“TaJny amendments or additions” to the Conversion Contract “become valid and
binding if they are in writing and signed by authorised persons.” The Tribunal has
not been made aware of any particular objections to the validity or binding nature of
these subsequent agreements, and the Tribunal considers it reasonable to conclude
from KCH’s consistent involvement in executing those agreements, without

objection, that it had an interest in the underlying contract.

B C0016.

C-0065.
C-0156; Chronology and Companies Involved (part 1).

4

5

28

106.

107.

108.

109.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

In light of the foregoing, the Tribunal concludes that the rights in the Conversion
Contract did indeed vest in KCH. Accordingly, Ukraine’s contentions to the contrary

are rejected.

(ii) Vesting of the Claims. With respect to Ukraine’s second objection, i.e., that any
claims against Ukraine now belong to Chemdis Limited and not the Claimant,
Ukraine alleges that any rights the Claimant may have had in relation to an
investment were transferred in 2004, when the Claimant sold KCH and its parent
company to Chemdis Limited, a private equity fund. Ukraine argues that, due to this
sale, any claims that KCH may have had either “continued to vest in KCH or tagged

along with it to Chemdis.””°

GEA disagrees and argues that it retained the KCH rights that are in dispute in this
arbitration. In support of this contention, GEA relies on Article 2.2 of the “Sale and
Purchase Agreement” between Solvadis Chemag AG (formerly KCH) and MG
Technologies AG (later renamed GEA) of 28 June 2004 under which, GEA argues,
KCH assigned its rights to GEA against Oriana and other entities, including Ukraine,

deriving from the Conversion Contract and all related transactions.”

Ukraine asserts that GEA’s argument that it retained KCH’s claims against Oriana is
inconsistent with the fact that KCH continued to prosecute those claims before the
courts of Ukraine after the apparent date of sale.”* While GEA argues that it was not

possible to change the identity of the creditor in bankruptcy to reflect that situation”,

Counter-Memorial, 4{f 159 — 164.
Reply, (9 84 — 94.
Counter-Memorial, { 161.

Reply, 191.

29

110.

111.

112.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

Ukraine states that “KCH did in fact successfully apply for a change of creditors in
9980

the third Oriana bankruptcy proceedings, after Chemdis had acquired its shares.
The Tribunal notes that Article 2.2 of the Sale and Purchase Agreement provides as

follows:

[KCH] assigns and transfers to [GEA] and [GEA] accepts the assignment
and transfer of all rights, title and interest held by [KCH] in and to all
claims of [KCH] against Oriana deriving from [KCH’s] business relations
to Oriana as described in more detail in Section | as well as all rights, title
and interest in and to the belonging underlying transactions, including all
rights thereunder.*!

It would seem from the language of the Sale and Purchase Agreement that Solvadis
Chemag AG (i.e., KCH) may have assigned, among other things, its claims against
Oriana to MG Technologies AG (i.e., GEA). At around the same time, it would seem
that Solvadis Chemag AG (i.e., KCH) was sold to Chemdis Limited (see J 41

above).

The Claimant’s most recent position with respect to the timing of these transactions is
that while the Sale and Purchase Agreement between KCH and GEA was concluded
on 28 June 2004, the actual assignment took place after 30 June 2004, the date on
which the agreement was signed for the sale of KCH shares to Chemdis. However,

the Claimant submits that the assignment took place before the closing date of the

KCH/Chemdis sale, as the “Effective Date” under German law.*

80 Rejoinder, { 134.

s €-0002.

See Chronology and Companies Involved (part 2).

Claimant's Closing, Tr.4/p. 30:

“Ms DUFETRE: So the assignment of rights between KCH and GEA was an intra-group transfer and

it was dated June 28th 2004, and it took place after the signature of the share purchase agreement for
(footnote cont'd)

30

113.

114.

115.

116.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

The Respondent disputes the fact that the shares in KCH were disposed of after the
assignment to GEA on the basis that the Claimant has not provided a copy of the
share purchase agreement between Solvadis Chemag AG and Chemdis Limited, or

any other documents, to support this assertion.**

The Tribunal considers that the Respondent’s objection regarding the missing copy of
the share purchase agreement between Solvadis Chemag AG and Chemdis Limited is
misplaced. In the early stages of these proceedings, the Tribunal had rejected a
request from the Respondent for the production of this document on the basis that no

: 85
such document was available.

This being said, the Tribunal is of the view that the other documents in the record do
not support the Claimant’s position regarding the timing of the sale versus the

assignment.

Indeed, the only other document submitted by the Claimant in support of the timing
of the sale versus the assignment is a print-out from the website of the Solvadis
Group, which does not indicate the date of any purported sale or closing of the
Solvadis Chemag AG/Chemdis Limited deal. It simply states that, at some point in
2004, “[t]he [S]olvadis group is taken over by Chemdis Limited” at which time its

form was changed to Solvadis GmbH.*°

 

the sale of KCH shares, but before the closing date. As I was told by my German clients, the closing
date is the effective date under German law.”

ao See, e.g., Respondent’s Closing, Tr. 5/pp. 61-64.
85 See Procedural Order No. 1, Annex B, request 17.
% C0042.

31

117.

118.

119.

120.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

In light of this, the Tribunal is of the view that the Claimant has not met its burden of
proving that it retained KCH’s claims arising under the Conversion Contract, or any
other interest in the alleged investment underlying this dispute, after 30 June 2004.
For the Tribunal to determine otherwise would be to take a decision based on

assertions unsupported by evidence.

Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes that the Claimant does not have standing to

bring any claims arising from the Conversion Contract after 30 June 2004.

In light of the Tribunal’s decision that the Sale and Purchase Agreement cannot be
taken into account as a basis for the Claimant’s claims after this date, the Tribunal
need not address the questions raised by the Respondent regarding the assignment’s

validity.*”

In addition, the Tribunal need not address the Respondent’s argument that, as a matter
of principle, KCH could not have assigned its treaty rights under the Sale and
Purchase Agreement to GEA.** While at the hearing there was an extensive
discussion as to whether, as a matter of general theory, treaty rights can ever be
assigned, the Tribunal notes that this broader question is ultimately irrelevant in this
case, as Article 1 of the Sale and Purchase Agreement (“Description of Sold Claims’)
only provided for an assignment of contractual claims, as opposed to an assignment
of treaty rights. Having carefully considered the various arguments of construction

and interpretation advanced by the Claimant, the Tribunal concludes that this

a The Respondent had disputed the validity of the assignment under German law (by which it is

governed) on the basis that the €1 paid by GEA for the assignment of KCH’s claims was below value,
in violation of Sections 76(1) and 93(1) of the German Stock Corporations Act and Section 266(1) of
the German Criminal Code, thereby rendering the entire agreement void under Section 134 of the
German Civil Code. Rejoinder, 133.

8s The Respondent had disputed the Claimant’s ability to be assigned KCH’s treaty rights under
the Sale and Purchase Agreement. See, e.g., Respondent's Closing, Tr.5/pp. 25 — 58.

32

121.

122.

123.

124.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

provision does not extend to rights or obligations under international law, and nor

was this intended at the time.

However, the Tribunal does need to address the Respondent’s argument that GEA did
not have the right to bring this arbitration because it no longer had control of KCH

when the Request was registered.

The Respondent relies on the case of Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, a.s. v. Slovak
Republic (“CSOB”) in support of its position, citing the following passage of the

tribunal’s decision on jurisdiction:

[I]t is generally recognised that the determination whether a party has
standing in an international judicial forum for purposes of jurisdiction to
institute proceedings is made by reference to the date on which such
proceedings are deemed to have been instituted.

In response, the Claimant contends that the Respondent “misses the point,” taking
into account that Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention does not require that an
investment “exists or is controlled by the national of another contracting state at the

time of registration.””°

The Tribunal agrees with the Claimant. The Respondent, in effect has attempted to
create a standing requirement (i.e., a requirement of ownership or control of the
investment at the time of registration of the Request) that does not otherwise exist
under the BIT, ICSID Convention or ICSID Rules. Indeed, such a requirement, if it
existed, would exclude a significant range of cases where claims are made in respect

of the divestment or expropriation of an investment. What is more, the Respondent

° ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4, Decision on the Objections to Jurisdiction, 24 May 1999.
Respondent’s Opening, Tr.1/pp. 64 — 65, citing CSOB at { 31.

0 Claimant's Closing, Tr.4/pp. 40 - 41.

33

125.

126.

127.

128.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

quotes the CSOB tribunal out of context, as the next paragraph of the award in fact

supports the Claimant’s position in these proceedings:”!

[A]bsence of beneficial ownership by a claimant in a claim or the transfer
of the economic risk in the outcome of a dispute should not and has not
been deemed to affect the standing of a claimant in an ICSID proceeding.

In light of the foregoing, the Tribunal concludes that even though GEA does not have
standing with respect to claims arising after 30 June 2004, GEA did have the right to

file the Request when it did.

(2) Did GEA Make an Investment?

Having determined that GEA has standing to pursue claims accruing up to 30 June
2004, the Tribunal must next determine whether GEA actually “invested” in Ukraine

at all, within the meaning and scope of the BIT and the ICSID Convention.

The Parties’ Positions. According to the Claimant, “[t]he current dispute concerns an

992

“investment” both within the meaning of the [BIT] and the ICSID Convention,””~ but
the Tribunal need only look to the language of the BIT to determine this issue, and
need not consider any different definition in the context of Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention. The Claimant submits that this is because where a BIT providing only

for ICSID arbitration gives a definition of “investment,” “there is no occasion for an

arbitral tribunal to apply a different definition of the term.”

In support of this, the Claimant notes that since ICSID arbitration is the only form of
investor-State dispute resolution provided for in the BIT, “if jurisdiction were found

absent under the ICSID Convention while the relationship at issue would otherwise

CSOB at 32.
2 Memorial, {| 131.
Memorial, { 144.

34

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

qualify as an investment under the [BIT], the [BIT]’s dispute resolution clause would

be deprived of any effectiveness, which is contrary to basic principles of treaty

interpretation.”**

. The Claimant adds, in any event however, that “the evidence establishes the existence

of an ‘investment’ within the meaning of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.””* It

notes that “[t]he jurisprudence to date reveals a wide variety of approaches to what
constitutes an investment under the ICSID Convention,””° but asserts that whatever

test is applied, it qualifies on the facts of this case:

Taking the six-part test in Phoenix Action®” as the most comprehensive:
first, GEA contributed assets of economic value to the territory of
Ukraine. These took the form of over one million metric tons of diesel
and naphtha delivered to Ukraine over a three-year period, as well as
catalysts and other materials, and its know-how on logistics and
marketing and its ability to mobilize repair and other services. Second,
GEA was exposed to market risk due to the duration of time between
when it purchased diesel for delivery to Oriana and the time when it was
able to realize a return by selling finished products converted by Oriana.
The arrangement amounted to some DM 100 million of working capital
financing for Oriana precisely because of this commitment of resources
over time.. A certain duration is evident. Third, multiple elements of risk
were present in the form of market risk, credit risk and political risk — as
demonstrated by the fact that no other companies were willing to supply
Oriana with diesel without advance payment. Fourth, GEA’s relationship
with Oriana kept Oriana’s factories running at a time when they would
otherwise have closed and thereby supported the only substantial
economic activity in the Ivano-Frankivsk region at the time. The
sustained attention at the highest levels of the Ukrainian and German
Governments to the GEA-Oriana relationship is compelling evidence of
its importance to the development of economic activity in Ukraine. Fifth,
there is no question that GEA’s assets were invested in accordance with

Reply, 156.

Memorial, {{ 138.
Memorial, {{ 139.

Phoenix Action, Ltd v. The Czech Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/5, Award, 15 April 2009.

35

130.

131.

132.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

Ukrainian law. Sixth, there is no question as to the bona fides of GEA’s
investment.**

The Respondent, on the contrary, considers that “[t]he ‘investment’ which the
Claimant invokes is not an investment for the purposes of Article 1(1) of the Treaty
and Article 25 of the ICSID Convention . . . Common to the jurisdictional
requirements of both Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention and Article 1(1) of the

Treaty is the meaning of the term ‘investment.’””?

As far as Article 1(1) of the BIT is concerned, the Respondent maintains that the
Conversion Contract was no more than a sales agreement, which did not confer on

GEA any “rights to the exercise of an economic activity.”

Moreover, the Respondent also argues that the definition of “investment” in the BIT
does not control the issue in any event, since this can only operate within the confines
of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention: “[t]he definition of the term ‘investment’
contained in the Treaty cannot extend beyond the requirements of the ICSID
Convention if the Tribunal is to retain jurisdiction. The definition of ‘investment’ in
the Treaty does not provide parties and the Tribunal a carte blanche to re-write the
ICSID Convention.”'” The Respondent relies in this regard on the decision in

Phoenix:

Memorial, { 145. Citations omitted.
Counter-Memorial, { 122 and J 124.
Counter-Memorial, {| 131.

36

133.

134.

135.

136.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

There is nothing like a total discretion, even if the definition developed by
ICSID case law is quite broad and encompassing. There are indeed some
basic criteria and parties are not free to decide in BITs that anything — like
a sale of goods or a dowry for example — is an investment. '°!

According to the Respondent, the term “investment” has “an identifiable inherent
core meaning” in ICSID matters, and the Tribunal is required to ensure that any
definition of the term “investment” provided by the BIT accords with this objective
meaning. '© Tt cites several decisions in which this concept of an objective definition

has been articulated.

The Respondent also prays in aid Zachary Douglas’ textbook, in which the author
states that “the use of the term ‘investment’ in both instruments [investment treaties
and the ICSID Convention] imports the same basic economic attributes of an

investment derived from the ordinary meaning of that term.”

Whereas the Claimant argues that the imposition of an objective definition of
“investment” in circumstances where a BIT only provides for ICSID arbitration risks
frustrating the BIT’s dispute resolution clause, the Respondent counters that if a BIT
provides a choice between several forms of dispute resolution (e.g., ICSID and
UNCITRAL arbitration), it would be a curious result if, by virtue of a “subjective”
definition agreed in the BIT itself, an “investment” could be established under the

UNCITRAL Rules, but not under the ICSID Convention.

In conclusion, the Respondent argues that “the Claimant has not made an investment
since (a) no contribution of economic value has been made to Ukraine, (b) no profits

or returns have resulted from such a contribution and (c) the Claimant assumed no

101 N. 97 supra, 1 82.
102 Counter-Memorial, {[ 134.

Zachary Douglas, THE INTERNATIONAL LAW OF INVESTMENT CLAIMS (Cambridge University
Press, 2009), p. 165.

103

37

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD.
investment risk. These principles underpin the definition of the term “investment”
under both Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention and Article 1(1) of the [BIT].”!

137. The Tribunal’s Analysis. It is well known that the ICSID Convention contains no

definition of the term “investment” used in its Article 25.
138. Article 1 of the BIT defines “investment” as follows:
For purposes of this agreement
1) the term “investments” means assets of any kind, in particular

a) movable and immovable property and other rights in rem such
as mortgages and security interests;

b) equity interests and other stakes in companies;

c) claims to funds used to create material or immaterial values
and claims to performances having such value;

d) intellectual property rights such as, in particular, copyrights,
patents, utility models, industrial designs and models, trademarks, trade
names, company and business secrets, technological processes, know-
how and goodwill;

e) rights to the exercise of an economic activity including rights
to the search for and the exploration, extraction and utilisation of natural
resources on the basis of statutory provisions or granted under an
agreement concluded in accordance with such statutory provisions.

Any change to the form in which assets are invested shall not affect their
nature as investments.

‘4 Counter-Memorial, 146.

38

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

139. In a number of well-known cases, tribunals have articulated objective criteria for the
definition of the term “investment” that are said to flow from the ICSID Convention,
and have concluded that such criteria cannot be set aside by a consent that may have
been given in another legal instrument, such as a BIT. A good example of such an
approach is the one taken by the ad hoc Committee in the Patrick Mitchell v. Congo
annulment proceeding, which expressed the limits of the notion of investment in clear

terms:

The parties to an agreement and the States which conclude an investment
treaty cannot open the jurisdiction of the Centre to any operation they
might arbitrarily qualify as an investment. It is thus repeated that, before
ICSID arbitral tribunals, the Washington Convention has supremacy over
an agreement between the parties or a BIT.'°5

140. The same position has been followed in Phoeni.

 

At the outset, it should be noted that BITs, which are bilateral
arrangements between two States parties, cannot contradict the definition
of the ICSID Convention. In other words, they can confirm the ICSID
notion or restrict it, but they cannot expand it in order to have access to
ICSID. A definition included in a BIT being based on a test agreed
between two States cannot set aside the definition of the ICSID
Convention, which is a multilateral agreement. As long as it fits within
the ICSID notion, the BIT definition is acceptable, it is not if it falls
outside of such definition. For example, if a BIT would provide that
ICSID arbitration is available for sales contracts which do not imply any
investment, such a provision could not be enforced by an ICSID
tribunal.

105 Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of Congo, I\CSID Case No. ARB/99/7, Decision on the
Application for Annulment of the Award, 1 November 2006, 31.

106 _N. 97 supra, 196. Citation omitted. See also J 82.

39

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

141. However, it is not so much the term “investment” in the ICSID Convention than the
term “investment” per se that is often considered as having an objective meaning in
itself, whether it is mentioned in the ICSID Convention or in a BIT. For example, the
tribunal in Romak S.A. v. Uzbekistan, conducting its proceedings on the basis of the

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, observed as follows:

The term “investment” has a meaning in itself that cannot be ignored
when considering the list contained in Article 1(2) of the BIT.

The Arbitral Tribunal therefore considers that the term
“investments” under the BIT has an inherent meaning (irrespective of
whether the investor resorts to ICSID or UNCITRAL arbitral
proceedings) entailing a contribution that extends over a certain period of
time and that involves some risk .... By their nature, asset types
enumerated in the BIT’s non-exhaustive list may exhibit these hallmarks.
But if an asset does not correspond to the inherent definition of
“investment,” the fact that it falls within one of the categories listed in
Article 1 does not transform it into an “investment.” In the general
formulation of the tribunal in Azinian, “labelling ... is no substitute for
analysis.”'""

142. On the other hand, insofar as BIT arbitration under the ICSID Convention is
concerned, it has also been held in a number of (again well-known) cases that,
because the ICSID Convention provides no definition of the term “investment,” the
limits of this concept are susceptible to agreement, or a subjective definition by the
State Parties in legal instruments such as BITs or national laws, which embody their
consent to ICSID jurisdiction. As the Tribunal in Biwater v. Tanzania'® noted, for

example:

‘01 Romak S.A. v. The Republic of Uzbekistan (PCA Case No. AA280), Award, 26 November 2009,
4 180 and 4 207. Emphasis in the original.

108 Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd v. Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22, Award, 24 July 2008,
qW 312-316.

40

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

312. ... it is clear from the travaux préparatoires of the Convention
that several attempts to incorporate a definition of “investment” were
made, but ultimately did not succeed. In the end, the term was left
intentionally undefined, with the expectation (inter alia) that a definition
could be the subject of agreement as between Contracting States.
Hence the following oft-quoted passage in the Report of the Executive
Directors:

“No attempt was made to define the term ‘investment’ given the
essential requirement of consent by the parties, and the mechanism
through which Contracting States can make known in advance, if
they so desire, the classes of disputes which they would or would
not consider submitting to the Centre (Article 25(4)).7 11°

313. Given that the Convention was not drafted with a strict,
objective, definition of “investment,” it is doubtful that arbitral tribunals
sitting in individual cases should impose one such definition which would
be applicable in all cases and for all purposes. . . .

314. Further, the Salini Test itself is problematic if, as some
tribunals have found, the “typical characteristics” of an investment as
identified in that decision are elevated into a fixed and inflexible test, and
if transactions are to be presumed excluded from the ICSID Convention
unless each of the five criteria''! are satisfied. This risks the arbitrary
exclusion of certain types of transaction from the scope of the
Convention. It also leads to a definition that may contradict individual
agreements (as here), as well as a developing consensus in parts of the
world as to the meaning of “investment” (as expressed, e.g., in bilateral
investment treaties). If very substantial numbers of BITs across the world
express the definition of “investment” more broadly than the Salini Test,
and if this constitutes any type of international consensus, it is difficult to
see why the ICSID Convention ought to be read more narrowly.

109 Footnote reference to Ch. Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION: A COMMENTARY (2001), pp.
121-125, {J 80 — 88.

110 Footnote reference to International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, REPORT OF THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON THE CONVENTION ON THE SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES BETWEEN
STATES AND NATIONALS OF OTHER STATES (18 March 1965), in 1 ICSID Reports 28 (1993), J 27.

‘11 The Tribunal notes that the Salini Test refers only to four criteria, the earlier Fedax decision
referring to five criteria (Fedax N.V. v. The Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No ARB/96/3,

Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction, 11 July 1997).

4l

143.

144.

145.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

315. Equally, the suggestion that the “special and privileged
arrangements established by the Washington Convention can be applied
only to the type of investment which the Contracting States to that
Convention envisaged” [footnote omitted] does not, in this Arbitral
Tribunal’s view, lead to a fixed or autonomous definition of “investment”
which must prevail in all cases, for the “type of investment” which the
Contracting States to the Convention in fact envisaged was an
intentionally undefined one, which was susceptible of agreement.

316. The Arbitral Tribunal therefore considers that a more flexible
and pragmatic approach to the meaning of “investment” is appropriate,
which takes into account the features identified in Salini, but along with
all the circumstances of the case, including the nature of the instrument
containing the relevant consent to ICSID.

In the circumstances of this case, this is a controversy that need not be resolved. Out
of an abundance of caution, the Tribunal has considered all potentially applicable
criteria and, as set out below, each leads to the same conclusion with respect to each

of the alleged “investments” in question.

The Claimant has identified its investment in Ukraine as its contractual and property
rights under the Conversion Contract, “formalised in the settlement agreement and
the repayment agreement with respect to the amounts that are at dispute, and

ultimately [...] crystallised in the ICC award.”!!

The Tribunal notes that, after considerable discussion at the hearing, the Claimant
elaborated its case on this issue, asserting (as its final position) that (i) the Conversion
Contract, together with the property rights in the products delivered under the
Conversion Contract, may constitute an investment; (ii) the Settlement Agreement,

together with the Repayment Agreement, may constitute an investment; and (iii) the

12° Reply, 41; Claimant's Closing, Tr.4/p. 9.

42

146.

147.

148.

149.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

ICC Award, on its own, may constitute an investment.!? In light of this, the Tribunal

will analyse these elements individually.

(i) The Conversion Contract and the Products. The Tribunal accordingly starts with
an examination whether the Conversion Contract may constitute an investment,
together with the property rights in the products delivered under the Conversion

Contract, under the BIT and/or the ICSID Convention.

In terms of the BIT, it is the Claimant’s case, among other things, that the Conversion
Contract falls within the definition of investment in Article 1(1)(e), as it confers
“rights to the exercise of an economic activity” and involves “movable property” in

the form of Products within the meaning of Article 1(1)(a).'"4

The Respondent disagrees, and argues that the Conversion Contract “does not confer
any rights upon the Claimant to exercise economic activities in Ukraine;” instead, the
Respondent argues that the Conversion Contract was a service contract, under which
“Kléckner/KCH simply undertook to deliver a certain amount of goods to Oriana for
conversion against payment of a tolling fee.”''> Further, the Respondent disputes that
the Products can be considered an investment, in and of themselves, under Article
1(1)(a), and argues that “movable property” must be considered “in the light of its

context (the reference to investment).”!!°

The Tribunal notes that in the present case, according to the BIT itself, its terms have
to be interpreted in the broader context of an investment operation, as is clear from
the last sentence of Article 1(1) stating that “(a)ny change to the form in which assets

are invested shall not affect their nature as investments.” (emphasis added) The

Claimant's Closing, Tr.4/pp. 16 — 19.

4 Memorial, {{ 137, 135.

"5 Counter-Memorial, {| 143; Rejoinder, J 156.
16 Counter-Memorial, {| 125; Rejoinder, J 155.

43

150.

151.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

question therefore is whether the Conversion Contact fits within the nature of an
“investment,” as understood in the BIT. In this context, the Tribunal considers that,
on its face, the Conversion Contract conveyed the right for GEA, through KCH, to
exercise an economic activity in Ukraine at the relevant time. In addition, contrary to
the Respondent’s contentions, the Conversion Contract was more than just goods
against a tolling fee — it established a relationship of “common interest” whereby
KCH (and, ultimately GEA) would, among other things, assist with delivery of
logistics and pay for Ukrainian domestic freight, resolve customs issues, and supply

the Oriana plant with necessary materials.'!”

Accordingly, the Tribunal is satisfied that the Conversion Contract constitutes an
investment within the meaning of Article 1(1)(e) of the BIT, in that it confers “rights
to the exercise of an economic activity.” Further, the Tribunal is satisfied that the
Products constitute an investment under Article 1(1)(a), as they form an integral part

of the investment under the Conversion Contract.

Turning then to Article 25 of the ICSID Convention (in deference to the view of
some, outlined above, that Article 25 places a limit on the State Parties’ ability to
define “investment” in their BIT for the purposes of ICSID jurisdiction), the Tribunal
has no doubt that the Conversion Contract also meets this test. In particular, it
satisfies all the elements of the “objective definition” that are commonly applied
under Article 25: the Claimant has provided some contribution to Ukraine, during a
certain period of time, while assuming the risks of the economic operation it was

performing.

17 WS Diss, 16.

44

152.

153.

154.

155.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

The Conversion Contract entailed a contribution in kind, in the form of over one
million metric tons of diesel and naphtha, catalysts and other materials, delivered to
Ukraine as part of a broad economic operation, as well as the contribution of the
Claimant’s know-how on logistics, marketing, and the mobilisation of repairs and
other services. This was clearly a complex relationship going far beyond a simple sale
of raw materials. The relationship extended over a certain duration (a three year
period if one considers only the time period when the Claimant was involved).
Further, it is unquestionable that the foreign investor, as it has itself emphasised in its
own Memorial, !'® undertook multiple risks, in the form of market risk, credit risk and
political risk, in particular since Oriana was supplied with diesel without advance

payment.

The Tribunal therefore concludes that, with respect to the Conversion Contract and
the Products, the Claimant made an “investment” in Ukraine, both within the
meaning of Articles 1(1)(e) and 1(1)(a) of the BIT and (if needed) Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention.

(ii) The Settlement Agreement and the Repayment Agreement. The Tribunal next
turns to the Settlement Agreement, together with the Repayment Agreement, being

the second category of alleged “investment” on which the Claimant relies.

The Claimant contends that, following the taking of its property, the form of its
investment changed into “claims to performance having [material or immaterial]
value” within the meaning of Article 1(1)(c) of the BIT. Specifically, the Claimant

argues that the Settlement Agreement “recognised the validity of the claims to

18 Memorial, {| 145.

45

156.

157.

158.

oo

159.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

performance,” while the Repayment Agreement “quantified the minimum value of

the claims and set out a mechanism for the value of the claims to be materialised.”!"°

The Respondent disagrees, and argues that neither agreement created rights under
Ukrainian law, which governs them. The Respondent contends that the Settlement
agreement “merely established an inventory of undelivered goods and recorded the
difference as a debt owed by Oriana to KCH,” while the Repayment Agreement

“established a means for the repayment by Oriana to KCH of Oriana’s debts.”!”°

The Tribunal agrees with Respondent that neither the Settlement Agreement nor the
Repayment Agreement — in and of themselves — constitute “investments” under
Article 1 of the BIT or (if needed) Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. As legal acts
they are not the same as the investment in Ukraine itself. In particular, (a) the
Settlement Agreement merely established an inventory of undelivered goods and
recorded the difference as a debt owed by Oriana to KCH; and (b) the Repayment
Agreement merely established a means for the repayment by Oriana to KCH of

Oriana’s debts.

(iii) The ICC Award. Finally, the Tribunal turns to the ICC Award, being the third

category of alleged “investment” on which the Claimant relies.

The Claimant argues that the ICC Award, in and of itself, falls under Article 1(1)(c)
of the BIT because it liquidated the amount due under the Settlement Agreement and

Repayment Agreement as of 2002. i

119 Memorial, {| 136.
120 Rejoinder, {] 158.
121 Memorial, {| 136.

46

160.

161.

162.

163.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

The Respondent disputes this, asserting that the ICC Award cannot be an investment
because it “is not an asset that was contributed to Ukraine, it was not made in

Ukraine, and therefore it does not fall within the definition of an investment.”!7?

The Tribunal agrees again with the Respondent. Whether tested against the criteria of
Article 1 of the BIT or Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, the ICC Award — in and
of itself — cannot constitute an “investment.” Properly analysed, it is a legal
instrument, which provides for the disposition of rights and obligations arising out of
the Settlement Agreement and Repayment Agreement (neither of which was itself an

“investment” — see {| 154 — 157 above).

Even if — arguendo — the Settlement Agreement and Repayment Agreement could
somehow be characterised as “investments,” or the ICC Award could be characterised
as directly arising out of the Conversion Contract or the Products, the Tribunal
considers that the fact that the Award rules upon rights and obligations arising out of
an investment does not equate the Award with the investment itself. In the Tribunal’s
view, the two remain analytically distinct, and the Award itself involves no
contribution to, or relevant economic activity within, Ukraine such as to fall — itself —
within the scope of Article 1(1) of the BIT or (if needed) Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention. For the same reason, the Settlement Agreement and Repayment
Agreement, as well as the Award, cannot be considered as falling within the terminal
proviso of Article 1 of the BIT (“Any change to the form in which assets are invested

shall not affect their nature as investments”).

It may be noted that in the Decision on Jurisdiction in Saipem S.p.A. v. The People’s
Republic of Bangladesh (a case heavily relied upon by the Claimant), the Tribunal

made statements that are difficult to reconcile, i.e., that the ICC arbitration is part of

22 Tr.5/p. 84.

47

164.

165.

166.

167.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

the investment (under the heading: “Has Saipem made an investment under Article 25
of the ICSID Convention?”); that the ICC award is not part of the investment (under
the heading “Does the dispute arise directly out of the Investment?”); and that it is
unnecessary to decide whether the ICC award is part of the investment (under the
heading “Jurisdictional objections under the BIT”).'3

The Tribunal therefore concludes that with respect to the Settlement Agreement and
the Repayment Agreement as well as the ICC Award, the Claimant has not made an
“investment” in Ukraine, both within the meaning of the BIT and (if needed) the

ICSID Convention.

(3) Did the Alleged Violations Occur Before the Alleged Investment?

Having determined that the Claimant made at least some “investment” in Ukraine
within the meaning of the BIT and the ICSID Convention (namely the Conversion
Contract and the Products), the Tribunal must next determine whether the violations

alleged by the Claimant occurred before the relevant investment was made.

It is Ukraine’s position that, to the extent any alleged breaches of the BIT took place
prior to the claimed acquisition by GEA’s subsidiary of shares in KCH, the Tribunal

lacks jurisdiction. ad

The Claimant disagrees, contending that the dispute meets the temporal requirement
of the BIT and the ICSID Convention because both “were applicable to both Ukraine

and GEA during the whole period relevant to the current dispute.” The Claimant

123

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/07, Decision on Jurisdiction, 21 March 2007, ff] 110; 113; 127.

24 Counter-Memorial, {| 149.

48

168.

169.

170.

171.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

further specifies that the BIT applies to investments made both before and after the

BIT’s entry into force. 1s

Furthermore, GEA claims that in any event “as a legal matter, an international claim
99126

can hardly accrue before the claimant learns of the acts that give rise to it.
Ukraine rejects this argument on the basis that it is a “novel” theory for which the

Claimant has provided no legal authority. v7

The Tribunal agrees with Ukraine that in order for the Tribunal to hear the Claimant’s
claims, the Claimant must have held an interest in the alleged investment before the
alleged treaty violations were committed. Contrary to the Claimant’s assertions, the
Tribunal’s analysis cannot hinge on whether the Claimant knew of Ukraine’s

purported treaty violations. The principle put forth by Ukraine has been consistently

128

applied in investment arbitrations ~°, and has been articulated by Zachary Douglas in

his treatise as follows:'”°

Rule 32. The claimant must have had control over the investment in the
host contracting state party at the time of the alleged breach of the
obligation forming the basis of its claim.

With this in mind, the Tribunal must determine as of what date the Claimant had an

interest in the alleged investment.

125 Memorial, { 147.

126 Reply, J 102.

127 Rejoinder, { 185, referring to Reply, 102.

8 See, e.g., Limited Liability Company Amto v. Ukraine, SCC Arbitration No. 080/2005, Final
Award, 26 March 2008, { 48(c); Saluka Investments BV (The Netherlands) v. The Czech Republic
(UNCITRAL), Partial Award, 17 March 2006, | 244; Phoenix Action, Ltd. v. The Czech Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/06/5, Award, 15 April 2009, 67.

po Zachary Douglas, THE INTERNATIONAL LAW OF INVESTMENT CLAIMS (Cambridge University
Press, 2009), p. 165, cited in Counter-Memorial, J 150.

49

172.

173.

174.

175.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

There is no dispute between the Parties that GEA indirectly owned and controlled
KCH when one of GEA’s wholly-owned subsidiaries purchased KCH from SF
Beteiligungs GmbH under the agreement dated 5 December 1997 (see {| 38 above).
However, the Parties do not agree as of what date GEA effectively gained ownership

of KCH.

Ukraine alleges that the Claimant’s acquisition of KCH took effect on 9 February
1998, and in any event no earlier than 29 January 1998, the date on which the

European Commission granted merger control approval to GEA’s acquisition of KCH

(a condition precedent to the share assignment taking effect).'*°

GEA disagrees, arguing that it acquired the share capital of KCH through the
agreement dated 5 December 1997, which took effect on 31 December 1997.13!

The Tribunal notes that Article 2.2 of the agreement dated 5 December 1997 provides
for GEA to acquire KCH’s shares subject to the fulfilment of certain conditions, as

follows:'?

[SF Beteiligungs-GmbH] hereby already assigns to [GEA], subject to the
condition precedent of the occurrence of the condition described in § 21.1
(hereinafter referred to as the “Cartel Condition’) as well as the payment
of the purchase price pursuant to § 3.1, all of the KCH Shares with effect
as of midnight December 31, 1997 (hereinafter referred to as the
“Effective Date’). [GEA] hereby accepts the assignment. The time at
which the Buyer shall have acquired the KCH Shares unconditionally and
free of encumbrances is hereinafter referred to as the “Closing Date.”

180 Rejoinder, ff 41 — 44.
St Reply, 195.
"C0153.

50

176.

177.

178.

179.

180.

181.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

Article 21.1 of the 5 December 1997 agreement, referred to in Article 2.2, sets forth
the details of the so-called “Cartel Condition,” which involves, among other things,

approval from the European Commission of the transaction foreseen by the Parties.

The Tribunal notes that, at the end of the agreement dated 5 December 1997, the
Parties’ notary advised that the agreement would not become “effective” until “all
consents required by law and the articles of association have been given and are
legally effective.”'*?

The Tribunal also notes that there are two concepts contained in Article 2.2 of the 5
December 1997 agreement, namely, that of an “Effective Date” and that of a “Closing

Date.”

In the Tribunal’s reading, once the European Commission granted approval of GEA’s
purchase of KCH — which it did — and the requisite purchase price was paid, the
conditions were fulfilled for the effective transfer of KCH shares on the Effective

Date of 31 December 1997.

As to whether the Tribunal should look to the Effective Date or the Closing Date as
the operative moment for determining ownership, the Tribunal observes that the
Claimant seems to take contradictory positions, requesting the Tribunal to look to the
Effective Date with respect to the 5 December 1997 agreement (see {174 above) and

the Closing Date with respect to the Sale and Purchase Agreement (see {[ 112 above).

This being said, the Tribunal notes that the Respondent, like the Claimant, argues
with reference to the Effective Date regarding the 5 December 1997 agreement. As
both Parties make this argument with reference to the Effective Date, the Tribunal

will accordingly take the Effective Date into account for purposes of determining

51

182.

183.

184.

185.

186.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

when GEA acquired KCH. The Tribunal thus concludes that GEA owned KCH as of
31 December 1997.

In light of the foregoing, the Tribunal determines that GEA had an interest in the
Conversion Contract as of 31 December 1997, when it gained an interest in KCH, and
up to 30 June 2004, when it lost its interest in KCH and any claims KCH had against

Oriana (see discussion in [| 94 — 118 above).

Having determined that GEA acquired its interest in the Conversion Contract as of 31
December 1997, the Tribunal must now determine whether the alleged treaty

violations occurred before or after that date.

The alleged violations consist of (i) the alleged misappropriation of 125,000 metric
tons of the Claimant’s Products; (ii) Ukraine’s alleged failure to investigate and
prosecute the shooting of Dr Chperoun; (iii) Ukraine’s alleged failure to recognise
and enforce the ICC Award; and (iv) Ukraine’s alleged failure to recognise GEA’s

claims in bankruptcy proceedings. ‘34 The Tribunal will examine these points in turn.

(i) Alleged Misappropriation of Products. With respect to the alleged
misappropriation of 125,000 metric tons of the Products, Ukraine submits that the
alleged misappropriation took place in 1997, prior to the purported acquisition of

KCH shares. '*°

In response, GEA submits that “there is no support in the record” for Ukraine’s
assertion that the alleged misappropriation occurred in 1997. The Claimant contends
that Ukraine’s assertion is based on the notes of a conversation with Mr Chernyk,

where he initially indicated that the taking took place in October/November 1997, but

4 Reply, {1 95 — 101.
85 Counter-Memorial, {ff 153 — 157.

52

187.

188.

189.

190.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

that those notes record that “Chernyk quickly crossed out the months,” suggesting

that the misappropriation extended after November 1997. 136

Instead, GEA argues that “major deliveries of products” from GEA to Oriana were
scheduled between 1 January 1998 and 31 December 1998, such that “[l]ogically,
these products could not have been taken from Oriana’s premises before they were
delivered to Oriana.” In any event, GEA is of the view that Ukraine bears the burden
of proving its allegation that the taking took place in 1997, which it has failed to

do,.!37

The Tribunal notes that the Claimant has not submitted any documents that speak
directly to the timing of any alleged taking. Instead, it relies principally on
Supplementary Agreement no. 57 to the Conversion Contract, dated 18 December
1997, which provides for the supply of large amounts of raw materials to Oriana over
the course of 1998.'°* The Claimant also relies on an interview dated 12 July 1998 of

the economic director of Oriana, who confirmed the 1998 deliveries. !*°

By contrast, Ukraine has adduced evidence that speaks directly to the timing of the

purported taking.

For example, Ukraine has submitted the minutes of a meeting between Oriana and the
management board of GEA (at the time named Metallgesellschaft AG), dated 10
August 1998, which indicate that the purported taking happened in large part before

GEA had obtained an interest in the investment: '“°

186 Reply, 1 98.
87 Reply, {91 99 — 101.

8S C0006.
"C0053.
40 R-0041.

53

191.

192.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

[A]ll documents are now to be made available for inspection. Arthur

Andersen will resume the examination on 11 August 1998 and

continuously provide information. According to the analysis of the

documents available so far, product shortages of at least DM 26 million

went missing prior to 31 January 1998 (= transfer of KCH to

[GEA]).(sic)!!
In addition, Ukraine has submitted the notes of a meeting held on 21 October 1998
between Mr Chernyk, president of Oriana, and Dr Kriiger of KCH, among others.
The notes of that meeting indicate that the president of Oriana himself indicated that
inventories were removed from Oriana during 1997 and in particular during the
months of October/November. Contrary to the Claimant’s assertion, the Tribunal
finds no indication that the fact that “Chernyk quickly crossed out the months”
suggests that the purported misappropriation extended after November 1997. It rather
seems to the Tribunal that Mr Chernyk scratched out October/November either
because he did not want the months he had written to be seen, or because he was

ultimately unsure of which months in 1997 to specify.

In the Tribunal’s view, the balance of the evidence adduced by the Parties militates
against the Claimant’s contention that “[t]he record indicates that the bulk of the
taking took place in 1998, that is, after GEA had acquired control of KCH.”'? To the
contrary, the Tribunal considers that the evidence adduced proves that the “bulk of
the taking” in fact took place in 1997, before GEA had acquired control of KCH.
This being said, the Tribunal is willing to give GEA the benefit of the doubt that,
though not the bulk, at least some of the taking took place after GEA had gained
control of KCH.

141 It should be noted that the sic is in the original document, presumably because the date referred
to should be 31 December 1997.

42 Reply, 199.

54

193.

194.

195.

196.

197.

198.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

The Tribunal therefore concludes that the Claimant did have an interest in the alleged
investment when the purported treaty violation occurred under this heading, and the

Tribunal accordingly has jurisdiction to hear claims arising in connection therewith.

In this regard, the Tribunal emphasises that the sole question in this context is
whether it can entertain a claim based on Ukraine’s alleged behaviour in connection
with the taking of the Products; the Tribunal reaches no conclusion regarding whether

such behaviour, if it occurred, actually amounted to a treaty violation.

(ii) Alleged Failure to Investigate Shooting. With respect to Ukraine’s alleged failure
to investigate and prosecute the shooting of Dr Chperoun, Ukraine argues that this
incident was not Ukraine’s fault and, in any event, it took place in December 1997,

prior to the Claimant’s alleged investment in Ukraine. MS

The Claimant does not contest Ukraine’s position that the shooting of Dr Chperoun
took place in December 1997. However, the Claimant specifies that it does not assert
“that Ukraine’s agents shot Dr Chperoun,” but rather that Ukraine failed to

investigate and prosecute the shooting beyond December 1997, '44

The Respondent answers that this incident appears to have been carried out by
“criminal elements” and is, therefore, not attributable to Ukraine. In any event, the
Respondent generally contends that the Claimant’s claims cannot be heard because
they “all relate directly or indirectly to its allegation that the Respondent expropriated

products allegedly belonging to the Claimant.”

The Tribunal notes that the Claimant’s assertion focuses not on the shooting of Dr

Chperoun in December 1997, but rather on the behaviour of Ukraine thereafter. The

Counter-Memorial, J 155.
44 Reply, 1.97.
Counter-Memorial, [ 245; Rejoinder, J 177.

55

199.

200.

201.

202.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

Claimant therefore makes an allegation of a treaty violation that, on its face, would
have occurred after it had gained an interest in the Conversion Contract. While the
Tribunal agrees with Ukraine that this allegation relates to the alleged taking of the
bulk of the Claimant’s products in 1997, it is nonetheless a separate contention.
Accordingly, the Tribunal considers that it may hear claims related to this alleged

violation in these proceedings.

In this connection, once again, the Tribunal emphasises that the sole question in this
context is whether it can entertain a claim based on Ukraine’s alleged behaviour
following the shooting of Dr Chperoun; the Tribunal reaches no conclusion regarding
whether the alleged behaviour actually occurred, and if it occurred, whether it

amounted to a treaty violation.

(iii & iv) Alleged Failure to Recognise ICC Award/GEA’s Claim in Bankruptcy.
With respect to Ukraine’s alleged failure to recognise and enforce the ICC Award and
Ukraine’s alleged failure to recognise GEA’s claims in bankruptcy proceedings, the
Claimant alleges that the former occurred over the course of 2003 — 2004, while the
courts’ refusal to accept GEA’s claims in bankruptcy occurred over the period 2003 —

2005.'4°

Here, Ukraine generally contends that the Claimant’s claims cannot be heard because
they “all relate directly or indirectly to its allegation that the Respondent expropriated

products allegedly belonging to the Claimant.” 4”

In the Tribunal’s view, these purported violations, on their face, would have taken
place after the Claimant had gained an interest in the Conversion Contract (i.e., after

31 December 1997). Taking this into account, and to the extent that these purported

146 Reply, 196.
147 Rejoinder, {{ 177.

56

203.

VII.

204.

205.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

violations also occurred before the Claimant lost its interest in the Conversion
Contract on 30 June 2004, the Tribunal considers that it may hear claims related to

these alleged violations in these proceedings.

Again, the Tribunal emphasises that the sole question in this context is whether it can
entertain a claim based on Ukraine’s alleged behaviour during the enforcement of the
ICC Award and the bankruptcy proceedings; the Tribunal reaches no conclusion
regarding whether such behaviour, if it occurred, actually amounted to a treaty

violation.

In light of the foregoing, on the issue of timing alone (and without reference to the
separate question as to the existence of, or nexus to, an “investment”) the Tribunal
concludes that it has jurisdiction to entertain claims based on the alleged violations
regarding the taking of the Claimant’s Products; Ukraine’s behaviour following Dr
Chperoun’s shooting and its behaviour in the enforcement of the ICC Award and in

the bankruptcy proceedings.

LIABILITY

GEA claims that Ukraine has violated its obligations under the provisions of the BIT
relating to expropriation; full protection and security; fair and equitable treatment;
arbitrary and discriminatory measures; national treatment and most-favoured nation
treatment; and adherence to obligations. The claims relating to each of these various

provisions are discussed, in turn, in this section.

The Tribunal recalls that, in accordance with its decision in J 125 above, the Claimant
does not have standing to bring claims arising out of the Conversion Contract that
accrued after 30 June 2004. It is not clear to the Tribunal, which, if any, of the
Claimant’s claims arise after this date. Indeed, such has not been specified by either
side over the course of these proceedings. Accordingly, out of an abundance of

caution, the Tribunal will address the merits of all of the Claimant’s claims in this

s7

206.

207.

a

208.

209.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

section.

Similarly, for the sake of completeness only, the Tribunal also considers claims
relating to the Settlement Agreement, the Repayment Agreement and the ICC Award,
which the Tribunal has determined in ff] 154 — 161 above did not constitute an

“investment” in any event under the BIT or the ICSID Convention.

A. Expropriation

Article 4(2) of the BIT protects against expropriation, in pertinent part, as follows:

Investments by nationals or companies of either Contracting State may
not, within the territory of the other Contracting State, be expropriated,
nationalized or subjected to such other measures the effect of which
would be tantamount to expropriation or nationalization except for the
public interest and against compensation. . . .

(1) | The Parties’ Positions

The Claimant alleges that (i) the misappropriation of Products and (ii) the failure of
the Ukrainian courts to recognise and enforce the ICC Award constitute

expropriations under Article 4(2) of the BIT for which Ukraine is responsible.

The Respondent denies having violated Article 4(2) of the BIT, stating that neither
the alleged loss of Products nor the refusal of Ukrainian courts to recognise and
enforce the ICC award constitute an expropriation by Ukraine of the Claimant’s

investment. '“*

48 Counter-Memorial, {| 179 — 180.

58

210.

211.

212.

213.

214.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis

The Tribunal will address the Parties’ arguments regarding the two alleged

expropriations in turn, before setting forth its conclusion.

(i) | The Misappropriation of the Products

The Claimant alleges that the misappropriation of the 125,000 metric tons of its
Products from the Oriana plant constituted an expropriation by Ukraine, rather than a
private theft, because the taking could not have been effected without State
support.'” In this regard, it has argued that various points evidence an expropriation

on the part of Ukraine.

By contrast, the Respondent considers that the Claimant has failed to “particularise

the alleged misappropriation or the Respondent’s alleged responsibility.”'*°

The Tribunal has carefully analysed each of the facts relied upon by the Claimant.

First, the Claimant contends that GEA’s managers, having spent considerable time
with the managers of Oriana both before and after the revelation of the taking, were
persuaded that these men were not thieves but were acting on orders from the

Government. '*!

In this connection, the Claimant contends that the managers of
Oriana, in contemporaneously memorialised conversations with GEA, indicated that

they were acting on orders “from Kiev” in appropriating GEA’s property. 152

49 Memorial, {¥] 157 — 158.
Counter-Memorial, J 205.
Reply, { 115.

182 Reply, J 115.

59

215.

216.

217.

218.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

The Respondent rejects as flawed the Claimant’s argument that because the
Claimant’s managers considered Oriana’s managers to be honest, the
misappropriation of the Products must have been undertaken on Government
orders.'*> The Respondent submits that even if Oriana’s managers were honest, this
does not exclude the possibility that criminal elements unconnected with the State,

such as Oriana employees, were responsible for the losses. Is4

The Tribunal is of the view that the Claimant has not met its burden of proof on this
point. In truth, the Claimant has provided nothing more than a character assessment in
support of its contention. In any event, even if the Tribunal were to accept the
Claimant’s contention, the Tribunal does not consider it sufficient to ground a holding

that Ukraine was responsible for the conduct in question.

Second, the Claimant argues that the sheer quantity of property taken and its
materiality “tends to confirm” the statements by Oriana managers that they were
acting on orders from the State. In support of this, the Claimant contends that it is not
possible to transport, market and recover the proceeds of the sale of material that
would fill a train 50 kilometres long, without Government approval and the

involvement of its officials.'*°

The Respondent rejects as “mere supposition” the Claimant’s allegation that the

quantity of the Products taken was so great as to make it “inconceivable” that those

1,156

responsible for the theft were acting without State approval Further, the

Respondent argues that the Claimant’s contentions on this point are inconsistent with

Counter-Memorial, J 215.

14 Rejoinder, 9] 229 — 230.

185 Reply, J 115.

186 Counter-Memorial, { 211; Rejoinder, 223.

60

219.

220.

221.

222.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

the Claimant’s contemporaneous view that the losses may have occurred over a long
4.157

perio
Once again, the Tribunal is of the view that the Claimant has not met its burden of
proof here. The Claimant has provided nothing more than speculation in support of
this contention. In any event, even if the Tribunal were to accept the Claimant’s
contention, as before, the Tribunal does not consider that such contention is sufficient

to allow a finding that Ukraine was itself responsible.

Third, the Claimant submits that the conduct of Ukrainian Government officials was
consistent with the taking, and inconsistent with a private theft. The Claimant
contends that, had it been a private theft, the Government would have initiated an
investigation and distanced itself from Oriana’s managers. Instead, the Claimant
observes that following the revelation of the taking, the Government and Oriana

immediately acted as a single unit. '%

The Respondent rejects the Claimant’s contentions, noting that the Claimant itself

never filed a criminal complaint in respect of the alleged misappropriation. 159

Again, the Tribunal is of the view that the Claimant has not met its burden of proof,
and has again provided nothing more than speculation in support of this contention.
In any event, even if the Tribunal were to accept the Claimant’s contention, the
Tribunal — again — does not consider that such contention could ground a holding as

to Ukraine’s responsibility.

1857 Rejoinder, {{ 228.
88 Reply, J 115.
189 Counter-Memorial, {212 — 214; Rejoinder, ff] 225 — 227.

61

223.

224.

225.

226.

227.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

Finally, the Claimant submits that the German Government came to the same
conclusion as GEA, i.e., that the taking of GEA’s property was attributable to
Ukraine.’

In response, the Respondent critically analyses the various statements of the German
Government upon which the Claimant relies, and submits that the “statements,
allegedly made by junior or unnamed officials, are hearsay and the Respondent has

absolutely no way of determining on what basis they were formulated.”'®!

As with each of the previous points, the Tribunal is of the view that the Claimant has
not met its burden of proof. The fact that certain German Government officials may
have come to the same conclusion as the Claimant is not evidence that can, on its

own, support a finding by this Tribunal as to Ukraine’s responsibility.

In conclusion, the Tribunal considers that the Claimant has not met its burden of
proving that Ukraine expropriated the Claimant’s property through the alleged taking
of GEA’s Products. Accordingly, the Tribunal rejects the Claimant’s contentions

under this heading.

(ii) The Non-Enforcement of the ICC Award

The Claimant asserts that the Ukrainian courts rendered “a travesty of justice in
applying a discriminatory law to avoid enforcement of GEA’s Award under the New
York Convention,” such that “their refusal to recognize GEA’s ICC Award is

tantamount to an expropriation.”

100 Reply, ¥ 115.
lol Rejoinder, {{ 231.
102 Reply, 161.

62

228.

229.

230.

231.

232.

233.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

In particular, the Claimant invokes the award of the ICSID tribunal in Saipem S.p.A.
v. The People’s Republic of Bangladesh, in support of its position that “[nJon-
recognition decisions rendered on grossly illegitimate grounds are tantamount to
expropriation.” !®

The Respondent argues that the Ukrainian courts’ refusal to recognise and enforce the
ICC Award does not constitute an expropriation, but was rather done “in accordance

with Ukrainian law and the New York Convention.”!

The Respondent argues that a finding that “a domestic court’s refusal to recognise
and enforce an arbitral award under the New York Convention” constitutes an
expropriation under international law would create an appellate jurisdiction for the
recognition and enforcement of awards, which “would undermine the present

international legal system for the recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards.” 165

Given the Tribunal’s finding that the ICC Award did not itself constitute an
“investment,” this claim must fail. However, even if the Tribunal had concluded

differently on the “investment” issue, the overall result would have been the same.

The Tribunal refers to the Saipem award, which forms the basis of the Claimant’s

claim under this heading.

In Saipem, the Bangladeshi courts annulled an ICC Award in Saipem’s favour. In {
133 of its award, the tribunal stated that setting aside an arbitral award cannot, in and

of itself, amount to an expropriation:
[T]he Tribunal agrees with the parties that the substantial deprivation of

Saipem’s ability to enjoy the benefits of the ICC Award is not sufficient

163 ICSID Case No. ARB/05/07, Award, 30 June 2009; Reply, { 148.
Counter-Memorial, { 218.
Counter-Memorial, { 219.

63

234.

235.

236.

237.

238.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

to conclude that the Bangladeshi courts’ intervention is tantamount to an
expropriation. If this were true, any setting aside of an award could then
found a claim for expropriation, even if the setting aside was ordered by
the competent state court upon legitimate grounds.

The tribunal then concluded that, based on the circumstances of that case, the non-
enforcement of the ICC Award amounted to an expropriation due to the particularly

egregious nature of the acts of the Bangladeshi courts.

The Claimant attempts in this case to deploy this standard, contending that Ukraine
committed “a travesty of justice in applying a discriminatory law to avoid

enforcement of GEA’s Award.”

The Tribunal disagrees with this characterisation. Even assuming (contrary to its
earlier finding) that the ICC Award could somehow qualify as an “investment,” the
Claimant has provided the Tribunal with no reason to believe that the courts of
Ukraine were “applying a discriminatory law,” only that the Ukrainian courts came to
a conclusion different to that which GEA had hoped. Moreover, contrary to Saipem,
the Tribunal has been presented with no evidence that the actions taken by the
Ukrainian courts were “egregious” in any way; that they amounted to anything other
than the application of Ukrainian law; or that they were somehow deliberately taken

to thwart GEA’s ability to recover on the ICC Award.

Accordingly, the Tribunal does not consider that the non-enforcement of the ICC
Award amounts to an expropriation, and rejects the Claimant’s contentions under this
heading.

(iii) Conclusion

In light of the foregoing, the Tribunal concludes that Ukraine has not committed any

expropriation in connection with the misappropriation of the Products, or its courts’

64

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

treatment of the ICC Award. Therefore, the Claimant’s expropriation claim fails.

B. Full Protection and Security

239. Article 4(1) of the BIT guarantees full protection and security to investments:

Investments by nationals or companies of either Contracting State shall
enjoy full protection and security within the territory of the other
Contracting State.

(1) | The Parties’ Positions

240. GEA claims that Ukraine’s failure to punish certain criminal acts constitutes a failure

241.

to provide full protection and security to GEA’s investment. Specifically, GEA
alleges that (i) the unpunished theft of GEA’s Products; (ii) Ukraine’s failure to
respond to the shooting of Dr Chperoun; and (iii) the unpunished misrepresentations
by Mr Sljuzar as to his status as President of Oriana constitute violations under

Article 4(1) of the BIT for which Ukraine is responsible. '®°

Ukraine alleges that the Claimant has failed to tie its full protection and security
allegations to the wording of Article 4(1) of the BIT, which provides for protection of

167 Tt ig

“Tijnvestments by nationals or companies of either Contracting State.
Ukraine’s position that the Claimant has not established that any of the alleged

violations relate to the protection or security of an investment. 168

166 Memorial, {| 167.
1o7  Rejoinder, {{ 268.
18 Rejoinder, {{ 268.

65

242.

243.

244.

245.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis

The Tribunal will address the Parties’ arguments regarding the three alleged
violations of the full protection and security standard in turn, before setting forth its

conclusion.

(i) | The unpunished theft of GEA’s Products

The Claimant claims that GEA’s Products were “the subject of a taking by the State,”
and that even if private individuals stole for their personal benefit, “the State’s
inaction in the face of these events itself constitutes a violation of the Treaty.” In the
Claimant’s view, the fact that “‘a whole range of Ukrainian State officials were aware
of the theft and acknowledged that compensation was due to GEA, yet did absolutely
nothing to punish or take disciplinary actions against the persons involved constitutes

a blatant breach by Ukraine of the full protection and security standard.”'®

The Respondent rejects the Claimant’s allegations, arguing that there is no evidence
here that the authorities in Ukraine were aware of the alleged taking prior to being
informed of it.!”° In addition, Ukraine states that the Claimant “cannot now object to
the fact that there was no ensuing criminal investigation,” given that KCH itself made

no criminal complaint at the relevant time. i

In response, the Claimant contends that its own decision not to initiate any criminal

complaints is irrelevant to the question whether Ukraine breached its obligation to

172

accord full protection and security. ‘~ The Claimant further alleges that “it was the

Ukrainian Government itself that dissuaded GEA from filing such a complaint,” and

109 Reply, {i 176 — 177.
17 Counter-Memorial, {ff 236 — 238.
"™ Counter-Memorial, {ff 239 — 240.
12 Reply, {if 181 — 183.

66

246.

247.

248.

249.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

that Ukraine’s promises that GEA would be compensated for the loss of Products

induced GEA to believe that it was unnecessary to file a criminal complaint. 17

In the Tribunal’s view, no matter under what legal standard the question is examined,

the Claimant’s contentions under this heading must fail.

The Claimant’s case on this issue entails a fundamental double standard. Over the
course of its contractual relationship with Oriana, GEA never considered it necessary
to file a criminal complaint for the taking of its Products. Yet within the context of
this arbitration, GEA now insists that Ukraine has breached its violations under the

BIT for doing the very same.

What is more, GEA argues as it does in the face of evidence that directly contradicts
its allegations, namely that it did not file a criminal complaint because Ukraine
dissuaded it from doing so. To the contrary, Ukraine made clear that the issues
between KCH and Oriana did not involve the State at all, and that any criminal
complaints should be filed by KCH or Oriana. Indeed, in the protocol of a meeting
held between the Ukrainian Government, the German ambassador and representatives
of GEA on 27 August 1998, Ukraine’s Vice Minister President indicated, with

respect to KCH’s problems, that:'4

[T]his is an issue solely between KCH and Oriana. He recommends to
initiate criminal proceedings against the guilty parties.

The Tribunal concludes, overall, that Ukraine’s conduct in response to the taking of
GEA’s Products does not amount to a violation of its obligations under Article 4(1) of

the BIT regarding full protection and security to investments.

3 Reply, J 183.
C0065.

67

250.

251.

252.

253.

254.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

(ii) Ukraine’s alleged failure to respond to the shooting of Dr
Chperoun
According to the Claimant, Ukraine was aware of the shooting of Dr Chperoun, but
did not initiate any investigation or undertake any other action “with respect to this
criminal offence.” The Claimant submits that this amounts to a breach of Ukraine’s

obligation under Article 4(1) of the BIT.!7>

The Respondent contends that “the shooting of Dr Chperoun did not concern an

investment by the Claimant,” as required by Article 4(1) of the BiT.'°

In any event, the Respondent contends that the “Claimant has not provided and is
unable to provide any evidence that the police authorities of the Respondent could in
any way have prevented the shooting of Dr Chperoun.”!”” Further, the Respondent
refers to a letter from the Lviv prosecutor’s office that indicates that the shooting was

investigated but that the crime remained unsolved. 178

Even if (which is doubtful) Dr Chperoun’s shooting could be construed as an event
that concerned an “investment” (i.e., the Conversion Contract), and no matter under
what legal standard this question is examined, the Claimant’s contentions under this
heading must fail. The record disproves the Claimant’s contention that Ukraine did
not initiate any investigation or undertake any other action with respect to this

criminal offence.

Specifically, the Tribunal refers to the letter from the Lviv prosecutor’s office dated

11 June 2010 addressed to the Deputy Minister of Justice regarding, among other

5 Reply, {if 185 — 187.

1% Rejoinder, {{ 270.

"7 Counter-Memorial, {[ 246.
"8 Rejoinder, {{ 285.

68

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

things, the shooting of Dr Chperoun. That letter clearly indicates that the shooting of

Dr Chperoun was investigated, but remains unsolved: 179

At the same time it was found out that on December 10, 1997, the
Investigation Unit of the Frankivskyi District Department of the Lviv
Municipal Office of the Main Office of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of
Ukraine in Lviv Oblast initiated the criminal case with regard to the
infliction of grave bodily injuries to V.M. [Chperoun], Vice-President of
Sirka association, who was also the representative of Klockner & Co.
Aktiengesellschaft, according to the elements of crime envisaged by part
1 of Article 101 of the Criminal Code of Ukraine (1960 version). During
the pre-trial investigation in the case it was established that on December
9, 1997 an unknown person gave a gunshot wound in the left hip by three
shots through the window of the first floor of building No. 98 located at
Konovalets street in Lviv.

On December 15, 1997 the prosecutor of Frankivsk district of Lviv city
re-interpreted the crime in the abovementioned criminal case according to
Art. 17, Art. 93 clause “e” of the Criminal Code of Ukraine (in the
wording of 1960) and it was accepted for proceedings by the investigator
of the abovementioned prosecutor's office. V.M. [Chperoun], the injured
person, was questioned during a pre-trial investigation and stated that to
his mind the criminal could kill him, however, he did not shoot in vital
organs deliberately. V.M. [Chperoun] does not suspect anybody in
commitment of the crime.

On July 24, 2007 the abovementioned criminal case was forwarded to the
Investigation Unit of the Frankivskyi District Department of the Lviv
Municipal Office of the Main Office of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of
Ukraine in Lviv Oblast for further investigation. In spite of measures
taken during pre-trial investigation at present the crime remains unsolved.

. Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes that, even if the shooting could be considered as
related to an investment, Ukraine’s treatment of the shooting of Dr Chperoun does
not amount to a violation of its obligations under Article 4(1) of the BIT regarding

full protection and security to investments.

"79 R-0060.

69

256.

257.

258.

259.

260.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

(iii) The unpunished misrepresentations by Mr Sljuzar

The Claimant argues that Ukraine violated its obligations of full protection and
security with respect to Mr Sljuzar’s execution of the Repayment Agreement (see T{

54 — 67 above).

According to the Claimant, Mr Sljuzar had the authority — and was represented as
having the authority — to sign the Repayment Agreement. The Claimant contends
that Oriana’s indications to the contrary in enforcement proceedings concerning the
ICC Award were falsehoods that Ukraine, as Oriana’s parent, never tried to

correct. '*°

Further, the Claimant submits that if Mr Sljuzar in fact had no authority but
nonetheless signed the Repayment Agreement on behalf of Oriana, then Oriana made
a misrepresentation to GEA to sign the Repayment Agreement, and that Ukraine — as
sole shareholder and party responsible for electing and empowering a duly authorised
president of Oriana — “was complicit in such misrepresentation through its silence

and acquiescence.”!*!

The Claimant asserts that in either scenario, Ukraine should have initiated
investigations and prosecuted wrongdoings “with respect to these criminal
offences.” '*?

According to the Respondent, the Claimant’s allegation regarding the failure to
prosecute Mr Sljuzar “clearly does not concern the protection or security of an

investment” and, therefore, falls outside the scope of Article 4(1) of the BIT. 183

180 Reply, {i 189 — 190.
ist Reply, J 191.
Reply, { 193.
Rejoinder, J 272.

70

261.

262.

263.

264.

265.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

In any event, the Respondent states that if any misrepresentation was made by Mr
Sljuzar regarding his status, such misrepresentation was not a criminal matter, and the
Respondent could not have prevented the making of the misrepresentation if such was

made. '**

In the Tribunal’s view, regardless of whether the actions of Mr Sljuzar could be said
to concern the protection or security of an “investment” (as to which, see {J 154 —
157), the Claimant’s claim under this heading fails. The Claimant’s attempts to make
Ukraine liable for the actions of Oriana cannot stand in light of the record, which
makes clear that Oriana was a separate legal entity, acting entirely in a commercial

capacity, for which Ukraine was not responsible.

In a meeting on 27 August 1998 between representatives of the Governments of
Ukraine and Germany and representatives of Metallgesellschaft, Vice Minister
President Tyhypko made clear that Claimant’s problems were “an issue solely
between KCH and Oriana.”'**

Claimant understood this. Indeed, in his notes of 9 December 1998 on the status of

negotiations between KCH, Oriana and Ukraine, Dr Déss wrote that;'°°

In this context, the Ukrainian side emphasised repeatedly that Oriana was
an independent legal entity for the transgressions of which Ukraine was
not responsible. This position was also articulated on August 27, 1998 by
[Vice] Minister President Tyhypko during a meeting with the German
ambassador and members of the board of management of
Metallgesellschaft AG.

Taking into account that the Repayment Agreement was signed on 29 September

1998 and that the Vice Minister President of Ukraine informed GEA of Oriana’s

‘8 Counter-Memorial, {[ 248.
‘5 C0065.

71

261

26

268.

6.

7.

oo

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

independence from Ukraine as early as a month before, the Tribunal considers that
there are no grounds to accept the Claimant’s argument that Ukraine was responsible

for Mr Sjulzar’s “unauthorised” signing of the Repayment Agreement.'*”

Accordingly, even if the Repayment Agreement could be considered as an
investment, the Tribunal concludes that Ukraine’s treatment of Mr Sljuzar does not
amount to a violation of its obligations under Article 4(1) of the BIT regarding full

protection and security to investments.

(iv) Conclusion

In light of the foregoing, the Tribunal concludes that there are no grounds to hold
Ukraine liable for violating its obligations under Article 4(1) of the BIT to accord the
Claimant’s investment full protection and security, whether it be with respect to the
unpunished theft of GEA’s Products; Ukraine’s alleged failure to respond to the
shooting of Dr Chperoun; or the unpunished alleged misrepresentations of Mr

Sljuzar.

C. Fair and Equitable Treatment
Article 2(1) of the BIT provides the following guarantee of fair and equitable

treatment:

Either Contracting State shall, if possible, promote within its territory
investments by nationals or companies of the other Contracting State and

 

se €-0063.
187 The Respondent has referred to other documents that also provide evidence that Ukraine was
not responsible for Oriana. See, e.g., C-0016 (minutes of a meeting dated 13 August 1998, confirming
that any debt under the Conversion Contract was Oriana’s alone); C-0023 (minutes of a meeting dated
23 February 1999, confirming the same); R-0011 (letter dated 4 September 2000 from the Ministry of
Finance to the State Property Fund, confirming that Ukraine was only liable for loans guaranteed by
the Government and that all other issues of private debts were to be settled between Claimant and
Oriana before the courts).

72

269.

270.

271.

272.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

shall permit such investments in accordance with its legislation. It shall
in any case grant investments fair and equitable treatment.

(1) | The Parties’ Positions

According to the Claimant, the Respondent has violated its obligations to provide fair
and equitable treatment to GEA’s investment in Ukraine by (i) failing to keep its
promise to repay GEA for property wrongfully taken; (ii) thwarting GEA’s
expectation to recover the amount Oriana owed to it during the bankruptcy
proceedings; and (iii) not supporting the enforcement of the ICC Award before the

Ukrainian courts, leading to a denial of justice.

The Respondent disputes that the Claimant had a legitimate expectation that Ukraine
would pay for its property or that it would recover in bankruptcy proceedings. In
addition, the Respondent submits that the Claimant has not been denied justice by the

Ukrainian courts.

Both Parties have pleaded their respective claims and defences relating to fair and
equitable treatment under Article 2(1) of the BIT in terms of whether GEA’s

“legitimate expectations” have been protected. 188

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis

(i)  Ukraine’s alleged promise to repay GEA for property
wrongfully taken

First, GEA contends that Ukraine violated GEA’s legitimate expectations that
Ukraine would keep its promise that GEA would be repaid within a reasonable time

for the property taken. 189

188 Memorial, { 171; Reply {91 197 et seq.; see generally, Counter-Memorial {{] 249, et seq.

73

273.

274.

275.

276.

277.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

Ukraine disagrees, arguing that this is simply a reiteration of the expropriation claim

and should accordingly be rejected. 190

Ukraine further argues with respect to “alleged promises made by or on behalf of the
Respondent” that (i) the documentary record shows that the Respondent considered
that any obligation to pay KCH for missing products lay with Oriana'”!; (ii) “the
Claimant purchased the KCH shares long before any of the statements relied on by
the Claimant were made”!”; and (iii) “the losses which the Claimant claims do not
relate to any shipments that the Claimant/KCH may have made subsequent to the

July-August meetings.” 18

GEA rebuts the Respondent’s contentions, arguing that the key question is not when
Ukraine made its representations, but whether GEA “change[d] [its] position based

on the undertakings at issue.”!°*

In response, Ukraine argues that the “Claimant assumed . . . a substantial risk when it
made its alleged investment in Ukraine” with respect to Oriana’s financial situation,
and that this assumption of risk evidences the “lack of basis in the Claimant’s claim

that its investment suffered unfair and inequitable treatment.”

The Tribunal has reviewed all the documents upon which the Claimant relies for the
proposition that Ukraine made a promise to repay the Claimant for the lost Products.
In the Tribunal’s view, it is entirely unclear from the documents that Ukraine in fact

made any such promises to the Claimant, or failed to keep any promises made.

 

189 Memorial, {| 172.

190 Rejoinder, {{ 288.

11 Counter-Memorial, {] 273 — 274; Rejoinder, ff] 294 — 308.
Counter-Memorial, {{ 275.

193 Rejoinder, {{ 321.

14 Reply, {i 231 — 233.

74

278.

279.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

For example, the Claimant refers to the record of a meeting held on 10 July 1998 in
Frankfurt. According to the Claimant, this record evidences that the Ukrainian
Government promised that specialists would promptly “work out” the amount of
misappropriated property and “[t]he form in which repayment is made and the
corresponding timetable will also be worked out by the end of July. The Ukrainian
side and [GEA] will make the final decision on this problem on 1 August.”!°°
However, the Tribunal struggles to see how Ukraine’s promise to “work out” the
amount of misappropriated property and a payment timetable could amount to a
promise to pay, particularly in light of the Parties’ indication that they would “make a

final decision on this problem” at a later date.

The Claimant further relies on a letter dated 31 July 1998 from Ukraine’s Ministry of
Economy, which reads: “[rlegarding the missing quantities identified after the
inventory at WAT ‘ORIANA’, we recommend the preparation of an inventory record

, which must then be signed by both contract partners. Immediately upon
submission of this record at the Ministry of Economy, the Ministry will take control
of the missing quantities noted during the inventory.”!”” Here, too, the Tribunal fails
to understand how a recommendation to prepare an inventory and a promise to “take
control of the missing quantities” could add up to a promise on the part of Ukraine to
make any sort of payment to GEA. This is all the more so, taking into account that in
that same letter, the Ministry of Economy specified that “[a]ccording to the Ukrainian
Law ‘On entrepreneurial activities’ the government is not permitted to interfere with

the business activities of single companies.” (emphasis added)

 

5 Counter-Memorial, {{[ 277 — 283.

196 Reply, J 221, quoting from Protocol of a meeting between representatives of the Ukrainian

Government, Oriana, BV and KCH signed only by the Ukrainian side on 10 July 1998 (C-0012).
197 Reply, | 222, quoting from Fax from the Ukrainian Ministry for Economy to GEA dated 31

July 1998 (C-0010).

75

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

280. In addition, the Claimant relies on the fact that the 10 July 1998 meeting and the 31

281.

July 1998 letter were followed by the conclusion of the Settlement Agreement on 7
August 1998. In this respect, the Claimant contends that it “legitimately understood .

that the Settlement Agreement was the direct consequence of Ukraine’s earlier
promises.”!°* The Tribunal considers the signing of the Settlement Agreement to be
of no help to the Claimant’s position. Not only were there no “earlier promises” from
Ukraine, but the Settlement Agreement itself does not include Ukraine as a party — it
is only between KCH and Oriana, which Ukraine had always made clear was a
separate legal entity (see [ 263 above).'”
The Claimant also refers to the record of a meeting held on 13 August 1998 between
representatives of the Ukrainian Government, Oriana and GEA, which, according to
GEA, “records specific obligations of the State, including an express undertaking that
‘the Ministry of Industrial Policy would ensure that the provisions of the protocol
would be fulfilled by the Ukrainian party.””20° While it does indeed seem that the
Ministry of Industrial Policy made such an undertaking, the Tribunal notes that the
undertaking in question only related to the protocol of that particular meeting which,
as the Claimant admits, concerned GEA’s “future dealings with Oriana, including the
execution of pledge agreements and the termination of the ongoing bankruptcy

9201

proceedings against Oriana. In other words, no promises were made, in the terms

now asserted by the Claimant, that Ukraine would pay GEA for the lost Products.

18 Reply, {if 223 — 225.
"C0015.

200 Reply, { 226, quoting from Protocol of a meeting between representatives of the Ukrainian and
German Governments dated 13 August 1998 (C-0016).

201 Reply, 1 226.

76

282.

283.

284.

285.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

Finally, the Claimant refers to the record of a 27 August 1998 meeting between
representatives of GEA and Ukraine and the ambassador of Germany, where Vice
Prime Minister Tyhypko stated that “he understands that Oriana’s high debt level
deters investors. Ukraine will do its part to resolve the problem.”?° In the Tribunal’s
view, the Vice Prime Minister’s words cannot be read as a promise that Ukraine
would pay for GEA’s lost Products, particularly taking into account that he is
recorded in the same document as saying that “[a]s for KCH’s problem . . . this is an

issue solely between KCH and Oriana.”

Overall, the Tribunal finds that, even on the assumption that there existed a relevant
“investment” for the purposes of this claim, there is no basis on the record before it to
find that Ukraine breached its obligation to give GEA’s investment fair and equitable
treatment, by failing to fulfil a promise to pay for the lost Products, as no such

promise was ever made.

(ii) Ukraine’s alleged thwarting of GEA’s expectation to recover
the amount Oriana owed to it during bankruptcy proceedings
GEA argues that Ukraine violated GEA’s reasonable expectations that GEA would be
able to recover the monies Oriana owed to it in bankruptcy proceedings. In response,
Ukraine submits that GEA cannot have had a legitimate expectation that the debt
would be recovered in the bankruptcy, given the Claimant’s knowledge of Oriana’s

financial situation.”

In the Claimant’s view, the Respondent made repayment impossible, in violation of
Article 2(1) of the BIT, because (i) the Respondent never terminated the bankruptcy

proceedings initiated by Shelton, as promised; (ii) the Respondent allowed the

22 Reply, | 228, quoting Protocol of a meeting between representatives of the Ukrainian and
German Governments, Oriana and MG dated 27 August 1998 (C-0065).

203 Counter-Memorial, {{ 288; Rejoinder, {[ 323 — 325.

77

286.

287.

288.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

transfer of Oriana shares to Shelton; and (iii) once Shelton’s custody of Oriana ended,
Oriana’s assets were stripped (see {50 above). The Tribunal will deal with each of

these points in turn, before setting forth (iv) its conclusion.

(i) Alleged Promises by Ukraine to Terminate the Bankruptcy Proceedings. With
respect to the bankruptcy proceedings brought by Shelton, the Claimant contends that
shortly after Shelton commenced bankruptcy proceedings against Oriana in July
1998, “Ukraine made specific representations and undertakings to GEA that the
bankruptcy proceedings against Oriana would be terminated and that GEA would be
repaid” the amount owed by Oriana.™ ~The Respondent denies that Ukraine made
any “unqualified undertaking” of this nature and denies the Claimant’s claim in its

entirety. 205

The Tribunal has reviewed all the documents upon which the Claimant relies for the
proposition that Ukraine made a promise to terminate the bankruptcy proceedings. In
the Tribunal’s view, it is entirely unclear from the documents that Ukraine in fact

made any promises to the Claimant, or reneged upon any promises made.

For example, the Claimant relies on a letter dated 31 July 1998 from the Ukrainian
Ministry of Industrial Policy, which states that “the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine
will pass a document which, under current Ukrainian law, will cancel these

bankruptcy proceedings.””°°

Similarly, the Claimant relies on the protocol of a
meeting between representatives of the Ukrainian Government, Oriana and
Metallgesellschaft dated 13 August 1998, in which Ukrainian officials are recorded as

stating that “[t]he Ukrainian party shall carry out all acts permitted by applicable

204 Reply, {1 238.

205 Rejoinder, J 332.
206 Reply, @ 240, quoting Letter from the Ukrainian Ministry for Industrial Policy to
Metallgesellschaft dated 31 July 1998 (C-0014).

78

289.

290.

291.

292.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

legislation of Ukraine in order to terminate the bankruptcy proceedings pending

against JSC ‘Oriana.””?”

In addition, the Claimant refers to the protocol of a meeting between representatives
of the Ukrainian and the German Governments, Oriana and Metallgesellschaft dated
27 August 1998, in which the Vice Minister President Tyhypko was recorded as
stating that “[t]he bankruptcy proceeding will be terminated in any event. In case of
doubt, Ukraine would be prepared to satisfy Shelton’s claims against Oriana through

state funds.”

In response, the Respondent submits that these statements do not amount to
unconditional promises, but rather demonstrate that “the Ukrainian Government
officials had emphasised to the Claimant and KCH that Ukrainian law governed the
question of the termination of the bankruptcy proceedings and that any termination

could only be carried out to the extent permitted by Ukrainian law.”2”

The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent. In the Tribunal’s view, the statements
made by the Respondent cannot be read as unconditional promises for payment. At
most, these statements, taken together, may be read as Ukraine engaging to use its
best efforts to assist in bringing the bankruptcy proceedings to an end within the

scope of Ukrainian law.

The Tribunal’s understanding is supported by documents that indicate that the
Claimant understood the Respondent’s statements the same way. For example, it is

recorded in the minutes of a presentation to the Claimant’s board on 10 August 1998

207 Reply, {| 241, quoting Protocol of a meeting between representatives of the Ukrainian

Government, Oriana and Metallgesellschaft dated 13 August 1998 (C-0016).
208 Reply, {{ 242, quoting Protocol of a meeting between representatives of the Ukrainian and the

German Governments, Oriana and MG dated 27 August 1998 (C-0065).
2 Rejoinder, J 327.

79

293.

294.

295.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

that “[t]he government allegedly has no influence on the suspension of the
bankruptcy proceeding. This would have to be stopped directly by Oriana.”?"”
Moreover, the Claimant itself lodged a bankruptcy petition in the Shelton bankruptcy
proceedings on 20 August 1998, which is evidence that the Claimant did not expect

Ukraine to stop them.7!!

Accordingly, assessing all the evidence, and again on the assumption that there
existed a relevant “investment” for the purposes of this claim, the Tribunal concludes
that the Respondent did not make any promises to the Claimant that it would
terminate the Shelton bankruptcy proceedings and, therefore, did not violate Article
2(1) of the BIT on this basis.

(ii) Shelton’s Control over Oriana’s Assets. The Claimant objects to the fact that, on
19 October 1998, the Ukrainian Cabinet of Ministers issued a decree, allowing the
transfer of the majority of Oriana’s share capital to Shelton. The Claimant argues that
this transfer was in violation of the Respondent’s obligation to give fair and equitable
treatment to the Claimant’s investment, as Shelton was given preference over other
creditors in the face of the Claimant’s legitimate expectation that “one creditor would
not be granted a majority interest in Oriana and control over all its assets without

. . «factati - 99212
notice, a hearing or any other manifestation of due process.

The Respondent submits that the appointment of Shelton as custodian of Oriana did
not amount to a breach of the BIT, as it was done in accordance with Ukrainian law.
In any event, the Respondent notes that Shelton’s custodianship ended in July 1999,

and denies that Shelton’s control over Oriana caused any prejudice to the Claimant:

210 R0041.
2 C0168.
212 Reply, i 244 — 248.

80

296.

297.

298.

os

299.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

“Ta] creditor of Oriana which had commenced bankruptcy proceedings was simply

appointed the temporary custodian of Oriana for a limited period of time.”?3

The Tribunal has been presented with no evidence that Ukraine somehow “gave
preference” to Shelton by granting it temporary custodianship of Oriana between
October 1998 and July 1999. What is more, the Claimant has not denied the
Respondent’s contentions that Shelton’s appointment as custodian was carried out in
accordance with Ukrainian law, and has not demonstrated that any damage resulted

from this short-term custodianship.

In light of this, assuming there existed a relevant “investment,” the Tribunal
concludes that whatever control the Respondent gave to Shelton over Oriana’s assets
did not violate the Respondent’s obligations to give the Claimant’s investment fair

and equitable treatment under Article 2(1) of the BIT.

(iii) The Alleged Stripping of Oriana’s Assets. The Claimant contends that Ukraine
violated GEA’s reasonable expectations that Oriana’s assets would not be granted to
a new legal entity without making provision for payment of Oriana’s debts to

GEA.*"*

In this respect, GEA refers to representations made by Ukrainian Government
officials during a meeting on 24 August 1999, in which GEA and others were told
that a new entity — namely, a new petrochemical joint venture — would repay debts

5

owing to GEA on a priority basis.”! According to the Claimant, however, the

resolution subsequently issued by the Cabinet of Ministers on 10 August 2000 “did

Counter-Memorial, J 303; Rejoinder, {{ 335.
Memorial, {{ 173.
Reply, { 252.

81

300.

301.

302.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

not provide for repayment of debts to GEA, and instead only provided for the

repayment of debts of Oriana that the State had specifically guaranteed.”?!°

The Claimant submits that, thereafter, a tender was organised to find an investor for
the joint venture, pursuant to which Luxoil Petrochemical was selected instead of
GEA. The Claimant explains that following this, a subsidiary of Oriana — Lukor —
was created, to which Oriana transferred its petrochemical complex as its contribution
to the joint entity. The Claimant submits that, as a result of this transfer, the Claimant
was left to attempt to enforce its debt against an entity with few assets but substantial
liabilities.”

The Respondent acknowledges that on 10 August 2009, the Cabinet of Ministers
issued a resolution that provided that the BV loan to Oriana should be repaid by the
new petrochemical venture (see | 48 above). However, the Respondent disputes that
the purported meeting on 24 August 1999 could have given rise to a legitimate
expectation on the Claimant’s part that any new petrochemical company would

assume all of Oriana’s debts, including the KCH debt.7!8

Further, the Respondent submits that the creation of Lukor “did not have the effect of
somehow defrauding Oriana’s creditors, which could and did continue to maintain
their claims against Oriana after Lukoil’s participation.” The Respondent maintains
that the shares held by Oriana in Lukor “represented a valuable asset” and that “if
KCH had been able to enforce its debt against Oriana, it could still have done so.”

Thus, “the facts complained of had no material effect on the Claimant’s position.”?!

216 Reply, {1 253.

Reply, {{ 250 — 261.

Rejoinder, #{[ 338 — 339.
Counter-Memorial, {{[ 316 — 318.

82

303.

304.

305.

306.

307.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

In the Tribunal’s view, it is a mischaracterisation to describe Oriana’s part-
privatisation as “asset stripping.” To the contrary, Oriana retained a 50% interest in
the new company, Lukor, valued at approximately US$ 300,000,000.7° What is
more, Oriana’s creditors could and did continue to maintain their claims against
Oriana after the part-privatisation”", and the Tribunal has been presented with no

basis to conclude that the Claimant could not have done the same.

Accordingly, on the basis of all the evidence, and again assuming there existed a
relevant “investment” for the purposes of this claim, the Tribunal concludes that
Ukraine did not violate GEA’s reasonable or legitimate expectations regarding the

placement of Oriana’s assets and the repayment of its debts to GEA.

(iv) Conclusion. In light of the foregoing, the Tribunal finds that there is no basis in
the record to find that Ukraine breached its obligation to give GEA’s investment fair
and equitable treatment, in relation to GEA’s expectation to recover the amount

Oriana owed to it during bankruptcy proceedings.

(iii) Ukraine’s alleged failure to support the enforcement of the
ICC Award before the Ukrainian courts, leading to a denial of
justice
The Claimant alleges that Ukraine’s actions or omissions led to a denial of justice on
two fronts, namely (i) the non-recognition of the ICC Award; and (ii) the legal

proceedings relating to the bankruptcy proceedings initiated by Pryvatbank.

(i) The Non-Recognition of the ICC Award. As regards the ICC Award, GEA’s claim

- 2
can be summed up as follows:?

220 €-0029.
21 Td.
222 Memorial, { 174.

83

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

GEA could and did reasonably expect that the Ukrainian courts would
respect fundamental principles of due process and international law
applicable to the enforcement and recognition of arbitration awards, and
that the Ukrainian State would support, as it had promised, and not
oppose the recognition of an award for a debt that it had repeatedly
promised would be paid in the past. GEA could and did reasonably
expect that the Ukrainian courts, if they were to take the extraordinary
step of refusing enforcement of an award under the New York
Convention, would at least address the arbitral tribunal’s grounds for
finding an agreement to arbitrate to exist — grounds reiterated by GEA in
its application. The Ukrainian judgments offend any sense of judicial
propriety.

308. The Respondent replies that to the extent that the Claimant’s denial of justice claim is

309.

based upon the refusal of Ukrainian courts to recognise and enforce the ICC Award, it
is a claim based on “substantive denial of justice.” The Respondent denies that the
Ukrainian courts misapplied Ukrainian law, and in any event states that the “Claimant
has been unable to cite any modern jurisprudence in which the misapplication of
national substantive law by a domestic court has been deemed to constitute a denial
of justice in public international law” because “no such jurisprudence exists.”
Further, the Respondent contends that the Claimant has failed to establish that the
Tribunal has jurisdiction that would allow “the re-examination of issues of Ukrainian

. 99223
substantive law.”?*

To the extent that the Claimant’s allegations regarding the ICC Award are procedural
in nature, the Respondent disagrees with the Claimant’s assertion that the Ukrainian
courts did not address all of GEA’s arguments. The Respondent submits that there is
no obligation under international law requiring courts to address in their decisions
every argument made by the Parties. The obligation is to provide reasons for

decision, and the Respondent states that this obligation was met. In any event, the

23° Counter-Memorial, { 336.

84

310.

311.

312.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

Ukrainian courts did address the question of the existence of the arbitration clause,

contrary to the Claimant’s assertions.*~*

In response, the Claimant argues that the decisions of national courts are not
“insulated from international consideration,” particularly where, as here, “the
decisions of the Ukrainian courts were so manifestly wrong.” In the Claimant’s view,
the Tribunal should examine the “grossly improper decisions in the application of the
law” taken by the courts of Ukraine, in light of the fact that they refused enforcement
without ever addressing “the arbitral tribunal’s grounds for finding an agreement to
arbitrate to exist — grounds reiterated by GEA in its application.” In the Claimant’s
view, this gives rise to “justified concerns as to the judicial propriety” of the outcome

of the enforcement proceedings.”

Given the Tribunal’s finding that the ICC Award did not itself constitute an
“investment,” this claim must fail. However, even if the Tribunal had concluded

differently on the “investment” issue, the overall result would have been the same.

As an initial matter, the Tribunal notes that the Parties agree that the standard by
which a denial of justice should be judged is that articulated in Mondev International

Ltd. v. United States of America (“Mondev’):°

The test is not whether a particular result is surprising, but whether the
shock or surprise occasioned to an impartial tribunal leads, on reflection,
to justified concerns as to the judicial propriety of the outcome, bearing in
mind on the one hand that international tribunals are not courts of appeal,
and on the other hand that Chapter 11 of NAFTA (like other treaties for
the protection of investments) is intended to provide a real measure of
protection. In the end the question is whether, at an international level

24 Counter-Memorial, {{ 337.

25 Memorial, 174; Reply, {ff 215, 262 - 265.
#6 ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2, Award, 11 October 2002, at | 127. Counter-Memorial, { 327;
Reply, { 207; Rejoinder, J 348.

85

313.

314.

315.

316.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

and having regard to generally accepted standards of the administration of
justice, a tribunal can conclude in the light of all the available facts that
the impugned decision was clearly improper and discreditable, with the
result that the investment has been subjected to unfair and inequitable
treatment. This is admittedly a somewhat open-ended standard, but it
may be that in practice no more precise formula can be offered to cover
the range of possibilities.

With this agreed standard in mind, the Tribunal turns to its analysis.

As the Tribunal understands it, the Claimant’s principal complaint is that the courts of
Ukraine purportedly refused enforcement of the ICC Award without ever
“address[ing] the arbitral tribunal’s grounds for finding an agreement to arbitrate to

exist — grounds reiterated by GEA in its application” (see { 310 above).

However, on the Tribunal’s review of the record, it is not that the courts of Ukraine
never addressed the Claimant’s argument, it is simply that the courts heard those

arguments and rejected them.

Indeed, in its decision of 28 May 2003 refusing enforcement of the ICC Award, the
Appellate Court of the Ivano-Frankivsk Region directly dealt with the issue, holding

that:?””

. this original agreement on jurisdiction [i.e., in the Conversion
Contract] was replaced by an arbitration agreement in the Agreement for
Repayment of Debts dated 29.09.1998, which provides for arbitration
under the [ICC Rules].

Considering the case, the court ascertained that the above-mentioned
agreement was concluded and signed in contradiction to the Ukrainian
effective legislation by the representatives of OJSC “Oriana” without duly
authorised powers.

27 €-0120.

86

317.

318.

319.

320.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

The same goes for the decision of the Supreme Court of Ukraine dated 15 April 2004,
in which it rejected the Claimant’s cassation complaint on the grounds that the
complaint was not one that, under the Civil Procedural Code of Ukraine, was “linked”

to allowing a change in an appellate court decision.?*

In light of this, and regardless whether this denial of justice claim is characterised as
procedural or substantive, the Tribunal concludes that the Claimant has failed to
demonstrate that the Ukrainian courts took their decisions without taking the
Claimant’s arguments into account. Instead, it appears from the record that the courts

took the Claimant’s arguments into account and simply rejected them.

Taking into account the terms of the Mondev test, the Tribunal does not have any
“justified concerns as to the judicial propriety of the outcome” of the decisions of the
Ukrainian courts in view of “generally accepted standards of the administration of
justice.” Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes that there is nothing “clearly improper
and discreditable” with respect to those decisions, with the result that the Claimant’s
claim that, if the ICC Award would have been considered as an investment, its

investment has not been subject to fair and equitable treatment is rejected.

(ii) The Legal Proceedings relating to the Bankruptcy Proceedings Initiated by
Pryvatbank. Finally, GEA contends that Ukraine violated GEA’s reasonable
expectations that the Ukrainian courts would recognise the debt claim pursued by
KCH in the Oriana bankruptcy proceedings, in particular those that were initiated by
Pryvatbank in September 2002.7? More specifically, the Claimant submits that, in

connection with these proceedings, the Ukrainian courts “failed to administer due

28 C0125.
229 Memorial, J 175.

87

321.

322.

323.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

process and GEA was deprived of a fair procedure” in violation of the fair and

equitable treatment standard.?*°

The Respondent explains that KCH initially attempted to register its claim by virtue
of the ICC Award which had not been recognised by the Ukrainian courts.
Consequently, the claim was dismissed as time-barred. According to the Respondent,
no denial of justice was committed, but rather KCH challenged the non-registration of
its claim through the appropriate legal channels in Ukraine and was ultimately
unsuccessful because of its own strategic decisions and issues of Ukrainian
bankruptcy law that were extensively litigated in Ukraine.”*!
The Tribunal has not been presented with any evidence that the Ukrainian courts
“failed to administer due process” or “deprived” the Claimant of a “fair procedure.”
To the contrary, the record before it demonstrates that the Claimant was accorded a
full hearing by the Ukrainian courts, but that the courts disagreed with the Claimant’s
point of view.?” Accordingly, even assuming that there existed a relevant
“investment” for the purposes of this claim, the Tribunal rejects the Claimant’s
contentions under this heading. The Claimant has not met its burden of proving that
it was subject to a denial of justice in the context of the bankruptcy proceedings

initiated by Pryvatbank.

In conclusion, on the basis of its findings under points (i) and (ii) under this heading,
the Tribunal has determined that the Claimant was not subject to a denial of justice in

the Ukrainian courts and, therefore, was not subject to unfair or inequitable treatment.

230

Reply, { 280.
231 Counter-Memorial, {ff 351 — 381.
22 See, e.g., C-0120; C-0129; C-0132; C-0134; C-0143.

88

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

(iv) Conclusion

324. In light of the foregoing, the Tribunal concludes that there are no grounds to hold

325.

32

327.

n

6.

x

Ukraine liable for violating its obligation to give the Claimant’s investment fair and
equitable treatment in accordance with Article 2(1) of the BIT, whether it be with
respect to payment for the Products; GEA’s expectation to recover amounts owed by

Oriana during the bankruptcy proceedings; or the enforcement of the ICC Award.

D. Arbitrary and Discriminatory Measures

Article 2(3) of the BIT provides for protection against arbitrary and discriminatory

measures, as follows:

Neither Contracting State shall in any way impair by arbitrary or
discriminatory measures the management, maintenance, use or enjoyment
of investments made by nations or companies of the other Contracting
State within its territory.

(1) | The Parties’ Positions
The Claimant contends that its enjoyment of its investment has been impaired

because the Respondent has violated its obligations under Article 2(3) of the BIT.

Specifically, GEA claims that “[t]he record establishes that 125,000 metric tons of
GEA’s property was impaired by lawless acts trampling on any sense of due
process.” In addition, GEA claims that, subsequent to the misappropriation of its
property, “Ukraine time and again impaired GEA’s residual interest — its claims for

compensation — by stripping Oriana of its assets, by baseless assertions as to the

89

328.

329.

330.

331.

332.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

authority of the Oriana officer who signed the Repayment Agreement, and by

. «ie 99233
arbitrary court decisions. 23

The Respondent contends that the Claimant’s allegations of breach of the obligation
not to engage in arbitrary and discriminatory measures relate to the same events in
respect of which the Claimant’s allegations of expropriation and breach of the fair
and equitable treatment standard are made, and that these allegations must be rejected

for the same reasons as invoked by the Respondent to refute those other claims.*™4

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis

The Parties agree that the standard of protection against arbitrariness or

discrimination is related to that of fair and equitable treatment.?*>

In light of this, it is not surprising that the Claimant raises the same grounds for
breach under Article 2(3) of the BIT as it did in connection with its claims under

Article 2(1) relating to fair and equitable treatment.

The Tribunal therefore rejects the Claimant’s claims under this heading for the same
reasons as the Claimant’s claims in respect of the fair and equitable treatment

standard were rejected (see { 324 above).

E. National Treatment and Most-Favoured Nation Treatment

Article 3 of the BIT provides for national treatment and most-favoured nation

treatment for the investments and investors protected by the BIT, as follows:

Memorial, {{ 184.
Counter-Memorial, 4{{ 362 — 363.
Memorial, 4 179; Counter-Memorial, { 360.

90

333.

334.

335.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

(1) Neither Contracting State shall subject investments in its territory that
are owned or controlled by nationals or companies of the other
Contracting State and that have been authorised and made pursuant to
Article 2(2) in accordance with the legislation in force in the territory of
the given Contracting State to treatment less favourable than it accords to
investments by its own nationals or companies of third states.

(2) Neither Contracting State shall subject nationals or companies of the
other Contracting State to treatment less favourable than it accords to
investments by its own nationals or companies or investments by
nationals or companies of third states.

(1) | The Parties’ Positions

GEA states in its Memorial that “there is strong reason to believe that GEA has been

the victim of discrimination” in several respects.”*°

First, GEA submits that while its claim in Oriana’s bankruptcy was rejected as time-
barred, a claim brought by a Seychelles company in the case Regent Company v.
Ukraine, Application No. 773/03, Eur. Ct. H.R. (2008), dating from the same time

period, was allowed.?*”

Second, in relation to the refusal of the Ukrainian courts to recognise and enforce the
ICC Award on the grounds that the Repayment Agreement had not been signed by
the president of Oriana, GEA alleges that Oriana had no president between August
and November 1998. GEA further alleges that contracts other than the Repayment
Agreement must have been signed on Oriana’s behalf within that period, and that it

was aware of “no other contracts that the Ukrainian courts held to be invalid from this

236 Memorial, 191.
237 Memorial, J 192.

91

336.

337.

338.

339.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

time period.” On the assumption that such contracts must exist, GEA claims that it

was treated less favourably than others of Oriana’s contractual counterparts.”**

Finally, GEA submits that Article 6 of the Law on Foreign Economic Activity (see
the quote of the Appellate Court in { 65 above, setting forth this provision) “was
discriminatory on its face since it imposed more burdensome requirements on foreign

« : 9923}
than national investors.”*?

Specifically, the Claimant submits that there was no
requirement for a contract to be signed with two signatures (i.e., of “a person who has
such right in accordance with his position under the statutory documents and a person
authorized by a power of attorney”) when an Ukrainian company entered into a

contract with an Ukrainian investor.”

The Respondent contends that the Claimant has failed to establish the existence of
nationals or foreigners in a situation similar to that of the Claimant, such that

Ukraine’s treatment of them can be compared.™"!

More specifically, the Respondent rejects the Claimant’s suggestion that the
Seychelles company referred to in its submissions was in a similar situation as GEA.
because the Claimant’s original claim, based on the ICC Award, was not rejected
because it was time-barred, but because the ICC Award had not been recognised in

. 2.
Ukraine.”

In addition, the Respondent rejects the Claimant’s proposition that the Ukrainian
courts discriminated against GEA by refusing to recognise the Repayment Agreement

on the basis of other contracts that “must have been signed” by Mr Sljuzar and

Memorial, { 193.

Reply, { 292.

Reply, { 293.

241 Counter-Memorial, {| 367 — 368.
Counter-Memorial, {{ 370 — 371.

92

340.

341.

342.

343.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

purportedly upheld by the Ukrainian courts. The Respondent considers this argument
to be unsustainable, as the Claimant does not, among other things, point to any other

contracts signed by Mr Sljuzar and upheld by the Ukrainian courts,"

Finally, with respect to the double-signature requirement of Article 6 of the Law on
Foreign Economic Activity, the Respondent submits that this provision applies to
Ukrainian individuals and legal entities, not to foreign companies, and thus “cannot

be considered as a measure that discriminated against [foreign companies].”?“4

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis

The Tribunal is of the view that, even assuming there existed relevant “investments”
for these purposes, and whatever standard were to apply to analyse the Claimant’s

contentions under this claim, the claim would fail for the reasons that follow.

With respect to the purported unequal treatment between the Claimant and the
Seychelles company, the Tribunal is not convinced that the situation of the Seychelles
company is comparable to that of GEA. In the Tribunal’s view, the simple fact that
the claim of the Seychelles company was not time-barred does not, in and of itself,
mean anything, in particular taking into account the differences in the procedural

posture between that case and the one at hand.

With respect to other contracts that Mr Sljuzar purportedly entered into and that were
approved by the Ukrainian courts, the Tribunal notes that the Claimant’s contention is
based on its “assumption” that such contracts exist. However, the Tribunal has been

provided with no evidence of such contracts. Clearly, the Tribunal cannot make a

2483 Counter-Memorial, { 373.

24 Rejoinder, {Jf 398 — 400.

93

344.

345.

346.

a

347.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

finding against the Respondent on the basis of mere assumptions, unsupported by the

record.

With respect to Article 6 of the Law on Foreign Economic Activities, the Tribunal
notes, as pointed out by the Respondent, that this provision applies only to Ukrainian
physical and legal persons. What is more, while this legislation may create additional
formal requirements for foreigners to invest in Ukraine, it does not concern the
treatment of investments once made. In light of this, the Tribunal does not consider

Article 6 of the Law on Foreign Economic Activities to be discriminatory.

Accordingly, the Tribunal rejects the Claimant’s claim that it was discriminated

against in violation of Article 3 of the BIT.

F. Adherence to Obligations
Article 8(2) of the BIT provides that:
Either Contracting State shall adhere to any other obligation it has

assumed with regard to investments of nationals or companies of the other
Contracting State in its territory.

(1) | The Parties’ Positions

GEA contends that Ukraine has not adhered to its obligation to pay GEA for the
property that was appropriated. According to GEA, this obligation arises from the
fact that, “on multiple occasions, Ukraine promised GEA that it would be

compensated for the taking.”*45

245 Memorial, J 199.

94

348.

349.

350.

351.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

In response, Ukraine submits that “‘as in the context of its allegation of breach of the
fair and equitable treatment standard, the Claimant fails to cite any evidence where
any such promise is actually made.”

In any event, the Respondent contends that the Claimant has not presented “pertinent
legal authority to support its argument that an umbrella clause can be used to elevate

a unilateral statement into a binding treaty obligation,””4”

in particular when the
Claimant “is unable to point to a unilateral statement of a legal obligation stated in
sufficiently clear and specific terms to meet the customary standard under

: A 99248
international law.

GEA responds that, contrary to the Respondent’s assertions, the record is clear that
Ukraine made promises “‘in sufficiently clear and specific terms to meet the standard

of customary international law.”?

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis

In support of its claim that Ukraine made promises of payment to GEA, the Claimant
refers to a letter from the Ministry of Industrial Policy to Metallgesellschaft dated 31
July 1998?°°
Ukrainian Government, Oriana and GEA dated 13 August 1998.7°' For the same

; as well as the protocol of a meeting between representatives of the

reasons as set forth in {{[ 288 — 293 above, the Tribunal does not consider that these

documents evidence any promises made by Ukraine towards GEA.

Counter-Memorial, | 375.

Counter-Memorial, {[ 377; Rejoinder §§[ 414 — 415.

Counter-Memorial, | 377.

Reply, (315.

Reply, {| 317, referring to Minutes of a meeting between the Ukrainian Government, Green

Party, Shelton, Oriana, MG and KCH (C-0023).

51 Reply, {| 319, referring to Protocol of a meeting between representatives of the Ukrainian

Government, Oriana and MG dated 13 August 1998 (C-0016).

95

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

352. The Claimant also refers to a statement of Vice Prime Minister Tyhypko, who

353.

ow

purportedly said during a meeting between the Ukrainian Government, the Green
Party, Shelton, Oriana, MG and KCH on 23 February 1999 “that the government of
Ukraine is willing to meet its obligations.”?* In the Tribunal’s view, it has been
presented with no evidence that such a statement refers to any obligation on the part
of the Respondent to pay compensation to the Claimant for the product that KCH had
allegedly lost. Within the context of the minutes of that meeting, this statement could
just as easily — if not more likely — mean that Ukraine was willing to meet its
obligations with respect to the working group that was being formed to “clarif[y] all

of the open issues concerning the liabilities of the Oriana Group to KCH.*?

In addition, the Claimant refers to a “clear and unambiguous promise” made by

Ukrainian officials that the debts owed to BV and GEA would be transferred to Lukor

4

and treated with priority.” However, the Tribunal observes that the paragraph

containing this alleged promise does not even refer to the State of Ukraine, aside from

its maintaining certain guarantees to parties other than GEA:

[Lukor] is to become assignee in respect of the receivables and debts from
the activities of the old petrochemical division of the concern Oriana.
This applies to the foreign debts in relation to Bayerische Hypo- und
Vereinsbank/Udeko and Kléckner Chemiehandel and for the remaining,
primarily national, debts; the latter are under all circumstances to be
considered less important than the Hypo- und Vereinsbank/Udeko and
Kléckner debts.

The existence of the Ukrainian state guarantee granted to Hypo- und
Vereinsbank/Udeko remains unaffected.

52 Memorial, {[ 199, referring to Minutes of a meeting between the Ukrainian Government, Green

Party, Shelton, Oriana, MG and KCH (C-0023).
3 C0023.

254 Reply, {| 323, referring to Protocol of a meeting between representatives of the Ukrainian
Government, representatives of the German Government, Hermes, Linde, BV, MG and KCH on 24
August 1999 (C-0027).

96

354.

355.

356.

VIII.

357.

358.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

In light of this, there is no basis for the Tribunal to conclude that Ukrainian officials

made any “clear and unambiguous promise” to GEA in this context.

Finally, the Claimant refers to the record of a 9 April 2003 meeting for the
proposition that Ukraine promised to support GEA in obtaining recognition and
enforcement of the ICC Award against Oriana.?°> However, the Tribunal notes that
the minutes of that meeting in fact state that Ukraine “agreed — insofar as possible —
to support Solvadis AG in obtaining the declaration of enforcement and the
subsequent enforcement of the international ICC arbitration award against OAO

Oriana” (emphasis added).*°

The Tribunal considers it clear that this does not
amount to a “promise” of anything on the part of Ukraine, but rather an indication

that it would use its best efforts to do what it could.

Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes that the Respondent did not violate any of its

“other obligations” pursuant to Article 8(2) of the BIT.

DAMAGES

As the Claimant has failed on each of its claims, such that the Tribunal has not found
the Respondent liable in any respect, the Tribunal need not address the Claimant’s

damages claims.

Costs

In its Submission on Costs dated 29 October 2010, the Claimant seeks to recover
EUR 1,309,084.74 and USD 315,016.44, plus interest from the date of this Award.

The Claimant considers that these amounts are reasonable, and that it should recover

55 Reply, {| 325, referring to Protocol of a meeting between representatives of the Ukrainian
Government, a representative of the German Government, BV, Linde and Solvadis AG dated 9 April
2003 (C-0025).

256 ag.

97

359.

360.

361.

362.

Nv

363.

364.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

these amounts in light of the Respondent’s behaviour before and during these

proceedings.

In its Submission on Costs dated 29 October 2010, the Respondent seeks to recover
USD 1,595,337.47 and UAH 4,300. The Respondent contends that, in the event the
Tribunal declines jurisdiction, or accepts jurisdiction but rejects the Claimant’s

claims, the Claimant should reimburse the Respondent for the entirety of its costs.

There were two further rounds of submissions on costs.

Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention provides as follows:

In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as the
parties otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the parties in
connection with the proceedings, and shall decide how and by whom
those expenses, the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal and
the charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre shall be paid. Such
decision shall form part of the Award.

Article 61(2) does not prescribe a particular test for tribunals to assess costs, nor does
it place any restrictions on a tribunal’s ability to do so. In light of this, the Tribunal

understands the power granted under this Article to be broad, allowing the Tribunal

discretion in making its determination.

The Respondent has articulated its Submission on Costs in terms of “costs follow the
event,” in that the Respondent asks the Tribunal to award the entirety of its costs

should the Claimant lose on jurisdiction and/or liability.

It has long been debated whether the “‘costs follow the event” rule should apply in
international investment arbitration. Without entering upon this debate here, the
Tribunal considers that this particular case is an appropriate one for the exercise of its

discretion under Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention in the Respondent’s favour.

98

365.

366.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

Here, the Claimant’s case has failed partially on jurisdiction (see {| 125 above) and
entirely on liability. In circumstances where no part of the Claimant’s endeavour in
commencing these proceedings has been successful, it may fairly be concluded that

the Respondent ought to recover its reasonable costs.

Having taken into account all the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal concludes
that the Claimant should bear the entirety of the costs in this matter. The Tribunal
finds the amounts claimed by the Respondent (USD 1,595,337.47 and UAH 4,300) to

257

be reasonable under the circumstances. Accordingly, the Tribunal shall order the

Claimant to reimburse the Respondent all of its costs.

257 The Tribunal notes that the Respondent has not claimed for interest on costs.

99

367.

GEA V. UKRAINE— AWARD

DECISIONS

FOR THE FOREGOING REASONS, the Tribunal renders the following decisions:

(1) DETERMINES that GEA has standing to bring claims arising from the

Conversion Contract until 30 June 2004, but not thereafter;

(2) DETERMINES that the dispute is within its competence and ICSID’s jurisdiction

insofar as the Conversion Contract and the Products are concerned;

(3) RevEcTS all of the Claimant’s claims within its competence and ICSID’s

jurisdiction; and

(4) ORDERS the Claimant to reimburse the Respondent all of its costs, being USD

1,595,337.47 and UAH 4,300.

100

GEA y. UKRAINE— AWARD

/ 28 March/
Date: 2011
THE TRIBUNAL:
/ signed /
Professor Albert Jan van den Berg
President
Date: /28 March 2011/
/ signed / / signed /
Mr Toby Landau QC Professor Brigitte Stern
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Date: / 25 March 2011/ Date: / 22 March 2011 /

101

