[Translated into electronic “Word.doc” format by “Grischenko & Partners” (S.Voitovich)
and “Proxen & Partners” (A.Alexeyev)]

ICSID CASE No. ARB/00/9

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR
SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

BETWEEN:

GENERATION UKRAINE, INC.

Claimant

and

UKRAINE
Respondent

AWARD

Before the Arbitral Tribunal Dr Eugen Salpius
comprised of: Dr Jiirgen Voss

Mr Jan Paulsson, President
Secretaries to the Tribunal: Ms Eloise M. Obadia (until December

2002)

Ms Martina Suchankova

Assistant to the Tribunal: Mr Zachary Douglas

Date of dispatch to the parties: 16 September 2003

10.

11.

12.

13.

14,

15.

16.

17.

CONTENTS

Overview. 1

The Parties’ Representatives, .ooo.o.....ccccsssssssssssssssessssssssessssssssses

 

 

Definitions, 2
The Procedure,.oooooiccssssssssssssssssssesessssssssssssssssessessesssssssssssesesesssenessessen: 4
Relief Sought, 12

 

PRELIMINARY ISSUES

The Parties’ Submissions on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility 13

Definition of the Preliminary Issues. oc assseseesenn 2

The Claimant’s Investment - Jurisdiction
Ratione Materiae. 33

The Validity of the Registration of
Heneratsiya 37

The Proper Parties to the Dispute - Jurisdiction
Ratione Personae. 38

Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis 40

The Validity of the Parties’ Consent to ICSID
Arbitration 41

Exhaustion of Local Remedies 43

 

Consultation and Negotiation. 45

Denying Advantages under Article I(2) of the BIT, 46

Validity of the Claimant’s Legal
Repr i 48

Conclusions on Jurisdiction and Admissibility,

 

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24,

25.

THE MERITS

The Legal Materialisation of the Claimant’s
Investment. 51

The Factual Materialisation of the Claimant’s
Investment. 75

First Alleged Expropriation, oo. cccsssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssessereeseeeen dL

Second Alleged Expropriation,

 

Third Alleged Expropriation... cssssssssssssesssesesseseseeee 95
Conclusions on Claims A to Do cessssesssssssesssessessssetseseseeseeee 96
Costs, 96

 

Award 98

1. Overview

Ll The Claimant, a U.S. corporate vehicle wholly-owned by a U.S. national,
Eugene J. Laka, seeks damages, at one time quantified in excess of USD 9.4

billion, for the spoliation of its alleged investment in commercial property in Kyiv.

1.2 The Claimant contends that it was strongly encouraged by the Government
in late 1992 to invest in Ukraine; that it established a local investment vehicle in
February 1993 (called Heneratsiya Ltd.); and that, after it duly identified and
achieved approval of a specific project, local authorities obstructed and interfered
with the realisation of that project over the course of the ensuing six years in a
manner which was tantamount to expropriation and therefore proscribed under the
Ukraine-U.S. Bilateral Investment Treaty. It asserts that it is therefore entitled to

remedies in ICSID arbitration.

1.3. Ukraine denies that its conduct toward the Claimant was violative of the
Bilateral Investment Treaty and argues that, at any rate, the Claimant has proven
no damages. Even without considering those issues, however, Ukraine contends

that the case must be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction.

2. The Parties’ Representatives

21 The Claimant, a company formed under the laws of New Hampshire,

U.S.A., was represented by:

Mr Robert Harding, Barrister-at-Law, Dublin;

Mr Brendan Kilty, Barrister-at-Law, Dublin;

instructed by Mr Gerard H. Walsh of Mssrs McKeever Rowan, Dublin.
2.2. The Respondent, the Government of Ukraine was represented by:

Mr A. Shlapak, Minister and Mr Andriy Medvetsky, Chief of Main Legal
Department, Ministry of Economy and on Issues of European Integration
of Ukraine;

Pagel

Mr Mykhaylo Pozhivanov, Head of Main Department for Foreign Economic
Relations and Mr Olexandr Kudlay, Head of Legal Department Kyiv State
City Administration;

Mr Dmitry Grischenko, Managing Partner and Dr Sergei Voitovich,
Grischenko and Partners, Kyiv;

Mr Oleg Schevchuk, Managing Partner and Mr Andriy Aleksejev, Attorney,
Proxen law firm, Kyiv.

Definitions

Act of Property Transfer: Legal instrument by which the Executive Vice
President of Generation Ukraine, Nellie Grigoriyevna Ageyeva, and Mr
Laka, in his capacity as President of Heneratsiya, transferred alleged
property rights owned by Generation Ukraine to Heneratsiya as the
former’s contribution to the latter’s authorised capital. The date of the
instrument is 21 July 1998.

Act of Reservation: Act of Reserving a Plot of Land for Fulfilment of
Engineering-Prospecting Works for Object Construction, issued by the
Department of Land Resources of Kyiv City State Administration and
dated 3 February 1995.

BIT: the Treaty Between the United States of America and Ukraine
Concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investment,
signed on 4 March 1994 and entered into force on 16 November 1996.

Certificates of the State Agency for Authors’ Rights: Two certificates issued
by the State Agency of Ukraine for Author’s and Joint Rights. The first
(referred to hereinafter as “Certificate A”) is titled “Certificate on State
Registration of the Author’s Right to a Creation”. The second (“Certificate
B”) is titled “Certificate on State Registration of the Exclusive Rights of a

Person to a Creation”. Both were issued on 5 June 1998.

Page2

3.10

3.11

3.12

Construction Permits: Construction Permit No.103/RU issued on 3 April
1997 for works on site preparation and extended in scope thereafter, and
Construction Permit No.189/RD issued on 16 July 1998.

Decision of the Kyiv City Council: The decision of the Kyiv City Council
No.358/459 dated 8 July 1999 which purportedly cancelled the Order on Land

Allocation as well as the 49-year land lease rights.

Foundation Agreement: Agreement with regards to the terms for
cooperation in the construction of an office building and electric transformer
station in the Radyansky District, at Boulevard Taras Shevchenko 32, 32-a
signed by O. Omelchenko (Acting Head of the Kyiv City State
Administration), V. Padalko (Deputy Head of the Kyiv City State
Administration) and Mr Laka (President of Heneratsiya Ltd) dated 26 July
1996.

Generation Ukraine: a U.S. company “Generation Ukraine Inc.”
incorporated in the State of New Hampshire on 3 February 1993 and
wholly owned by Mr Laka.

Heneratsiya: a Ukrainian company “Heneratsiya Ltd” incorporated in Kiev
on 4 October 1993 and 99.97% owned by Generation Ukraine and 0.03%
owned by Mr Laka.

Lease Agreements: Agreements for the Temporary Right of Exploitation of
Land (Including Conditions on Rent Payments) signed by O. Omelchenko
(Acting Head of the Kyiv City State Administration) and Mr Laka
(President of Heneratsiya Ltd), both dated 27 June 1996.

List of Potential Construction Sites: Letter dated 10 December 1992 from
Mr Martynenko to Mr Laka containing a List of Potential Construction Sites.

Order on Land Allocation: Order No 608 of the Kyiv City State
Administration “Regarding the granting of a land parcel for the building of
an office building and a transformer station at Blvd. Taras Shevchenko 32,
32-a, in the Radiyansky District to the limited partnership Heneratsiya
Ltd” dated 24 April 1996.

Page3

3.13

3.14

3.15

3.16

3.17

41

Parkview Project or Parkview Office Building: the Claimant’s “proposed
premier office block development” at Boulevard Shevchenko 32 in the City
of Kyiv.

Protocol of Intentions: Protocol of Intentions signed on 10 December 1992
by Ivan Sali (Representative of the President of Ukraine in the City of Kyiv),
V.P. Nesterenko (Chairman of the City Council of Peoples’ Deputies),
AS. Taranenko (Chief of Department of Administration for Foreign
Economic Relations), A.P. Martynenko (General Director of
“Kyivbudcentr” of the Kyiv City State Administration), U.F. Yurchenko
(Deputy Director of “Kyivbudcentr” of the Kyiv City State
Administration), John W. Milton (Project Manager, Turner Steiner
International) and Mr Laka.

Registration Certificates: Registration Certificates of Investments in
accordance with Article 15 of the Law of Ukraine on Foreign Investments,
dated 24 May 1993.

Resolution on Land Allocation: Resolution of the Kyiv City Soviet of
People’s Deputies, No 12, “On allocation and withdrawal of land plots and
approval of object location” dated 19 May 1994.

Yalovoy Protocol: Record of a meeting on 11 July 1997 chaired by V.B.
Yalovoy (Deputy Head of the Kyiv City State Administration) with Mr
Laka and, inter alia, a representative of the Security Service of Ukraine.

The Procedure

On 21 July 2000 the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment

Disputes (ICSID or the Centre) received from the Claimant a Request for the

Institution of Arbitration Proceedings against the Respondent. The Request invoked

the provisions of the BIT.

42

ICSID was established by the Convention on the Settlement of Investment

Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (the ICSID Convention),
signed on 18 March 1965. The United States of America is a Contracting State to the

ICSID Convention since its entry into force on 14 October 1966. Ukraine became a

Page4

Contracting State on 7 July 2000 and was thus a Contracting State to the ICSID

Convention at the date of the institution of arbitration proceedings by the Claimant.

4.3 The Claimant supplemented its Request for Arbitration by letters of 28 and
31 July 2000. On 1 August 2000 the Centre, in accordance with Rule 5 of the
ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration
Proceedings (Institution Rules), acknowledged receipt of the Request, as
supplemented, and on the same day transmitted copies thereof to Ukraine and to
Ukraine’s Embassy in Washington, D.C.

44 On 20 October 2000, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID registered the
Request pursuant to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention. On the same date, the
Acting Secretary-General, in accordance with Institution Rule 7, notified the
Parties of the registration of the Request and invited them to proceed to constitute an

Arbitral Tribunal as soon as possible.

4.5 On 25 October 2000, the Claimant proposed to the Respondent that the
Arbitral Tribunal consist of a sole arbitrator to be appointed by agreement of the
parties from a list of three persons. By a Note Verbale dated 22 November 2000
from the Embassy of Ukraine in Washington, D.C., the Respondent rejected the
Claimant’s proposal and proposed instead that the Arbitral Tribunal be composed
of three arbitrators, one arbitrator appointed by each Party, and the third, presiding
arbitrator, appointed by agreement of the Parties.

4.6 On 27 November 2000, the Claimant accepted the Respondent’s proposal
of 22 November 2000 regarding the number of arbitrators and the method of
constituting the Arbitral Tribunal and appointed Dr Eugen Salpius, an Austrian
national, as an arbitrator. On 16 January 2001, the Respondent appointed Dr Jiirgen
Voss, a German national, as an arbitrator. On 6 February 2001, the Respondent
accepted the Claimant’s proposal to appoint Dr Ibrahim F.I. Shihata, an Egyptian

national, as the President of the Arbitral Tribunal.

4.7. On 15 February 2001, the Deputy Secretary-General of ICSID, in accordance
with Article 6(1) of the Arbitration Rules of the Centre, notified the Parties that all

three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was therefore

Pages

deemed to have been constituted on that date. On the same date, pursuant to ICSID
Administrative and Financial Regulation 25, the parties were informed that Ms Eloise
M. Obadia, Counsel, ICSID, would serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

48 On 9 March 2001, the Secretary of the Tribunal transmitted to the Parties
the declarations required under Rule 6(2) of the Arbitration Rules of the Centre
signed by each member of the Arbitral Tribunal, including a separate “Statement on
relationships with Ukraine” dated 9 March 2001 provided by Dr Jiirgen Voss. On
16 March 2001, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID notified the Parties, in
accordance with Rule 9(2)(b) of the Arbitration Rules, that the Claimant had
proposed the disqualification of Dr Voss as an arbitrator pursuant to Article 57 of
the ICSID Convention. As a consequence, in accordance with Rule 9(6) of the

Arbitration Rules, the proceeding was suspended.

49 On 21 March 2001 the Secretary of the Tribunal transmitted to the other
Members of the Tribunal and to the Parties Dr Vo:

 

” observations of 20 March
2001 on the Claimant’s proposal for his disqualification as an arbitrator. On 23
March 2001 the Respondent, upon request by the President of the Tribunal,
provided the Centre with its observations on the issue of the disqualification of Dr
Voss, requesting the other Members of the Tribunal to reject the Claimant’s
proposal. On the same date, the Claimant provided a response to Dr Voss’

observations of 20 March 2001, maintaining its proposal.

4.10 On 23 March 2001, the Respondent submitted Objections to the Jurisdiction
of ICSID dated 20 March 2001 under Rule 41(1) of the Arbitration Rules of the
Centre.

4.11 Further observations on the proposal for disqualification of Dr Voss were
submitted on 27 March 2001 by the Claimant and by Dr Voss respectively, on 2
April 2001 by the Respondent, on 5 April 2003 by the Claimant, on 9 April 2001
by Dr Voss and on 11 April 2001 by the Claimant.

4.12 On 13 April 2001, the Respondent submitted an addendum of 12 April 2001
to its Objections to the Jurisdiction of ICSID.

Page6

4.13 On 18 April 2001, ICSID notified the Parties that, due to illness, Dr Shihata

would no longer be able to serve as President of the Arbitral Tribunal.

4.14 By letter of 23 April 2001, the Respondent informed the Centre that it
accepted the Claimant’s proposal to appoint Mr Jan Paulsson, a French national,
as the new President of the Arbitral Tribunal. On 24 April 2001, the Secretary of
the Tribunal notified the Parties that Mr Paulsson had accepted his appointment.

4.15 On 21 May 2001, the Secretary of the Tribunal informed the Parties that
Mr Paulsson and Dr Salpius were equally divided on the Claimant’s proposal for
the disqualification of Dr Voss as an arbitrator. Pursuant to Article 58 of the
ICSID Convention and Rule 9(4) and (5) of the Arbitration Rules, it therefore fell
to the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council to decide on the proposal.

4.16 On 6 June 2001, the Deputy Secretary-General of ICSID informed the
Parties that, in view of Dr Voss’ prior service at the World Bank and in order to
ensure the impartiality of the process, the Centre had asked the Secretary-General
of the Permanent Court of Arbitration at the Hague for his recommendation as to
the decision on the proposal for disqualification. Upon request by the Centre, the
Parties agreed to extend the time limit for the Chairman of the Administrative
Council of ICSID to render his decision on the proposal for disqualification of Dr
Voss by 15 days, until 5 July 2001.

4.17 On 19 June 2001, the Claimant submitted new information in support of
its proposal for the disqualification of Dr Voss, accompanied by an expert report.
The Claimant’s submission was forwarded to the Secretary-General of the
Permanent Court of Arbitration by the Secretary of the Tribunal. Observations on
the Claimant’s submission of 19 June 2001 were provided by Dr Voss on 20 June
2001 and by the Respondent on 21 June 2001 and were also forwarded to the
Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration.

4.18 On 5 July 2001, the Deputy Secretary-General of ICSID informed the Parties
that the recommendation of the Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of
Arbitration was to decline the Claimant’s proposal to disqualify Dr Voss as an
arbitrator, and that the Acting Chairman of the Administrative Council of ICSID had

Page7

accepted this recommendation. The Parties were consequently notified that the

proceeding had resumed.

4.19 On 12 July 2001, the Claimant submitted BOOK 1(B) to its Memorial

which substantially amended its pleadings.

4.20 On 13 July 2001 the Respondent requested the production of certain
corporate documents by the Claimant under Article 1(2) of the BIT. Upon request
by the Centre, the Respondent elaborated on its request by letter of 6 August 2001,
arguing that the documents requested might be material to the question of ICSID’s

jurisdiction.

4.21 On 18 September 2001, the Claimant submitted its Reply of 13 September
2001 to the Respondent’s Objections to the Jurisdiction of ICSID dated 20 March
2001, as supplemented.

4.22 The first session of the Tribunal was held on 26 September 2001 at the
International Dispute Resolution Centre in London. On that occasion, the Parties
expressed their agreement that the Tribunal had been properly constituted, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the ICSID Convention and the
Arbitration Rules.

4.23 During the course of the first session, the Parties also agreed on a number
of procedural matters reflected in written minutes signed by the President and the
Secretary of the Tribunal. It was agreed that the language of the proceeding would
be English and that the place of proceedings would be Paris.

4.24 The Respondent requested that its Objections to the Jurisdiction of ICSID
be treated as a preliminary question separate from the merits of the case. The
Claimant disagreed, requesting that the objections to jurisdiction be joined to the
merits. The President informed the Parties that the Tribunal was disinclined to
deal with the objections to jurisdiction as a preliminary matter, and that the

objection would therefore be joined to the merits.

Page8

4.25 The Tribunal urged the Parties at the first session to deal reasonably with
any request for production of documents directly between themselves. Upon the

Tribunal’s invitation, the Claimant agreed to produce copies of its organic documents.

4.26 On 8 November 2001, the Claimant produced a “Booklet of Discovery
Documentation,” containing, among other things, the category of documents
requested by the Tribunal at the first session. On 13 November 2001 the Claimant
filed a request for production of documents by the Respondent, to which the

Respondent responded on 17 and 21 January 2002.

427 On 1 March 2002, the Centre received electronic versions of the
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial dated February 26, 2002. The Claimant received
a hard copy thereof on 6 March 2002.

4.28 On 12 March 2002, ICSID received a “Notice of Motion” from the
Claimant requesting that the Tribunal issue orders that (i) the Respondent’s
Counter-Memorial be dismissed; (ii) an “Award in principle” be made in favour of
ssed by the Tribunal. As
basis for its request, the Claimant stated that the Respondent had not complied with:

the Claimant; and (iii) the Claimant’s damages be as:

 

(a) Rule 23 of the Arbitration Rules regarding the signing of the Counter-
Memorial;

(b) Regulations 24 and 30 of the ICSID Administrative and Financial
Regulations regarding the filing and certification of supporting

documentation; and

(c) The Parties’ agreement regarding discovery of documents (failure by the
Respondent to make “full and frank discovery” pursuant to the Claimant’s
request of 13 November 2001 and destruction by the Respondent of

documents requested).

4.29 On 14 March 2002, the Centre received the Respondent’s observations on
the Claimant’s Motion of 12 March 2002 rejecting the Claimant’s allegations. On
28 March 2002, the Centre received three further submissions from the Claimant
relating to its Motion and to the Respondent’s production of documents. The

Respondent replied to the Claimant’s further submissions by a letter of 5 April 2002.

Page9

4.30 On 12 April 2002, the Arbitral Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1
dismissing the Claimant’s Motion of 12 March 2002 (as supplemented by the

subsequent correspondence).

4.31 On 6 May 2002, ICSID received electronic versions of the Claimant’s
Reply Memorial. Hard copies of the Reply were received by the Respondent on
14 May 2002.

4.32 On 8 May 2002, the Claimant requested that the Tribunal instruct the
Respondent not to initiate any further direct contact with a person who was stated
to be a representative of the Claimant. After an exchange of correspondence by
the Parties on this issue, on 26 June 2002, the Tribunal invited the Respondent to
confirm that it would have no further contact with that person until such time as he

might be questioned in the presence of the Arbitral Tribunal.

4.33 On 12 July 2002, ICSID received electronic copies of the Respondent’s
Rejoinder. Hard copies of the Respondent’s Rejoinder were transmitted to the
Tribunal and to the Claimant on 17 July 2002.

4.34 On 8 October 2002, the Tribunal gave instructions to the Parties regarding
the further procedure and invited them simultaneously to produce, by 27 November
2002, witness statements and expert reports; by 6 January 2003 rebuttal
statements and reports; by 20 January 2003, lists of witnesses and experts whom
the Parties desired to be cross-examined; and, by 27 January 2003, lists of rebuttal
witnesses and experts. Having consulted with the Parties, the Tribunal also
confirmed that it had reserved the two weeks of 17-21 February 2003 and 17-21
March 2003 for the hearing on the jurisdictional objections and the merits of the

case.

4.35 The Centre received the Parties’ witness statements and expert reports on
27 November 2002. On 12 December 2002, the Respondent challenged the
Claimant’s submission of 27 November 2002 as inconsistent with the Tribunal’s

instructions.

Pagel

4.36 On 21 December 2002, the Parties were informed that Ms Martina
Suchankova had been appointed as new Secretary of the Tribunal replacing Ms
Obadia.

4.37 On 6 January 2003, the Parties submitted their Rebuttal witness
and expert reports. By letter of 15 January 2003, the Tribunal informed the Parties

statements

  

that it found that the Claimant had complied with the Tribunal’s instructions of 8
October 2002. On 20 January 2003, the Parties submitted lists of witnesses and
experts that they wished to examine at the hearing. The Parties did not provide any
further lists of witnesses and experts to be heard and they subsequently agreed not

to examine certain witnesses and experts previously listed.

4.38 The first phase of the hearing on jurisdiction and the merits took place at
the World Bank Offices in Paris during the period 17-21 February 2003. The
Tribunal received the testimony of Mr Eugene Laka and Mr Igor Ivanovich
Marynyako, witnesses presented by the Claimant; and Mr Nick Cotton, expert
presented by the Respondent. Upon the Tribunal’s request, made at the hearing
and articulated formally in a letter of 20 February 2003, the Parties submitted their
responses to certain questions made by the Tribunal on 24 February 2003.

4.39 The second phase of the hearing, devoted to oral submissions, took place
at the Hotel Baltimore in Paris during the period 17-20 March 2003. During the
course of the hearing, the Parties submitted further responses to the Tribunal’s
questions of 20 February 2003; the Claimant in writing and the Respondent orally.
On 26 March 2003, the President of the Tribunal instructed the Parties to submit to
the Tribunal a statement of costs reasonably incurred or borne in the proceeding by 4
April 2003 and written comments on the reasonableness of the other Party’s
statement of costs by 18 April 2003. The Parties submitted their respective

statements and written comments within the time limits prescribed.

440 On 18 July 2003 the Tribunal declared the proceedings closed pursuant to
Rule 38 of the Arbitration Rules of the Centre.

Pagel

5. Relief Sought

5.1 In Book 1 (“Memorial”) of its 8-volume introductory pleading dated 5
April 2000, the Claimant articulated eight claims under lettered headings from A to
H. On 12 July 2001, the Claimant submitted a revised Book 1(B), which it
explained had become necessary “because the Claimant obtained important new
information.” In paragraph 2.0.a of Book 1(B), the Claimant made clear that “[t]he
statement of claims in this Book supersedes and replaces all prior claims statements
..-” The eight claims - of which the last two are not, properly speaking, claims at all -
thus finally reworded and calculated in Part 3 of Book 1(B) are the following:

“Claim A: Unlawful indirect and unlawful direct expropriation of
anticipated revenues (US$1,611,551,868)

Claim B: Unlawful indirect and unlawful direct expropriation of
invested funds (US$35,346,207)

Claim C: Unlawful indirect and unlawful direct expropriation of the
Project at its appraised market value (US$123,964,142)

Claim D: Unlawful indirect expropriation (unlawful denial of
property rights) of adjacent properties intended for
construction staging purposes (US$4,070,000, but
“integrated as a non-recurring item in the calculation of
Claim A”)

Claim E: Compensation of the Company’s expenses for its legal

defence (US$2,358,768,473)

Claim F: Moral (punitive) damages subject to compensation under
Ukrainian law (US$5,3 12,586,651)

Claim G: Other forms of relief as the Court may deem appropriate in
the circumstances

Claim H: Counterclaims and offsets — none”

5.2 Within the hundreds of pages of the Claimant’s voluminous submissions,
there are a myriad of allegations of misconduct attributable to the Ukrainian
Government. The task of the Arbitral Tribunal, however, is not to rule on every
allegation, but rather to determine whether the claims for relief are founded or not.
It is, therefore, constrained only to deal with those arguments which it finds to be

decisive with respect to the relief sought.

Pagel2,

PRELIMINARY ISSUES

6. The Parties’ Submissions on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

6.1 An important feature of this case is that the alleged investment did not
arise out of a single transaction or event, but instead evolved through the
Claimant’s activities in Ukraine over a number of years. This is unsurprising given
the nature of the alleged investment, viz. a construction project for an office
building, which one would expect to encompass a bundle of proprietary,
contractual and administrative rights and involve capital contributions at different

stages of the project’s development.

6.2. The disparate elements of the Claimant’s alleged investment are shrouded
in intricate detail. The regulatory framework involved both international and
purely local dimensions - from the regulation of inward investment to constraints
upon urban land use. Moreover, it seems fair to observe that the Claimant’s
Ukrainian interlocutors were unfamiliar with American business methods and that
this was the Claimant’s first experience with Ukrainian administrative practices.
The result was not only complexity, but considerable confusion. These features of
the factual background are directly relevant to the analysis of the legal dispute,
because the Claimant alleges a series of expropriatory acts which are said to have
been carried out over a period of years even as the investment was gradually
taking place. Since expropriation concerns interference in rights in property, it is
important to be meticulous in identifying the rights duly held by the Claimant at

the particular moment when allegedly expropriatory acts occurred.

6.3 In light of these considerations, the Tribunal elected to join issues of
jurisdiction and admissibility to the merits because of the close relationship
between the Respondent’s primary jurisdictional objection, based on the alleged
absence of any relevant investment by the Claimant, and the factual evidence

pertaining to the complete history of the Claimant's activities in Ukraine.

64 The Parties’ pleadings on jurisdiction and admissibility have been unhelpfully

diffuse and hence, in order to identify the issues with adequate precision, it is

 

indispensable to review the Parties’ submissions in considerable detail. Furthermore,

Pagel3

the question of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione materiae and ratione temporis,
dependent as it is on evidence of the nature and timing of the Claimant’s alleged
investment, is interwoven with the Claimant’s cause of action founded upon
expropriation. Therefore it is necessary to consider comprehensively the nature,
extent and timing of the Claimant’s investment, and expedient to do so from the

outset - and unnecessary to repeat the exercise when dealing with the merits.

6.5 The Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction dated 20 March 2001 may be

summarised as follows:

(a) The Claimant has not proved that the “Parkview Office Building Project”
falls within the definition of an “investment” for the purposes of Article 1(1)
of the BIT.

(b) Although the Claimant’s shareholding in its Ukrainian _ subsidiary,
Heneratsiya, admittedly constitutes an investment pursuant to Article 1(1),

the Claimant does not allege any grievance with respect to this investment.

(c) The Claimant has not demonstrated that the dispute is between itself and
Ukraine for the purposes of Article VI(1) of the BIT. The dispute is rather
between the Claimant and Kyiv City State Administration “as a local body

of executive power”.

(d) The Claimant has not provided any evidence of substantial business
activities in the United States and therefore the Respondent is entitled to
deny the advantages of the BIT to the Claimant pursuant to Article 1(2) of the
BIT.

(e) The ICSID Convention is a /ex specialis in relation to the BIT and therefore
Article 26 of the ICSID Convention should prevail over Article [V(4) of
the BIT. Article 26 of the ICSID Convention allows a Contracting State to
require the exhaustion of local administrative or judicial remedies as a
condition of its consent to ICSID arbitration and the Respondent objects to
the present submission to ICSID arbitration prior to the exhaustion of

“Ukrainian judicial remedies”.

Pagel4

6.6

The Respondent’s “Addendum to the Respondent’s Objection to

Jurisdiction of ICSID”, filed on 12 April 2001, alleged one further jurisdictional

objection based the defective registration of Heneratsiya:

(f)

6.7

The registration was effected in breach of Ukrainian law because the
foundation agreement between Generation Ukraine and Mr Laka
establishing Heneratsiya was signed by Mr Laka both in his personal
capacity and as the representative of Generation Ukraine. According to the
Respondent, this alleged defect defeats ICSID jurisdiction because if
Heneratsiya was not legally constituted in accordance with Ukrainian law,
and the Claimant’s shareholding in Heneratsiya is the only recognisable
investment in Ukraine for the purposes of the BIT, it must follow that there

can be no “investment dispute”.

The Claimant’s “Reply to the Respondent’s Objection to the Jurisdiction

of ICSID” on 13 September 2001 countered as follows:

(a)

(b)

The Claimant objects to the Respondent’s submission that the Parkview
Office Project Building does not fall within the definition of an investment
pursuant to Article 1(1) of the BIT affirming that the “issuance of an
insurance policy by the Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC)
to an investor is incontrovertible evidence of a valid and authentic

investment into Ukraine by a US citizen or US legal entity”.

In relation to the Respondent’s submission that the only investment made
by the Claimant is its shareholding in Heneratsiya, the Claimant states that
it transferred the “entire Parkview project” on 21 July 1998 as an
additional investment into Heneretsiya. Furthermore, the Claimant objects
to the Respondent’s statement that there is no alleged grievance in relation
to the Claimant’s majority share in Heneratsiya. The Claimant refers to its
Request for Arbitration, and the allegation that Ukraine treated Generation
Ukraine and Heneratsiya unfairly and obstructed their efforts to proceed

with their investment.

Pagels

(c)

(d)

(e)

6.8

In response to the Respondent’s contention that the dispute is in reality
between the Claimant and the Kyiv City State Administration, the Claimant
states that the Kyiv City State Administration is a “political subdivision” of
Ukraine and thus identified with the State by virtue of Article XI of the BIT.

In relation to the Respondent’s reliance on Article 1(2) of the BIT, the

Claimant notes that its “substantial busines:

  

tivities is a matter of public

and private record and is well within the knowledge of the Respondent”.

The Claimant objects to the Respondent’s interpretation of Article 26 of the
ICSID Convention by submitting that Article IV(4) of the BIT, which does
not envisage any requirement for the exhaustion of remedies, governs the
present submission to arbitration. Moreover, Ukraine did not make any
reservation upon ratifying the ICSID Convention that local remedies had to be

exhausted as a precondition to its consent to arbitration under the Convention.

The Claimant rejects the Respondent’s contention that the registration of
Heneratsiya by the Pecherska District Administration is void on the grounds
that the latter scrutinised the foundation documents and found them to be in
conformity with existing Ukrainian legislation. Ukraine should therefore be
estopped from denying the validity of the registration. The Claimant further
relies on Article 6 of the Law of Ukraine “Concerning Enterprises in
Ukraine”, which provides that: “An enterprise is considered created and

acquires the rights of a legal entity from the day of its state registration”.

The Respondent’s Counter-Memorial developed its submissions on issues

of jurisdiction and admissibility as follows:

(a)

(b)

The Act of Property Transfer relied upon by the Claimant as substantiating
its investment in the Parkview Project relates only to the transfer of an
intellectual property right in the architectural design of the Parkview

building and not any other right or interest.

In relation to the Claimant’s submission that the Kyiv City State
Administration is a political subdivision for the purposes of Article XI of the

Pagel6

(c)

(d)

(e)

BIT, the latter is subject to Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention (as the
lex specialis) which requires that any “constituent subdivision or agency of
a Contracting State” be “designated to the Centre by that State”. No
designation was made in relation to the Kyiv City State Administration,
which cannot be a “political subdivision” for the purposes of Article XI of
the BIT. There is, therefore, no dispute between Ukraine and the Claimant.

Evidence of “third country control” (allegedly Canadian) over the
Claimant for the purposes of Article 1(2) of the BIT includes the
following: the Ambassador of the Embassy of Canada in Kyiv intervened
on the Claimant’s behalf; a Canadian national was at one stage president of
Generation Ukraine and provided architectural services to the company;
Generation Ukraine established a representative office in Toronto and
opened a bank account at the Royal Bank of Canada; the Generation
Ukraine letterhead represents that the company is “A United States, Canada,

Ukraine venture”.

In relation to Article 26 of the ICSID Convention and its relationship to
the BIT, the “BIT contains a preliminary consent/declaration of the
Respondent subject to (i) accession to the ICSID Convention and (ii) non-
application of the rule on exhaustion of domestic remedies at latest during
the first consideration of an investor’s request for an ICSID arbitration
after such accession.” By this contention the Respondent appears to
maintain that it had the right to insist on the exhaustion of local remedies
upon the first reference to ICSID arbitration following its accession to the
ICSID Convention.

The registration of Heneratsiya’s foundation documents by the Pecherska
District Administration was erroneous because those documents did not
comply with the requirements of the Civil Code of Ukraine. This
registration cannot cure the illegality of these documents. The application of
the doctrine of estoppel to this issue is refuted on the basis that Ukrainian
law does not recognise such a concept. Further irregularities in the
foundation documents of Heneratsiya include the absence of a provision

regarding the audit commission of the company.

Pagel7

(f) The Counter-Memorial raised a new point in relation to the nature of the
Claimant’s consent to ICSID arbitration, which, according to the Respondent,
was defective because no consent was communicated to Ukraine but was

contained only in the Request for Arbitration forwarded to ICSID.

(g) | Another new point was raised in relation to the “negotiation and
consultation” attempts undertaken by the Claimant as required by Article
VI of the BIT. The Respondent asserts that the mediation chaired by V.P.
Gorbulin, the Secretary of the Council of National Security and Defence of
Ukraine, does not constitute a “negotiation and consultation” between the
parties to the dispute because Mr Gorbulin was not authorised to conduct
such negotiations on behalf of Ukraine. A similar objection is made in
relation to the mediation pursued by the Claimant before the Chamber of
Independent Experts, a mediation body established by the President of
Ukraine for investment disputes. This mediation body does not have the
competence to mediate disputes between investors and the Ukraine, but
instead “bodies of executive power and bodies of local self-government”.
Rather, the bodies designated by Ukraine to conduct negotiations of this
nature are the Administration for Investment Corporation of the Ministry of
the Foreign Economic Relations of Ukraine and Department of Foreign

Investment and Credits of the Ministry of Economy of Ukraine.

(h) _ Finally, the Respondent argued in relation to the same point (g) that the
dispute presented to Mr Gorbulin and the Chamber of Independent Experts
was formulated very differently to the dispute currently before the present
Tribunal. In particular the draft protocol of the mediation before Mr Gorbulin
does not mention “expropriation” which is the cause of action now alleged
by the Claimant. A similar statement is made in relation to the Claimant’s

Notice submitted to the Independent Chamber of Experts.

6.9 In its Reply to the Counter-Memorial, the Claimant commented in detail

on each of the points relating to jurisdiction and admissibility. To summarise:

(a) The investment transferred by Generation Ukraine to Heneratsiya by the Act
of Property Transfer was evidenced by the Certificate of the State Agency for

Pagel8

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Authors’ Rights and the appraisals of the value of such rights thereafter.
This Certificate does not merely evidence an intellectual property right in
the design of the Parkview Office Building, as alleged by the Respondent,
but rights to the “entire project”. Article 1(1) in its entirety “applies directly
to the Claimant’s investment structure and fully validates it...” and, in
particular, covers the Claimant’s “equity investments into its local
subsidiary as a means of completing and operating the project”. The
Claimant’s investment was comprised of two components, “which
included the direct cash investment” calculated by Ukrainian and U.S.
auditing firms and the “intangible component represented by the know-how,
expertise, business contacts, reputation, and the quality of the work
produced” which was the subject of an appraisal by a state investment

agency and adjusted by a U.S. auditing firm thereafter.

A grievance does arise out of the Claimant’s ownership of shares in
Heneratsiya, because the investment was transferred from the former to the
latter by the Act of Property Transfer.

The contention that the Chamber of Independent Experts did not have the
competence to resolve an investment dispute between the Claimant and the
Kyiv City State Administration “on behalf of the State” is wrong because the
Chamber was established by the President of Ukraine for this very purpose.

The Kyiv City State Administration is an “organ of executive power and
local self-government” and therefore a “political subdivision” for the
purposes of Article XI of the BIT. By ratifying the BIT, Ukraine accepted
full responsibility for its political subdivisions. Alternatively, to the extent
that the Kyiv City State Administration is a “constituent element of the
State of Ukraine”, the provisions of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention
relating to a “constituent subdivision” do not apply, and in any case Article
XI of the BIT constitutes a waiver of any rights it might have to exclude

“constituent subdivisions” pursuant to Article 25.

 

Although there was an “extensive contribution” to the Claimant’s investment

made by “Canadian firms and citizens,” this does not constitute “third country

Pagel9

(g)

(h)

(i)

control” for the purposes of Article 1(2) and the Respondent has failed to
evidence any proof of such. The Respondent’s assertion that the Claimant,
Generation Ukraine, did not conduct “substantial business activities” in the
United States is incorrect because, for instance, “a professional staff in the
New York office numbering upwards of 30 people in peak periods, was
responsible for a broad array of planning and co-ordination activities between
the key countries, the USA, Ukraine, Canada, Austria, Turkey and others.”
The Claimant’s construction, legal and tax advisors and other service

providers were all U.S. firms, and such services were performed in the U.S.

Neither the BIT nor the ICSID Convention required the Claimant to exhaust
local remedies prior to the submission of a dispute to arbitration pursuant to
Article VI of the BIT. If the Claimant had in fact submitted its dispute to the
local courts of Ukraine, it would thereafter have “forfeited” its right to refer
the dispute to ICSID arbitration pursuant to Article VI(3)(a) of the BIT.

The Respondent is estopped from denying the validity of the state
registration of Heneratsiya as a corporate entity in Ukraine. The Pecherska
District State Administration assumed responsibility for compliance of the
documents with Ukrainian law and never notified Heneratsiya that there
was any error in the registration of its founding documents. Article 8 of

Chapter 2 of the Law of the Ukraine “Concerning Enterpris

 

Ss” envisages
only that the owner of the legal entity can petition the court to cancel the

state registration of such a legal entity.

The contention that the Claimant’s written consent to ICSID arbitration is
defective because it was communicated to the ICSID Secretariat rather
than Ukraine is incorrect in light of Article VI(3)(a)(i) of the BIT, which
sets out the procedure for the submission of the dispute. The Respondent’s
contention that its consent to arbitration in Article VI(4) of the BIT is in
some way only a “preliminary consent” is incorrect as contrary to the

express wording of that provision: “Each Party hereby consents...”.

As for the assertion that the mediation attempts involving Mr Gorbulin and the

Chamber of Independent Experts do not qualify as an attempt to negotiate and

Page20

consult with Ukraine, Ukraine received even earlier notice of the dispute in
the form of a petition filed by numerous deputies of the Kyiv City Council
and Verhovna Rada (Parliament of Ukraine) in support of the Claimant on
1 March 1996. Mr Gorbulin was, furthermore, appointed as the Executive
Secretary for Ukraine to the Gore-Kuchma Commission, which was
charged with resolving investment disputes between the two countries.
Therefore Mr Gobulin did have the authority to act on behalf of Ukraine at
the mediation. Finally, the Claimant had been diligent in seeking negotiation
and consultation with the Kyiv City State Administration as a manifestation
of the State “virtually on a daily basis from the start of its project in 1993
to the meeting of Dec. 4, 1998, with Mr Omelchenko and his entire
entourage”. The meeting with Mr Omelchenko in and of itself satisfied the
requirement for consultation and negotiation for the purposes of Article VI(2)
of the BIT.

Gj) In relation to the assertion that the dispute presented to Mr Gorbulin was
formulated differently than the case brought before the present Tribunal, the
Claimant counters that the agenda of that mediation was designed to restart
the Parkview Project; hence it necessarily differed from one that “would be
appropriate in the context of litigation”. In any case, the agenda expressly
mentioned the problem of executing land lease amendments, which is
central to the Claimant’s expropriation claim as pleaded before this
Tribunal. In relation to the formulation of the dispute submitted to mediation
before the Chamber of Independent Experts, there is no requirement that the
matters submitted to that forum would be replicated before this Tribunal
because both petitions for relief “deal with the same goal”, i.e. to recover
damages for the unlawful actions of Kyiv City State Administration “that
blocked the completion of the Parkview Office Building Project and that
ultimately led to its expropriation by the Respondent”.

6.10 The Respondent’s Rejoinder contained the following further submissions

on jurisdiction and admissibility:

(a) In relation to the nature of the Claimant’s investments, the only proven

tangible investments in the Ukraine were Heneratsiya’s computer and office

Page21

(b)

(d)

(e)

equipment and the copyright to the design “Parkview (Version 3)”,
whereas the intangible form of the investment was the Claimant’s majority
share in Heneratsiya. None of these investments have been expropriated.
The certificate issued by the State Agency for Authors’ Rights could not
confer anything other than an intellectual property right, since this was the
extent of the competence of the Agency. The Act of Property Transfer
referred to by the Claimant could only, therefore, transfer intellectual

property rights in the project to Heneratsiya and nothing more.

Even if the “entire project” was transferred by the Act of Property Transfer,
as the Claimant alleges, this would simply form part of the Claimant’s

majority share in Heneratsiya, which has never been expropriated.

Ukraine concedes that the BIT does apply to political subdivisions of
Ukraine and the U.S.A. Nevertheless, Article XI of the BIT does not confer
of the ICSID Convention.
In particular, “[bJeing the embodiment of the state executive power at the
local level, the KMDA does not act on behalf of Ukraine as a State at the

standing on political subdivisions for the purpos:

 

international arena”. The ratification by Ukraine of the BIT does not
constitute the designation or approval of consent of a political subdivision
required by Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. The present dispute, which
is between the Claimant and the KMDA, is therefore inadmissible.

Generation Ukraine was subject to the control of a third country (Canada)

and conducted no substantial business activity in the United States.

The registration of Heneratsiya by the Pecherska District Administration
was erroneous as not in compliance with the Civil Code of Ukraine. The
fact of this illegal registration should be “evaluated by the Tribunal in the
context of the ICSID jurisdiction”. Furthermore, the Claimant’s suggestion
that Article 8 of the Law of Ukraine “On Entrepreneurial Activity” does
not envisage the possibility of the State initiating legal proceedings to
cancel the registration of a company is incorrect. Ukraine concedes,

however, that there have been no such proceedings instituted to date.

Page22,

(d)

(g)

(h)

(i)

6.11

The term “preliminary consent” is used by the Respondent to indicate that,
insofar as the BIT entered into force prior to the Ukraine’s accession to the
ICSID Convention, its consent to ICSID arbitration was “preliminary” and
subject to “final” consent upon accession to the ICSID Convention. The
form of the Claimant’s consent to ICSID was defective because it was
addressed to the ICSID Centre rather than to the Respondent.

Mr Gorbulin had no authority to represent Ukraine as a State in the
mediation between the Claimant and the KMDA. This mediation cannot
therefore constitute “consultation and negotiation” for the purposes of the

BIT. Mediation is, in any cas

 

, different from consultation and negotiation
as a matter of substance. Nor did Mr Omelchenko have any authority to

represent Ukraine at the meeting on 4 December 1998.

The claims in these proceedings were never raised in the various mediation
attempts, nor was there any reference made to the BIT. Hence, the present

dispute was never before Ukraine.

The correct interpretation of Article XII of the BIT is that the BIT applies to
investments in existence at the time of its entry into force, but only to “events,
facts and situations related to such investments” after the BIT enters into
force. The BIT entered into force, in accordance with Article XII, thirty days
after the date of the exchange of instruments of ratification, on 16 November

1996. It had no legal force as a matter of Ukrainian law before this date.

On the occasion of the hearing of witnesses in Paris on 20 February 2003,

the Tribunal, by a letter to the Parties of the same date, requested that they address

certain issues in their final oral submissions. Some of these issues had emerged

from the Parties’ written pleadings; others were identified by the Tribunal and

raised in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 41.2. The relevant part of the

Tribunal’s letter is reproduced below:

“The 27.06.96 and 26.07.96 Agreements [i.e. the Lease Agreements and
the Foundation Agreement]

Are these agreements valid today?

Page23

6.12

Have they been breached?
May the Claimant’s grievance be said to arise out of them?

What meaning is to be ascribed to the words “court” and “procedure”
under Article 4.3 of the 27.06.96 agreement?

What is the effect, if any, of Article 4.3 of the 27.06.96 agreement and
Article 8 of the 26.07.96 agreement in light of Article 26 (first sentence) of
the ICSID Convention, or of Article VI(2)(a) and (b) of the BIT?

The BIT

What investments did Generation Ukraine Inc. make as defined by Article 1
of the BIT?

What was the contractual or other proprietary foundation of such
investments?

When and by whom were such contractual or proprietary rights acquired,
if any; and on the basis of what legal instrument?
May the dispute concerning the Parkview Project be said to arise out of

Generation Ukraine Inc.’s interest in Heneratsiya Ltd.?

What provisions of the BIT have been breached? (The Parties are invited
to pay special attention to the terms of Article VI(1).)

What is the meaning and the consequences of Articles II(7) and VIII(a)?

Under Article I(2), may Ukraine deny the advantages of the BIT to U.S.
companies only if they are BOTH controlled by third country nationals AND
do not have substantial busin tivities in the US, or is EITHER condition
sufficient? What is the consequence if either interpretation is plausible?

 

The ICSID Convention

Does Ukraine’s consent to ICSID jurisdiction in Article VI of the BIT
extend to investment disputes arising:

(i) before 16 November 1996;
(ii) after 16 November 1996;

(iii) or only after 7 July 2000.”

Instead of addressing these issues in its oral submissions, the Claimant applied

to the Tribunal to have written responses to these issues received into the record. The

Respondent acceded to this request. The following is a summary of the main points

Page24

made in that document, which was produced on the occasion of the final oral

submissions.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

The 27.06.96 and 26.07.96 Agreements

The Kyiv City Council issued a decree on 8 July 1999 which purported to
void its earlier decision to grant the Claimant the land which was the
subject of the two Lease Agreements dated 27 June 1996. The Kyiv City
Council did not obtain a judgment of a Ukrainian court as required by the
Land Code of Ukraine. Therefore the decree is invalid and has no legal

effect. The Foundation Agreement of 26 July 1996 also remains valid.

Each of these agreements has been breached by the Ukrainian authorities
and the “Claimant’s grievance arises partly from the breaches of the

aforementioned Agreements”.

Article 4.3 of the Lease Agreements “convey[s] the notion that disputes
relating to the agreement shall be resolved in accordance with the
provisions of existing or future laws. However, in view of the existence of
the US/Ukraine Bilateral Investment Treaty this would suggest that,
whereas the Claimant is exempted by the BIT from adjudicating its

disputes in Ukrainian courts, the Respondent is not.”

Article 26 of the ICSID Convention prescribes that once the Claimant
commences an ICSID arbitration “both parties are bound to a resolution of
their dispute exclusively under the rules and procedures of the Convention
and no other venue”. Article VI(2)(a) and (b) of the BIT provide that the
investor has the option of bring disputes to a domestic forum of the State
party to the dispute or in accordance with a previously agreed dispute
resolution procedure, but this is not mandatory. Indeed, if the investor
makes such an election, it would thereafter lose its right to bring an ICSID
claim pursuant to Article VI(3)(a) of the BIT.

The BIT

Page25

(e)

The Claimant’s investment was not comprised of a company, or shares or

stock or other interests in a company, or interests in the assets thereof;

rather, it made several investments which qualify under different
categories as defined in Article 1 of the BIT:

()

(2)

(3)

Tangible property: “The total expenses (investment) paid in by
Generation Ukraine Inc. for the period January 1* 1993 through
January 31° 1999 equalled US$4,064,388...” The Claimant also

invested computer and office equipment with a value of USD 24,000.

Intangible property: “GUI [Generation Ukraine Inc] transferred to
Heneratsiya Ltd. its total rights to the Parkview Project, including
its architectural design, engineering work, Kyiv technical and
utility permissions, marketing work and draft tenant’s lease
agreements, all project related rights to contracts and agreements
with third parties for the execution of work required to continue
the project in a formal Akt of Property Transfer, dated July 21,
1998, valued at $19.97 million U.S. dollars... GUI’s legal rights to
the transferred property was established by the State Agency of
Ukraine for Author’s and Joint Rights in its Certificate VP No.
190 issued to Generation Ukraine Inc...” The value of this
property increased as reflected in various expert valuations,
arriving at a final figure of USD 38.75 million, which was

recorded in an amendment to the Charter Fund of Heneratsiya.

A claim to money or a claim to performance having economic value,
and associated with an investment: “The Claimant was entitled to
maintain a claim to money or a claim to performance arising from this
project. Following upon the completion of the building, the Claimant
had a legitimate expectation to receive the proceeds of the investment
being future rents, under a general management agreement with its
Ukrainian subsidiary. The Claimant was also entitled to rely on the

performance of the Respondent in co-operating with, assisting in and

Page26

(g)

(h)

assuring full compliance with her laws and regulations for the

successful completion of the venture”.

(4) Intellectual property: “The aggregate collection of the materials
which comprised the entirety of the Parkview Project can
properly be classified as a combination of literary and artistic
works, inventions and industrial designs. It is this aggregate which
the State Agency of Ukraine for Author’s and Joint Rights
acknowledged in its Certificate VP No. 190...”

The contractual or proprietary foundation of such investments were not
recorded in one document alone. The starting point was the Protocol of
Intentions, which is, for the purposes of Article VI, an “investment
agreement between that Party and such national or company” and “an
investment authorization granted by that Party’s foreign investment
authority to such national or company”. Even though Mr Laka in his
personal capacity signed the Protocol of Intentions, Generation Ukraine
and Heneratsiya became the “lawful successor organizations for the
execution of the terms of the Protocol”. Thereafter, “each and every
licence and permit obtained by the Claimant from the Respondent is further
evidence of the contractual arrangement between the parties”. Moreover,
“(t]he Agreements of 27/6/1996 and 26/7/1996 advanced the contractual
arrangements further to the point where property rights were granted to the

Claimant which still exist to this date”.

In response to the question concerning what provisions of the BIT have
been breached, the Claimant simply listed 16 different Articles of the BIT

as comprehensive justification for its claim of expropriation.

In response to the question relating to the proper interpretation of Article I(2)
of the BIT, the Claimant submits that at least two of the conditions set out in
Article I(2) must be present for a Party to deny the benefits of the BIT to a
company or national of the other Party: first the company must be owned or
controlled by nationals of a third country and either the company is a “mere

shell” or the third country is one with which the denying Party does not

Page27

maintain normal economic relations. Insofar as the Claimant is a “U.S.
chartered corporation owned 100% by a U.S. citizen”, Article I(2) cannot

apply in the present case.
The ICSID Convention

Although the BIT entered into force thirty days after the exchange of
instruments of ratification (on 16 November 1996), Ukraine nevertheless
“absorbed the Treaty into her domestic laws on 21 October 1994 under
Law No.226/94/VR”. The Claimant was therefore entitled to the protection
of the BIT from 21 October 1994. Furthermore, Article XII of the BIT
provides that the BIT shall apply to investments existing at the time of
entry into force of the BIT. The Claimant’s investment existed before
this time and hence is covered by the terms of the BIT. Finally, “Ukraine
did not sign the ICSID Convention until 7 July 2000 and clearly cannot
benefit from her wilful delay in ensuring that the proper mechanism was

available for the resolution of disputes as provided for under the Treaty”.

6.13. The Claimant made these further oral submissions relevant to jurisdiction

and admissibility:

(a) The Protocol of Intentions, the two Lease Agreements and the
Foundation Agreement constitute “investment agreements” for the
purposes of Article VI(1)(a).

(b) In relation to the time at which the dispute came into existence: “all of
the elements of the present complaint were first mutually and publicly
acknowledged by both the company and the KMDA at the joint
meeting between the company, the KMDA and representatives of the
Embassy of the USA on 4 December 1998”.

(c) The jurisdictional problem in Tradex v. Albania’ does not arise in the present

" ICSID Case No. ARB/94/2, dis

case because the “de facto forced termination and expropriation” occurred
after the BIT entered into force on 16 November 1996 when the “KMDA

 

sed in Paragraph 9.2 below.

Page28

(d)

(e)

6.14

refused to carry out its obligations under the Yalovoy Protocol” following
the meeting on 11 July 1997.

It was reiterated that the Claimant’s investment consists of “two
components”: “the direct cash investment from Generation Ukraine
amounting to US $4,064,338” and the “intangible components” including

know-how, contracts, expertise, and the like.

A further attempt at “negotiation and consultation” was made on 8 February
1999 at a meeting involving Mr S. Tyhypko of the Ministry of the Economy
of Ukraine, Mr Bowen of the United States Embassy in Kyiv, and Mr Laka.
Mr Tyhypko sent a letter to the US Embassy the following day on the

letterhead of the Cabinet of Ministers to explain the results of the meeting.

For its part, the Respondent addressed the issues raised in the Tribunal’s

letter in its oral submissions at the second hearing, arguing as follows:

(a)

(b)

(c)

()

The 27.06.96 and 26.07.96 Agreements

The Lease Agreements and the Foundation Agreement remain valid to this
day. The decision of the Kyiv City Council “had no legal impact on the
validity of Land Lease Agreements [sic] for forty-nine years”.

The Lease Agreements have not been breached by either Party. The
Foundation Agreement was breached by Heneratsiya because it failed to
commence construction at the appropriate time and to pay the USD
150,000 infrastructure fee.

Clause 4.3 of the Lease Agreements envisages that the settlement of any
disputes arising out of the agreements shall be “through the courts of
Ukraine”. In this case the appropriate court would be the Economic Court
of the City of Kyiv. This clause does not, however, create jurisdiction in a

court that would not otherwise have jurisdiction in the absence of this clause.

Article 26 of the ICSID Convention and Article VI(2)(a) and (b) of the BIT

“have no effect” in light of clause 4.3 of the Lease Agreements and clause 8 of

Page29

(g)

(h)

(i)

the Foundation Agreement. The parties to these agreements were Heneratsiya
and KMDA (not Generation Ukraine and Ukraine) and hence these
agreements are not “investment agreements” for the purposes of Article
VI(2)(a). Furthermore, the BIT and the ICSID Convention were not in force
at the time the Lease Agreements were executed and hence could have no

impact on clause 4.3.
The BIT

The only investments the Claimant has made in the Ukraine are the
computer and office equipment and “indirect control over the design, plans
and specifications concerning version three of the corrected design of the
Parkview Building”. The “form of the investment” was the Claimant’s
majority share in Heneratsiya. There was “no other direct investment...
made by Generation Ukraine in the territory of Ukraine which might fit the
broad criteria of the BIT”.

The Protocol of Intentions is not capable of being the foundation for the
Claimant’s investment. It is not a binding contract (as follows from its
title) because it does not meet the requirements of Ukrainian law for it to
have such an effect. Furthermore, the parties to the Protocol of Intentions

are not the same as the Parties to this dispute.

The dispute concerning the Parkview Project cannot be said to arise out of
Generation Ukraine’s interest in Heneratsiya because there is no legally

recognisable “project”.

There is no dispute within the meaning of Article VI(1)(a) or (b) of the BIT
because there was no investment agreement between the Parties and nor
any investment authorisations because the latter have “never been
mandatory” for foreign investment in Ukraine. Ukraine has, furthermore,
never breached any provision of the BIT in relation to the Claimant’s

investment.

Ukraine can deny the Claimant the advantages of Article I(2) of the BIT if it

can be shown that either there is third country control over the Claimant or no

Page30

substantial business activities of the Claimant in the United States. In the
present case the Claimant “has failed to provide sufficient evidence with

regard to third country control and substantial business activities”.

The ICSID Convention

() Ukraine rts: “Neither the ICSID Convention nor the BIT give any

ground to assume that Ukrainian consent to the ICSID jurisdiction extends to

 

disputes arising before the date such consent was given ... [t]herefore there
is no reason to allege that the Ukraine consent to ICSID jurisdiction could
extend to investment disputes arising before 7 July 2000”. The BIT did not

become part of Ukrainian law until it came into force in November 1996.

6.15 The Respondent made several further points in its oral submissions on 19
March 2003:

(a) The Claimant’s legal advisors did not have proper authority to represent
Generation Ukraine. The resolution of the Board of Directors of Generation
Ukraine dated 1 February 2000 refers to the instruction of counsel “to
represent the corporation in its complaints against the Government of
Ukraine before the ICSID additional facility and other venues”. This
resolution was not effective to confer authority to Mr Kilty because, on the
one hand, “the word venue means only the place of proceedings rather
than arbitration institution”, and, on the other hand, because the present
arbitration is not before the ICSID Additional Facility. Mr Kilty therefore

has no authority to represent the Claimant.

(b) The BIT only became part of Ukrainian law when it came into force on 16
November 1996. The BIT could not be in force for the Ukraine in 1994
because “at this time it was not in force for the counterparty, for the United
States of America, and how could the BIT be effective for one party
without being effective for another party?”

Page31

7.

7A

following is:

Definition of the Preliminary Issues

Having regard to the Parties’ pleadings, the Tribunal has identified the

es in the Parties’ written and oral pleadings relating to jurisdiction

 

and admissibility that fall to be decided:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

Has the Claimant made an investment in Ukraine within the definition of
Article 1(1) of the BIT and Article 25 of the ICSID Convention? What are
the legal rights acquired by the Claimant that evidence such an investment?

What is the factual basis for the investment in terms of the consideration

 

advanced by the Claimant to secure these legal rights? What is relevance
of the Claimant’s shareholding in Heneratsiya as an investment in

Ukraine? These issues relate to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione materiae.

Was the registration of Heneratsiya as a legal entity in Ukraine defective in

any way? How would such a defect impact on this Tribunal’s jurisdiction?

Are the Claimant’s grievances directed against Ukraine or the Kyiv City
State Administration? Is Ukraine the proper party to this investment

dispute? These issues relate to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione personae.

For the purposes of Article VI(1) of the BIT, is the investment dispute
between the Parties to be characterised as a dispute arising out of or
relating to: (i) an investment agreement between Ukraine and the
Claimant; (ii) an investment authorisation granted by Ukraine’s foreign
investment authority to the Claimant; or (iii) an alleged breach of any right
conferred or created by the BIT with respect to an investment made by the

Claimant?

From what point in time does the Tribunal have jurisdiction (ratione

temporis) over the investment dispute?

Was the Claimant’s or the Respondent’s consent to ICSID arbitration in

some way defective?

Is the Claimant required to exhaust local remedies before making a
submission to ICSID?

Page32,

(h) Have the parties sought a resolution of the investment dispute through
consultation and negotiation pursuant to Article VI(2) of the BIT? Was
Ukraine properly represented in the alleged attempts at consultation and

negotiation? Was it nec

 

ry for the present investment dispute to be
formulated in the same way at the alleged attempts at consultation and

negotiation?

(i) Is Ukraine is entitled to deny the Claimant the advantages of the BIT
pursuant to Article I(2)?

Gj) Were the Claimant’s legal advisors properly authorised to represent the

Claimant in this arbitration?
8. The Claimant’s Investment - Jurisdiction Ratione Materiae

8.1 In accordance with Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, an arbitral
tribunal established pursuant to the ICSID Convention has jurisdiction ratione

materae over “any legal dispute arising directly out of an investment”.

8.2 _No definition of “investment” is to be found in the ICSID Convention. It is
well settled that Contracting Parties may agree upon a more precise definition of
“investment” in a separate legal instrument. The Claimant has invoked the
jurisdiction of ICSID pursuant to Article VI of the BIT. Hence, the definition
contained in Article I(1)(a) of the BIT (set out in full at Paragraph 18.1 below) applies
in this reference to ICSID arbitration.

8.3. The Claimant’s description of its investment was first articulated in its
Request for Arbitration as follows:
“Generation Ukraine Inc is a “company” within the meaning of Article I of
the Treaty which undertook an “investment” (also within the meaning of
Article I) in Ukraine in the form of a proposed premier office block

development known as the Parkview Office Building Project at Boulevard
Shevchenko 32 in the City of Kyiv.”

8.4. The same document also described a second investment for the purposes
of Article I of the BIT:

Page33

“[...] Generation Ukraine Inc. caused to be registered on May 7 1993 in
Ukraine a company called Heneratsiya Ltd. Heneratsiya Ltd. is a wholly
owned sub: of Generation Ukraine Inc. and qualifies by Ukrainian
law as a company with 100% foreign investment. It is an exclusively U.S.
investment being owned by Generation Ukraine Inc. (99.97%) and by Mr
Eugene Laka (0.03%). In accordance with Article I of the Bilateral
Investment Treaty, Heneratsiya Ltd. constitutes an U.S. Investment in
Ukraine made by both Generation Ukraine Inc. and Mr Laka...”

 

8.5 The Tribunal accepts that Generation Ukraine’s shareholding interest in
Heneratsiya prima facie constitutes an investment within the meaning of Article
1(1)(a)(ii) of the BIT which includes “shares of stock or other interests in a
company”. (This is without prejudice to the Tribunal’s consideration of the
Respondent’s jurisdictional challenge concerning the legality of Heneratsiya’s
incorporation in the Ukraine.) Generation Ukraine’s ownership rights in the vehicle
Heneratsiya (i.e. its title to shares in Heneratsiya) has not, however, been shown to
have been affected by the conduct which has given rise to Generation Ukraine’s
grievance. The Claimant’s allegations rather pertain to the difficulties encountered

by Heneratsiya when it sought to make investments of its own.

8.6 Each cause of action pleaded by the Claimant in the present case relates to
the “proposed premier office block development known as the Parkview Office
Building Project at Boulevard Shevchenko 32 in the City of Kyiv” as described in
the Request for Arbitration. Therefore, as long as there was no interference in
Generation Ukraine’s ownership of Heneratsiya per se, there could be no
“investment dispute” for the purposes of Article VI of the BIT unless and until

Henera

 

siya actually made an investment in the Parkview Project. A contention that
Ukrainian officials made it unacceptably difficult for Heneratsiya to effect the
investment could not give rise to an investment dispute unless the Claimant was in a
position to invoke pre-investment protections. Such protections do exist in various
international treaties (e.g. the right to establish a business or tender for contracts

without discrimination) but no such right has been invoked here.

8.7 In response to the Claimant’s Request for Arbitration, the Respondent
challenged the jurisdiction of ICSID by asserting that “[t]he Claimant has not proved
that the Parkview Office Building Project fits the criteria of an ‘investment’
established in Article I(1) of the BIT”.

Page34

8.8 Since there cannot be an expropriation unless the complainant demonstrates
the existence of proprietary rights in the first place, the legal materialisation of the
Claimant’s alleged investment is a fundamental aspect of the merits in this case
and will be considered in detail in Section 18 of this Award. For present purposes,
it is sufficient to record that the Tribunal is satisfied that the Claimant’s efforts
resulted in the materialisation of rights that qualify as “investments” under several
criteria defined in Article I(1)(a). This conclusion is not, however, sufficient to
create jurisdiction ratione materiae. It is also necessary that there be a dispute of a

kind contemplated by the BIT.

8.9 The determination of the nature of the dispute is made difficult by the fact that
the Claimant has advanced an extraordinarily broad and heterogenous swathe of
claims based on Ukrainian tort law, Ukrainian constitutional and administrative law
and the BIT itself. The interrelationship between domestic law claims and BIT claims
is far from clear in the Claimant’s pleadings. In parts of the Claimant’s voluminous

written submissions, it appears that the Claimant is advancing the domestic law

 

 

claims in their own right, whereas in others one might deduce that the references to
domestic law provisions are designed to put the various acts of Ukrainian authorities

into context for the purposes of demonstrating a breach of an international standard.

8.10 This Tribunal is not endowed with general jurisdiction to hear claims based
on any source of law arising at any point in time against any potential defendant.
The jurisdiction of the Tribunal is limited to investment disputes, which are
defined in Article VI(1) of the BIT as:
“... a dispute between a Party and a national or company of the other Party
arising out of or relating to (a) an investment agreement between that Party
and such national or company; (b) an investment authorization granted by
that Party’s foreign investment authority to such national or company; or
(c) an alleged breach of any right conferred or created by this Treaty with
respect to an investment.”

8.11 This limited nature of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction has escaped the
Claimant’s analysis of its claims. The formulation of “Claim A” will suffice to

illustrate the point:

Page35

“This claim seeks to recover the 114 months of lost revenues, up to
December 31, 1999 and which continues to grow, from the company’s
Parkview Project which should have been completed and ready to accept
paying tenants on, or before, June 1, 1996 ... but was not because of
documented unlawful acts of officials of the Kyiv City State
Administration (KMDA). The company enjoys protection from two
sources for the compensation of these lost revenues: Article III of the
US/Ukraine Bilateral Investment Treaty which bars unlawful expropriations
and two Laws of Ukraine that expressly require the indemnification for lost
revenues due to the misconduct of government entities and officials.”

 

8.12 This Tribunal could conceivably have jurisdiction over domestic law
claims under categories (a) and (b) of the definition of investment disputes in
Article VI(1). But the Claimant’s domestic law claims cannot possibly fall within
these two categories. In relation to category (a), an “investment agreement” must
be an agreement between the investor and one of the two State Parties to the BIT.
The Claimant has never contracted directly with Ukraine as a “Party” to the BIT.
In the present case, the parties to the Lease Agreements and the Foundation
Agreement are the Claimant and a municipal authority of Ukraine, the Kyiv City
State Administration. True enough, the acts of the Kyiv City State Administration
may be imputable to Ukraine as a sovereign state for the purposes of the
international law of state responsibility. For this reason, the Claimant is entitled to
bring a cause of action based on alleged expropriation of its investment by acts
performed by Ukrainian municipal authorities. It is an international claim and
international rules of attribution apply. But such rules do not operate to join the
central government of Ukraine to contractual relationships entered into by
municipal authorities. The Claimant has not, moreover, ever advanced a specific
claim for the breach of its agreements with the Kyiv City State Administration. In
relation to category (b), it has never been suggested that the Order on Land
Allocation or the Construction Permits were granted by Ukraine’s Party’s “foreign
investment authority”. Nor does the Tribunal understand the Claimant to have
alleged a grievance arising out of these administrative acts. The domestic law claims
discernable in “Claim A” and elsewhere in the Claimant’s pleadings are therefore

beyond the scope of this Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

8.13 The are additional reasons for this conclusion. The Tribunal’s jurisdiction

ratione personae and ratione temporis will be examined in detail below, but to

Page36

complete the jurisdictional analysis of “Claim A” it should be noted that the
proper defendant to any domestic law claims is the Kyiv City State
Administration, not Ukraine. This is because the international rules of attribution
obviously do not apply to causes of action grounded in domestic law, so that any
such claim cannot be directed against Ukraine vicariously. Furthermore, the
alleged “unlawful acts of officials” date from 1993. The BIT did not enter into
force until 16 November 1996, and the earliest date at which the Claimant can be
said to have a recognisable investment pursuant to Article I(1) of the BIT is 24
April 1996, upon the Kyiv City State Administration’s Order of Land Allocation.
Hence, any cause of action over which this Tribunal has jurisdiction must have

arisen after 16 November 1996.

8.14 The Tribunal concludes that its jurisdiction ratione materiae in this case is
limited to category (c) of Article VI(1), viz. “any alleged breach of any right
conferred or created by [the] Treaty with respect to an investment”. In its Claims
A to D, the Claimant has pleaded three distinct acts of expropriation in breach of
Article III of the BIT that were effected by: (i) the Kyiv City State Administration’s
failure to provide Heneratsiya with corrected land lease agreements by 31 October
1997 in accordance with the terms of the Yalovoy Protocol; (ii) the Kyiv City
Council’s Decision of 8 July 1998 which purported to annul Heneratsiya’s
leasehold rights; and (iii) the Kyiv City State Administration’s failure to procure
the use of neighbouring land for the benefit of the Claimant’s construction staging
area. Subject to the resolution of the Respondent’s other jurisdictional objections
below, the Tribunal rules that it has jurisdiction ratione materiae over these three

causes of action with respect to the Claimant’s investment.

9 The Validity of the Registration of Heneratsiya

9.1 The Respondent has submitted that the registration of the Claimant’s
investment vehicle in Ukraine, Heneratsiya, was formally defective under Ukrainian
law because the foundation agreement between its shareholders Generation
Ukraine and Mr Laka was signed by Mr Laka in both his personal capacity as a

shareholder and as the representative of Generation Ukraine.

9.2 In accordance with Article 6 of the Law of Ukraine “Concerning Enterprises

in Ukraine”: “[a]n enterprise is considered created and acquires the rights of a legal

Page37

entity from the day of its state registration”. Further, that registration can only be

annulled by a decision of a competent Ukrainian court.

9.3. The Respondent has not produced any decision of a competent Ukrainian
court on the validity of the state registration of Heneratsiya. In these circumstances,
the Tribunal must accept the status quo of Heneratsiya’s effective existence as a
Ukrainian legal entity because this Tribunal has no jurisdiction to investigate and

rule upon the alleged formal defect raised by the Respondent.

10. The Proper Parties to the Dispute - Jurisdiction Ratione Personae

10.1 The Respondent has asserted that the Kyiv City State Administration,
rather than the State of Ukraine, is the proper party to this dispute, which relates to
acts or omissions of officials of the Kyiv City State Administration allegedly causing
harm to Generation Ukraine. In this connection, the Respondent has stated that
“being the embodiment of the state executive power at the local level, the [Kyiv
City State Administration] does not act on behalf of Ukraine as a State at the

international arena”.

10.2 The Respondent has failed to differentiate between disputes arising under
domestic law and dispute arising under the BIT. Insofar as this statement relates to a
cause of action based on the BIT, it discloses a confusion about the juridical nature
of such a cause of action. By invoking Article III of the BIT, the Claimant is
seeking to invoke the international responsibility of Ukraine on the basis that
various acts or omissions of officials of the Kyiv City State Administration are
attributable to Ukraine in accordance with the rules of international law and that
such acts or omissions amount to an expropriation. The relevant international rule
of attribution is summarised in Article 4 of the ILC’s Articles on State
Responsibility:
“1, The conduct of a State organ shall be considered an act of that
State under international law, whether the organ exercises legislative,
executive, judicial or any other functions, whatever position it holds in the
organization of the State, and whatever its character as an organ of the
central government or of a territorial unit of the State.

 

 

2. An organ includes any person or entity which has that status in
accordance with the internal law of the State.”

Page38

10.3. There is no doubt that the conduct of a municipal authority such as the
Kyiv City State Administration, which is listed as an organ of State power by the
Ukrainian Constitution, is capable of being recognised as an act of the State of
Ukraine under international law. Judicial authority for this proposition may be
found in the decision of the Permanent Court of International Justice in Certain
German Interests in Polish Upper Silesia (Merits):

“From the standpoint of International Law and of the Court which is its

organ, municipal laws ... express the will and constitute the activities of

States, in the same manner as do legal decisions or administrative measures.””
10.4 The Respondent is correct to affirm that “the [Kyiv City State
Administration] does not act on behalf of Ukraine as a State at the international
arena”. This is precisely the reason that Ukraine rather than the Kyiv City State
Administration is the proper party to these international arbitration proceedings,
where the international obligations of the former are alleged to have been
breached by the conduct of the latter.

10.5 It would be an entirely different matter if this Tribunal were to be seized of
a cause of action based on an alleged breach of a contract between the Claimant and
the Kyiv City State Administration. In such a case, the Kyiv City State
Administration itself would be the proper party to these proceedings. It is in this
situation that Article 25(3) of the ICSID Convention, cited by the Respondent in
the context of this jurisdictional objection ratione personae, has a role to play.
Article 25(3) relates to the consent of the respondent State to the participation of a
“constituent subdivision or agency” of that State in ICSID proceedings. This is a
necessary prerequisite for investment disputes where the investor alleges a breach
of an obligation owed by the “constituent subdivision or agency” in its own
capacity. Only Ukraine is privy to the obligations under the BIT, not the Kyiv City

State Administration.

10.6 This distinction between the basis of liability in treaty and contractual
claims was examined at length by the ad hoc Committee in Compania de Aguas

del Aconquija S.A. & Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic:

2 1926, P.C.1J., Series A, No.7 at p. 19.

Page39

.. in the case of a claim based on a treaty, international law rules of
attribution apply, with the result that the state of Argentina is internationally
responsible for the acts of its provincial authorities. By contrast, the state of
Argentina is not liable for the performance of contracts entered into by
Tucuman, which possesses separate legal personality under its own law and
is responsible for the performance of its own contracts.”*

 

 

10.7 There is no difficulty in applying the international rules of attribution in
this case. The proper focus is instead on whether the Claimant can establish that
the conduct of the Kyiv City State Administration, or other relevant Ukrainian

State organs, amounts to a breach of an international obligation set out in the BIT.

11. Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis

11.1 The Tribunal finds, for reasons explained in Section 18 below, that the
Claimant acquired legal rights in the Parkview Project that are susceptible to falling
within the definition of an investment under Article 1(1) from the moment the Order on
Land Allocation came into effect on 24 April 1996. The BIT came into force on 16
November 1996. Article XII(3) provides, inter alia, that the BIT “shall apply to
investments existing at the time of entry into force as well as to investments made or
acquired thereafter”. Hence the Claimant’s investment, evidenced by the various
administrative and contractual documents referred to in Section 18, is an investment
recognised by the BIT notwithstanding that the BIT entered into force after the date of
the Order of Land Allocation, the Lease Agreements and the Foundation Agreement.

11.2 A separate issue arises, however, relating to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal
over investment disputes that came into existence before the BIT came into force.
The Claimant’s causes of action appear to invoke the prohibition against
expropriation in Article III of the BIT. Thus the disputes underlying these-causes of
action fall within the third category (c) “investment disputes” under Article VI(1):
“an alleged breach of any right conferred or created by this BIT with respect to an
investment.” The obligations assumed by the two state parties to the BIT relating to
the minimum standards of investment protection (including the prohibition against
expropriation) did not become binding, and hence legally enforceable, until the BIT

entered into force on 16 November 1996. It follows that a cause of action based on

3 ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3, at para. 96. (Footnote omitted.)

Paged4o

one of the BIT standards of protection must have arisen after 16 November 1996.
Support for this conclusion may be found in Tradex Hellas S.A. v. Republic of
Albania,’ a case cited by the Claimant, where the Tribunal recognised that it could
only have jurisdiction over causes of actions arising after the relevant bilateral
investment treaty entered into force, notwithstanding that the treaty applied expressly

to investments made before the treaty entered into force.

11.3. It is plain that several of the BIT standards, and the prohibition against
expropriation in particular, are simply a conventional codification of standards
that have long existed in customary international law. The Tribunal does not,
however, have general jurisdiction over causes of action based on the obligations

of states in customary international law.

11.4 In conclusion, the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione temporis is limited to

alleged expropriatory acts which occurred after 16 November 1996.

12. The Validity of the Parties’ Consent to ICSID Arbitration

12.1 The Respondent submits that the Claimant’s consent to ICSID arbitration
was defective because it was communicated directly to the ICSID Centre and not
to Ukraine. The Respondent further maintains that its own consent has not been
perfected because it expressed only “preliminary” consent to ICSID arbitration in the
BIT before the ICSID Convention had been ratified by Ukraine. This “preliminary”
consent was, according to the Respondent, subject to its “final” consent once the

ICSID Convention came into force for Ukraine.

12.2 Neither of these arguments have any merit. First, it is firmly established that
an investor can accept a State’s offer of ICSID arbitration contained in a bilateral
investment treaty by instituting ICSID proceedings. There is nothing in the BIT to
suggest that the investor must communicate its consent in a different form directly to

the State; to the contrary, the express language of Article VI(3)(a) dictates otherwise:

* ICSID Case No. ARB/94/2.

PagedI

“\the national or company concerned may choose to consent in writing to
the submission of the dispute for settlement by binding arbitration: (i) to
the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes ...”

12.3 It follows that the Claimant validly consented to ICSID arbitration by filing
its Notice of Arbitration at the ICSID Centre.

124  Inrelation to the Respondent’s second argument, there is nothing in the BIT to
suggest that its consent to ICSID arbitration was in some way “preliminary” and subject
to later confirmation once Ukraine had ratified the ICSID Convention. Once again, the
express language of the BIT compels the opposite conclusion; Article VI(4) provides:
“Each Party hereby consents to the submission of any investment dispute
for settlement by binding arbitration in accordance with the choice specified
in the written consent of the national or company... Such consent, together
with the written consent of the national or company... shall satisfy the

requirement for: (a) written consent of the parties to the dispute for the
purposes of [the ICSID Convention].”

12.5 The use of the adverb “hereby” in Article VI(4) conveys the finality of the
consent to arbitration on the part of the State Parties to the BIT. There is no scope
for a State Party to subsequently modify or refine its unilateral consent either

generally or in relation to a particular submission to arbitration.

12.6 Ukraine’s consent to ICSID arbitration in Article VI(3) of the BIT was
naturally conditional upon a future event, viz. Ukraine’s ratification of the ICSID
Convention. This no doubt explains the proviso to the consent in Article 3(a)(i)
which states: “provided that the Party is a party to [the ICSID] Convention”. But
Ukraine’s free standing consent to ICSID arbitration was perfected as soon as the
ICSID Convention entered into force for Ukraine on 7 July 2000. Ukraine did not
make any reservation to the BIT whereby it could reassess the status of its consent
once the condition precedent for its full validity had been fulfilled.

 

12.7 The possibility that the ratification of the ICSID Convention could be a
condition precedent to the validity of an offer to arbitrate was recognised in the very
first ICSID arbitration, the Holiday Inns S.A. v. Morocco’ case, where the arbitration

5 ICSID Case No. ARB/72/1.

Paged42,

clause was contained in a contract between the investor and the State. The Tribunal

put it as follows:
“The Tribunal is of the opinion that the Convention allows parties to
subordinate the entry into force of an arbitration clause to the subsequent
fulfilment of certain conditions, such as the adherence of States concerned to
the Convention, or the incorporation of the company envisaged by the
agreement. On this assumption, it is the date when the conditions are
definitively satisfied, as regards one of the Parties involved, which
constitutes in the sense of the Convention the date of consent by that Party.”

12.8 The Claimant’s Notice of Claim was filed on 21 July 2000 after the
condition precedent to the validity of Ukraine’s offer to arbitrate disputes under the
auspices of the ICSID Convention had been fulfilled on 7 July 2000. This disposes
of the second limb of the Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction based on the validity

of the consent to ICSID arbitration.

13. Exhaustion of Local Remedies

13.1 The Respondent maintains that it had the right to insist upon the exhaustion
of local remedies by the Claimant as a precondition to the submission of the
dispute to ICSID arbitration. The source of this right, according to the Respondent,
is Article 26 of the ICSID Convention, which reads:
“Consent of the parties to arbitration under this Convention shall, unless
otherwise stated, be deemed consent to such arbitration to the exclusion of
any other remedy. A Contracting State may require the exhaustion of local
administrative or judicial remedies as a condition of its consent to
arbitration under this Convention.”
13.2 The Respondent submits that the second sentence of Article 26 of the ICSID
Convention prevails over Article VI(4) of the BIT, which contains no reference to
the local remedies rule, by reason of the /ex specialis character of the ICSID

Convention vis-a-vis the BIT.

13.3 It is not necessary for the Tribunal to consider the relationship between Article
26 of the ICSID Convention and Article V1(4) of the BIT because there is no conflict

between these provisions. Article 26 of the ICSID Convention does not assist the

 

® Quoted in P. Lalive, “The First World Bank Arbitration (Holiday Inns v. Morocco) - Some Legal
Problems” (1993) 1 ICSID Reports 645, 668.

Paged3

Respondent in its attempt to impose a procedural obstacle for the Claimant’s

submission to arbitration.

13.4 The first sentence of Article 26 secures the exclusivity of a reference to ICSID
arbitration vis-a-vis any other remedy. A logical consequence of this exclusivity is
the waiver by Contracting States to the ICSID Convention of the local remedies
tule, so that the investor is not compelled to pursue remedies in the respondent
State’s domestic courts or tribunals before the institution of ICSID proceedings.
This waiver is implicit in the second sentence of Article 26, which nevertheless
allows Contracting States to reserve its right to insist upon the prior exhaustion of

local remedies as a condition of its consent.

13.5 Any such reservation to the Ukraine’s consent to ICSID arbitration must
be contained in the instrument in which such consent is expressed, i.e. the BIT itself.
As the Tribunal put it in Lanco International Inc. v. Argentina:’ “A State may require
the exhaustion of domestic remedies as a prior condition for its consent to ICSID
arbitration. This demand may be made (i) in a bilateral investment treaty that offers
submission to ICSID arbitration, (ii) in domestic legislation, or (iii) in a direct
investment agreement that contains an ICSID clause.”* The United States and
Ukraine have elected to omit any requirement that an investor must first exhaust
local remedies before submitting a dispute to ICSID arbitration in the BIT. In any
case, once the investor has accepted the State’s offer to arbitrate in the BIT by
filing its Notice of Arbitration, no further limitations or restrictions on the
reference to arbitration can be imposed unilaterally, whether by the State or by the

investor.

13.6 For these reasons, the Respondent’s reliance on Article 26 is unfounded. The
Claimant was under no constraint to exhaust any remedies in the Ukrainian courts
before filing its Notice of Arbitration to the ICSID Centre.

7 ICSID Case No. ARB/97/6.
* [bid. at para. 39.

Paged44

14. Consultation and Negotiation

14.1. The Respondent submits that the Claimant has not complied with the
requirement in Article VI(2) of the BIT to seek a resolution of the investment

dispute through consultation and negotiation.

14.2 Unlike many BITs, there is no compulsory period for consultation and
negotiation envisaged by Article VI(2), but rather a stipulation in Article VI(3)
that six months must elapse from the date on which the dispute arose before the

submission of the dispute to binding arbitration by the investor.

14.3. Some authorities consider the requirement to consult and negotiate before
proceeding to arbitration as “procedural” rather than a condition precedent for the
vesting of jurisdiction. This Tribunal would be hesitant to interpret a clear provision
of the BIT in such a way so as to render it superfluous, as would be the case if a
“procedural” characterisation of the requirement effectively empowered the

investor to ignore it at its discretion.

14.4 The Tribunal need not rule upon the status of the requirement to consult
and negotiation in this case because the Claimant has quite clearly discharged its
obligation to do so. The Tribunal is satisfied that the attempts to mediate before
V.P. Gorbulin, Secretary of the Council of National Security and Defence of Ukraine
and Executive Secretary for Ukraine to the Gore-Kuchma Commission, and before
the Chamber of Independent Experts, a body established by the President of
Ukraine for the settlement of investment disputes are sufficient for the purposes of
Axtticle VI(2).

14.5 It is certainly true, as the Respondent maintains, that the formulation of the
Claimant’s legal case before this Tribunal differs in many respects from its
representations to Mr Gorbulin and the Chamber of Independent Experts. The
requirement to consult and negotiate, however, does not serve to compel the investor
to plead its legal case on multiple occasions. To insist upon a precise congruity in the
investor’s articulation of its grievances in these different fora would only have a
chilling effect on consultation and negotiation between the investor and the host State.

There is no doubt that the subject matter of the two mediations was the Claimant’s

Page4s

Parkview Project and the conduct of Ukrainian authorities in respect thereto. This is

sufficient for the purposes of the requirement in Article VI(2) of the BIT.

14.6 The Tribunal is also unconvinced by the Respondent’s insistence that these
two mediation attempts were not “authorised” by the Ukrainian State or the
specific ministry responsible for the conduct of ICSID arbitrations. The Claimant
had every right to expect that the aforementioned mediators acted with the ultimate
authority of the Ukrainian State.

15. Denying Advantages under Article I(2) of the BIT

15.1 | The Respondent has invoked Article I(2) of the BIT to prevent the Claimant

from deriving benefit from the investment protection

 

ndards conferred by the

BIT in the circumstances of this case. Article I(2) provides as follows:

“Each Party reserves the right to deny to any company the advantages of
this Treaty if nationals of any third country control such company and, in
no substantial
business activities in the territory of the other Party or is controlled by
nationals of a third country with which the denying Party does not
maintain normal economic relations.”

 

15.2 Leaving aside, for the moment, the factual predicate for the Respondent’s
reliance on Article I(2), the proper interpretation of this provision was a subject of
controversy in the parties’ written and oral pleadings. The controversy stems from
an ambiguity in the text of Article (2), insofar as it might reasonably be argued that
the right of denial may extend to companies without substantial activities in the
place of incorporation, whether or not they are subject to “third country control”.

In view of this ambiguity, the Tribunal req d the Parties’ on the

following question:
“Under Article I(2), may Ukraine deny the advantages of the Treaty to
U.S. companies only if they are BOTH controlled by third country nationals

AND do not have substantial business activities in the US, or is EITHER
condition sufficient?”

15.3. The Parties’ responses to this question did not advance the analysis much
further as both simply asserted competing semantic points without investigating the

ramifications of either approach as a matter of law or policy. Nor did the Parties rely

Paged6

upon any travaux préparatoires or other extraneous materials from which the

common intention of the Contracting Parties might be better understood.

15.4 The Claimant did submit for the record various documents relating to the
United States’ ratification of the BIT at an early stage of the proceedings. In
particular, the Tribunal has access to the “Letter of Submittal” from the United States
Department of State to the President dated 7 September 1994 which provides an
article-by-article commentary to the BIT. In the course of the oral submissions, the

Respondent emphasised that this commentary should not be regarded as

 

necessarily reflecting the official interpretation given to the BIT by Ukraine. This
is certainly a fair and understandable reservation, but equally the Respondent did

not tender any documents emanating from official Ukrainian sources.

15.5 The relevant section of the commentary in the U.S. “Letter of Submittal”
reads:
“Under paragraph 2 of Article 1, either country may deny the benefits of
the Treaty to investments by companies established in the other that are
owned or controlled by nationals of a third country if (1) the company is a
mere shell, without substantial business activities in the home country, or
(2) the third country is one which the denying Party does not maintain
normal economic relations.”
15.6 Unlike the executed version of Article I(2), this commentary is crystal clear:
one or the other of the numbered provisos must be fulfilled in addition to the
general requirement that the company in question is owned or controlled by
nationals of a third country. Hence the official and contemporaneous U.S.
interpretation of Article I(2) unequivocally supports the Claimant’s position in this
case. A textual analysis of Article (2) also seems to favour this approach. If the
“third country control” requirement was not intended to pervade the rest of the
article, one would expect the use of the disjunctive “or” rather than the conjunctive
“and” before the first comma in Article I(2).

15.7 In the absence of any competing considerations advanced by the Respondent,
the Tribunal is satisfied that “third country control” over Generation Ukraine is a
prerequisite for any purported invocation of Article I(2) by the Respondent.
Furthermore, the burden of proof to establish the factual basis of the “third country

Paged7

control”, together with the other conditions, falls upon the State as the party
invoking the “right to deny” conferred by Article 1(2). This is not, as the
Respondent appears to have assumed, a jurisdictional hurdle for the Claimant to
overcome in the presentation of its case; instead it is a potential filter on the

admissibility of claims which can be invoked by the respondent State.

15.8 The Respondent’s

sufficient evidence with regard to third country control and substantial business

 

assertion that the Claimant has “failed to provide

activities” is therefore inapposite, and, when coupled with the paucity of the
Respondent’s own factual submissions on these issues, demonstrates the weakness
of this admissibility objection. It will be recalled that, in relation to the question of
“third country control”, the Respondent names Canada as the third country and
relies upon the following facts: the Ambassador of the Embassy of Canada in
Kyiv came to the Claimant’s assistance on one occasion; a Canadian national was at
one stage president of the Generation Ukraine and provided architectural services
to the company; Generation Ukraine established a representative office in Toronto
and opened a bank account at the Royal Bank of Canada; and finally, it is stated
on the Generation Ukraine letter head that the company is “A United States, Canada,

Ukraine venture”.

15.9 Even if the Tribunal accepts these facts, the Respondent is still a long way
from displacing the clear manifestation of control by a U.S. national (Mr Laka),
who owns 100% of the share capital of the Claimant, Generation Ukraine. This
admissibility objection is therefore dismissed and hence it is unnecessary to
consider whether or not the Claimant conducts or conducted substantial business

activities on the territory of the U.S.

16. Validity of the Claimant’s Legal Representation

16.1 At the final hearing, the Respondent raised a jurisdictional objection based
on an alleged deficiency in the formal appointment of the Claimant’s counsel by the
Board of Directors of Generation Ukraine. Rule 41 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules
describes that jurisdictional objections shall be made “no later that the expiration of
the time limit fixed for the filing of the counter-memorial ... unless the facts on
which the objection is based are unknown to the party at the time’. The facts in this

instance taken from a document filed with the Notice of Claim. This objection must

Paged8

therefore be dismissed as having been raised late. Even if this had not been so, the
Tribunal would dismiss it as hypertechnical and unmeritorious since the
continuous presence of the sole shareholder of Generation Ukraine, Mr Laka, at
the hearings leaves no doubt that the corporation chose to be represented by the

counsel who appeared on its behalf.

17. Conclusions on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

17.1 The Tribunal’s jurisdiction extends to any dispute arising out of or relating
to an “alleged breach of any right conferred or created by [the] Treaty” with
respect to the bundle of rights the Claimant had acquired in its “Parkview Project”,
to the extent that the dispute arose on or after 16 November 1996. It does not
matter that such disputes may relate to rights recognised as earlier investments that
have been made by the Claimant, i.e. as evidenced by the Order on Land
Allocation (24 April 1996), Lease Agreements (27 June 1996) and Foundation
Agreement (26 July 1996) (see Section 18 below). This follows from Article XII of
the BIT which provides that “[i]t shall apply to investments existing at the time of

entry into force as well as to investments made or acquired thereafter”.
17.2 At paragraph 5.1 above, the Tribunal set out Claims A to H as articulated
by the Claimant. For the sake of convenience, these claims are now reproduced:

Claim A: Unlawful indirect and unlawful direct expropriation of
anticipated revenues

Claim B: Unlawful indirect and unlawful direct expropriation of
invested funds
Claim C: Unlawful indirect and unlawful direct expropriation of the

Project at its appraised market value

Claim D: Unlawful indirect expropriation (unlawful denial of
property rights) of adjacent properties intended for
construction staging purposes (“integrated as a non-recurring

item in the calculation of Claim A”)

 

Claim E: Compensation of the Company’s expenses for its legal defence

Claim F: Moral (punitive) damages subject to compensation under
Ukrainian law (treble of Claims A+B+C)

Paged9

Claim G: Other forms of relief as the Court may deem appropriate in
the circumstances

Claim H: Counterclaims and offsets - none

17.3. Claims A to D allege expropriatory acts attributable to Ukraine and thus
fall within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione materiae as giving rise to a dispute
with respect to a right created by the BIT (the prohibition against expropriation in
Article III). It is therefore necessary to identify these acts with some precision in

order to test the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione temporis in relation to each.

17.4  Inrelation to Claims A, B and C, two alleged expropriatory acts are invoked
in the Claimant’s pleadings, namely: (i) the Kyiv City State Administration’s failure
to provide Heneratsiya with a pair of corrected land lease agreements by 31 October
1997 in accordance with the terms of the Yalovoy Protocol, and (ii) the Kyiv City
Council’s Decision of 8 July 1998 which purported to annul Heneratsiya’s leasehold
rights. Claim D alleges a third expropriatory act relating to the failure of the Kyiv
City State Administration to provide the Claimant with use of two properties
adjoining Heneratsiya’s site as a construction staging area. The source of the
expropriated right is claimed to be the Yalovoy Protocol, which, it is alleged, was to

be performed one week after its ratification, which occurred on 17 December 1998.

17.5 Each of the alleged acts of expropriation therefore occurred after 16
November 1996.

17.6 Claim E is a request for legal costs that will be dealt with separately in
Section 24 below. Claim F alleges a cause of action based on Article 56 of the
Constitution of Ukraine relating to “moral damages inflicted by unlawful decisions”
of state officers. As the Tribunal has found that its jurisdiction is limited to disputes
arising out of an “alleged breach of any right conferred or created by [the] Treaty”
for the purposes of Article VI(1), Claim F is beyond the scope of the Tribunal’s

jurisdiction ratione materiae.
17.7 Claims G and H, as previously mentioned, do not disclose claims at all.

17.8 As the Tribunal turns to address the merits, each of the three separate

expropriatory acts will be tested against the standard in Article III.

Pages

18.1

18.2

THE MERITS
The Legal Materialisation of the Claimant’s Investment
The word “investment” is defined in Article I(1)(a) of the BIT as meaning:
“every kind of investment in the territory of one Party owned or controlled

directly or indirectly by nationals or companies of the other Party, such as
equity, debt, and service and investment contracts; and includes:

  

(i) tangible and intangible property, including rights, such as mortgages,
liens and pledges;

(ii) a company or shares of stock or other interests in a company or interests
in the assets thereof;

(iii) a claim to money or a claim to performance having economic value,
and associated with an investment;

(iv) intellectual property which includes, inter alia, rights relating to:
literary and artistic works, including sound recordings,
inventions in all fields of human endeavour,
industrial designs,
semiconductor mask works,
trade secrets, know-how, and confidential business information, and
trademarks, service marks, and trade names; and

(v) any right conferred by law or contract, and any licenses and permits
pursuant to law...”

In their written pleadings, neither Party systematically analysed the various

agreements, protocols, registrations and executive orders submitted to the Tribunal

for the purposes of identifying legal rights that fall within this definition of an

investment. A precise identification of the investment is clearly of fundamental

importance. For this reason, the Tribunal requested, by its letter dated 20 February

2003 (see para. 6.11 above), that the Parties address this

 

ue with greater clarity and

precision in their oral submissions. This request did not result in significant advances

on either score. It is therefore necessary to analyse the various agreements, protocols,

registrations and executive orders to determine whether they may have generated

Pages!

rights recognisable as an investment within Article I of the BIT. The examination
that follows focuses on the Parties’ final submissions in response to the Tribunal’s

request and the Tribunal’s own consideration of the documentary evidence.

18.3. It is not possible in the present case to identify a single or precise
coincidence between the expenditure of funds by the investor and the acquisition of
a legal right to an investment. This state of affairs arises due to two reasons. First,
the Claimant is unable to supply any primary evidence of its actual expenditure for
various reasons which will be considered in Section 19. As a result, the factual basis
of Generation Ukraine’s investment is a source of great controversy between the
Parties. Secondly, the Claimant has put forward a multitude of documents as
evidence of a legal right to its alleged investment. Their very multiplicity highlights
the absence of straightforward transaction such as a deed of sale or a corporate
of

Generation Ukraine’s investment is highly complex and necessitates an analysis of

share purchase agreement. The relevant inquiry in this case into the legal b:

 

the legal rights, if any, that are evidenced by each of the documents invoked.

18.4 A logical starting point would be to establish the investor’s contribution of
capital. One would then go on to examine the legal rights acquired by such capital
expenditure. But due to the absence of reliable evidence of the timing and quantum
of such contributions by Generation Ukraine, this case requires that the Tribunal

first investigate the legal basis for the Claimant’s investment.
Protocol of Intentions and List of Potential Sites

18.5 It is not nec

 

ary for the Tribunal to rule upon the legal significance of
the Protocol of Intentions and the List of Potential Sites because at the time of
their conclusion the Claimant in these proceedings, Generation Ukraine, was not
in existence (Generation Ukraine was incorporated in the State of New Hampshire
on 3 February 1993). Mr Laka therefore signed in his personal capacity. There is
no evidence that he thereafter transferred any purported rights existing under the
Protocol of Intentions or the List of Potential Sites to Generation Ukraine.
Generation Ukraine cannot invoke the Protocol of Intentions as the embodiment of

its investment in the Ukraine.

Pages2,

18.6 It is important, nevertheless, to understand the evolution of the Claimant’s

activiti

 

in Ukraine. The following comments on the Protocol of Intentions and List

of Potential Sites are thus significant by way of background.

18.7 Neither the Claimant nor Respondent has provided a detailed explanation of

the circumstances leading up to the signing of the Protocol of Intentions. The

  

Claimant devotes one paragraph to this issue in its Memorial: the Tribunal was told
that Mr Yuriy Lebedinsky, Vice Representative of the President of Ukraine in Kyiv
and Chairman of the Economics, Finance and Budget Department of the Kyiv City
State Administration, invited Mr Laka to travel to Kyiv to negotiate the broad terms
of their future cooperation in construction projects in Kyiv. This invitation was
recorded in a letter dated 31 August 1992. The Protocol of Intentions was signed on
10 December 1992, concluding a two-month visit by Mr Laka and Mr John Milton,
a representative of the U.S. construction firm Turner Construction Corporation. On
the same day, Mr A. Martynenko, the General Director of “Kyivbudcentr” (the
investment office of the Kyiv State Adminis

 

ation) sent the List of Potential Sites

to Mr Laka proposing four possible building sites “on which we can cooperate”.

 

18.8 The objective of the Protocol of Intentions ited to be “to define the
basis on which the parties will endeavour to identify, research, finance and complete
one or more profitable real estate projects in Kyiv, and to carry out the
development of available properties as described in lists furnished by City of Kyiv
authorities.” The protocol, written in fluent professional American English, was
drafted principally by Mr Laka. The obligations envisaged by the Protocol of
Intentions are couched in the form of unilateral promises relating to future conduct
of certain Ukrainian organisations represented by the signatories to the Protocol.
These undertakings are not specific; they are imprecise and exhortatory. This is

consistent with the very title of the document as a “Protocol of Jntentions.”

18.9 Were it necessary for the Tribunal to rule upon the legal effect of the Protocol
of Intentions and the supplementary List of Potential Sites, its conclusion would be
that these documents embodied an agreement to agree to co-operation in construction
projects yet to be defined. As such, they do not purport to generate legally

enforceable rights and obligations, and could not constitute an investment for the

Pages3

purposes of Article I(1)(a) of the BIT, and therefore could not give rise to an
expropriation claim before an ICSID Tribunal. The Claimant itself lends support to
this interpretation of the legal nature of the Protocol of Intentions in its written

pleadings (see para. 18.29 et seq. below).
Registration Certificates

18.10 The Registration Certificates recorded the planned contributions to be made
by Mr Laka and Generation Ukraine to the charter capital of Heneratsiya. The
prospective status of the contributions was confirmed by Mr Laka at the hearing:

“[...] At the time these certificates were prepared they were intended not as

obligatory commitments, they were intended to serve as the sort of
ballpark estimates of what would be put into a particular organisation.

So that’s what we did, we put in ballpark estimates of what we thought we
put into the corporation, and when the time came to make concrete
investments, we put in $30,000 instead of $100,000...”

18.11 Mr Laka’s statement confirms the description of the Registration Certificates

as concerning “planned foreign investments” in the Claimant’s written pleadings.

18.12. The investments in question related to office and computed equipment for

the representative office of Heneratsiya.

18.13 It is clear that the Registration Certificates do not record actual investments
made in the Ukraine. Perhaps more significantly, the USD 30,000 referred to by Mr
Laka that was ultimately paid into the charter fund of Heneratsiya represented
Generation Ukraine’s contribution to the initial start up costs of its investment
vehicle. This investment does not give rise to any rights or interests in the Parkview

Project and hence cannot properly be understood as the subject of this dispute.
Resolution on Land Allocation

18.14. The Resolution on Land Allocation records the allocation of 30 land plots
to various entities. The 25" entry reads:
“A land plot for construction of office building of “Heneratsiya Ltd” of

company “Generation Ukraine Inc.” at 32, Tarasa Shevchenko Boulevard
in Radyansky District shall be approved.

Pages4

(For conditions of the approval of location refer to Annex 25).”

18.15 Annex 25 to the Resolution on Land Allocation lists five separate conditions
for the approval of the “location”, including the payment of city social infrastructure

fee and the resolution of all outstanding “legal and property issues”.

18.16 The Resolution on Land Allocation thus contemplates that further steps are
required to consummate the allocation of the land plot to Heneratsiya upon the
satisfaction of the conditions set out in Annex 25. It follows that the undertakings in
favour of Heneratsiya recorded in the Resolution were not legally binding at this
stage, and thus incapable of constituting an investment pursuant to Article I(1)(a) of
the BIT. The Resolution instead serves as the legislative approval necessary for the
subsequent alienation of the land by the relevant executive authority, in this case the
Kyiv City State Administration.

Act of Reservation

18.17 The legal status of the Act of Reservation is the subject of lengthy
submissions of both Parties in this case. The Claimant relies on a letter from L.
Novakovsky, Head of the State Committee of Ukraine for Land Resources
(Derzhcomzem) to O. Omelchenko, Head of the Kyiv City State Administration,
which is titled “Observations concerning the elimination of violations of laws
currently in force”. On page 3 of this letter, Mr Novakovsky concludes that:
“Existing legislation does not require the compilation of an ‘Act for the

Reservation of Land’ after the advance approval of the location of the land parcel.”

18.18 Thus the legality of the Act for the Reservation of Land has been contested by
the Claimant, which has described the Act as “a totally artificial administrative
requirement”. The Respondent did not, in the Tribunal’s opinion, present compelling
arguments to counter this description. It is not necessary for the Tribunal to rule upon

the compliance of this administrative requirement with Ukrainian legislation, but it is

 

nevertheless clear that it cannot provide a legal basis for the Claimant’s investment

 

and indeed the Claimant, unsurprisingly, has never contended otherwise.

Pagess

Order on Land Allocation

18.19 The Order on Land Allocation appears to be an implementation of the
previous legislative consent in the Resolution on Land Allocation. It constitutes the
executive act necessary for the subsequent alienation of land in the inventory of
the Kyiv City Administration to private entities (by leasehold). The Order on
Land Allocation records the decision to: “Grant the limited partnership
Heneratsiya Ltd a parcel of land with an area of 0.206 hectares for the construction
of an office building and a transformer station under a long-term lease for a
period of 49 years” and to grant a short-term lease over an adjoining parcel of

land with an area of 0.159 hectares for three years (the period of construction).

18.20 The Order on Land Allocation sets out various obligations upon

Heneratsiya as the grantee of land:
“5, The grantee of the land is obligated as follows:

5.1. To carry out the duties of a land grantee as specified in Statute 40
of the Land Code of Ukraine.

5.2. Prior to starting construction, pay the City Administration via the
Economics Department, the fee for the development of socially oriented
structures and communal property in accordance with the Act dated
28.06.95 NOS/72-a-54.

5.3. Resolve all property rights in accordance with laws currently in
effect.

5.4. Exploit the land parcels in accordance with the specified purposes,
and to not violate the ecological states of sites on their borders.

 

5.5. Within one month’s time, order from the Kyiv Department of
Land Resources the documents which shall affirm the right of exploitation
of the land parcels.

5.6. _ Upon the conclusion of the temporary utilization of the site (for
the construction period) restore its greenery to allow pleasant utilization.”

18.21 The Order on Land Allocation was amended by a subsequent Order of the
Kyiv City State Administration “On making amendments and additions to Order

of the City State Administration No. 608 dated 24.04.96”. The most significant

Pages

amendment was to shift back the construction period from 1996 to 1999 (clause 6.1
of the Decision on the Land Parcel) to 1998-2001.

18.22. The Order on Land Allocation does not establish a contractual relationship
between the Kyiv City Administrator and the grantee. Furthermore, the leasehold
rights contemplated in the Decision on the Land Parcel are not vested in the grantee
until lease agreements are signed and registered. The rights of the grantee arising
pursuant to the Decision on the Land Parcel are, however, capable of meeting the
definition of an investment in Article I(1)(a)(v) of the BIT which reads: “any right
conferred by law or contract, and any licences and permits pursuant to law”. The
right in question is the administrative right to obtain a lease over the two land
parcels contemplated by the Order on Land Allocation. The Claimant did in fact
secure these lease agreements shortly after the Order on Land Allocation on 27 June
1996 (see below). Whilst, therefore, the Order on Land Allocation was of transient
significance to the practical development of the Claimant’s Parkview Project, it
does, nevertheless, vest the Claimant’s investment vehicle, Heneratsiya, with a right
cognisable as an investment right under the BIT. This right is connected to the
Parkview Project, which is the subject matter of the dispute. The Tribunal thus finds
that the Order on Land Allocation establishes the first of a series of rights relating to

the Parkview Project that are cognisable as part of the Claimant’s investment.
Lease Agreements and Foundation Agreement

18.23. The Lease Agreements were executed using a standard form contract, the
first such agreement relating to a 49-year lease over the construction site at
Boulevard Taras Shevchenko No. 32-32-a and the second relating to a 3-year lease
over an area surrounding the perimeter of construction site and a small construction

staging area.

18.24 The Lease Agreements refer to the previous Order on Land Allocation. The

rights and obligations of the parties are set out in clause 3:

“3.1. The State Administration shall:

a) have the right to, if the user exploits a land parcel for purposes
other than those approved in accordance with the general plan of
construction:

Pages7

- terminate the present Agreement ahead of schedule;

- reset the amount of land tax or of lease payment at up to a level 5 times
greater than that set herein;

- charge a penalty in accordance with existing laws if the payment defined
in paragraph 2.1. has not been made on time:

3.2. The Land User shall:
a) have the right to:

- exploit the land parcel independently and in accordance with the
designed purposes;

- construct buildings and facilities in accordance with the project and
general plan of construction, approved according to the procedure
established by law and with the building construction order already granted:

- renew the Agreement after its term has expired:

b) undertake to:

- exploit the land parcel in accordance with the designed purposes:

- protect the land parcel from arbitrary seizure and attempted constructions
made by other subjects:

- follow the provisions of existing laws.”

18.25 The Lease Agreements also contain a section entitled “Payment for Land”

which will be considered below.

18.26 Following an episode involving the Security Service of Ukraine, which will
be examined in detail at Paragraph 18.47 et seq. below, several drafts of amended
lease agreements were exchanged between Mr Laka and the Kyiv City Department of
Land Resources in February 1999. These exchanges did not produce amended

lease agreements.

18.27 As in the Lease Agreements, the Foundation Agreement also makes
reference to the earlier Order on Land Allocation. The obligations of the Kyiv City

State Administration are set out in clause 4.4:

“4.4. For the purpose of rendering practical assistance to the Company to
carry out its Project, the City shall:

Pagess

a) agree, in accordance with established procedure, to prolong the
duration of all technical agreements and other permissions, which formed
the basis of design estimates, for a period of 2 years, as an issue which has
been elaborated and approved;

  

b) undertake to entrust the City of Kyiv Investment Agency with
responsibility for resolving all problems, on behalf of the City, which may
arise during the execution of the Project;

c) undertake to revise paragraph No. 5.2. of the Head of the Kyiv City
State Administration’s Order No. 608, dated 24.04.96, as to the ‘land
parcels for construction of an office building and electric transformer
station at Boulevard Taras Shevchenko 32, 32-a, Radyansky district, to
"Heneratsiya Ltd.’ in accordance with established procedures.”

The obligations of the Claimant are as follows:

“4.5 The Company shall finance the Project, for the most part, using
foreign investment sources.

4.6. | The Company shall solicit a number of potential candidates and
shall appoint _a general contractor (hereinafter referred to as the
*Contractor’). The Company shall seek to appoint Ukrainian sub-contractors
to work the Project on normal terms and conditions.”

18.28 The Foundation Agreement was amended by written agreement of the
Parties dated 3 September 1998. The amendments concern primarily the amount

and manner of the payments to be effected by Heneratsiya.

18.29 The Tribunal finds that the Lease Agreements, together with the
Foundation Agreement, established the contractual and proprietary foundation for
the Claimant’s investment in the Parkview Project (through its vehicle,
Heneratsiya). The rights derived by the Claimant from these agreements
collectively fall within several of the specific definitions of an investment under
Article I(1)(a) of the BIT including subsections (i), (iii) and (v). This conclusion is
supported by various independent Ukrainian organisations that were called upon to

review the nature of the Claimant’s investment in Ukraine.

18.30 Mr Laka requested a legal opinion from the Institute of State and Law,
National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine on the prospect of claiming damages
against Kyiv City State Administration. The legal opinion, signed by V-P.
Nahrebelny and dated 21 December 1998, makes the following assessment:

Pages®

“... it is logical to ask if there developed civil-legal obligatory relationships
between the Kyiv City State Administration, as an organ of the executive
branch of the government, and “Heneratsiya LTD,” which would convey
to one or the other side the right to demand the fulfilment of obligations
taken on by the other party or the indemnification for any damages... On
July 25, 1996 (with a revision on September 3, 1998) the aforementioned
parties concluded an agreement of cooperation for the development of an
office building and transformer sub-station at Boulevard Shevchenko 32,
32a in the Radyansky District the purpose of which is clearly spelled out in
the title and text of the agreement. Therefore, in the interests of completing
the terms of the agreement the sides are justified in requiring the fulfilment
of mutual obligations in accordance with the agreement and existing laws.”

18.31 It is curious that the Institute of State and Law did not mention the Lease
Agreements in this context. At any rate, the quoted passage confirms the conclusion
that the earlier “Protocol of Intentions” and other administrative acts did not give
rise to a contractual relationship between the Claimant and the Respondent. The
Tribunal notes that this was a legal opinion procured by the Claimant and evidently

accepted by the Claimant.

18.32 In 1999, the Claimant submitted various claims against the Ukrainian
authorities to mediation by the Chamber of Independent Experts, a body
established by the President of Ukraine for the settlement of investment disputes.
In its “Conclusions and Recommendations” issued on 31 October 1999, the
Chamber made the following determination:
“The contractual relations between company ‘Heneratsiya Ltd’ and the
Defendant [Kyiv City State Administration] were the following. On the 27"
of June, 1996, two agreements were made between them on the right to
temporary use the land on leasing conditions: for the term of forty-nine

years (plot with the total area of 2079 sq. m) and with the term of three
years (plot with area of 1558 sq. m)

On the 26" of July, 1996 between company ‘Heneratsiya Ltd’ and the
Defendant an agreement was made; this agreement dealt with conditions of
common activities in realization of the project of construction of a building
of office premises in Taras Shevchenko blvd, 32, 32-a. From September of
1998 alterations in and amendments to the Agreement were made in
relation to common activities.”

18.33. It is certainly true that the Claimant took issue with many of the findings
made by the Chamber. To this end, the Claimant submitted a very detailed rebuttal to

the Chamber’s decision which had been prepared as an attachment to a letter to the

Page6o

President of Ukraine on 21 January 2000. In this rebuttal, the Claimant did not,
however, challenge the specific conclusions regarding the timing of the existence
of contractual relations between the Claimant and the Respondent. To the contrary,

the Claimant confirmed the position in its rebuttal to the Chamber:

“Even though the company may not have had a formal contractual
relationship with the KMDA at that time, that fact has no bearing,
whatsoever, on the company’s rights to the protection of its assets under
Ukrainian law covering extra-contractual relations”.

Finally, the Claimant cited this passage of the report of the Chamber of Experts

with approval once again in its oral submissions.
18.34 This position is repeated in the Claimant’s Memorial:

“In accordance with the existing laws of Ukraine, the right to
indemnification for damages, in the form of lost revenues, objectively is
present in the company’s situation not only from the moment of its
execution of its two civil law land lease agreements with the KMDA, having
thus formed a contractual relationship, but prior to the execution of these
particular agreements as well in the context of a clearly defined extra-
contractual relationship starting with the Protocol of Intentions signed with
both city leaders (Sali and Nestorenko) on 10 December 1992.”

 

 

18.35 The Claimant later reversed its position in the final stages of the arbitral
proceedings before this Tribunal by asserting that the Protocol of Intentions was a
formal contractual arrangement between the parties thereto. As the Tribunal
concluded at Paragraph 18.9 above, this interpretation of the document is not
persuasive.

18.36 Both the Claimant and Respondent acknowledge that the 49-year Lease

Agreement and the Foundation Agreement remain in effect to this day.

18.37 The Lease Agreements and the Foundation Agreement contained

provisions on the various types of payments to be made by the Claimant.

18.38 Article 2 of the Lease Agreements provided:
“2. The Payment for the Land

2.1. Payment for the land shall be made by the user in accordance with
the law ‘Regarding Payments for Land’ in the form of /ease payments in the

Page6!

amount of Five /and taxes and transferred to the account No. 010130403 p.
37 § 1, in the Radyansky District at USB MFO 322238 department.

2.2. The land user shall not be exempted from partial or full land
payment.”

18.39 Article 4 of the Foundation Agreement regulated this issue in more detail:
“4, THE PARTIES AGREE THAT:

4.1. The Company shall give to the City $1,650,000 U.S. for the
development of the social infrastructure and municipal economy of City of
Kyiv in the following forms:

- $1,4000,000 U.S. within 5 (five) years in equal annual shares, upon the
Project’s completion;

- $250,000 U.S. within a month after the Project is completed and
occupancy is begun on the conditions of the City’s rendering stance to the
Company in resolving all possible administrative and technical problems
which may arise during construction, so as to complete construction by a
predetermined deadline. The Company shall bear responsibility in
accordance with the existing laws of Ukraine if any funds due are not paid
on time.

 

 

4.2. The City shall make the necessary arrangements, in accordance
with established procedures, to insure the Company becomes exempt from
payment for land lease charges equal to 20% of the amount specified in the
lease agreement for the period of construction of the Project and with the
possibility of further extensions of these kinds of exemptions.”

18.40 Mr Laka testified that Heneratsiya did not make any payments under the
Lease Agreements or the Foundation Agreement. In relation to the former, he
stated that clause 1.2 of the Lease Agreements exempted him from lease payments
until he was granted a construction permit:

“The land parcel is granted for a temporary, long-term lease period of 49

years for the construction of an office building and electric transformer

station on Boulevard Taras Shevchenko 32, 32-a, in the Radyansky District.”
18.41 Mr Laka contended that this translation, although supplied by the Claimant,
was incorrect because the Ukrainian text read “under the construction ...” rather
than “for the construction”. According to Mr Laka, the proper translation conveyed
the intention that no lease payments should be effected until the office building had
been constructed. In support of this interpretation he stated that he had never

received any request for a lease payment.

Page62

18.42 The Tribunal does not find Mr Laka’s interpretation of Heneratsiya’s
obligation to make lease payments to be persuasive in light of the wording of
Article 2 of the Lease Agreements. As the Claimant’s cause of action does not arise
under the Lease Agreements, it is not necessary to rule upon the precise scope of the
Claimant’s obligations with respect to lease payments. It is, nevertheless, important
to note that both the Claimant and Respondent agree that no lease payments were

ever advanced by Heneratsiya in consideration for its leasehold interest.
Construction Permit

18.43 On 28 March 1997, Heneratsiya submitted an application for a Construction
Permit to the relevant organ of the Kiev City Counsel. A Construction Permit was
then issued on 3 April 1997, No.103/RU, for the preparation of the site for
construction. There is a disagreement between the parties as to when this limited
Construction Permit actually became usable by Heneratsiya. The Tribunal will
assume that this limited Construction Permit was in fact usable on the day of issue
because it is clear that Heneratsiya acted upon it by installing fencing around the
construction site and by removing trees and garbage. Mr Pidhirniak, the architect
employed by Heneratsiya pursuant to a contract dated 15 November 1996,
requested an extension of this limited Construction Permit on 25 September 1997.
The Ukrainian authorities acceded to this request and granted an extension until 31
December 1997. On 16 January 1998, Mr Pidhirniak then requested a full
Construction Permit from the Kiev City Council in recognition of the fact that all
the preparatory works on the construction site had been completed. A full
Construction Permit bearing the same index number (No.103/RU) was then issued

on 19 January 1998. It was to remain valid until 31 December 1999.

18.44 On 12 July 1998, Mr Pidhirniak once again submitted an application for
full Construction Permit, this time on the basis of a new architectural design version
No. 3, which had been prepared to reflect amendments requested by the Security
Service of Ukraine. The nature of these amendments shall be considered at

Paragraph 18.47 et seq. below.

18.45 A new full Construction Permit was then issued on 16 July 1998, No.
189/RD, which would be valid for three years up to 31 July 2001.

Page63

18.46 The Tribunal is prepared to accept these Construction Permits as part of the
Claimant’s investment through Heneratsiya insofar as they evidence “licenses and

permits pursuant to law” for the purposes of Article I(1)(a)(v) of the BIT.
Yalovoy Protocol

18.47 Following the execution of the Land Leases and Foundation Agreement,
Heneratsiya received a letter from the Head of the Administrative Department of the
Security Service of Ukraine (hereinafter referred to by its Ukrainian acronym,
“SBU”) on 20 February 1997. The SBU cited a previous decision of the Cabinet of
Ministers of Ukraine which had given the SBU control over land and buildings
adjacent to Heneratsiya’s property and requested that “you consent to withdraw
from 522 sq.m. of the site which has been allocated for your use”. The reason
given for this request was that the SBU needed to install special equipment on that
territory to protect the confidentiality of communication in the building. Mr Laka
promptly responded on 25 February 1997 by requesting a copy of the Cabinet of
Ministers decision and seven other municipal permits that the SBU had referred to
in their letter. Mr Laka did not receive a reply. The SBU, however, requested the
Kyiv City State Administration to instigate an investigation into Heneratsiya’s
financial affairs, which did not result in any serious findings against the company.
Then, on 19 June 1997, the SBU wrote to the Deputy Head of the Kyiv City State
Administration, V.B. Yalovoy. In this letter, the SBU stated that it did not oppose the
construction of the Parkview office building, but rather insisted on compliance with
several technical specifications relating to the position and height of the building
and the location of fire lanes. On 25 July 1997, Mr Laka finally received a response
to his original letter to the SBU; the answer was to the effect that the Cabinet of
Ministers’ decision is confidential and that the municipal permits are irrelevant to Mr

Laka’s consideration of the SBU’s request.

18.48 On 11 July 1997, Mr Yalovoy sought to facilitate an agreement between
all the parties affected by the SBU’s demands by proposing a compromise
solution. According to the Claimant, the compromise envisaged that, in return for
Heneratsiya’s relinquishing of 522 sq.m. at the rear of its territory, the Kyiv City State
Administration would expedite the technical approval process and allow Heneratsiya

to use the neighbouring land at 28 Boulevard Shevchenko, under leasehold to

Pageo4

International Business Centre (“IBC”), as its constructing staging area for the
entire period of construction. The Claimant has estimated that the latter benefit
translated to a saving of 15% on its total construction costs, or USD 3.42 million.
Heneratsiya and the Kyiv City State Administration agreed to this compromise,
which was recorded in the written minutes of the meeting which came to be known

as the “Yalovoy Protocol”.

18.49 The Tribunal concludes that the Claimant made a genuine attempt at the
meeting on 11 July 1997 to remove a host of administrative obstacles that had
affected the preparatory stages of its project in addition to the problem arising from
the SBU’s demands. The Yalovoy Protocol thus allocated responsibility to various
state agencies and to Heneratsiya itself for a 20-point action list designed to

expedite the approvals required to commence construction.

18.50 The Tribunal also appreciates that the Claimant took a serious risk in
accepting this compromise. Mr Laka perceived the Yalovoy proposal as an
opportunity to turn the SBU problem into a benefit in the form of a major saving
on construction costs and an expedited approval process. But there was,
nevertheless, a risk in acquiescing to the SBU’s demands (and thereby waiving
any potential claim for damages for this interference) but then failing to secure the
benefits of the compromise. Mr Laka was no doubt aware of this risk and
therefore insisted on a written confirmation of the obligations undertaken by the

respective parties in the form of the Yalovoy Protocol.

18.51 Several points of the Yalovoy Protocol were acted upon by the relevant
Ukrainian agencies. The State Tax Administration, for instance, complied with point
16 of the Protocol by annulling a previous decision to impose fines on Heneratsiya.
The Foundation Agreement was also amended to release Heneratsiya from a
substantial amount of the land payments that would fall due after the Construction
Permit was issued. The main prize at stake, however, proved to be illusive, as control

over the neighbouring property remained out of the Claimant’s reach.

18.52 Mr Yalovoy did not endorse the Protocol until 17 December 1997. The
Claimant submits that the version of the Protocol then signed by Mr Yalovoy had

been altered in order to deprive the Claimant of its right to use the neighbouring

Page6s

property. The Tribunal, for its part, cannot find any evidence to support this
allegation. The relevant part of the “authentic” version of the Yalovoy Protocol
(according to the Claimant) refers to the Claimant’s purported right to use the
neighbouring property in point 10. The text of point 10 in the “authentic” Yalovoy
Protocol furnished by the Claimant reads as follows:
Provide the company “Heneratsiya Ltd” with the right for the temporary
utilisation of the territory of International Business Centre (Boulevard
Shevchenko 28-30) to facilitate the construction of its office building and
construction of a temporary right-of-way to the buildings of SB Ukraine
and the Financial Directorate, (Boulevard Shevchenko 32-A and

Boulevard Kotsiubinskoho 7, 7-A), in accordance with the contract
between IBC and Heneratsiya Ltd.

18.53 Responsibility for this item-for-action was accorded to Heneratsiya Ltd,
IBC and Kyiv City Department of Land Resources.

18.54 The “falsified” version of the Yalovoy Protocol, also provided by the

Claimant, reads as follows:
Provide the company “Heneratsiya Ltd” with the right for the temporary
utilisation of the territory of International Business Centre (Boulevard
Shevchenko 28-30) to facilitate the construction of its office building and
construction of a temporary right-of-way to the buildings of SB Ukraine
and the Financial Directorate, (Boulevard Shevchenko 32-A and Boulevard
Kotsiubinskoho 7, 7-A).

18.55 Thus the phrase after the final comma in the “authentic” version was

deleted in the “falsified” version. Furthermore, Heneratsiya was removed from the

list of entities responsible for the implementation of point 10.

18.56 The Tribunal accepts, as the Respondent has, that the version of the Protocol
signed by Mr Yalovoy on 17 December 1997 is different from the version prepared
on 21 July 1997 following the meeting. However, the Tribunal does not share the
Claimant’s interpretation that “the permission to use these territories to facilitate the
construction of the company’s building has been removed” from the “falsified”
version. To the contrary, the Tribunal understands that “authentic” version to place
more onerous demands on the realisation of the Claimant’s right because there is a

clear reference to a “contract between IBC and Heneratsiya Ltd”, thus implying that

Pageo6

the consent of IBC was a necessary condition to Heneratsiya’s right to use its land,

as one would expect.

18.57 The IBC and Heneratsiya had crossed paths before, in the early stages of

preparatory work for the Parkview Project, in fairly acrimonious circumstances

 

Hence it must have been clear to Mr Laka at the time the Yalovoy Protocol was
negotiated that the Executive Manager of IBC, Mr Tishchanko, would not
abandon control over his property as an act of good will. Mr Tishchanko was not
present at the 11 July 1997 meeting and, not surprisingly, refused to add his
signature to the Yalovoy Protocol thereafter. Mr Laka was simply counting on the
Kyiv City State Administration, and the SBU, to deliver this benefit to him using
whatever means were at their disposal, without regard to Mr Tishchanko’s
interests. For instance, when Mr Laka wrote to Mr Yalovoy on 25 August 1997
asking him to sign the Protocol, he requested that the Kyiv City State
Administration “endow us with a legal right to use Shevchenko Boulevard, 30,
without any obligations to Mr Tishchanko”. Again in a letter dated 3 November
1997, Mr Laka opined that “Mr Tishchanko’s consent is not required for the

protocol to enter into force”.

18.58 The position of the IBC was revealed in a letter of 17 February 1999, when
a representative of the IBC wrote to Mr Yalovoy explaining that, insofar as his
company is the lawful leaseholder of the land in question, any modification of the
terms of this leasehold can only be effected by a court order or with their consent. It
was affirmed that the issue of Heneratsiya’s temporary use over this land must be
resolved “within the framework of a special agreement” between Heneratsiya and
IBC.

18.59 The question that arises in relation to the Yalovoy Protocol at this stage of the
analysis is whether the Claimant acquired a right to use the neighbouring property
as a construction staging area as part of the bundle of rights pertaining to the
Parkview Project. The Tribunal has concluded that the Claimant has no such right.
Leaving aside the validity or otherwise of the Yalovoy Protocol as a contractual
document, the Tribunal cannot proceed on the assumption that the IBC’s leasehold
could be encumbered without the consent of the IBC or on the basis of a decision of

an Ukrainian Court, as provided in the Ukrainian Land Code. The Claimant has not

Page67

presented sufficient proof that Mr Tishchanko ever agreed to Heneratsiya’s
utilisation of his property during the construction period. The evidence available in

fact indicates that Mr Tishchanko was a long way from providing such consent.

18.60 The Tribunal will return to the Yalovoy Protocol in Section 20 when

consideration is given to the claim for expropriation.
State Agency of Ukraine for Author’s and Joint Rights Certificates

18.61 The Claimant attaches great significance to the right it acquired under one
of these certificates, which, so the claim says, embodies its definitive proprietary
interest in the entire Parkview Project, which then became the subject of several

valuations and registration by several Ukrainian agencies.

18.62 There are two certificates issued by the State Agency of Ukraine for
Author’s and Joint Rights that require analysis. Then shall be referred to as
“Certificate A” and “Certificate B”.

18.63 Certificate A is titled “Certificate on State Registration of the Author’s
Right to a Creation” and recognises that Pidhirniak Volodymyr Petrovych and
Pidhirniak Kvitana Yuriyivna as the “authors” have a right to “[t]he corrected
project for the office premises building at Boulevard T. Shevchenko, 32, in the City
of Kyiv, Variant 3 (the Parkview Project)”. Certificate A was issued on 5 June
1998. Mr and Mrs Pidhirniak were commi

up the architectural plans for the Parkview Project.

 

ioned by Generation Ukraine to draw

18.64 Certificate B is titled “Certificate on State Registration of the Exclusive
Rights of a Person to a Creation” and recognises that Generation Ukraine Inc. as the
“person having exclusive rights to a creation” has exclusive rights to “[t]he
corrected project for the office premises building at Boulevard T. Shevchenko, 32,
in the City of Kyiv, Variant 3 (the Parkview Project)”. The names of the authors of
the creation are noted as Pidhirniak Volodymyr Petrovych and Pidhirniak Kvitana
Yuriyivna. Certificate B was issued on the same day as Certificate A, viz. 5 June
1998.

18.65 The characterisation of the rights evidenced by the two certificates appears to

be quite straightforward. Certificate A recognises the architects’ personal intellectual

Pageos

property right in their architectural plans or design, whereas Certificate B
recognises Generation Ukraine’s right to the exclusive use of the same
architectural plans or design. Certificate B might therefore be said to confer a
licence to Generation Ukraine for the exclusive use of the design created by Mr and
Mrs Pidhirniak. By the language employed in the two certificates, and the fact that
the issuing authority is the State Agency of Ukraine for Author’s and Joint Rights,
it would appear to be quite uncontroversial that the subject matter of both certificates
is nothing more and nothing less than intellectual property rights in the design of the

Parkview Project (specifically “variation 3” thereof).

18.66 Contrary to this interpretation, Mr Laka testified that these certificates create
entirely different rights over entirely different proprietary interests: Certificate A
in relation to the “architectural design”, Certificate B in relation to the “project”.
According to Mr Laka:
“The project is everything that went into creating a composition consisting
of architectural drawings, engineering drawings, marketing plans and

every conceivable thing that goes into executing the construction of a
project.”

18.67 Elsewhere in his oral testimony, Mr Laka opined:

“So the entire language of the two certificates is completely different, one

is for the project and the other one is for the architectural design, and the

certificates reflect that distinction.”
18.68 The Tribunal is unable to accept Mr Laka’s interpretation of the two
certificates, which if given effect would uproot the plain meaning of the language
used in the certificates and impermissibly extend the competence of the State
Agency of Ukraine for Author’s and Joint Rights. Rights in a building project in
any jurisdiction inevitably arise from disparate legal sources. The ultimate owner
of the project may have contractual rights vis-a-vis various entities performing
different aspects of the work, proprietary rights over the land where the building is
to be built, administrative rights granted by the local council to perform the work,
and so on. The Claimant’s attempt to channel all these aspects of the Parkview

Project into a single registered interest evidenced by a single certificate is untenable.

Page69

18.69 Claimant’s purpose in insisting upon its characterisation of Certificate B
appears to lie in the resulting ease by which the single global right could be appraised,
as will become clear in the following account of the steps taken by the Claimant to

valuate this purported global right and register such value with Ukrainian authorities.

18.70 The Claimant foreshadowed a large investment in the Parkview Project by
increasing the “authorized fund” of its Ukrainian subsidiary, Heneratsiya, before
Certificate B was issued. The amendments to Heneratsiya’s charter were in fact

numerous.

18.71 The original version of the Heneratsiya’s charter, registered by the
Pechersk District State Administration on 5 May 1993, described Generation
Ukraine’s prospective contribution as “property rights to the construction of office
and dwelling structures in Kyiv, in particular in Shevchenko blv., 32”. The next
version of the charter, registered on 4 October 1993, stated this contribution to be
“computer and office equipment” to the value of USD 24,000. Then, on 20 April
1995, Heneratsiya’s charter was amended once again, this time anticipating a
contribution by Generation Ukraine to the value of contribute USD 19,994,000,
without specifying the form of such contribution. Mr Laka’s contribution, as the
other shareholder in Heneratsiya, remained static throughout at USD 6,000 in the
form of office and computer equipment. In the first two versions of the charter,
the proportion of Generation Ukraine’s contribution was stated to be 80%,
whereas Mr Laka’s was 20%. In the version registered on 20 April 1995, where
the contribution of Generation Ukraine was increased dramatically, the respective

percentages were not listed.

18.72 Heneratsiya’s charter was amended again on 14 June 1997 and registered at
the Pechersk District State Administration on 26 June 1997. The respective
contributions envisaged by the two shareholders (i.e. Generation Ukraine and Mr
Laka) remained the same (USD 19,994,000 and USD 6,000). However on this
occasion the respective percentage shares in the authorised fund was 99.97% and
0.03%. This new percentage distribution does not proportionately reflect the increase
in Generation Ukraine’s contribution from USD 24,000 to USD 19,994,000. The

Page70

contribution by Generation Ukraine was described as “equipment, materials
required for construction of premises in Kyiv at the address 32 Shevchenko

Boulevard”.

18.73. Then followed yet another amendment approved by the shareholders of
Generation Ukraine on 25 March 1998, and registered on 28 April 1998. It did not
alter the sums of the contributions or the respective percentage interests in the
authorised fund, but rather changed the description of Generation Ukraine’s
contribution:
“\.. equipment, materials and material assets, property rights, including
intellectual property rights (conceptual design documentation, architectural
documentation, design plans and specification, etc) required for construction
of premises in Kyiv at the address 32 Shevchenko Boulevard ...”
18.74 The Tribunal infers that this final amendment to the charter of Heneratsiya
was likely to be made in anticipation of the Certificate B registered two months
later on 28 May 1998 and issued to Generation Ukraine on 5 June 1998. This
conclusion is supported by the next steps undertaken by the Claimant with respect
to the right it acquired under Certificate B.

18.75 Heneratsiya presented an appraisal of the value of the Parkview Project to the

Ukrainian State Investment Expertise on 15 June 1998 with the following

calculations:
“1, Total annual gross revenue $19,860,000 USD
2. The estimated sales price of the $99,300,000 USD
completed and fully leased building
3. The present market value of the $22,200,000 USD”
completed project phase of the
Parkview

18.76 The Central Service of the Ukrainian State Investment Expertise concluded,
in its four page report, that it “concurs with the forecasts presented by the

company”. The report was presented to Heneratsiya on 2 July 1998.

18.77 Shortly afterwards, on 21 July 1998, the Executive Vice President of
Generation Ukraine, Nellie Grigoriyevna Ageyeva, and Mr Laka in his capacity

as President of Heneratsiya, entered into the Act of Property Transfer to transfer

Page71

property rights owned by Generation Ukraine to Heneratsiya as the former’s

contribution to the latter’s authorised fund. The contribution was described thus:

“....a contribution to the charter fund of Heneratsiya LTD in the form of
property and rights, assigned to Generation Ukraine Inc in the Certificate
issued by the State Agency of Ukraine for Author’s and Joint Rights, VP
No. 190, dated 5 June 1998, and which property and rights the Ukrainian
State Investment Expertise (Central Division) valued at $22,200,000 US
dollars (in its decision dated 2 July 1998, No. 06-123).”

 

18.78 The Act of Property Transfer noted that there had been an agreement
between the parties to this transaction that the value of the contribution would be
USD 19,970,000.

18.79 Generation Ukraine submitted the Act of Property Transfer, and other
supporting documents, to the Chief Tax Inspector of the Pechersk District to
obtain the registration of its “foreign investment”. The Chief Tax Inspector
registered the investment in the amount of USD 19,957,173 on 28 December 1999
and affirmed the “kind of investment” as:
“Author’s property rights to the corrected design of the building of office
premises at 32 Shevchenko Boulevard, in the City of Kyiv, version 3

(design “Parkview”), which are registered by the investor with the State
Agency of Ukraine for Authors’ and Joint Rights on 28.05.98 ...”

18.80 The next step in this registration process was the certification of the legitimacy
of this increase to the charter fund by the State Tax Administration. For this purpose,
the relevant documents were submitted to the Hard Currency Expertise Department of
the Kyiv City State Administration under a covering letter from Generation Ukraine’s
local attorney dated 21 February 2000 (this date is probably incorrect because the
response to this letter predates it). By its reply dated 10 February 2000, the Kyiv City
State Administration’s refused to register Generation Ukraine’s foreign investment
because, inter alia, “documents confirming the [cost] of the foreign investment were
not presented”. In order to overcome this obstacle, Mr Laka wrote to the Central
Service of the Ukrainian State Investment Expertise on 15 February 2000 asking them
to confirm whether their previous appraisal of “the [market cost] of development of
the ‘Parkview’ project” remains the same, i.e. USD 22,200,000”. Confirmation

from the Ukrainian State Investment Expertise was forthcoming a few days later, on

Page72,

21 February 2000. There then ensued a flurry of correspondence between Mr Laka
and the Kyiv City State Administration that was characterised by lengthy
impassioned pleas from the former (threatening to add the “offence” of non-
registration to “our pending legal action”) and unhelpful brevity from the latter. Mr
Laka appealed to the Ukrainian Prime Minister and Minister of the Economy, and
the US Ambassador in Kyiv (his counsel in these proceedings was copied in on
occasion), but the Kyiv City State Administration refused to register an increase in

Heneratsiya’s charter fund for the same reason on six separate occasions.

18.81 In the meantime, Mr Laka had procured another evaluation of the
projected annual revenue of the Parkview Office Building. The Ukrainian State
Investment Expertise had based its previous appraisal on a report by Price
Waterhouse in November 1997, which had forecasted a rental rate of USD 80 per
square metre per month, resulting in a total annual figure of USD 19,860,000.
Colliers provided a second report on 20 May 1999 and opined that the rental rate
in 1996 (when they assume the building should have been completed) would have
been USD 120 per square metre per month, or USD 29,790,000 per year. Mr Laka
then requested his U.S. accountants, Marcum & Kliegman, to use the same
computational model as the Ukrainian State Investment Expertise, but substituting
this new projected rate of revenue. According to Marcum & Kliegman’s two page
letter of 1 November 2000, which made reference to these arbitration proceedings,
the new “appraised value” of the Parkview Project became USD 38,750,000.
Wasting no time, the founders of Heneratsiya approved an amendment recognising
the increase in value of Generation Ukraine’s contribution to Heneratsiya’s charter
fund on 7 December 2000. Heneratsiya resubmitted its application for registration
of this amendment on 14 November 2001 following several months of informal
communications with Pechersk District State Administration. Registration was
effected on 30 November 2001.

18.82 There is no basis in law or logic to conclude that the subject of Certificate B is
the entire bundle of rights in the Parkview Project, whether administrative,
contractual or proprietary. It follows that the whole valuation, transfer and registration
process undertaken by the Claimant is flawed. The Tribunal is, moreover, singularly

unimpressed by the “expert appraisal” conducted by the Ukrainian State Investment

Page73

Expertise. It is little more than a rubber stamp on Heneratsiya’s own projections
of the income producing potential of a completed Parkview office building. The
appendices cited in the appraisal, which would expose the data underlying the
calculations, have not been produced to the Tribunal. But most importantly, a
linkage between the incoming producing potential of a completed office building
and a registered intellectual property right to the design of such building is simply
untenable. It is precisely this linkage which figures in the text of the instrument
which purports to transfer the Parkview Project from Generation Ukraine to
Heneratsiya:
“...a contribution to the charter fund of Heneratsiya LTD in the form of
property and rights, assigned to Generation Ukraine Inc in the Certificate
issued by the State Agency of Ukraine for Author’s and Joint Rights, VP
No. 190, dated 5 June 1998, and which property and rights the Ukrainian

State Investment Expertise (Central Division) valued at $22,200,000 US
dollars (in its decision dated 2 July 1998, No. 06-123).”

18.83 In his testimony, Mr Laka attached great significance to the fact that the
Pechersk District State Administration registered the corresponding amendment to
Heneratsiya’s charter fund on two occasions. A debate ensued as to whether the
registration authorities were required to verify the substance of proposed
amendment (in this case the actual value of the contribution to Heneratsiya’s
charter fund) or simply confirm that the formal requirements of the registration
had been complied with (i.e. that the correct documents had been lodged in the

required form).

18.84 A registration procedure cannot transform the essential qualities of the
subject of the registration. If a transport vessel bearing the name “Voyager” is
registered as an aircraft but it is actually a ship, the fact of the registration in

compliance with all the relevant rules will not assist the Voyager in flight.

18.85 The Tribunal finds that Certificate B grants the Claimant an intellectual
property right to the version 3 of the architectural design for the Parkview office
building and that this right was transferred to Heneratsiya on 21 July 1998.
However, the Claimant’s characterisation of Certificate B and the valuations that
flow from it are not accepted for the purposes of establishing the extent of the

Claimant’s investment.

Page74

19. The Factual Materialisation of the Claimant’s Investment

19.1 The Claimant has the burden of demonstrating the nature and quantum of
its expenditure relating to the Parkview Project in accordance with internationally

acceptable accounting practices.

19.2 The Claimant is severely handicapped in its efforts to discharge its burden
of proof because all the primary documentation evidencing Heneratsiya’s
expenditure in Ukraine was, according to the testimony of Mr Laka, accidentally
destroyed in Kyiv. Mr Laka described the incident, which occurred after the
Claimant’s decision to pull out of Ukraine in October 2000, as follows:

“We were moving or actually closing down our office facility at

[Kovpaka] Street, and some of the material had to go into archives, and
some of the material simply had to be thrown away.

The instructions given to the people who were throwing the stuff away
were misunderstood and a number of the boxes, including the expense
records and some other files were mistakenly taken by them and thrown into
the dumpster.

By the time they realised what had happened, the dumpster had been
removed, and that was the end of that story.”

19.3. Counsel for the Claimant was admirably forthright about the true extent of
this handicap:

“_.. it is hugely embarrassing that we don’t have the documentation here,
hugely embarrassing, if one wanted to dig as big a hole I can’t imagine
how we could have gone about it than getting the wrong delivery man to
remove the documents rather than the rubbish.”

 

19.4 The Claimant thus embarks on its quest to discharge its burden of proof
well and truly on the back foot and must make up significant ground before the
factual reality of its investment can be accepted by this Tribunal. In these
circumstances, one would expect that the Claimant would have done everything in
its power to furnish the Tribunal with other forms of evidence to corroborate its
statements on the nature and quantum of its expenditure in Ukraine. It transpired
that the Claimant both comprehensively and conclusively failed to meet this
expectation, and thus by the close of these proceedings was actually further from

discharging its evidential burden than at the starting point.

Page75

19.5 The Claimant relied primarily on financial reports produced by Mr
Marynyako to substantiate its alleged expenditure connected with the Parkview
Project in Ukraine. Mr Marynyako has an engineering and teaching degree, but
never completed formal training in auditing, although he did obtain an auditing
certificate on the basis of his own study and practical experience. Mr
Marynyako’s auditing career was rather brief, commencing in 1995 and ending on
30 October 2000, when he allowed his auditing certificate to elapse. He was
employed by Mr Laka in 1999 in order to verify that the primary documents
evidencing expenditure were accurately reflected in the accounting software used
by Generation Ukraine. Mr Marynyako was not concerned with the compliance of
his reports with accounting standards:

“If we come to the issues of accounting and accounting standards, I will

tell you right away that the client didn’t set me the task of making an
assessment of compliance with some specific set of standards.

My task was to make an assessment of compliance of primary information
with software, and I made my conclusion on that account, and wrote it
down...”

19.6 In contrast to Mr Marynyako’s oral admission of the limitations of the
exercise that he undertook for Generation Ukraine, the Claimant has represented
that his reports are certified audits of Generation Ukraine. Elsewhere in his oral

evidence, Mr Marynyako made the same assertion.

19.7 Mr Marynyako testified that he spent about 200 hours on compiling his
reports for Generation Ukraine, and yet he did not receive any remuneration for
this work. Instead, Mr Laka confirmed that Mr Marynyako would receive a
percentage of the damages awarded in these ICSID arbitration proceedings. In this
context, the credibility of Mr Marynyako’s evidence is highly questionable, and
the conflict of interest arising from this situation is readily apparent. The
following response to a question from the Tribunal is hardly satisfying:

“THE CHAIRMAN: Did anyone explain to you why this report was important
to do?

MR MARYNYAKO: Well I got to know about it later, after that work was
already done.

Page76

THE CHAIRMAN: So you did not understand at the time what use was going
to be made of the report, is that correct?

MR MARYNYAKO: Well I had to take an objective approach to that, and at
that point in time I didn’t really have any knowledge about the use of that.”

19.8 In Ukraine there is a distinction between an auditing certificate, which
evidences the holder’s personal qualifications, and an auditing licence allowing
the holder to conduct auditing activity, which is a regulated activity under Ukrainian
law. At the time Mr Marynyako compiled his reports, he had an auditing
certificate, but not an auditing licence. Therefore, to give these reports “legal
force”, Mr Marynyako procured the signature of a licensed Ukrainian auditing
firm, DAR, on these reports. DAR did not perform any additional verification of
Mr Marynyako’s methodology or calculations, nor was DAR provided with any
primary documents upon which the reports were allegedly based or any financial
reports of Generation Ukraine. In response dated 17 May 2002 to a request for
information from Counsel to the Respondent, the Director of DAR stated that:
“Irrespective of my permit [sic: permission] to affix the seal of the AF
‘DAR’ upon the financial statements (documents) of ‘Generation Ukraine
Inc.’, neither of the permanent auditors of the AF ‘DAR’ examined these
documents and certified correctness thereof by his/her signature, and could
appropriately evaluate them, since none of them (including me) knows
foreign languages.”
19.9 A further insight into the pretext for compiling these financial reports of
Generation Ukraine is provided in the same letter:
“As an additional motive of the resort exactly to me [sic] Mr Marynyako

explained that it was necessary to help a foreign entrepreneur, who had
supposedly suffered from the injustice of local power.”

19.10 Many questions were put to Mr Marynyako in cross examination about the
methodology he employed to compile the financial reports of Generation Ukraine and
the basis for certain entries in the balance sheets. Mr Marynyako’s recollection failed
him on almost every occasion. The problem was no doubt exacerbated because Mr
Marynyako did not keep any working notes during the conduct of his “audit”, despite
the requirement under national standards issued by the Ukrainian Auditing Committee

to do so. For example, Mr Marynyako was asked to explain the following dramatic

Page77

increases in the “equity appreciation” of Generation Ukraine’s subsidiary
Heneratsiya (in US Dollars):

1993: 262,000; 1994: 1.3 million; 1995: 1.58 million; 1996: 4 million; 1997:
4 million; 1998: 20 million.

19.11 The only increase that Mr Marynyako recollected was the last, which he

identified as the transfer of ownership in the Parkview Project.

19.12 In addition to these very serious reservations about the credibility of Mr
Marynyako’s reports and evidence, the Tribunal is perplexed as to why the

Claimant enlisted the assistance of various Ukrainian accountants to audit

 

Generation Ukraine, which is of course an American company registered in New
Hampshire. Mr Marynyako was certainly not qualified to audit U.S. companies;
indeed he never had sight of the statutory documents of Generation Ukraine.
Hence the lengthy debate between the parties as to the “legal force” of the audits
performed by Mr Marynyako and signed by DAR is really beside the point: the
Tribunal cannot possibly treat these audits, at best prepared in accordance with
Ukrainian accounting standards, as in any way definitive of the true financial

situation at Generation Ukraine throughout the relevant period.

19.13. Mr Laka explained that the decision to approach Ukrainian accountants to
audit Generation Ukraine was based on a “suggestion” in 1999 by Generation
Ukraine’s American auditor, Marcum & Kliegman, to “conduct an audit in Ukraine
of our expenses and financials”. Mr Laka thus confirmed that no audit had been
undertaken by Generation Ukraine before this time because corporations returning
losses do not need to file income tax returns in the U.S. It was envisaged that Mr
Marynyako would conduct an initial review of the primary documents against the
accounts, insofar as these primary documents were mainly in Ukrainian, and then
provide Marcum & Kliegman with the accounts for their review. Marcum &
Kliegman were not, however, in a position to review the primary documents
themselves and made a reservation to that effect in their auditing statement. When
asked why Marcum & Kliegman were not furnished with these documents, Mr
Laka responded:

Page78

“Well that’s very simple, because the supporting documents were no
longer available for anybody to review, they were discarded by accident
back in Kyiv, when we were cleaning out our office..., so we would have
sent them the supporting documents if we had had them, but by that time
we no longer had them.”

19.14 Thus, on this issue of the reliability of the auditing statements compiled by
Mr Marynyako and Marcum & Kliegman, one comes the full circle without

finding any solid corroboration.

19.15 No further reliable evidence was forthcoming from the Claimant in relation
to its expenditure in Ukraine, despite the fact that several avenues appeared to be

open to the Claimant to obtain such evidence.

19.16 First, Mr Laka testified that Generation Ukraine was financed by loan
capital, 99% of which came from Mr Laka himself. No formal loan agreements,
however, were executed between Mr Laka and Generation Ukraine. Instead Mr
Laka paid over these sums directly into the bank account of Generation Ukraine in
the United States, which was held at NatWest until the beginning of 1999. One
would expect that NatWest would at least have records of the receipt of these
sums, but Mr Laka testified that they would be impossible to retrieve because
NatWest had gone “bankrupt”. In response to a question in cross examination, Mr,
Laka stated:
“You’re not going to get much account detail from a bank that’s gone out
of business, and I don’t know how to do that, but if you know how to do it
I’ll be glad to give you a power of attorney and you can find the people, if
there’s anybody still managing their affairs ...”
19.17 Mr Laka confirmed that he had not approached NatWest for this

information because “there was no need”.

19.18 Second, although Mr Laka stated that his loans to Generation Ukraine
could be evidenced by the bank statements relating to his own cheque account,

this information was never tendered for the record in this arbitration.

19.19 Third, no attempt was made to recreate the files that were destroyed in Kyiv
in October 2000 from other sources. Mr Laka gave the following reason in cross

examination:

Page79

“No we didn’t try to do it for a very simple reason, because we had the
affirmation of the person who had checked those records in writing, and it
was confirmed by the licensed auditor.”

19.20 Fourth, several documents submitted by the Claimant referred to annexes
that purportedly contained a detailed breakdown of Generation Ukraine or
Heneratsiya’s expenditure relating to the Parkview Project. For instance, the
Claimant relied heavily on an “Expert Appraisal” of the value of the Parkview
Project conducted by the Central Service of the Ukrainian State Investment
Expertise, dated 2 July 1998. The appraisal refers to “Expenses incurred by the
Developer during the period 1 January 1993 to 31 May 1998 for the execution of
the Parkview project, which are shown in Appendix 9”. The next line of the report
states: “Total expenses which are shown in the exhibits in Appendix 9 =
$2,180,356 USD”. The Chairman of the Tribunal asked Counsel for the Claimant
whether “Appendix 9” was available. Counsel later responded that the reference to

“Appendix 9” was “an error”.

19.21 Fifth, although Mr Laka testified that he had a staff of 30 people at
Generation Ukraine in New York, and several staff at Heneratsiya in Ukraine, he
was unable to produce any records evidencing their employment because, in his

evidence, they were hired on a casual basis.

19.22 Sixth, in accordance with the OPIC insurance policy maintained by the
Claimant in relation to its investment in Heneratsiya, the Claimant was obliged to
“maintain in the United States true and complete copies of the records, books of
account and current financial statements for the foreign enterprise necessary to
compute and substantiate compensation, including (1) records documenting the
investment...” Either Generation Ukraine failed to keep such records in breach of its
obligations under the OPIC policy, or they were withheld from the Tribunal despite

their importance.

19.23 The documents that are available do not support the level of expenditure that
Mr Laka contends. In an “audit certificate” prepared by the State Tax Administration
of Ukraine on 30 May 1997 in relation to Heneratsiya, it is stated that there was no
movement of funds in the company between 1993 and 1997 save for USD 200 placed
on the current account on 9 August 1993. Mr Laka signed this “audit certificate”.

Page80

One would have expected that funds transferred from Generation Ukraine to

Heneratsiya would have been detected by this audit.

19.24 Furthermore, Generation Ukraine’s OPIC insurance policy, procured on 4
February 1994, states that “the Investor promises that the Investor contributed or
will contribute $150,000” towards its putative investment in the Ukraine. The
maximum aggregate compensation payable under the policy was USD 405,000.
Mr. Laka testified that from 1995 onwards, OPIC adjudged that the project “had
moved into an area of imminent expropriation risk” and therefore the insurance
coverage was frozen at this level. Despite the fact that the Claimant provided a great
deal of correspondence from OPIC as purported evidence of its investment
activities in Ukraine, there is nothing on the record documenting a request by the
Claimant for additional coverage based on further contributions, nor a refusal from

OPIC to satisfy any such request.

19.25 Counsel for the Claimant noted at the final hearing that:

“The evidence that one dollar has been spent is in the bin, that’s a fact of life, so

we have to rely on let’s say other sources of information in relation to that.”
19.26 In the circumstances just described, the Tribunal finds that the “other
sources” presented by the Claimant are totally inadequate as proof of the
Claimant’s factual investment in the Parkview Project. Moreover, the absence of
information that must surely have been available to a party making reasonable

endeavours further undermines the Claimant’s case.

20. First Alleged Expropriation

20.1 The Claimant submits that the “indirect (‘first’) global expropriation of the
company’s rights and property” occurred on 31 October 1997 “by virtue of the
[Kyiv City State Administration]’s failure to produce revised land lease
agreements with valid site drawings”. This is characterised by the Claimant as the

beginning of the dispute.

20.2 The Claimant relies on the Yalovoy Protocol as creating a legal obligation

upon Kyiv City State Administration and the Kyiv City Department of Land

Page81

Resources to issue Heneratsiya with a new set of land lease agreements that
incorporated corrected site plans by 31 October 1997. The background to the
Yalovoy Protocol has been explained previously at Paragraph 18.47 et seg. The
Claimant submits that new land lease agreements were required to reflect changes
in its design that were necessitated by the SBU’s demands. Hence the inclusion of
point 13 of the Yalovoy Protocol which reads:

“To change the boundaries of the land parcels of Heneratsiya Ltd, SB

Ukraine, the Financial Directorate, and the International Business Centre by

taking into account the situation which developed around these approved
projects and with the consent of the landholders.”

20.3 Responsibility for implementation of point 13 was placed on the Kyiv City
Department of Land Resources. The “authentic” (as the Claimant would have it)
version of the Yalovoy Protocol imposed a deadline of 31 October 1997 for this
amendment, whereas the “falsified” (idem) version extended the date to 1
February 1998.

20.4 The Claimant also submits that, even in the absence of the Yalovoy
Protocol, the Kyiv City State Administration and Kyiv City Department of Land
Resources “could not lawfully escape the obligation to prepare new site plans
approved for the new building by the Kyiv Architectural Council that was designed
especially for the SBU/KGB”.

20.5 The source of the obligation to provide amended lease agreements was

therefore either the Yalovoy Protocol or Ukrainian law relating to land use.

20.6 The Claimant submits that the Kyiv City State Administration’s failure to
comply with this obligation effectively put an end to the Parkview Project because
it created an insurmountable obstacle for any construction work to lawfully
proceed. Mr Laka explained the ramifications of this omission as follows:

“The Land Code of Ukraine requires that any land lease agreement correctly
and properly reflect the territory to which the land user has lawful access.

Our old land lease agreements did not correctly and properly reflect the territory
to which we were now being given access, so they became unlawful.”

Page82,

20.7 It is important first to identify the object of the alleged expropriation. The
Claimant has persistently asserted that this omission on the part of the Kyiv City
State Administration constitutes the final and irreparable destruction of the
Parkview Project. Hence the issue becomes the precise nature of the “Parkview
Project” on 31 October 1997.

20.8 It will be recalled that the Claimant interprets Certificate B issued by the State
Agency of Ukraine for Author’s and Joint Rights on 5 June 1998 as giving effect to
the Claimant’s ownership rights over the Parkview Project in its entirety. This
interpretation of the scope of the rights contemplated by Certificate B has been
rejected by the Tribunal. Independently of this finding, it is important to point out the
contradiction in the Claimant’s pleadings, for if its interpretation were to be accepted,
it would not be possible for the entire Parkview Project to be expropriated before the
point in time at which the Claimant’s rights to the project were perfected. The truth of
the matter is that, as of 31 October 1997, the Claimant had a very limited bundle of
rights arising under the Order on Land Allocation, Lease Agreements, Foundation
Agreement and Construction Permit. Thus, if the Kyiv City State Administration’s
omission on 31 October 1997 did constitute an expropriation, it could only have

deprived the Claimant of these legal interests and them alone.

20.9 The Claimant’s reliance on Certificate B as the penultimate and definitive
source of its rights in the Parkview Project gives rise to another contradiction. The
Claimant invokes the Yalovoy Protocol as the source of the legal obligation upon
the Kyiv City State Administration to provide a set of amended lease agreements.
The beneficiary of this obligation was Heneratsiya as the signatory to the Yalovoy
Protocol and the named leasee pursuant to the Lease Agreements. According to the
Claimant’s submissions, however, the “entire” Parkview Project was not
transferred from Generation Ukraine to Heneratsiya until the Act of Property
Transfer was signed on 21 July 1998. Thus it is difficult to see how the Kyiv City
State Administration’s omission vis-a-vis Heneratsiya on 31 October 1997 could
have the effect that the Claimant alleges if the Claimant’s interpretation of
Certificate B were to be accepted.

20.10 It is necessary to consider some facts surrounding the Kyiv City State

Administration’s failure, by 31 October 1997, to provide a set of amended lease

Page83

agreements to properly reflect changes to the boundaries of the territory to which

the Claimant, through Heneratsiya, had a leasehold interest.

20.11 According to the Claimant, these changes were necessitated by reason of
the SBU’s demands for a buffer zone around their building on the neighbouring
property. Such demands were first communicated by the SBU on 20 February 1997,
by which time Heneratsiya had obtained Construction Permit No.103-Rd to

commence construction at its site.

20.12 The SBU’s demands necessitated corrections to the design of the Parkview
Office building. These corrections were approved by the relevant Ukrainian
authorities and a new Construction Permit No.189-P(d) was issued on 17 July
1998. The Yalovoy Protocol was drafted to regulate this and several other

outstanding issues following the meeting on 11 July 1997.

20.13 In recognition of the additional expense incurred by the Claimant in
modifying its existing architectural plans to comply with SBU’s demands,
amendments were made to the Foundation Agreement which, inter alia, exempted
Heneratsiya from land payments until the date a construction permit is obtained for
the revised design. The payments envisaged under clause 4.1 of the Foundation
Agreement were also reduced significantly. Concomitantly, the date of the
commencement of construction was postponed to December 1998. These
amendments were signed by Mr Laka on behalf of Heneratsiya on 25 August 1998
and by Mr Omelchenko of Kyiv City State Administration on 4 December 1998.
The latter issued a Ruling by the Kyiv City State Administration on the same day to

give administrative effect to these changes.

20.14 At a meeting attended by Mr Yalovoy, Mr Omelchenko and Mr Laka on 25
December 1998, Mr Laka was informed that there was no longer any administrative
obstacle to the commencement of construction. Mr Yalovoy reiterated this position
in letters to Mr Laka and the U.S. Ambassador in Kyiv dated 20 January 1999 and
28 January 1999 respectively. Mr Laka wrote to the U.S. Ambassador on 4
February 1999 to challenge the Kyiv City State Administration’s position that there
were no further obstacles preventing construction at Heneratsiya’s site and cited the

following “major problems” that remained outstanding:

Page84

20.15

- the uncertainty concerning Heneratsiya’s liability in the event that the roof
of a neighbouring derelict building collapses during construction on
Heneratsiya’s site;

- Heneratsiya’s unjustified prepayment of 15 months rent instead of 3

months rent, amounting to an “interest free loan” of USD 12,145.53;

- the failure of the Kyiv City State Administration to procure the temporary use
of the neighbouring property (leased by IBC) for Heneratsiya as a construction
staging area in accordance with point 10 of the Yalovoy Protocol;

 

- the failure of the Kyiv City State Administration to release a copy of the
order granting a section of Heneratsiya’s territory covered by its three year
lease to the SBU:

- the failure of a neighbouring occupant to gain a “technical exemption
approval” for a sewage line encroaching on the property of Heneratsiya;

- the fact that the same neighbouring occupant commenced construction on
a portion of Heneratsiya’s territory preventing the installation of hot water,
electricity and water lines;

- the failure of the Kyiv City State Administration to “produce a pair of
simple, two page documents” to effect amendments to Heneratsiya’s two
land lease agreements;

- the failure of Mr Omelchenko to reprimand Mr Karminsky for attempting
to invalidate Heneratsiya’s construction permit;

- the fact that Heneratsiya must have guaranteed access to Mr Omelchenko
“when it needs it to resolve critical issues”;

- the fact that Heneratsiya must have “Mr Omelchenko’s guarantee to the
company regarding his personal protection of [Heneratsiya’s] project”.

 

Mr Laka concluded this letter with the following statement, the first

sentence of which appeared in bold, underlined and in capital letters:

20.16

“The Kyiv City State Administration, in the past, has repeatedly left
matters unresolved resulting in persistent interruptions in the company’s
project. Therefore, the company is unwilling to move forward at any level
of effort on its project until each und every outstanding problem is fully
resolved.”

 

This letter has been summarised in detail because it is the most

comprehensive contemporaneous account of the types of grievances that, according

to the Claimant, prevented the realisation of its Parkview Project following its receipt

of a Construction Permit. In its pleaded case, the Claimant has attached particular

significance to the Kyiv City State Administration’s failure to execute amended land

Page85

lease agreements by labelling this as an expropriatory act for the purpose of Article III
of the BIT.

20.17 In its defence to this alleged act of expropriation, the Respondent denies
that the Kyiv City State Administration was under any obligation to issue amended
land lease agreements pursuant to the Yalovoy Protocol or otherwise.
Furthermore, the Respondent submits that Heneratsiya did not itself comply with
its own obligations under the Yalovoy Protocol by failing to procure the requisite
approvals for the relevant version of its design of the Parkview Project office
building, which in turn would have prevented the Kyiv City State Administration
from issuing the aforementioned amended land lease agreements. Finally, the
Respondent contests the necessity of amending the leases at all in order for

Heneratsiya to proceed with construction.

20.18 The Tribunal notes that there is serious disagreement between the parties
about the existence of an obligation on the part of the Kyiv City State
Administration, whether pursuant to the Yalovoy Protocol or arising under general
Ukrainian law, to issue amended land lease agreements. There is also serious
disagreement about whether or not the Claimant was in a position to proceed with
the construction of its Parkview Office Building in the absence of these amended

lease agreements.

20.19 In order to analyse the Respondent’s international obligations under the BIT,
the Tribunal will put this controversy to one side and accept the facts as pleaded by
the Claimant in order to test the Respondent’s conduct against the standard of

investment protection encapsulated in Article III of the BIT. Article III provides:

“1, Investments shall not be expropriated or nationalized either directly or
indirectly through measures tantamount to expropriation or nationalization
(expropriation) except: for a public purpose; in a nondiscriminatory manner;
upon payment of prompt, adequate and effective compensation; and in
accordance with due process of law and the general principles of treatment
provided for in article II(2). Compensation shall be equivalent to the fair
market value of the expropriated investment immediately before the
expropriatory action was taken or become known, whichever is earlier; be
calculated in a freely usable currency on the basis of the prevailing market
rate of exchange at that time; be paid without delay; include interest at a
commercially reasonable rate, such as LIBOR plus an appropriate margin,
from the date of expropriation; be fully realizable; and be freely transferable.

 

Page86

2. A national or company of either Party that asserts that all or part of
its investment has been expropriated shall have a right to prompt review by
the appropriate judicial or administrative authorities of the other Party to
determine whether such expropriation has occurred and, if so, whether
such expropriation, and any associated compensation, conforms to the
principles of international law.”

  

 

20.20 The formulation in the first sentence of Article III(1) is somewhat circular by
prohibiting an expropriation by measures tantamount to expropriation.
Nevertheless, it is perfectly clear that the State Parties to the BIT envisaged that

both direct and indirect forms of expropriation are to be covered by Article III.

20.21 The alleged final expropriatory act or measure, as previously mentioned, is
said to be the failure by the Kyiv City State Administration to issue amended lease
agreements. The disputed measure cannot possibly constitute a direct expropriation of
the Claimant’s investment because the Kyiv City State Administration never
purported to transfer Heneratsiya’s proprietary rights in its investment to the State or
to a third party. Quite properly, the Claimant has never sought to characterise the
disputed measure as a direct expropriation. Instead, the Claimant has, in its written
and oral pleadings, contended that this disputed measure was the culmination of a
series of other prejudicial acts that ultimately deprived the Claimant of its rights to its
investment, due to the level of resulting interference. The various measures of the

Respondent thus, according to the Claimant, amounted to a “creeping expropriation”.

20.22 Creeping expropriation is a form of indirect expropriation with a
distinctive temporal quality in the sense that it encapsulates the situation whereby a
series of acts attributable to the State over a period of time culminate in the
expropriatory taking of such property. The case of German Interests in Polish Upper
Silesia’ is one of many examples of an indirect expropriation without a “creeping”
element—the seizure of a factory and its machinery by the Polish Government was
held by the PCIJ to constitute an indirect taking of the patents and contracts
belonging to the management company of the factory because they were so closely
interrelated with the factory itself. But although international precedents on indirect
expropriation are plentiful, it is difficult to find many cases that fall squarely into

the more specific paradigm of creeping expropriation.

° Judgment No.7, P.C.LJ., Series A, No.7.

Page87

20.23 The Tippetts, Abbett, McCarthy, Stratton v. TAMS-AFFA Consulting
Engineers of Iran, et al.'° case before the Iran/US Claims Tribunal might be said to
demonstrate the possibility of a taking through the combined effect of several acts.
The Iranian Government appointed a temporary manager of the joint venture
investment company in which the claimant had a fifty percent stakehold with the
other fifty percent owned by an Iranian entity. The temporary manager commenced
his duties in August 1979 and immediately breached the partnership agreement that
regulated the joint venture by signing cheques on the partnership’s accounts by
himself and making other decisions without consulting the claimant. The claimant
managed to rectify these violations of the partnership agreement. Thus, for instance,
the practice of two signatures on cheques was restored. The hostage crisis at the U.S.
Embassy in Tehran then intervened in November 1979 and the working relationship
that had developed between the temporary manager and the claimant came to an end.
The claimant’s representatives left Iran in December 1979 and thereafter the
management of the joint venture ceased all communication with the claimant with
respect to its business operations. The Iran/US Claims Tribunal reflected upon the
nature of the indirect taking in light of these facts in the following oft-cited passage:
“A deprivation or taking of property may occur under international law

through interference by a state in the use of that property or with the
enjoyment of its benefits, even where legal title to the property is not affected.

While assumption of control over property by a government does not
automatically and immediately justify a conclusion that the property has
been taken by the government, thus requiring compensation under
international law, such a conclusion is warranted whenever events
demonstrate that the owner was deprived of the fundamental rights of
ownership and it appears that this deprivation is not merely ephemeral.
The intent of the government is less important than the effects of the
measures on the owner, and the form of the measures of control or
interference is less important than the reality of their impact.”"!

 

20.24 The Tribunal held that the taking of the claimant’s property was
consummated not when the temporary manager was first appointed in August
1979, but in March 1980 by which time the tentative cooperation between the

claimant and the temporary manager had come to an end.

"© Award No. ITL 32-24-1 (19 Dec. 1983); reported at 4 Iran-US. C.T.R. 122.
"' [bid, at 225-6 (footnotes omitted).

Page88

20.25 The Tippetts case was cited with approval in a recent ICSID arbitration in
Compaiiia del Desarrollo de Santa Elena, S.A. v. The Republic of Costa Rica.'* The
following statement of principle provides useful guidance in the analysis of the

Claimant’s plea of creeping expropriation in the circumstances of the present case:

“As is well known, there is a wide spectrum of measures that a state may
take in asserting control over property, extending from limited regulation of
its use to a complete and formal deprivation of the owner’s legal title.
Likewise, the period of time involved in the process may vary—from an
immediate and comprehensive taking to one that only gradually and by
small steps reaches a condition in which it can be said that the owner has
truly lost all the attributes of ownership. It is clear, however, that a measure
or series of measures can still eventually amount to a taking, though the
individual steps in the process do not formally purport to amount to a taking
or to a transfer of title. . .

There is ample authority for the proposition that a property has been
expropriated when the effect of the measures taken by the state has been to
deprive the owner of title, possession or access to the benefit and
economic use of his property. . .”'*

20.26 The Claimant’s submis

been seriously flawed due to the absence of a coherent analysis of the timing and the

 

ions on its plea of creeping expropriation have

nature of its investments in Ukraine and how the acts and omissions of the Kyiv
City State Administration have affected the Claimant’s investment in the form it
existed at the time of those acts and omissions. A plea of creeping expropriation
must proceed on the basis that the investment existed at a particular point in time
and that subsequent acts attributable to the State have eroded the investor’s rights
to its investment to an extent that is violative of the relevant international standard
of protection against expropriation. It is conceptually possible to envisage a case of
creeping expropriation where the investor’s interests in its investment develop in

parallel with the commis

  

ion of the acts complained of. But such a plea, in order to
be successful, would demand a high level of analytical rigorousness and precision

that is absent from the submissions before this Tribunal.

20.27 The Claimant’s pleadings assume that the Claimant had a vested right to a

commercial return on a completed office building, on or before the alleged final act of

? ICSID Case No. ARB/96/1.
'3 Tbid, at paras. 76-7.

Page89

expropriation on 31 October 1997. This cannot possibly be so. As of 31 October
1997, not a single brick had been laid, nor had the foundations for the building
been excavated, nor indeed had the Claimant definitively secured financing for the
construction phase of the Parkview Project. The materialisation of the Claimant’s
legal interests - evidenced by the Order on Land Allocation, Lease Agreements,
Foundation Agreement and Construction Permit - translate not to a right to a
commercial return, but simply to proceed with the construction of the Parkview

Office building on land over which Heneratsiya had a 49-year leasehold interest.

20.28 The Kyiv City State Administration’s omission on 31 October 1997 did not
have the express intention of depriving the Claimant of the legal basis of this right to
proceed to construction. The question is, therefore, whether on this date the alleged
cumulative interference on the part of the Kyiv City State Administration nevertheless
constituted an “indirect” expropriation for the purposes of Article III of the BIT.

20.29 Predictability is one of the most important objectives of any legal system. It
would be useful if it were absolutely clear in advance whether particular events
fall within the definition of an “indirect” expropriation. It would enhance the
sentiment of respect for legitimate expectations if it were perfectly obvious why, in
the context of a particular decision, an arbitral tribunal found that a governmental

action or inaction crossed the line that defines acts amounting to an indirect

  

expropriation. But there is no checklist, no mechanical test to achieve that purpose.
The decisive considerations vary from case to case, depending not only on the
specific facts of a grievance but also on the way the evidence is presented, and the
legal bases pleaded. The outcome is a judgment, i.e. the product of discernment,

and not the printout of a computer programme.

20.30 The fact that an investment has become worthless obviously does not mean
that there was an act of expropriation; investment always entails risk. Nor is it
sufficient for the disappointed investor to point to some governmental initiative, or
inaction, which might have contributed to his ill fortune. Yet again, it is not enough
for an investor to seize upon an act of maladministration, no matter how low the level
of the relevant governmental authority; to abandon his investment without any effort

at overturning the administrative fault; and thus to claim an international delict on the

Page90

theory that there had been an uncompensated virtual expropriation. In such
instances, an international tribunal may deem that the failure to seek redress from
national authorities disqualifies the international claim, not because there is a
requirement of exhaustion of local remedies but because the very reality of
conduct tantamount to expropriation is doubtful in the absence of a reasonable -

not necessarily exhaustive - effort by the investor to obtain correction.

20.31 As stated earlier, the Claimant’s pleadings do not disclose an analysis of
the acts attributable to the Respondent, occurring between 16 November 1996 and
31 October 1997, that purportedly interfered with its right to proceed with the
construction of the Parkview office building (leaving aside the question of
whether such a right existed throughout this entire period commencing from the
date of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione temporis). Nevertheless, Mr Laka’s
letter to the U.S. Ambassador in Kyiv dated 4 February 1999 (see para. 20.14)

provides a detailed account of all the obstacles (mostly in the form of

 

administrative omissions) that he alleged prevented him from proceeding with the
construction of his Parkview Office Building. Although it is far from certain that all
these purported obstacles existed on or before 31 October 1997, Mr Laka’s list of
outstanding grievances nevertheless gives a flavour of the other acts that could
form the series of measures constituting a creeping expropriation. The final alleged
act of expropriation that was identified was the Kyiv City State Administration’s

failure to issue amended lease agreements.

20.32 The Tribunal finds that the conduct of the Kyiv City State Administration in
the period 16 November 1996 to 31 October 1997 does not come close to creating a
persistent or irreparable obstacle to the Claimant’s use, enjoyment or disposal of its
investment. The Tribunal’s conclusion would be no different if the relevant period

were to be extended to the date when the Claimant instituted these proceedings.

20.33 No act or omission of the Kyiv City State Administration during this period,
whether cumulatively or in isolation, transcends the threshold for an indirect
expropriation. This Tribunal does not exercise the function of an administrative
review body to ensure that municipal agencies perform their tasks diligently,
conscientiously or efficiently. That function is within the proper domain of domestic

courts and tribunals that are cognisant of the minutiae of the applicable regulatory

Page91

regime. In the circumstances of this case, the conduct cited by the Claimant was
never challenged before the domestic courts of Ukraine. More precisely, the
Claimant did not attempt to compel the Kyiv City State Administration to rectify
the alleged omissions in its administrative management of the Parkview Project
by instituting proceedings in the Ukrainian courts. There is, of course, no formal
obligation upon the Claimant to exhaust local remedies before resorting to ICSID
arbitration pursuant to the BIT. Nevertheless, in the absence of any per se
violation of the BIT discernable from the relevant conduct of the Kyiv City State
Administration, the only possibility in this case for the series of complaints relating
to highly technical matters of Ukrainian planning law to be transformed into a BIT
violation would have been for the Claimant to be denied justice before the

Ukrainian courts in a bona fide attempt to resolve these technical matters.

20.34 In Feldman vy. Mexico,'* the arbitral tribunal found that although “the
Claimant, through the Respondent’s actions, is no longer able to engage in his

business” as a result of the elimination of a tax rebate on export resales of cigarettes, '*

 

and although “‘it is undeniable that the Claimant has experienced great difficulties in

 

dealing with [Ministry] officials, and in some respects has been treated in a less than

reasonable manner”,'® the Mexican Government’s regulatory actions were, on
balance, not equivalent to an expropriation. In declining to find that the claimant’s
allegations of unlawful administrative actions constituted expropriation, the tribunal
took account of the availability of court review of those administrative actions.'’ The

claimant contended that those actions violated both Mexican judicial precedents and

 

a specific agreement between governmental officials and the claimant. The arbitral
tribunal summarised its rationale under four points'* which may be paraphrased as
follows: (1) “not every business problem experienced by a foreign investor in an
expropriation,” (2) neither general international law nor the relevant treaty required

the state to permit the kind of activity which was impeded by adverse regulation, (3)

"4 ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/L.
'S Ibid, at para.109.

'6 Thid, at para.113.

"” Tbid, at para.140.

'8 Tbid, at para.111.

Page92

local law did not create the right to engage in such activity and (4) control of the
corporate vehicle for the investment remained in the hands of the claimant, with
the “apparent right” to pursue its activities in conformity with Mexican regulations.
The arbitral tribunal concluded: “while none of the factors alone is necessary
conclusive, in the Tribunal’s view taken together they tip the
expropriation/regulation balance away from a finding of expropriation.” The
parallels with the precedent case where the Claimant argues that the Kyiv authorities

violated both Ukrainian law and specific agreements with the investor, are evident.

20.35 In Feldman v. Mexico, although the tribunal recognised that use of the
power of taxation could constitute acts tantamount to expropriation, it was
influenced by the victim’s failure to seek “formal, binding rulings” with respect to
what he viewed as the irregular denial of certain tax benefit which had motivated
his investment. The arbitrators wrote:
“Tt is unclear why he refrained from seeking clarification, but he did so at
his peril, particularly given that he was dealing with tax laws and tax
authorities, which are subject to extensive formalities in Mexico and in
most other countries of the world.”"”
20.36 In Middle East Cement Shipping and Handling Co. S.A. v. Arab Republic
of Egypt® the act found to be “tantamount to expropriation” was a decree, signed by
the competent Minister and published in the Egyptian Gazette, and containing the
following simple resolution: “To prohibit the import of all kinds of Gray Portland
Cement either through the Public Governmental Sector or the Private Sector.” The
decree was found to contradict the terms of an import license in reliance upon
which the relevant investment had been made. Moreover, the respondent conceded
that the decree had deprived the claimant of rights under the license for “at least a
period of four months”. It did not agree to the 10-year duration allegation by the
claimant.”! The difference with the present case is palpable, both with respect to
the clear and categorical effect of the governmental measure, and the level of

government at which it was taken.

° Thid, at para. 114.
*> ICSID Case No. ARB/99/6.

2! [bid, at paras. 107-111.

Page93

 

20.37 Finally, it is relevant to consider the vicissitudes of the economy of the
state that is host to the investment in determining the investor’s legitimate
expectations, the protection of which is a major concern of the minimum standards
of treatment contained in bilateral investment treaties. The Claimant was attracted
to the Ukraine bece

 

se of the possibility of earning a rate of return on its capital in
significant excess to the other investment opportunities in more developed
economies. The Claimant thus invested in the Ukraine on notice of both the
prospects and the potential pitfalls. Its investment was speculative. Perhaps for this
very reason, the Claimant was cautious about contributing substantial sums of its
own money to the enterprise, preferring to seek capital from third parties to finance
the construction of the building. By 31 October 1997, the Claimant had undoubtedly
experienced frustration and delay caused by bureaucratic incompetence and
recalcitrance in various forms. But equally, the Claimant had managed to secure a
49-year leasehold over prime commercial property in the centre of Kyiv without
having participated in a competitive tender and without having made any substantial

payment to the Ukrainian authorities.

20.38 For these reasons, the Tribunal rejects the Claimant’s submission that an
“indirect ... global expropriation of the company’s rights and property” occurred
on 31 October 1997 “by virtue of the [Kyiv City State Administration]’s failure to

produce revised land lease agreements with valid site drawings”.

21. Second Alleged Expropriation

21.1. The Claimant submits that the “Direct (‘Second - Repeat’) global
expropriation of the company’s rights and property” occurred on 8 July 1999 “by
virtue of the Kyiv City Council’s (with the support of the Kyiv City State
Administration) Decision No. 358/459 unlawfully cancel[l]ing the company’s 49
year land lease rights”. According to the Claimant, this action “is merely a
continuation and intensification of the dispute initiated on October 31, 1997 and

not a ‘new’ dispute in its own right.”

21.2 The notion of a “second” or “repeat” expropriation of the same investment
poses a daunting conceptual problem. But even if the Tribunal were to consider this
as a submission in the alternative (which is not the characterisation offered by the

Claimant), the Decision of the Kyiv City Council cannot amount to an expropriatory

Page4

act because both Parties agree that it had no legal effect in relation to the
Claimant’s rights under the Order on Land Allocation or Lease Agreements. The
Respondent concedes that the Decision was “legally defective” as it was beyond
the competence of the Kyiv City Council to cancel a previous decision of the Kyiv
City State Administration (in this case the Order on Land Allocation). The
Claimant and the Respondent concur that the 49-year Lease Agreement remains
valid and binding to this day (the 3-year Lease Agreement having now expired in
accordance with its own terms) because any cancellation of a lease agreement
relating to land can only be effected by a judgment of a Ukrainian court. This was
implicit in the Decision of the Kyiv City Council itself, which called upon the
Kyiv City Department of Land Resources to apply to the Supreme Arbitration

Court of Ukraine for that purpose. No such application has ever been made.

21.3. Heneratsiya’s legal rights to its leasehold property have, therefore, not
been infringed by the Decision of the Kyiv City Council. Nor has the Decision
resulted in any factual interference with Heneratsiya’s enjoyment of its leasehold
property as no actions have been taken by any Ukrainian authority to evict

Heneratsiya from the land. Heneratsiya remains in control of its construction site.

21.4 Insofar as Heneratsiya’s leasehold interests in its property were the sole
target of the Decision of the Kyiv City Council and such interests remain
unaffected, the Decision cannot amount to an expropriatory act for the purposes of
Article III of the BIT.

22. Third Alleged Expropriation

22.1 The subject of the third alleged expropriation is the Claimant’s right to use the
adjoining property as a construction staging area. The Claimant submits that the
source of this right is the Yalovoy Protocol. The Tribunal has previously found at
Paragraph 18.59 above that no such right can be recognised by the Tribunal because
this was not the clear intention of the parties to the Yalovoy Protocol. In the absence
of any proof that the lessee of the adjoining property consented to the Claimant’s use
of this land, any countenance to the Claimant’s alleged right would involve a flagrant
breach of Ukrainian land law. There cannot be an expropriation of something to

which the Claimant never had a legitimate claim. The Tribunal concludes that the

Page95

failure of the Kyiv City State Administration to secure the Claimant’s use of the

adjoining property cannot amount to an expropriation.
23. Conclusions on Claims A to D

23.1 The Tribunal has rejected the Claimant’s submissions on each of the acts
alleged to be tantamount to expropriation pursuant to Article III of the BIT. The
Tribunal has not, therefore, discerned a breach of the BIT by the Respondent. It
follows that Claims A to D, as predicated on a breach of Article III of the BIT,
must be dismissed. As made clear in Section 17, the only other claim with respect

to which the Tribunal has jurisdiction is that of costs.

24. Costs

24.1 Since the claim fails in its entirety, it remains to be considered whether
there are any reasons to attenuate the general rule than an unsuccessful litigant in

international arbitration should bear the reasonable costs of its opponent.

24.2. Counsel for the Claimant has suggested that “there’s more documentation
in this particular ICSID reference than has ever been in any previous ICSID
reference.” The Tribunal is not certain that such an affirmation is verifiable; it is
certainly true that the written evidence and submissions in this case have been
voluminous. But the Claimant’s written presentation of its case has also been
convoluted, repetitive, and legally incoherent. It has obliged the Respondent and
the Tribunal to examine a myriad of factual issues which have ultimately been

revealed as irrelevant to any conceivable legal theory of jurisdiction, liability or

 

recovery. Its acterisation of evidence has been unacceptably slanted, and has
required the Respondent and the Tribunal to verify every allegation with

st tion of

 

spicion. (For example, the Claimant’s confident assertions of its mobilis

 

nec

 

ary financing do not match the evidence of Crédit Lyonnais Ukraine’s
expression of interest, which was in the form of a draft term sheet that promised to
“study applications from prospective tenants ... for the financing of their
obligations under the lease”. The fact that the author of that letter was announced
as a witness, that a document purporting to be his written statement was produced,
but that no signed version was forthcoming, and that he declined to appear before
the Tribunal, has hardly helped matters.)

Page96

24.3. The Claimant’s position has also been notably inconsistent. For example, it
alleged that “we established Heneratsiya in anticipation of the fact that the Bilateral
Investment Treaty allowed us to function in Ukraine through a local subsidiary.”
But Heneratsiya was formed in 1993, and Mr Laka ultimately, on the last day of
his testimony, revealed that he had not become aware of the BIT until a U.S.
Embassy official advised him about it at the time of preparing the Claimant’s case

before the Chamber of Independent Experts - which was in 1999.

24.4 Moreover, the Claimant’s presentation of its damages claim has reposed on
the flimsiest foundation. The Tribunal has no doubt that Mr Laka spent some
money during his years pursuing the Parkview Project, but there is not one item of
direct evidence of a single expenditure. Mr Laka testified that all accounting
evidence was destroyed inadvertently by workmen who misunderstood their
instructions when the Claimant abandoned its office in Kyiv in 2000. That may be
so, but the Claimant’s approach to filling that evidentiary gap has been singularly
unimpressive: it presented an “audit” by Mr Marynyako, a graduate of the
Department of Machinery of the Ukrainian Agricultural Academy who apparently
is a self-taught accountant. He testified that he spent perhaps 200 hours verifying
the Claimant’s accounts in 1999 (before they were destroyed) but was not
remunerated. Mr Laka explained that he had an understanding with Mr Marynyako
to the effect that the latter would receive a share in the Claimant’s hoped-for
recovery in this arbitration. And yet there are numerous documents in the file that
refer to previous examinations of the Claimant’s costs; somehow the relevant
annexes, notwithstanding the plethora of the Claimant’s documentation, are
missing. (For example, the “Expert Appraisal” of the value of the Parkview Project
conducted by the Central Service of the Ukrainian State Investment Expertise made
reference to an Appendix 9 showing “[e]xpenses incurred by the Developer during
the period 1 January 1993 to 31 May 1998 for the execution of the Parkview
project”. This appendix was not produced to the Tribunal despite its request.)
Similarly Mr Laka contended that the Claimant’s expenditures were essentially

financed by loans from himself, “paid out of his pocket” but with no formal trace.

Page97

24.5 As for the Claimant’s non identified staff, with the exception of Mr Laka, they
were “hourly employees” paid in local currency with “no contractual or employment

status.” Such is the explanation offered for the absence of payroll or similar records.

24.6 The Claimant’s presentation has lacked the intellectual rigour and
discipline one would expect of a party seeking to establish a cause of action
before a international tribunal. This lack of discipline has needlessly complicated

the examination of the claim.

24.7 Even at the stage of final oral submissions in March 2003, counsel for the
Claimant relied on two ICSID awards without mentioning that they had been
partially annulled. While the Tribunal was fortunately aware of that limitation on
the pertinence of those awards, this was due to the happenstance of the arbitrators’
personal knowledge. The Tribunal assumes in counsel’s favour that he was

unaware of the annulments; that is bad enough, and does no credit to the Claimant.

24.8 The Respondent has claimed costs of USD 739,309.80, representing
“contract payments of lawers [sic] and experts services and expenses for business
trips”. The Tribunal is unsatisfied with these uncorroborated costs submissions,
and considers them vastly overstated. It awards all costs the Respondent has paid
into ICSID, or USD 265,000 as well as a contribution of USD 100,000 to the
Respondent’s legal fees.

25. AWARD
25.1 Rejecting all claims and contentions to the contrary, the Tribunal decides that:
(1) _ The claim is dismissed.

(2) The Claimant is ordered to pay costs to the Respondent in the
amount of USD 365,000.

Paged8

Signed this 15" day of September 2003:

signature, signature,
Dr Eugen Salpius Dr Jiirgen Voss

signature,
Mr Jan Paulsson
President

Page99

