INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovi¢ d.o.o.

Republic of Croatia

(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

DECISION ON CLAIMANTS’ REQUEST FOR PROVISIONAL MEASURES

 

Members of the Tribunal
Michael C. Pryles, President of the Tribunal
Stanimir A. Alexandrov, Arbitrator
Matthias Scherer, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Lindsay Gastrell

Assistant to the President of the Tribunal
Albert Dinelli

30 April 2015

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

(A)

(B)

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION 5
RELEVANT PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

 

 

 

 

 

THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS 10
THE CLAIMANTS’ REQUEST. 10
(i) Introduction 10
(ii) Factual Background: The Criminal In igati 12

 

(iii) The Criminal Investigation is Without Legal Basis...
(iv) Factual Background: Other Hi and Intimidati 19

(v) The Respondent's Harassment Drains the Claimants’ Resources and Threatens the Continued
Existence of Gavrilovié d.o.o. 19

(vi) The Provisional Measures Should be Granted ....

 

(vii) Prima Facie Jurisdiction 21

 

(viii) Requirement (1): Rights to be Protected by Provisional Measures...

 

(ix) Requirement (2): Provisional Measures are Urgent ....

 

(x) Requirement (3): Provisional Measures are Necessary to Safeguard the Claimants’ Rights...

 

(xi) The Provisional Measures are Proportionate

 

 

THE RESPONDENT'S REPLY 31
(i) Introduction 1
(ii) Factual Background in Summary 1

 

(iii) Factual Background: The Health and Safety Inspections...

 

(iv) Factual Background: The Criminal I igati 2

 

(v) The Criminal Investigation in no Way Interferes with the Arbitration...
(@

(vii) The Circumstances do not Justify F ional Measur 42

   

    

) The Requirements for Granting Provisional Measures.....

(1) The Claimants are not entitled to confidential or privileged information under the guise of a
request for provisional measures

   

 

 

 

(1) The integrity of the arbitral dings is not at risk 43
(I) The Investigation Decision does not affect the regular, fair and orderly conduct of this

itrati 45
(IV) Equality of arms is maintained 48

Page 2 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gaovrilovié d.o.o. 0 Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

(©)

(D)

(E)

(A)
(B)
(©)

(D)

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

 

(V) The Arbitral Tribunal’ jurisdiction is not being usurped ....

 

(VD Provisional measures are neither urgent nor necessary...

THE CLAIMANTS’ REJOINDER 52

 

(i) The Respondent Misstates or Mischaracterises Certain Relevant Facts.

 

(ii) The Claimants’ Request Should be Granted to Safeguard the Claimants’ Rights ....

THE RESPONDENT'S SURREJOINDER 59

 

(i) Overarching Submissi 59

(ii) This Arbitration, and the Claimants’ Request, was Brought Solely to Obstruct the Lawful
Investigation of a Suspected Criminal 60

(iii) The Claimants Continue to Fail to Provide any Evidence of the Alleged Urgent Need for Provisional
Measures 61

(iv) The Balance of Convenience Cannot Substitute the Lack of Material Risk of Substantial or Irreparable
Injury 62

63

 

(v) The Investigation Order is Justified Under Croatian Law...

(vi) The Claimants’ Manipulation of these Arbitral Proceedings Causes Prejudice to the Respondent and

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Should be Remedied. 64
FURTHER SUBMISSIONS. 64
(i) The Claimants’ Letter Dated 2 April 2015 ..... 64
(ii) The Respondent's Letter Dated 13 April 2015... 65
ANALYSIS 66
JURISDICTION 6!
THE APPROPRIATE STANDARD 6!
FINDINGS 0

 

 

(i) The Criminal Investigation of Mr Gavrilovic...

 

(ii) The Health and Safety Inspection of Gaorilovié d.o.0. ..

 

 

 

 

 

 

(iii) Conclusic 5

ARE THE PROVISIONAL MEASURES URGENT AND NECESSARY TO SAFEGUARD THE CLAIMANTS’ RIGHTS?
5

(i) Request No. 1: Stay of the Criminal Investigation of Mr Gavrilovic... 75

(ii) Request No. 2: Injunction to Protect Integrity of the Arbitration and Equality of Arms..........76

(iti) Request No. 3: Injunction in Relation to Contact with Witnesses ... 76

(iv) Request No. 4: Access to Documents Related to the Criminal File... 277

Page 3 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gaovrilovié d.o.o. 0 Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

(E)
(F)

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

Costs

 

CONCLUDING REMARKS.

DECISION

81

Page 4 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

INTRODUCTION

This arbitration arises out of the alleged investments of Mr Georg Gavrilovi¢, a national of
Austria, and Gavrilovi¢ d.o.o., a company organised under the laws of Croatia (together,
the “Claimants”), in the Republic of Croatia (the “Respondent” or “Croatia”) (collectively,

with the “Claimants”, the “Parties”).

On 21 December 2012, the Claimants commenced this arbitration under the auspices of the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”) on the basis of the
Agreement between the Republic of Austria and the Republic of Croatia for the Promotion
and Protection of Investments, which entered into force on 1 November 1999 (the “BIT”),
and the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals

of Other States, which entered into force on 14 October 1966 (the “ICSID Convention”).

This Decision sets out the Tribunal’s analysis of, and decision in respect of, the Claimants’

Request for Provisional Measures dated 15 December 2014 (the “Claimants’ Request”).

For the reasons elaborated in Section IV below, the Tribunal has decided to refuse the

Claimants’ Request.

RELEVANT PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

On 28 November 2014, the Respondent informed the Tribunal that, on 26 November 2014,
a crime unit of the Croatian State Attorney’s Office, the Croatian Office for Suppression of
Corruption and Organised Crime (“USKOK”) had issued a decision to conduct criminal

investigations in respect of Mr Georg Gavrilovi¢ (the “Investigation Order”).

On 2 December 2014, the Claimants submitted a letter to the Tribunal, setting out several
objections to the investigation initiated by USKOK and informing the Tribunal that the

Claimants would file an application for provisional measures shortly.

Page 5 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

10.

11.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

On 15 December 2014, the Claimants submitted their Request, accompanied by the

following evidential material:

(a) a legal opinion of Professor Davor Derencinovi¢ dated 12 December 2014 (the “First

Derenéinovi¢ Opinion”);

(b) a witness statement of Amela Lovrekovic dated 12 December 2014;

(c) a witness statement of Marko Dabi¢ dated 12 December 2014 (the “Dabi¢ Statement”);

(d) a witness statement of Suzana Juri¢ Sekuli¢ dated 12 December 2014; and

(e) a witness statement of Tihana Prpi¢ LuZai¢ dated 12 December 2014 (the “LuZai¢

Statement”).

In short, in reliance on that evidential material, the Claimants seek relief ordering the
Respondent to take all appropriate measures to suspend any criminal investigation of
Mr Gavrilovic, to refrain from any criminal prosecution of Mr Gavrilovi¢, and to refrain

from any other conduct which may jeopardise the procedural integrity of the arbitration.

On 16 December 2014, the Tribunal invited the Parties to confer regarding a procedural
timetable for written submissions in relation to the Claimants’ Request and to advise the

Tribunal of their respective initial views as to whether an oral hearing was necessary.

On 22 December 2014, each of the Parties made submissions as to the procedural timetable
for the written submissions. The Respondent proposed to submit its observations on the
Request by 30 January 2015 and informed the Tribunal that it saw no benefit to holding an
oral hearing. The Claimants proposed that the Respondent submit its observations by 31

December 2014 and made no submissions regarding an oral hearing.

On 23 December 2014, having considered the Parties’ respective submissions as to the

procedural timetable, the Tribunal ordered that the Respondent provide its reply to the

Page 6 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

Claimants’ Request by 28 January 2015. The Tribunal reserved its decision on whether to

hold a hearing.

On 28 January 2015, the Respondent provided its Reply to the Claimants’ Request for
Provisional Measures (the “Respondent's Reply”), together with a legal opinion of

Professor Petar Novoselec dated 27 January 2015.

On 9 February 2015, the Tribunal invited the Claimants, if they so wished, to provide a

rejoinder to the Respondent's Reply by 24 February 2015.

On 10 February 2015, the Claimants requested that the deadline for the submission of any

rejoinder be extended to 27 February 2015. The Tribunal granted that request.

On 27 February 2015, the Claimants provided their Rejoinder in Support of their Request
for Provisional Measures (the “Claimants’ Rejoinder”), together with a supplemental legal
opinion of Professor Davor Derenéinovi¢ dated 27 February 2015 (the “Second

Derendinovi¢ Opinion”).

On 4 March 2015, the Tribunal invited the Respondent to submit any surrejoinder by
31 March 2015.

On 13 March 2015, while the Tribunal was awaiting the Respondent's submission of the
surrejoinder, the Claimants made an urgent application to the Tribunal. The Claimants
informed the Tribunal that Mr Gavrilovi¢ had, the day prior, received an official summons
compelling his appearance on 20 March 2015 for an interrogation by the Respondent. In

those circumstances, the Claimants sought relief as follows:

In order to maintain the status quo, and to preserve the procedural integrity of this
arbitration, Claimants respectfully request that the Tribunal, order Respondent to
temporarily suspend its interrogation of Mr Gavrilovi¢ until the Tribunal rules on
the Claimants’ Request to stay in its entirety the criminal prosecution of Mr
Gavrilovic¢.

Page 7 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

The Respondent immediately sought leave to respond to the Claimants’ application, and
on 14 March 2015, the President of the Tribunal requested that the Respondent submit its

response by 17 March 2015. The Respondent subsequently filed its response on that date.

The Tribunal duly considered each Party’s submissions and ultimately granted the relief
sought in an Order dated 19 March 2015. That relief expires, according to the terms of the
Order, when “the Tribunal rules on the Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures dated
15 December 2014 filed in this arbitration”. This Decision constitutes such ruling; therefore,

the urgent relief granted on 19 March 2015 expires as of the date of this Decision.

On 31 March 2015, the Respondent provided its Surrejoinder to Claimants’ Rejoinder in
Support of their Request for Provisional Measures (the “Respondent's Surrejoinder”),
together with a supplemental legal opinion of Professor Petar Novoselec dated 30 March

2015.

In the cover letter to the Respondent's Surrejoinder, the Respondent requested that an in-
person hearing on the Claimants’ Request be held, and informed the Tribunal of its
availability to attend such hearing in April. It explained that “considering the importance
for what is at stake for the Respondent — namely, interference with its undisputable
sovereign right and duty to investigate suspected criminal activity in its territory — the
Respondent considers that such a hearing is necessary to ensure that the Arbitral Tribunal

engages the issue with the appropriate level of care and attention”.

On 1 April 2015, the President invited the Claimants to comment on the Respondent's

request for an in-person hearing.

On 2 April 2015, the Claimants wrote to the Tribunal, asserting that any oral argument
could be easily achieved by in a telephone hearing. In so doing, it proffered some further
(unsolicited) submissions on the subject matter of the Claimants’ Request and submitted

two additional exhibits.

Page 8 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

24,

25.

26.

27.

28.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

On 3 April 2015, the Respondent wrote to the Tribunal objecting to these unsolicited
submissions and seeking that they be struck off the record or, alternatively, that it be given
the opportunity to make submissions in response. In addition, with respect to the issue of
a hearing, the Respondent contended that only an in-person hearing would allow the

Respondent to rigorously test the evidence of the Claimants’ lay and expert witnesses.

Having considered the Parties’ respective submissions as to the need for an oral hearing
(whether by telephone or in-person), the Tribunal concluded that such hearing was
unnecessary and informed the Parties accordingly on 7 April 2015. This was so because, as
is apparent from Section III below, the legal submissions of the Parties are very extensive
and the Tribunal was, and remains, of the view that the testing of the witnesses was

unnecessary to resolve the matters in dispute.

In this regard, the Tribunal, of course, considers that, irrespective of whether a hearing is
held or not, it has given, and will continue to give, the issues between the Parties
appropriate care and attention. Indeed, in coming to the conclusions set out herein, it has
given careful consideration to all of the submissions of the Parties, and the evidential
material relied upon. To contend that an in-person hearing is necessary to ensure that
appropriate care and attention be given to a matter is a submission that is of no assistance

to the Tribunal.

On 9 April 2015, the Tribunal invited the Respondent to file a brief response as soon as

possible in relation to the submissions the subject of the Claimants’ letter dated 2 April 2015.

On 13 April 2015, the Respondent provided those submissions.

Page 9 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

Tl.

29.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS

(A) — The Claimants’ Request

(i) Introduction

The Claimants’ Request is made pursuant to Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Rule

39 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. They request that the Tribunal order the Respondent “to

take all appropriate measures to suspend criminal investigations recently initiated against

Mr Gavrilovic¢ and to refrain from engaging in any other conduct which may jeopardize

Claimants’ rights”.! More specifically, their Request for Relief, as set out in both Section IV

of their Request and Section IV of their Rejoinder, seeks a decision providing as follows:

(i)

(ii)

Respondent shall take all appropriate measures to suspend any
investigation relating to the Investigation Order dated November 25, 2014,
and any other criminal investigatory actions or criminal proceedings
initiated against Mr. Georg Gavrilovic, and to suspend any other criminal
proceedings or investigation related in any way to the present arbitration,
until the arbitration is completed or upon a further decision of the Tribunal.
[(“Request No. 1”)]

Respondent shall refrain from engaging in any other course of action which
may directly or indirectly jeopardize the procedural integrity of this
arbitration, aggravate or extend the dispute, alter the status quo, destroy the
equality of arms between the parties or threaten the exclusivity of this
ICSID arbitration, including, but not limited to:

(a) conducting health or safety inspections of Gavrilovi¢ d.o.o. ina manner
and frequency that is inconsistent with the manner and frequency in
which such inspections were conducted prior to the date this
arbitration was commenced; and

(b) publicizing any allegations of health and safety violations of Gavrilovi¢
d.o.o. until such allegations are proven.

[(“Request No. 2”)]

Claimants’ Request, §1

Page 10 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

30.

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

Respondent shall refrain from providing any instructions or warning to
potential witnesses not to communicate with Claimants or their counsel,
and shall provide Claimants with written notices, in a form to be approved
by the Tribunal, ensuring witnesses and potential witness that they may
speak with the Claimants and Claimants' representatives, and appear as
witnesses in this arbitration, without fear of reprisal from the Respondent.
[(“Request No. 3”)]

Respondent shall provide to Claimants copies of all evidence collected
during the course of the criminal investigation to date, and any such

evidence collected in the future. [(“Request No. 4”)]

Respondent shall pay all costs associated with the Tribunal’s issuance of
provisional measures.

And any such relief as the Tribunal deems just and proper.

The gravamen of the Claimants’ concern is summarised as follows:

This investigation, and the initiation of criminal proceedings through the
Investigation Order are obviously intended to advantage Respondent in this
arbitration and deprive Claimants of their right to a fair hearing. "Evidence"
obtained by Respondent's criminal investigation authorities appears to provide the
basis for its jurisdictional arguments in this arbitration. Furthermore, Respondent
has used its police powers to intimidate current and potential witnesses in this
arbitration.

Such egregious conduct obviously prevents Claimants from preparing their case
and, if not restrained by this Tribunal, will destroy any possibility that Claimants
will be fairly heard in this matter.

Under Croatian law, Respondent's criminal authorities have enormous powers to
intimidate Claimants and their witnesses: Respondent may intercept and record
telephone calls and emails and other electronic data of any individual or legal entity,
use undercover investigators and informants, forcibly question witnesses inside
and outside Croatia, and restrict or impose conditions for travel from Croatia.
Furthermore, pursuant to the Investigation Order, the Respondent may arrest and
incarcerate Mr Gavrilovic for at least two years, without further notice or a trial

Claimants’ Request, §§4-7.

Page 11 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures
(ii) Factual Background: The Criminal Investigation

The factual background to the Request in relation to the criminal investigation is as follows.

As already noted,? on 26 November 2014, USKOK issued the Investigation Order. The
Investigation Order alleged that the State Attorney could show a reasonable suspicion that
Mr Gavrilovi¢ induced an “abuse of power in the privatization process”. Those allegations
concern the investments made by Mr Gavrilovi¢ in 1991 and 1992 which are the subject of

this arbitration.

On 1 December 2014, the State Attorney released to Mr Gavrilovi¢ the material which

allegedly supports the charge.

In essence, the Claimants contend that the material released to Mr Gavrilovi¢ demonstrates
that the investigation was commenced in response to the Claimants filing the arbitration,
rather than as a bona fide attempt to investigate any potential crimes. It follows, the
Claimants say, that the Respondent’s criminal investigation, which is supported by
USKOK’s broad investigative powers, is being used to advantage the Respondent in this

arbitration and deprive the Claimants of their right to a fair trial.

Returning to the factual background, the Claimants point to the following facts in support

of their Request:

(a) While the crimes cited in the Investigation Order are alleged to have occurred in 1991
and 1992, and were the subject of civil and criminal proceedings in 1996, the first
investigatory action in the criminal case file that was made available to Mr Gavrilovi¢

took place on 23 April 2013.

See §5 above.

Page 12 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

36.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

(b) This is more than 22 years after the alleged wrongdoing and only months after the

Claimants commenced this arbitration on 21 December 2012.

(¢

In the letter to the Tribunal dated 28 November 2014,‘ the Respondent's counsel said
that the Respondent's investigation resulted from “new evidence”, but, when the
investigation commenced in 2013, the only “new evidence” could have been the
materials filed with the request for arbitration. Other material, especially the Order of
the Bankruptcy Court to submit payment to Inacomm International SA Panama dated
3 March 1992, cannot be “new evidence”, as it has been known to the Respondent for

over 20 years.

(d) In these circumstances, the Claimants say that the only possible “new evidence”
generated by the Respondent's investigation of Mr Gavrilovi¢ is the appearance of
Mr Ivica Papeg, and the Respondent admits that it only found Mr Pape after the
Claimants filed their memorial on the merits, at least 10 months after the investigation

commenced.

(e) Mr Pape is a convicted felon currently on probation. In 2012, he was convicted of tax
fraud and abuse of power in connection with his theft of over 2 million kuna (HRK)
from a Croatian company. He was sentenced to 11 months of imprisonment with five

years of parole.

Pointing to the wide criminal investigation powers vested in USKOK under Croatian law,

the Claimants contend that:

(a) the Respondent is using its investigation to intimidate current and potential witnesses

in the arbitration; and

See §5 above.

Page 13 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

37.

38.

39.

40.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

(b) the Respondent is using its investigation to obtain evidence in this arbitration.

Before turning to the Claimants’ particularisation of (a) and (b) of the preceding paragraph,
the Claimants contend that the powers of USKOK are extensive. They point to the
availability of “special discovery measures” and “precautionary measures” and,
specifically, to the availability, after the issuance of an investigation order, of a power
vested in the State Attorney to request that a judge order that the suspect be put in
“investigative prison”, which may last over three years, depending on the crime of which

he or she is suspected.

As to the alleged intimidation of current and potential witnesses, the Claimants point to
various matters, including (i) the warning of potential witnesses to not speak to the
Claimants and their counsel; (ii) statements by the Respondent's officials that attempts by
the Claimants or their representatives to speak to persons with relevant information for the
criminal proceeding (which parallels the relevant information for the arbitration) may be
construed as a crime of “influencing witnesses”; and (iii) the commencement of the USKOK
investigation, which “by its nature is a powerful deterrent to any potential witness to give

evidence contrary to the Respondent's position in the arbitration” 5

The Claimants contend that, since the investigation has been publicised, the Claimants have
experienced a reduced willingness among potential witnesses to speak with the Claimants
and their representatives. Even those who have previously co-operated have been reluctant

to co-operate further due to a fear of testifying because of retaliatory measures.
The high watermark of the Claimants’ case appears to be the following:

The means by which the Respondent has attempted to gain information for its
defense from potential witnesses has been particularly shocking and intimidating.
One of the potential witnesses reported having been woken very early in the

Claimants’ Request, §28.

Page 14 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

41.

42.

43.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

morning by Croatian police forces. The officers brought him to a government
building in which he was interrogated by a large group of state attorneys for almost
20 hours without breaks and without food. He was denied the right to call an
attorney and the interviewers refused to provide him a copy of the interrogation-
protocol when the questioning ended. Before the officers permitted him to leave
the premises they issued a “warning”, saying that he “better not get in touch with
Claimants” and “refuse to talk to Claimants” if he were approached.®

No evidence was provided by this person, anonymously or otherwise.

The Claimants contend that these matters are such that they could be a violation of human
rights, in particular Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights, which
prohibits torture and inhumane, degrading treatment or punishment. The Claimants also

identify a number of cases in which Croatia has been found to have contravened Article 3.”

Further, the Claimants contend that the inappropriate and intimidating interrogation
techniques extend to what occurred during the Respondent’s excessive raid at
Gavrilovic¢ d.o.0.’s factory on 21 October 2014. As to this event, they rely on the evidence
of Ms Tihana Prpi¢ Luzai¢, Gavrilovi¢ d.o.0.’s head of production of semi-durable sausages

and meat. Her witness statement attests to the following facts:

(a) After the 13-hour long raid, the Respondent's police forces ordered her to the local

police station for questioning.*

(b) She was interrogated for 2 % hours.’

Claimants’ Request, §34.

Claimants’ Request, §37, citing Gladovic v Croatia, no. 28847/08, ECHR 2011; Testa v Croatia, no. 20877/04, ECHR:
2008; Longin v Croatia, no. 49268/10, ECHR 2012; Piléié v Croatia, no. 33138/06, ECHR 2008.

Luzaié Statement, §12.

Id.

Page 15 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

(c) She was denied defence counsel."

(d) The leading officers warned her that she had to tell them everything, and that a failure

to do so would lead to liability."

(e) Further, an officer told her several times that the police had clear evidence against the

Claimants and it would be better for her to tell everything immediately.”

(f) At the conclusion of the interrogation, she was required to sign a “confidentiality
declaration”, the officers telling her that the contents of the interrogation must be kept

secret.

As to the use of the investigation to obtain evidence for the arbitration, the Claimants point

to a number of matters, including:

(a) The criminal investigation and the Respondent's defence are “clearly linked” ."

(b) Several of the Claimants’ witness statements in this proceeding, including various
exhibits, and correspondence from the Claimants’ solicitors, form part of the criminal

file.

(c) The Respondent has admitted in correspondence to the Tribunal that it plans to use

additional evidence from the criminal investigation in the proceeding.’

LuZaié Statement, §13.

Claimants’ Request, §40.

See letter dated 12 December 2014 from the Respondent's to the Tribunal.

Page 16 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

45.

46.

47.

48.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

(d) An analysis of the criminal investigation file discloses that the primary purpose of the
criminal investigation is to support the Respondent's defence, as evidenced by the

subject of the questioning of witnesses.

(e) The Respondent has abused State powers by requesting documents from the Republic

of Austria, which are relevant to the arbitration, and not to the criminal allegations.

(iii) The Criminal Investigation is Without Legal Basis

The Claimants contend that the Investigation Order is invalid and does not support the
criminal investigation. They assert that the Investigation Order does not set forth factual
allegations or evidence that lead to a reasonable suspicion that Mr Gavrilovi¢é committed

the alleged offences.

The Claimants make this submission in reliance on evidence of Professor Davor
Deren¢inovié, a Doctor of Law in criminal law sciences, Master of Law in criminal law
sciences, a Fulbright scholar, and a university professor, with significant experience on
matters related to criminology, criminal sciences, Croatian criminal law and human rights

law.

In essence, Professor Deren¢inovi¢ testifies that the Respondent has improperly issued the

Investigation Order against Mr Gavrilovic¢.'®

In coming to that conclusion, Professor Derenéinovic¢ explains that “the Investigation Order
does not meet the standard for issuing an investigation order under Croatian law, because
it does not show the existence of a reasonable suspicion that Mr Gavrilovi¢ committed the
alleged crimes” .!” Further, Professor Derencinovi¢ emphasises that the statute of limitations

would have expired long before but for the State Attorney’s reliance on the Act on the

See, especially, First Derenéinovié Opinion, §55; Second Derenéinovié Opinion, §48.

First Derenéinovi¢ Opinion, §56.

Page 17 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

49.

50.

51.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

Abolishment of the Statute of Limitations for Crimes of War Profiteering and Privatization
Crimes (the “War Profiteering Act’). But Professor Derendinovié explains that the
retroactive exception to the rule that criminal offences must be prosecuted within a certain
period of time would be restrictively interpreted, and that the Investigation Order does

nothing to explain how Mr Gavrilovi¢’s alleged crimes fall within that exception.

Further, the Claimants point to allegations of facts that are not relevant to the charges cited
in the Investigation Order but are relevant to the Respondent's defences. The Claimants
allege that their inclusion goes to its central contention that “the true nature of the
Investigation Order [is] not aimed at the bona fide prosecution of crimes that ... Mr
Gavrilovi¢ allegedly committed 23 years ago, but ... at destroying Claimants’ ability to

pursue their claims in this arbitration”!

Although an appeal by Mr Gavrilovi¢ against the validity of the Investigation Order failed,
the Claimants contend that that failure does not mean that the Order was properly issued.
under Croatian law. In this regard, they rely on Professor Derendinovi¢’s testimony,
including his statement that there is a “well-established, yet extremely questionable,
practice of almost unconditional judicial granting of the investigation orders issued by the
USKOK”.!° The decision is also criticised for not providing any analysis of the deficiencies

in the Investigation Order and its internal contradiction.

In short, therefore, for these reasons, the Claimants say that “[t]he Investigation Order is
not legitimate, but rather was issued to harass Claimants, their witnesses and otherwise

unbalance the equality of arms in this arbitration” °

Claimants’ Request, §68.
First Derenéinovié Opinion, §50.

Claimants’ Request, §75.

Page 18 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

52.

53.

54,

55.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures
(iv) Factual Background: Other Harassment and Intimidation

The Claimants contend that the Respondent’s harassment and intimidation has not been
limited to its conduct in relation to the Investigation Order, but that conduct extends to
conduct by which the Respondent subjected Gavrilovic¢ d.o.o. to a vastly increased number
of extraordinary health and safety inspections, including a dawn raid on 21 October 2014,

to which reference has already been made.

In relation to the increased number of inspections, the Claimants point to the fact that there
were 11 health and safety inspections in 2014, but only three, five and two in, respectively,

2011, 2012 and 2013.7"

In relation to the so-called dawn raid on 21 October 2014, the Claimants contend that the
raid was grossly disproportionate to the allegations. In particular, the Claimants point to
Ms LuzZaic’s testimony that a force of 30 Croatian police officers arrived at the factory at
dawn, ordered employees to stand motionless in the corner and threatened them with
personal liability if requested information was not provided.” This raid was required, the
Claimants emphasise, only to pick up meat samples from the factory, a task that in the past
has been undertaken by a single inspector.

(v) The Respondent's Harassment Drains the Claimants’ Resources and Threatens the

Continued Existence of Gavrilovié d.o.0.

The Claimants contend that this harassment and intimidation has not only affected the
procedural integrity of the arbitration, but has severely harmed the reputations of the
Claimants and, if continued, will likely cause Gavrilovi¢ d.o.o. severe financial distress, and

may well threaten the survival of the company.

See Dabié Statement, §11; Exhibit C-0199.

Luzaié Statement, §§5-6.

Page 19 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

56.

57.

58.

59.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

In this regard, the Claimants point to the fact that commercial survival in the food industry
depends on strong brand name and the trust of consumers in the safety of the products, all
of which has been affected by the disproportionate police raid, the media coverage and the
enormous harm so caused. This is particularly so given that Mr Gavrilovic¢ is the “face” of

the Gavrilovi¢ brand.

The Claimants point to the fact that, particularly since the issuance of the Investigation
Order, certain business partners no longer wish to be associated with the Gavrilovi¢ name.”
Further, there has been a significant strain on human resources and the management of
Gavrilovié d.o.o. The Claimants contend that Gavrilovi¢ d.o.o.’s “entire management is
currently working tirelessly on damage control, to the severe detriment of its normal

responsibilities. The October raid alone led directly to nearly 1,200 lost man-hours” *4

(vi) The Provisional Measures Should be Granted

The Claimants contend that the Tribunal should grant the provisional measures sought to
protect the Claimants’ rights to: (i) the procedural integrity of the arbitration; (ii) the
preservation of the status quo and the non-aggravation of the dispute; (iii) equality of arms;

and (iv) the exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings under Article 26 of the ICSID Convention.

As already noted, the Claimants’ Request is made pursuant to Article 47 of the ICSID
Convention and Rule 39 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. The Claimants contend that, as the

tribunal explained in City Oriente v Republic of Ecuador, Article 47 of the ICSID Convention:

provides authorization for the passing of provisional measures prohibiting any
action that affects the disputed rights, aggravates the dispute, frustrates the

Dabi¢ Statement, §§7-9

Claimants’ Request, §93, citing Exhibit C-0199.

Page 20 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

60.

61.

62.

63.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

effectiveness of the award or entails having either party take justice into their own
hands.
Further, the Claimants contend that, while Article 47 and Rule 39 use the word
“recommend”, “it is generally recognized that arbitral tribunals are empowered under
these provisions to order provisional measures with binding force and that the parties are

obliged to comply with such orders” 76

The Claimants contend that to be entitled to an order for provisional measures, a party must

satisfy three requirements:

(a) the party has a right (whether substantive or procedural) which can be protected;
(b) the need for the provisional measures sought is urgent; and

(c) the provisional measures are necessary to protect those rights.

(vii) Prima Facie Jurisdiction
Before turning to these three requirements, the Claimants first address the question of
jurisdiction, contending that an ICSID tribunal may recommend provisional measures even

where (as here) it has yet to decide the question of its jurisdiction.”

The Claimants contend that all that is required is that the provisions invoked appear prima

facie to afford a basis for jurisdiction to decide the merits. To support this contention, the

City Oriente Limited v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petrdleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador), ICSID
Case No. ARB/06/21, Decision on Provisional Measures, §55.

Claimants’ Request, §99, citing Tethyan Copper Company Pty Limited o. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1CSID Case
No. ARB/12, Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures (13 December 2012), §120; Occidental
Exploration and Production Company v Republic of Ecuador, CSID Case No. ARB/06/11, Decision on Provisional
Measures (17 August 2007), §58; Tokios Tokeles v Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/2/18, Order No. 1 - Claimants’
Request for Provisional Measures (1 July 2003), §§51-53.

Claimants’ Request, §102, citing Quiborax SA Non Metallic Minerals SA & Allan Fosk Kapliin v Plurinational State
of Bolivia, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures (26 February 2010), §108.

Page 21 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

64.

65.

66.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

Claimants cite a number of authorities, including the Case Concerning Passage Through the

Great Belt, where the International Court of Justice stated:

Whereas on a request for provisional measures the Court need not, before deciding
whether or not to indicate them, finally satisfy itself that it has jurisdiction on the
merits of the case, yet it ought not to indicate such measures unless the provisions
invoked by the Applicant appear, prima facie, to afford a basis on which the
jurisdiction of the Court might be founded ...8

This, the Claimants suggest, is a low threshold, which is satisfied in this case, particularly
because: first, the Respondent does not contest the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione persone or
ratione temporis; second, although the Parties are in dispute in relation to jurisdiction ratione
voluntatis and ratione materiae, ratione voluntatis has been established by the Respondent's
consent to arbitration in Article 9 of the BIT; and, third, jurisdiction ratione materiae can be
affirmed on the basis of the Claimants’ submissions in their Request for Arbitration and

Memorial on the Merits and their continued operation of a going-concern in Croatia.

(viii) Requirement (1): Rights to be Protected by Provisional Measures

As already noted at §58, the Claimants point to four rights which are to be protected by the

grant of provisional measures.

Turning first to (i) — the procedural integrity of the arbitration — the Claimants point to their
right to have their claims “fairly considered and decided by the Arbitral Tribunal” .”
Referring to Quiborax v Bolivia® and Biwater Gauff v Tanzania, the Claimants point to

various aspects of procedural integrity, including the access to and integrity of the evidence,

Case Concerning Passage Through the Great Belt (Finland v Denmark), ICJ Order (29 July 1991), §14.

Claimants’ Request, §110, quoting Plama Consortium Limited v Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24,
Order (6 September 2005), §40.

Quiborax SA Non Metallic Minerals SA & Allan Fosk Kapliin v Plurinational State of Bolivia, ICSID Case No.
ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures (26 February 2010).

Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd v United Republic of Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB 05/22, Procedural Order No. 1
(31 March 2006).

Page 22 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

67.

68.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

the minimisation of any scope for external pressure on any party, witness, expert or other
participant in the process, a level playing field and the avoidance of “trial by media”. In

particular, the Claimants refer to the tribunal’s statement in Quiborax that:

[E]ven if no undue pressure is exercised on potential witnesses, the very nature of
these criminal proceedings is bound to reduce their willingness to cooperate in the
ICSID proceeding.”

Further, the Claimants cite Lao Holdings v Laos, where the respondent similarly alleged
potential criminal behaviour by or on behalf of the claimant in relation to the respondent's
government officials. As in this case, Laos sought to pursue criminal proceedings arising
out of the same facts and at the same time as the arbitration. Because of the direct
relationship between the subject matter of the arbitration and the criminal investigation,

and the timing of the investigation, the tribunal concluded:

[T]he integrity of the arbitral process would be compromised by permitting the
Respondent to run a criminal investigation concurrently with the arbitration
directed to the same people and the same facts at the same time.*

The tribunal identified the fact that the parallel criminal investigation would be
“disruptive”, as it would “inevitably divert at least some of the Claimant’s resources”
needed for the arbitration “to dealing with issues arising out of police interviews with
people now or in the past associated with the Claimant” .** Further, the tribunal was there
concerned that concurrent criminal investigations would have a “chilling effect” and
constitute a “powerful deterrent” to witnesses giving evidence contrary to the respondent's

position.** The tribunal concluded that such domestic criminal investigations would

Quiborax SA, Non Metallic Minerals SA & Allan Fosk Kapltin v Plurinational State of Bolivia, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures (26 February 2010), §146.

Lao Holdings NV v The Lao People’s Democratic Republic, ICSID Case No ARB(AF)/12/6, Ruling on Motion to
Amend the Provisional Measures Order (30 May 2014), §§37-39.

Id, §40.
Id, §41.

Page 23 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

69.

70.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

“aggravate the dispute, by endangering the procedural integrity of the arbitral
proceeding”.*° The Claimants contend that the same conclusions follow from the
Respondent's conduct in this case. Further, they say that the Respondent's actions are
similar to those of Bolivia in Quiborax, in that the pressure placed on potential witnesses by

the criminal investigation has reduced their willingness to cooperate in this arbitration.

As to (ii) — the aggravation of the dispute and disruption of the status quo — the Claimants
rest their case on Article 47 of the ICSID Convention, which they contend is based on the
principle that “once a dispute is submitted to arbitration, the parties should not take steps
that might aggravate or extend their dispute or prejudice the execution of the award” .”
It follows that the preservation of the status quo and the non-aggravation of the dispute are

rights capable of protection by provisional measures.**
Concerning Mr Gavrilovi¢ and Gavrilovic¢ d.o.0., the Claimants contend:

Through the announcement of the USKOK Investigation, Mr Gavrilovic is at risk of
incarceration and extradition. Moreover, Respondent's continued and intensified
attacks on the Claimants’ business threaten the viability of Mr Gavrilovic’s business.
Respondent's actions also create serious obstacles for Claimants’ presentation of
their claim and put intolerable pressure on Claimants to abandon their claims.
Respondent has continued to disrespect its obligation to treat foreign investors such
as the Claimants in accordance with fair and equitable treatment-standard set forth
in the Treaty. As such, Respondent's misconduct constitutes (a) a gross aggravation
of the dispute and (b) a departure from the status quo between the parties.

[T]he Claimants own and operate a going-concern in Croatia which severely suffers
from the Respondent’s harassment. And it is not just any going-concern that is at

Id, $42.
Claimants’ Request, §120, quoting G Kaufmann-Kobler & A Antoniett, “Interim Relief in International
Investment in K Yann ll, Under —A Guide

 

to the Key Issues (OUP, 2010), p 522.

Claimants’ Request, §120, citing Churchill Mining ple and Planet Mining Pty Ltd v Republic of Indonesia, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/12/14 and 12/40, Procedural Order No. 9 (8 July 2014), §90.

Page 24 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

71.

72.

73.

40

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

risk, but a long lasting family tradition which is today one of the most successful
meat processing businesses and one of the largest employers in the region. In
addition, Mr Gavrilovi¢ and his family reside in Croatia and are fully exposed to all
of the pressures resulting from Respondent's improper criminal investigation.”

As to (iii) — equality of arms — the Claimants contend that equality of arms is a fundamental
tule of procedure, emphasising that tribunals have the “inherent power” and a duty to
proactively restore equality of arms if it is affected by a State which abuses its “dual role as

both equal-level party to an arbitration and, simultaneously, as sovereign State” .“”

The Claimants contend that such abuse has occurred here by virtue of the Respondent
having used the investigative powers of the USKOK - Croatia’s most powerful
investigative body — in service of evidence gathering, including interviewing potential and
actual witnesses, and having circumvented the arbitration’s document production
processes by use of judicial assistance under EU law. Further, the Claimants particularise
the following actions in support of this submission: surveillance and technical recording of
telephone conversations and other means of communication, interception, gathering and
recording of electronic data, and entry into the premises for the purpose of conducting
surveillance and technical recording at the premises. Finally, the Claimants identify the
possibility that Mr Gavrilovi¢ may be arrested and detained at any time and held for up to

three years.

As to (iv) — circumvention of Article 26 of the ICSID Convention — the Claimants assert that
their right to international adjudication under the Convention “to the exclusion of any other
remedy” is being infringed by the Respondent's misconduct. The Claimants point to the

fact that, by investigating the alleged criminal conduct, the Respondent is raising in

Claimants’ Request, §§122, 126.

Claimants’ Request, §129, quoting T Wilde, “Equality of Arms’ in Investment Arbitration: Procedural
Guide to the Key

 

Challenges” in K Yannaca-Small (ed), Arbitration Under International Investment Agreements:
Issues (OUP, 2010), pp 161-162, 180-182.

Page 25 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

74.

75.

76.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

alternate fora the issues that are presently, and exclusively, before the Tribunal relating to
the jurisdiction and admissibility of the Claimants’ claims. That is to say, “[i]t is evident
that Respondent is using the criminal investigation to build its case on the objections on
jurisdiction, thereby bringing the criminal investigation in line with this arbitral proceeding

and the issues in dispute”."!

While the Claimants do not contest that the Respondent has the sovereign power to
investigate and prosecute conduct within its territory that may constitute a crime if it has
sufficient evidence to justify prosecution, they highlight that such prosecutorial powers
“must be exercised in good faith and with due respect for Claimants’ rights”. The
Claimants say that, as in Lao Holdings, this is a case which warrants a departure from the
general rule entitling a state to enforce its criminal laws. Indeed, they contend this is a
stronger case than Lao Holdings, where like relief was granted; effectively, the Claimants
say, the Respondent’s conduct is such to remove from the exclusive jurisdiction of the
Tribunal the very subject matter of this proceeding and, in so doing, to act without due

respect for the Claimants’ rights.

(ix) Requirement (2): Provisional Measures are Urgent

The Claimants note that, while there is no urgency requirement in the language of Article 49
of the ICSID Convention or Rule 39 of the Arbitration Rules, previous tribunals have held
that provisional measures are only appropriate if a question cannot await the outcome of

the award on the merits.

They contend that Tribunals have applied a “low threshold” to the element of urgency and

that the observation of the tribunal in Biwater Gauff is apposite:

Claimants’ Request, §143.

Claimants’ Request, §144, quoting Lao Holdings NV v The Lao People’s Democratic Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/12/6, Ruling on Motion to Amend the Provisional Measures Order (30 May 2014), §25.

Page 26 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

77.

78.

79.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

[T]he degree of “urgency” which is required depends on the circumstances,
including the requested provisional measures, and may be satisfied where a party
can prove that there is a need to obtain the requested measure at a certain point in
the procedure before the issuance of an award.

In this regard, the Claimants point to the Respondent’s misconduct in threatening the
physical integrity of Mr Gavrilovic, the Claimants’ representatives and witnesses with
incarceration and extradition, any or all of which require immediate action from the
Tribunal. The Claimants emphasise that the Respondent has offered no indication that it
will cease what they describe as a “campaign against the Claimants”, absent being so
ordered by the Tribunal. Further, the Claimants also submit that the circumstances of this
arbitration give rise to the question whether the Claimants will have the opportunity to
properly present their case and whether they may rely on the integrity of specific evidence.
Accordingly, the provisional measures, the Claimants contend, are intended to protect the
jurisdictional powers of the Tribunal, the integrity of the arbitration and the final award,

among others — it follows a fortiori, that such measures are “urgent by definition” 4

(x) Requirement (3): Provisional Measures are Necessary to Safeguard the Claimants’

Rights
The third requirement identified by the Claimants is that the provisional measures are
“necessary” to avoid harm or prejudice being inflicted on the applicant (here, the

Claimants).

The Claimants concede that investment treaty tribunals have taken different approaches
with respect to the intensity of the harm required to justify provisional measures. Those

approaches are as follows:

Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd v United Republic of Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB 05/22, Procedural Order No. 1
(31 March 2006), §76.

Claimants’ Request, §153, quoting Quiborax SA Non Metallic Minerals SA & Allan Fosk Kapliin » Plurinational
State of Bolivia, 1CSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures (26 February 2010), §153.

Page 27 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

80.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

(a) first, some earlier tribunals, including those in Occidental and Plama, applied a test of
“irreparable prejudice”, concluding that provisional measures could only be ordered if
there is a threat of “irreparable” harm incapable of being compensated by an award of

monetary damages; and

(b) second, on the other hand, a series of recent decisions of ICSID tribunals have invoked
a lower threshold and adopted a standard of “harm not adequately reparable by an
award of damages”.* Other tribunals have required “the existence of a risk of
irreparable or substantial harm’*’ or even the lower threshold of “a sufficient risk of

harm or prejudice”.

The Claimants contend that the threat of harm to them by the Respondent's conduct is such
that it meets either of these standards. Further, an order of provisional measures would be
proportionate, because the Claimants’ interest in such measures greatly outweighs any
harm or disadvantage to the Respondent. Indeed, the continuation of the Respondent's
harassment, the Claimants allege, will ultimately lead to the eradication of the investment
itself. A monetary award cannot compensate such harm. Alternatively, the Claimants
contend that, even if a monetary award were practicable, “irreparable harm” has a flexible

meaning and, adopting the words of the UNCITRAL tribunal in Paushok v Mongolia, “the

Occidental Petroleum Corporation v Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11, Decision on Provisional Measures (17
August 2007), §92; Plama Consortium Limited v Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Order
(6 September 2005), §46.

Burlington Resources Inc v Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (PetroEcuador), 1CSID
Case No. ARB/08/5, Procedural Order No. 1 on Burlington Resource’s Request for Provisional Measures (29
June 2009), §75; Quiborax SA Non Metallic Minerals SA & Allan Fosk Kaplin v Plurinational State of Bolivia, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures (26 February 2010), §155.

Churchill Mining PLC & Planet Mining Pty Ltd v Republic of Indonesia, 1CSID Case No. ARB/12/14 & 12/40,
Procedural Order No. 9 (8 July 2014), §69.

Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd v United Republic of Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB 05/22, Procedural Order No. 3
(31 March 2006), §146.

Page 28 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

81.

82.

83.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

possibility of monetary compensation does not necessarily eliminate the possible need for

interim measures” .”

The Claimants contend that the approach of the tribunal in City Oriente should be followed.
There, the tribunal held, referring to Article 17A of the UNCITRAL Model Law:

It is not essential that provisional measures be necessary to prevent irreparable
harm, but that the harm spared the petitioner by such measures must be significant
and that it exceeds greatly the damage caused to the party affected thereby.”
The Claimants emphasise that in City Oriente, the Ecuadorian State Attorney General
announced the filing of a criminal complaint and eventually filed two criminal complaints
against the claimant's executives. The tribunal considered that the provisional measures
requested by the claimant — including the stay of all proceedings affecting the claimant's
offices or employees — “are necessary to preserve Claimant's rights and the claims it has

asserted” in the arbitration.*!

In particular, the tribunal found that “pending a decision on this dispute, the principle that
neither party may aggravate or extend the dispute or take justice into their own hands
prevails” over Ecuador's sovereign right to prosecute and punish crimes.” For these
reasons, the tribunal ordered Ecuador to “take such measures as may be necessary in order
that the Ecuadorian prosecutor's office will not pursue any procedures or make any

inquiries that may affect claimant or claimant's offices or employees, or which may require

Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden East Company and CJSC Vostokneftegaz Company v The Government of Mongolia,
UNCITRAL, Order on Interim Measures (2 September 2008), §68.

City Oriente Limited v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador), ICSID Case
No. ARB/06/21, Decision on Revocation of Provisional Measures and other Procedural Matters (13 May 2008),
§72.

Claimants’ Request, §167, quoting City Oriente Limited v The Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos
del Ecuador (Petroecuador), ICSID Case No. ARB/06/21, Decision on Revocation of Provisional Measures and
Other Procedural Matters (13 May 2008), §57.

City Oriente Limited v The Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador), \CSID Case
No. ARB/06/21, Decision on Provisional Measures (19 November 2007), §§57, 62.

Page 29 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

84.

85.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

them to make an appearance, throughout the full force and effect of this provisional

measure” .3

(xi) The Provisional Measures are Proportionate

Finally, the Claimants contend that the provisional measures are proportionate. Invoking
what was said by the tribunal in Paushok v Mongolia, the Claimants assert that the Tribunal
“is called upon to weigh the balance of inconvenience in the imposition of the [provisional

measures] upon the parties” .*

In this regard, the Claimants assert that ordering the Respondent to suspend the criminal
investigations against Mr Gavrilovi¢ concerning acts that occurred more than 20 years ago
and restraining further harassment or intimidation would not harm the public interest of
Croatia or its citizens. A mere stay of criminal investigations does not seriously affect the
sovereign rights of a state. The Claimants point out that the Respondent could have
initiated the investigation more than 20 years ago; therefore, a decision to stay that process
now has little or no impact on the Respondent's sovereign rights. Likewise, no prejudice
results from prohibiting the Respondent from publicising any allegations against the
Claimants until proven. On the other hand, the Claimants will suffer substantial and

irreparable harm without the provisional measures.

Id, $66.
Sergei Paushok v The Government of Mongolia, UNCITRAL, Order on Interim Measures (2 September 2008), §79.

Claimants’ Request, §170, citing Quiborax SA Non Metallic Minerals SA & Allan Fosk Kaplin v Plurinational State
of Bolivia, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures (26 February 2010), §165; Lao Holdings
NV o The Lao People’s Democratic Republic, ICSID Case No ARB(AF)/12/6, Ruling on Motion to Amend the
Provisional Measures Order (30 May 2014), §74.

Page 30 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

86.

87.

88.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures
(B) The Respondent's Reply
(i) Introduction

The Respondent contends that the Claimants’ Request should be dismissed in its entirety.

Its case is encapsulated in §2 of its Reply:

There is no material risk of serious or irreparable injury to the Claimants’ existing
rights. Specifically, neither the First Claimant's physical integrity nor the Second
Claimant's existence are at risk, nor is there any other grave threat of serious harm.
The Respondent has not engaged in any intimidation or harassment of the
Claimants or any witnesses. Access to and integrity of evidence is unimpaired.
Equality of arms is maintained, and the Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction is not
threatened. There is no question here that cannot await the outcome of this
arbitration.

(ii) Factual Background in Summary

The Respondent identifies the two events that the Claimants rely upon to found their
Request as (i) the health and safety inspections conducted at the premises of Gavrilovi¢
d.o.o. and, in particular, the inspection of 21 October 2014; and (ii) the criminal investigation

of Mr Gavrilovic.

The Respondent contends that both of these events have been misdescribed and

mischaracterised by the Claimants. The Respondent asserts, in summary:

(a) as to (i) — the health and safety inspections — the number of health and safety inspections
since the Claimant has filed its Request for Arbitration has decreased, rather than
increased, and the inspection on 21 October 2014 was conducted in good faith, with
respect for due process and has involved serious violations of EU health and safety

laws; and

(b) as to (ii) — the criminal investigation of Mr Gavrilovic, which was initiated before the
commencement of this arbitration and is legally justified, has been conducted in good

faith and does not undermine the integrity of the arbitral process.

Page 31 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

89.

90.

91.

92.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures
(iii) Factual Background: The Health and Safety Inspections

The Respondent contends that the two factual premises upon which the Claimants rely —
namely that throughout 2014, Gavrilovié d.o.o. was subjected to a vastly increasing number
of health and safety inspections and that the “dawn raid” on 21 October 2014 was excessive

~are false.

As to the number of inspections, the Respondent asserts that in 2012, there were 171
planned and seven unplanned inspections, in 2013, there were 88 planned and eight
unplanned inspections and, in 2014, there were 24 planned and three unplanned

inspections.® The allegation is, thus, unsubstantiated and undeveloped.

As to the 21 October 2014 inspection, the Respondent states that:

(a) it was a standard health inspection, ordered on the basis of an anonymous complaint;
(b) the inspection was conducted in good faith and respected due process; and

(c) the inspection revealed numerous breaches of EU health and safety regulations and

infringements of corresponding provisions of Croatian law.

(iv) Factual Background: The Criminal Investigation

Turning now to the factual background to the criminal investigation of Mr Gavrilovic¢, the
Respondent contends that the allegations made by the Claimants are also false. In this
regard, the bases identified by the Claimants —- each of which are contested by the
Respondent — are that “the Respondent's investigation of Mr Gavrilovi¢ was a direct

response to the commencement of this arbitration, not a bona fide use of police powers to

Respondent's Reply, §11; Exhibit R-0089.

Page 32 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

93.

94.

95.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

investigate [crime]” and that the “Respondent has already used its investigat[ory] powers

to intimidate actual or potential witnesses” .”

In relation to the former, the Respondent contends that the public prosecution service
opened its inquiry into the relevant events in 2011 before the Claimants commenced this
arbitration, on 16 November 2012. In this regard, it relies on the fact that, in 2010, with the
passing of the War Profiteering Act, a complaint was received by the public prosecution
service in Zagreb alleging a number of illegalities in respect of the sale of the five Gavrilovi¢

companies to Mr Gavrilovic.

Further, the Respondent contends that it was not until early 2014 that the focus of the
investigation turned to Mr Gavrilovi¢ himself. The Respondent states that Mr Pape’
independently approached the public prosecution service for the first time at around this
time with information concerning the events surrounding the sale to Mr Gavrilovi¢ of the
five companies in bankruptcy. The Respondent relies, in particular, on the following

summary of Mr Pape’’ interview:

Mr Pape& alleged during the interview and produced documentation confirming
that, in March 1992, a couple of days after informing Mr Gavrilovi¢ that he had
deposited DEM2,000,000 of State money [in] a bank account in Frankfurt,
Mr Gavrilovi¢ came to his house with then Minister of Finance, Mr Joso Martinovic¢,
who requested that Mr Pape transfer that money to Mr Gavrilovic. Mr Papes did
so.

This evidence, according to the Respondent, precipitated the expansion of the inquiry and
interviews with further individuals. The Respondent contends, however, that none of these
witnesses who were interviewed after Mr PapeS approached the public prosecution service

are among the Claimants’ witnesses in the arbitration or employed by Gavrilovi¢ d.o.0.

Claimants’ Request, §§15, 11.

Respondent's Reply, §28 (citations omitted).

Page 33 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

96.

97.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

On 25 November 2014, pursuant to Article 27(1) of the Criminal Procedure Act, USKOK
issued the Investigation Decision referred to in the Claimants’ Request. In this regard, the

Respondent contends that:

(a) Mr Gavrilovi¢ was provided with all information gathered during the inquiry;

(b) the Investigation Decision was issued on the basis that there is a reasonable suspicion
that: (i) as an accessory, Mr Gavrilovi¢ induced another to commit the criminal offence
of abuse of office and official authority; and (ii) as principal, Mr Gavrilovi¢ committed

the criminal offence of abuse of office and official authority;

S

the underlying facts of the investigation are set out therein; and

(d) in accordance with the due process rights provided by Article 218 of the Criminal
Procedure Act, Mr Gavrilovi¢ appealed the Investigation Decision. The County Court
in Zagreb held that the evidence collected during the pre-investigation stage satisfied
the threshold required to establish a reasonable suspicion for the commission of the

offences.®

In relation to the Claimants’ allegation that the Respondent has already used its
investigatory powers to intimidate actual or potential witnesses, the Respondent contends
that the investigation is being conducted in good faith, namely with the exclusive purpose
of enforcing, and adhering to, its criminal law. By way of particularisation, the Respondent

points out that:

(a) it is a party to the United Nations Convention Against Corruption and is committed to

its enforcement;

Ruling of the Investigating Judge of the County Court in Zagreb, Ref No: 3 Kir-Us-551/14 (9 December 2014),
Exhibit C-0201.

Page 34 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

98.

o

a

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

(b) the public prosecution service is duty-bound to inquire into, investigate and prosecute
alleged offences where a reasonable suspicion exists that those offences have been

committed;

(c) the expert evidence of Professor Petar Novoselec, the former President of the Criminal
Division of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Croatia and former head of the
Criminal Law Department at the University of Zagreb, shows that reasonable suspicion
exists and the Investigation Decision is compliant with Croatian law and European

Union standards;

(d) the public prosecution has at all times protected the rights of Mr Gavrilovi¢, which are

enshrined in Croatian law.

(e) the criminal investigation is legally justified because the evidence establishes a
reasonable suspicion that: (i) Mr Gavrilovi¢é induced Mr Martinovi¢ to commit the
criminal offence of abuse of office and official authority; and (ii) Mr Gavrilovic as

principal committed the criminal offence of abuse of office and official authority;

Thus, according to the Respondent, the criminal investigation respects due process, and the
rights of the individuals are at all times respected. In this regard, the Respondent states
that “[t]he Claimants make outrageous and irresponsible statements about the pre-
investigation stage of the proceedings, alleging that the Croatian police and public
prosecution service have abused their powers to threaten witnesses and interrogate them
under pressure” .“* The Respondent contends that none of these allegations is supported by

any evidence.

See Professor Petar Novosalec’s expert report dated 27 January 2015.
The Respondent also relies on Professor Petar Novosalec’s expert report dated 27 January 2015 in this regard.

Respondent's Reply, $57.

Page 35 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

99.

100.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

Further, the Respondent rejects the Claimants’ “generalisations about the Croatian criminal
justice system”. The Respondent describes the Claimants’ appeal to the most extreme
procedural measures as “a baseless caricature”. In that regard, the Respondent notes that
it has not sought any of the measures identified by the Claimants, namely “special
discovery measures” or “precautionary measures”. Specifically, in relation to the detention
of a person pursuant to investigative detention, the Respondent notes that “there is no
suggestion that Mr Gavrilovic is a flight-risk, or that special circumstances exist that would
indicate, at this stage, that Mr Gavrilovi¢ has or will tamper with evidence, commit a further
offence, hinder the conduct of the criminal investigation, or fail to show up at a court
hearing”. Further, given Mr Gavrilovie’s age, only in “exceptional circumstances” would

detention be appropriate.

It bears emphasis that, with regard to the conduct of the criminal investigation, the

Respondent specifically contends as follows:

[T]he investigation has shown the utmost respect for Mr Gavrilovi¢’s due process
rights and, as required by the Criminal Procedure Act, will continue to do so going
forward.

The Criminal Procedure Act ensures that, during the questioning, Mr Gavrilovic’s
basic rights, including his due process rights, will be respected. In particular, (i)
prior to the questioning, the respective authority must confirm that Mr Gavrilovi¢
has received and understood the list of basic rights provided with the Investigation
Decision, (ii) Mr Gavrilovic’s lawyer must be present at the questioning; (iii) the
questioning must be filmed; (iv) Mr Gavrilovi¢ is entitled to use notes during the
questioning and must be given the opportunity to comment on all the circumstances
surrounding the alleged offences and to present all the facts supporting his defence,

Respondent's Reply, §II(2)(b)(ii).
Respondent's Reply, §66.
Respondent's Reply, §71.
Respondent's Reply, §73.

Page 36 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

101.

102.

103.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

and (v) following the questioning, Mr Gavrilovi¢ must be given the opportunity to
fill any gaps and remove any contradictions or ambiguities in his statement.

..If charged, Mr Gavrilovi¢ is ... entitled to submit an objection to the indictment
within eight days from the day of its service. ...

...[T]he only measures that could, allegedly, prevent Mr Gavrilovi¢ from fully
participating — “precautionary measures” or investigative detention — will not and
could not be applied, as the particular facts of the Case and Mr Gavrilovic’s personal
circumstances do not warrant them.”

(v) The Criminal Investigation in no Way Interferes with the Arbitration

Before turning to the requirements for the granting of provisional measures, the
Respondent argues that the criminal investigation will not interfere in any way with the
arbitration by making the resolution of the ICSID dispute more difficult. In this regard, the

Respondent makes three submissions.

First, the criminal investigation does not affect the Claimants’ rights to pursue this
arbitration. In this regard, the Respondent asserts that any “precautionary measures” and
investigative detention will not be applied; thus, the on-going investigation does not
prevent the Claimants’ participation in the arbitration. The Respondent also points to the
fact that, even if charged, Mr Gavrilovié will remain at liberty for the course of the trial and

will be able to fully participate in the arbitration.

Second, the criminal investigation does not prevent any witnesses from testifying or
sharing information with the Claimants or their lawyers. Indeed, the Respondent contends
that only one of the Claimants’ witnesses has been interviewed, and emphasises that “with
the exception of this one witness, none of the Claimants’ witnesses will be questioned
during the course of the formal investigation’.® Further, the Respondent states that

individuals interviewed by the public prosecution service will be at liberty to discuss with

Respondent's Reply, §§58, 63, 76 (citations omitted; emphasis added).

Respondent's Reply, $78.

Page 37 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

104.

105.

106.

107.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

the Claimants and their representatives everything they know about the subject matter of
the arbitration; the only restriction is that those individuals are unable to discuss what was
revealed to them by the public prosecution service, which given the nature of the
interviews, would be limited to who conducted the interview, the documents shown and.

the questions asked.

Third, the criminal investigation does not disadvantage the Claimants or advantage the
Respondent. In this regard, the Respondent points to the fact that the public prosecution
service has not collected any evidence beyond that which is strictly necessary for the
inquiry. Further, in short, it contends that: (a) whatever may have been the case during the
inquiry that led to the Investigation Decision, when the exact nature and characterisation
of the offences was not known, the investigation is now limited to those alleged offences
cited in the Investigation Decision; (b) the investigation and arbitration are being carried
out by distinct agencies — respectively, the public prosecution service and the civil division
of the State Attorney’s Office — and the work of the former is confidential and the substance
of its inquiries cannot be disclosed; and (c) Mr Gavrilovi¢ has, and has already exercised,

the right to request the entire case file of the investigation.

(vi) The Requirements for Granting Provisional Measures

The Respondent notes that it is common ground that this Tribunal has power to grant
provisional measures under specific conditions. It makes submissions directed to four

topics.

First, in relation to the legal framework, the Respondent submits that Article 47 of the ICSID

Convention and Rule 39 govern the Tribunal’s power to recommend provisional measures.

Second, the Respondent emphasises that the Claimants bear the burden of proof of
establishing the requirements for provisional measures. In this regard, the Respondent

contends that the Claimants must provide sufficient evidence to show that the Tribunal has

Page 38 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

108.

109.

110.

111.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

prima facie jurisdiction, that there is an urgent need for the requested measures and that the

Claimants have a prima facie case on the merits.

Third, and without prejudice to its jurisdictional objections, the Respondent does not
contest that the Tribunal need not satisfy itself of its jurisdiction in respect of the merits of
the dispute for the purposes of determining the Claimants’ Request. Nevertheless, the
Respondent points out that provisional measures are not a means to expand the jurisdiction
of the Tribunal, and contends that the fact that it has raised serious preliminary objections
in relation to admissibility and jurisdiction is relevant to the Tribunal’s exercise of

discretion in relation to the Claimants’ Request.

Fourth, and most fulsomely, the Respondent identifies a number of factors which inform

the appropriateness (or otherwise) of provisional measures.

The first factor the Respondent identifies is the exceptional nature of provisional measures.
The Respondent cites Phoenix Action v Czech Republic, where the tribunal reasoned that
“provisional measures are extraordinary measures which should not be recommended

lightly”. The Respondent explains:

The core rationale for provisional measures is to protect the object of the litigation,
ie. the decision to be given. Neither party should render proceedings meaningless
or frustrate a potential result. Those are evidently extreme situations.”

Further, the Respondent argues that particular stringency is required where, as in this case,

the jurisdiction of the tribunal has not yet been established, citing Perenco v Ecuador.” It

Phoenix Action Ltd v The Czech Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/5, Decision on Provisional Measures (6 April
2007), §33.

Respondent's Reply, $99.

Perenco Ecuador Ltd v The Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador), 1CSID Case
No. ARB/08/6, Decision on Provisional Measures (8 May 2009), §59.

Page 39 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

112.

113.

114.

115.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

emphasises the high threshold to be met, relying on the commentary of Kaufmann-Kohler

and Antonietti, who explain:

[A]pplicants are faced with a high threshold when seeking to establish that the
interim relief requested is urgent and needed. This may explain the reluctance of
the vast majority of the tribunals to grant interim relief in the context of investor-
state arbitration, whether in the ICSID system or under UNCITRAL rules.

Finally, the Respondent asserts that this stringency is further supported by the fact that the

Tribunal can review any conclusion it reaches now, if relevant circumstances change.

The second factor to which the Respondent points is the existence of a right requiring
preservation. In this regard, the Respondent emphasises that the purpose of provisional
measures is to safeguard existing rights, not to assert hypothetical rights or prejudge the

substance of a dispute.

The third factor identified by the Respondent is the urgent necessity to avoid irreparable
harm. The Respondent contends that, consistently with the exceptional nature of
provisional measures, provisional measures may only be issued if they are necessary and

urgent.” The Respondent contends:

A measure is said to be necessary if it is required to avoid a party causing or
threatening irreparable prejudice to the rights invoked. Accordingly, where less
intrusive relief is available, typically monetary damages, provisional measures are
inappropriate.”

Further, the Respondent points to established international legal practice, including past

decisions of ICSID tribunals, which it contends does not recognise a need for provisional

G Kaufmann-Kohler & A Antonietti, “Interim Relief in International Investment Agreements” in K Yannaca-
Small, Arbitration under International Investment Agreements: A Guide to the Key Issues (OUP, 2010), p 550.

Respondent's Reply, §107, citing Quiborax SA, Non Metallic Minerals SA & Allan Fosk Kapliin » Plurinational
State of Bolivia, [CSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures (26 February 2010), §113.

Respondent's Reply, §108 (citations omitted).

Page 40 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

116.

117.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

measures in situations where the alleged prejudice, if established, can be readily repaired
by an award of damages at a later stage of the proceedings. It quotes the CEMEX tribunal,

which, on the basis of a survey of the relevant cases, concluded:

In the light of the preceding analysis, the Tribunal sees no reason not to retain the
generally accepted standard of ‘irreparable harm’ as criterion for the “necessity”
required by Article 47 of the ICSID Convention.”

It follows, the Respondent argues, that a measure can be considered to be urgent only where
the action which would irreparably harm the rights of a party is very likely to be taken
before a final decision is rendered. That is, the Respondent submits that the threatened

harm must be imminent, and not just theoretical.

The fourth factor raised by the Respondent is the fact that conducting criminal
investigations is the duty of a State. The Respondent contends that “[s]imply by virtue that
they filed for ICSID arbitration, the Claimants cannot seek to prevent [the] criminal
investigation of Mr Gavrilovi¢, when the competent authorities have independently
established that wrongful conduct is likely to have occurred”.” Further, the Respondent
submits that provisional measures in the context of domestic criminal investigation require
“special consideration”, such criminal law being an obvious and undisputed part of State
sovereignty. It follows, the Respondent says, that “the already high threshold ... for
recommending provisional measures is further increased in the context of criminal
investigations”.” The Respondent relies on various ICSID authorities to support this

position.”

CEMEX Caracas Investments BV and CEMEX Caracas II Investments BV v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID
Case No. ARB/08/15, Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures (3 March 2010), §§46, 56.

Respondent's Reply, $116.
Respondent's Reply, $117.

See, eg, Caratube International Oil Company LLP v The Republic of Kazakhstan, 1CSID Case No. ARB/08/12,
Decision Regarding Claimant's Application for Provisional Measures (31 July 2009), §137; Churchill Mining
and Planet Mining Pty Ltd v Republic of Indonesia, 1CSID Case No. ARB/12/14 & 12/40, Procedural Order No. 14

Page 41 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

118.

119.

120.

121.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures
(vii) The Circumstances do not Justify Provisional Measures

The Respondent accepts that the following are existing rights vested in all disputing parties
and, in principle, susceptible of protection: (i) the integrity of an arbitration; (ii) non-
aggravation of a dispute; (iii) equality of arms; and (iv) the exclusivity of ICSID

proceedings.

But, according to the Respondent, there are six reasons that point against the

recommendation of provisional measures in this case, each of which is set out below.

() The Claimants are not entitled to confidential or privileged
information under the guise of a request for provisional measures

This contention responds to the Claimants’ request that they be provided “all evidence
collected during the course of the criminal investigations to date, and any such evidence
collected in the future”.”? The Respondent objects in particular to the inclusion within this
category of correspondence between the Respondent and its legal counsel in the ICSID

arbitration.

The Respondent characterises the Claimants’ application for such an order as, in reality, an
application for disclosure, rather than a request for provisional measures. In that regard,
the Respondent submits that provisional measures cannot give the Claimants more rights
than they possess and can claim. More specifically, the Respondent explains that “the
Claimants have no existing right to confidential information or privileged documentation,

including correspondence with counsel”.*

(22 December 2014), §72; Quiborax SA, Non Metallic Minerals SA & Allan Fosk Kapliin v Plurinational State of
Bolivia, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures (26 February 2010), §129; SGS Société
Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1CSID Case No. ARB/01/13, Procedural Order No. 2
(16 October 2002), §36.

Claimants’ Request, Section IV, §(iv).

Respondent's Reply, §128.

Page 42 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

122.

123.

124.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures
(I) The integrity of the arbitral proceedings is not at risk

Regarding the Claimants’ reliance on the threat to the integrity of the arbitral proceeding
as a basis for the provisional measures, the Respondent points, as a general matter, to the
fact that “it is established tribunal practice that an exercise of the procedural power to
safeguard the integrity of the proceedings is an extraordinary step that should be resorted
to only if extreme circumstances have been established”.*! Further, the Respondent
contends that the Claimants’ two assertions concerning access to, and integrity of, evidence
— supposed interference with witnesses and supposed efforts to improperly obtain evidence

— are without merit.

Turning first to access to and integrity of witness evidence, the Respondent contends that
the Claimants have not particularised any concrete instance of harassment, intimidation or
otherwise abusive behaviour regarding actual or potential witnesses that would endanger
the integrity of the arbitration. Rather, it characterises the Claimants’ Request as one

“replete with unsubstantiated supposition”

In short, the Respondent contends that the Claimants have identified no witnesses who can
give evidence of such matters. Insofar as the Claimants rely on the testimony of persons
such as Ms LuZaic¢, the Respondent points to the fact that, first, she has provided a witness
statement and is not in any way prevented from participating in the proceedings, and,
second and in any case, it is difficult to see how her questioning in relation to the semi-
durable sausage production in an unrelated health and safety matter could impair the

Claimants’ ability to fairly present their case in this arbitration. Further, the Respondent

Respondent's Reply, §133, citing Commerce Group Corp & San Sebastian Gold Mines Inc v Republic of El Salvador,
ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17, Decision on El Salvador’s Application for Security for Costs (20 September 2012),
§g44-45.

Respondent's Reply, $136.

Page 43 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

contends that decisions regarding provisional measures are highly context-dependent and,

on this basis alone, Quiborax and Lao Holdings can be distinguished.

Insofar as the Claimants point to Croatian law and criminal procedure in support of this
limb of their argument, the Respondent contends that their submissions are misleading.
Two points are highlighted by the Respondent: (a) the standard instructions public
prosecutors are obliged to issue to interviewees do not prevent them from appearing as
witnesses or divulging personal knowledge in the arbitration - those instructions prevent
only disclosure of confidential information given to him or her by the State; (b) people are
invited back for interviews because information gathered in the (preliminary) inquiry stage

is inadmissible in criminal proceedings, so official questioning must occur at a later point.

As to the independence of the criminal investigation from the arbitration, the Respondent
points, again, to the fact that there is no substantiation by the Claimants of any evidence
having been improperly obtained. In relation to the commencement of the investigation,
the Respondent explains, as it has already, that the inquiry commenced in 2011, nearly two
years before the Claimants initiated the arbitration. Further, the Respondent contends that
the decisive evidence supporting the Respondent's preliminary objections and the
documentation relevant thereto was obtained independently from the criminal
investigation and the health inspections. The Respondent identifies three sources, namely
Mr Pape§, the Claimants’ voluntary disclosure in the course of the arbitration and the
original bankruptcy file, none of which were obtained through improper use of the criminal

investigative powers of the State.

See Quiborax SA, Non Metallic Minerals SA & Allan Fosk Kapliin v Plurinational State of Bolivia, CSID Case No.
ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures (26 February 2010), §§142-146 and Lao Holdings NV v The Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, ICSID Case No ARB(AF)/12/6, Ruling on Motion to Amend the Provisional
Measures Order (30 May 2014), §§28, 32, 37, 40.

Page 44 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

127.

128.

129.

130.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

The Respondent also argues in this regard that the issues and evidence in the arbitration
are not identical to those in the criminal investigation. It submits that the arbitration
concerns the Respondent’s purported treaty violations and the Claimants’ claim for
damages, while the criminal investigation is about whether Mr Gavrilovi¢ embezzled
corporate funds and incited a government minister to abuse his position. Similarly, the
Respondent contends that the core issues and arguments are distinct, pointing out that the
bankruptcy irregularities at issue in the arbitration are civil law matters while the criminal

investigation concerns abuse of a management position by Mr Gavrilovic¢.

The Respondent contends that the criminal investigation is not, as the Claimants allege, a
fishing expedition. It asserts that the asking of what the Claimants describe as irrelevant
questions during the informal process is explicable on the basis that a preliminary inquiry
will cover more ground than that which is ultimately the subject of a formal investigation.
And, even if some irrelevant questions were asked, the Respondent submits that this cannot

imply coercion, bad faith or that the rights of the Claimants are being defeated.

Finally, the Respondent contends that it has always acted transparently in informing the
Tribunal of its criminal investigation, including by providing the Tribunal with a copy of
its letter dated 12 December 2014. The Respondent rejects the Claimants’ argument that
this letter constitutes an admission that the investigation serves the arbitration, and argues
that in any event, “even an admission that an investigation was directed at conduct relevant

to a defence in an arbitration would not itself be a sufficient basis for enjoining a State”.+

(III) The Investigation Decision does not affect the regular, fair and orderly
conduct of this arbitration

Third, the Respondent contends that the Investigation Decision does not affect the regular,

fair and orderly conduct of the arbitration. Insofar as the Claimants contend that the

Respondent's Reply, §178, citing Lao Holdings NV v The Lao People’s Democratic Republic, ICSID Case No
ARB(AF)/12/6, Ruling on Motion to Amend the Provisional Measures Order (30 May 2014), §29.

Page 45 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

131.

132.

133.

134.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

Investigation Decision disrupts the status quo and aggravates the dispute because
Mr Gavrilovic is at risk of incarceration and Gavrilovi¢ d.o.o. suffers threats to its continued
existence, the Respondent contends that these submissions are wrong in fact and law.
Before turning to those matters, the Respondent emphasises that the Claimants have not

satisfied the burden of proving such egregious conduct.

As to Mr Gavrilovic’s personal integrity, the Respondent contends that the proposition that
he is at risk of incarceration or personal endangerment is impossible to credit.° The
Respondent again points to the fact that Mr Gavrilovic¢ continues to enjoy the full range of
due process rights. In short, therefore, the Respondent's position is that the Claimants have
not shown, and cannot show, that the Respondent has engaged in, or will engage in, the

alleged harassment, intimidation, seizure or any other abusive treatment of Mr Gavrilovic¢.

Further, the Respondent points to the fact that Mr Gavrilovi¢ has not brought any judicial
review proceedings, any criminal complaints, any civil action concerning the accusations
made in the Request with respect to his personal well-being or that of his family or any
objection to the conduct of the public prosecution service. Notably, even though
Mr Gavrilovi¢é brought his appeal against the Investigation Decision, he made no

allegations therein about the risk of abuse that is the subject of the Request.

Insofar as the Claimants otherwise pursue this ground, the Respondent contends that the
submissions involve generalised misrepresentations of Croatian law and criminal

procedure, as to which the Respondent's submissions have been summarised at §125 above.

The Respondent summarises its contentions in this regard as follows:

In sum, the Claimants have not demonstrated how the resolution of this arbitration
is being made more difficult by the Investigation Decision, let alone any abusive

At the time of the Reply, the Respondent was able to contend that Mr Gavrilovié had not even been invited to
be formally questioned, but that has now changed: see §17 above.

Page 46 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

135.

136.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

conduct or threat to [Mr Gavrilovi¢’s] liberty or welfare. The offences that form the
subject of the investigation in Croatia are not claims before this Tribunal. They will
not affect the Claimants’ pursuit of their monetary claims here or the Tribunal’s
ability to dispose of them. Provisional measures are hence inappropriate.*

As to the continued existence of Gavrilovi¢ d.o.o. or any risk to it of substantial damages,
the Respondent again points to the fact that the Claimants have not provided any evidence
demonstrating that any of the Respondent's alleged actions threaten to, as they say,

“destroy the Claimants’ investments” 6” The Respondent contends that:

(a) Mr Gavrilovic’s ownership of Gavrilovi¢ d.o.o. and the corresponding shares is not
contested, whether by the Investigation Decision, the health and safety inspection of 21

October 2014, or otherwise;

(b) there is no indication that the relationship between the foreign investor and the host

State will come to an end;

(c) the official documentation of the Ministry of Agriculture’s Directorate for Veterinary
and Food Safety shows that any health and safety inspections are instances of genuine

concern by Croatian authorities, and nothing more;

(d) as to the Investigation Decision, there is no evidence that this will, or could, cause

Gavrilovic¢ d.o.0.’s imminent demise or seriously harm it; and

(e) in any case, there is no reason why any such damage could not be compensated by an

award of monetary damages.

Further, the Respondent contends that Gavrilovic¢ d.o.o. is not being intimidated, harassed.

or otherwise harmed. Highlighting that there is no evidence to support the Claimants’

Respondent's Reply, §199 (citations omitted).

Claimants’ Request, §165.

Page 47 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

137.

138.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

contentions, the Respondent argues that the criminal investigation is based on reasonable
suspicion, that there is no basis for the allegation that the number of health and safety
inspections has increased, and that the inspection on 21 October 2014 was warranted on the
facts. These submissions have been summarised above. Specifically, in relation to the
inspection on 21 October 2014, the Respondent further emphasises that any allegation that
employees of Gavrilovi¢ d.o.o. were mistreated is contradicted by the fact that no complaint

was made at the time.

Finally in relation to this factor — the fact that these matters do not affect the regular, fair
and orderly conduct of the arbitration — the Respondent refutes the allegation that there has
been an orchestrated “media campaign” against the Claimants. It contends that, first, the
Respondent has not publicised any information on the inspection of 21 October 2014 or the
investigation, and, second, and in any case, freedom of the press is a constitutional right in

Croatia and any publicity cannot be attributed to the Respondent.

(IV) _ Equality of arms is maintained
The Respondent refutes the allegation that it has upset the equality of arms between the
Parties. Noting that it is common ground that equality of arms denotes basic procedural
fairness including equal rights to be heard and put one’s case, the Respondent points to its
previous submissions, summarised above, that the Claimants’ capacity to argue their
claims, including through witnesses, has not been effected. That leaves only what the
Respondent contends is a groundless assertion of inequality derived from the Respondent’s
status as a State. The Claimants’ factual allegations, including describing the surveillance

of the Claimants as an “open secret”, are not supported by evidence.

Claimants’ Request, §134.

Page 48 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

139.

140.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures
(V) The Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction is not being usurped

This fifth point addresses the Claimants’ argument that the current and future criminal
proceedings should be enjoined to maintain the exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings
enshrined in Article 26 of the ICSID Convention. The Respondent contends that Article 26
protects the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to resolve the investment dispute before it. Citing
various ICSID awards,” the Respondent contends that exclusivity extends only to
investment disputes and does not apply to criminal investigations. With respect to this
case, the Respondent contrasts the subject matter of the arbitration, which concerns whether
the Respondent has breached international obligations under Articles 2, 3(1), 4(1) and 8(2)
of the BIT, with that of the criminal investigation, which concerns whether the legal and
evidential requirements to charge Mr Gavrilovi¢ are satisfied. The Respondent further
submits that, since the subject matter and facts are not identical, the evidence is also
different. It follows, the Respondent contends, that the criminal proceedings initiated in
Croatia do not threaten the exclusivity of the ICSID arbitration or the jurisdiction of the

Tribunal.

The Respondent further contends that, in any case, as several ICSID tribunals have

explained,” a mere relation between criminal proceeding and an investment arbitration

See Emilio Agustin Maffezini v The Kingdom of Spain, 1CSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Procedural Order No. 2 (28
October 1999), §23; Tokios Tokelés v Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Procedural Order No. 1 (1 July 2003),
§1; Lao Holdings NV v The Lao People’s Democratic Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/6, Ruling on Motion to
Amend the Provisional Measures Order (30 May 2014), §21; Perenco Ecuador Ltd v The Republic of Ecuador and
Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador), ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6, Decision on Provisional
Measures (8 May 2009), §59; Churchill Mining and Planet Mining Pty Ltd v. Republic of Indonesia, CSID Case No.
ARB/12/14 & 12/40, Procedural Order No. 9 (8 July 2014), §86; Quiborax SA Non Metallic Minerals SA & Allan
Fosk Kapliin v Plurinational State of Bolivia, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures (26
February 2010), §129.

See, eg, Quiborax SA, Non Metallic Minerals SA & Allan Fosk Kapliin v Plurinational State of Bolivia, ICSID Case
No. ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures (26 February 2010), §128; Churchill Mining and Planet Mining
Pty Ltd v Republic of Indonesia, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/14 & 12/40, Procedural Order No. 9 (8 July 2014), §85.

Page 49 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

141.

142.

143.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

does not threaten the exclusivity of an arbitration. In particular, any duplicate use of

materials or evidence is not improper, as the tribunal explained in Quiborax:

Even if the criminal proceedings result in evidence that is later used by Respondent
in this arbitration, that would not undermine the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to resolve
the Claimants’ claims, if such jurisdiction is established at the appropriate
procedural instance.”

(VI) Provisional measures are neither urgent nor necessary

Sixth, and finally, the Respondent contends that the provisional measures are neither
urgent nor necessary. In short, the Respondent contends that it has not taken any on-going
actions, or is not currently taking any actions, that impact the Claimants’ identified rights
in this arbitration. In particular, the Respondent refutes the Claimants’ contention that
urgency is “satisfied easily in practice”,” instead contending that the circumstances must

be serious and extreme.

In regard to this sixth point, the Respondent makes three submissions.

First, it contends that the measures requested are not required to achieve their stated aim.
More specifically, the Respondent says that, even leaving aside the Claimants’ failure to
demonstrate substantial or irreparable harm, restraining the criminal investigation is not
required to safeguard Mr Gavrilovi¢’s physical integrity. At the time of the Reply, the
Respondent also contended that there was no urgency on the basis that Mr Gavrilovi¢ had
not yet been invited for questioning. The Respondent also relies on Mr Gavrilovic’s
constitutionally guaranteed presumption of innocence and right of defence. Further, the
Respondent emphasises that there are no other criminal investigatory actions or criminal

proceedings initiated against Mr Gavrilovi¢, and there is no urgency attendant to the

Quiborax SA, Non Metallic Minerals SA & Allan Fosk Kaplin v Plurinational State of Bolivia, \CSID Case No.
ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures (26 February 2010), §130.

Claimants’ Request, §148.

Page 50 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

144.

145.

of

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

conduct and frequency of food inspections. Insofar as any loss arises from the improper
publications of allegations of health and safety violations, which the Respondent denies,

damages would be adequate compensation.

Second, the measures requested by the Claimants would, the Respondents say, constitute a
disproportionate interference with the sovereignty of the Republic of Croatia. The
Respondent emphasises that the balancing between the prejudice to be suffered by each
party cannot be used to circumvent the particularly high threshold to be met by the
Claimants, where the subject matter of the application for provisional measures is a
criminal investigation. The Respondent submits that “[a] tribunal should be mindful not
to unduly encroach on State activities serving the public interest [and] [i]Jnvestigation and

prevention of crime are paramount amongst these”.

Third and finally, the Respondent contends that the measures sought are too broad and
unspecific. In particular, they constitute a disproportionate interference with the
sovereignty of the Republic of Croatia, and any compliance would be impossible and
unsafe. The Respondent points to the ambiguity surrounding what investigations or
proceedings are “relate[d] in any way to the present arbitration” and to the imprecise and
open-ended nature of the injunction sought. And any restraint on the Respondent
providing “instructions or warnings” to potential witnesses would lead to the Respondent
being required to violate provisions of the Croatian Constitution and basic due process

requirements.

Respondent's Reply, $284.
Respondent's Reply, $287.

Page 51 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

146.

147.

148.

149.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures
(©) The Claimants’ Rejoinder

In their Rejoinder, the Claimants further refine the focus of their application. In particular,

the Claimants state:

The most important basis for Claimants’ Request, is that the Respondent has,
through a specialized crime unit under the auspices of the State Attorney's Office,
the [USKOK] concurrently with this arbitration, conducted a criminal investigation
of [Mr Gavrilovic] that is closely related to the facts of its jurisdictional objections
(though those facts occurred over 20 years ago), and on November 26, 2014, issued
[the Investigation Order].%

Pointing to the chronological order of events described in their Request, the Claimants
contend that the Respondent's characterisation of the criminal investigation as an innocent
coincidence should be rejected. Indeed, the Claimants explain that “[m]ost tellingly,
although the Respondent claims that Croatian law requires the independence of the
arbitration and litigation, it appears that a State Attorney with the civil division of the State
Attorney’s Office working on this arbitration, and a Criminal State Attorney from USKOK

were both present at at least one interrogation included in the criminal case file’”.°°

The Claimants maintain their position that: (a) the Respondent's unsubstantiated claims of
independence should be rejected, the criminal investigation should be stayed pending the
conclusion of this arbitration, and any improperly gained fruits should be made available
to the Claimants; and (b) the extraordinary health and safety inspections should also be

enjoined because such harassment threatens the very existence of the Claimants.

The Claimants’ Rejoinder is divided into two main submissions, each of which will be

considered separately, namely: (i) the Respondent misstates or mischaracterises certain

Claimants’ Rejoinder, $3.

Claimants’ Rejoinder, $5.

Page 52 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

150.

151.

152.

153.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

relevant facts; and (ii) the Claimants’ Request should be granted to safeguard the

Claimants’ rights.

(i) The Respondent Misstates or Mischaracterises Certain Relevant Facts

The Claimants’ submissions in this regard are three-fold.

First, they contend that the criminal investigation of Mr Gavrilovic¢ is directly linked to the
arbitration. Indeed, they say that “it is obvious that the criminal investigation and the

arbitration are fundamentally linked”.”

The Claimants contend that the only fact used to substantiate the commencement of the
inquiry is the file number assigned to the investigation. They emphasise the lacunae in the
Respondent's evidence, namely the failure to provide the complaint that supposedly
precipitated the investigation, the date it started and what, if anything occurred, between
2011 (when the file was allegedly opened) and 2013 (when the Claimants contend the first
undisputed action occurred on the file). The Claimants further assert that the file itself
supports the true (improper) purpose of the investigation. In this regard, the Claimants

state:

[T]he content of the criminal file shows that the true purpose of the criminal
investigation was to gain evidence for the arbitration, rather than a bona fide
investigation of Mr Gavrilovic for the crimes included in the Investigation Order, as
the evidence contained that file deals with issues such as the bankruptcy
proceedings of the Gavrilovi¢é companies, and Mr Gavrilovic’s payment for those
companies, that are not relevant to the alleged crimes Mr Gavrilovi¢ committed.*
Further, the Claimants point to the fact that three additional interviewees are named in the

Investigation Order, who have no knowledge of the matters raised by Mr Papes’ testimony,

but do have knowledge of matters related to the Respondent's jurisdictional objections.

Claimants’ Rejoinder, $9.

Claimants’ Rejoinder, §12.

Page 53 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

154.

155.

9

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

And the Claimants contend that “most concretely ... Ms Ines Videni¢, a State Attorney with
the civil division of the State Attorney’s Office whom Respondent's counsel has copied on
multiple emails to the distribution list in this arbitration, and a Criminal State Attorney
Gordana Haramina Hranilovic¢, were both present at at least one interrogation included in

the criminal case file”.

Second, the Claimants contend that the criminal investigation of Mr Gavrilovi¢ is
interfering, and will continue to interfere, with the conduct of the arbitration. They point,
again, to the wide variety of investigative powers at the State’s disposal, and identify one
other witness extensively questioned by the State Attorney in 2014, who was a long-time
employee of Gavrilovi¢ d.o.o. Further, in this regard, they repeat the content of their
Request, insofar as they allege that (i) the Respondent has approached potential key
witnesses and employees of Gavrilovi¢ d.o.o.; (ii) has warned them not to speak to
Claimants or their counsel; (iii) under threat of criminal charges; and (iv) denied them their

right to defence counsel.

In this regard, the Claimants again contend that the Investigation Order is not justified
under Croatian law; they assert that Professor Novoselec’s conclusion has no merit. They
further rely on the First and Second Deren¢inovic Opinions, which set out three matters,

each of which renders the Investigation Order inappropriate, namely:

(a) the Investigation Order does not set out a reasonable suspicion that Mr Gavrilovi¢
induced an abuse of authority. The Claimants refer to the First Derencinovi¢ Opinion,
and criticise the First Novoselec Opinion as being based on the assumption or invention

of relevant facts;

Claimants’ Rejoinder, §18.

Page 54 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

156.

10

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

(b) the limitation period applicable to the alleged crimes has long expired. In this regard,
the Claimants again point to the First Derencinovi¢ Opinion, contending that the War
Profiteering Act would be read restrictively, and thus not retrospectively. In any case,
the crimes cited in the Investigation Order do not fall within the ambit of that Act, which
applies to matters that are a direct threat to independence and territorial sovereignty of

the State; and

(

2

furthermore, USKOK does not have jurisdiction over the prosecution of Mr Gavrilovic
because he is not an “official person”, and USKOK would have power to prosecute him

only in conjunction with a prosecution of Mr Martinovic.

Third, the Claimants describe the health and safety inspections of Gavrilovi¢ d.o.o. as
extraordinary. Two broad submissions are made in response to the Respondent's Reply,

namely:

(a) the Respondent cannot claim good faith for the excessive raid, it having not even
attempted to explain the need for such police force. This is particularly so, the
Claimants say, given the fact that the matters being investigated (namely, the so-called
“fresh return” issue and the use of sodium nitrate in one sample) are minor.
Specifically, the Claimants say that “a force of around 30 armed policemen is clearly out
of proportion for investigating such violations (even if true, which Claimants deny)”;'

and

(b) the Respondent's stated number of inspections are disconnected from reality. In this
regard, the Claimants seek to draw a distinction between “ordinary” inspections and

“extraordinary” inspections, the latter of which has increased considerably. And any

Claimants’ Rejoinder, §45.

Page 55 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

157.

158.

159.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

justification for the increased health and safety inspections, including any legitimate

concern for food safety, is unfounded.

(ii) The Claimants’ Request Should be Granted to Safeguard the Claimants’ Rights

The Claimants also make four substantive submissions in response to the Respondent's
Reply, supporting their contention that the Request should be granted to safeguard the

Claimants’ rights.

First, they contend that the Respondent proposes an improperly high standard for granting

provisional measures under Article 39(1) of the ICSID Convention.

Before turning to the different approach advocated by the Claimants, some semblance of
agreement between the Parties is to be found in their concession that they appear to agree
that the fundamental standards that are applicable to a request for provisional measures
are that they are necessary to protect the rights of the applicant, they are urgent and they

are proportional. The Claimants make three specific submissions:

(a) They say that the appropriate standard is “material risk”, which is lower than
irreparable harm. In this regard, the Claimants point to the recent decision of PNG v

Papua New Guinea, where the tribunal said:

In the Tribunal’s view, the term “irreparable” harm is properly understood as
requiring a showing of a material risk of serious or grave damage to the requesting
party, and not harm that is literally “irreparable” in what is sometimes regarded
as the narrow common law sense of the term. The degree of “gravity” or
“seriousness” of harm that is necessary for an order of provisional relief cannot be
specified with precision, and depends in part on the circumstances of the case, the
nature of the relief requested and the relative harm to be suffered by each party;
suffice it to say that substantial, serious harm, even if not irreparable, is generally
sufficient to satisfy this element of the standard for granting provisional measures.

The Tribunal is also of the view that the requesting party need not prove that
“serious” harm is certain to occur. Rather, it is generally sufficient to show that

Page 56 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

101

102

103

105

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

there is a material risk that it will occur. The requirement of showing material risk
does not, however, imply a showing of any particular percentage of likelihood, or
probability, that the risk will materialize. The proper requirement is that the
requesting party must establish the existence of a sufficient risk or threat that grave
or serious harm will occur if provisional measures are not granted.'!

(b) Insofar as the Respondent relies on Perenco v Ecuador? to suggest that “particular
stringency is warranted”, the Claimants submit that this view is not shared by other
investment tribunals.’ In particular, the Claimants refer to the decision in Caratube v
Kazakhstan, where the tribunal stated that there was “no room” for the approach

followed in Perenco v Ecuador.'™

(c) The Claimants contend that the Respondent is wrong to argue that tribunals do not
question the sovereign rights and duties of States to conduct criminal cases. Instead,

the Claimants rely on Burlington v Ecuador, where the tribunal stated:

[Bly ratifying the ICSID Convention, [the Respondent State] has accepted that an
ICSID tribunal may order measures on a provisional basis, even in a situation which
may entail some interference with sovereign powers and enforcement duties.'

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd v Independent State of Papua New Guinea, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33,
Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures (21 January 2015), §§109-111 (emphasi
Claimants’ Rejoinder).

 

Perenco Ecuador Ltd v The Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador), 1CSID Case
No. ARB/08/6, Decision on Provisional Measures (8 May 2009).

See, eg, Helnan International Hotels A/S v Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/19, Decision on
Claimant's Request for Provisional Measures (17 May 2006), §27; Phoenix Action Ltd v The Czech Republic, ICSID
Case No. ARB/06/5, Decision on Provisional Measures (6 April 2007), §29; SGS Société Générale de Surveillance
S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ARB/01/13, Procedural Order No. 2 (16 October 2002), §20 Tokios Tokelés v.
Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Procedural Order No 1 (1 July 2003), §6; Railroad Development Corporation
v Republic of Guatemala, \CSID Case No. ARB/07/23, Decision on Provisional Measures (15 October 2008), §31.

Caratube International Oil Company LLP and Devincci Salah Hourani v Republic of Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No.
ARB/13/13, Decision on the Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures (4 December 2014), §108.

Burlington Resources Inc v Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (PetroEcuador), 1CSID
Case No. ARB/08/5, Procedural Order No. 1 on Burlington Resource’s Request for Provisional Measures (29
June 2009), $66.

Page 57 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

160.

161.

106

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

It follows, the Claimants contend, that the appropriate inquiry is not whether the requested
relief interferes with sovereign powers, but the ultimate prejudice caused by such
interference, compared to the prejudice the investor might suffer if the measures are not
granted. They rely on PNG v Papua New Guinea, where the tribunal stated that “in deciding
whether to grant provisional measures, tribunals also generally look to the nature of the

provisional measures that are requested, and the relative injury to be suffered by each

party”.10

Second, the Claimants submit that the requested measures are urgent and necessary to

protect the procedural integrity of the arbitration and equality of arms. They submit:

(a) The available evidence shows that the criminal investigation of Mr Gavrilovic is not
independent from the arbitration. The Claimants assert that the “strong linkage” to
which reference was made in Lao Holdings is satisfied here.'"” The Claimants again point
to the chronological link between the commencement of the arbitration and the opening
of the criminal file. They also cite the communications between the Respondent's
counsel in this arbitration and USKOK regarding their concurrent cases, as well as the
fact that “there can be no legitimate disagreement that the events relevant to
Respondent's objections to jurisdiction in the arbitration, and the evidence contained in
the criminal file and relied upon in the Investigation Order, are substantially similar, if

not identical” .1°°

(b) The criminal investigation has been, and may continue to be, used to interfere with

witnesses. The Claimants explains that the fact that certain of the allegations are not

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd v Independent State of Papua New Guinea, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33,
Decision on the Claimant's Request for Provisional Measures (21 January 2015), §113.

Lao Holdings NV v The Lao People’s Democratic Republic, ICSID Case No ARB(AF)/12/6, Ruling on Motion to
Amend the Provisional Measures Order (30 May 2014), §37.

Claimants’ Rejoinder, §69.

Page 58 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

162.

163.

164.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

supported by witness statements points to the threat of criminal prosecution if potential

witnesses were to testify.

Third, the Claimants contend that the requested measures are necessary to avoid
aggravation of the dispute and to preserve the status quo. The Claimants continue to submit
that the incarceration of Mr Gavrilovi¢ would threaten the procedural integrity of the
arbitration, and say that no comfort is to be drawn from the Respondent's submissions
which suggest that there is no imminent danger of his arrest. Further, the Claimants point
to, as a particular of this contention, the prosecution of Mr Gavrilovi¢ and continued

harassment of Gavrilovié d.o.o. through the extraordinary health inspections.

Fourth, the Claimants submit that the Respondent is wrong to characterise the provisional
measures as disproportionate and too broad. Indeed, they contend that the measures
sought are narrowly tailored to address any remedial harm the Claimants have suffered
due to the Respondent's actions, and avoid any future harm. In this regard, the Claimants
point to the acceptance of a temporary stay of a criminal investigation in Lao Holdings.'°
Insofar as the Claimants seek copies of all documents collected during the course of the
criminal investigation, and any evidence in the future, the Claimants assert that this is to

remedy past harm. Indeed, they say that this measure will restore a level playing field.

(D) The Respondent's Surrejoinder
(i) Overarching Submissions
In its Surrejoinder, the Respondent makes various overarching submissions, namely:

(a) the Claimants’ Request should be seen as an attack against the Respondent to shield

themselves from their own wrongdoing;

Lao Holdings NV v The Lao People’s Democratic Republic, ICSID Case No ARB(AF)/12/6, Ruling on Motion to
Amend the Provisional Measures Order (30 May 2014), §70.

Page 59 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

165.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

(b) the alleged conduct of Mr Gavrilovi¢ involves serious violations of Croatian law and
“[ijt is only natural, therefore, that a State governed by the rule of law investigates

them”.!° The public prosecution service was duty-bound to investigate the conduct;

(c) the War Profiteering Act, which was adopted in 2011, opened a wide-ranging inquiry

into conduct that had occurred many years prior, during the privatisation period;

(d) the Investigation Decision was issued in full compliance with Croatian law and the

acquis communautaire of the European Union;

(e) there is no substance to the Claimants’ allegation that the investigation began after the

Claimants commenced the arbitration;

(f) being an EU Member State, the Republic of Croatia has achieved stability of institutions

guaranteeing democracy, the rule of law and human rights; and

(g) “[clonsidering (i) the seriousness of the offences for which Mr Gavrilovi¢ is being
investigated, (ii) the respect for fundamental rights that is enshrined in the Croatian
justice system, and (iii) the fact that criminal law and procedure are a most obvious and
undisputed part of State sovereignty, the stakes in this matter could not be higher” .!"!

(ii) This Arbitration, and the Claimants’ Request, was Brought Solely to Obstruct the

Lawful Investigation of a Suspected Criminal

The Respondent again points to the timing of the commencement of the criminal
investigation, this time to establish that Mr Gavrilovic is using the arbitration to avoid
criminal prosecution. According to the Respondent, the Claimants’ Request should be

viewed similarly.

Respondent's Surrejoinder, §4.

Respondent's Surrejoinder, §13.

Page 60 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

166.

167.

168.

169.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

Regarding the Claimants’ allegation that 20 years have passed since Mr Gavrilovi¢
committed the acts cited in the Investigation Decision, the Respondent points out that until
the passage of the War Profiteering Act, these offences were time-barred. Further, the
Respondent cites the complaints filed on 8 December 2010 by an association of former
employees of the Gavrilovié companies in which, inter alia, allegations of unlawful
possession of State property are made. The Respondent refers to these complaints to
support its chronology of events from the commencement of the criminal investigation in

2011.

(iii) The Claimants Continue to Fail to Provide any Evidence of the Alleged Urgent Need for
Provisional Measures

The Respondent emphasises that, despite having had opportunities to do so, the Claimants
have failed to provide any evidence demonstrating a serious risk of substantial or
irreparable harm to Mr Gavrilovic, the continued existence of Gavrilovi¢ d.o.o. or the
orderly and fair conduct of these arbitral proceedings. The Respondent contends that “[t]he
reason is obvious. There is no such evidence, and the Request must fail because the

Claimants have not even remotely met their heavy burden of proof” .!"?
The Respondent makes three specific submissions.

First, it asserts that the provisional measures are not urgently needed to safeguard
Mr Gavrilovic’s personal integrity. The Respondent notes, in this regard, that the
Claimants’ Rejoinder does not dispute the availability and effectiveness of the full range of
due process rights and remedies available to Mr Gavrilovic. It contends that “[iJnstead of
being genuinely concerned about any irreparable prejudice, the Claimants are, fully in line

with their strategy of abusing the arbitral process as a shield from legitimate criminal

Respondent's Surrejoinder, §30.

Page 61 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

170.

171.

172.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

investigation, simply trying to run out the clock for the criminal investigation’.!° The
Respondent points to the fact that the Investigation Order expires on 25 May 2015, and

alleges that the Claimants’ Request is an attempt to stall the investigation.

Second, the provisional measures are not urgently needed to save Gavrilovi¢ d.o.o. from
imminent ruin or substantial harm. The Respondent points again to the alleged absence of
any evidence to this effect. Further, it says that the Claimants seek to reverse the onus of
proof and rejects the Claimants’ suggestion that the Respondent had conceded that
compensable harm was caused to Gavrilovi¢ d.o.o. by the hygiene inspection or that the
company’s existence is threatened. Finally, the Respondent describes the Claimants’
attempt to contest the misdemeanour charges regarding the reprocessing of certain types

of meat or the contamination of food products with excessive sodium nitrate as misplaced.

Third, according to the Respondent, the Claimants’ “direct link”, “interference” or
“procedural integrity” argument is a meritless ruse contrived to evade lawful investigation
for suspected crimes. In relation to this argument, the Respondent repeats what it has
stated elsewhere in relation to, inter alia, the relevant timeline for the investigation and the
commencement of the arbitration and the inadequacy of the Claimants’ grounds for its
Request.

(iv) The Balance of Convenience Cannot Substitute the Lack of Material Risk of Substantial or

Irreparable Injury

The Respondent contends that the Claimants’ reliance on an inappropriately low threshold
for the recommendation of provisional measures should be rejected. The Respondent
refers, in this regard, to its Reply, where it contended that an exceptionally high threshold
to interfere with criminal proceedings is appropriate. The Respondent criticises the test the

Claimants propose, suggesting that it “would make provisional measures available in every

Respondent's Surrejoinder, §35.

Page 62 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

173.

116

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

case where an applicant is simply more inconvenienced than a respondent, irrespective of
whether an issue can await a final award. This defeats the purpose of awards on the
merits”. Further, it points to PNG v Papua New Guinea, where the tribunal emphasised
that, “of course, the harm alleged by the requesting party must not be purely hypothetical
or theoretical”."5 In relation to that case, the Respondent cites four points made by that
tribunal which support the Respondent's position, namely: (i) it considered measures
unwarranted where the applicant was not even sure the alleged actions were planned; (ii) it
expressly affirmed the high threshold in matters of criminal justice; (iii) it held that a
connection between criminal proceeding and an arbitration was not enough; and (iv) it

rejected similarly illusory allegations of harassment.

(v) The Investigation Order is Justified Under Croatian Law

The Respondent notes that the Second Derencinovi¢ Opinion appears to have dropped the
allegation that there does not exist a reasonable suspicion that Mr Gavrilovi¢ committed
the criminal offence of abuse of official and official authority to the detriment of Gavrilovi¢
d.o.o. But, in any case, the Respondent contends that his opinion is irrelevant. The
Respondent explains that “[s]ince the Claimants are seeking provisional measures, the
question at issue is not whether the investigation order was issued in accordance with the
law (which it was), but whether there is such a risk of prejudice that the Claimants cannot
await an award on the merits”."'6 Further, the Respondent criticises the Second
Derendinovi¢ Opinion for raising a new jurisdictional argument and contends that, in any
case, USKOK has jurisdiction to investigate the alleged crimes, relying in this regard on the
Second Novoselec Opinion. Indeed, the Respondent relies upon that opinion to undermine

the evidence offered by the Claimants’ expert, Mr Deren¢inovic. In short, based on the

Respondent's Surrejoinder, §71.

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd v Independent State of Papua New Guinea, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33,
Decision on the Claimant's Request for Provisional Measures (21 January 2015), §112.

Respondent's Surrejoinder, §76.

Page 63 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

174.

175.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

Second Novoselec Opinion, the Respondent contends that the Investigation Order issued
against Mr Gavrilovi¢ was in full compliance with Croatian and European standards.
(vi) The Claimants’ Manipulation of these Arbitral Proceedings Causes Prejudice to the

Respondent and Should be Remedied

Finally, the Respondent contends that the Claimants’ Request is an abuse of process and

seeks the entirety of its costs of defending it.

(E) Further Submissions
(i) The Claimants’ Letter Dated 2 April 2015
On 2 April 2015, the Claimants, ostensibly for the purpose of making submissions as to the

appropriateness, or otherwise, of an oral hearing, made further substantive submissions to

the Tribunal. Therein, they submit that:

(a) the Respondent has not presented any evidence or testimony of any investigatory acts
prior to April 2013 that could have alerted the Claimants to this existence of the

investigation before this arbitration was commenced in December 2012;

(b) the Respondent is wrong to say that the criminal investigation had to be completed
within six months, as this deadline can be extended by one year, pursuant to Article

229(1) of the Croatian Criminal Procedure Act;

(¢

the Respondent's allegation that the requested provisional measures are inappropriate
because Croatia “has achieved stability of institutions guaranteeing democracy, the
tule of law, and human rights” should be rejected. The Claimants refer to the latest
Global Corruption Barometer by Transparency International, a global anti-corruption
NGO, in which 70% of survey participants believe that the Croatian judiciary is
“corrupt” or “extremely corrupt.” According to the Claimants, the poor state of the

justice system in Croatia is further reflected in the Global Competitiveness Report 2014-

Page 64 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

176.

177.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

2015 of the World Economic Forum, in which Croatia ranks 100th out of 144 countries
in judicial independence, behind Bolivia - which was ordered to suspend criminal
proceedings until completion of the arbitration in Quiborax'” - and Laos — which was

ordered to suspend criminal proceedings by the tribunal in Lao Holdings."'*

The Claimants also point to two further factual developments since the filing of the
Claimants’ Request that they consider support their position. First, they noted that a
potentially important witness had been interviewed as part of the investigation, yet the
statement was not in the criminal file. Second, one of the two misdemeanor charges that
resulted from the police raid on 21 October 2014 was dismissed by the Misdemeanor

Court of Sisak.

(ii) The Respondent's Letter Dated 13 April 2015

The Respondent characterises the five matters raised in the Claimants’ correspondence
dated 2 April 2015 as being “unsubstantiated allegations”, “false and misleading” and,
indeed, not supporting the need or urgency for provisional measures. The Respondent

makes five brief submissions:

(a) first, it matters not whether the Claimants were aware of the criminal investigation
from 26 November 2014, or earlier — rather, what matters is the fact that the
investigation was started before the Claimants commenced the arbitration, thus
showing the “fiction” that the State is responding to the arbitration by commencing a

criminal investigation;

Quiborax SA, Non Metallic Minerals SA & Allan Fosk Kaplin v Plurinational State of Bolivia, \CSID Case No.
ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures (26 February 2010).

Lao Holdings NV v The Lao People’s Democratic Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/6, Ruling on Motion to
Amend the Provisional Measures Order (30 May 2014).

Page 65 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

178.

179.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures
(b) second, while a twelve month extension of the criminal investigation may be granted,
this would demand an especially complex case and the approval of the Public

Prosecutor General of the Republic of Croatia, such approval not being guaranteed;

S

third, the Claimants’ reliance on what the Respondent describes as internet opinion
polls and surveys is of no utility and, in any case, the EU Commission has observed
that Croatia enjoys “efficient, effective and unbiased investigation, prosecution and

court rulings in organised crime and corruption cases at all levels”;""°

(d) fourth, the Claimants’ reliance on the fact that one of the misdemeanour charges
brought after Gavrilovi¢ d.o.o. failed a standard hygiene inspection was dismissed on
procedural grounds is irrelevant. Indeed, the Respondent points to the ruling as

evidence that Croatia has an independent and functioning judiciary; and

(e) fifth, the Respondent notes that the Claimants have decided to not defend their
misrepresentations, other than by issuing bare denials. This, the Respondent says, is
in marked contrast to the Respondent, who has provided specific and substantiated

responses to the Claimants’ misstatements in the Surrejoinder and elsewhere.
ANALYSIS

Having carefully considered the submissions of the parties, the Tribunal has decided to

deny the Claimants’ Request.

Despite the length of the submissions, and extensive material, filed on behalf of each Party,
the ultimate resolution of the Claimants’ Request turns on various discrete issues as part
of a careful analysis of the material in relation to what, for the most part, are accepted

principles. Insofar as any of the arguments summarised above are not referred to below,

 

ission, Monitoring Report on Croatia's Accession Preparations (26 March 2013), §5.

Page 66 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

180.

181.

182.

12

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

that should not be taken to mean that the argument has not been considered. Rather, all
arguments have been considered, and the analysis that follows is intended to set out the
reasoning of the Tribunal so as to explain the basis of its decision, rather than reciting its
consideration of each and every argument. Not only is this sufficient, but it is appropriate
where there is, at least in the view of the Claimants, an urgency attendant to the Tribunal’s

determination of this application.

Before turning to the reasons for the Decision, it is necessary to put to one side some

preliminary matters, namely jurisdiction and the appropriate standard to be applied.

(A) Jurisdiction

First, the Tribunal has no hesitation in confirming its jurisdiction to hear, and determine,
the Claimants’ Request. While acknowledging that the Respondent has made various
jurisdictional and admissibility objections, each of which will be considered at the hearing
on preliminary objections and the merits in March 2016, those objections do not prevent the
consideration by the Tribunal, and its consideration now, of a request for provisional
measures. An ICSID tribunal may recommend provisional measures even where it is yet

to decide the question of its jurisdiction.”

The Claimants contend, and the Tribunal accepts, that all that is required is that the
provisions invoked appear prima facie to afford a basis for jurisdiction to decide the merits.
While the Tribunal is not, of course, finally satisfied that it has jurisdiction on the merits of
the case, it is satisfied that the provisions invoked by the Claimants are such that this
Tribunal has the requisite prima facie jurisdiction. Indeed, the Respondent does not strongly

contend otherwise. It does submit, by reference to Perenco v Ecuador,'?! that particular

Quiborax SA, Non Metallic Minerals SA & Allan Fosk Kapliin v Plurinational State of Bolivia, ICSID Case
No. ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures (26 February 2010), §105.

Perenco Ecuador Ltd v The Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador), 1CSID Case
No. ARB/08/6, Decision on Provisional Measures (8 May 2009), §59.

Page 67 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

183.

184.

185.

rr}

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

stringency is required where the question of jurisdiction is yet to be determined. However,
the matters relied on in support of that argument, including the writing of Kaufmann-
Kohler and Antonietti,’ are matters which the Tribunal considers are appropriately
considered in exercising the discretion to recommend provisional measures, rather than in
shutting an applicant for interim relief out as a jurisdictional matter. While the Tribunal
notes, as the Claimants have, that there is some doubt as to whether the caution expressed
by the tribunal in Perenco is correct, it is unnecessary to determine that question here. Even
when “particular stringency” is applied, it is plain to the Tribunal that it is empowered to
consider the questions raised by the Claimants’ Request. (The Tribunal does, in any case,
note that the weight of authority does appear to disfavour the approach in Perenco,'* but it

need not form a final view on this question.)

So, therefore, it is clear that the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules provide
a sufficient basis for the existence of the Tribunal’s power to decide the questions the subject

of the Claimants’ Request.

(B) The Appropriate Standard

The second preliminary matter is the appropriate test to be applied. The Claimants’
Rejoinder, in particular, showed a sharp distinction in the test said to be applicable to the

question of the appropriateness of a recommendation of provisional measures.

While it is right to say, as the Claimants acknowledged, that the Parties agree on the

fundamental standards that are applicable to a request for provisional measures, namely

G Kaufmann-Kohler & A Antonietti, “Interim Relief in International Investment Agreements”, in K Yannaca-
Small, Arbitration Under International Investment Agreements — A Guide to the Key Issues (OUP, 2010), p 522.

See, eg, the decisions cited by the Claimants at §15959(b) above, especially Caratube International Oil Company
LLP and Devincci Salah Hourani v Republic of Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/13, Decision on the Claimants’
Request for Provisional Measures (4 December 2014), §108.

Page 68 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

186.

187.

188.

189.

it

125

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

that such measures are necessary to protect the applicant’s rights, are urgent and are

proportional, the schism appears when one considers where the threshold is to lie.

The Claimants, on the one hand, contend that the standard is one of “material risk”. The
Respondent, on the other hand, contends that the appropriate standard is one of

“irreparable harm”.

It is again correct, as the Claimants note, that some ICSID tribunals have utilised
terminology suggestive of a lower standard. Indeed, the Claimants place significant
reliance on the recent decision of PNG v Papua New Guinea, where the tribunal used
language suggestive of a distinction between a higher threshold of “irreparable” harm and
a lower, and preferable one, in their view, of some “serious harm’. More fully, the
tribunal explained that, as will be recalled, “the term ‘irreparable’ harm is properly
understood as requiring a showing of a material risk of serious or grave damage to the
requesting party, and not harm that is literally ‘irreparable’ in what is sometimes regarded.
as the narrow common law sense of the term. The degree of ‘gravity’ or ‘seriousness’ of
harm that is necessary for an order of provisional relief cannot be specified with precision,
and depends in part on the circumstances of the case, the nature of the relief requested and
the relative harm to be suffered by each party”. The tribunal continued, “suffice it to say
that substantial, serious harm, even if not irreparable, is generally sufficient to satisfy this

element of the standard for granting provisional measures” .!
The Respondent contends that this threshold is insufficiently discerning.

It is not necessary in this case to set out the test that would apply in all cases of requests for

provisional measures. One must ascertain what test is appropriate in the circumstances of

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd v Independent State of Papua New Guinea, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33,
Decision on the Claimant's Request for Provisional Measures (21 January 2015), §109.

Id.

Page 69 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

190.

191.

192.

193.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

a case, such as this, where the relief sought would interfere with the exercise of a sovereign

State’s rights and duties to investigate and prosecute crime.

No doubt, it was this concern which underlay the approach of the tribunal in Caratube v

Kazakhstan, where it explained:

This Tribunal feels that a particularly high threshold must be overcome before an
ICSID tribunal can indeed recommend provisional measures regarding criminal
investigations conducted by a state.!”°

It is trite to say that criminal law and procedure are a most obvious and undisputed part of
a State’s sovereignty. That (trite) fact supports the approach adopted here by the Tribunal,
namely that any obstruction of the investigation or prosecution of conduct that is
reasonably suspected to be criminal in nature should only be ordered where that is

absolutely necessary. As will be seen, this is not such a case.

(C) Findings

The Claimants identify four rights as the basis for their Request, namely: (i) the procedural
integrity of the arbitration; (ii) the preservation of the status quo and the non-aggravation of
the dispute; (iii) equality of arms; and (iv) the exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings under
Article 26 of the ICSID Convention. The Respondent accepts that these rights, if relevantly

infringed, are rights capable of protection by provisional measures.

Before turning to those rights, it is necessary to return to the factual background in some
more detail, so as to expound upon the underlying basis for the Claimants’ Request. In so

doing, the Tribunal will make some findings which support its conclusions.

Caratube International Oil Company LLP and Devineci Salah Hourani v Republic of Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No.
ARB/13/13, Decision on the Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures (4 December 2014), §137.

Page 70 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

194.

195.

196.

197.

198.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

As is apparent from the submissions summarised above, the factual sub-stratum
encompasses two distinct aspects: (a) the criminal investigation of Mr Gavrilovi¢; and

(b) the health and safety inspections of Gavrilovi¢ d.o.o. Each is dealt with in turn now.

(i) The Criminal Investigation of Mr Gavrilovié

As noted at the outset of the Parties’ respective submissions, the gravamen of the Claimants’
case for provisional measures rests on their allegation that this investigation, and the
initiation of criminal proceedings through the Investigation Order, is intended to advantage
Respondent in this arbitration and deprive Claimants of their right to a fair hearing. The

Claimants’ submission is not supported by the evidence.

True it is that the Claimants point to a number of facts which suggest that there is more
than coincidence between the initiation of this arbitration and the commencement of the
investigation, or at least the time when substantive actions were taken, but, even taking
these matters together, the Tribunal cannot reach the conclusion that the criminal

investigation is being used as a vehicle through which to assist it in this arbitration.

Taking the Claimants’ case at its highest, and assuming that the criminal investigation did
commence after the Claimants initiated this arbitration, the Tribunal considers that this fact
would still have to be seen against the backdrop of the serious criminal allegations made
against Mr Gavrilovic. Trite though it is to say that States have the power, indeed duty, to

investigate criminal conduct, this is an important contextual factor.

In May 2011, when the War Profiteering Act enabled the prosecution of persons who had
committed crimes as early as the 1990s by extending the limitation period, the Croatian
State was empowered to investigate crimes which form part of that State’s law. It was not
required to have regard to the fact that an alleged perpetrator was in dispute with the State
about commercial matters which are related to those alleged crimes. While, of course, the

investigation could not be used for the sole or predominant purpose of advantaging Croatia

Page 71 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

199.

200.

201.

202.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

in this arbitration, a fact which, if found, would satisfy the high threshold of an application
of this type, this Tribunal should be slow to interfere with the Respondent's rights (and

duties) to enforce its own criminal law.

A further prong to the Claimants’ argument is that the Investigation Order itself is invalid.
In this regard, it will be recalled that the Claimants rely on the evidence of Professor
DerenGinovi¢ to establish that the Investigation Order does not meet the standard for
issuing an investigation order under Croatian law on the basis that it does not show the

existence of reasonable suspicion that Mr Gavrilovi¢ committed the alleged crimes.”

Professor Novoselec, the Respondent's expert on Croatian law, opines to the contrary,

concluding that the Investigation Order is, in fact, valid.

The Tribunal considers it unnecessary, for the purposes of this application, to opine on this
dispute in the evidence. This is so because it is satisfied that, where the Croatian courts
have decided on the validity of the Investigation Order, it would be inappropriate, absent
manifest error, to conclude that the judicial determination of the validity of the

Investigation Order should be ignored, as the Claimants would have it.

According to the Claimants, the fact that an appeal by Mr Gavrilovi¢ against the validity of
the Investigation Order failed does not necessarily mean that the order was properly issued
under Croatian law standards. This may be so. However, where, as here, there is a conflict
in the evidence of two experts, and no manifest error in the decision itself, the Tribunal
cannot be satisfied of the allegation of invalidity. The submission, premised on the
evidence of Professor Deren¢inovi¢’s evidence that there is a “well-established, yet
extremely questionable, practice of almost unconditional judicial granting of the

investigation orders issued by the USKOK”,!8 does not assist the Tribunal. Indeed, the

See §§46-50 above.

First Derenéinovi¢ Opinion, §50.

Page 72 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

203.

204.

205.

206.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

Claimants appear, on one hand, to criticise the Croatian judicial system (as here) but, where
the decision is favourable (as is the case with respect to the recent dismissal of one of the

two misdemeanour charges), to embrace that same system.

Leaving the issue of the validity aside, the Tribunal accepts that even if a valid Investigation
Order were in place, it could, albeit only in narrow circumstances, support an application
for provisional measures. The Claimants allege that it was issued to harass the Claimants,
their witnesses and otherwise unbalance the equality of arms in this arbitration. But this
Tribunal cannot be satisfied that the harassment and inequality of arms alleged is

established by the evidence.

The Claimants’ evidence on such matters is insufficient. While the submissions allege
instances supporting such a conclusion, the Claimants suggest, implicitly in places and
explicitly in others, that the reason for that absence of evidence is the fear preventing people
from speaking to the Claimants and their representatives. But that leaves the Tribunal in a
difficult position. It can, indeed must, act on evidence, and not on speculation or conjecture.
Perhaps it would be unsurprising that no witnesses would come forward if the Claimants’
(unfounded) allegations are true, but there must be sufficient evidential foundation to

support the relief sought, which is not the case here.

Accordingly, the Tribunal is not satisfied of the factual findings the Claimants wish it to

make in relation to the criminal investigation of Mr Gavrilovic¢.

(ii) The Health and Safety Inspection of Gavrilovié d.o.0.

The second factual basis for the Claimants’ Request is the pressures placed on
Gavrilovié d.o.o. and, by necessity, also Mr Gavrilovic¢, in the form of health and safety
inspections, particularly the “raid” on its factory on 21 October 2014. The Claimants
contend that such inspections are intended to place pressure on the Claimants, and, again,

to benefit the Respondent in this arbitration.

Page 73 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

207.

208.

209.

210.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

The Claimants point to the evidence of various employees of Gavrilovié d.o.o. in relation
to, particularly, the “raid” on 21 October 2014. Indeed, Ms LuZai¢ refers, in the evidence
summarised at §42 above, to her treatment at the hands of the relevant officers on that
occasion. Taking her evidence at its face value, however, the Tribunal remains unsatisfied
of that which the Claimants must establish, namely that that raid was directed at infringing
the rights of the Claimants in respect of this arbitration. Such a finding is a metaphorical
bridge too far, and would require giving more weight to the evidence of those called on

behalf of the Claimants than is warranted.

As to the number of health and safety inspections since the Claimant has filed its Request
for Arbitration, the Parties present differing pictures. The Claimants claim that there has
been a marked increase, particularly in 2014. The Respondent, on the other hand, says that
the number of inspections has decreased, rather than increased, and that inspections have
uncovered serious violations of EU health and safety laws. Interestingly, for the first time,
in their Rejoinder, the Claimants seek to explain the decrease identified by the Respondent

as being based on a distinction between “ordinary” and “extraordinary” inspections.

Be that as it may, the Tribunal considers it unnecessary to decide between the two versions.
What is required is, however many inspections have occurred, that there is some malicious
intent on the part of the Respondent (namely, that the inspections are used to put improper

pressure on the Claimants). The Tribunal cannot be satisfied of that intent.

The Claimants also rely on the publicity generated by the inspections, and its consequent
effect on the reputation of Gavrilovi¢ d.o.o. But the Respondent, not unreasonably, points
to the fact that it has no control of what is publicised by media outlets in Croatia. Absent
some link between the conduct of the Respondent and that publicity, by way of some illegal
disclosure of information, of which there is none, this additional basis provides no

assistance to the Claimants.

Page 74 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

211.

212.

213.

214.

215.

216.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures
(iii) Conclusion
In conclusion, therefore, having regard to the evidential material provided by the Claimants

to support their Request, the Tribunal simply cannot be satisfied that the high threshold

necessary to found the relief sought has been met.

That conclusion is fatal to the Claimants’ Request. That is, having so concluded, the

Tribunal must dismiss the Claimants’ Request.

It may nevertheless be useful to the Parties, especially the Claimants, to understand why,
having regard to these findings, the Claimants’ allegation that the provisional measures are
urgent and necessary to safeguard the Claimants’ rights must be rejected. It is to that

question to which attention now turns.

(D) Are the Provisional Measures Urgent and Necessary to Safeguard the
Claimants’ Rights?

(i) Request No. 1: Stay of the Criminal Investigation of Mr Gavrilovié

By Request No. 1, the Claimants seek the following order:

Respondent shall take all appropriate measures to suspend the
[Investigation Order] and any other criminal proceedings initiated against
Mr. Georg Gavrilovi¢, and to suspend any other criminal proceedings or
investigation related in any way to the present arbitration, until the arbitration is
completed or upon a further decision of the Tribunal.

Having concluded that the Claimants have failed to convince the Tribunal that the criminal
investigation of Mr Gavrilovi¢ is improper, or being conducted improperly, there is no basis

for this relief.

It bears emphasis, again, that what is being sought is a restraint on the sovereign power of
Croatia to investigate crimes against its law within its territory. To meet the threshold, the

Tribunal would need to be satisfied that the conduct of a government agency, charged with

Page 75 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

217.

218.

219.

220.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

investigating criminal offences, was improper. It should be slow to come to that conclusion.

The Tribunal cannot here.

(ii) Request No. 2: Injunction to Protect Integrity of the Arbitration and Equality of Arms

By Request No. 2, the Claimants seek the following order:

Respondent shall refrain from engaging in any other course of action which may
directly or indirectly jeopardize the procedural integrity of this arbitration,
aggravate or extend the dispute, alter the status quo, destroy the equality of arms
between the parties or threaten the exclusivity of this ICSID arbitration, including,
but not limited to:

(a) conducting health or safety inspections of Gavrilovi¢ d.o.o. in a manner and
frequency that is inconsistent with the manner and frequency in which such
inspections were conducted prior to the date this arbitration was commenced;
and

(b) publicizing any allegations of health and safety violations of Gavrilovi¢ d.o.o.
until such allegations are proven.

Request No. 2 depends on a finding that the health and safety inspections and/or impugned
publicity are such as to have an effect on this arbitration. The Tribunal, for the reasons

already explained, cannot be so satisfied.

While the rationale for respect for the sovereignty of a State’s criminal jurisdiction is
perhaps not as strong with respect to the issue of health and safety inspections, it is
nevertheless relevant to consider that those governmental agencies charged with regulating
this field perform a very important function. For the Tribunal to interfere with that function
would need clear evidence of the use of that vehicle in such a way to achieve an ulterior,

and improper, purpose.

(iii) Request No. 3: Injunction in Relation to Contact with Witnesses

By Request No. 3, the Claimants seek the following order:

Page 76 of 81

221.

222.

223.

224,

225.

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

Respondent shall refrain from providing any instructions or warning to potential
witnesses not to communicate with Claimants or their counsel, and shall provide
Claimants with written notices, in a form to be approved by the Tribunal, ensuring
witnesses and potential witness that they may speak with the Claimants and
Claimants’ representatives, and appear as witnesses in this arbitration, without
fear of reprisal from the Respondent.

The Claimants here seek careful regulation of the criminal investigation by the Tribunal.
Even assuming that the Tribunal were willing to assume the obligations the Claimants wish
to confer upon it by this (mandatory) order, there would be a risk that such an order would
interfere with what is otherwise a valid criminal investigation. As such, the Tribunal
considers that the appropriate arbiter of the form of notices, if any, to be given to particular
witnesses is a matter for Croatian officials. It would be inappropriate to grant an injunction

ordering the Respondent, or indeed any party, to comply with the law.

Insofar as threats are said to be made to prospective witnesses, the Tribunal is not satisfied
on the evidence that such threats have been, or will, be made. As explained above, there is
not a proper evidential basis for such a conclusion.

(iv) Request No. 4: Access to Documents Related to the Criminal File

By Request No. 4, the Claimants seek an order that:

Respondent shall provide to Claimants copies of all evidence collected during the
course of the criminal investigation to date, and any such evidence collected in the
future.

The Tribunal considers that it is unnecessary for the safeguard of the Claimants’ rights to
ensure that such documents, insofar as they are relevant to this arbitration, be provided by

way of a provisional measure.

The Tribunal makes two observations in this regard:

Page 77 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

226.

227.

129

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

(a) first, insofar as the criminal file contains documents that are relevant to this arbitration
and are within the scope of any disclosure ordered, the Tribunal would expect that the

Respondent would, of course, disclose those documents; and

(b) insofar as the Respondent comes under an obligation under Croatian criminal law and
procedure to disclose the documents related to the criminal file, that is a matter for the
Croatian authorities in whom that duty vests. Of course, the Tribunal would expect
that the Respondent's agencies would comply with Croatian law in this regard and, in
any case, insofar as there was some failure to so comply, the Claimants have redress as

a matter of Croatian law.

One specific matter in this regard must be mentioned. It will be recalled that, in their letter
dated 2 April 2015, the Claimants indicated that a potentially important witness had been
interviewed as part of the investigation, yet the statement was not in the criminal file. The
Tribunal makes no order in relation to this allegation, it not being sought, nor being
supported by any specific request for relief in the nature of discovery.” If the Claimants’
characterisation of Croatian criminal law and procedure is correct, presumably they will be
able to rely on their rights thereunder to seek access to this document. It would be

inappropriate for this Tribunal to say any more.

(E) Costs

The Respondent has been successful in its opposition to the Claimants’ Request. In those
circumstances, it seeks an order that the Claimants bear all costs incurred in connection
with the Claimants’ Request on an indemnity basis, including, but not limited to, legal fees

and expenses.

cf. §(iv) of the relief sought refers generally to documents in the criminal file, not identifying this statement
specifically.

Page 78 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

228.

229.

230.

231.

130

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

No submissions have been made by any of the Parties on the issue of costs. The Tribunal
considers it unnecessary to decide this issue at this point in time. In those circumstances, it
is appropriate that the issue of the costs of, and incidental to, the Claimants’ Request, be

reserved.

The Parties will be invited, if they so wish, to make submissions regarding the costs of the
Claimants’ Request at a later stage, before the Tribunal decides the question of the costs of

the arbitration.

(F) — Concluding Remarks

If circumstances arise which the Claimants consider impede the arbitration in any way or
prevent the Claimants from presenting their case, the Claimants may renew their

application for provisional measures.

It is noteworthy, however, in the Tribunal’s view, that, in the course of its submissions, the
Respondent has acknowledged a number of matters of Croatian criminal law and
procedure, which will govern the future conduct of the Respondent in the course of its
investigation. Indeed, further, it has specifically relied upon Croatia’s status as a member
of the European Union in seeking to defeat the Claimants’ Request. That contention should

be set out here in full:

The Republic of Croatia is an EU member State which, as required for EU
membership, has achieved stability of institutions guaranteeing democracy, the rule
of law, and human rights. The independence of the Croatian judiciary is guaranteed
by the Constitution, as are the protection of fundamental rights. These rights are
further underpinned by the international conventions to which the Republic of
Croatia is a signatory, not least of which is the European Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.!”

Respondent's Surrejoinder, §12.

Page 79 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

232.

233.

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

In this regard, the Tribunal points especially to the following assertions set forth in the

Respondent's submissions:'!
(a) the Respondent will continue to respect Mr Gavrilovic’s due process rights;

(b) under the Criminal Procedure Act, during any questioning of Mr Gavrilovi¢, his basic
rights will be respected, including, but not limited to, the respective authority
confirming that Mr Gavrilovi¢ has received and understood the list of basic rights
provided with the Investigation Decision, his lawyer being present at the questioning,
the questioning being filmed, his entitlement to use notes and to present all the facts
supporting his defence and, following the questioning, he must be given the
opportunity to fill any gaps and remove any contradictions or ambiguities in his

statement;

(c) the present circumstances are such that “precautionary measures” or investigative

detention will not and could not be applied;

(d) the criminal investigation does not prevent any witnesses from testifying or sharing
information with the Claimants or their lawyers (save that those individuals are unable

to discuss information revealed to them by the public prosecution service); and

(e) the public prosecution service has not (and the Tribunal assumes will not) collect any

evidence beyond that which is strictly necessary for the inquiry.

No undertakings have been given in this regard by the Respondent (a point noted by the
Claimants), but the Tribunal is confident that, as a nation State and a member of the
European Union, the Respondent will comply with its obligations under Croatian,

European and other law.

See further, §§ 100, 103 and 104 above.

Page 80 of 81

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.0. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures

 

234. The Claimants, of course, have liberty to apply to this Tribunal if they consider that the
confidence so reposed in the Respondent by the Tribunal is not met by appropriate conduct
on the Respondent's part (whether as part of the criminal investigation of Mr Gavrilovi¢,
the health and safety inspections of Gavrilovi¢ d.o.o or otherwise). In such circumstances,

the Claimants may, of course, return to this Tribunal to seek further relief.

Vv. DECISION

235. For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal refuses the Claimants’ Request for Provisional

Measures.
236. Therefore, the Tribunal decides:

(1) The Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures dated 15 December 2014 is

refused.

(2) Any decision regarding the costs incurred during this procedure on provisional

measures is reserved.

For and on behalf of the Tribunal,

[signed]
Michael Pryles
President of the Tribunal
Date: 30 April 2015

Page 81 of 81

