INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT
DISPUTES

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o.
v.

Republic of Croatia

(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

DECISION ON BIFURCATION

 

Members of the Tribunal
Michael C. Pryles, President of the Tribunal
Stanimir A. Alexandrov, Arbitrator
Matthias Scherer, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Lindsay Gastrell

Assistant to the President of the Tribunal
Albert Dinelli

21 January 2015

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

Ill.

Decision on Bifurcation

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION. 3

THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS

 

A. TheR dent’s issi 4

 

(i) Factor 1: Frivol 7

 

(ii) Factor 2: Reduction in Scope of Issues...

 

(iii) Factor 3: Connection with the Merits .....

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(iv) Procedural Fairness 12
B. The Claii ° issi 13
(i) Efficiency of the Proceeding 15
(ii) Procedural Fairness 18
ANALYSIS 19
A. The Objections Re-visited
B. The First Objecti 21
C. The Second and Third Objections
D. The Fourth Objecti 26
E. Procedural Fair: 27
F. Exercise of the Tribunal’s Discretion

 

DECISION 29

FURTHER PROCEDURAL ORDERS

 

Page 2 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

Decision on Bifurcation

INTRODUCTION

The present dispute arises out of the alleged investments of Mr. Georg Gavrilovi¢, a
national of Austria, and Gavrilovié d.o.o., a company organized under the laws of Croatia

(together, the “Claimants”), in the Republic of Croatia (the “Respondent” or “Croatia’’).

The Claimants commenced this arbitration under the auspices of the International Centre
for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”) on the basis of the Agreement between
the Republic of Austria and the Republic of Croatia for the Promotion and Protection of
Investments, which entered into force on November 1, 1999 (the “BIT”), and the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of

Other States, which entered into force on October 14, 1966 (the “ICSID Convention”).

On October 31, 2014, pursuant to paragraph 15.1.3 of Procedural Order No 1 of August
21, 2013 (as amended on November 16, 2013 and February 19, 2014) (“Procedural Order
No 1”), the Respondent submitted its Counter-Memorial on the Merits and Memorial on
Preliminary Objections (the “Counter-Memorial”) and a Submission in Support of

Bifurcation of the Proceedings (the “Request”).

On December 1, 2014, pursuant to paragraph 15.1.4 of Procedural Order No 1,
the Claimants submitted their Observations on the Respondent’s Bifurcation Request

(the “Observations’”’).

By letter dated December 4, 2014, the Respondent requested that the Tribunal allow a

second round of written submissions on the issue of bifurcation.

That same day, the Tribunal granted the Respondent’s request, setting forth a schedule for
further submissions. The Tribunal also invited each party to propose a schedule for each

of a bifurcated proceeding and a non-bifurcated proceeding.

On December 12, 2014, in accordance with the Tribunal’s schedule, the Respondent filed

its Reply on Bifurcation (the “Reply”).

Page 3 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

Decision on Bifurcation
On December 19, 2014, the Claimants requested a three-day extension of time to file their

rejoinder submission. The Tribunal granted this request.

On December 22, 2014, the Claimants subsequently submitted their Rejoinder on

Bifurcation (the “Rejoinder”).

On December 31, 2014, each party filed its proposed schedule for each of a bifurcated

proceeding and a non-bifurcated proceeding.

Following receipt of the parties’ written submissions, the Tribunal considered the

respective submissions of the parties, and deliberated.

For the reasons set out in Section IV below, the Tribunal has decided to refuse the
Respondent’s request for bifurcation of the proceedings into a jurisdictional phase and a

merits phase.

THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS

A. The Respondent’s Submissions

In the Counter-Memorial, the Respondent raises objections to the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal and to the admissibility of the Claimants’ claims. In the Request, the Respondent
asks the Tribunal to hear and decide these objections as preliminary issues prior to

considering the merits.
The Respondent raises the following objections to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction:

a. first, it contends that the Claimants have not made an “investment” in Croatia within
the meaning of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention and Article 1(1) of the BIT, as
they have neither made a contribution of economic resources in Croatia nor assumed

the necessary investment risk (the “First Objection”);! and

Counter-Memorial, Section III.B; Request, 4.

Page 4 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)
Decision on Bifurcation

 

b. second, it contends that legality is an express requirement of the BIT and an implicit
condition of consent to ICSID arbitration, and the Claimants’ alleged investment was
acquired illegally in breach of Croatian and international law, and in contravention of
international public policy (the “Second Objection”)” It follows, so it contends, that

the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction.”

15. Further or alternatively, the Respondent submits that the Claimants’ claims are

inadmissible and should be dismissed on the following grounds:

a. first, it says that, as a matter of general principles of law, international law and
international public policy, a court or tribunal will not grant assistance to a party that
has engaged in illegality, as the Claimants have done in this case (the “Third

Objection”);> and

b. second, it contends that the Purchase Agreement of November 11, 1991 contains an
exclusive choice of forum clause providing that the Regional Commercial Court in
Zagreb has jurisdiction over “any dispute” arising in relation to the agreement.
Accordingly, the Tribunal should not consider the merits of the Claimants’ claims
concerning alleged non-performance of obligations in the Purchase Agreement (the

“Fourth Objection”).4

16. | The Respondent submits that the Tribunal has the power to consider these objections as a
preliminary matter and to suspend the proceeding on the merits pursuant to Article 41 of
the ICSID Convention and Rules 41(3) and 41(4) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.° Even if
one were to assume that these provisions address only jurisdictional objections, the

Respondent argues that “the Tribunal has the discretion to rule on admissibility objections

 

Counter-Memorial, Section III.C; Request, 5.
Counter-Memorial, Section IV.A; Request, 17.
4 Counter-Memorial, Section IV.B; Request, 18.
5 Request, {{[12-15.

Page 5 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

10

Decision on Bifurcation

as a preliminary matter under its residual powers and Article 44 of the ICSID

Convention”.®

According to the Respondent, it is common practice in international investment arbitration
to bifurcate proceedings between preliminary objections and the merits.’ The Respondent
contends that early resolution of jurisdictional and admissibility issues “avoids spending
time and resources on issues that will become moot if the Tribunal turns out to be unable to

hear the claims.”*

Further, for the Respondent, the case for bifurcation of preliminary
objections is particularly strong when the respondent is a sovereign State, as States “need
not give an account of themselves before an international court or tribunal on the substance

of a dispute when jurisdiction has not yet been established”.’

In this regard, the Respondent points to procedural regimes such as the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules 1976, the Swiss Rules 2012 and the Swiss Private International Law Act
1987, which the Respondent says “adopt a presumption or general rule in favour of
bifurcation in order to ensure that a tribunal seised of a case proceeds on a sound
footing”.!° The fact that the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rules contain no
such explicit presumption does not suggest that bifurcation is to be discouraged in ICSID
cases. Rather, the Respondent asserts that previous decisions in ICSID cases reflect the

shared rationale that:

notwithstanding the importance of the specific circumstances and claims
advanced, bifurcation makes sense where (i) an attempt is undertaken to
make a State a party to proceedings and (ii) its consent to arbitrate or the
admissibility of the claims are in doubt, especially where jurisdiction is

Reply, 420.
Request, 24, citing inter alia C. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (CUP, 2009), pp. 537,

Request, 420.

Request, 28, citing S. Rosenne, The World Court: What it Is and How it Works (Martinus Nijhoff, 2003),
p. 81.

Request, (21.

Page 6 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

20.

21.

22.

23.

Decision on Bifurcation

sought based on the respondent State’s unilateral advance offer in respect

of a potentially unlimited number of cases.!!
The Respondent submits that the relevant considerations in determining whether
bifurcation is appropriate are those set out by the tribunal in Glamis Gold v United States
of America (“Glamis Gold”).'? In Glamis Gold, the tribunal opined that bifurcation is not
apt where the preliminary objections are: (i) frivolous; (ii) incapable of materially reducing
the scope of proceedings; or (iii) unduly entwined with the merits.!* According to the

Respondent, none of these factors is present in this case.
The Respondent deals with each of those factors in turn, as follows.

(i) Factor 1: Frivolousness

The Respondent submits that its objections are “anything but frivolous”; indeed, they

contend that they are substantial and supported by ample evidence.'*

In relation to the First Objection, the Respondent considers it an uncontested fact that the
payment made to acquire the Claimants’ alleged investment, which was required by law to
have gone to five separate bankruptcy estates in Croatia, was instead transferred to the
Swiss account of a Panamanian company.'* It follows from this fact, it says, that “there
was no contribution or genuine economic arrangement amounting to a qualifying

‘investment’ for the purposes of the constituent treaties.””'®

In relation to the Second and Third Objections, which are based on the Claimants’ alleged

unlawful actions, the Respondent submits that, in its Counter-Memorial, it identified a

Reply, 43.

Request, 25; Reply, 6, citing Glamis Gold Lid. v. United States of America, NAFTA/UNCITRAL,
Procedural Order No. 2 (Revised), 31 May 2005, { 12(c).

Id.

Request, 431; Reply, 21.
Request, 432; Reply, 113.

Reply, {13. See also, Request, 33.

Page 7 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

24.

25.

Decision on Bifurcation

number of illegalities relating to the Claimants’ alleged investment, including what they
described in the Counter-Memorial as “gross violations of Croatian and international law”
and infringements of “transnational public policy”.'7 Further, the Respondent points to
current criminal investigations into the Claimants so as to highlight the seriousness of these

objections.'*

In relation to the Fourth Objection, the Respondent rejects the Claimants’ contention that

the objection is “not tenable”. It contends that the Claimants have misrepresented the

19

Respondent’s position.'” According to the Respondent, this objection is substantial

because:

the binding, voluntary and unqualified choice to resolve “any” dispute
from the Purchase Agreement in the Commercial Court in Zagreb ...
provides a compelling reason why the Tribunal should not enter into the
merits of such a dispute, even on the assumption that it might have

jurisdiction under an international legal instrument.”

(ii) Factor 2: Reduction in Scope of Issues

The Respondent submits that early determination of its preliminary objections “would
result in a complete dismissal of the case or, at the very least, materially reduce its scope if

the Respondent prevails”.?!

Indeed, according to the Respondent, if either of its
jurisdictional objections is upheld, or if the Tribunal finds the claims inadmissible, the case
cannot proceed. At a minimum, bifurcation would shorten the proceedings and save

costs.”

Counter-Memorial, 1318.
Reply, 14.

Reply, {19.

Reply, 119

Request, 135.

Request, 138.

Page 8 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

Decision on Bifurcation

In particular, the Respondent contends that bifurcation could obviate the need for the
parties and the Tribunal to engage in the complex and costly task of, respectively, making
submissions upon, and determining, the merits of the Claimants’ claims. Although the
Respondent has submitted a Counter-Memorial on the merits, it contends that there is still
extensive work outstanding, such as written pleadings, expert and witness testimony, oral
hearings and document production. According to the Respondent, all of these processes
will be narrower, less time-consuming and less costly if focused solely on preliminary

objections.”* As an example, the Respondent contends:

addressing the merits of the Claimants’ case would involve examining and

determining the ownership of no fewer than 80 commercial properties and

470 apartments spread out over more than three thousand plots of land

throughout Croatia.”*
Furthermore, the Respondent argues that it would be a waste of time and costs to address
the Claimants’ quantum claim any further before the Tribunal decides the jurisdictional
and admissibility issues.’> In this regard, the Respondent says that the Claimants’ claim
for direct damages “entails determination of the market value of 80 commercial properties
and 470 apartments ... as well as calculation of the income allegedly obtainable from
letting some of those properties between 2002 and 2013”,”° and that the claim for indirect
damages involves a range of “complex variables affecting the Croatian meat industry”.?”
The Respondent also argues that early determination of its Fourth Objection relating to the
Purchase Agreement could significantly reduce the scope of claims before the Tribunal.

Those claims, according to the Respondent, would require the determination of many

Request, 1139-44.
Request, 441.
Request, 445.
Request, 146.
Request, 447.

Page 9 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

29.

30.

31.

Decision on Bifurcation

issues of Croatian law, an exercise that could be avoided if the Fourth Objection were

upheld in a preliminary phase.”*

In its Reply, the Respondent argues that the Claimants underestimate the extent of
outstanding work in this case.?? In particular, the Respondent rejects the Claimants’
contention that the Tribunal need not consider “strict ownership” under Croatian law to
decide their claims. Rather, the Respondent contends that the Claimants’ right in rem
under Croatian law is a necessary precursor to any question of liability under the BIT
relating to Claimants’ real property.*? Similarly, the Respondent asserts that, contrary to
the Claimants’ argument, the Tribunal will need to consider the status of thousands of land
plots because it cannot take for granted that the Claimants have correctly bundled the plots

as properties.*!

(iii) | Factor 3: Connection with the Merits

In relation to the third factor identified in Glamis Gold, the Respondent submits that its
preliminary objections “turn on discrete and self-contained questions of fact, Croatian and
international law, and international public policy”, which are distinct from the merits.*?
Therefore, there would be no duplication of work in a bifurcated proceeding. According to
the Respondent, because its preliminary objections concern only the questions of whether
consent exists and whether the claims are admissible, the Tribunal can decide these issues

without touching upon the substance of the Claimants’ claims.**

In particular, the Respondent argues that the facts relevant to deciding the preliminary
objections (including the alleged failure to pay for shares and misuse of bankruptcy

proceedings) are not connected to the facts relevant to the Claimants’ claims (relating to

Request, (1148-49.

Reply, Section V.
Reply, 60.
Reply, 61.
Reply, (23.
Request, 152.

Page 10 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

32.

33.

34.

Decision on Bifurcation

real property ownership and land registration). Similarly, in the Respondent’s
submission, there is no overlap between the evidence relevant to the preliminary objections
and that which is relevant to the merits. For example, the witnesses and experts who would
testify in relation to the merits would not be expected to testify in relation to the

preliminary objections.*>

Regarding the First Objection — lack of an “investment” — the Respondent asserts that “the
issue can be resolved by assessing whether or not there was a contribution of value by the

Claimants” and whether any such contribution would be lost if the venture failed.*°

With respect to the Second and Third Objections — illegality — the Respondent argues that
the relevant facts and evidence concern “the source of the funds, the destination of the
funds and the bankruptcy illegalities”.*7 According to the Respondent, none of these
matters is related to land ownership or registration, which is central to the Claimants’ case
on the merits. In this respect, the Respondent refers the decision in Philip Morris Asia
Limited v. Australia, in which the tribunal considered an objection based on non-

conformity with host-State law to be:

suitable for bifurcation because it concerns the foundation of the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction under the Treaty. In the Tribunal’s view, it can be
considered as a discrete and self-contained question both factually and
legally limited to the application of Australian law...**

As to the Fourth Objection, the Respondent states that “it is undisputed that this requires

virtually no factual analysis at all and that it is not connected to the merits.”*

Request, 154.
Request, 1158-63.
Reply, 424.
Reply, 425.

Reply, $41, quoting Philip Morris Asia Limited v. Commonwealth of Australia, PCA Case No. 2012-12,
Procedural Order No. 8 regarding Bifurcation of the Procedure, 14 April 2014, (111.

Reply, 27.

Page 11 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

35.

36.

37.

Decision on Bifurcation

In any event, the Respondent rejects the Claimants’ apparent suggestion that bifurcation is
not appropriate if the preliminary objections are “fact-intensive”.‘” In the Respondent’s
view, there is a benefit of potential cost and time savings in dealing with such objections

separately when the relevant factual examination is unconnected with the merits.

(iv) — Procedural Fairness

In addition to its arguments relating to the three factors identified in Glamis Gold,
the Respondent submits that bifurcation is appropriate in this case because “the balance of
procedural fairness favors the Respondent”.*! According to the Respondent, the Claimants
will not be prejudiced by bifurcation of the proceedings because: (i) there is no risk of
delay given that the Tribunal can set an efficient timetable for separate phases; (ii) there
will be no waste of time because the preliminary objections must be heard and decided in
any event; (iii) in light of the disconnect between preliminary issues and the merits, a
decision on jurisdiction and admissibility could not prejudge the merits; and (iv) a decision

on bifurcation can be made without prejudging the Respondent's preliminary objections.‘

In this regard, in the Reply, the Respondent denies any suggestion made by the Claimants
that bifurcation would affect the quality of evidence or unduly prolong the dispute.*7_ The
Respondent specifically rejects the Claimants’ use of empirical studies on bifurcation to
suggest that bifurcation is time-consuming and inefficient. According to the Respondent
these studies are not only “empirically and methodologically questionable”, but they are
based on an assumption that a respondent’s objections will be rejected.** In any event, the
Respondent contends that the Tribunal “should—all other things being equal—err on the

side of caution rather than speed.”

Reply, 428.
Request, Section IV.
Request, 1165-68.
Reply, Section VI.
Reply, (47.

Request, 74.

Page 12 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

38.

39.

40.

Al.

42.

43.

Decision on Bifurcation

The Respondent argues that it would suffer serious prejudice if the preliminary objections

are joined to the merits.

First, the Respondent says that, in the absence of bifurcation, it would be burdened with
the extensive task of defending itself in a full case in “improper proceedings to which it did

not consent”."®

Second, given that the Respondent has complied with the Tribunal’s direction in
Procedural Order No | to submit a full Counter-Memorial on the merits, it argues that at
this stage, it would serve procedural fairness and equality of arms to address the

Respondent’s objections before considering the merits.*”

Third, the Respondent states that its request for bifurcation stands “apart from routine
bifurcation requests” because the Claimants acquired their alleged investment unlawfully

and “now seek the assistance of the Tribunal to further profit from their own wrongs”.**

B. The Claimants’ Submissions

In their Observations and Rejoinder, the Claimants ask the Tribunal to refuse the

Respondent’s Request in its entirety.

The Claimants contend that the ICSID Rules do not contain a presumption in favour of
bifurcation; indeed, the ICSID Administrative Council explicitly rejected such a policy
when, as part of the 2006 amendments to the ICSID Arbitration Rules, it amended the
previous rule that provided for automatic suspension of the merits.*? Citing Ascension v.

Hungary, the Claimants state that a tribunal should exercise its discretion to bifurcate

Request, 69.
Request, 72.
Request, 73.
Observations, 13.

Page 13 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

44.

45.

46.

Decision on Bifurcation

proceedings only after considering whether bifurcation would preserve or improve fairness

and procedural efficiency.”

The Claimants say that the Respondent’s analysis of different procedural regimes is
“irrelevant and inaccurate”.>! In particular, the Claimants contend that the Respondent has
failed to consider that, in 2010, the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules were changed “to
remove any previously existing presumption in favour of bifurcation”,*? and that Glamis
Gold was decided under an out-dated version of these rules which did have such a

presumption.>*

The Claimants reject the Respondent’s assertion that bifurcation is common practice in
international investment arbitration, citing a study “which found that only 45 out of 174

ICSID tribunals have bifurcated proceedings between jurisdiction, merits and quantum.”**

The Claimants agree with the Respondent that the three factors listed by the Tribunal in
Glamis Gold are among the relevant considerations for determining whether to bifurcate
proceedings but emphasise that they are not the only considerations that may be relevant.*>
Instead, tribunals deciding whether to bifurcate proceedings must look “through the lens of
several factors that either promote or detract from procedural efficiency and judicial

economy.”°°

Observations, [9-10 and Rejoinder, 945, citing Accession Mezzanine Capital L.P. and Danubis
Kereskedohaz Vagyonkezelo Zrt. v. Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/3, Decision on Respondent’s Notice
of Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation, August 8, 2013, 438.

Observations, {11.
Observations, 12.
Observations, 420; Rejoinder, 57.

Observations, 16, citing Lucy Greenwood, “Does Bifurcation Really Promote Efficiency?” Journal of
International Arbitration, Kluwer Law International, Volume 28, Issue 2 (2011).

Observations, 422; Rejoinder, {{[46-50.
Rejoinder, 54.

Page 14 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

47.

48.

49.

50.

Decision on Bifurcation

According to the Claimants, “statistical evidence and procedural fairness” are relevant
considerations in this case.*”? Thus, the Claimants state that “[a]s a baseline”, one must
recognise that a bifurcated jurisdictional phase may add a year or more to the length of the
proceedings and can be expensive to litigate; yet, they say that “only less than a quarter of

ICSID cases are dismissed for lack of jurisdiction”.**

Applying these considerations to the present case, the Claimants argue that, for several
reasons, bifurcation would not be procedurally efficient and would result in procedural and
substantive unfairness for the Claimants. It is convenient to set out their arguments in

relation to each of these two matters separately.

(i) Efficiency of the Proceeding

With respect to the question of the efficiency of the proceeding, the Claimants argue that
early determination of the Fourth Objection would be of no procedural advantage since the
case would continue to the merits phase even if the objection were granted.*? Although the
Claimants accept that the First, Second and Third Objections, if granted, could dispose of
the entire case, they contend that there would be little cost or time savings from bifurcation
because the facts underlying these objections are intertwined with the merits. In any
event, they say that there is little chance the Respondent will prevail in respect of any of its

objections.®!

First, the Claimants point to the decision in Mesa Power Group LLC v. Canada to support
their position that “even a partial overlap of evidence” between preliminary and merits

issues is sufficient to deny bifurcation.©? Further, citing Minnotte v. Poland and

Rejoinder, 51.
Observations, 423.
Observations, 429.
Observations, 130.
Observations, 931; Rejoinder, $6.

Observations, (33, citing Mesa Power Group, LLC v. Government of Canada, NAFTA Chapter 11, PCA
Case No. 2012-17, Procedural Order No. 2, January 18, 2013, 16.

Page 15 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

51.

52.

Decision on Bifurcation

Generation Ukraine vy. Ukraine, the Claimants contend that “tribunals confronted with
allegations of fraud and that the investment at stake was not made in accordance with the
host State’s law typically decide to join such objections to the merits”, and that the

Respondent has made such allegations in this case.°

According to the Claimants, “[t]wo factual matrices are central to both merits and
jurisdiction questions: the bankruptcy proceedings and the pre-bankruptcy assets of
Claimant Gavrilovié d.o.0”.+ As such, the evidence relating to the Respondent’s
preliminary objections is intrinsically and inextricably linked to the merits of the dispute.
In particular, the Claimants contend that numerous exhibits to their Memorial on the
Merits, most notably the Record and the Asset List, would need to be reviewed from the
perspective of both jurisdiction and merits. In this regard, the Claimants reject as “simply
false” the Respondent’s statement that the Record and the Asset List are not mentioned in
the Respondent’s preliminary objections; the Claimants point out that the Respondent
references these documents in relation to its allegation that Mr. Gavrilovié schemed with
the bankruptcy trustee, and that the Respondent’s “Bankruptcy Law Expert Report”

discusses the Record extensively.”

Similarly, the Claimants state that “at least half of the witnesses testify both as to the
circumstances of the bankruptcy purchase (jurisdiction) and later breaches of FET by
Croatia (merits)”.°* Thus, many witnesses would need to appear twice during this

arbitration if the Tribunal were to bifurcate the proceedings.”

Observations, (36, citing Minnotte and Lewis v. Republic of Poland, \CSID Case No. ARB (AF)/10/1,
Award, May 16, 2014, 1129.

Rejoinder, 21.
Observations, {1[4, 41.

Observations, 441-46; Rejoinder, {[21-30.
Rejoinder, 4931-32.

Rejoinder, 437.

Observations, 4947-50; Rejoinder, ${[33-37.

Page 16 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

53.

54.

55.

Decision on Bifurcation

Second, the Claimants contend that “to determine whether bifurcation is appropriate, it is
necessary to make a preliminary determination of the likelihood of success of the
preliminary objections”.”° Applying this test, the Claimants contend that the Respondent’s

objections are insufficiently substantial to warrant bifurcation.”!

According to the Claimants, the First Objection is “particularly frivolous” for several
reasons, including that “risk is already indicated by the existence of a dispute” and that

“the origin of capital used in investments is immaterial”.”*

The Claimants say that the Second and Third Objections are unsubstantiated because
(i) the Respondent did not “successfully challenge the purchase in the 23 years” since the
investment; (ii) Croatian courts have never refused to confirm the transaction’s
effectiveness; (iii) a senior state attorney of Croatia confirmed that the investment was
made in accordance with Croatian legislation made pursuant to the BIT; (iv) the
Respondent subjected the bankruptcy purchase to a state audit process which did not find
any illegalities; (v) the Respondent’s key witness for these objections is a convicted felon
who recently entered into a plea agreement with the Respondent’s state attorney’s office
reducing his punishment; (vi) the Respondent has “not cited to one Croatian [statute] or
other applicable law that either of the Claimants supposedly breached”; and
(vii) documents in the criminal file which the Respondent has concealed “demonstrate that
the transfer of funds to Mr. Gavrilovi¢ in connection with this investment was not

unlawful”.”3

Rejoinder, 4952-60.
Observations, 451.
Observations, 52.
Observations, 4954-63; Rejoinder, 8-17.

Page 17 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

56.

57.

58.

59.

Decision on Bifurcation

The Claimants argue that the Fourth Objection is not substantial either because, as the
tribunal explained in Vivendi v. Argentina, “a forum selection clause in a contract pointing
to domestic courts will not oust ICSID’s jurisdiction”.”*

Finally in relation to issues of efficiency, the Claimants argue that dismissing their claims
on the merits would not lead to substantially less cost and expense because: (i) the parties
have already provided complete submissions covering all stages of the proceedings; (ii) the
Respondent has “grossly exaggerated” the amount of outstanding work related solely to the
merits by claiming that each land plot and property requires a unique determination, when
in fact many can be addressed simultaneously and the parties have already submitted
expert reports on this subject; and (iii) the Respondent’s jurisdictional objections are
“highly fact-based”, such that “having one document production for the jurisdictional and

merits phases will save considerable time and costs”.”>

(ii) Procedural Fairness

Turning to the issue of procedural fairness, the Claimants argue that bifurcation of the
proceedings would prolong the arbitration and with it the Respondent’s illegal “campaign
of harassment and deprivation”, which the Respondent has, according to the Claimants,
“intensified” since the filing of the arbitration. This conduct has caused “serious damage to
[the Claimants’] business reputation” and relationships, and forms the basis of the

Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures.’°

Furthermore, the Claimants argue that, by delaying the merits phase, bifurcation could

deprive the Tribunal of the opportunity to hear testimony from several witnesses “due to

Observations, 64.
Observations, {ff 65-71; Rejoinder, 38-43.
Observations, 4972-77; Rejoinder, ${{18-20.

Page 18 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

Ill.

60.

61.

62.

63.

Decision on Bifurcation

their high age and health problems”.”’ Thus, bifurcation would “manifestly reduce the

fairness of these proceedings.””®

ANALYSIS

Having carefully considered the submissions of the parties, the Tribunal has decided to
refuse the Respondent’s request for bifurcation of the proceedings into, first, a

jurisdictional and admissibility phase and, then, a merits phase.

Before turning to the reasons for this decision, it is necessary to put to one side some

preliminary matters.

First, it is clear that the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules provide a

sufficient basis for the existence of the Tribunal’s power to decide whether to bifurcate.

Second, as to the breadth of the discretion, while the Tribunal has been assisted by
reference to the relevant regimes under other arbitration rules, and decisions of other
tribunals, the exercise of its discretion is not to be unduly narrowed by reference to
presumptions or circumstances in which other tribunals have considered it appropriate to
(or not to) bifurcate on the facts of other cases. The Tribunal notes that, formerly, the
ICSID Arbitration Rules provided that when a respondent State raised an objection to
jurisdiction, all proceedings on the merits were automatically suspended until the tribunal
either ruled on the respondent's jurisdictional objections or ordered them to be joined to the
merits.”” The present Rules provide for a discretion in such circumstances: Rule 41(3) now
states that “[u]pon the formal raising of an objection relating to the dispute, the Tribunal
may decide to suspend the proceeding on the merits” (emphasis added). The present
Rules, therefore, contain no such mandatory suspension; nor is there any reference to a

presumption in favour of bifurcation.

Observations, 478.
Observations, 47.
ICSID Convention, Regulations and Rules, ICSID/15/Rev. 1 (2003), Rule 41(3).

Page 19 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

64.

65.

66.

67.

80

Decision on Bifurcation

Third, the Tribunal considers that little assistance is gained by seeking to identify, if it may

exist, the common practice of international arbitral tribunals.

Fourth, statistical data on how many bifurcation applications have been granted are apt to

mislead.

What is clear is that each case must turn on its own facts. And, this being so, the Tribunal
does not consider that it should be placed in the “straightjacket” of considering this
question by reference to the Glamis Gold factors, and nothing further. To do so would be
to overlook what can be discerned from relevant cases, namely a governing principle that a
decision on an application for bifurcation, like other procedural orders, must have regard to
the fairness of the procedure to be invoked and the efficiency of the Tribunal’s
proceedings. To identify, and discuss in turn, only certain identified factors may distract

from the task at hand.

A. The Objections Re-visited

It will be recalled that the Respondent’s request for bifurcation rests on four objections to
either jurisdiction or admissibility.8° While it is, of course, unnecessary for the purposes of
this decision to rule on these objections, it is important, indeed critical, to the outcome to
have regard to what would be involved in determining, in a bifurcated phase, whether the
objections should be upheld. Before turning to consider the procedural advantages and
disadvantages of considering each of these objections in a bifurcated phase, it bears briefly

re-visiting the First to Fourth Objections.

a. The First Objection is a jurisdictional one. The Respondent claims that the Claimants
have not made an “investment” in Croatia within the meaning of Article 25(1) of the

ICSID Convention and Article 1(1) of the BIT.

See paragraphs 14-15 above.

Page 20 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

68.

69.

Decision on Bifurcation

b. The Second Objection is also a jurisdictional one, namely that legality is an express
requirement of the BIT and an implicit condition of consent to ICSID arbitration. As
the Claimants’ alleged investment was acquired illegally in breach of Croatian and
international law, and in contravention of international public policy, it was obtained

illegally and, thus, the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction.

c. The Third Objection can be considered together with the Second Objection — it,
however, goes to the admissibility of the Claimants’ claims. As a matter of general
principles of law, international law and international public policy, a court or tribunal

will not grant assistance to a party that has engaged in illegality.

d. The Fourth Objection relates only to alleged non-performance of the Purchase
Agreement dated November 11, 1991. At least insofar as disputes under that
agreement are concerned, they should be determined by the chosen court, namely the

Regional Commercial Court in Zagreb, and not this Tribunal.

B. The First Objection

The Respondent’s contention that the Tribunal is able to simply determine the issue of
whether there is an “investment” has a superficial attraction to it. Indeed, the Respondent
contends that the evidence in support of the First Objection arises from the Claimants’ own
evidence: “A letter from the First Claimant’s bank dated 18 March 1991 and two foreign
transfer orders dated 6 and 16 March 1992 demonstrate that the money that should by law
have gone to five separate bankruptcy estates in Croatia in return for five companies in
bankruptcy ... was instead transferred to the account of a Panamanian company ... in Zug,

Switzerland”.*!

The Tribunal’s present view is that there is merit in the Claimants’ Response. It may be that
the determination of whether there was a relevant “investment”, and thus jurisdiction, will

require consideration to be given, at least, to the bankruptcy proceedings that preceded the

Request, 32.

Page 21 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

70.

Decision on Bifurcation

payment identified by the Respondent and the other salient aspects of the context in which
the investment was (or was not) made. That this is so follows from the contentions relied
upon by the Claimants to support the existence of an “investment”. In their Observations,
they identify four such contentions,*? namely (i) the broad interpretation of the term
“investment”; (ii) the acceptance of an “investment” where the purchase price has been a
nominal amount; (iii) the assumption of risk by the Claimants which is evidenced by the
existence of a dispute; and (iv) the fact that tribunals have generally found that the origin
of capital used in investments is immaterial. Whether these contentions ultimately succeed
is another question, but the issue of whether a financial contribution was made may well
necessitate the Tribunal’s review of the relevant bankruptcy proceedings in considerable
detail, so as to assess not only their legality under the domestic law, but also to determine
exactly what assets were transferred, and to whom, in the course of the bankruptcy
proceedings. Furthermore, as the tribunal identified in Kardasopoulous v. Georgia, the
prevailing political and economic climate may also inform the existence, or otherwise, of

an assumption of risk.

Further, the Tribunal’s opinion is informed by the approach of the tribunal in Minnotte v.
Poland, where it was explained that the investment must be a real one. But the precise
amount and value of which is not critical to the question of the existence, or otherwise,
of jurisdiction.** The First Objection, as to the ultimate veracity of which we say nothing,
requires an investigation of that which preceded the relevant payment to identify whether,
indeed, there was value which passed from the Claimants to the Respondent. That value
may take many forms, and the fact that funds were deposited in a Swiss account (assuming
that to be so) does not explain the provenance of those funds, nor the ultimate beneficiary
of such funds. In short, the First Objection cannot, in the Tribunal’s view, be determined
by reference to a factual matrix as narrow as that posited by the Respondent. Indeed to do
so would be to overlook what the Tribunal considers may, in an appropriate case (of which
this may be one), be relevant to the determination of the existence, or otherwise, of an

Observations, 52.
Minnotte and Lewis v Republic of Poland, 1CSID Case No. ARB (AF)/10/1, Award, May 16, 2014, (112.

Page 22 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

71.

72.

73.

Decision on Bifurcation

“investment”, namely the other conduct which preceded and post-dated the relevant

payment.

Accordingly, insofar as the First Objection is concerned, the Tribunal does not accept the
proposition, emphasised numerous times by the Respondent (in relation to this objection
and others) that the preliminary objection can be determined on the basis of “discrete and
self-contained questions of fact”.** The proceeding, in this regard, bears insufficient
resemblance to Philip Morris Asia Limited v. Australia, where it was said that the relevant
question was a “discrete and self-contained question both factually and legally limited to
the application of [national] law”.*> Indeed, the Tribunal considers that deciding upon the

First Objection is, indeed, a task requiring a considerable “fact-intensive” analysis.

C. The Second and Third Objections

The Second and Third Objections concern allegations of illegality which, in the
Respondent’s submissions, go to, respectively, jurisdiction and admissibility. That is, the
Respondent alleges, inter alia, that the First Claimant “orchestrated the bankruptcy of the

Five New LLCs and fraudulently took possession of them”*°

or “fraudulently took money
belonging to the Croatian State”.87. The Respondent contends that a finding on these
matters, at a jurisdictional or admissibility phase, would alleviate the need for the
burdensome task of reviewing the propriety, or otherwise, of the ownership of no fewer

than 80 commercial properties and 470 apartments throughout Croatia.

The Tribunal is cognisant of the need to ensure procedural efficiency, and can see the good
sense in considering an objection which, if upheld, would save the parties considerable
time and expense in considering such fact-intensive inquiries. Indeed, the Claimants

frankly concede that the Respondent’s success on either of the Second or Third Objections

cf. Reply, 61.

Philip Morris Asia Limited v. Commonwealth of Australia, PCA Case No. 2012-12, Procedural Order No 8
regarding Bifurcation of the Procedure, 14 April 2014, (111.

Counter-Memorial, (20.

Counter-Memorial, (33.

Page 23 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

74.

75.

76.

Decision on Bifurcation

(as well as the First Objection) would dispose of their claims in their entirety, and thereby

obviate a need for a merits phase at all.**

The Tribunal is not, however, satisfied that the proceeding can be neatly divided in the
manner suggested by the Respondent. Absent consideration of the various factual disputes
in relation to the bankruptcy proceedings, and perhaps the consideration of the provenance
of the title of each and every property (that is, the determination of issues such as validity
and proper registration of the relevant titles), no proper conclusion can be drawn as to the
illegality (or otherwise) of the Claimants’ conduct. This may well involve careful
consideration of the propriety of the actions of various administrative and judicial
authorities in registering (or refusing to register) title. To determine that question at the
first stage, without the benefit of a comprehensive evidential basis, would be to risk

prematurely dismissing the Claimants’ claims.

The Tribunal is not persuaded by the Respondent’s argument that various documents can
be effectively ignored for the purposes of determining the appropriateness of bifurcating
the proceeding. By way of example, the Respondent contends that the Record and Asset
List are each a sham produced to obscure the fact that various properties were not properly
divided amongst the relevant companies. Whether that is so can only be determined on a

proper analysis of the evidence in support of that proposition.

The Claimants rely on these very documents as evidence of their rights for the purposes of
the merits of the dispute and highlight that the Respondent relies on the very same
documents to posit illegality for the purposes of its jurisdictional and admissibility
objections. It must follow, in the Tribunal’s view, that the jurisdictional and admissibility
stage, on the one hand, and the merits stage, on the other, will be linked, if not inextricably,

at least closely. In this regard, the Tribunal notes that it was accepted by the tribunal in

Observations, 130.

Page 24 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

77.

78.

79.

Decision on Bifurcation

Mesa Power Group, LLC v. Government of Canada*® that the existence of “closely linked”

facts may, of itself, be sufficient to justify a refusal of an application to bifurcate.

Further, the prospect of a division between these phases, especially in relation to the
matters the subject of the Second and Third Objections, raises the prospect of witnesses
having to give evidence on two occasions. That may be particularly problematic where, as
here, there are serious allegations of fraud to be put to witnesses. The Tribunal considers
that the possibility of it being asked to consider such allegations, and make findings as to
credibility, at the jurisdictional or admissibility stage is such that the Tribunal may be
asked to undertake this task where it has not yet had the benefit of the full factual matrix.
Only a hearing of the entirety of the dispute will provide the Tribunal with all of the
relevant evidence to properly consider such serious allegations. That is not to say that
where allegations of fraud and illegality are made, bifurcation will never be appropriate.
But where, as here, the allegations said to support the Second and Third Objections are, at

least, closely linked, bifurcation is rendered difficult, if not impossible.

Finally, the Respondent’s reliance on the existence of a criminal investigation in Croatia”

as “emphasis[ing] the seriousness of the Respondent’s objections”?!

is, in our view,
unhelpful. What matters to the Tribunal’s ultimate determination of the illegality (or
otherwise) of conduct in Croatia at the relevant time will turn on the evidence led by the

parties, not the existence (or otherwise) of an investigation.

In these circumstances, the Tribunal considers that the reduction in scope of the issues
identified by the Respondent is more apparent than real. At least insofar as the Second and
Third Objections are concerned, the overlap between the factual matters is such that the
jurisdiction or admissibility phase, even if it were considered to be appropriate, would be
time-consuming. Indeed, if that objection failed, the length of the proceeding, as a whole,
would be significantly increased because similar, if not identical, matters would have to be
NAFTA Chapter 11, PCA Case No. 2012-17, Procedural Order No. 2, January 18, 2013, 116,

See further, paragraph 23 above.
Reply, 14.

Page 25 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

80.

81.

82.

83.

Decision on Bifurcation

canvassed in evidence at the merits stage as well. As such, a hearing of the entirety of the

dispute at once must be preferable.

D. The Fourth Objection

As to the Fourth Objection — the forum selection clause in the Purchase Agreement — the
Tribunal accepts that this objection could be determined discretely. However, there are
three reasons why the Tribunal is minded not to divide this issue from the merits phase for

separate determination.

First, it must be borne in mind that, as the Claimants emphasised, and as is well-
established by decisions of other tribunals, a jurisdiction agreement pointing to domestic
courts will not necessarily oust ICSID’s jurisdiction.°? So much is recognised (perhaps
implicitly) by the Respondent in identifying this objection as one that goes to admissibility,

rather than jurisdiction.

Secondly, even if the Respondent were successful in its reliance on this agreement, it
would not appear to obviate the need for a merits phase, at least in relation to those claims
that are unrelated to the Purchase Agreement. Indeed, the scope of the dispute, although
perhaps narrower, may not be so narrowed as to warrant the cost, expense and
inconvenience of dividing the proceeding into two phases. Put simply, as the Claimants
contend, it appears not to be a substantial enough objection, in and of itself, to justify

bifurcation.”

Thirdly, in light of the conclusions in relation to the First, Second and Third Objections,
the bifurcation of the Fourth Objection alone would be causative of unnecessary delay, in
circumstances where the proceeding would be divided into two phases for very little
procedural, or other, advantage. If it were appropriate to bifurcate the First, Second and
Third Objections, the Tribunal would be persuaded to determine the Fourth Objection at

See, eg, Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets LP v The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case
No. ARB/O01/3, Decision on Jurisdiction, January 14, 2004, 491.

Observations, 64.

Page 26 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

84.

85.

86.

87.

Decision on Bifurcation

the same time but, in and of itself, it does not warrant the bifurcation sought. Indeed, the

Respondent does not appear to suggest otherwise.

E. Procedural Fairness

Both parties rely on arguments as to procedural fairness in support of their respective

positions. They have been summarised above.°*

It is, of course, trite to observe that the provision of an adequate opportunity to be heard

and to put one’s case is fundamental to an arbitral proceeding.

The Tribunal considers that the matters relied upon by the Respondent are not sufficient to
persuade us that the Respondent will be deprived of the opportunity to fairly put its case if
the proceeding is not bifurcated. In this regard, the Tribunal rejects the contention that the
State has an entitlement to have jurisdiction determined before the merits.°° — The
objections of a State (whether jurisdictional or otherwise), like the objections of a non-
State party, are entitled to be properly considered, and ruled upon. The Tribunal does not
consider itself bound to afford a State a bifurcated hearing on the basis of a submission of

°° that States need

such an entitlement; nor does it accept that it is bound by a “general rule’
not make submissions as to the merits unless, and until, jurisdiction is definitively

established.

Further, the Tribunal does not accept that the Respondent’s provision of a full Counter-
Memorial on the merits is such that procedural fairness and equality of arms demand a
bifurcated hearing. The provision of the full Counter-Memorial was required in
accordance with Procedural Order No. 1 and, indeed, to enable the Claimants (and the

Tribunal) to understand the Respondent’s case. It is difficult to understand an argument

See the summary of the Respondent’s contentions at paragraphs 36-41 and the summary of those of the
Claimants at paragraphs 58-59 above.

cf. Request, §28. The Respondent’s contention in this regard is summarised more fully at paragraph 17
above.

cf. Request, 28. See further, paragraph 17 above.

Page 27 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

Decision on Bifurcation

that calls in aid the provision of a full Counter-Memorial as providing a basis why

bifurcation must necessarily be ordered.

The fact that the Respondent relies upon the unlawful conduct of the Claimants does not,
in the Tribunal’s view, necessarily support a decision in favour of bifurcation. Indeed, for
the reasons explained in paragraph 77 above, the seriousness of the allegations suggests

that they need be determined in the one hearing.

In short, a non-bifurcated proceeding can be conducted in a manner that ensures that both
parties are accorded procedural fairness. The convenience of having particular issues
determined first, so as to seek to either conclude the proceeding at an earlier stage or, at
least, narrow the issues, does not go to the question of procedural fairness. Indeed, the
Tribunal will, after publication of this decision, give the parties a (further) opportunity to

make submissions on the question of an appropriate timetable.

F. Exercise of the Tribunal’s Discretion

As we have explained above, the Tribunal’s discretion is a broad one. Its proper
consideration of the Respondent’s Request is not confined to the Glamis Gold factors or
indeed the factors identified in other cases, each of which fell to be determined on the basis

of its own facts.

In deciding the Respondent’s request, therefore, the Tribunal also had regard to the other
matters relied upon by the parties in support of their respective positions. In considering
the matters above in the context of each of the First to Fourth Objections, the Tribunal was
of the view that the relevant factors called in aid by the parties were such that, ultimately,

bifurcation was not appropriate.

The balancing of these various considerations is often a difficult task. In this case, the
Respondent has not satisfied the Tribunal that it is appropriate, having regard to all the
circumstances, that bifurcation should be ordered. In particular, the Tribunal is not

persuaded that bifurcated proceedings would enable the consideration of separate, and thus

Page 28 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

93.

94.

Decision on Bifurcation

not overlapping, factual matrices at each of the jurisdiction and admissibility stage and at
the merits stage. Put another way, the result of bifurcation may well require a
consideration of the same, or similar, facts for the purpose of jurisdiction and admissibility
and then, later, for the purpose of the merits. In these circumstances, the balance favours
one single hearing where each party can present its full case as to jurisdiction, admissibility

and the merits. As such, this is not an appropriate case for bifurcation.

Put simply, a ruling on at least three of the four preliminary objections would in all
likelihood require a detailed examination of the same evidence that will ultimately need to
be examined at the stage of determining the merits. There is no procedural or other
advantage with bifurcating the proceeding, so as to require not only the Tribunal to
consider the same, or similar, evidence on two occasions, but so as to require witnesses to
appear on two occasions, submissions to be prepared which canvass the same, or similar,
matters, and the consequential cost and expense. Most fundamentally, it risks a
determination on jurisdiction and admissibility divorced from the entirety of the factual
matrix. Once a considerable factual overlap is accepted, which the Tribunal considers to
be the case, little can be said in support of the division of the case. Indeed, such
bifurcation would be unfair, both to the parties (in terms the cost and expense of preparing
for two significant hearings) and the witnesses (who may be required to appear twice).

Further, unavoidable delay would be thereby caused.

DECISION

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal refuses the Respondent’s request for bifurcation of

the proceedings into a jurisdictional phase and a merits phase.

Page 29 of 30

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.0. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)
Decision on Bifurcation

Vv. FURTHER PROCEDURAL ORDERS

95. In light of this decision, it will be necessary for the Tribunal to make further procedural
orders for the conduct of the proceeding. Having had regard to the proposed schedule for a
non-bifurcated proceeding submitted by each of the parties, the Tribunal will shortly

circulate draft orders to the parties for their consideration.

For and on behalf of the Tribunal,

[signed]

Michgef Prylles

President of the Tribunal
Date: 21 January 2015.

Page 30 of 30

