INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.0.
v

Republic of Croatia

(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

DECISION ON THE RESPONDENT’S REQUEST OF 4 APRIL

 

Members of the Tribunal
Dr Michael C. Pryles AO PBM, President of the Tribunal
Dr Stanimir A. Alexandrov, Arbitrator
Mr Christopher Thomas QC, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms Jara Minguez Almeida

Assistant to the President of the Tribunal
Mr Andrew Di Pasquale

Date: 30 April 2018

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.o. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

Til.

Decision on the Respondent’s Request of 4 April 2018

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION

 

RELEVANT PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND ........cscssecsseseeseeteseeeseeeseeneseenes

THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS

 

A. The Respondent’s Request of 4 April 2018 .......c.ccccceceseeeeseesneseeeeneeneenees
B. The Claimants’ Response of 11 April 2018 .........cccceseseesesseessesneseeeeneeseese
C. The Respondent’s Comments in Reply of 14 April 2018 ....... cc cscs
D. The Claimants’ Second Round of Comments of 20 April 2018 ............00

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

 

DECISION

 

Page | of 13

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.o. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

Decision on the Respondent’s Request of 4 April 2018

INTRODUCTION

This arbitration arises out of the alleged investments of Mr Georg Gavrilovi¢, a national of
Austria, and Gavrilovié d.o.o., a company organised under the laws of Croatia (together,
the “Claimants”), in the Republic of Croatia (the “Respondent” or “Croatia”)

(collectively, with the Claimants, the “Parties”).

On 21 December 2012, the Claimants commenced this arbitration under the auspices of the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”) on the basis of the
Agreement between the Republic of Austria and the Republic of Croatia for the Promotion
and Protection of Investments, which entered into force on 1 November 1999 (the “BIT”),
and the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals

of Other States, which entered into force on 14 October 1966 (the “ICSID Convention”).

The Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits and Memorial on Preliminary

Objections was filed on 31 October 2014.

The substantive hearing of the issues for determination in this arbitration was held in March
2016. A hearing following the submission of post-hearing briefs was held in September

2016.

The parties were informed in March 2018 that the Tribunal expected that the award may

be issued in a few months.

This Decision sets out the Tribunal’s analysis of, and decision in respect of, the
Respondent’s request to fix a schedule for pleadings on its “supplementary preliminary

objections” raised by letter of 4 April 2018 (the “Request of 4 April 2018”).

For the reasons in Section IV below, the Tribunal has decided to dismiss the Respondent’s
Request of 4 April 2018, and, therefore, it will not fix a schedule for pleadings concerning

the same.

Page 2 of 13

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.o. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

Il.

Decision on the Respondent’s Request of 4 April 2018

RELEVANT PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

On 4 April 2018, the Respondent submitted a letter to the Tribunal to draw attention to the
ruling of the Grand Chamber of the Court of Justice of the European Union (“CJEU”) in
Case C-284/16 Slowakische Republik (Slovak Republic) v Achmea B.V. (“Achmea”), and
raise supplementary preliminary objections to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and the
admissibility of the Claimants’ claims. Accordingly, the Respondent requested that the

Tribunal fix a schedule for the Respondent’s supplementary preliminary objections.

At the invitation of the Tribunal, on 11 April 2018, the Claimants submitted a letter to the
Tribunal in response, asking that the Respondent’s request be dismissed and providing

short submissions in support.

On 14 April 2018, the Respondent submitted a further letter in support of what it
characterised as its request to fix a schedule for pleadings on its supplementary preliminary

objections.

At the invitation of the Tribunal, on 20 April 2018, the Claimants submitted comments on

the Respondent’s letter of 14 April 2018.

THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS

THE RESPONDENT’S REQUEST OF 4 APRIL 2018

The Respondent submits that the ruling of the CJEU in Achmea is “a new circumstance of
a fundamental nature that will decisively affect the outcome of this arbitration” that calls

for further submissions by the Parties.

The Respondent states that in Achmea the CJEU ruled “that the Treaty on the Functioning
of the European Union precludes provisions in an international agreement concluded
between EU Member States under which an investor from one of those Member States may

bring arbitral proceedings against the other Member State.”

Page 3 of 13

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.o. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

Decision on the Respondent’s Request of 4 April 2018

The Respondent argues that the judgment of the CJEU was unknown to the Tribunal and
the Respondent before 6 March 2018, and the Parties could not have addressed it in their

earlier case presentations.

Accordingly, the Respondent requests the Tribunal to fix a schedule for pleadings limited
to the Respondent’s supplementary preliminary objections to the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal and the admissibility of the Claimants’ claims, including pursuant to Article 11(2)

of the BIT.

THE CLAIMANTS’ RESPONSE OF 11 APRIL 2018

The Claimants submit that the Respondent’s request of 4 April 2018 should be dismissed,
as it was raised too late in the proceedings and was based on a “gross misinterpretation of

the reach and effect” of the Achmea decision.

The Claimants argue that, first and foremost, the ICSID Arbitration Rules require that
jurisdictional objections must be raised as early as possible, but no later than the expiration
of the time limit for the filing of the Counter-Memorial. According to the Claimants,
because the Respondent failed to raise any European Union law related objections to the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction in compliance with this provision, it should now be barred from

doing so.

The Claimants contend that the jurisdictional objections related to the EU law compatibility
of certain elements of investor-State arbitration were not previously “unknown” to the
Respondent, and have been raised in numerous cases over the past 10 years. Rather, the
Claimants posit that the Respondent “simply decided not to plead EU law related

preliminary objections in this case.”

Further, the Claimants contrast the situation in Achmea with that in the present case, where
the relevant State measures and the filing of the Request for Arbitration predate Croatia’s

accession to the EU on | July 2013. According to the Claimants, it is well established that

Page 4 of 13

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.o. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

20.

21.

22.

Decision on the Respondent’s Request of 4 April 2018

the CJEU has no jurisdiction to interpret EU law in matters where the facts arose prior to a
country’s accession, such that EU law, including the ruling in Achmea, have no application

here.

Finally, the Claimants contend that the Respondent’s consent to this arbitration was
perfected when the Claimants filed the Request for Arbitration on 16 November 2012.
From that date, in accordance with Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, “no party may
withdraw its consent unilaterally”, including through any alleged change in internal law
that would invalidate such consent, or an alleged incapacity to have entered into such
consent. Thus, the Claimants submit that, regardless of any alleged effects of Achmea on

the Austria-Croatia BIT, it can have no bearing on the Tribunal’s jurisdiction in this case.

In sum, the Claimants contend that the Respondent’s Request “is nothing more than a[n]
attempt to further prolong the resolution of the dispute before this Tribunal”, and, at this

stage, no further submissions should be allowed.

THE RESPONDENT’S COMMENTS IN REPLY OF 14 APRIL 2018

The Respondent contends that its objections based on the Achmea judgment are timely.
ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(1) permits objections to be raised later than the Counter-
Memorial if “the facts on which the objection is based are unknown to the party at that
time.” The Respondent says that it bases its objections on the Achmea judgment of the
CJEU of 6 March 2018. According to the Respondent, it is undisputed that this is the date
when the supreme court of the European Union in matters of EU law determined that intra-
EU investor-State arbitration clauses, such as Article 9 of the Austria-Croatia BIT, are
precluded by EU law. It follows, according to the Respondent, that this is the earliest
possible point in time when the Respondent could advance its objections based on this new
and authoritative ruling that addresses the situation at hand (namely, investment arbitration
between EU nationals and an EU Member State). The Respondent raised its objections

shortly thereafter on 4 April 2018. Any discussions pre-dating the Achmea judgment could

Page 5 of 13

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.o. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

23.

24.

25.

26.

Decision on the Respondent’s Request of 4 April 2018

not take into account the repercussions of the ruling of the Grand Chamber of 6 March

2018 “and any related observations”.

The Respondent also points to Article 41(2) and contends that “objections to the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal cannot be ignored if raised during the pendency of the
proceedings, as here.” Further, the Tribunal has a duty to verify its jurisdiction ex officio
and it is empowered to deal with jurisdictional questions of its own motion “at any stage

of the proceeding” under Arbitration Rule 41(2).

Further, the Respondent says that the Claimants also make submissions on the substance
of the Respondent’s supplementary preliminary objections, and advance the following
short observations in response. First, the Claimants’ suggestion that EU law and the
Achmea ruling have no application ratione temporis is mistaken. It is sufficient to dispose
of the Claimants’ objection to note that the Claimants also impugn State measures post-
dating the accession of the Republic of Croatia to the EU, including land registrations that
took place in 2017. It is also settled case law that rulings of the CJEU under the preliminary
reference procedure, as in Achmea, must be applied ab initio from the time the respective
provisions (here, what are currently known as Articles 267 and 344 of the Treaty on the

Functioning of the European Union (“TFEU”) entered into force.

Secondly, Article 11(2) of the Austria-Croatia BIT illustrates that there was never an offer
of consent to arbitrate investor-State disputes if this is “incompatible with the legal acquis
of the European Union (EU) in force at any given time.” Accordingly, the Claimants’
argument that consent was allegedly irrevocably perfected with the filing of the Request

for Arbitration on 16 November 2012 is “ill-considered.”

In sum, the Respondent submits that Article 9 of the BIT is inapplicable and this arbitration

must come to an end forthwith.

Page 6 of 13

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.o. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

27.

28.

29.

Decision on the Respondent’s Request of 4 April 2018

THE CLAIMANTS’ SECOND ROUND OF COMMENTS OF 20 APRIL 2018

First, in response to the Respondent’s (new) argument that the Achmea judgment is a
“fact”, the Claimants contend that the judgment is a legal ruling, not a “fact” as envisaged
by Rule 41(1). Moreover, even if it is assumed, for the sake of argument, that the Achmea
judgment constitutes a “fact” pursuant to Rule 41(1), it is not the fact upon which the
Respondent’s objection will truly be based: the relevant fact is simply that the Claimants
rely on a BIT in place between two EU Member States, a fact which has been known to

the Respondent since its accession to the EU on 1 July 2013.

Secondly, the Claimants note the Respondent’s argument that Article 41(2) of the ICSID
Convention and Arbitration Rule 41(2) give rise to a “duty” of the Tribunal to hear any
preliminary objection, so long as it is brought during the pendency of the proceedings. In
response, the Claimants posit that this proposition would render Rule 41(1) meaningless,
and point out that the Respondent cites no authority for its proposition. Although Rule
41(2) states that the Tribunal “may, on its own initiative” consider its jurisdiction at any
stage of the proceedings, the Claimants stress that numerous tribunals have declined to
exercise this discretion when a party raises a belated preliminary objection, based on the

language of Rule 41(1).

Thirdly, the Claimants argue that the inconvenience and disadvantage to the Claimants in
permitting the briefing of the Respondent’s supplementary objections is “manifest”. The
Claimants point to the fact that they brought their claims over five years ago, and have
spent considerable effort and expense responding to the numerous preliminary objections
already submitted by the Respondent. Further, to add delay and expense to these
proceedings 18 months after the last hearing in this case, as the Tribunal prepares to render
its Award, to address an additional objection the Respondent “chose not to bring in a timely
manner”, would be a severe disadvantage and inconvenience to the Claimants. This is said
to be particularly true as the Second Claimant, Mr Gavilrovic, continues to fight criminal

charges brought by the Respondent.

Page 7 of 13

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.o. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

30.

Iv.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

Decision on the Respondent’s Request of 4 April 2018

Finally, the Claimants address the Respondent’s contention that it is “undisputed ... that
the [CJEU] determined that intra-EU investor-State arbitration clauses such as Article 9 of
the Croatia-Austria BIT are precluded by EU law”, submitting that the Claimants certainly
do dispute Respondent’s characterisation of the Achmea decision, and in particular its

application in the present case.

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

As noted above, the Claimants commenced this arbitration under the auspices of ICSID on
the basis of the BIT between the Republic of Austria and the Republic of Croatia and the
ICSID Convention.

Article 9 of the BIT provides for the settlement of investment disputes between a
Contracting Party and an investor of the other Contracting Party. If a dispute cannot be
settled within three months of a written notification of sufficiently detailed claims, the
dispute shall be subject to conciliation or arbitration by ICSID, or arbitration in accordance

with the UNCITRAL Rules (Article 9(2)).
Notably, Article 11(2) of the BIT, concerning the application of the Agreement, provides:

The Contracting Parties are not bound by the present Agreement insofar as it is
incompatible with the legal acquis of the European Union (EU) in force at any
given time.

On 4 April 2018, the Respondent raised supplementary preliminary objections to the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal and the admissibility of the Claimants’ claims, including

pursuant to Article 11(2) of the BIT.

The Parties cite the following provisions as relevant to the Tribunal’s decision on the

Respondent’s Request of 4 April 2018.

Article 41(2) of the ICSID Convention provides:

Page 8 of 13

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.o. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

37.

38.

39.

40.

Decision on the Respondent’s Request of 4 April 2018

Any objection by a party to the dispute that that dispute is not within
the jurisdiction of the Centre, or for other reasons is not within the
competence of the Tribunal, shall be considered by the Tribunal
which shall determine whether to deal with it as a preliminary
question or to join it to the merits of the dispute.

ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(1) establishes that:

Any objection that the dispute or any ancillary claim is not within
the jurisdiction of the Centre or, for other reasons, is not within the
competence of the Tribunal shall be made as early as possible. A
party shall file the objection with the Secretary-General no later
than the expiration of the time limit fixed for the filing of the counter-
memorial, or, if the objection relates to an ancillary claim, for the
filing of the rejoinder unless the facts on which the objection is
based are unknown to the party at that time [emphasis added].

Finally, ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(2) provides:

The Tribunal may on its own initiative consider, at any stage of the
proceeding, whether the dispute or any ancillary claim before it is
within the jurisdiction of the Centre and within its own competence
[emphasis added].

Having carefully considered the submissions of the Parties, for the reasons that follow, the
Tribunal considers that the Respondent has not raised the supplementary preliminary
objections “as early as possible”, as required by ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(1). It follows
that the Tribunal dismisses the Respondent’s request to brief the proposed supplemental

jurisdictional objections.

First, the question of the jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal that is not part of the judicial
system of the EU to determine a dispute between an investor of the EU and an EU Member
State, and its invocation as a defence in investor-State arbitration, is a notorious one which
has been hotly disputed in many cases involving EU Member States. By way of example,

the Claimants appositely refer to EDF v Hungary, in which the European Commission’s

Page 9 of 13

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.o. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

Al.

42.

43.

Decision on the Respondent’s Request of 4 April 2018

intervention specifically addressed Articles 267 and 344 of the TFEU, being the articles at

issue in Achmea, and in which counsel for the Respondent represented the claimant.!

Secondly, and more particularly, many of the facts concerning Achmea are not new. The
decision of the arbitral tribunal was issued in December 2012. The respondent Member
State, Slovakia, sought to set aside the award in the Frankfurt am Main Higher Regional
Court. When the court dismissed the action, Slovakia appealed on a point of law against
the dismissal to the Federal Court of Justice of Germany. In March 2016, the Federal Court
of Justice referred to the CJEU questions concerning whether Articles 267 and 344 of the
TFEU preclude the application of a provision in a bilateral investment protection
agreement between Member States of the EU under which an investor of a contracting
state, in the event of a dispute concerning investments in the other contracting State, may
bring proceedings against the latter State before an arbitral tribunal. The fact that the matter
was submitted to the CJEU was public knowledge, and the judgment was expected in the
first half of this year. While no one could know how the Court would rule, these facts

should have been known to the Respondent.

There is a dispute between the Parties as to whether the decision of the CJEU in Achmea
is a fact or ruling of law. To some extent it may be regarded as both. Clearly, the handing
down of the decision is a fact. But the decision itself is legal rather than factual in nature:
it clarifies the law in the EU. On balance, the Tribunal considers that the “fact” of the ruling
in Achmea does not suffice as a basis for the objection(s) that the Respondent seeks to raise

at this stage of the proceeding.

Thirdly, even if the Respondent decided not to rely on the so-called intra-EU BIT objection
in the absence of a ruling by the CJEU, the Respondent could have stated at a minimum

that it reserved the right to raise the objection if the CJEU ruled in favour of Slovakia.

' E.D.F. International S.A. v Republic of Hungary, PCA Case No 2009-13, Written Observations of the European
Commission dated 14 May 2013, pp 14-15, available at:
ec.europa.eu/dgs/legal_service/submissions/arbitrage/pca_2009_13_obs_en_red.pdf.

Page 10 of 13

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.o. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

44.

4S.

46.

Decision on the Respondent’s Request of 4 April 2018

Alternately, the Respondent could have requested that the Tribunal suspend the proceeding
until the judgment was rendered, arguing that the application of the dispute settlement
provision of the BIT was contingent upon the ruling of the CJEU. In this regard, the
Tribunal notes that the Respondent has not been reluctant to make other reservations of
rights in the course of this arbitration. However, the Respondent did not raise the matter of
compatibility of the BIT with EU law as an issue, let alone an objection. Nor was there a

reservation of rights.

Fourthly, the terms of Article 11(2) of the BIT reinforce the Tribunal’s view. The explicit
requirement — that the Contracting Parties are not bound by the BIT insofar as it is
incompatible with the legal acquis of the EU in force at any given time — is not contained
in many other intra-EU BITs. Together with the (then) impending decision of the CJEU,
and the view that intra-EU BITs were embraced by the European Commission for a number
of years, the Respondent could have raised the issue in some form at an earlier stage of the
proceedings. The Respondent could not have been ignorant of the existence of Article

11(2).

Fifthly, as foreshadowed, the Tribunal is mindful of the stage of the proceedings. The
Request for Arbitration was filed on 26 November 2012, and was registered on 21
December 2012. The Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits and Memorial on
Preliminary Objections was filed on 31 October 2014. The last hearing in this case was
held in September 2016. The parties were informed in March 2018 that the Tribunal

expected that the award may be issued in a few months.

Finally, Article 41(2) of the ICSID Convention does not give rise to a mandatory obligation
on the part of the Tribunal to hear any preliminary objection to jurisdiction, provided that
it is raised during the pendency of the proceedings. Rather, the Tribunal agrees with the
conclusion in Siag & Vecchi v Egypt:

It is [Arbitration Rule 41] which grants the right to a party to object
to the jurisdiction of the Centre, and it is the right granted by

Page 11 of 13

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.o. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

Decision on the Respondent’s Request of 4 April 2018

Rule 41 which the Claimants assert has been waived as a result of a
failure to invoke that right “as early as possible.” The alternative,
which is a logical extension of Egypt's argument, is that a party
could never waive an objection to jurisdiction no matter
how dilatory had been that party’s conduct, because the right to
object to jurisdiction at any time was protected by Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention. The Tribunal does not accept that proposition?

47. Further, ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(2) states that the Tribunal “may, on its own initiative”
consider its jurisdiction at any stage of the proceedings. Tribunals have declined to exercise
this discretion when a party raises a belated preliminary objection, based on the language
of Rule 41(1).> As the tribunal in Vestey v Venezuela stated, “the Tribunal’s discretionary
power to review its jurisdiction ex officio does not absolve the parties from compliance
with ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(1).4 For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal likewise

declines to exercise the discretion provided for in Arbitration Rule 41(2).

48. In conclusion, therefore, the Tribunal considers the Respondent’s Request of 4 April 2018
untimely and thus inadmissible. Accordingly, the Tribunal dismisses the Respondent’s
request to fix a schedule for pleadings concerning the proposed supplementary preliminary

objections.

2 Waguih Elie George Siag & Clorinda Vecchi v Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/15, Award dated
1 June 2009 (“Siag & Vecchi”) (CL-0060), § 288.

3 See, eg, Siag & Vecchi (CL-0060), { 288 (dismissing untimely objection) and Vestey Group Ltd v Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/4, Award dated 15 April 2016 (“Vestey”), | 150 (same). But see also AIG
Capital Partners Inc. and CISC Tema Real Estate Company v Republic of Kazakhstan, 1CSID Case No. ARB/O1/6,
Award dated 7 October 2003, {ff 9.1-9.2 (allowing objection to jurisdiction raised shortly after submission of the
counter-memorial, but before the hearings).

4 Vestey, | 149.

Page 12 of 13

Gavrilovié & Gavrilovié d.o.o. v Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39)

 

Decision on the Respondent’s Request of 4 April 2018

Vv. DECISION
49. For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal finds and decides as follows:

qd) The Respondent’s Request of 4 April 2018 is rejected.

For and on behalf of the Tribunal,

[signed]

Dr Michael Pryles AO PBM
President of the Tribunal
Date: 30 April 2018

Page 13 of 13

