Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 129 of 173

THE INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Washington, D.C.

In a procedure between

GETMA INTERNATIONAL, NCT NECOTRANS, GETMA INTERNATIONAL INVESTISSEMENTS, &
NCT INFRASTRUCTURE & LOGISTIQUE

Claimants

versus
THE REPUBLIC OF GUINEA

Respondent

(Case: ICSID NO. ARB/1 1/29)

DECISION REGARDING JURISDICTION
Rendered by:
Mrs. Vera Van Houtte, President
Mr. Bernardo M. Cremades, Arbitrator

Professor Pierre Tercier, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal: Mrs, Mairee Uran Bidegain

 

Counselfor the Claimants: Counsel for the Respondent:

Jose Miguel Judice, Esq. Laurent Jaeger, Esq.

Tiago Duarte, Esq. Pascal Agboyibor, Esq.

PLMJ Sociedade de Advogados, RL Romain Sellem, Esq.

Cedric Fischer, Esq. ORRICK Rambaud Martel, Attorneys
Elisabeth Mahe, Esq. Mamadou Traore

Fischer, Tandeau de Marsac, Sur & Ass. Edasso Bayala

The Firm Mamadou 5. Traoré

Date sent to the Parties: December 29, 2012

S| —_—_—_—_ aE eee OEee

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 130 of 173

Table of contents:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

i. TH= PARTIES 3
a. TIIL CIAIMANTS anpeneti 3
b. THE RESPONDENT 3
I. THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL 4
Il THE ARBITRATION CLAUSE 4
lv. BRIEF STATEMENT OF THE FACTS 5
Vv. BACKGROUND OF THE PROCEDURE 7
a. BEGINNING OF THE PI 7
b, REQUEST FoR RECUSAL 8
c. BIFURCATION OF THE 8

 

 

VI. THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS CONCERNING JURISDICTION

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a. THE RESPONDENT 9
b. THE CLAIMANTS. 9
Vil. THE PARTIES' ARGUMENTS 10
a. THE RESPONDENT'S 10
b. THE CLAIMANTS’ IT 14
Vill. DISCUSSION 18
a. INTRODUCTION— BIFURCATION. 18
b. ARBITRATION CLAUSE AS A "CONTRARY AGREEMENT"........... 19

 

. ARTICLE 32.5 OF THE CONCESSION AGREEMENT

 

°

d. GETMA INTERNATIONAL's REQUESTS IN THE CCJA ARBITRATION. ........:-secssesssessesssesseeeveessesssesaness cee 26
e. THE CONTRARY AGREEMENT OF THE 2ND, 3RD AND 4TH CLAIMANTS.........0....:ssesecsesseesesseeseeesenesnenees 33
IX. DECISION ove as 38

 

RpES |. G

VA ay
fs $07 Eric x
9/ sever BOWZFOI S\ -v

58 Av. de ii perct: ce F

e4200BIARRI"2 j Z/
Se 05 14 1654.55 i
74

7

= OCOlUM l= | oH

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 131 of 173

THE PARTIES
a. THE CLAIMANTS

The first Claimant is Getma International, a simplified joint stock company existing under
French law, with registered offices at 66 rue Pierre Charron, 75008 Paris.

The second Claimant is NCI Necotrans, a joint stock company existing under French law with
registered offices at 66 rue Pierre Charron, 75008 Paris.

The third Claimant is Getma International Investissements, a simplified joint stock company
existing under French law with registered offices at 66 rue Pierre Charron, 75008 Paris.

The fourth Claimant is NCT Infrastructure & Logistique, a simplified joint stock company with
registered offices at 66 rue Pierre Charron, 75008 Paris.

The Claimants are represented in the arbitration procedure by:

José Miguel Judice, Esq.

Tiago Duarte, Esq.

PLMJ-A.M. Pereira, Saragga Leal, Oliveira Martins, Judice e Associados, RL
Attorneys & Members of the Lisbon Bar Association

Avenida da Liberdade, 224

1250-148 Lisbon

Portugal

And

Cedric Fischer, Esq.

Elisabeth Mahe, Esq.

Fischer, Tandeau de Marsac, Sur & Ass.

Attorneys & Members of the Paris Bar Association
67, Boulevard Malesherbes

75008 Paris

France

b. THE RESPONDENT

The Respondent is the Republic of Guinea, represented by the State Judicial Agency whose
offices at POB 1005 Conakry, the Republic of Guinea (referred to hereinafter as the
"Respondent" or the "Republic").

The Respondent is represented in this arbitration procedure by:

Laurent Jaeger, Esq.

Pascal Agboyibor, Esq.

Romain Sellem, Esq.

Orrick Rambaud Martel, Attorneys
Avenue Pierre ler de Serbie

75782 Paris

France

10.

11.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 132 of 173

And

Mamadou Traore, Esq.

Cdasso Bayala, Esq.

Of the Firm Mamadou S. Traore
11 POB 721 CMS Ouagadougou
Place Naba Koom, 11

Burkina Faso

THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

On November 14, 2011, the Claimants appointed as arbitrator, pursuant to Article 2 of the
ICSID Regulations:

Mr. Bernardo M. Cremades

B. CREMADES Y ASOCIADOS

Goya, 18

28001 Madrid

Spain

On December 12, 2011, the Republic appointed as arbitrator, in accordance with Article 2 of
the ICSID Regulations:

Professor Pierre Tercier

Chemin Guillaume Ritter 5

1700 Fribourg

Switzerland

On January 20, 2012, the Parties jointly appointed as President of the Arbitral ‘fibunal:

Mrs. Vera Van Houtte 2, wignor e01

STIBBE = Ave iti

Central Plaza 64200BIARRITZ 5
Rue de Loxum, 25 $, n 06 14 16.54 66 JR
1000 Brussels v

Belgium

On February 2, 2012, the Secretary General of the Centre appointed Mrs. Mairee Uran
Bidegain, Legal Advisor at the ICSID, as Secretary of the Arbitral Tribunal.

THE ARBITRATION CLAUSE

Article 28 of Court Order no.00/PRG/87 of January 3, 1987, amended by law no.L/95/029/CTR
in of June 30, 1995 governing the Investment Code of the Republic of Guinea (the "Investment
Code") stipulates that:

"1) Disputes resulting from the interpretation or application of this Code are settled by the
Guinean courts entertaining jurisdiction in accordance with the laws and regulations of the
Republic.

2) However, disputes between the Guinean State and foreign nationals, concerning the
application or interpretation of this Code are, unless otherwise agreed by the parties
involved, definitively settled by arbitration conducted:

© in accordance with the provisions of the Convention of March 18, 1985 for the "settlement
of disputes concerning investments between States and nationals of other states"

— CO

—_—_—_ ES sk me

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 133 of 173

established under the aegis of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, ratified by the Republic of Guinea on November A, 1986, or;

° if the person or company concerned does not meet the nationality conditions stipulated in
Article 25 of said Convention, in accordance with the provisions of the regulations of the
additional mechanism approved on September 27, 1978 by the Administrative Council of
the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID)."

BRIEF STATEMENT OF THE FACTS

On September 22, 2008, the Republic of Guinea and Getma International concluded an
agreement for the Concession of the container terminal of the port of Conakry, its extension
and the building of a rail extension (the "Concession Agreement") (Exhibit C - 11). Under this
agreement, the Republic of Guinea granted to Getma International a Concession to the public
service of managing and operating the Conakry container terminal (the "Concession").

Pursuant to Article 7 of the Concession Agreement, Getma International was to create a
company under Guinean law for the operation of the Concession. Pursuant to this provision,
the Societe du Terminal 4 Conteneurs de Conakry SA (the Conakry container terminal company)
(the "STCC") was created on November 20, 2008 (Exhibit C - 13). 95% of the STCC is owned by
Getma International Investissements, created on November 12, 2008, 51% by Getma
International in its turn, and 49% by NCT Necotrans (Counter-Memorial no.2 § 219, Memorial
no. 2 § 69).

On November 7, 2009, the Republic and Getma International concluded Additional Clause no.
1 to the Concession Agreement in order to specify the conditions for suspending and
calculating the terms and deadlines contained in the Concession Agreement, the number of
members in the monitoring committee, the nature of the activities granted, the share in the
parking costs and fees ("Additional Clause no. 1") (Exhibit C- 12).

Through its French subsidiary NCT Infrastructure & Logistique, Getma International launched
an international call for bids, closed in February 2011, for the construction of a new dock and
the building of a new area of 120,000 m? (Counter-Memorial no. 2 § 219, Memorial no. 2 § 70).

On March 8, 2011, the President of the Republic adopted a Decree pursuant to which the
Concession Agreement and its Additional Clause were "terminated for failures to meet the
Concessionary's obligations [...] effective immediately and without indemnification, at the
expense and risk and based on the faults of the Getma International SAS companies [sic] (the
"Termination Decree") (Exhibit C - 19).

On March 9, 2011, the President of the Republic adopted a second Decree pursuant to which
“the Guinean State has decided to requisition, for a period of 60 days or more, beginmng’on the
date of the signing of this Decree, the personnel, equipment, installations, real property and
assets it deems necessary, belonging to the Getma International SAS company and to the
Conakry container terminal company, which are located in the Conakry container terminal or
elsewhere on the national territory of the Republic of Guinea" (the "Requisition Decree")
(Exhibit C - 21).

—=— Ee

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 134 of 173

19. On May 10, 2011, Getma International submitted a request for arbitration to the common
court of justice and arbitration (the "CCJA") of the Organisation pour 1'Harmonisation en
Afnque du Droit des Affaires (the "O.H.A.D.A.) (Organization for the Harmonization of Business
Law in Africa) against the Guinean state, pursuant to the Arbitration Clause stipulated in Article
31 of the Concession Agreement (the "Arbitration Clause").

20. Pursuant to its request for arbitration of May 10, 2011, Getma International requested of the
Tribunal created as a result of this request and composed of Messrs. Eric Teynier, Juan Antonio
Cremades and Ibrahim Fadlallah (referred to hereinafter as "the CCJA Tribunal") to:

"State and rule that the termination of the Concession Agreement pursuant to the Decree of
the President of the Republic of Guinea is null and void;

Establish that, due to the new Concession Agreement granted on March 11, 2011 to BAL, or to
any other company in the Bollore group, a return to the "statu quo ante bellum" is henceforth
impossible;

Sentence the Respondent to indemnify the Concessionary for the prejudice sustained due to the
termination of the Concession Agreement, and comprising among other things and subject to
adjustment (i) the all-inclusive termination indemnity, (ii) the termination indemnity, (Hi) the
unamortized amount of the entry ticket, (iv) the severance pay and (v) the additional prejudice,
in addition to interest accruing at the legal rate from the date of the preliminary notice of a
change of law;

To leave it up to the Respondent to pay all the costs, expenses and fees borne by the Claimant”
(Exhibit R - 9).

21. The CGA procedure is currently underway.

22. On September 29, 2011, the Claimants filed a request pursuant to Article 36 of the ICSID
Convention as well as order no.00/PRG/87 of January 3, 1987, amended by law
no..L/95/029/CTRN of June 30, 1995 pertaining to the Investment Code of the Republic of
Guinea.

23. Pursuant to their arbitration request of September 29, 2011, the Claimants requested of the
ICSID Tribunal (the Tribunal composed as mentioned in chapter 2 above, also referred to as
"the Arbitral Tribunal"):

"a) to declare that the state of Guinea violated its investment laws and/or International law,
in particular that it expropriated in a discriminatory manner the Claimants’ investment,
without prompt, just adequate compensation, in breach of Articles 5, 6 and 7 of the
Investment Code and/or in breach of customary International law;

c¢) to order Guinea to indemnify the Claimant due to the breach of its investment laws and/or
International law in an amount to be determined at the appropriate time in this procedure, in
a freely convertible currency accepted by the Claimants, plus interest accruing at a
reasonable commercial rate for the currency at issue from the date of the expropriation 1 until
full payment of the amount has been made;

d) To award all other compensation which the Tribunal considers appropriate, and;

e) to order the state of Guinea to pay all the costs of this arbitration procedure, including,
without limitation, the fees and costs of the Tribunal, the fees and costs f the ICSID, the

—_—

24,

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 135 of 173

fees and costs pertaining to the Claimant's legal presentation and the costs and fees of
any expert appointed by the Claimant or the Tribunal, plus the interest owed".

BACKGROUND OF THE PROCEDURE
a. BEGINNING OF THE PROCEDURE

On September 29, 2011, Getma International, NCT Necotrans, Getma International
Investissements and NCT Infrastructure & Logistique (referred to hereinafter as the
"Claimants") filed a request for arbitration ("the request") with the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes ("ICSID" or the "Centre") against the Republic of Guinea.

The basis of the request is the convention for the settlement of investment disputes between
states and nationals of other states (the "Convention" or the "ICSID Convention") as well as
order no.00/PRG/87 of January 3, 1987, amended by law no. L/95/029/CTRN of June 30, 1995
governing the Investment Code of the Republic of Guinea.

On October 19, 2011, the ICSID Secretariat, in order to pursue the examination of the request,
asked the Claimants to clarify the requesting parties’ respective roles in the Concession and to
explain the investment made by Getma International Investissements and NCT infrastructure
& Logistique. According to the information submitted by the Claimants on October 28, 2011:

-  NCT Necotrans is the group's leading holding company owning directly or indirectly 100%
of the three other Claimants, and financed the investment in Guinea;

-  Getma i was the C ionary of the
-  Getma International Investissements is an intermediary holding company controlled by

Getma International and controlling the Guinean Company STCC which is the company
which operates the terminal;

 

-  NCTi & Logistique is NCT * techni idiary ible for the
work of extending the terminal.

In accordance with Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention, ICSID's Secretary General registered
the request on November 3, 2011.

In a letter of November 14, 2011, the Claimants proposed that the dispute be settled by the
Tribunal composed of three members, one arbitrator appointed by each of the parties and the
third appointed by common agreement. In this same letter, the Claimants confirmed the
appointment as arbitrator of Mr. Bernardo Cremades, of Spanish nationality, whom they had
already announced in the request.

 

 

Ina letter of December 12, 2011, the Resp pted the Clai pl
the method of appointing the Arbitral Tribunal and appointed Professor Pierre Tercier of Swiss
nationality as arbitrator.

In a letter of December 20, 2011, the Centre's Secretariat informed the parties-that Mr.
Bernardo Cremades and Professor Pierre Tercier had accepted their appointments, and

to them the and i signe’ pectively by
the two arbitrators, in accordance with Article 6 (2) of the procedural regulations governing
the ICSID's arbitration proceedings (the "Arbitration Regulations").

EE

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 136 of 173

On January 20, 2012, the parties appointed jointly Mrs. Vera Van Houtte of Belgian nationality,
as President of the Arbitral Tribunal. Mrs. Van Houtte accepted her appointment on February
2, 2012. On the same day, the Centre's Secretary General informed the parties that the three
arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that in accordance with Article 6 (1) of the
Arbitration Regulations, the Tribunal was considered was created and the proceedings
commenced on such date, namely February 2, 2012. A copy of the statement signed by Mrs.
Van Houtte was also communicated to the parties on the same day.

Mrs. Mairee Uran Bidegain was also appointed as the Tribunal’s Secretary on same date.

In accordance with Article 13 of the Arbitration Regulations, the Arbitral Tribunal's first session
was held in Paris with the parties on March 30, 2012. During this session, the Arbitral Tribunal
established the specific rules for the procedure. A record of this session was approved by the
parties as stated below.

b. REQUEST FOR RECUSAL

On April 16, 2012, the Respondent submitted a request for recusal against Mr. Bernardo
Cremades (the "request for recusal") pursuant to Article 57 of the ICSID Convention.

Ina letter of April 18, 2012, the ICSID Secretariat informed the parties that in accordance with
Article 9(6) of the Arbitration Regulations, the proceedings were considered as suspended on
the date of the filing of the request, namely on April 16, 2012. The secretary of the Arbitral
Tribunal communicated to them a draft record of the first session held on March 30, 2012,
with the indication that the parties would be asked to confirm their agreement to various
points on the agenda upon resumption of the proceedings.

After an exchange of memorials between the parties regarding the request for recusal and the
filing of the observations of Mr. Bernardo Cremades, Mrs. Vera Van Houtte and Professor
Pierre Tercier considered the request for recusal and put it to an immediate vote without the
presence of Mr. Bernardo Cremades. Following a tie of the votes of the two arbitrators, the
Chairman of the Administrative Council made the decision on June 28, 2012 regarding the
request for recusal, in accordance with Article 58 of the ICSID convention. According to the
decision of the Chairman of the Administrative Council:

"1, The request for recusal made by the Republic of Guinea on April 16, 2012 against Mr.
Bernardo M. Cremades is rejected.

2. The costs incurred by the parties and the members of the Tribunal in examining this
request for recusal will be the object of asubsequent decision by the Tribunal.

3. In accordance with Article 9(6) of the Arbitration Regulations, these proceedings are
considered as having resumed on the date of this decision”.

c. BIFURCATION OF THE PROCEDURE

During its first session, the Arbitral Tribunal — after having noted that the Respondent intended
to contest the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal and that the parties agreed on the
bifurcation of the procedure — established the procedural calendar on the issue of jurisdiction
as follows:

e — June 22, 2012: Respondent's Memorial on jurisdiction

_

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

vi.

45.

46.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 137 of 173

July 13, 2012: the Claimants' Counter Memorial on jurisdiction
August 3, 2012: the Respondent's Replication

September 7, 2012: the Claimants’ rejoinder

September 28, 2012: Hearing

eocee

On June 7, 2012, the Arbitral Tribunal proposed that the parties not suspend the calendar of
the procedure and maintain the dates established during the first session, notwithstanding the
suspension of the procedure following the Respondent's request for recusal. The parties
marked their agreement on June 8, 2012.

On June 22, 2012, the Respondent submitted its Memorial no. 1 on jurisdiction by email
("Memorial no. 1").

On June 28, 2012, the parties were asked to confirm their agreement regarding the draft
record of the first session of the Arbitral Tribunal. The Claimants and the Respondent mark
their agreement regarding the record respectively on July 4 and 12" 2012. On this occasion,
the parties also stated that they were not opposed to the ICSID's publication of the decision of
the Chairman of the administrative council regarding the request for recusal.

On July 13, 2012, the Claimants submitted their Counter Memorial no. 1 on jurisdiction by
email ("Counter Memorial no. 1").

On July 30, 2012, the Respondent requested, pursuant to Article 26(2) of the ICSID regulations,
a three-day extension to present its Memorial no. 2 on jurisdiction. Given the Claimants’
agreement, the Arbitral Tribunal granted the requested extension. On August 6, 2012, the
Respondent submitted its Memorial no. 2 on jurisdiction by email ("Memorial no. 2").

On September 7, 2012, the Claimants submitted their Counter Memorial no.2 on jurisdiction
by email ("Counter Memorial no.2").

On September 28, 2012, a hearing on the jurisdiction of this Arbitral Tribunal was held in Paris,
the record of which was submitted to the Parties and the arbitrators in draft form on the same
day, and in its final form subject to possible corrections by the Parties or the arbitrators, on
October 2, 2012.

THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS REGARDING JURISDICTION
a. THE RESPONDENT

In its Memorial no. 1 on jurisdiction of June 22, 2012 and its Memorial no.2 on jurisdiction of

August 6, 2012, the Respondent requested that the Arbitral Tribunal:

"declare that it entertains jurisdiction;

- sentence the Claimants to pay all of the arbitration costs including the costs and fees
incurred by the Respondent for the purposes of its defense in the framework of this
arbitration, the amount of which will be determined at the end of the procedure."

b. THE CLAIMANTS

In their Counter Memorial no. on jurisdiction of July 13, 2012 and their Counter Memorial
no.2 on jurisdiction of September 7, 2012, the Claimants request that the Arbitral Tribunal

ma =

—_ wen

Vil.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 138 of 173

declare that it entertains jurisdiction;

“sentence the Republic of Guinea to pay all the costs incurred up until the present day,
including the costs of arbitration pertaining to the objection to jurisdiction and the costs
and fees of the Claimants’ attorneys."

THE PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS
a. THE RESPONDENT's ARGUMENT
i) _ The Arbitration Clause as "a contrary agreement"

The Respondent contests the jurisdiction of this Arbitral Tribunal, on the basis of Article 23 of
the ICSID Convention. It contends that the parties did not grant their consent in writing to
submit their dispute to the ICSID.

The Respondent claims that the ICSID arbitration proposal contained in the Investment Code is
limited. Indeed, Article 28 of the Investment Code stipulates that "Disputes between the
Guinean state and foreign nationals concerning the application or interpretation of this code
are, unless otherwise agreed by the parties involved, definitively settled by arbitration
[ICSID]..." (The Respondent's underlying) (Memorial no. 1 §§ 12 and 14).

The Respondent considers that Article 28 of the Investment Code must be interpreted
objectively. It agrees to seek out the parties’ common intent. According to the Respondent,
Article 28 means that the ICSID entertained jurisdiction only failing the parties' choice of
another court. The "contrary agreement” at issue must be a contractual agreement between
the Guinean State and the foreign investor which has a result which is contrary to that of the
appointment of the ICSID as the arbitration institution with authority to rule on their
investment dispute. Such an agreement could be in the form of an exclusion clause or clause
for the selection of the forum (Memorial no. 14 §§ 18-24).

The Respondent affirms that the parties concluded such a "contrary agreement" when they
inserted the Arbitration Clause designating the CGA in their Concession Agreement. According
to the Resf this Arbitration Clause all gri and litigati

from the Concession Agreement regardless of their nature or legal grounds (Memorial no. 1 §
31).

Contrary to the Claimants’ affirmations, the Respondent considers that the "contrary
agreement" must not explicitly govern liti ing the interp! ion and the
application of the Investment Code. It affirms that the restrictive interpretation rule invoked
by the Claimants is based on no rule or case law (Memorial no. 2 §§ 34-37). Assuming even
that a specific contrary agreement were required, the Respondent specifies that Article 32.5 of
the Concession Agreement clearly incorporates the protection afforded investors under the
Investment Code. Indeed, this Article refers to the "amendment of the Guinean Investment
Code and of the laws in force [..1", namely acts of the State acting as legislator and not as a
party to the Concession Agreement (Memorial no. 2 §§ 38-40).

 

 

The Respondent contends that the Parties’ choice to grant jurisdiction to the CGA is
irrevocable. It is based on the use of the term "irrevocable" in the arbitration clause. The
Respondent claims that Article 28 of the Investment Code is identical to the'so-called ‘fork in
the road" clauses. Thus, like the "fork in the road" clauses, Article 28 proposes an exclusive

ND
A

10

mm =

—_ ein

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 139 of 173

choice between the ICSID or another court and the choice ~ once made ~ is irrevocable
(Memorial no. 1 §§ 47-51).

Furthermore, the Respondent alleges that the Parties’ choice of the CCJA was confirmed by (i)
the filing of Getma International's arbitration request before the CGA on May 10, 2011 and (ii)
the signing of the minutes of the meeting of the CCJA Tribunal on March 12, 2012 which
constitutes a valid Arbitration Clause (Memorial no. 1 §§ 54-55).

ji) Scope of the Concession Agreement and the Arbitration Clause

According to the Respondent, the requests made by the Claimants before the ICSID resulted
directly from the Concession Agreement and are covered by the Arbitration Clause given that
(i) the Concession Agreement constitutes the exclusive basis for the investment on which the
Claimants are relying, (ii) the termination of the Concession Agreement constitutes the
foundation for the Claimants’ requests, and (iii) the prejudice for which the Claimants are
requesting damages relies on the stipulations of the Concession Agreement (Memorial no. 1§§
35-37).

Regarding the investment, the Respondent alleges that according to the terms of the
Claimants’ arbitration request, the Concession Agreement is the exclusive basis thereof. The
Claimants indeed affirmed that "we are confronting a true investment |...]. Indeed, (i) the
execution of the public service Concession contract implied a financial investment to be made
by the Concessionary (investor)" (Memorial no. 1 § 35).

Concerning the basis of the request, the Respondent quotes the Claimants’ arbitration request
according to which "the termination of the contract represents [..] an act of the Public
Authorities and not only a simple execution of the clause of the contract, thereby constituting a
measure with an effect equivalent to expropriation". The Respondent specifies that Article 32.5
of the Concession Agreement governs explicitly litigations concerning acts of the Public
Authorities contravening the investor's rights (Memorial no. 1 §§ 39-41, Memorial no. 2 § 23).
If the expropriation is explicitly governed by the Concession Agreement, the Respondent
considers that any litigation concerning an expropriation is a result of the Concession
Agreement and falls into the scope of the Arbitration Clause. The Arbitration Clause and Article
32 moreover are contained in the same chapter in the Concession Agreement (Memorial no. 2
§§ 25-26).

Concerning the prejudice, the Respondent argues that the extra-contractual prejudice claimed
by Getma International to warrant the jurisdiction of this Arbitral Tribunal (namely the /ucrum
cessans) is in fact the direct result of the termination of the Concession Agreement. According
to the Respondent, the "just, adequate compensation" stipulated in the Investment Code can
only be that which was agreed upon by the parties in the Concession Agreement. Indeed, the
application of the “usual rules and practices of International law" to which the Investment
Code refers leads to the application of the Concession Agreement via the pacta sunt servanda
principle. The prejudice claimed by Getma International therefore indeed results from the
Concession Agreement (Memorial no. 2 §§ 98-110)

iii) Parties to the Arbitration Clause

The Respondent specifies that the "contrary agreement" binds all the Claimants to this
arbitration procedure. The Respondent bases its argument on the theory of groups of
companies (established by the Paris Court of Appeal in the Dow Chemical case) to extend the
effects of the Arbitration Clause to NCT Necotrans, Getma International Investissements and

mm

59.

60.

61.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 140 of 173

NCT infrastructure & Logistique. The Respondent considers that the groups of companies
theory applies in the case at issue because, pursuant to a material rule of the international law
of arbitration acknowledged in the uniform act on the OHADA arbitration laws, the existence
and effectiveness of an Arbitration Clause is appreciated on the basis of the parties’ will,
independently of any reference to a state law (Memorial no. 2 §§ 87-91).

According to the Respondent, the Claimants - belonging to the same group of companies —
due to their participation in the conclusion and execution of the Concession Agreement and
Additional Clause no.l, manifested their wish to be bound by the Arbitration Clause. Indeed
(Memorial no. 2 §§ 58-74):

a) the Claimants all belong to the same group of companies (the Necotrans group) and share
executives who are also officers in NCT Necotrans;

b) the Claimants (with the exception of Getma International Investissements) participated
and were personally represented during the negotiations of the Concession Agreement,
which was signed by Mr. Talbot in his capacity as "president of the NCT Necotrans group";

c) NCT Necotrans was in charge of obtaining the financing necessary for making the

investments stipulated in the Concession Agreement. Getma__ International

Investissements was created as the holding company vehicle for the Necotrans group's

participation in the STCC and NCT Infrastructure & Logistique launched a call for bids for

the construction of the new dock stipulated in the Concession Agreement for the account
of Getma International;

Additional Clause no. 1 to the Concession Agreement - which explicitly targets the Getma

International Investissements company - was signed by the president of the Necotrans

group and by the president of the STCC and of NCT Infrastructure & Logistique;

e) The CCJA arbitration was initiated and pursued at the initiative and under the control of
NCT Necotrans.

&

iv) Identity between litigation brought before the COA Tribunal and the ICSID Tribunal.

The Respondent contends that the CCJA Tribunal's record shows that the litigations and
requests brought before the CCJA Tribunal and the ICSID Tribunal are identical and that the
Arbitral Tribunal entertains jurisdiction to rule on the investment litigations. On the one hand,
Getma International's presentation of the dispute quoted in the minutes of the meeting of the
CGA Tribunal of March 12, 2012 is identical verbatim to the presentation made by the
Claimants in their request for ICSID arbitration and, on the other hand, all the Claimants"
requests were brought before the CGA Tribunal, including those governed by the legislation
on investments (Memorial no. 1 § 77).

The Respondent specifies that the litigation brought before the CCJA concerns not only the
contract but also the investment. The Respondent refers to an opening brief introduced by
Getma International in the context of the CGA procedure which states that:

a) The suit is based on International principles for the protection of investments. Getma
International invokes the rules and principles of International law, the notion of a "State
Contract’, the general principles which apply to investments (such as good faith,
legitimate expectations or just and equitable treatment) as well as doctrine in the domain
of International investment law and ICSID case law (Memorial no. 1 §§ 80-84, Memorial
no. 2 § 54)

The litigation concerns the Termination Decree and the Requisition Decree which are acts
of the Public Authorities. Getma International therefore acknowledges that the
jurisdiction of the CGA Tribunal is not limited solely to contractual aspects but

=

12

mn man [|

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 141 of 173

encompasses all aspects linked to the illegal actions of the Public Authorities (Memorial
no. 1 § 89, Memorial no. 2 § 49).

c) The litigation concerns an expropriation. Getma International utilizes terms specific to this
type of measure such as "requisitioning [...] using the armed forces" or “manu military"
and is requesting indemnification for this expropriation. The Respondent specifies that
the CCJA entertains jurisdiction to rule on all of requests concerning the alleged
expropriation, including the violation of investment laws (Memorial no. 1 §§ 92-97).

The Respondent refutes the Claimants’ allegation that Getma International's requests before
the CCJA Tribunal do not cover their entire prejudice.

As the isition of goods, the Resp izes that the i ity claimed
before the CGA Tribunal corresponds to the value of the goods. This indemnity covers
therefore all the consequences of the requi tion Decree and not only the consequences of the
Republic's failure to meet its to minimize the by
Getma International in its capacity as Concessionary (Memorial no. 2 §§ 46- 48).

 

As far as the loss of profit (lucrum cessans) is concerned, the Respondent contends that this
item is included in the al-inclusive termination indemnity stipulated in Article 32 three of the
Concession Agreement which is claimed by Getma International before the CGA Tribunal.
Indeed, the all-inclusive indemnity is aimed at compensating the loss of activity and is based
on revenue (Memorial no. 2 §§ 51-53).

The Respondent emphasizes that Getma International brought the case before the CGA freely
with full knowledge of the facts. It was due to the CCJA's guarantees of independence and
jurisdiction that Getma International allegedly accepted and confirmed the jurisdiction of this
arbitration organization. On the other hand, the ICSID procedure stems from a ‘forum
shopping" strategy on the Claimants’ part (Memorial no. 1 §§ 64-65).

v) Capacity as investor and the carrying out of the investment

The Respondent alleges that neither NCT Necotrans nor Getma International Investissements,
nor NCT Infrastructure & Logistique refers to any dispute presenting a direct connection with
an investment. These companies do not specify the nature of their investment, the violations
of the Investment Code or the facts they intend to invoke and do not prove their capacity as
investor or the actual prejudice they allege they sustained. According to the Respondent,
alleging a treaty claim does not suffice to warrant the jurisdiction of the ICSID. The Respondent
quotes in this respect the court's decisions in the SGS versus the Philippines and Impregilo
versus Pakistan cases, according to which it is necessary — at the jurisdiction stage — to
determine whether the alleged facts are prima facje such that they constitute a violation of
investment laws. It therefore requests that the Arbitral Tribunal establish that the treaty
claims invoked by the NCT Necotrans, Getma International Investissements and NCT
Infrastructure & Logistique companies are nonexistent (Memorial no. 2 §§ 113 and 122).

Finally, the Respondent contends that NCT Necotrans does not have the capacity of investor
because it has made no investment in the Republic of Guinea as per the Investment Code.

 

Indeed, only direct contributions to a i in Guinea in for
stock are considered as investments under Article 3.2 of the Investment Code, to the exclusion
of indirect holdings. And ding to the p NCT is participating in this

 

arbitration due solely to the fact of its control over Getma International (Memorial no. 2 §§
129-131)

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

74,

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 142 of 173

b. THE CLAIMANTS' ARGUMENT
i) Arbitration Clause as a "contrary agreement"

The Claimants contest the existence of a “contrary agreement" between the parties, as per
Article 28 of the Investment Code, which would exclude the ICSID's jurisdiction for settling
litigations concerning the interpretation and application of said code. According to the
Claimants, only one agreement exists between one of them and the Respondent as concerns
the method for settling contractual litigation (Counter Memorial no. 1 § 149).

The Claimants contend that in order to rule out the ICSID's jurisdiction pursuant to Article 28
of the Investment Code, the "contrary agreement" must be concluded by the Republic itself
and all the investors concerned and must concern the same litigation, the same requests and
the application of the same legal standards (Counter Memorial no. 1 §§17-18). The Claimants
consider that this is not the case here.

The Claimants allege that the Arbitration Clause and Article 28 of the Investment Code do not
have the same ratione materiae scope of application. According to the Claimants, Article 28
covers solely disputes concerning the interpretation or application of the Investment Code,
while the Arbitration Clause covers disputes resulting from the Concession Agreement and its
Additional Clauses (Counter Memorial no. 1 §§ 25-27).

The Claimants consider that the simple fact that an Arbitration Clause exists in the Concession
Agreement is not sufficient for ruling out the existence of another arbitral agreement
concerning the interpretation and application of the Investment Code (Counter Memorial no. 1
§ 35). The Claimants referred to the case law of the Arbitral Tribunal according to which the
method for settling litigations stipulated in a bilateral investment treaty cannot be excluded
following the simple confirmation of an alternative forum in a contract. The Claimants quote in
this respect the Aguasdel Tunari versus Bolivia and Vivendi versus Argentina cases (ad hoc
committee) (Counter Memorial no. 1 §§ 33-39).

The Claimants consider indeed that it is exceptional that a contractual clause for settling
litigations encompass also investment litigations. If such were the parties wish, the Claimants
considered that it was necessary to express it in a clear unequivocal manner. And yet the
Concession Agreement makes no reference to litigations concerning the interpretation and
application of the Investment Code, to the parties wish to eliminate ICSID arbitration or to the
fact that the Arbitration Clause is the "contrary agreement" as per the Investment Code. The
scope of the application of the Arbitration Clause is narrow moreover in that it applies solely to
disputes or litigations "resulting from this agreement or its Additional Clauses". (Counter
Memorial no. 2 §§ 23-27).

The Claimants add that under Article 32.5 of the Concession Agreement, the parties stipulated
explicitly the obligation to maintain the provisions of the Investment Code. In light of this
explicit obligation, the Claimants consider that it is not reasonable to claim that the Parties
wanted to implicitly exclude some of the most important clauses of the Investment Code (such
as those pertaining to the limits on expropriations or to the method for settling disputes)
(Counter Memorial no. 2 § 31).

According to the Claimants, the parties’ conduct also shows that no "contrary agreement"
exists. Thus, up until March 15, 2012, the Republic expressed no objection jo the Claimant's
letter of May 24, 2011 containing the acceptance of the ICSID arbitration proposal (Counter
Memorial no. 2 §§ 41-42).

14

mete te eee

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 143 of 173

Cven if one considered that a contrary agreement exists, the Claimants deem that it has not
been proven that this agreement grants exclusive jurisdiction to the CCJA Tribunal to deal with
investment litigations as opposed to a jurisdiction which is alternative to that of the ICSID. The
Claimants establish an analogy with Article 26 of the ICSID Convention which stipulates that
"unless otherwise agreed", consent to the ICSID's arbitration implies a waiver of the right to
exercise any other recourse. In the case of the departure from the rule of the exclusive
jurisdiction of the ICSID, the other four have a jurisdiction which is alternative to that of the
ICSID which is nonetheless not excluded (Counter Memorial no. 2 §§ 48-56). The Claimants
reject the Respondent's argument concerning the "irrevocable" nature of the choice of the
CCJA arbitration or the analogy with the ‘fork in the road" clauses. The Claimants consider
that the adjective "irrevocable" refers to the decision of the Arbitral Tribunal and not to the
parties’ choice of the CCJA Tribunal. The Claimants note moreover that it is always possible for
the parties to amend an Arbitration Clause later on, so that the choice of the CGA arbitration
is never irrevocable. As concerns the "fork in the road” clauses, the Claimants allege that
Article 28 of the Investment Code does not offer a choice between several Tribunals but
requires that the litigations concerning its interpretation or application be settled exclusively
by an ICSID Tribunal (Counter Memorial no. 1 §§ 87-92 and 96-99).

As an explicit, unequivocal “contrary agreement" does not exist between the Parties, the
Claimants consider that the Investment Code must be interpreted in a manner which protects
the investors and, more specifically, which favors the jurisdiction of the ICSID (Counter
Memorial no. 2 §§ 12-13).

The Claimants argue that at the jurisdiction stage, the Arbitral Tribunal must determine solely,
prima facie, whether the facts alleged by the Claimants (in the event that they were to prove
founded) are apt to constitute a breach of the Investment Code. The Claimants refer in this
respect to the AMCO versus Indonesia, Impregilo versus Pakistan and SGS versus Pakistan
cases. The Claimants recall that this latter case also concerned a contractual termination and
that the Arbitral Tribunal acknowledged its jurisdiction, despite the fact that the contractual
Arbitration Clause was broader than the Arbitration Clause in the case at issue (Counter
Memorial no. 2 §§ 132-141 and §§ 90-94, 122 and 213).

ii) Scope of the Concession Agreement and the Arbitration Clause

Contrary to the Respondent's allegation, the Claimants object that the expropriations scheme
is not governed by the Concession Agreement and that the requests concerning expropriations
do not fall into the scope of the Arbitration Clause. The Concession Agreement indeed
stipulates that an act of expropriation can lead to the termination thereof and to the payment
of a contractual indemnification. But, according to the Claimants, this does not imply that the
expropriation - as an act of the Public Authorities - cannot also constitute a breach of the
Investment Code (which was not abrogated), as acknowledged by the court in the SPP versus
Egypt, Azurix versus Argentina or Impregilo versus Pakistan cases (Counter-Memorial no. 2 §§
65-73).

According to the Claimants, the Concession Agreement was not aimed at replacing the
Investment Code. The reference to the expropriation was aimed solely at prohibiting the
Republic from modifying in its legal order in order to permit, for example, that contractual
terminations following expropriations not call for indemnification. According to the Claimants,
the reference to the Investment Code proves that for Getma International the fact of
maintaining the clauses of the Investment Code continued to constitute a useful guarantee
(Counter Memorial no. 2 §§ 95-99).

15

—_— —_— eee eet

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 144 of 173

As concerns specifically the indemnity, the Claimants object that the "just and adequate
compensation” referred to in Article 5 of the Investment Code, is not defined by Article 32.5 of
the Concession Agreement. According to them, a distinction exists between indemnification
(due to the contractual termination) stipulated in the Concession Agreement and calculated
according to the rules of stipulated in the contract on the one hand, and the compensation
(due to the expropriation) stipulated in the Investment Code and calculated according to the
usual rules and practices of international law, on the other hand. They add that the Investment
Code does not permit the parties to depart from the evaluation criteria stipulated in Article 5
of the Investment Code and that the Concession Agreement makes no reference to Article 5 of
the Investment Code (Counter Memorial no. 2 §§ 110-114). To illustrate the difference
between contractual compensation for termination and legal compensation for expropriation,
the Claimants contend that in the event of a partial expropriation not entailing the termination
of the Concession Agreement, only the legal indemnification would be owed (Counter
Memorial no. 2 §§ 146-149).

iii) Parties to the Arbitration Clause

The Claimants contend that only Getma International is party to the Arbitration Clause. They
consider that the theory of the group of companies does not apply in the case at issue and in
all events would not lead to the elimination of the ICSID arbitration (Counter Memorial no. 2 §
155).

On the one hand, the Claimants allege that the group of companies theory is far from being
established and was even rejected in several countries. In all events, they consider that the
crucial factor for applying the group of companies theory - namely the parties’ common
intention to bind non-signatories - has not been proven by the Respondent. They emphasize
that the Respondent merely establishes that the Claimants are part of the same group of
companies and alleges (without proving it) that they participated in the negotiation,
conclusion or execution of the Concession Agreement. And yet, the "negotiation, conclusion
and execution" can, according to the Claimants, merely indicate the parties’ common intent. In
the case at issue, the Claimants denied that it was their wish to be bound under the Arbitration
Clause and, in particular, under an implicit "contrary agreement" liable to obviate an ICSID
arbitration. The Claimants specify that Mr. Talbot's signing of the Concession Agreement is not
relevant, inasmuch as this was necessary for Getma International's valid commitment (Counter
Memorial no. 2 §§ 157-181, 190-197).

Moreover, the Claimants allege that the group of companies theory was never utilized in case
law to eliminate an investor's right to resort to ICSID arbitration. The effect of this argument
on the contrary, is to extend the rights of the creditors or members of the group of companies
by involving non-signatories in the arbitration. As for the argument of the "piercing of the
corporate veil", the Claimants consider that it can apply only if it is proven that the corporate
veil is utilized for illegal purposes. However, the Claimants affirm that Getma International's
signing of the Concession Agreement is not the result of an attempt to commit fraud or to
derive undue benefit from any right whatsoever (Counter-Memorial no. 2 §§ 201-211).

iv) Identity between the litigation brought before the CCJA Tribunal and before the ICSID
Tribunal

The Claimants contend that the CGA arbitration and the ICS IT arbitration yre distinct, as they

are dealing with different litigations, different requests and different grounds. Only the facts
are the same (Counter Memorial no. 2§§ 114-115); the Claimants allege that the Respondent

16

—_—_—

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 145 of 173

acknowledged moreover the existence of a contractual litigation and an investment litigation
in paragraph 79 of its Memorial. They emphasize in this respect that contrary to that which the
Respondent alleges, the investment litigation has not been brought before the CGA. This
interpretation would seem to stem from a poor reading of the Memorial filed by Getma
International in the CCJA procedure (Counter Memorial no. 2 §§117 and 130). In all events, the
CCJA Tribunal could always decline its jurisdiction if requests concerning the application of the
investment legislation were effectively brought before it (Counter Memorial no. 2 § 125).

The Claimants recall that international arbitral case law admits that the same series of facts
can constitute simultaneously a breach of a contract and of a bilateral investment treaty (or
mutatis mutandis of national legislation for the protection of foreign investments). The
Claimants quote the decisions pronounced in the Vivendi versus Argentina case (award
canceling the ad hoc committee), the Bayindir versus Pakistan, Impregilo versus Pakistan,
Vivendi versus Argentina cases (Vivendi II) and the Biwater versus Tanzania case (Counter
Memorial no. 1 §§ 57-67).

The Claimants contend that in the case at issue, the Termination Decree is an act of the Public
Authorities which - incidentally — also resulted in a breach of the Concession Agreement
(Counter Memorial no. 2 §§ 68-70). The Claimants emphasize that the Respondent itself
acknowledges that the Termination and Requisition Decrees are acts of the Public Authorities
and not merely acts on the part of a party to a contract (Counter Memorial no. 2 § 73).

The Claimants explain that the litigation brought before the ICSID Tribunal concerns precisely
the extra-contractual effect of the act of the Public Authorities constituting an expropriation
measure as per the Investment Code. The CGA Tribunal for its part has been asked to rule on
the contractual effects of this Termination Decree which constitutes an act "which impedes the
proper functioning of the activities of the concession” as per article 32.5 of the Concession
Agreement (Counter Memorial no. 1 §§ 48-49, 78-80, Counter-Memorial no. 2 §§ 82-87).

Moreover, the Claimants allege that the grounds for the requests and the indemnification
claimed before the CGA Tribunal and the ICSID Tribunal are distinct. In this regard, the
Claimants quote the opening brief submitted by Getma International in the CGA procedure, in
which the requests are based on the Republic's violation of its contractual obligation to
minimize the effects of any change of law and acts of the Public Authorities which impede the
proper functioning of the activities in the concession. In this same brief, Getma International
also indicates that the damages claimed in its capacity as Concessionary correspond to "the
portion of its prejudice which was contractualized in the Concession Agreement" but that “the
indemnification stipulated in article 32.3, paragraph 5, as well as that resulting from the
breach of article 32.5, paragraph 3, of the Concession Agreement (cf. Section 5.5) is not such
that it will indemnify Getma International for the entire prejudice it sustained in its capacity as
an investor evicted as the result of an illegal act on the part of the Public Authorities amounting
to an expropriation” (Counter-Memorial no. 1 §§ 105-107, Counter-Memorial no. 2 §§ 125-
130).

The Claimants add that they intend to request of the ICSID Tribunal a decision which places
them in the economic and financial position in which they would have been had the
Concession Agreement been pursued for the total 25-year period (/ucrum cessans). This
amount will be considerably higher than the amount requested, in the strictly contractual
terms, by Getma International, and the CCJA arbitration (Counter Memorial no. 1 §§ 72-76,
109, 141-142).

17

SE SO

90.

91.

92.

93.

Vill.

94.

95.

96.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 146 of 173

The Claimants specify finally that the independence of the CGA and ICSID Tribunals,
emphasized by the Respondent, is not called into question and is not relevant for resolving the
issue of jurisdiction (Counter-Memorial no. 1 § 38).

v) Capacity as investor and the making of an investment

In a preliminary capacity, the Claimants note that the Republic acknowledges that Getma
International and the Concession Agreement constitute respectively an investor and an
investment. Concerning the other members of the group, the Claimants refer to their letter of
October 28, 2011 to the ICSID'’s Secretariat, and contend that the investments they made
respectively are the result of: (i) the signing of the Concession Agreement and Getma
International's direct shareholding in the STCC Company, (ii) STCC's activity as operator, (iii)
NCT Infrastructure Logistique's performance of the work of extending the container terminal,
(iv) the shares owned directly or indirectly in the aforementioned companies by NCT
Necotrans and Getma International Investissements (Counter Memorial no. 2 §§ 216-222).

The Claimants specify that the Investment Code does not restrict the scope of its application to
certain types of investments. The Investment Code indeed does not stipulate that the
litigations subject to the ICSID's arbitration must pertain to investments and does not contain a
definition of the notion of investment (article 3.2 concerns only the "investment of capital
from abroad"). According to the Claimants, under article 28 of the Investment Code, it suffices
that the Claimant be a foreign investor and that the litigation pertain to the application and
interpretation of said code, which is the case here (Counter Memorial no. 2 §§ 230-240).

Finally, the Claimants allege that each of them sustained a personal prejudice in direct
conjunction with the Republic's actions, in their respective capacities as contracting parties to
the Concession Agreement, a shareholder in the group's companies, financer of the
investments, Concessionary, first ranking investor, STCC’s money-lender and assistant project
manager. They point out however that the grounds of the alleged counts of prejudice must be
examined at the merits stage (Counter Memorial no. 2 §§ 248-265).

DISCUSSION
a. _INTRODUCTION— BIFURCATION

During the first procedural meeting of March 30, 2012, as the Respondent had announced that
it intended to contest the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal, the parties agreed on the
bifurcation of the procedure and a procedural calendar which implemented this bifurcation.

The Arbitral Tribunal is therefore called upon at this stage to rule exclusively on its jurisdiction,
without ruling on the merits of the litigation. However, as shall be discussed below, questions
regarding the merits are or may be raised at this stage, during the analysis of the issue of
determining whether the Claimants, and in particular the second, third and fourth Claimants,
are "investors" or have made "investments" as per the Investment Code, and the issue of the
relation between the material clauses of the Concession Agreement and those of the
Investment Code, issues which inevitably arise in the analysis of the jurisdiction of this Arbitral
Tribunal.

The arbitrators consider however that this decision regarding their jurisdiction can and must

be made regardless of the possible ties with the merits of the litigation. Given the parties’
agreement on the bifurcation, the Arbitral Tribunal is also of the opinion that its decision

18

—_— eee

97.

98.

99.

100.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 147 of 173

regarding jurisdiction is to be made independently of any issue regarding the merits. The
Arbitral Tribunal is therefore adopting the following decision regarding its jurisdiction, without
prejudice to possible issues pertaining to the merits on which it will be called upon as the case
may be to dwell at a later stage.

THE ARBITRATION CLAUSE AS A "CONTRARY AGREEMENT".

The jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal (if it exists) relies on Article 28, para. 2, of the
Investment Code quoted above in para. 12. This provision however reserves for the parties
involved the right to conclude contrary agreements. Consequently, the Arbitral Tribunal would
not entertain jurisdiction if it turned out that the Parties had concluded such a "contrary
agreement”.

The Arbitral Tribunal considers that the expression "contrary agreement":

a) allows for a parallel jurisdiction: to exclude the ICSID's arbitration, it does not suffice to
grant jurisdiction to another forum for the same litigations;

b) implies the expression of a clear intent on the parties’ part;

c) places the burden of proof on the party who intends to claim such a contrary agreement.

It must then be determined whether Article 31 of the Concession Agreement, on which the
Respondent bases its plea of lack of jurisdiction, constitutes a "contrary agreement of the
parties involved" as per article 28 of the Investment Code.

Article 31 is the first article of section 4 of the Concession Agreement which covers "the
settlement of disputes and litigations, termination and indemnification”. \t stipulates that:

"this clause will survive the termination of the agreement
The OHADA treaty and its subsequent uniform act will apply to this agreement.

Any dispute or litigation resulting from this agreement or its Additional Clauses will be settled
amicably,

Failing an amicable settlement within 3 (three) months following the protest, the parties may
resort to arbitration in the manner stipulated below:

The grievance, dispute or litigation will be settled definitively and irrevocably following an
arbitration procedure governed by the arbitration regulations of the OHADA Common Court of
Justice and Arbitration (the "CCJA Arbitration Regulations").

The arbitral commission will be composed of 3 (three) arbitrators, one appointed by the
Grantor, the second by the Concessionary, and the third by joint agreement of the two
arbitrators. |f one party fails to appoint an arbitrator within a period of thirty (30) days
following receipt of a request to this effect from the other party, or the two arbitrators failed to
agree on the choice of the third arbitrator within a period of thirty (30) days (beginning on the
date of the appointment of the second arbitrator), the Common Court of Justice and Arbitration
will replace the parties in accordance with the CCJA Arbitration Regulations.

Each of the parties will bear the cost of the arbitrator it has appointed. The other costs
generated by the arbitration will be shared equally between the parties.

19

—_—_——_— eee CO

101.

102.

103.

104.

105.

106.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 148 of 173

The arbitration will be conducted in the French language in Abidjan, the Republic of the Ivory
Coast.

The granting authority explicitly waves its right to claim for itself or for its assets any sovereign
immunity in order to defeat the execution of an award rendered by an arbitral commission
made up in accordance with this clause." (Referred to hereinafter as "the arbitration clause").

The "contrary agreement" must be concluded between the “parties involved”. It is not
contested that the Concession Agreement was concluded between the signatory parties,
namely the Guinean state and the first Claimant, Getma International. The Arbitral Tribunal
will if necessary focus on the issue of determining whether the three other Claimants are also
parties thereto, after having decided whether article 33 constitutes a "contrary agreement"
concluded between the Guinean state and Getma International.

The arbitration clause establishes recourse to an Arbitral Tribunal according to the OHADA
regulations (the "CCJA Tribunal") for:

a) any “dispute or litigation" (art. 31, para. 3), or "the grievance, dispute or litigation” (art.
31, para. 5), a formula which appears broad and certainly broader than "the disputes”
which are the object of article 28. of the Investment Code;

b) "resulting from this Agreement and its Additional Clauses".

According to the Respondent, a contrary agreement between the parties "must lead to a result
“contrary” to that of the designation of the ICSID as the arbitration institution with jurisdiction
to rule on their investment litigation"? (Memorial no. 1 § 23). It considers that the arbitration
clause designates "irrevocably" the CCJA Tribunal for all disputes resulting from the agreement
and excludes the jurisdiction of the ICSID? (Memorial no. 1 § 29).

The Tribunal cannot follow the Respondent's reasoning. For there to be a "contrary"
agreement, the Arbitration Clause contained in Article 31 of the Concession Agreement must
grant jurisdiction to a CGA Tribunal to settle all the claims which Getma International might
infer from the Investment Code, thereby depriving the ICSID Tribunal of all the jurisdiction it
would otherwise have to rule on this issue.

And yet the arbitration clause, by granting jurisdiction to the CGA Tribunal (i) did not specify
that this jurisdiction replaces that of the ICSID, nor did it explicitly exclude the ICSID's
jurisdiction; and (ii) did not specifically attribute jurisdiction to the CGA court to settle
disputes "pertaining to the application and interpretation of the Investment Code". And the
disputes "resulting from this agreement" are not a priori necessarily the same as those
“pertaining to the application and interpretation of the Investment Code”

Contrary to that which the Respondent claims, the fact that all the litigations arising from the
agreement must be brought before a CGA Tribunal, regardless of their nature or the legal
grounds invoked by the parties (memorandum no. 1 § 31), does not prove that the arbitration
clause applies also to (or to all the) disputes concerning the application and interpretation of
the Investment Code and excludes the jurisdiction of the ICSID. The Respondent is thereby

? Our underlining.
? Our underlining,

20

107.

108.

109.

110.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 149 of 173

attempting to lump together® the contract claims and the treaty claims (the different nature
and grounds of which are nonetheless generally acknowledged by arbitral case law5) and
denies the fact that a same given act can constitute both a breach of a contractual obligation
and a violation of the Investment Code, and, as the case may be the subject to two different
courts.

A literal reading of Article 28.2 of the Investment Code which mentions only the litigations
arising from the Concession Agreement, in no manner constitutes a "restrictive interpretation”
such as the Respondent claims (Memorial,° 2 §§ 35-37).

Inasmuch as the jurisdiction of the ICSID Tribunal was not excluded, this Tribunal in theory
entertains jurisdiction to settle disputes pertaining to the application and interpretation of the
Investment Code. Inasmuch as an act of the state would constitute both a breach of the
contract and a violation of the Investment Code, there would then be the parallel jurisdiction
of the two Tribunals. However, it would not be competitive, given that the focus of the
jurisdiction of each Tribunal would depend on the respective legal grounds of each request,
the rights violated, the parties injured, the prejudice sustained and the entitlement to
respective compensation under the Concession Agreement, or the Investment Code. The fact
that the parallel jurisdictions can lead to a double collection of damages, does not mean that
each court will not be called upon to exercise its own jurisdiction. It is in the handling of the
merits and in particular at the time of the verification of the evidence of the prejudice, that the
double collection of compensation shall be avoided.

Subject to that which is stated in subsection D below, the Tribunal rejects the Respondent's
argument that Getma International chose irrevocably the CCJA Tribunal as the only Tribunal
with jurisdiction by coming before it in the first place. Contrary to that which the Respondent
claims (Memorial no. 1, §§ 44), the use of the term “irrevocable” in article 33 of the
Concession Agreement does not mean that the choice of CGA arbitration excludes all other
judicial or arbitral channels. It is clear upon reading the article that the terms "irrevocably" and
"definitively" pertain to the manner in which the dispute arising from the agreement will be
settled by the CGA Tribunal, namely without any possibility of appeal. The fact that the two
terms are undoubtedly pleonasms does not permit one to interpret one of them as pertaining
to anything other than the Tribunal's decision. The irrevocable nature of the choice between
the two courts would imply moreover that the jurisdiction of the two (OHADA and ICSID)
Tribunals is mutually exclusive. And yet it has not yet been proven that the jurisdiction of the
CCJA Tribunal excludes that of the ICSID Tribunal for disputes concerning the interpretation
and application of the Investment Code.

For the same reason, the Tribunal cannot follow the Respondent's argument according to
which article 28 two of the Investment Code is comparable to a ‘fork in the road" clause. This
comparison stems, according to the Respondent, from the nature of the "exclusive" choice the

4 Although it recognizes the distinction, given that, in its Memorial n° 2 it supposes that the Arbitratin Clause
includes not only the contract claims, but also the treaty claims (§§ 17 and the following).

5 whether there has been a breach of the BIT and whether there has been a breach of contract are different
questions. Each of these claims will be determined by reference to its own proper or applicable law (...)"
(Vivendi versus Argentina, annulment decision, Case ARB/97/3, § 96); "treaty claims are juridically /sic/ distinct
from claims for breach of contract, even where they arise out of the same facts” (Bayindir versus Pakistan,
decision on jurisdiction, Case. ARB/03/29, § 148); “The fact that a breach may give rise to a contract claim does
not mean that it cannot also - and separately - give rise to a treaty claim. Even jf the two perfectly coincide,
they remain analytically distinct; and necessarily require different enquiries". (Impregilo versus Pakistan,
decision on jurisdiction, April 22, 2005, Case. ARB/03/3, § 258).

21

ms

111.

112.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 150 of 173

Code offers the parties (Memorial no. 1 §§ 46-53, and in particular § 52). And yet up until now
the analysis of the arguments proffered by the Respondent does not allow one to conclude
that the arbitration clause excluded the ICSID's jurisdiction.

ARTICLE 32.5 OF THE CONCESSION AGREEMENT

The Respondent also invokes article 32.5 of the Concession Agreement in support of its
argument that the CCJA arbitration agreement covers not only the contract claims but also the
treaty claims and therefore excludes the ICSID's jurisdiction for the treaty claims.

Article 32.5 is part of the same section 4 ("settlement of disputes and litigations, termination
and indemnification") as article 31. The Arbitral Tribunal recognizes that this circumstance
could be relevant for interpreting the arbitration clause. This article stipulates:

"32.5 Changes of law and acts of the Public Authorities impeding the proper functioning of the
activities in the concession

Any act, decision or absence of an act or decision, springing from the state, the
dismemberment of the state or of the granting authority of a constitutional, legislative,
regulatory or other nature, the direct or indirect effect of which is to prevent the
Concessionary's proper execution of its obligations (a "change of law and acts of the Public
Authorities impeding the smooth functioning of the activities granted in the concession"), and
in particular:

(i) Any unwarranted withdrawal, nonrenewal or non-issuing of any permit, license or other
form of authorization necessary for the execution of the agreement, for the operation or
management of the activities granted in the concession.

(ii) Expropriation, nationalization, gradual expropriation and gradual nationalization.
(Hi) Amendment of the Investment Code and of the laws inforce.

(iv) Direct and indirect measures, the result gf which is to discriminate against the
Concessionary in favor of possible competitor(s) of the Concessionary, or to favor them to
the Concessionary's detriment, in the port of Conakry.

The Concessionary will send to the Grantor a "preliminary notice of change of law” within
fifteen (15) days following the change of law, (or within forty-eight (48) hours following the
becoming aware of the Change of Law jf the Concessionary could not reasonably have become
aware thereof beforehand.)

The Grantor will do its utmost to minimize the effects of any change of law or acts of the Public
Authorities which impede the smooth functioning of the activities granted under the
concession.

If, at the expiry of a period of sixty (60) days, the consequences of the change of law and acts of
the Public Authorities impeding the smooth functioning of the activities granted in the
concession have not been satisfactorily remedied for the Concessionary, it may serve ‘final
notice of change of law” upon the Grantor and the Monitoring Committee.

22

eee eet

113.

113.

11

11

oo

o

4.

>

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 151 of 173

In the event of a termination following a change of law and acts of the Public Authorities
impeding the smooth functioning of the activities granted under the concession", the
Concessionary will receive the indemnification stipulated in article 32.3 of the agreement.”

This article therefore contains several provisions aimed at acts which constitute violations of
the Investment Code such as:

the withdrawal etc.... of any authorization whatsoever which is not warranted;
expropriation and nationalization (even gradual) (art. 5 of the Investment Code);

measures discriminating against the Concessionary in favor of its possible competitors or
favoring these competitors to the detriment of the Concessionary (art. 6 of the
Investment Code).

On the other hand, the act referred to in subparagraph (iii) consisting in amending the
Investment Code, does not necessarily constitute a violation of this code. This is the case in
particular when the guarantees benefiting the investor pursuant to the first book of the Code
are not restricted by said amendment. Article 32.5 of the Concession Agreement for its part is
aimed at the amendment of the Investment Code only inasmuch as its "direct or indirect direct
effect is to prevent the Concessionary's proper execution of its obligations".

Furthermore, the other provisions of article 32.5 do not concern as is such violations of the
Investment Code, but are aimed at them exclusively inasmuch as they prevent "the
Concessionary's proper execution of its obligations". The article is aimed above all at the
Concessionary's obligations and not its rights. If a change of law or an act of the Public
Authorities prevents the Concessionary from meeting its obligations properly, article 32.5
confers upon the Concessionary the right to terminate the agreement after the mailing of two
notices and the observance of a waiting period. Regarding this point, article 32.5 clearly
departs from the Investment Code, which is aimed at maintaining the Concessionary's rights as
an investor.

Article 32.5 also uses the term "impeding the smooth functioning of the activities granted in
the Concession". The "activities granted in the Concession" however are operational activities,
defined objectively (article 2, as well as article 6 of the Concession Agreement) and do not
directly concern the conditions in which the Concessionary must execute them (subjective
element in the operator's count). This confirms that article 32.5 is hardly preoccupied with the
Concessionary's situation, except that it authorizes it to terminate the Concession Agreement
with the financial consequences stipulated in another article (article 32.3) and identical to
those which prevail in the case of a termination due to the Grantor's fault. Article 32.5 indeed
does not establish a strict correlation between the change of law/act of the Public Authorities
and the termination of the agreement. Even if this is not explicitly stipulated, it ensues from
the preliminary and final notice procedure stipulated in article 32.5 that the decision to
terminate the agreement following a change of law/act of the Public Authorities belongs to the
Concessionary. Only this decision creates the right for the Concessionary to the indemnities
stipulated in article 32.3 (which are identical to those stipulated in the case of termination due
to the Grantor's fault).

23

117.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 152 of 173

According to the Respondent, (i) article 32.5 "introduces the expropriation dispute into the

scope of the contract" and (ii) the combination of this provision and of article 31° (which
submits any litigation resulting from the Concession Agreement to the CCJA Tribunal)
constitute an agreement contrary to the jurisdiction of the ICSID (Memorial no. 2, § 17). As
expropriations are explicitly governed by article 32.5 and as this clause is in the same section 4
as the arbitration clause, the Respondent considers that "this confirms that the parties
intended to place expropriation disputes in the scope of the CCJA arbitration agreement."
(memorial no. 2 § 26).

118. The Tribunal accepts that "the expropriation and its consequences are expressly governed by
article 32.5 of the Concession Agreement. They therefore fall into the scope of the CCJA
arbitration agreement" (Memorial no. 2 § 31). However, this is true only inasmuch as the
expropriation becomes the cause of the agreement's termination and therefore of a litigation
as a result of the agreement. Article 32.5, like article 31, therefore covers only one particular
aspect of expropriation, which is the termination resulting therefrom. It does not govern
expropriation per se. This distinction was perfectly illustrated by the example of a partial
expropriation given by the Claimants’: in the event that the State were to expropriate two
cranes in the port of Conakry belonging to Getma International, without however impeding
the Concessionary's proper execution of its obligations or the smooth functioning of the
activities granted under the concession, both article 5 and article 28.2 of the Investment Code
would continue to apply.

119. Thus, the Tribunal cannot follow the Respondent when it infers from the observation quoted
at the beginning of paragraph 117 above, that the parties "chose explicitly to grant jurisdiction
to the CCJAfor litigations concerning the Guinean Investment Code" and that they "intended to
withdraw this litigation from the jurisdiction of the ICSID" (Memorial no. 2§ 41). The
jurisdiction granted to the CGA Tribunal concerns litigations resulting from the agreement,
including those pertaining to the termination of the agreement following a change of law or an
act of the Public Authorities which prevents the Concessionary's proper execution of its
obligation or impedes the smooth functioning of the activities granted under the concession.
However, it covers nothing else.

120. Article 32.5 of the agreement establishes a particular termination scheme following a change
of law or other act on the part of the Public Authorities which applies subject to the respect of
certain conditions of substance (impeding the smooth functioning of the activities granted
under the concession and/or® the direct or indirect effect of which is to prevent the
Concessionary's proper execution of its obligations) and of form (two notices and two waiting
periods). This particular scheme differs from the scheme which applies to termination as a
result of the Grantor's fault (covered by article 32.3 of the agreement) due to:

- a double notice (preliminary notice of change of law and final notice of change of law),
although in the case of a purely contractual fault, a single written notice specifying the list
of the grievances put forth suffices;

® The Tribunal notes that the Respondent acknowledges here implicitly that Article 31 alone does notsuffice to
conclude that the ICSID's jurisdiction is excluded by Article 31, conclusion of sub-section b. above.

7 Counter-Memorial n° 2 §§ 147-149.

® It is an issue pertaining to the merits which must not be resolved at this stage, to determine whether "to
impede the smooth functioning of the Activities granted under the concession" is the same condition as, or an
additional condition to, or only an alternative condition compared to, the condition of "having as direct or
indirect effect of impeding the Concessionary's proper execution of its obligations.

24

SK —_— i es

121.

122.

123.

124,

125.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 153 of 173

a fixed 60-day correction period, while in the case of a purely contractual fault the period
can be established by the Concessionary itself, although it cannot be under 60 days;

the 15-day period beginning on the date of the change of law (or 48 hours following the
becoming aware of the change of law) for mailing the preliminary notice, while no time
limit is imposed in the case of a purely contractual fault;

The intervention of the Monitoring Committee which must also receive the final notice of
change of law.

On the other hand, the indemnity owed under the contract in the event of termination
following a change of law or an act of the Public Authorities and that which is owed in the case
of termination due to the Grantor's fault, are identical. This scheme is not illogical: by signing
the agreement, the state acknowledges that any change of law or act on the part of the Public
Authorities, without even being faulty or unwarranted, authorized the Concessionary to
terminate the agreement and entitled it to an indemnity which was identical to that owed in
the event of the Grantor's fault, if, and only if, the change of law or act on the part of the
Public Authorities impeded the smooth functioning of the activities granted under the
concession/or impeded, directly or indirectly, the Concessionary's proper execution of its
obligations.

Litigations concerning the application of article 32.5, like those pertaining to the other articles
of the agreement, obviously fall within the sole jurisdiction of the CCJA Tribunal.

The fact that the parties have specifically determined the impact which a change of law or act
of the Public Authorities could have on their contract, does not in itself constitute a basis for
contending that this contractual scheme replaces the legal scheme set forth in the Investment
Code. Article 32.5 has its own specific contractual objective which cannot replace a general
legal scheme. The reference, in article 32.5 of the Concession Agreement, to “any act [...] on
the part of the state" cannot replace the Investment Code. As stated above, such acts are
taken into account — and will be covered — by the agreement only if their "direct or indirect
effect is to prevent the Concessionary's proper execution of its obligations" or if they impede
"the smooth functioning of the activities granted under the concession". The agreement
governs the consequences of these acts on the agreement. Inasmuch as termination follows an
act on the part of the Public Authorities, article 32.5 "contractualizes" the treaty claims which
must, as a consequence, be brought before the CCJA Tribunal in accordance with article 31 of
the agreement.

The question which remains then is to determine whether the agreement governs exhaustively
the consequences of the acts fulfilling the conditions of article 32.5. The answer to this
question would determine concretely whether the Concessionary, acting in its capacity as
investor or otherwise, can — in the case of an expropriation leading to the termination of the
agreement - claim other indemnities or indemnities higher than those stipulated in article
32.3, and before what court. This is an issue pertaining to the merits which must be solved by
the court before which the requests concerning these additional indemnitees are brought.

This Arbitral Tribunal therefore concludes that there is a "contrary agreement" pursuant to
which the jurisdiction of the CGA Tribunal replaces that of the ICSID, but the scope of the
application of which is strictly circumscribed by the terms of article 32.5. There is therefore no
jurisdiction which competes with the CGA Tribunal and the ICSID Tribunal for requests based
on the termination of the agreement as a result of an act by the Public Authorities, but at the
very most this Tribunal's additional jurisdiction if the Concessionary deems that an act of the
Public Authorities constitutes a violation of the Investment Code and has entailed damaging
consequences other than (those of) the termination of the agreement.

25

126.

127.

128.

129.

130.

131.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 154 of 173

0. GETMA INTERNATIONAL's REQUEST IN THE CCJA ARBITRATION

The Respondent contends that Getma International's filing of the request for arbitration
before the CCJA of May 10, 2011 and the signing of the minutes of the meeting of the CGA
Tribunal of March 12, 2012 confirm the parties' agreement to totally exclude the ICSID's
jurisdiction for disputes concerning the application and interpretation of the Investment Code
pursuant to the arbitration clause (Memorial no. 1 §§ 54 and the following).

It is therefore fitting to determine whether the first Claimant's conduct (i) proves its
agreement to replace the ICSID's jurisdiction in its entirety (and not only for the act of the
Public Authorities which causes the termination of the agreement) by that of the CCJA
Tribunal, (ii) can constitute a waiver of the ICSID's jurisdiction or (iii) constitutes an obstacle (or
estoppel) to its now denying that it accepted the jurisdiction of the CGA Tribunal for the treaty
claims which "result from the agreement".

Referral to the CCJA Tribunal does not in itself prove Getma International's waiver of the
ICSID's jurisdiction. In the case of parallel jurisdictions, each Tribunal exercises its own
jurisdiction and the prior referral of a case to one of them does not deprive the other of its
jurisdiction. Indeed, the "fork in the road" doctrine applies only in the case of competing
jurisdictions.

On the other hand, the fact of submitting to one court requests which fall within the specific
jurisdiction of another court could possibly constitute a waiver. In this regard, the Claimants
statement of the requests made by Getma International before the CGA Tribunal (Memorial
no. 1 §§ 54-97 and Memorial no. 2 §§ 44-56) is interesting. Indeed, it appears that the request
for arbitration filed on May 10, 2011 by Getma International before the CGA Tribunal did not
concern solely the contractual requests such as defined in article 32.3 of the Concession
Agreement. Getma International requested in particular that the CCJA Tribunal sentence the
Respondent to pay not only the "contractual prejudice" (para. 3.3.1) comprising the four
indemnitees mentioned in article 32.3, but also the "additional prejudice", comprising, in
addition to an indemnification for undermining its reputation, "an indemnity equal to the loss
of profit it could legitimately have expected for the entire duration of the Concession
Agreement” (para. 3.3.2) (exhibit R-9). The Tribunal notes that Getma International bases this
request on article 104, para. 2 of the public contracts code of the Republic of Guinea.

It is remarkable that, notwithstanding this very clear language, the Claimants allege
categorically, in their Counter Memorial no. 1, that "in the CCJA - contractual- arbitration,
Getma did not request compensation for the lucrum cessans which is unquestionably part of
the prejudice sustained by the expropriated investors [...] (§ 109).

The requests made in the request for CGA arbitration were subsequently broadened, in
particular in the minutes of the parties’ meeting with the CGA Tribunal on March 12, 2012
(also called "CCJA arbitration agreement’). At this stage, Getma International intended to see
the Respondent sentenced to pay the following, duly quantified, indemnities:

"" - 20,894,966 € as an all-inclusive termination indemnity;
pRES
Ne
Enic x
-  €14,201,096 as an indemnity equal to the unamortized amount of the enry ticket;

84200BIARRITZ |
141654 56

-  €2,508,214 as a termination indemnity;

vo>
26

132.

133.

134.

135.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 155 of 173

CI3,606,721 as the indemnity owed for the requisitioned goods"

€1,361,305 for the indemnity owed for initial capital expenditures and formation
expenses;

€110,557 as the indemnity owed for the current contracts;

0806,959 as the indemnity owed for the non-collection of the current assets;
€87,124 as the indemnity owed for the costs of repatriating personnel;
€279,863 as an indemnity owed for expenditures linked to crisis management;

an indemnity to be quantified for the_additional prejudice’? referred to in § 33.2 of the
arbitration request;

the interest accruing at the legal rate on all the preceding sums from the date of the
preliminary notice of change of law" (exhibit R-10, p. 16).

Of the items on this list, only the first three items clearly pertain to the contractual indemnities
stipulated in article 32.3 of the agreement; the sixth and eight items could represent the
fourth contractual count of prejudice stipulated in article 32.3, namely "the amount of the
possible severance indemnities which the Concessionary might owe to its personnel". The
“additional prejudice" is again claimed therein, but once more, without being quantified.
Among the other new items, one draws particular attention: the amount of €13,606,721
claimed as an "indemnity owedfor the goods requisitioned”.

Even if all the other new items, like the additional prejudice, could be considered as
contractual counts of prejudice (notwithstanding the fact that they are not included in the all-
inclusive indemnities established in article 32.3 of the agreement), the indemnity for the
requisitioned goods is, for its part, clearly outside the scope of the application of the contract
and constitutes without a doubt an investor's request based on the guarantees contained in
article 5 the Investment Code."

Getma Internationals initial conduct could therefore cause one to conclude that it recognized
or accepted the jurisdiction of the CCJA Tribunal, even for the treaty claims which are not
explicitly referred to in article 32.5 of the Concession Agreement or, alternatively, waived the
jurisdiction of the ICSID to rule on these claims. The Claimants however contest this conclusion

First of all, they place the accent on a letter sent by Getma International to the Guinean
President on May 24" 2011 to confirm its consent to submit the disputes existing between the
state concerning the application and interpretation of the Investment Code to the arbitration
of the ICSID, and to accept the offer of arbitration made by the State in article 28 of the
Investment Code (exhibit C-6). The Tribunal considers, along with the Respondent, that the

° Our underlining.

1° Our underlining.

"' Article 5 of the Investment Code: "The Guinean State takes no measures of expropriation or nationalization
impacting the investments made by persons or companies, subject to the cases of public utility established on
the conditions stipulated by law. In the event of public utility, the expropriation measures must not be
discriminatory and must provide just, adequate compensation the amount of which will be determined
according to the usual rules and practices of international law.

27

=i

136.

137.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 156 of 173

simple acceptance of the offer, without formulating the slightest request and without even
referring to the "expropriation" (although it occurred on March 8, 2011 and was notified
formally to Getma on March 18, 2012) cannot be considered as a referral of the case to the
ICSID. The Claimants acknowledged this moreover implicitly when they asserted that:
“Document number C-6 is a very standard document. Its purpose is to no longer permit the
Republic of Guinea to withdraw its offer which is in the Investment Code" (record of the
hearing on ICSID's jurisdiction, p. 54, lines 24-26). The Tribunal considers moreover that given
that the jurisdiction of the CCJA Tribunal for treaty claims is limited to those which fall into the
scope of article 32.5, thereby leaving additional jurisdiction to the ICSID, the Respondent had
no reason to protest to the acceptance of the principle of the ICSID arbitration proposal.

Secondly, in their Counter Memorial no. 2, the Claimants distanced themselves from their
requests for indemnification for the additional prejudice and the goods requisitioned. They
have not responded to the argument developed by the Respondent in its Memorial no. 2 ($§
44-56) according to which Getma International submitted it treaty claims to the CCJA Tribunal
in its request for CCJA arbitration and in the CGA arbitration agreement. The Claimants deny
having called upon the CGA Tribunal regarding the /ucrum cessans and the indemnification
for the requisition, not only by their silence regarding that which the request for CCJA
arbitration and the CCJA arbitration agreement say, but also by the fact that the deny explicitly
having presented a treaty claim: "First of all, it is important to recall that, even jf Getma
International had presented a treaty claim to the COA Arbitral Tribunal - which is not the case
- this would not mean that the COA Tribunal necessarily entertains jurisdiction to rule on this
same claim" (§ 125). They rely exclusively on the Memorial presented by Getma International
in the framework of the CGA arbitration (Exhibit R-6) and charge the Respondent with not
having referred to this Memorial in its statements on jurisdiction filed in the framework of this
ICSID arbitration. They refer (§ 129) in particular to paragraph 571 of the CGA Memorial
according to which "despite its contractual obligation, the Guinean State not only did not
believe it was its duty to minimize the prejudice it was deliberately causing Getma
International. Worse even, it preferred to requisition all of Getma International's assets, goods
and employees using the armed forces”. They conclude (in § 130) that the legal basis for this
request for indemnification is the breach of Art. 32.5 of the Concession Agreement, which
stipulates that “the Grantor shall take all useful measures for minimizing the effects of any
Change of Law and Acts of the Public Authorities which impede the smooth functioning of the
Activities granted in the Concession".

In order to grasp the Claimants’ change of position, which they are attempting to deny -

wrongly according to this Tribunal -, it is important to recall the chronology of the pertinent

facts and acts of the procedure:

- March 8, 2011: Termination Decree of which Getma became aware from television (and
communicated formally on March 18, 201 1)

- March 9, 2011: Preliminary Notice from Getma, with reference to Article 32.5, of a change
of Law

-  March9, 2011: requisition Decree
- March 9 2011: Getma's fina! notice
- May 10 2011: Getma’s request for CGA arbitration, based on article 32.5 of the

agreement and targeting, in addition to the contractual prejudice, also the additional
prejudice (comprising the /ucrum cessans) (exhibit R-9);

28

zr lo

138.

139.

140.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 157 of 173

May 24 2011: letter accepting the offer of ICSID arbitration in article 28.2 of the
Investment Code (exhibit C-6).

June 22, 2011: Decree lifting the requisition of Getma's assets (exhibit C-26)

September 29 2011: request for ICSID arbitration and just, adequate indemnification
which is not quantified-for the breach of articles 5, 6 and 7 of the Investment Codes.

March 12, 2012: (report) CCJA arbitration agreement, comprising €13.6 million for the
assets requisitioned and an unquantified indemnity for the additional prejudice (R-10)

March 30, 2012: minutes of the first session of this ICSID Tribunal
June 15, 2012: CCJA Memorial presenting the (highly reduced) indemnity for the goods
requisitioned as an indemnity for the breach of a contractual duty and no longer claiming
the /ucrum cessans (exhibit R-6)
June 22, 2012: the Claimants’ opening brief on jurisdiction in the ICSID arbitration
- July 13, 2012: the Claimants’ first Counter Memorial on jurisdiction in the ICSID arbitration
The Arbitral Tribunal notes that it is only after the first session of this Tribunal that the
Claimants removed from their request before the CCJA Tribunal the indemnities for the lucrum

cessans and for the requisitioned goods.

Indeed, page 119 of the CCJA Memorial contains, in conclusion the request to sentence the
Respondent to pay a total amount of €42,245,208 for the following items (exhibit R-6):

- All-inclusive termination indemnity €20,884,966
- termination indemnity €4,189,140
- indemnity for the entry ticket €14,201,096
- indemnity linked to repatriated personnel €172,874
- indemnity pertaining to invoices to be issued €589,418
- indemnity pertaining to restituted goods
€1,974,885

- indemnity pertaining to non-terminated contracts €187,995
- indemnity pertaining to crisis management costs €258,834

On first site, these counts of request are similar to those appearing in the CGA arbitration’?
agreement, (even if there are several differences, not only in the amounts, but also in their
wording). However, the total amount of the requests is no longer €53,856,805 (as in the CGA
arbitration agreement), but is reduced to €42,459,208. There is no longer a request for "an
additional indemnity" (/ucrum cessans). Moreover, the list no longer contains "the indemnity
owed for the assets requisitioned" for the amount of €13,606,721, but rather and indemnity for
the requisitioned goods "for an amount of €1,974,885. In paragraphs 568 — 572, it presents this
request for indemnity pertaining to the requisitioned assets as based on a violation of the
Respondent's contractual duty to minimize, after receipt of a preliminary notice, the effects of
any change of law and acts of the Public Authorities. In paragraphs 592 to 623 of the same
CGA Memorial, Getma International explains then that following the requisition Decree of
March 9, 2011, its operating equipment and stocks were made unavailable and "were returned

"8 See § 131 above.

29

141.

142.

143.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 158 of 173

only later" pursuant to a new Decree of June 22, 2011, for the purposes of lifting the
requisition of these assets'*. The costs entered into accounts concern the repatriation and
repair of the equipment.

This new presentation of the facts and request leads us to the realization that, at least in the
CGA Memorial, there are no longer, currently, any requests which could be considered as
treaty claims.

During this Tribunal's hearing on jurisdiction in Paris, on September 28, 2012, one of the
Claimants’ attorneys specified that "in the [CCJA] Memorial (...) Exhibit R-6 [...], The counts of
prejudice are specified and quantified this time; it's paragraph 645._In all of these counts of
prejudice, not one concerns the loss of future income’*... On the other hand, in the request for
arbitration before your Tribunal, the issue, which preceded the opening brief before the CCJA, is
extremely precise. Even jf the quantification has not been done at this stage, [...]." (Record of
hearing on ICSID jurisdiction, p. 58, line 26-p. 59, line 3).

The Tribunal then sought confirmation of Getma International's change of position in the CCJA
arbitration:

 

"Professor P. Tercier.- (...) In the current state of the CCJA procedure, you have no more
requests based on the violation of the... Investment Code?

Mr. C. Fischer.- That is totally true. With one overtone; it's not that there are "no more"
requests, there are none"®. In my opinion there never were any explicit clear requests,

Professor P. Tercier.- (...) At the end there was a reference to number 332 regarding which we
understood (...) that it was a prejudice which resulted this time from the breach of article 5, of
articles 6 and of article 7 of the [mining] code.

Is this a change in your position?
Mr. C. Fischer - My reference to articles 5, 6 and 7 of the Investment Code was indeed in the
requestfor ICSID arbitration.

Professor P. Tercier,- Alright. My question is obviously: at the CCJA, you no longer have any
justified requests?

Mr. C. Fischer- No, there are no more.

Professor P. Tercier.- There are no more, to answer your question, because there were some, jf
I may say in the initial stage; is that true?

Mr. C. Fischer.- No, that is not our understanding of things." (Record of hearing on ICSID
jurisdiction, p. 60, line 8 - 26).

‘4 This Decree lifting the requisition is also mentioned on page 12 of the ICSID arbitration request.
‘5 Our underlining.
16 Our underlining.

30

144

145.

146.

147.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 159 of 173

Later on, another of the Claimants’ attorneys made a similar statement:

“Mr. J.M. Judice.- [...] My strongest conviction is to the effect that we used e: licitly the criteria

of article 32.3 and no other criteria. We did not request lucrum C@ssans Record of the

hearing on the ICSID's jurisdiction, p. 62, lines 25 - 27).

 

  

The question pertaining to that which the Tribunal could only consider as a change of Getma
International's position-but which its attorneys were reluctant to acknowledge-was
nonetheless brought back to the table in conjunction with the indemnity of €13.6 million owed
for the requisitioned goods requested in the CCJA arbitration agreement, but no longer in the
CCJA Memorial of June 15, 2012. At that moment, the Claimants acknowledged the change in
the request and explained it as follows:

"Mr. C. Fischer.- [...] Second point, why did we slip, evolve as you said? That is perfectly true,
because the question we were confronting was to determine whether the all-inclusive
indemnity stipulated under the Concession Agreement was necessarily limited, in the
contractual context, and could we request a higher sum or not? In other words, could we under
the Concession Agreement, consider that the compensation stipulated in the contract
exhausted all the prejudice for which we could request indemnification under the Concession
Agreement?" (record of hearing on ICSID jurisdiction, p. 69, lines 20-27).

The Tribunal considers that it cannot settle for this answer. It is clear that Getma International
indeed envisaged at the outset bringing all its requests resulting from the termination and the
requisition, including that for indemnification for its /ucrum cessans and for a substantial
indemnification for the requisitioned goods before the CCJA Tribunal. The idea of basing
certain requests on the Investment Code and of claiming them before an ICSID Tribunal was a
second reflex. However, it was not implemented in a substantial manner:

(i

the request for ICSID arbitration of September 29, 2011 brought before this Tribunal is-
with the exception of (i) the description of the facts, which is practically identical to that
of the request for CGA arbitration and (ii) the legal grounds” - very vague and in no
manner quantifies the prejudice but plans to determine it "at the appropriate time in this
procedure" (p.22, b) thereby allowing a doubt to remain regarding that which is
requested in each of the two procedures and;

Oi

even after the filing of the request for the ICSID arbitration, on March 12, 2012, Getma
International again signed a report/CGA arbitration agreement which covers explicitly a
request for indemnification for its Jucrum cessans and for the requisitioned assets. It is
only in its CGA Memorial of June 15, 2012, six weeks after the first session of this ICSID
Tribunal, that Getma International appears?! to have reduced its request to the counts of
request which is considers to be "contractual".

The evolution in the Claimants’ procedural strategy however does not prevent the fact that
this Tribunal must determine the parties’ common intent at the time of the conclusion of the
Concession Agreement and that this intent, if it was not explained, can also be inferred from

 

"9 Our underlining.

°° Which, in short, consist in stating that the termination of the contract was discriminatory, produce effects
comparable to those of an expropriation (p. 14) and represent an act of the Public Authorities and not only a
simple contractual execution or breach (p. 5 and 16).

*" Its being understood that this Tribunal is not required to rule on the nature of the requests before the CGA

Tribu

nal and furthermore it does not have the means to do so.

31

—_ EE Ee Co

148.

149.

150.

151.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 160 of 173

the parties’ execution of the contract. And the fact that Getma International included, in its
request for CGA arbitration, requests which were not "strictly contractual” in the sense that
they exceeded that which article 32.3 stipulated, but some of which (the indemnities for the
lucrum cessans prejudice, for undermining its reputation and for the goods requisitioned)
could, depending on their grounds, be contractual or based on the Investment Code, then
became relevant.

If the /ucrum cessans request no longer appears in the CGA Memorial of June 15, 2012, the
question arises as to whether it still falls within the jurisdiction of the CCJA Tribunal. According
to the Respondent's attorney, the arbitration agreement defines the perimeter of the CCJA
Tribunal's mission and it matters little that Getma modified its position in its Memorial (record
of hearing on ICSID jurisdiction, p. 63, lines 6 - 12). This Tribunal considers that the issue is one
for the CCJA Tribunal, the only Tribunal with jurisdiction to determine the scope of the referral,
particularly as the Respondent did not accept Getma International's rejection or waiver of the
CCJA's jurisdiction for /ucrum cessans and the requisition of the goods. This Tribunal must
therefore accept as fact the initial referral of the case to the CCJA Tribunal for the Jucrum
cessans and requisition indemnities.

This Tribunal attempted during its hearing on jurisdiction on September 28, 201 2, to Clarify the
parties’ respective positions. It specifically questioned the Claimants regarding the legal
interpretation to give to the limitation on their requests in the CCJA Memorial and in particular
whether the requests which no longer appear therein had been abandoned before the CCJA
Tribunal and if this waiver was then explicit and final (record of hearing on ICSID jurisdiction, p.
68, lines 24-31).

In response, the Claimants acknowledged that “our analysis [...] has evolved and we considered
that under the Concession Agreement a prejudice existed which had been contractualized and
that, on the basis of the Concession Agreement, we do not have the grounds for requesting
future profits for the loss of the contract [..]. Today things are very clear, although they were
not clear previously, before the COA: we are no, and are no longer, requesting future profits, if
it can be considered that we made such a request [...]. Jt was considered contractually that the
prejudice for the loss of the contract [...] should not be assessed as a number of years of results,
but should be lumped together in one year of revenue” (record of hearing on {C jurisdiction, p.
69, line 28, — p. 70, line 20°;

Itis then fitting to determine what the Claimants are requesting of this Tribunal. An analysis of
the request brought before this Tribunal reveals that the Claimants consider that:

i. Having acted in a unilateral manner, the Guinean state violated the standards binding it
through the Investment Code, in particular in the domain of expropriation, i.e. the most
consolidated rules of customary international law (p. 13, 3rd para.);

ii. the decision to terminate the contract, in the terms in which it was carried out, was
discriminatory inasmuch as it could not be applied to a Guinean investor (p. 14, 1° para.);

Termination produced effects comparable to those of an expropriation (p. 14, 4!" para.):

iv. The termination of the contract by the President represents an act of the Public
Authorities (p.15, 4" para.) and exceeds the framework of the execution of the contract
because:

32

vi.

152.

153.

154,

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 161 of 173

1. ihe state is represented in the contract by the Transport Minister;

2. the preliminary formalities for a contractual termination based on the
Concessionary's fault, such for example as a formal notice and a 60. day correction
period, were not carried out (p. 17);

the requisition also produced effects equivalent to those of an expropriation, because no type
of indemnification is provided for (p. 17);

the two Decrees constitute jus imperiiet acts, not merely acts carried out pursuant to a
contract in force (p. 17, last para.).

Prima facie this Tribunal entertains jurisdiction for requests formulated in this manner, subject
to the requests which the parties to the Concession Agreement had excluded from the ICSID's
jurisdiction in their contrary agreement, in accordance with article 28.2 of the Investment
Code. The scope of the application of this Tribunal's jurisdiction therefore does not include
litigations resulting from the Concession Agreement, including its termination, even following
an act of the Public Authorities. Indeed, Articles 32.5 and 31 of the Concession Agreement are
also binding upon this Tribunal. However, it will not be until the time of the analysis of the
Claimants’ precise requests, their legal grounds, their factual causes and the damages, that this
Tribunal can determine if and to what extent its jurisdiction, supplementary to that of the CCJA
Tribunal, can be effectively implemented to rule on a "supplementary" indemnity for a
“supplementary” prejudice, which exceeds the jurisdiction of the CCJA Tribunal.

THE CONTRARY AGREEMENT OF THE SECOND, THIRD AND FOURTH CLAIMANTS.

This Tribunal must then determine what parties are bound by the arbitration clause. To do $0,
it is not enough to observe that the second, third and fourth Claimants all belong to the same
group of companies and that they have shared executives. To appreciate whether these other
three Claimants indeed intended to be bound by the arbitration clause, it is fitting to examine
their respective roles during the negotiation, conclusion and execution of the Concession
Agreement. This is what this Tribunal will do in an initial stage.

(i) NCT Necotrans' signing of the Concession Agreement

It is not contested that only Getma International signed the Concession Agreement. According
to the introduction and the signature page (p. 27) of the Concession Agreement, Getma
International was represented at the time of the conclusion of the agreement by its President,
the NCT Necotrans company, represented in its turn by Mr. Richard Talbot in his capacity as
chairman of NCT Necotrans' Board of Directors. The fact that Getma International was
represented by its President appears normal’? and does not permit one to infer a desire on

® According to Article 12 of the Articles of Association: "the company is represented, managed and
administered by a president, who can be a legal entity or natural person, of French or foreign nationality, a
company shareholder or not. The president, f it is a legal entity, is represented by its corporate officers or by a
representative appointed specifically for this purpose." (Exhibit R-12)

According to the excerpt from the Trade and Companies Register of September 12, 2011 for Getma
International, Getma International's president was NCT Necotrans (Exhibit C-H).

The Tribunal notes that, according to the entry in the Trade and Companies Register of May 13, 2011 for NCT
Necotrans, Mr. Richard Talbot was chairman of the Supervisory Board at the time, while the chairman of the
Executive Board was Mr. Gregory Querel (Exhibit C-2). However this does not enable one to conclude that on
September 22, 2008, the title utilized by Mr. Talbot was not correct (which neither party has raised for that

33

155.

156.

157.

158.

159.

160.

161.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 162 of 173

NCT Necotrans' part to be involved in the Concession Agreement in its own name. Even if
article 15 of Getma International's Articles of Association stipulates that "the president [i.e.
NCT Necotrans] is vested in oil circumstances with oil the powers necessary for representing
and managing the company", this power is merely a power of representation and
management "as regards third parties®*” and does not permit one to conclude that the two
companies are identical or one in the same.

If Mr. Talbot's signature implies the agreement of NCT Necotrans (of which he was a corporate
officer) with the conclusion of the contract by its subsidiary Getma International, this still does
not mean that NCT Necotrans, although a Getma International shareholder, is itself bound
under the contract (as the Respondent claims in its Memorial? 2, § 66).

Similarly, the fact that it be the chairman of NCT Necotrans’ Executive Board, Mr. Querel, who
signed it for NCT Necotrans acting in the capacity of Getma International's chairman, the
special power of attorney granted to the Fischer and Judice firms to represent Getma
International in the CCJA arbitration (exhibit R - 14), in no manner means that this power of
attorney was granted by NCT Necotrans, and even less that it thereby became a party to the
contract, or even to the procedure. There is no doubt that NCT Necotrans acted, in all of these
instruments, as Getma International's president.

It appears that the NCT Necotrans company is the chairman of the Board of Directors, not only
of the Getma International (exhibit C - one), but also of Getma International Investissements
(Exhibit C-3). The signature of the president of NCT Necotrans can therefore, depending on the
case, bind this company or one of its subsidiaries of which NCT Necotrans is the legal
representative. It is therefore fitting to check each time in what capacity NCT Necotrans has
affixed its signature. It is not proven that NCT Necotrans affixed its signature in a capacity
other than as Getma International's president.

(ii) joint address

We note furthermore that NCT Necotrans, Getma International, Getma International
Investissements and NCT infrastructure & logistique all four had their respective registered
offices at the same address (66, rue Pierre shower all, 75008 Paris).

This same address, like the double functions, are apt to create a certain confusion between the
various companies. However, they do not mean that the distinct identities of these various
legal entities can be disregarded and that the rights and obligations of some with those of the
others are lumped together. Third parties are required to recognize each company's specific
identity, unless the companies themselves fail to respect it and create confusion in this regard.

(iii) The role of NCT Necotrans’ legal director in the COA arbitration
The Respondent also invokes the direct participation of Mr. Sean Danielle Littler legal director
of NCT Necotrans, in the CCJA arbitration, and in particular his presence at the hearing of

March 12, 2012, as well as his signing of the CGA arbitration agreement (Memorial no. 2 § 74),

Mr. Littler was indeed present, but it was clearly in his capacity as "Legal Director of NCT
Necotrans" (exhibit R — 10, last page). The mere presence of the legal director of a group's

 

matter). In all events, both of them were "corporate officers" of NCT Necotrans, which appears to suffice under
article 12 of Getma’s Articles of Association
?3 The Respondent omitted to quote these important words in § 60 of its Memorial n° 2,

34

ae

162.

163.

164.

165.

166.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 163 of 173

holding company does not allow one to conclude that he represented one or several
companies not party to the procedure at this hearing. It is common practice that a parent
company provide services (i.e. legal services) to its subsidiaries”. Nowhere in the record is it
stated that Mr. Littler was present in any capacity other than that of the group's (and
therefore also Getma International's) legal director, for example as legal representative of NCT
Necotrans. Mr. Littler also signed the record of the hearing (Exhibit R-10), but it was clearly
specified on page 1 of the record that he was (present as) "Legal Director NTC [sic] Necotrans".

The Tribunal concludes that the mere signing of the record by Mr. Littler does not bind NCT
Necotrans anymore than his presence at the hearing.

(iv) Mr. Abdel Aziz Thiom's signature

The position as president of NCT Infrastructure & Logistique of Mr. Abdel Aziz Thiam, who is
also Vice-Chairman of NCT Necotrans' supervisory board (Exhibit C-4), does not suffice either
in itself to conclude that these two companies are bound under contracts concluded by Getma
International.

Mr. Abdel Aziz Thiam cosigned (along with Mr. Richard Talbot) Additional Clause no. 1 to the
Concession Agreement. As he is both chairman of the Board of Directors of the STCC operating
company and president of the Board of Directors of NCT Infrastructure & Logistique, it is
nonetheless clear that he signed this Additional Clause in his capacity as STCC's corporate
officer: his signature proves that the operating company "read and approved" (as stated above
his signature) Additional Clause no. 1 to which only Getma International and the Guinean State
were parties. The preamble to Additional Clause no. 1 recalls that the operating company was
(in accordance with the Concession Agreement) the "Concessionary's representative". It was in
the capacity of contractual representative that it was present at the signing of the Additional
Clause, as was the Conakry port authority which was there as "the Grantor's representative".
None of these representatives however was party to Additional Clause no. 1.

(v) The negotiators of the Concession Agreement

The respondent also derives an argument from the fact that Mr. Abdel Aziz Thiam also directed
Getma International's negotiation team, as confirmed by Getma International in its opening
brief before the CCJA (exhibit R6- § 161). Getma International specified however that this same
Mr. Aziz Thiam subsequently became Chairman of the Board of Directors of the operating
company ("STCC") which was to be created in accordance with the obligations resulting from
article 7.1 of the Concession Agreement. The Arbitral Tribunal considers that it is entirely
normal that the person selected for managing the operating company, who has the technical
knowledge pertaining to the concession operations, be a member, even the manager, of the
negotiation team. One cannot infer solely from his presence on the team that the future
operating company or NCT Necotrans was planning to be bound by the contract.

It is the same for the legal director and the assistant legal director of the NCT Necotrans group
who were also part of the contract negotiation team. If NCT Necotrans delegates the
negotiation to its legal directors, this does not necessarily imply that they represent their
employer in these negotiations. As already noted above, these persons participated in
negotiations as the group's legal experts whose legal services can be provided to all the
companies in the group on the basis of intergroup service agreements. In such a case, these of

24 Cfr. Also the presence of Mr. Littler at the hearing of this Tribunal of March 30, 2012.

35

167.

168.

169.

170.

171.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 164 of 173

services concern purely intellectual contributions and cannot be confused with a mandate to
represent their employer.

"Mr. Michel Kerambrun, port expert intervening for the account of the subsidiary and NCT
infrastructure & Logistique" and "Mr. Jean de Montmarin, project chief at NCT Infrastructure &
Logistique" (opening brief before the CCJA Tribunal § 162 and Exhibit C-II p. 38) also
participated in the negotiations. This observation alone however does not permit one to
conclude that NCT infrastructure & Logistique became a party to the Concession Agreement.
Indeed, according to the letter of October 28, 2012 from the Claimants to ICSID's Secretariat,
NCT infrastructure & Logistique was a technical subsidiary of NCT Necotrans responsible as
assistant project manager for the work of extending the container terminal. Under these
circumstances, this company's mere delegation of its technical experts to the negotiations was
not abnormal and did not necessarily mean that NCT Infrastructure & Logistique was becoming
or had the intention of becoming party to the Concession Agreement itself.

It is in the same capacity that NCT Infrastructure & Logistique was able to execute a portion of
the obligations resulting from the Concession Agreement, among others by launching, for the
account of Getma International, the call for bids for the construction of the new dock
stipulated under the Concession Agreement (ICSID arbitration request, p. 11). The position as
assistant project manager can constitute the legal basis on which NCT Infrastructure &
Logistique executed certain obligations under the Concession Agreement for Getma
International, a basis which was therefore distinct from the contract binding Getma
International to the Guinean state.

The Tribunal therefore concludes that, taken in an isolated manner, each of the interventions
of the second, third and fourth Claimants in the negotiation, the signing and execution of the
Concession Agreement - inasmuch as they are proven - is legally and/or factually warranted by
and based on specific mandates. In themselves these interventions in no manner prove that
they are due to the neglect of, or confusion between, the companies belonging to a given
economic group, acting in breach of their legal identities and respective roles. The mandate
and specific role of each company in the group, such as they appear in the file, prove that the
second, third and fourth Claimants did not agree to be bound directly under the Concession
Agreement. Subject to that which follows, the Tribunal notes that the respondent has not
proven that the involvement of the aforementioned Claimants in the negotiation, the signing
or execution of the agreement proves such an intent on their account.

(vi) The Claimants’ joint, concerted action

The Arbitral Tribunal deems however that it is necessary to consider the Claimants’ different
interventions in this negotiation, signing and execution, not only separately, but also globally
and in their context. An entirely different impression then emerges.

First of all, we note that the Claimants acknowledge that the investment which constitutes
their basis for making their requests in this ICSID arbitration, is exclusively the product of each
of their contributions to the execution of the Concession Agreement (Claimants’ letter to
ICSID's Secretariat of October 28, 2011). In their request for ICSID arbitration, the Claimants
acknowledged that "the execution of the public service concession contract implied a financial
investment to be made by the Concessionary (investorj" (ICSID arbitration request, p. 21),
Therefore, this financial obligation of the contract was in fact not executed, or certainly not
exclusively by the Concessionary, Getma International, but by NCT Necotrans, via the
Concessionary Getma International, and by the intermediary holding company Getma
International Investissements which was created specifically for the purpose of owning 95% of
the STCC operating company. This Tribunal considers that Concession's financial structure

36

172.

173.

174.

175.

176.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 165 of 173

proves that NCT Necotrans' intervention in the execution of the Concession Agreement (and in
particular its financial obligations) had been envisaged from the outset when Getma submitted
its bid. This appears to be confirmed by the title of exhibit C - 15 in the index of the
attachments to the ICSID arbitration request: "excerpt from the NCT NECOTRANS group's
financial proposal, [blank] GETMA INTERNATIONAL/TRANSAFRICA S.A., containing the
summary of the investments made during the first two years of the Concession". NCT
Necotrans’ argument that it was not bound by the Concession Agreement can therefore not be
followed.

The situation is comparable for NCT Infrastructure & Logistique which apparently had the
necessary technical knowledge to meet other obligations of the Concession Agreement and in
particular to become the assistant project manager appointed by Getma International for the
extension of the terminal.

This being said, the participation of the representatives of NCT Necotrans and NCT
Infrastructure & Logistique (even if individually they can also be considered as the
representatives or legal or technical advisors of Getma International as stated above in
subsection (v)) takes on a particular meaning: if they are viewed as a group, they are the
representatives of the companies which planned from the outset of the negotiations (or even
since the filing of the bid) to execute the Concession Agreement together. In fact, the list of
the parties participating in the negotiation of the Agreement (attached thereto as appendix
10) makes no mention of any person representing the Concessionary, Getma International,
alone. It is therefore fitting to consider Getma International, NCT Necotrans and NCT
infrastructure & Logistique as an association or group whose members have undertaken jointly
to execute the obligations of the Concession Agreement together.

Even if this joint and several commitment was not made in writing vis-a-vis the Respondent
(regarding which the two Claimants could however not have ignored that they would derive
assurances of the presence of the representatives of the various companies in the negotiations
and the close ties between them), this Tribunal concludes that the participation in the
negotiations on the part of natural persons with double roles, but representing in fact also
companies who are clearly participating in the execution of the Agreement - which was
effectively confirmed later on - warrants that these companies which did not sign the
agreement be bound by the Agreement, if not jointly and severally, at least each for its part,
and also by the Arbitration Clause.

Furthermore, without wanting to prejudge the capacity as investors of the second and third
Claimant (NCT Necotrans and NCT Infrastructure & Logistique), the Tribunal considers that
their affirmation, in their letter of October 28, 2011 to the ICS IDs Secretariat, that they are
both investors (exhibit C-44) confirms that they were just as committed as Getma
International, and on the same conditions, including the arbitration clause.

Inasmuch as the investment(s) made in Guinea constitute the execution of the Concession
Agreement, this Tribunal cannot admit that the Claimants base their argument on their
respective investment, ie. their joint and several investment, while denying that they are
bound under the agreement. It is inadmissible that they infer a right from the Investment Code
on the basis of the same acts which constitute the execution of contractual obligations which
they claim they did not take on. The duty of this Tribunal however is not to rule on the
execution of the Concession Agreement, but only on the "contrary agreement" which

?5 This could be a confusion created on the count of a third party, which is discussed in § 158 above.

37

177.

(vii)

178.

179.

(viii)

180.

xX.
For tl

1.

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 166 of 173

eliminated the jurisdiction of this ICSID Tribunal for the consequences of the termination of
the agreement which ensues from an act on the part of the Public Authorities.

For the foregoing reasons, this Tribunal considers that NCT Necotrans and NCT Infrastructure
& Logistique are bound by the arbitration clause in article 31 of the agreement.

Getma International Investissements

As concerns Getma International Investissements, the Tribunal noted that it was not created
until November 12, 2008, as an intermediate holding company, in order to channel the
investment which Getma International had undertaken to make in a Guinean operating
company, itself created on November 20, 2008. This implies therefore that, contrary to the
other Claimants, Getma International Investissements was not able to participate in the
negotiations of the Concession Agreement or to express any wishes whatsoever regarding the
Arbitration Clause. However, this does not suffice to maintain that this intermediate holding
company is not bound by this Arbitration Clause.

Precisely because Getma International is merely an instrument created specifically for the
purposes of fulfilling Getma's obligation to create an operating company (article 9 of the
agreement) and constituted merely a "pass-through" for the capitalization of STCC by Getma
International and NCT Necotrans, there is no reason to exclude it from the application of the
Arbitration Clause which binds its two shareholders. The fact that the Arbitration Clause can be
applied to it is confirmed by its shareholders meeting which decided on May 9, 2011, as did (i)
NCT Infrastructure & Logistique’s shareholders meeting, (ii) NCT Necotrans' executive board
and (iii) Getma International's sole shareholder?s:

“to initiate all judicial or arbitral procedures designed to obtain compensation for the prejudice
sustained by the company following the termination of the Conakry container terminal
Concession Agreement and the expropriation of which it was the victim, and in particular in the
framework of arbitrations before the COA and the ICSID against the Guinean State as well as
against the Bollore group."””

Conclusion

For the reasons stated above, as well as for the acknowledgment implicit in the decisions of
their respective competent bodies of May 9, 2011, the wording of which, identical for each
Claimant, is mentioned in paragraph 179 above, this Tribunal concludes that its jurisdiction to
rule on disputes pertaining to the interpretation and application of the Investment Code is
limited, with respect to the four Claimants, by the arbitration clause in article 31 of the
Concession Agreement.

DECISION
he reasons stated above, the Tribunal decides:

This Tribunal does not entertain jurisdiction to rule on the effects of the termination of the
Concession Agreement as concerns the four Claimants.

°° Documents n° 1, n° 2, n° 3 and n° 4, attached to the Claimants’ letter to the ICSID Secretariat.
27 Our underlining.

38

Case 1:19-cv-02405-DLF Document 1-2 Filed 08/08/19 Page 167 of 173

This Tribunal entertains jurisdiction to rule on the effects of the requisition and other alleged
breaches of the Investment Code which do not fall into the framework of the Concession
Agreement with respect to the four Claimants.

The costs incurred by the parties and the members of the Tribunal up until this date, including
the costs of arbitration pertaining to the declining of jurisdiction will be the object of a
subsequent decision of the Tribunal.

[Signature] [signature]
BERNARDO M. CREMADES PIERRE TERCIER
Arbitrator Arbitrator
[Signature]
VERA VAN HOUTTE
President

39

