INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.
In the proceedings between

GIOVANNI ALEMANNI AND OTHERS
(CLAIMANTS)

- and -
THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC
(RESPONDENT)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/8)

DECISION ON JURISDICTION AND ADMISSIBILITY

Members of the Tribunal
Sir Franklin Berman KCMG, QC, President
Professor Karl-Heinz Boéckstiegel, Arbitrator
Mr J. Christopher Thomas QC, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms Anneliese Fleckenstein

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: November 17, 2014

Representing the Claimants Representing the Respondent

Avv. Piero G. Parodi, Dra. Angelina Maria Esther Abbona
Prof. Abogado Rodolfo Carlos Barra Procuradora del Tesoro de la Nacién
Via S. Maurilio 14 Argentina

20123 Milan Posadas 1641 — Piso 1

Italy CP 1112 Buenos Aires

and Argentina

Avy. Luca G. Radicati di Brozolo
ARBLIT Radicati di Brozolo Sabatini
15 via Alberto da Giussano

20145 Milan

Italy

INDEX

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
   

 

 

 

 

 

 

  
 

 

 

 

 

I. INTRODUCTION 6
A. THE PARTIES 6
B. PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 6

Il. THE ARGUMENTS OF THE PARTIES. .........cccsccssessesseessesseeeeseeseeseeseesessesnseneenseneeneesee 13
A. THE WRITTEN PLEADINGS 13

1. The Request for Arbitration
2. The Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction and Admissibility.......0.0.00ee 17
21 The background to Argentina’s default
2.11 Jurisdiction and Admissibility ...
a. The claims fall outside the framework of the ICSID Convention and the BIT
and would violate due process .........cccceeeeeeseseeeeeeees
b. The Claimants have not validly consented to ICSID arbitration .
c. There is no ‘investment’ . 26
d. The failure to state a prima facie treaty violation .
e. The absence of jurisdiction ratione personae and of standing on the part of the
Clai 32
f. The absence of an investment in the Republic of Argentina
g. The Claimants’ lack of standing
h. The failure to comply with the preconditions under Article 8 of the BIT....... 34
3. The Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction and Admissibility.................. 36
3.1 The background to Argentina’s default .......0.0..c cece eee eeeeeeeneneeeeteeeeeee 36
3.11 Jurisdiction and Admissibility 0.0.0.0. ccc eee ee ee eeeeeeeeeeeteeeteeeeeeeees 39
a. The NASAM mandate 39
b. The funding arr:
c. The Powers of Attorney
d. The Claimants’ ‘consent in writing’ . 42
e. Claims brought by multiple claimant:
f£. Jurisdiction ratione MALCTIAe .....ccccccccecceec testes ee este este es eeeseeeseeneseeneseeneseeies 47
g. A prima facie Treaty Violation... ccc eee neneneeeeeeece cette eeeeeeneeeeeieee 52
h. Jurisdiction ratione personae
i. The connection between the Claimants and the investment ..............cccccee 54
3.1 Article 8 of the BIT 55
a. The most favoured nation clause
b. The futility of resort to the local courts
4. The Respondent’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction and Admi

 

4l

41

The background to Argentina’s default
a. The Exchange Offer and Law 26,017..

 

 

b. Italian law. 61

Jurisdiction and Admissibility ....0.0.0.0.cccc cc cececeeeeeseseeceeseeceseeeeseseseenenenecaee 61
a. The collective nature of the Claim ..........ccccceccceescesesseseeeseeeseeseseeseseeneseeeaeenes 61
b. The NASAM Mandate and the Power of Attormey 0.0.0... eee 67
c. The absence of an investMent............ccccccceesseseeseseeseseeeseeseseeeseeneseeneseeneaeeees

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

d. The Claimants’ lack of standing
e. The prerequisites under Article 8 of the BIT. 78
Consultations would not have been futile...
g. The MEN clause does not apply ..........c cece eee eeeeseeeeeeeseeteeeteteeeeeeeneneeeeeeeee 80
AIll The relief sought 81
5. The Claimants’ Rejoinder 82
5.1 The NASAM Mandate Package. 82
5.11 The question of multiple claimant .......0.0.0.c ccc cece neteeeeee eee teeeeeeeees 84
SI Jurisdiction and Admissibility 0.0.0.0... ccc ee ee eeeeneneeeeeeteeeteeeeeeenes
a. Jurisdiction ratione materiae under the ICSID Convention and the BIT.
b. A prima facie treaty violation .
c. The 2010 POE 89
d. The nationality requirement ............. cece eeteseeeseeeseeseseeseseeseseeneseeneseeneeeeees 90
e. The Claimants’ standing ...........ccccceesccsceseseeeseeseseessseessseeseseeseseessseensseensaeenes 90
The domestic court proceedings in Italy ..........ccccccceesseeeteseeteseeeseeteseeeseeees 90
g. Amicable consultations and recourse to the local COUTItS ...........:ccsceeeeeeees 90
B. THE ORAL HEARING 93
1. The evidence of Mr Molina .........c.ccccccssessesseseseesestesestesestessseessseesestessseesesneseaeneas 93
2. The evidence of Mr Marx 97
3. Closing statements of the Parties ..........cccccscceseeseseeseseeeseeseseeseseeseseessseensseeneaeenes 99
a. The Respondent 99
b. The Claimants 101
C. POST-HEARING 103
1. The Post-Hearing Briefs 103
a. The Respondent 103
b. The Claimants 105
2. The Abaclat Decision 107
a. The Respondent 108
b. The Claimants 109
3. The BGS, ICS, Daimler, and RosInvest arbitrations .......0..cccccccccseeseeseeseeseeseeaees 111

4

a. The Respondent
b. The Claimants
Il. |THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

 

 

 

A. THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE ARBITRATION .........c:cecesesesseessesseseeeeseeeee 113
B. JURISDICTION AND ADMISSIBILITY ..........:cc:csccscsssessesesseesessesseeseseeneeneeseesee 116
1. “Mass claims”: the ICSID Convention ...........c.cccccccsesceeeteseeteseeteseeeseeneseeneseenes 118
2. The ‘jurisdictional’ Objections ..........c cece eee eeeee eee eeeeeeceeeeeneeeeeeeenenenees 125

 

No valid authorization or consent by the Claimants...

a.
b. No consent to arbitration on the part of the Respondent

 

 

 

 

 

c. No jurisdiction ratione materiae
d. No prima facie breach of the BIT 0.0... ccc eee ees ee este eeeeeeneneeeaeee
e. The preconditions to arbitration laid down in the BIT have not been duly met
146
3. The ‘admissibility’ objection: 157
a. Sovereign default 157
b. Procedure: Due Process .........cccccccccsesseseessseeeseeseseessseeseseessseesssceseatessseensaeeneas 159
C. PARTIES, CASE TITLE, AND COSTS ........ccccescesesseessesneeeeseeseeseeseesnesensenseneeneesee 162
IV. | CONCLUSIONS 167
Concurring Opinion of Mr J Christopher Thomas QC .........ccccscssessesesseseeseseeestesestesestesesneneas 169

L INTRODUCTION

A. THE PARTIES

1. The Claimants are a series of initially 183 Italian individuals and legal entities, each
of whom claims in its capacity as a holder of “debt instruments issued by the Republic
of Argentina” on which Argentina is said to have defaulted in 2001 and
subsequently. ! As more fully explained in paragraphs 327ff. below, the Claimants’
state that as a result of intervening events, notably Argentina’s Exchange Offer of

2010, the remaining number of Claimants is 742

2. By letter of 5 October 2010, Respondent did not oppose the discontinuance of the
proceedings on the part of those Claimants who had tendered into the 2010 Exchange
Offer and requested that the Tribunal order the Claimants to inform it which of them

had tendered their security entitlements into the 2010 Exchange Offer.

3. The uncertainties remaining as to the number and identities of the withdrawn
Claimants, as well as to the appropriate title of the case in light of Mr. Alemanni’s
withdrawal, were addressed by the Tribunal in a letter to the Parties of 22 March

2011, further details of which are given in paragraphs 333-334 below.
4. The Respondent is the Argentine Republic.

B. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

5. On 9 January 2007, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(“ICSID” or the “Centre”) received a Request for Arbitration (the “Request”) dated
22 December 2006, from Mr. Giovanni Alemanni and others (the ‘“Claimants’),
against the Argentine Republic (the “Respondent”). On 12 January 2007, the Centre
acknowledged receipt of the Request. On 16 January 2007, the Centre transmitted a
copy of the Request and its accompanying documentation to Respondent and its
Embassy in Washington, D.C. The Request was supplemented by counsel for the
Claimants’ letters dated 28 February and 9 March 2007.

' Request for Arbitration of 22 December 2006, para. 4.

? Claimants’ Comments on the Decision on Jurisdiction and the Dissenting Opinion in the Abaclat and others v
Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/O7/5 (formerly known under the name Giovanna a Beccara,
hereinafter “Abaclat”), 19 December 2011, para. 50.

6. On 27 March 2007, ICSID’s Secretary-General registered the Request pursuant to
Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention and Rules 6(1)(a) and 7 of the Rules of
Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (the
“Institution Rules”). The same day, the Secretary-General dispatched the Notice of
Registration to the parties, inviting them to proceed as soon as possible with the
constitution of the arbitral tribunal, in accordance with Articles 37 to 40 of the ICSID

Convention.

7. By letter of 31 May 2007, Claimants invoked Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID
Convention since the parties had not reached an agreement regarding the method for
constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal. In the same letter Claimants appointed Professor
Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel, a national of Germany, to the Arbitral Tribunal. Professor

Bockstiegel accepted his appointment on 4 July 2007.

8. By letter of 25 June 2007, Respondent appointed J. Christopher Thomas, QC, a
national of Canada, to the Arbitral Tribunal. Mr Thomas accepted his appointment on

4 July 2007.

9. Absent an agreement between the parties on the appointment of the President of the
Tribunal, by letter of 25 June 2008, pursuant to Article 38 of the ICSID Convention,
the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council appointed Sir Franklin Berman,
KCMG, QC, a national of the United Kingdom, as presiding arbitrator.> Sir Franklin
accepted his appointment on 3 July 2008.

10. On the same day, the Centre notified the parties that the Arbitral Tribunal was deemed
to be constituted and the proceeding to have begun on that day. The Tribunal is
accordingly composed of Sir Franklin Berman, KCMG, QC (appointed by the

Chairman of the Administrative Council); Prof. Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel, (appointed

> By letter of 15 February 2008, the Respondent had objected to the Centre’s intention to designate Sir Franklin
Berman as President of the Tribunal, on the grounds of the position publicly adopted by him on the most
favoured nation clause, citing in this connection the Jurisdictional Award of the Tribunal in RosInvestCo v The
Russian Federation, SCC Case No. V079/2005, Award on Jurisdiction, 1 October 2007, (hereinafter
“RosInvest’). By letter of 29 February 2008, elaborated in a more detailed letter of 3 March 2008, the
Claimants rejected, with reasons, the Respondent’s objection. By letter of 14 March 2008, the Respondent
replied to the Claimants’ reasons. By letter of 5 June 2008, the Centre indicated to the Parties that the
Respondent's objections had not been found to be compelling, and that the recommendation to designate

Sir Franklin Berman would therefore go ahead unless the Parties jointly submitted an alternative solution. No
such alternative solution was in the event received by the Centre.

 

by Claimants); and Mr J. Christopher Thomas QC (appointed by Respondent). The
Centre also informed the parties and the Tribunal that Mr. Gonzalo Flores, Senior
Counsel, would serve as Secretary of the Tribunal. Mr. Flores was replaced as
Secretary of the Tribunal by Mrs. Anneliese Fleckenstein, Legal Counsel, on

4 October 2011.

On 5 December 2008, the Tribunal held a First Session with the parties at the seat of
the Centre in Washington D.C. at which a procedural calendar for the further conduct
of the proceedings was agreed by the parties. During the First Session it was agreed
that the arbitration would be separated into a preliminary jurisdictional and
admissibility phase and a merits phase. The preliminary phase would deal with
objections of a general character only, but not with any jurisdictional issues that might
arise in relation to individual claimants, which, it was agreed, would be dealt with at a

later stage as necessary and appropriate.

By letters of 6 and 9 January 2009, Respondent and Claimants agreed to a time

schedule for the submissions on Jurisdiction and Admissibility.

On 21 May 2009, in accordance with the agreed schedule, Respondent filed a
Memorial on Jurisdiction and Admissibility. On 5 November 2009, Claimants filed
their Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction and Admissibility. On 5 February 2010,

Respondent filed a Reply on Jurisdiction and Admissibility.

On 28 April 2010, Claimants requested the suspension of the proceedings in light of
the Argentine Government’s New Exchange Offer. On 30 April 2010, Respondent

agreed to the requested suspension.

On 4 May 2010, the proceeding was suspended pursuant to the parties’ agreement.
The hearing on jurisdiction, scheduled to be held on 21-25 June 2010 was cancelled,
and the deadline for the Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and Admissibility was

extended.

By letter of 31 May 2010, Respondent objected to a communication to Claimants
from the North Atlantic Société d’Administration (“NASAM”) with respect to the
New Exchange Offer. By letter of 10 June 2010, Claimants submitted a response to

Respondent’s letter. Exchanges between the parties ensued concerning this matter, as

20.

well as the Claimants’ request for an extension to submit their Rejoinder on

Jurisdiction and Admissibility.

On 21 July 2010, following an invitation from the Tribunal, the Claimants submitted a
statement of their position as to the continuation of the proceedings, and the possible
procedural implications of the potential adherence by some of the Claimants to

Argentina’s New Exchange Offer.

By letter of 29 July 2010, following an exchange of correspondence between the
parties, the Tribunal: (i) directed that the Claimants must indicate no later than
12 August 2010, on the instructions of the persons concerned, whether any of the
Claimants wished to discontinue their claim in the proceedings, and to specify such
persons by name; (ii) requested the Respondent to confirm, within two weeks
thereafter, whether Respondent agreed, for the purposes of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules, to the discontinuance of the claims in question, in which case the Tribunal
would formally order those claims to be removed from the record for the subsequent
stages of the proceedings; (iii) set 1 September 2010, as the deadline for the
submission of the Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and Admissibility by all Claimants in

respect of whom the proceedings continued.

On 1 September 2010, the Claimants filed their Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility, attaching a list of claimants who wished to discontinue their claim.
Counsel for the Claimants requested leave from the Tribunal to update the list of

Claimants who had discontinued the proceeding as of 1 September 2010.

On 7 September 2010, the Tribunal granted Counsel for the Claimants’ request. By
letter of 21 September 2010, Counsel for the Claimants submitted an updated list of
Claimants who had decided to discontinue the proceeding. By letter of
5 October 2010, Respondent agreed to the discontinuance of the proceeding in respect
of those Claimants “who, among those listed in the Updated List, have entered into
the 2010 Exchange Offer”. Respondent further requested the Tribunal to order, in due
course, that Respondent and those Claimants with respect to whom the proceeding is
discontinued share equally the arbitration costs and that each of them bear their own

costs.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

On 7 and 8 June 2011, the Tribunal held a hearing on jurisdiction in Paris. Present at
the hearing were, for the Tribunal: Sir Franklin Berman KCMG, QC, President;
Professor Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel; MrJ. Christopher Thomas, Q.C.; and
Mrs. Anneliese Fleckenstein, Secretary of the Tribunal. The Claimants were
represented by Professor Luca G. Radicati di Brozolo, Ms. Maria Cristiana de
Giovanni di Santa Severina, Ms. Victoria Vifies and Mr. Giovanni Minuto. The
Respondent was represented by Dr. Horacio Diez, Subprocurador del Tesoro de la
Nacién, Dr. Gabriel Bottini, Director Nacional de Asuntos y Controversias
Internacionales de la Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién; Ms. Silvina Gonzalez
Napolitano, Ms. Cintia Yaryura, Ms. Mariana Lozza, Ms. Verénica Lavista,
Mr. Diego Gosis and Ms.Carolina Coronado from the Procuracién del Tesoro de la
Nacion; Ms. Marianela Lopez and Ms. Florencia Rosental from the Ministerio de

Economia y Finanzas Ptiblicas.

On 8 August 2011, the parties submitted simultaneously their Post-Hearing Briefs.

On the same day, the Claimants sought leave to submit brief comments on the
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility in the case of Abaclat and Others v
Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/07/5, which it understood to have been
rendered a few days earlier, but withdrew this request on 29 August 2011 on the basis
that “all the issues addressed in the [Abaclat] decision have been amply debated in

both parties’ submissions in this case.”

On 29 August 2011, however, the Respondent submitted that the Tribunal should
indeed be apprised of the views of both Parties on the Abaclat Decision, but proposed
that that should be postponed until after receipt of the Dissenting Opinion of Prof.
Abi-Saab in that case, a request which the Tribunal granted by letters of 8 September
and 9 November 2011 once the Dissenting Opinion had become available. The
Respondent’s comments on the Abaclat Decision were duly received on 29 November

2011 followed by those of the Claimants on 19 December 2011.

By letter of 29 December 2011, the Respondent asked the Tribunal to exclude certain
new authorities cited in the Claimants’ comments on the Abaclat Decision, or in the
alternative to allow the Respondent an opportunity to submit comments of its own on

those authorities. By letter of 17 February 2012, the Respondent made a reasoned

10

26.

27.

application for leave to introduce into the record two recent arbitral decisions
(Republic of Argentina v BG Group ple and ICS v Argentine Republic), which the
Claimants contested by reasoned letter of 5 March 2012. By a decision of 11 April
2012, the Tribunal (a) took note of the Respondent’s request of 29 December 201 lon
which it would rule, if necessary, at the appropriate time; (b) admitted into the record
the materials referred to in the Respondent’s letter of 17 February, together with the
Claimants’ comments on them in its letter of 5 March; while (c) indicating that it did
not wish to receive any further materials from either Party without the leave of the

Tribunal having been obtained in advance.

In the same letter, the Tribunal renewed its requests of 8 September and 9 November
2011 to know whether the Parties had reached an agreement on the need to change the
title of the case to reflect the discontinuance by certain of the original claimants, in the
absence of which the Tribunal would itself decide. By letter of 18 June 2012, the
Tribunal regretted that, despite repeated requests, the Parties had not come back to it
either with an agreed position on the name by which the case should now be known
after the decease of Sig. Alemanni, or with an indication that they had reached
agreement as to which of the original Claimants should be regarded as having
discontinued their claims in accordance with Rule 44 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules
and the Tribunal’s communications of 8 September and 9 November 2011, and 11

April 2012, and ruled as follows:-

“~ as regards the name by which the case will in future be known, the
Tribunal will take whatever action may be necessary in this respect as
part of its forthcoming decision on the Respondent’s Preliminary
Objections. In the meanwhile, the Centre’s website will include an
indication that the name of the case is under review.

“~ as regards the identification of the remaining Claimant Parties, if, in
the event, the Tribunal’s decision on the Respondent’s Preliminary
Objections has the effect that the case continues to the merits, the
Tribunal will at an early stage thereafter lay down a procedure, after
consultation with counsel, that will place it in a position to determine
formally and conclusively the identities of the Parties to the
substantive phase of the arbitral proceedings.”

By letter of 14 September 2012, the Respondent sought leave to introduce into the

record a further ICSID Award and a decision rendered by a Swedish court. By letter

28.

29.

of 18 September 2012, the Claimants resisted this application. By direction dated 28
September 2012, the Tribunal ruled as follows:-

“The Tribunal recalls the direction conveyed in the Centre’s letter of
April 11, 2012 that, pending its decision on the Respondent’s
Preliminary Objections, the Tribunal did not wish to receive any
further unsolicited materials from either party, without its leave having
been obtained in advance. That said, the Tribunal is in doubt as to its
inherent authority, in accordance with the principle iura novit curia, to
consult any arbitral decision or award which is in the public domain
and which the Tribunal considers may be materially relevant to its own
decision, whether or not that decision or award has been specifically
introduced into argument by either party.

In the light of the foregoing, the Tribunal takes the view that it would
be unrealistic to exclude from consideration the decisions in the
Daimler and Rosinvest arbitrations to which the Respondent’s letter
refers, and in the circumstances the Tribunal agrees exceptionally to
the introduction into the record of the Respondent’s comments on
those decisions, subject however to the other Party having an
equivalent opportunity to comment. The Claimants’ comments must
however be brief (not exceeding in scope or extent those in the
Respondent’s letter under reference) and must be received not later
than Friday, October 12, 2012.”
The Tribunal emphasized that this ruling should be regarded as an exception, and that
from that point onward it did not wish to receive any further materials from either
Party while it was in the process of completing its decision on the Respondent’s

Preliminary Objections.

By letter of 16 October 2012, the Claimants submitted brief comments on the Daimler

and RosInvest Awards in accordance with the above ruling by the Tribunal.

By letter of 14 March 2013, the Respondent drew attention to the recent Decision on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility of the ICSID Tribunal in the case of Ambiente Ufficio
S.P.A. v Argentine Republic* and sought leave for both Parties to be given an
opportunity to comment briefly on this decision; it referred in this context to the fact
that one of the members of that tribunal is also a member of the present Tribunal. By
e-mail dated 16 March 2013, the Claimants registered their strong objection to this

request. By letter of 22 March 2013, the Tribunal indicated that it saw no reason to

* Ambiente Ufficio S.p.A. and others v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/09, (formerly known
under the name Giordano Alpi, hereinafter “Ambiente Ufficio”), Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 8
February 2013.

12

IL.

30.

31.

vary the terms of its direction of 28 September 2012 at an advanced state of its

deliberations, and rejected the Respondent’s application accordingly.

THE ARGUMENTS OF THE PARTIES

As will be explained below, the dispute which is the subject of the present Arbitration
does not cover new ground, but corresponds instead to two other disputes that have
already, as of the date of this Decision, proceeded to decision on questions of
jurisdiction and admissibility under the same bilateral investment treaty as forms the
foundation of the present proceedings. The account that follows of the arguments of
the Parties, as well as the construction of the Tribunal’s decision itself, have been
adjusted accordingly, where the Tribunal finds it appropriate to do so, in the interests

of economy of expression.

THE WRITTEN PLEADINGS
1. The Request for Arbitration

The Request for Arbitration need not be summarized at length. It is signed by
Advocate Piero Parodi, and by Professor Radicati di Brozolo both in his own name
and p.p. (per procurationem) for Advocate Rodolfo Carlos Barra, on behalf of 183
named Claimants, each one of whom is said to be an Italian citizen or an Italian
corporate entity and the holder of “debt instruments issued by the Republic of
Argentina.” These instruments are referred to in the remainder of the Request as the
“Bonds”, and they are described as denominated in various currencies (Euros, US
Dollars, Italian Lire, and Deutschmarks), with an indication of which Claimants had
subscribed to which instruments, in what amount, and with what maturity date. The
Request cites breaches by the Respondent of the guarantees of fair and equitable
treatment and full protection and security as well as the guarantee against
expropriation without the payment of prompt, adequate and immediate compensation
contained in the Agreement between the Argentine Republic and the Italian Republic
on the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments signed in Buenos Aires on
22 May 1990 (“the BIT”). By way of relief, the Request seeks: a declaration of
breach; the refund to each Claimant of the entire nominal value of his Bonds, plus
accrued interest until maturity, plus compound interest thereafter to the date of the

Request; plus “all other damages that shall be demonstrated to be a direct

13

32.

33.

consequence of the Respondent’s international law violations; and compound interest

on the above between the date of the Request and the date of payment.”

To found the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, the Request cites Article 8 of the BIT,
which provides (as set forth in greater detail in paragraphs 1-5 of that Article) for
ICSID arbitration as one of the two available processes for the settlement of disputes
between an investor from one of the Contracting Parties and the other Party, and in
particular gives “advance and irrevocable consent that any dispute may be submitted
to arbitration” given by the Contracting Parties in Article 8(3). The Claimants’
matching consent to arbitration is then attributed, as is commonly the case, to the
Request for Arbitration itself, and there is attached to the Request a ‘Special Power of
Attorney’ granted for this purpose, in identical terms, to Mr Piero Giuseppe Parodi by
each of the named Claimants. According to the Request, Professor Luca Radicati di
Brozolo and Professor Rodolfo Carlos Barra have both been designated as co-Counsel
for the Claimants by Mr Parodi himself, in exercise of powers to that effect granted

him under the Special Powers of Attorney.

As to the substance, the Request cites “actions whereby the State of Argentina
deprived the Claimants of all their rights with respect to the Bonds held by them”. It

rehearses in brief terms —

e the economic crises suffered by Argentina in the late 1980s and early

1990s

e the steps taken to revive the Argentine economy, including pegging the

local currency to the US dollar

e the steps taken to give positive encouragement to inward investment into
Argentina, including the ratification of the ICSID Convention and the
conclusion of several bilateral investment treaties (including the present

BIT)

e the renewed economic crisis from 1998 onwards

e the attempt to counter the crisis by the issue of government bonds to

foreign investors, which is said to have happened in unprecedented

14

34.

amounts both of capital raised and of the number of foreign purchasers,
and to have amounted at its peak to more than one-quarter of all emerging-

market debt issuance

e the worsening of the crisis notwithstanding these measures, leading to a
run on the Argentine banks, restrictions on withdrawals, and in due course
at the end of 2001 to a moratorium on all payments on the external debt,
resulting in what the Request terms “the largest sovereign default in
history”; this constituted, it is claimed, a repudiation of the Respondent’s
promise to honour its financial obligations and to pay the full amount of

principal and interest at the agreed maturity dates

The Request then cites the new economic plan instituted by Argentina in 2002,
entailing a moratorium on debt repayments and the ‘pesification’ of debt obligations,
through a scheme providing for a conversion of debts denominated in US dollars to
Argentine pesos at a fixed rate of one-to-one, and then in due course, but some three
years later, the launch of a Public Offer of Exchange (“the POE”) on 14 January 2005,
which, it is alleged, effectively imposed the exchange of all outstanding public debt
instruments (including those held by the Claimants) for new financial instruments on
extremely unfavourable terms. Although the new instruments fell into four series,
with different interest rates, maturities etc., the common feature was a “huge
reduction” in net present value, which the Request estimates at approximately 70%
and thus assesses as having the effect of a confiscation of the Claimants’ property.
Moreover, the POE remained open for a short period only (6 weeks) and was backed
by the threat that bonds not exchanged would “remain in default indefinitely”.° This
situation was further reinforced by Argentine Law No. 26,017, enacted during that
period, which on the one hand precluded the Argentine Government from making any
further offer on bonds not exchanged under the POE or any judicial, extra-judicial or
private settlement in respect of those bonds, and on the other hand shut bondholders
out from effective access to the Argentine domestic courts, by providing that resort to
those courts would result “de pleno derecho” in the conversion of the bonds that were
the subject of legal action into one of the new bonds offered under the POE.

Similarly, bondholders accepting the POE were required to waive their right to bring

> Quoting the prospectuses and notices put out by the Argentine Ministry of Economy and Production: Exhibits
C-3(A) and (B).

15

35.

36.

any further legal action or claim and to abandon any action already brought. That
remained the position to date despite the very substantial improvement in Argentina’s

economic situation in the meanwhile.

On that basis, the Request asserts a breach by the Respondent of its obligations under
the BIT to accord the Claimants’ investments fair and equitable treatment and full
protection and security, as well as the obligation not to expropriate without prompt,
adequate and effective compensation. As to the failure to accord fair and equitable
treatment, the Request invokes, in addition to the terms of Article 2(2) of the BIT,
arbitral decisions to the effect that the standard is an objective one, not depending on
malice or bad faith, and the Respondent’s continued “refus[al] to make a good faith
effort to restructure its debt on reasonable terms even after its robust economic
recovery that has allowed it to repay a large fraction of its outstanding debt”® and
cites in that connection various recent arbitral awards on disputes arising out of the
same Argentine economic measures as lie at the origin of the present dispute. As to
the failure to provide full protection and security, the Request prays in aid the most-
favoured-nation clause in Article 3 of the BIT, and seeks via that route to rely on
Article 2(2)(a) of the US-Argentina BIT signed on 14 November 1991.7. As to
expropriation without compensation, the Request cites the terms of Article 5 of the
BIT and refers to cases and commentary supporting the proposition that cancellation
of loans and bonds, or interference in their contractual arrangements by legislative

fiat, constitute acts of expropriation for which compensation is due.

Moving to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, the Request enumerates four conditions that
need to be satisfied under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention: the dispute must be
of a legal nature; it must arise directly out of an investment; it must be between a
Contracting Party and a national of another Contracting Party; and the parties have
expressed their consent in writing to submit the dispute to ICSID. The Claimants
submit that all four conditions are satisfied: the first because the dispute is governed
by international law, and in particular the BIT; the second because the notion of
‘investment’ under the Convention is a broad one which extends to loans, including
bonds, especially where (as in the present case) they contribute towards a State’s

economic development, and because the BIT itself expressly contemplates State-

© Request, para. 43.
7 Entered into force on 20 October 1994.

37.

38.

issued bonds and other public debt instruments in Article 1(1)(c), and Article 1(1)(f)
encompasses “any right having an economic value conferred by law or by contract’;
the third because all of the Claimants are either Italian nationals or entities
incorporated in Italy, and both Italy and Argentina were Contracting States at the
relevant time; the fourth because Argentina gave, under Article 8 of the BIT, its
irrevocable consent in advance to arbitration at the option of Italian investors,
including resort to ICSID, and the Claimants exercised that option, in accordance with
well-established precedent, by submitting the Request for Arbitration itself;
conversely, the preconditions for resort to arbitration under Article 8 were clearly
inapplicable in the present case, given the combination of the exclusion of amicable
settlement by the Argentine legislation and the effective bar on recourse to the
Argentine courts, as described above (which would in any case have been futile

within the 18 month period laid down in Article 8).
On that basis, the Request seeks the following relief:-
e adeclaration of breach;

e the repayment of the full nominal value of the bonds, plus accrued interest
payments due until maturity, plus compound interest from maturity until
the date of the Request, plus “all other damages that shall be demonstrated
to be a direct consequence of the Respondent’s international law

violations”;

® compound interest on the above from the date of the Request until the date
of payment.

2. | The Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

In its Memorial on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, filed on 21 May 2009, Argentina
requested the Tribunal to decline jurisdiction for a series of reasons, the majority of
which went to the Tribunal’s formal competence under the ICSID Convention, but
certain of which derived from the claim that the nature of the proceedings as initiated

by the Claimants was such as to deny Argentina its due process rights as Respondent.

39.

40.

Al.

21 The background to Argentina’s default

The Memorial prefaces the particularization of these preliminary objections by
offering Argentina’s own summary account of the events underlying the Claimants’
claims. It begins by describing the magnitude of the collapse of the Argentine
economy in the period from 1998 onwards as the worst political, social and economic
crisis in its modern history, caused by a series of external shocks, the effects of which
are still present. The contraction of GDP in the period 1998-2001 was comparable to
(perhaps even greater than) in the USA during the Great Depression of the 1930s, and
the reduction in public revenue forced Argentina to default on its foreign debt. The
will to deal with creditors fairly and equitably thereafter was shown by Argentina’s
collaboration with international arrangements to restructure its foreign debt, leading to

voluntary offers to creditors which the majority of them accepted.

The Memorial describes the background to the bond issues of the 1990s, notably their
link to the Brady Plan in relation to the USA and equivalent restructuring programmes
for other regions including Europe. The interests asserted by the Claimants in the
present proceedings involve 51 of these series of bond issues, but each one of the
bond issues is governed by the law of a State other than Argentina, and each
incorporates Argentina’s submission to the jurisdiction of non-Argentine courts;
neither of these two characteristics was fortuitous — to the contrary, they were
requirements commonly insisted upon by the underwriters, precisely to protect the
interests of the debt purchasers and to ensure them a forum for asserting their rights

independently of the law of the issuing State.

The Memorial also gives an account of the process by which bonds were issued in
Europe, starting with approaches to Argentina by the leading investment banks and
continuing through competitive proposals to the appointment by Argentina of a lead
manager for each bond issue, and then to the establishment by the lead manager of an
underwriting syndicate, and ‘road shows’ (in which Argentina participated) for
institutional investors (not private investors) designed to assess the market for the
bond issue in question, leading finally to the conclusion of an underwriting agreement
under which the banks gave a full and unconditional commitment to payment of the
purchase price out of their own funds on the closing date. From that moment

onwards, once it had delivered the bonds to the joint lead managers in exchange for

18

42.

43.

the agreed purchase price, Argentina dropped out of the process, and it became
entirely a matter for the underwriting banks if, when, and how to sell on the

indebtedness on the secondary market.

According to the Memorial, this situation had consequences of its own for the
restructuring process after Argentina’s default. Like other sovereign issuers of debt,
Argentina had no knowledge of the identity of the holders of interests in its bonds,
since these normally took the form of tradable interests (known as ‘security
entitlements’), listed in the stock markets, which were freely bought and sold and
would be held by a very large number of beneficial owners for variable periods of
time, some of which could be very short indeed (hours, or even minutes). This made
it impossible to negotiate with each holder of an interest in a bond issue, or even with
groups of holders, but instead made it necessary to carry out market surveys to
determine the terms of a replacement offer, which is what Argentina did, with the
encouragement inter alia of the G7, the IMF, and the World Bank. After Argentina
had announced general guidelines for the restructuring of its foreign debt in
September 2003, a series of meetings was held with representatives of retail
bondholders in Zurich, Rome, Tokyo, San Francisco and New York, and in addition
consultative groups were formed with bondholders in the United States, Germany,
Italy and Japan. The purpose was to explain the inevitable effects on bonded debt of
the economic constraints under which Argentina was suffering, but the consultations
also allowed counter-offers from the creditor side to be put forward and considered by
Argentina during a lengthy period extending over two years, and culminating in the
POE of January 2005, covering 152 different series of bonds embracing some
USD 81.8 billion of outstanding debt, and offering creditors a menu of options with
varying admixtures of discounted capital values and interest rates. The offer was
accepted by approximately 76.15% of the outstanding debt, making it into the biggest

sovereign debt restructuring in history.

The Memorial asserts that the exchange instruments issued under the POE have since

performed according to their terms. It describes the resulting situation as follows:-

Contrary to the statements made by Claimants, the restructuring
process was completely voluntary in nature. There is no bankruptcy
legislation for sovereign states and, therefore, there is no way to
require creditors to accept a proposal for the restructuring of a state’s

44.

debt, regardless of the percentage of such creditors that are willing to
do so. Contrary to the typical “cram down” provisions contained in
local laws on insolvency, each creditor has the right to reject the
proposal for the restructuring of sovereign debt and demand the
fulfilment of the legal obligations arising under the terms of his debt
instrument. It is precisely in order to preserve these unaffected rights
that the underwriters of sovereign debt instruments issued abroad
always insist that debt must be governed by the legislation of a
jurisdiction other than that of the issuer and that legal remedies before
courts other than those of the issuer must be provided for. The
existence of such contractual rights, which, as a result, cannot be
affected by any action taken by the State represents the legal
framework within which all sovereign debt restructurings are carried
out and provides the ultimate remedy for those who do not wish to
voluntarily exchange their instruments.

At the same time, the holders of interests in bonds who choose not to
participate in a restructuring cannot reasonably expect that the
sovereign debtor will be able to pay them a sum higher than that
accepted by the creditors who did participate in the restructuring.
Given that the whole process is voluntary in nature, no holder of
interests would choose to participate if he knew, or even had the
reasonable expectation, that another person, in a similar position,
would later receive a better offer. This is why the essential premise of
the debt restructuring process is that the sovereign state will accord the
same treatment to all creditors who are in a similar position.

In the case of Argentina’s 2005 Exchange Offer, this principle was
reflected in a clause, which set forth that if Argentina offered better
conditions to holdouts, it would have to provide the same improved
terms to such creditors as had previously accepted the Offer. In view
of the fact that the Exchange Offer was based upon terms that would
make it possible for Argentina to pay its new debt in the long term,
offering to pay a higher amount to any other creditor at a later time
would have defeated the purpose of the initial restructuring and would
have led Argentina once again to the position of unsustainable debt
existing before the Exchange Offer.®

makes the following assertions among others:-

* Memorial, paras. 46-48.

The Memorial concludes this description with an assessment of the contribution made
by the debt restructuring under the POE itself to Argentina’s economic recovery,
against the prevailing economic circumstances, before offering its own account of the

onward sale of the original bond issues on the Italian secondary market, in which it

20

4S.

e that the widespread dissemination of Argentine debt at the retail level was
unique to Italy; up to 450,000 persons or entities whose average holdings

barely amounted to €30,000;

e that the retail bondholders purchased their holdings mainly from the Italian
banks which had themselves typically acquired their interests “in the

context of private placements intended for institutional purchasers”;?

e that these “massive” retail sales were in violation of a series of Italian laws
and regulations relating to both the offering of securities to the public and
the duties of financial intermediaries in respect of the sale of securities to

retail customers;

e that the sales were moreover in breach of selling restrictions contained

within the terms applying to the bonds themselves.

Before proceeding to enunciate its formal preliminary objections, the Memorial
dwells on the circumstances under which the arbitration had been brought by the
Italian bondholders, and specifically on what it refers to as the “NASAM Mandate
Package’, against the allegation that the initiative to launch the arbitration originated
from a company based in the Principality of Monaco called North Atlantic SAM
(hence “NASAM”) which had solicited the claimants to complete and sign a package
consisting of “at least” five documents. These included in particular, under cover of
a letter encouraging claimants to sign up to a “joint action to be brought before the
ICSID arbitration tribunal (World Bank) in order to recover from the Argentine

government the unpaid principal of and interest on the bonds”!”

and for that purpose
to sign the remaining documents, a mandate to establish a principal-agent relationship
between the individual and NASAM (“the NASAM Mandate”), and a Special Power
of Attorney, in English and Italian, in favour of Avv. Guiseppe Parodi. The
Memorial alleges that the NASAM Mandate Package establishes a structure through
which NASAM entirely controls Claimants’ claims in any “joint action” brought on
their behalf, including the present arbitration, while at the same time not precluding

Claimants from suing Italian banks for any wrongdoing that may have occurred in the

° Memorial, para.57.
° Lettera Ai Portatori Di Bond Argentini, available at
http://guardiansa.com/docs/LTR%20ai%20bond%20holders.jpg (A RA 107).

21

46.

47.

sale and purchase of their investments (and itemizes the remedies potentially available

in that connection). It alleges also —

e that the Claimants are not permitted any say in how the arbitral

proceedings are run;

e that they have no control over the attorneys representing them, and are not
even supposed to contact them but are to receive all information through a

third party source;

e that the chosen attorney, Avv. Parodi, was selected by NASAM, not the
investors, so that the attorney-client relationship is in effect with NASAM,

not with the Claimants in the Arbitration;

e that NASAM’s control over the proceedings is mirrored by its financial
interest in them, as represented by its undertaking to finance their cost
(subject to a percentage contribution ad valorem by each Claimant) and by
its entitlement to a success fee on a sliding scale that, in the event of total
success, would amount to 30.5% of the face value of the bonds but, in the

event of less than 30% recovery, would fall to zero;

e that the Claimants in fact irrevocably assign to NASAM the right to collect

on their claims, subject to a right to repayment against NASAM.

The Memorial asserts that, taken overall, these factors make NASAM into a veritable

party in interest in the arbitral proceedings.

211 Jurisdiction and Admissibility

Against that background, the Memorial lodges the following objections to the

Tribunal’s jurisdiction or to the admissibility of the Claimants’ claims.

a. The claims fall outside the framework of the ICSID Convention and the BIT
and would violate due process

The Memorial characterizes the Arbitration as a “collective action” through which

180 unrelated Claimants attempt to jointly arbitrate their claims against a State in a

single ICSID proceeding. The attempt is described as extraordinary, and as being

22

without precedent for good reason, namely that the States party to the ICSID
Convention did not consent to jurisdiction over collective actions and neither the
ICSID Arbitration Rules and Procedures nor the Argentina-Italy BIT provide any
standards or procedures to govern proceedings of that kind. The Memorial asserts
that the failure to provide explicitly for collective proceedings cannot be construed as
permitting them by implication, since it constitutes “powerful evidence of the absence

1! and invokes

of any intent by the parties to these instruments to permit such claims’
in further support that national jurisdictions permitting mass or collective claims
typically make specific provision for them by legislation, in fulfilment of a policy
choice. It supports this with an analysis of the procedures for class actions in the
United States of America under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure No. 23, of the
provision made in the United Kingdom for collective claims under Civil Procedure
Rule 19, of the legislation on collective claims recently enacted in Italy, and of the
Supplementary Rules for Class Arbitrations drawn up by the American Arbitration
Association, as well as certain arrangements in the international field, such as the
International Oil Pollution Compensation Fund and the United Nations Compensation
Commission, in order to show that each of them contains consciously limiting
features which would not be satisfied by the present claims. It draws the conclusion
that acceptance of jurisdiction over these claims would “manifestly disregard” the
jurisdictional limitations imposed by the ICSID Convention and the limits of the
consent given by Argentina in the BIT, and would be fundamentally different from
the multiparty claims hitherto entertained by ICSID tribunals, which “have involved
claims joined by common holders of interests of a single investment or a single
investment vehicle or similar connections between the individual claimants; they have
not involved claims—like those Claimants seek to prosecute here—by contractually
unrelated persons who made their purported investments at different times, in

wl2

different instruments, and under different circumstances. According to the

Memorial, the present claims involve “180 different holders of security entitlements
relating to 50 different classes of bonds, which have different applicable laws,
issuance dates, type of currency, and amounts, that were acquired in different places,

nl3

at very different prices and on different dates,”’” whereas no prior ICSID case has

'' Memorial, para. 91.
"2 Thid., para. 104.
' bid.

23

involved more than 14 claimants, and moreover there has always been a strong
connection between claimants coupled with no opposition by the respondent State to
their joinder (including by Argentina itself where such a strong pre-existing
connection was present).'4 The Memorial refers in that connection to the views of
Schreuer!* and Szasz'®, and to an article by Parra describing an earlier proposal for
the creation of a consolidation facility which could be opted into by interested

parties. 0

48. As to the second limb of the objection (due process), the Memorial raises a number of
issues which, in the Respondent’s opinion, would lead in the present case to a
violation of fundamental principles of due process, including: the lack of any
mechanism to verify the identity of the individual Claimants; the multiple issues of
fact and law that would arise in unravelling the nature and incidents of their respective
holdings would be unworkable and unfair to Argentina as the Respondent; and the
fact that the Claimants offer no solution as to how the Respondent could, within any
reasonable period of time, address all these issues as regards to each Claimant in its
written submissions, let alone in cross-examination and oral submissions in the course

of a hearing. The Memorial itemizes the principal issues as follows:

“whether each individual Claimant has Italian nationality, does not
have Argentine nationality, and was not domiciled in Argentina for
more than two years prior to acquiring his or her security entitlement,
the place of incorporation, seat, and legal status under Italian law of
each of the Claimant entities, whether additional people and entities
identified in discovery purport to have succeeded to the legal rights
represented by the security entitlements of the persons previously
listed as Claimants (and its consequences for the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction), the amount allegedly invested by each Claimant (the
purchase price), the circumstances of each Claimant’s acquisition of
their security entitlement, including the date on which the security
entitlement was acquired, the identity and characteristics of each
person who sold the security entitlement to each Claimant, what
disclosures and assurances, if any, each seller made to each Claimant,

4 Such as LG&E Energy Corp., LG&E Capital Corp. and LG&E International Inc. v Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1 (hereinafter “LG&E”), Compaiita de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi
Universal S.A. v Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/97/3, (hereinafter “Compaiita de Aguas del
Aconquija”); and Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and Interagua Servicios Integrales de
Agua S.A. v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17, (hereinafter “Suez”).

'S Christoph H. Schreuer, ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2001), p.162 (AL RA 4).

'© Paul Szasz, The Investment Dispute Convention—Opportunities and Pitfalls (How to Submit Disputes to
ICSID), 5 Journal of Law and Economic Development (1970), p. 23, 28 (AL RA 6).

"7 AR. Parra, Desirability and Feasibility of Consolidation: Introductory Remarks, 21 ICSID-Review Foreign
Investment L.J. (2006), p. 132, 134 (AL RA 8).

24

49.

50.

51.

whether such sale violated contractual and statutory requirements, the
circumstances and terms and conditions of each of the 50 bond
issuances, including the existence of different choice of law and forum
clauses, the flow and use of funds resulting from the original bond
issuances, how the value of each bond evolved before and after the
contested measures, and the value of each security entitlement at the
date of acquisition.” '*

It asserts that individual treatment of the circumstances of each claimant was crucial
in this case because — unlike international mechanisms that provide for collective
claims where liability had been established and the only issue that remained was the
quantum of damages — here responsibility under the Argentina-Italy BIT had yet to be

established and was very much in dispute in relation to each individual Claimant.

The Memorial further alleges the absence of any link between the individual
Claimants, who were suing on 50 different series of bonds, which had different
governing rules, issuance dates, type of currency, and amounts, and were acquired in

different places, at different prices, and on different dates.

Lastly, the Memorial draws attention to the absence of a legal representative who can
adequately and fairly represent, and vigorously pursue, the interests of the individual

Claimants.

b. The Claimants have not validly consented to ICSID arbitration

The Memorial recalls that a host State’s consent to arbitrate contained in a legislative
or treaty provision is no more than an offer that must be validly accepted by the
investor in order to perfect consent for the purposes of Article 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention. Whereas the Claimants contention is that their consent was established
in the normal course by the filing of the Request for Arbitration itself, the Memorial
submits that, inasmuch as the Request was not signed by the Claimants in person, but
by an attorney claiming to act on their behalf, the effectiveness of their consent is
dependent on whether or not the attorney had been duly authorized by the Claimants
to do so. The Memorial draws attention in this connection to the fact that the Power
of Attorney (see paragraphs 32 and 45 above) nowhere contains a mention of ICSID,
nor indeed of the Italy-Argentina BIT, the only reference coming in two of the recitals

in the NASAM Mandate, and asserts that in both cases the reference constitutes

'8 Memorial, para. 110.

25

52.

53.

54.

information being conveyed to the recipient, but not any form of authorization given
by the recipient. The Memorial points finally to the circumstance that the Claimants
did not in fact sign the Request for Arbitration, although it was specifically foreseen
in the documents constituting the ‘package’ that they would have to do so; it follows
from this that the mere filing of the Request by counsel, without the Claimants’
signatures, is not capable of fulfilling the requirement of consent in writing laid down

in Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.

The Memorial further argues that, even assuming arguendo that the NASAM
Mandate and the Power of Attorney, the only instruments actually signed by the
Claimants, did contain their written consent, that consent would be invalid because
both of these instruments violate formal and substantive requirements of Italian law,
as the applicable law regulating them; the defects relate both to matters of form,
which determine how powers of attorney must be entered into, and of substance,
which determine what the relations must be between the client and the attorney, and
these defects taint all of the instruments in the package, under the Italian legal
doctrine of negozi collegati. In particular, the structure under which the Claimants,
in effect, surrender all control over the handling of their claims in favour of NASAM
is incompatible with the requirements of Article 77 of the Italian Code of Civil

Procedure.

c. There is no ‘investment’ ...

The Memorial maintains that the Tribunal is without jurisdiction ratione materiae as
the assets in respect of which the Claimants are claiming do not rank as ‘investments’
for the purposes of the ICSID Convention or the BIT. The Claimants’ bare assertions
to that effect are belied by the fact (a) that the BIT does not refer to ‘bonds’ or to
‘rights derived from bonds’, and that in any case (b) a stringent set of criteria has to be
fulfilled in order to turn holdings of these kinds into protected investments under the

ICSID system.

i. ... under the ICSID Convention

As to point (b), the Memorial relies on a series of ICSID cases for the proposition that

the ICSID Convention itself is based upon an autonomous notion of ‘investment’ that

26

55.

must be satisfied and is not determined by the terms of a particular BIT. It cites with

approval the dictum of the tribunal in Joy Mining that:

“The parties to a dispute cannot by contract or treaty define as
investment, for the purpose of ICSID jurisdiction, something which
does not satisfy the objective requirements of Article 25 of the
Convention. Otherwise, Article 25 and its reliance on the concept of
investment, even if not specifically defined, would be turned into a
meaningless provision.” 19

To ascertain the criteria that go to determine whether an asset is an ‘investment’ for
the purposes of the ICSID Convention, the Memorial relies on the Awards in Salini,
Joy Mining, and Phoenix Action” to support its submission that there may be as many
as seven criteria that come into play: duration; regularity of returns; risk; substantial
commitment; contribution to the host State’s economy; compliance with local law;
and bona fides. The Memorial asserts that the doubts as to whether the Claimants’
assets fulfil any of the first five of these criteria are so substantial as to require the
conclusion that they do not fall within the concept of ‘investment’ under the

Convention. Specifically —

e The Claimants have made no commitment, still less a substantial one; the
only information provided by them is the nominal value of their security

entitlements, but nothing even about the price they had paid for them.

e Set against the criterion laid down in prior ICSID Awards that an
investment should as a minimum have a duration of two — five years, the
Claimants have provided no information on the intended tenure of their
assets, a matter which is entirely under the control of each individual
holder; the nature of security entitlements purchased on the secondary
market is that they need not be held for any particular duration since they
are freely tradable, and can be sold virtually instantaneously following
their purchase. Even if the maturity dates were taken as a guide, a large

number of Claimants bought security entitlements with a duration of less

© Joy Mining Machinery Limited v Arab Republic of Egypt, CSID Case No. ARB/03/11, Award on
Jurisdiction, 6 August 2004, (hereinafter “Joy Mining v Egypt’), (AL RA 46), para. 50.

® Phoenix Action Ltd v Czech Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/06/5, Award, 15 April 2009, (hereinafter
“Phoenix Action”) (AL RA 44).

27

56.

57.

than five years, and some appear to have bought them immediately before

maturity.

There is no evidence that the risk assumed was anything more than normal
commercial risk, whereas Tribunals have held that ordinary commercial
contracts cannot be considered as ‘investments’ .”!

the fact that security entitlements are easily and recurrently transferred
implies in turn that there is no regularity of profit and return for Claimants,
who would have been able to acquire the security entitlements at stake at
any moment, including on the day immediately preceding the maturity

date, in which case there would have been no regularity of return at all.

Likewise, the Claimants’ security entitlements made no contribution to
Argentina at all; they merely served to reimburse the underwriting and
intermediary banks who had taken on themselves full responsibility for
selling on these entitlements on the open market in conformity with the
laws and regulations applicable at the places of sale. It is of the nature of
secondary market transactions that their proceeds “accrue to the selling
dealers and investors, not to the companies that originally issued the

922

securities,”"~ whereas the economic benefit to Argentina derived from the

contracts concluded by it with the underwriters themselves.

ii. ... under the BIT

As to point (a), the Memorial begins with an indication of what it considers to be
errors in the Claimants’ translation into English of Article 1(1)(c) of the BIT, and
points out that the Spanish and Italian language versions constitute the authentic texts,
and thus the valid ones for interpretation, pursuant to the Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties. It submits that the failure to use in either language a term
corresponding to the English ‘bonds’ should be seen as evidence that the Contracting

Parties intended to exclude bonds from the scope of application of the BIT.

The Memorial then submits that in any event the governing law clauses in the security

entitlements in themselves exclude these instruments from the scope of protected

*! Cf. Joy Mining v Egypt (AL RA 46), para. 57.
» Memorial, para.176, citing Barron’s Financial Guides (6 ed.).

28

58.

59.

investments under the BIT. Invoking the dictum of the Bayview Tribunal that the
“salient characteristic” of a covered investment is that it “is primarily regulated by the
law of a State other than the State of the investor’s nationality, and that this law is
created and applied by that State which is not the State of the investor’s nationality,””*
the Memorial asserts that Argentine law does not apply to any of the security
entitlements at issue in the arbitration, nor did any law or regulation created or applied

by Argentine authorities govern the issue or sale of the security entitlements.

iii. _... by reason of violations of the applicable law

The Memorial further asserts that the sale and purchase of the security entitlements to
the Claimants was in violation of the governing law, the law of Italy, and that as a
result the security entitlements cannot be investments falling under the protection of
the BIT. This conclusion is founded on the argument that the express ‘in accordance
with law’ reference in Article 1 of the BIT is a reflection of general public policy and
of the principle of good faith, with the result that the Treaty cannot be construed as
protecting assets acquired illegally. Under Argentine conflict of laws rules, the
validity of contracts made outside the territory of Argentina, and the obligations that
derive from them, is governed by the law of the place where the contract was made,
i.e., in the present case, Italy. However, under Italian law, the terms and conditions
of the bonds expressly prohibited the sale of security entitlements to unqualified,
unsophisticated buyers, and a specific restriction to that effect was included in almost
all the prospectuses or subscription agreements. The Memorial submits that, in
consequence, the acquisition of the security entitlements by the present Claimants was

unlawful under both Italian and Argentinian law.

iv. _... in the territory of Argentina
The Memorial asserts finally that the security entitlements fail to meet the
territoriality requirement under the BIT, since there was, in fact, no investment ‘in the
territory of Argentina, as is required under the definition of ‘investment’ in
Article 1(1) of the BIT. The Memorial relies on the equivalent wording in the

Preamble to the BIT, and on the reasoning of the Tribunals in SGS v Philippines”,

> Bayview Irrigation District and others v United Mexican States, CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/05/1, (hereinafter
“Bayview”), (AL RA 54) para. 98.

* SG Société Générale de Surveillance SA v Republic of the Philippines, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/6, Decision
on Objections to Jurisdiction, 29 January 2004, (hereinafter “SGS v Philippines”) (AL RA 57).

29

60.

61.

and Canadian Cattlemen”*, to support its argument that the plain meaning of
Articles 1(1) and (2) excludes from the scope of the BIT investments made outside the

territory of the respondent State, whether or not beneficial to that State.

The Memorial further asserts that a series of factors combine to show that the claimed

assets are indeed not invested ‘in the territory of’ Argentina, namely:-

e Claimants’ security entitlements are not physically located in the territory

of Argentina;

e Claimants’ purchases of security entitlements were made outside the

territory of Argentina;

e Claimants’ security entitlements are registered outside the territory of

Argentina;
e all of Claimants’ security entitlements are governed by foreign law;

e and all of Claimants’ security entitlements are enforceable in foreign

jurisdictions.

The Memorial reiterates once more that the proceeds of Claimants’ purchase of
security entitlements did not accrue to Argentina, no funds from Claimants were made
available to Argentina, and the security entitlements generated no ‘capital at the
disposal of’ Argentina. The Memorial asserts that there was no contractual connection
between the initial purchase of the bonds and the secondary sale of the security

entitlements in these bonds.

d. The failure to state a prima facie treaty violation

The Memorial asserts as a well-established general principle that an international
court or tribunal must satisfy itself at the preliminary stage that the claim brought
before it is capable of coming within the provisions of the treaty that has been
invoked, and cites in support the Ambatielos and Oil Platforms cases before the

International Court of Justice, applying a prima facie test which had in turn been

°5 Canadian Cattlemen for Fair Trade v United States, NAFTA/UNCITRAL, Award on Jurisdiction, 28 January
2008, (hereinafter “Canadian Cattlemen”) (AL RA 59).

30

62.

63.

applied by a large number of ICSID tribunals, including in SGS v Philippines and

Salini.
On that basis, the Memorial asserts that the Claimants

“do not state an arguable case under the BIT that Argentina interfered

with their security entitlements in the exercise of her sovereign

authority under any of their legal theories. Indeed, it was impossible

for Argentina to do that. Claimants’ security entitlements and the

underlying bonds are governed by foreign law and enforceable in

foreign courts. The bonds and security entitlements are therefore

beyond the scope of Argentina’s legislative jurisdiction and are subject

to the jurisdiction of foreign courts over which Argentina has no

influence. Argentina could not and did not alter or cancel the rights

represented by Claimants’ security entitlements through exercise of

her sovereign authority because those rights were not created by and

are not governed by Argentine law, and they are enforceable in

municipal courts outside of Argentina.””°
Instead, the Memorial says, the Claimants have no more than a contractual claim,
which could not be cognisable before the Tribunal unless their contractual rights had
been interfered with by the Respondent, acting not as a contractual party but in
exercise of its puissance publique. The Memorial asserts further that it is not open to
the Claimants to evade this essential fact by attempting to disguise their claims as
Argentina “not respecting its obligation to pay principal and interest in accordance
with the conditions of the Bonds,” or “imposing on the Claimants the scandalous
conditions of the ‘take-it-or-leave-it’ POE,” or “continuing to refuse to make a good
faith effort to restructure its debt on reasonable terms even after its robust economic
recovery that has allowed it to repay a large fraction of its outstanding debt”.?”. These
allegations are not, however, capable of constituting breaches of the BIT because it is
well established that a mere failure to pay a contractual debt cannot in itself amount to
a violation of international law, nor does international law preclude a debtor from
offering terms of settlement to its creditors or to offer special treatment to creditors
who do accept settlement terms, all of these being actions that would be open to any
contractual party. Moreover, the assertion in the Request that “Argentina’s actions

have definitively deprived the Claimants of property of the Bonds without adequate

effective or immediate compensation” flies in the face of the statements made by their

°° Memorial, para. 224.
°7 The quotations are from para.43 of the Request.

31

64.

65.

own banks, contained in the annexes to the Request, to the effect that the bonds are
“at present in the full property and availability” of the named Claimants.* In sum,
the Claimants are simply asserting that Argentina failed to pay Claimants their
contract entitlements, which does not however amount to expropriation under
international law. This analysis of the essential nature of the Claimants’ claims is
further reinforced by the terms of the Powers of Attorney granted by them, which
never refer to rights under the BIT but only to property in the bonds and the credits

due under them.

The Claimants therefore fail to state a prima facie claim under the BIT, and this
fundamental defect is not capable of being cured by the invocation of the most-
favoured-nation clause in the BIT in an attempt to summon up the protection of the
principle of ‘full protection and security’ since no argument is offered in the Request

either to justify it or to indicate how it would apply to Claimants’ claims.

e. The absence of jurisdiction ratione personae and of standing on the part of the
Claimants

The Memorial asserts that the onus lies on the Claimants to establish that they are
‘nationals of a Contracting State’ (other than the Respondent) for the purposes of
Article 25(2) of the ICSID Convention, and also (positively) that they meet the
definition of ‘investor’ under Article 1(2) of the BIT and (negatively) that they are not
disentitled pursuant to the corresponding provision in the Additional Protocol to the
BIT; yet the Request merely asserts Italian nationality and neither it nor the
documents submitted in support offer sufficient material either to substantiate the time
element or to enable the criteria in the Additional Protocol to be applied, for example
in relation to dual nationality, which is permitted in both Italian and Argentine law, or
in relation to domicile in Argentina before the claimed investment was made. Given
that Italian nationality law is based upon ius sanguinis, whereas Argentine nationality
law is based upon ius solis, and that under both sets of laws nationality can be
acquired on other grounds, such as marriage, residence or naturalization, mere
declarations of birth and residence are not sufficient for the prima facie establishment
of nationality. These failures are exacerbated, according to the Memorial, by the

inconsistencies in the Claimants’ documentation in respect of the identification of

°8 Cf. Exhibit C-2.

32

66.

67.

who the Claimants are. The Memorial alleges that certain persons covered in the
Claimants’ disclosure of documents did not appear on the list of Claimants in the
Request, while, conversely, some Claimants listed in the Request were not covered in

the disclosure.

f The absence of an investment in the Republic of Argentina

The Memorial points out that under the BIT the definitions of ‘investor’ and
‘investment’ are inherently linked, from which it follows that no person can be
considered to be an ‘investor’ under the definition in Article 1(2) without having
made an investment” “in the territory of” the other Contracting Party (in this case
Argentina). However, for the reasons already given, none of the Claimants’ security

entitlements meets this criterion.

g. The Claimants’ lack of standing

The Memorial asserts that the Claimants’ security entitlements do not represent a
legal interest in the underlying bonds. The consequence would be that, even if the
bonds themselves could be considered to be ‘investments’ within the meaning of the
BIT, the same would not hold for the security entitlements because of the remoteness
of their connection with the bonds. In support, the Memorial argues that the
Claimants acquired their security entitlements on the secondary market from the
Italian banks, and that the banks, in turn, had acquired their security entitlements
through a layer of intermediaries, varying from case to case. It further argues that
neither the Claimants’ nor the banks from whom they bought have any contractual
relationship with either Argentina or the underwriters. It argues further that
Claimants’ security entitlements are registered in the accounts of the Italian banks, not
in the accounts of the registered owners of the bonds, the clearing organizations, with
the result that the Claimants are at least one step more remote than an Italian bank or
intermediary that has an account with the clearing organization. It submits that this
indirect holding system implicates a cut-off point beyond which claims would not be
admissible because of the remoteness of their connection with the investment. The
Memorial finally submits that the Claimants’ assets lie beyond this cut-off point, as
evidenced by the fact that they fall outside Argentina’s consent to arbitrate, and

should therefore be declared in any case to be inadmissible.

> Or being in the process of so doing or having assumed an obligation so to do.

33

68.

69.

70.

The Memorial raises two further arguments in favour of this submission of
inadmissibility. The first is that the Claimants remain free to pursue their remedies
against the banks from whom they bought (and one Claimant at least had already done
so before the Italian courts, seeking the nullification or termination of the contract of
sale), and that issues of that kind ought to be determined before the arbitration
proceeded. The second is that the Claimants are in fact pursuing their claims for the
benefit of a third party (NASAM), which has itself no standing to bring arbitral
proceedings, and this constitutes an abuse of process. It was NASAM that took the
decision to bring the proceedings, not any of the Claimants, individually or jointly,
and NASAM retains the sole power to instruct counsel, and to settle them, including

the decision as to whether the terms of settlement are expedient or not.

h. The failure to comply with the preconditions under Article 8 of the BIT

The Memorial draws attention to the provisions of Article 8 of the BIT which, it
asserts, establish a multi-layered, sequential dispute resolution system, beginning with
amicable consultations, and proceeding through recourse to the administrative or
judicial authorities of the host State, and finally to the possibility of international
arbitration, but only if 18 months has elapsed since the notification of the local
recourse. Here the Claimants have jumped, inadmissibly, directly to the third stage
without proceeding through the prior stages. The Memorial rejects both of the
reasons adduced by the Claimants for their failure to comply: that in the
circumstances the conditions laid down in Article 8 are not applicable, or alternatively
that direct consultations would have been fruitless, in the light of the Respondent’s
general ‘hostile and uncooperative’ attitude, and in the face of Argentine Law

No. 26,017.

As to the applicability of the prior steps under Article 8(1) and (2) of the BIT, the
Memorial invokes the common approach under the dispute settlement provisions of
investment protection treaties and the decision by the Tribunal in the Wintershall v
Argentina arbitration, upholding the “interdependent and inter-linked” dispute
resolution provisions of the Argentina-Germany BIT which, it asserts, are closely

related to those of the present BIT. It draws attention in particular to the fact that

* Wintershall Aktiengesellschaft v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/14, Award, 8 December 2008,
(hereinafter “Wintershall”) (Al RA 78).

34

both paragraph (2) of Article 8 (referring to recourse to local authorities or courts) and
paragraph (3) (referring to international arbitration), begin with the word ‘If’, thus
clearly indicating the existence in each case of a prior condition that had to be
satisfied. The Memorial denies also, on the factual level, the allegation of
Argentina’s ‘hostile and uncooperative’ attitude, citing Argentina’s “substantial
efforts” over several years to engage with purchasers and their representatives and
that the POE was a product of these discussions, and reflected the contributions of
many creditor groups. On the legal level, it denies further that Law No. 26,017 did
more than establish an “internal process” that would prevent the executive branch
from reopening the Exchange Offer without legislative authorization. In other words,
Law 26,017 did not make settlement with Argentina impossible or futile: it only

required legislative consent to any settlement.

71. As to the 18 month delay laid down by Article 8(3) of the BIT, the Memorial rebuts
what it refers to as the ‘excuses’ put forward by the Claimants for not attempting to
meet this requirement. It points to the absence of any jurisprudence constante in
favour of the Claimants’ submission that the provision lacked a jurisdictional
character, citing in particular the decisions of the Tribunals in Wintershall v Argentina

al
and Enron v Argentina.

It asserts further that a categorical denial of this provision,
and of the evident intention lying behind it, runs counter to the basic principle of effet
utile in the interpretation of treaties. It takes issue also with the Claimants’
invocation of an exception to the application of this provision (and others of a similar
kind) in circumstances where resort to local courts or authorities would be futile, on
the grounds that an asserted futility has to be ‘obvious’ or ‘manifest’; that Article
8(3) says only that a dispute must be submitted to the local courts or authorities, not
that it must necessarily be resolved within 18 months of submission, the plain
intention of the Contracting Parties being that the local courts or authorities should
have the opportunity to decide a dispute before the route to arbitration was opened;
and that, based on actual experience, there was no factual or legal reason why the
Argentine courts could not decide a dispute of the present kind, and do so within the

time limit prescribed by the BIT.

5! Enron Creditors Recovery Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v Argentine Republic (formerly known
under the name Enron Corporation, hereinafter “Enron v Argentina”), ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/3, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 14 January 2004 (AL RA 75).

35

72.

723.

74.

For all the above reasons, the Memorial seeks a decision that the Tribunal (and
ICSID) lacks jurisdiction over the dispute, and that the Respondent be awarded its

costs and expenses.

3. The Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

In their Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, filed on 5 November
2009, the Claimants contest the Respondent’s description of the circumstances
surrounding Argentina’s default on its bonded debt and set out in greater detail their
reasons for asserting that both ICSID and this Tribunal have jurisdiction to hear the

dispute, which should be ruled admissible.

3.1 The background to Argentina’s default

The Counter-Memorial begins with a rebuttal of the Respondent’s factual description
contained in the Memorial, alleging that the Respondent offers a distorted and self-
serving account which is designed to paint itself as an innocent victim of the crisis
leading to its default rather than as the author of that default, bearing responsibility for
its consequences. It alleges that (although this is properly an issue for the merits) it
was Argentina’s own profligate and undisciplined policies that led to the financial
collapse in 2001-2002. It cites in this context a report of 2004 by the Independent
Valuation Office of the IMF, and the serious long-term effects of the convertibility
regime which pegged the Argentine Peso to the US Dollar at a fixed parity of one to
one, against the background of a failure to maintain fiscal discipline and control
public expenditure (provincial as well as national) and in particular to control the
level of the external public debt. It alleges that the Argentine governing authorities
knew what was required, as this was at the centre of its discussions with the IMF in
the 1990s, but nevertheless failed to introduce the necessary structural reforms. It
sets out the economic reasons why Argentine debt ought to have been kept at a low
level, and contrasts this with the growth in the ratio of debt to GDP from 35.1% in
1994 to 64.1% in 2001. It alleges that Argentina failed to estimate a sustainable level
of national debt and massively over-borrowed, mostly on the international markets
and notably in foreign currencies. It asserts that, had Argentina been a responsible
policy-maker and enforcer and a prudent spender and borrower, it would have

prevented the 2001 crisis and would have been able to service its debt commitments.

36

75.

76.

The Counter-Memorial continues with its own account of what happened in the wake
of Argentina’s default, which it describes as being of historically record-breaking
proportions, leading to a rise in the debt-to-GDP ratio to 150% in 2002 after the
currency devaluation that followed the abandonment of the peg to the US Dollar. The
Counter-Memorial asserts that the total debt balance amounted in 2004 to US$195.5
billion, 53% of which was in bonds, which had a cumulative unpaid principal of
US$81.2 billion and accrued interest of US$22.9 billion; this bonded indebtedness
was held as to 47% by Argentine citizens and as to 35% by retail private investors
concentrated in Italy, Switzerland and Germany (with the remaining 18% divided
between the USA, Asia and Latin America). It further asserts that, although Argentina
took certain of the measures required of it to deal with this situation, the same was not
true in respect of the restructuring of its debt even though it had succeeded by 2004 in
bringing inflation under control, stabilizing the currency and indeed generating a
fiscal surplus of between 3 and 4%. That notwithstanding, debt restructuring did not
take place until the early months of 2005 and took the form, the Counter-Memorial
alleges, of “impos[ing] on the holders of its bonds, without any good faith negotiation,
an outrageous take-it-or-leave-it offer unprecedented in the history of sovereign debt
restructuring and totally out of keeping with the commonly accepted guidelines of
sovereign debt restructuring.”*? The Counter-Memorial maintains that, contrary to the
Respondent’s assertions, it never negotiated in good faith with its bondholders or gave
consideration to counter-offers, but dictated an offer to bondholders which it declared

would not be improved.

The Counter-Memorial rebuts Argentina’s argument that sovereign States were not
aware of the holders of its external bonds or interests in them, so that it would be
impracticable to enter into negotiations with each such person individually or even in
groups, by retorting that an issuing State’s duty is to negotiate not with individual
bondholders but with groups or categories of bondholders; while it concedes that
meetings with creditor representatives did take place and even that Argentina did form
consultative groups with US, German, Italian, and Japanese bondholders, it denies
that Argentina made any genuine effort to negotiate the counter-proposals of such
groups, sticking instead to its own proposal, which imposed an unprecedentedly high

rate of loss on the bondholders. The Counter-Memorial gives its own account of the

* Counter-Memorial, para. 58.

37

77.

history of the Argentine offer to bondholders from the Dubai proposal of September
2003, through its rejection by creditor groups and criticism by the IMF, to the
meetings with bondholder groups in April 2004 (which it characterizes as the mere
presentation of Argentine conditions) and the Buenos Aires offer of June 2004 and the
criticism of that by bondholder representatives, and finally to the POE of January
2005 (which it describes as being only a slightly modified version of the Buenos Aires
offer). It refers further to the enactment, during the brief period in which the POE
was open for acceptance, of Law 26,017, commonly known as the Ley Cerrojo,* and
to the fact that 50% of the acceptances of the POE came in the fortnight remaining

after the promulgation of this Law.

The Counter-Memorial summarizes as follows the main features of the POE, which

together establish its ‘total illegality under international law’ :-

e the magnitude of the loss imposed on bondholders, both capital and
accrued interest, which far exceeded the average in previous

restructurings;

e the fact that it was imposed unilaterally without any consideration of

creditors’ counter-proposals;
e the deliberate understatement of the debtor’s capacity to pay;

e the low acceptance rate: a nominal 75% (by contrast with the IMF
threshold of 90%) which however masked the real level of voluntary
acceptance at around 50% only, once one discounts for the Argentine

pension funds which succumbed to Government pressure;

e the threat that bonds not offered for exchange “may remain in default
indefinitely” (and in fact are no longer recorded in Argentina’s public

accounts).

All in all, the Counter-Memorial assesses the total loss to bondholders at US$ 97
billion, $67 billion of which is attributed to bonds that were surrendered and the

remainder to hold-out bondholders.

*} ‘cerrojo’ is the Spanish word for ‘lock’.

38

78.

79.

80.

3.11 Jurisdiction and Admissibility

The Counter-Memorial then proceeds to an analysis of the ‘NASAM mandate’, the
powers of attorney granted by the individual Claimants, and the funding arrangements
for the Claimants’ case, in order to contest the Respondent’s argument that these
elements are tainted with illegality that fatally undermines the Claimants’ written

consent to arbitration, as required by Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.

a. The NASAM mandate

The Counter-Memorial sets out the origin and development of NASAM since 1978 as
part (since 1998) of the NASAM-GUARDIAN Group, the core business of which is
described as “providing qualified tax advice, at domestic and international level and a
wide range of administrative services to corporate entities and individuals”.** It
asserts that it was in the context of its routine activities that NASAM decided in 2006
to co-ordinate, organize and fund legal action against Argentina by the owners of
defaulted Argentine bonds, with the intention of recovering the amounts unpaid under
the bonds; bondholders who intended to bring such an action gave NASAM the
authorization known as the “NASAM Mandate”. The Counter-Memorial insists that
NASAM has no conflict of interest in respect of the arbitral proceedings, that it is not
an Italian bank nor has any connection with Italian banks, and that it played no role of
any kind in the placing of the bonds with the Claimants (nor indeed with any
investors); in sum, that the present arbitration must be sharply distinguished from the
situation in the Beccara v Argentina arbitration, where the third party funder is, it
asserts, an association of Italian banks which may possibly have been involved in the

sale of Argentine bonds to Italians.

As regards the NASAM Mandate, the Counter-Memorial describes it as a contract
(‘Incarico’) between each individual Claimant and NASAM, governed by Italian law,
under which NASAM undertakes to co-ordinate and to finance litigation against
Argentina in connection with the bonds. The following features are singled out: the
Claimants acknowledge that Argentina’s default may constitute a serious violation of
the BIT which entitles them to institute arbitration proceedings under the ICSID or the

UNCITRAL Rules; they confer on NASAM the power to promote, co-ordinate and

* Counter-Memorial, paras. 85-87, referring further to online information at www.guardiansa.com.

39

81.

pursue any legal action deemed appropriate for the recovery of the amounts due; to
that end, they agree to issue a power of attorney (‘Procura Speciale’) to Mr Guiseppe
Parodi; they agree to pay, as a contribution to the expenses a set fraction (0.5%) of
the nominal value of the bonds which they hold, the contribution being payable to a
NASAM account under the reference ‘Arbitrato ICSID’; NASAM agrees to defray
all of the remaining legal and other costs relating to any legal action commenced by
them; in consideration of NASAM’s activity as coordinator and for the risk assumed
by it in relation to the funding, they agree to pay NASAM a ‘base amount’ of 5% of
any amount recovered, plus a variable percentage ‘success fee’ linked to the amount

of the actual recovery.

The Counter-Memorial rejects the Respondent’s claim that this arrangement is
questionable, either in fact or in law, or that there is anything in it that contaminates

the validity of the powers of attorney, for the following reasons —

e there is no basis for claiming that NASAM is given ‘complete control’
over the claims, as its powers are limited and circumscribed by the

Mandate itself;

e nor is there any basis for alleging that the Claimants are prohibited from
contacting and instructing their attorneys or that the Mandate displaces the
attorney-client relationship: the intermediate entity “MFO” has only the
functions of managing the bank account and acting as a centre for the
exchange of information; the relationship between each Claimant and
counsel is governed solely by the Power of Attorney, and the Mandate
gives NASAM no power to instruct counsel for the Claimants; nor is
NASAM by any stretch of the imagination a party to the arbitral

proceedings;

e the argument that the Mandate is contrary to Italian law is therefore
lacking in both a factual and a legal basis, and confuses the situation in
arbitration with that before the Italian courts under the Code of Civil
Procedure, from which it follows that under Italian law a party to an
arbitration may delegate any third party (who need not even be a lawyer)

to appear before the tribunal on its behalf and to dispose of its substantive

40

82.

83.

or procedural rights; in any case, the Code could at the very most only
apply to arbitrations having their seat in Italy, not to foreign arbitrations,

still less to ICSID arbitration.

b. The funding arrangement

The Counter-Memorial recalls that third party funding is becoming increasingly
common in arbitration, recalls (by reference to numerous examples, including in
particular that of Italy) its increasing acceptance in national jurisdictions as well, and
maintains that no-one seriously contests the legality of third party funding in
international arbitration “especially in a case like the present one where the claims are
brought by the original holders of the rights which are the subject of the litigation and
where the benefits of the arbitration accrue for the most part to the Claimants”.*> It
recalls also that the NASAM funding scheme is essential to allow the present
Claimants access to justice, as they would never have had on their own account the
means to finance an ICSID arbitration. It draws the conclusion that NASAM’s role is
therefore perfectly legitimate and has no impact on the rights of the Claimants to

bring and to control the proceedings, or on their position within the proceedings.

c. The Powers of Attorney

The Counter-Memorial rejects the Respondent’s invocation of the doctrine of “negozi
collegati” (connected transactions) as being irrelevant, given that there is nothing
illegal in the NASAM Mandate which could infect the validity of the powers of
attorney. As to the powers of attorney in their own right, it equally rejects the
Respondent’s reliance on provisions of the Italian Civil Code which apply only to
proceedings before Italian courts and not to arbitration, even arbitration governed by
Italian law. It cites authority for the lack of formality in the designation of party
representatives in arbitral proceedings, which may even be accomplished orally. It
submits that, merely because (as the Respondent asserts) the powers of attorney are
legal instruments signed in Italy by Italian citizens in favour of an Italian lawyer
practising in Italy, that does not make Italian law applicable to them for the purposes
of an ICSID arbitration. It recalls that, were the position otherwise, ICSID tribunals
would have to engage in preliminary conflict of law analyses just to verify that the

powers of attorney of those appearing before them were in order, and cites in this

*5 Counter-Memorial, para.113.

41

84.

85.

86.

*© Limited Liabil

connection the ‘curt dismissal’ by the Tribunal in Amto v Ukraine of an argument that
the consent of the claimant in that case was defective owing to its being based on an
invalid power of attorney,*° a finding which it argues is directly in point to the present

case.

The Counter-Memorial submits further that, in order to assess their jurisdiction,
ICSID tribunals have to apply only the provisions of Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention, which are free-standing, and which require no particular legal
requirement or requirement as to form for the “consent in writing” stipulated by
Article 25(1), citing in this connection the Decision on Jurisdiction in the CSOB v
Slovakia arbitration that “[t]he question of whether the parties have effectively
expressed their consent to ICSID jurisdiction is not to be answered by reference to
national law [but] is governed by international law as set out in Article 25(1) of the

ICSID Convention.”*”

d. The Claimants’ ‘consent in writing’

The Counter-Memorial next counters the Respondent’s contentions that the Claimants
have not given their ‘consent in writing’ for the purposes of Article 25(1) by reason of
the fact that they did not personally sign the Request for Arbitration and that there is
no specific mention of ICSID arbitration in the powers of attorney. It dismisses these
contentions as wholly without merit, given the universal recognition that an investor
may validly accept an offer of ICSID arbitration contained in a BIT by the simple
expedient of instituting proceedings, and that that is in fact precisely the mode by
which the great majority of ICSID proceedings have been set in train in recent years,
relying in this context on the clear holding by the Tribunal in Tokios Tokeles v
Ukraine that “the Convention does not stipulate the form that written consent must

take, much less to whom it must be addressed and sent.”*®

The Counter-Memorial submits that the present Claimants clearly did give their
consent to ICSID arbitration by filing the Request through their duly appointed

Counsel, acting under powers of attorney that (as had been shown) were perfectly

 

ty Company Amto v Ukraine, SCC Case No.080/2005, Award of 26 March 2008 (hereinafter

“AMTO v Ukraine”), para.56.

*? Ceskoslovenska obchodni banka, a.s. v Slovak Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/97/4, Decision on Objections
to Jurisdiction, 24 May 1999 (hereinafter “CSOB v Slovakia” or “CSOB”), para. 35.

*§ Tokios Tokelés v Ukraine, I\CSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Decision on Jurisdiction, 29 April 2004, para. 97.

42

87.

88.

valid. The powers of attorney expressly authorize Counsel to “communicate any
notice of dispute in my/our name and on my/our behalf” and to “sign and forward any
request of arbitration ... in my/our name and on my/our behalf’. Moreover, if the
powers of attorney are read in conjunction with the NASAM Mandate, there is no
room for dispute that they confer on Counsel the authority to institute ICSID
proceedings, and in fact explicitly instruct him to do so, inasmuch as their general
wording unquestionably includes ICSID within the category of “the Arbitral Tribunal
and/or ... any other competent Court or Authority of whatever Country of the World,”
the NASAM Mandate explicitly mentions ICSID, and the Claimants’ initial
contributions were paid in under the reference “Arbitrato ICSID”. It is, moreover,
common practice for requests for arbitration to be signed by duly authorized counsel,
and not by the parties in person, nor has it ever been questioned that this meets the

requirements of Article 25(1).

e. Claims brought by multiple claimants

In rejecting the Respondent’s submission that the multiplicity of claimants requires
the Request to be rejected in limine, either because it falls outside the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction or is otherwise inadmissible, the Counter-Memorial asserts that this
submission rests on a three-fold argument: (i) that it represents a ‘mass claim’; (ii)
that it does not meet the conditions under which it could be dealt with by an ICSID
tribunal as a multi-party arbitration; (iii) that it could not be handled without violating
fundamental principles of due process. In contesting all three of these arguments, the
Counter-Memorial asserts that there is nothing either extraordinary or unprecedented
about the present proceedings, against the well-known background that another
arbitration is pending on much the same subject matter with a number of claimants

. 3
one hundred times larger.”

As to the ‘mass’ nature of the Claimants’ claims, the Counter-Memorial points out
that the Respondent’s written argument refers variously to ‘mass claims’, ‘collective
claims’, and ‘collective actions’, but that it is mostly concerned to paint the claims as
a class action, in order to show that the conditions for bringing such an action are not
met. The entire line of argument is however said to be beside the point, since the

main feature of class actions is their representative nature; a representative is

* The reference is to Abaclat.

43

89.

90.

91.

permitted to act on his own behalf and also on behalf of others who are not directly
party to the proceedings but suffered the same harm at the hands of the defendant, and
who lose their individual capacity to decide when and how to exercise their own
rights against the defendant. That essential feature is however missing from the
present case. The individual Claimants are moreover identified with precision. The
Claimants therefore need no further representative to represent their interests before

the Tribunal.

The Counter-Memorial denies the allegation that NASAM ‘recruited’ the Claimants
to take part in the arbitration, asserting to the contrary that NASAM merely made
available to them a mechanism to fund their action, so providing for them a concrete

opportunity to pursue their rights.

The Counter-Memorial denies further that there is any analogy between the present
proceedings and the global machinery set up in past instances for the settlement of
claims against a State, e.g. to compensate the victims of the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
In those cases the aim was to reach a global settlement in the wake of State conduct
that affected a large number of individuals whose identity could not be determined in
advance, and whose interests had been affected in many different ways; that shows
the contrast with the present case, in which a limited number of well-identified
claimants is participating, through duly appointed counsel, in complaints about the

very same illegality committed by the Respondent State.

The Counter-Memorial concedes that nothing in the ICSID Convention and rules nor
in the BIT expressly envisages claims brought by a plurality of claimants, but
maintains that this does not in any way serve to exclude them. It asserts that it is
“extremely common” for ICSID tribunals to entertain such claims, which the
Respondent indeed accepts while asserting that the difference lies in the fact that the
present Claimants are not contractually related to one another. The Counter-Memorial
contests, however, whether the Respondent’s characterization is more than just a
description of past cases rather than a comprehensive account of the entire field of
cases capable of being brought before an ICSID tribunal, and relies in that respect on
the change between the treatment in the first edition of the authoritative commentary
by Schreuer (cited by the Respondent) and the second edition. It submits that, under

the ICSID Convention, the only requirement for setting in motion arbitral

44

92.

proceedings, including those involving a multiplicity of parties, is that all of them
should have given their written consent, which is clearly the case here; nor can there
be any doubt that all of the Claimants have expressed their consent for their claims to
be adjudicated in the same proceedings. It denies, however, that there is any
requirement for the Respondent to give a specific consent to that effect, maintaining
that the case is different from one where a multiplicity of plaintiffs is claiming under
different arbitration clauses linking them to the defendant under different contracts,
but rather is a case in which the respondent State had made an offer to arbitrate to an
indefinite number of potential counterparties, and there is nothing in the terms of the
BIT to suggest that this consent by the respondent State had been made conditional
on their claims being brought in separate proceedings. It cites in support the approach
adopted by the Tribunal in LG&E v Argentina, which contented itself with
establishing the Respondent’s consent but did not further investigate specific consent

to a multipartite arbitration.

The Counter-Memorial concedes that there ought to be a “reasonable and significant
link” between the claims of the individual claimants, for the simple reason that it
would not be possible to adjudicate unrelated claims in a single arbitration, but
submits that this criterion is amply satisfied here, because all of the claims arise out of
a substantially identical legal and factual situation, in that “each one of the Claimants
is the holder of Bonds issued by Argentina in almost identical circumstances to
finance its external debt and each one of them suffered harm to its interests from the
same sovereign acts of the Republic of Argentina, i.e. the POE and the Law No.
26,017,”*° from which it can be seen that it is quite untrue to assert that they have
different or divergent interests. It argues that the identical nature of the illegality, the
legal basis and the relief sought is amply sufficient to establish a link between them
that justifies their being treated in the same proceedings, and draws a comparison in
this respect with the situation which prevailed in the Funnekotter v Zimbabwe
arbitration, brought by fourteen unrelated Dutch investors where the only link
between them was that they had all suffered the same harm from the host State’s

measures."' It cites the Schreuer commentary as authority for the proposition that,

#° Counter-Memorial, para.179.

+! Bernardus Henricus Funnekotter and others v Republic of Zimbabwe, ICSID Case No. ARB/O5/6 (hereinafter
“Funnekotter”). And also the Decisions in Antoine Goetz v Republic of Burundi, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/2,
(hereinafter “Goetz v Burundi”), where the tribunal saw no need to investigate the differences between the

45

93.

94.

95.

once the principle of multiple claims is accepted, no question arises by virtue only of
the number of co-claimants. It discounts the Respondent’s argument that the earlier
multipartite actions against Argentina can be explained away by the latter’s consent,
by retorting that the issue of admissibility was simply not addressed by the tribunals

in question.”

As to the management of the case and the question of due process, it dismisses the
Respondent’s arguments as based on a failed attempt to assimilate the case to mass
claims or a class action, and accuses the Respondent of deliberately exaggerating the
complexity of the case, which involves on the one hand only 120 Claimants and on
the other, legal and factual situations which are in reality quite straightforward, and
for the most part are common to all the claims. The prospect would be that the
documentary load would be no greater than that routinely dealt with by commercial
and investment arbitration tribunals. That was demonstrated in practice by the
Bayview and Canadian Cattlemen cases, where the numbers of claimants were similar

to the present (although both tribunals ultimately declined jurisdiction).

The Counter-Memorial accuses the Respondent of failing to make out in what way its
right to due process might be jeopardized, inasmuch as all that it mentions is a
potential difficulty in the hearing of witnesses; this argument is however rejected as
far-fetched, since it is hard to imagine for what reason the Respondent could seek to
cross-examine each individual Claimant. The great majority of the issues likely to
arise on the merits could be dealt with on the documents. All other issues relate
simply to case management, and are well within the capacity of an experienced

Tribunal.

The Counter-Memorial asserts that the absence of specific procedural rules is not a
valid criterion for the assessment of a tribunal’s jurisdiction, which is exclusively
determined by the conditions laid down in Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention and
in the BIT, and these do not include the availability of suitable procedural rules.
Jurisdiction once established, it is for the tribunal and the parties to agree on the

appropriate procedures to deal with the issues that may arise, and nothing prevents the

 

acquisition and nature of the holdings of the six shareholders, and in Bayview v Mexico, where, although the
tribunal ultimately declined jurisdiction, the widely differing nature of the 46 unrelated claimants was not even
addressed as a possible objection to the admissibility of their claim.

” LG&E, Compania de Aguas del Aconquija, and Suez.

46

96.

97.

98.

99.

tribunal from borrowing, on an ad hoc basis, from instruments developed in other

mechanisms.

The Counter-Memorial finally submits that, at the practical level, the bringing of all
of the claims in one single proceeding is unquestionably the most efficient and
advantageous course, which is in fact to the benefit of the Respondent itself, saving it
complication and expense. Had each claim been brought by a separate request for
arbitration, the Respondent would undoubtedly have moved for them to be joined, and

this is also what a national court would have done.

f Jurisdiction ratione materiae

The Counter-Memorial contests the Respondent’s twin contentions that the
Claimants’ holdings do not amount to ‘investments’ under the ICSID Convention or
under the terms of the BIT, and that they were in any event not made ‘in the territory
of Argentina’ in accordance with applicable law so as to entitle them to protection
under the BIT. It takes issue in particular with the Respondent’s premise that the
Claimants’ holdings are not ‘bonds’ but ‘security entitlements’, which it characterizes

as a semantic exercise designed to escape the express terms of the BIT.

Beginning with the position under the ICSID Convention, the Counter-Memorial
asserts that the Respondent is mistaken in the value it attaches to the ‘Salini test’, but
that in any case the financial instruments at issue in the arbitration do satisfy the
Salini test, and are properly ranked as ‘investments’ for the purposes of the
Convention.*? It reproaches the Respondent for having espoused the notion of a
strict and wholly autonomous concept of ‘investment’ under the ICSID Convention,
while ignoring entirely the growing and authoritative body of opinion and decision
which adopts a two-fold test that allows considerable scope for agreement between
the parties (as, for example, in a BIT) on the precise definition of what will constitute

an investment within a broad and flexible conception of the term.

The Counter-Memorial points out that, although the Respondent relies on the
Decision in CSOB v Slovakia, that Decision in fact held that the concept of investment

“should be interpreted broadly because the drafters of the Convention did not impose

+ The reference is to the Decision on Jurisdiction of 23 July 2001 in Salini Construttori S.p.A. and Italstrade
S.p.A. v Kingdom of Morocco, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/4, (hereinafter “Salini”); the Counter-Memorial cites
also Joy Mining v Egypt and Phoenix Action v Czech Republic.

47

100.

101.

102.

any restrictions on its meaning”“*

and the Award is of no assistance to the Respondent
either in this or in other respects. Similarly the Fedax tribunal supported a “broad
approach” to the interpretation of investment which left to the parties to a BIT a
“large measure of discretion” to determine whether a transaction constitutes an

investment for the purposes of the ICSID Convention.**

As to the ‘Salini test’ itself and the five conditions which the Respondent derives from
it, the Counter-Memorial submits that some tribunals have attached undue weight to
them, citing in particular the more flexible approach taken by the CSOB, MCI v
Ecuador, and Biwater Gauff tribunals, and draws attention to the description in the
latest edition of the Schreuer commentary as “unfortunate” of the tendency to elevate
a descriptive list of typical features into a set of mandatory legal requirements. It
submits further that the Decision of the Annulment Committee in Malaysian
Historical Salvors is especially instructive in its criticism of the sole Arbitrator for his
having failed to give full effect to the definition of ‘investment’ in the relevant BIT,
and cites an extensive list of arbitral awards in support of the argument that the Salini
criteria are not to be regarded as separate and independent of one another, nor do all

of them have to be satisfied in each individual case.

The Counter-Memorial submits further that “there is little doubt that financial
instruments, and hence the Bonds held by the Claimants, are investments for the
purposes of the Convention no matter how an investment is defined,”** given that
bond instruments are for present purposes the same as borrowings under loan
agreements. It points out that the Fedax tribunal was categorical that loans qualify as
investments, therefore so do bonds, and that for the same reason the purchase of

promissory notes qualifies as an investment.*”

The Counter-Memorial specifically rejects the Respondent’s analysis of the
characteristics of the present Bonds, pointing out that the overall capital outlays of the
bondholders undoubtedly constitute a huge financial commitment on their part, so that

to disaggregate it into the amounts paid by any individual Claimant is disingenuous

* CSOB Decision, para. 64.

5 Fedax N.V. v Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/96/3, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction of 11
July 1997, (hereinafter “Fedax”), para. 22.

4 Counter-Memorial, para.237.

#7 Tt cites as further Awards accepting loans as investments, those in CSOB v Slovakia and in CDC Group ple v
Republic of Seychelles, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14.

48

103.

104.

and part of a strategy to distract attention from the overall nature of the bond issues
and their relation with the international financial market, as is the attempt to evade the
nature of the Respondent’s intervention to deprive of all value the Bonds issued by it.
Similar arguments, asserts the Counter-Memorial, apply to the question of duration,
where the Fedax Tribunal had readily recognized that the fact that the investor
changed with each endorsement of a promissory note did not affect the overall
duration of the investment itself; in the present case, the average interval between the
issue of the bonds and their maturity date is some 7/2 years. The Counter-Memorial
rejects likewise the Respondent’s assertion that the Bonds did not qualify as
investments inasmuch as they involved no more than ordinary commercial risk,
arguing instead that the risk entailed in lending to sovereigns is fundamentally
different from commercial risk, notably in view of the very possibility that had
occurred here, i.e. repudiation of the debt by sovereign act. As in the case of

Kardassopoulos v Georgia, lending to Argentina entailed a high intrinsic risk.

The Counter-Memorial dismisses as completely beside the point the argument that the
Bonds had never provided ‘a regularity of profits or returns’ when the reason for that
was the Respondent’s default on its obligations and the entrenchment of that situation
through the Ley Cerrojo. The situation of investors was, in this respect as well,
identical to that in Fedax; the periodic interest payments due were precisely the

expected regular return for the holders.

The Counter-Memorial regards as unworthy of comment the allegation that the
investments did not contribute to Argentina’s economic development, when the
Memorial itself describes the purpose of the bonds as having been to raise capital to
finance its foreign debt, and focusses its attention instead on the Respondent’s
argument that the investments were not made ‘in the territory of’ Argentina. It
begins by recalling the terms of the definition of ‘investment’ in Article 1 of the BIT,
and in particular the use of the terms “obbligazioni” (in the Italian language text of
subparagraph (1)(c)) and “obligaciones” (in the Spanish language text), for which it
submits the literal translation into English, in this context, is “bonds”. It argues
further that this is supported by a range of authoritative Italian-English and Spanish-
English dictionaries, whereas the Respondent has not marshalled any similar backing

for its claim that the term should be translated as “obligations”. While conceding that

49

the term is capable of having that broader meaning, it submits that, if the provision is
read in its context in the BIT, namely its juxtaposition to the phrase “public or private

securities,”**

it can plainly be seen that it refers to the particular, not the general
meaning, and renders the Respondent’s reading untenable. Moreover, even if the
term did not mean “bonds”, but simply “obligations”, this would hardly help the
Respondent since a ‘bond’ is clearly the source of ‘obligations’. Furthermore bonds
would certainly be caught by the catch-all phrase “any other right to benefits or
services of an economic value, as well as capitalized income” that appears at the end
of Article 1(1)(c). The Counter-Memorial draws attention finally to Article 1(1)(f),

referring to “any right having an economic value conferred by law or contract” which

once again would cover the case of a bond.

105. As regards the Respondent’s argument to the effect that, for various listed reasons, the
Bonds are not an investment made in the territory of Argentina, the Counter-
Memorial asserts that this argument deliberately seeks to avoid the real features of the
transaction at issue, where what matters is the initial transaction, i.e. the issue of
negotiable bonds on the international financial markets, not subsequent sales and
purchases on the secondary market. It submits that, in considering the place where
the investment was made, account must be taken of the destination of the proceeds of
the bond issues, which undisputedly went to the benefit of Argentina, from which it
follows that they cannot be held not to have been made in its territory. This is not
affected by the fact that, by definition, the bond instrument will be physically held by
the owner, presumably at the latter’s place of residence. The Counter-Memorial
refers once again to the Fedax Decision, where the Tribunal rejected an almost
identical objection that had been raised in relation to an equivalent provision in the
relevant bilateral investment treaty. It refers also to the CSOB Decision and asserts
that the Respondent’s reliance on SGS v Philippines is misplaced, because in that case
the Tribunal expressly referred to “an injection of funds into the territory of” the host
State, and pointed out that the provision of services outside of the host State was a
very different matter.” Likewise in Canadian Cattlemen the would-be investors and

their investments had no connection whatever with the Respondent State.

48 Tn the authentic languages: “titoli pubblici o private” | “titulos piblicos o privados”.
* Counter-Memorial, para. 284.

50

106.

107.

108.

The Counter-Memorial further dismisses the Respondent’s argument based on the law
governing the Bonds, which it asserts is merely the same argument in another form. It
distinguishes the Award in the Bayview arbitration on the basis that there the tribunal
was searching for the rationale to distinguish an investment made by an investor in his
own home State from one that would be under the protection of a treaty (in that case
NAFTA); that was different from the present case where the investors were very
much subjecting themselves to the law of the issuing State, or at least assuming the
risk that the State would interfere with their investment, and the submission of the
Bonds to another system of law did not (unfortunately for the investors) have the
effect of protecting them against that risk. Neither that Award nor scholarly
commentary justifies adding yet another criterion (that of applicable law) to the

supposed list of factors determining the existence of an ‘investment’.

The Counter-Memorial finally refers to the Respondent’s argument that the
Claimants’ investments fall outside the protection of the BIT because the sale of the
Bonds to them was in breach of Italian law. This argument is firmly rejected on the
basis that, for the purposes of Article 1(1) of the BIT, the laws and regulations there
mentioned, in common with most bilateral investment treaties, are plainly those of the
host State, for sensible and logical reasons. But there has been no claim that Argentine
law has been violated, unlike in the cases of Inceysa and Fraport, and the novel
attempt to bring Argentine law in by the back door via the reference to conflict of
laws in Article 8(7) of the BIT is not valid, as that provision governs only the merits
of the case, not the question of jurisdiction. The Counter-Memorial observes further
that, in those cases in which the argument of illegality had been upheld, it had always

been on the basis that three conditions were fulfilled: a serious illegality, committed

 

knowingly by the investor, and taking place at the time of the admission of the
investment to the host State, not later. Conversely, in cases like Kardassopoulos and
Saluka, illegalities imputable either to host State authorities or to third parties had not

been admitted.

The section concludes by asserting that, in any case, the situation over the resale of
the Bonds was not as simple as the Respondent argues. Specifically, there was no
limitation in the Bonds themselves on who could be their holders; as could be seen

from, for example, the Offering Circulars, the only limitation on onward sales was

Sl

109.

that there could not be a general public offer, and that the sale had to be negotiated, on
an individual basis, through properly authorized financial intermediaries (including
therefore the banks), so that, in other words, there was nothing amounting to a
prohibition on the sale of the bonds to private investors in Italy. Where individual
investors had brought legal actions in the Italian courts, the actions were about
whether the financial intermediary had duly met its duty of information towards the
individual investor in the particular case, thus taking the issue outside the ‘preliminary
objections of a general character only’ which were the subject of the present phase of
the arbitration. But even if such a claim by an investor were found to be valid, it
would not affect who was the rightful owner of the Bonds as such, and therefore able
to pursue the corresponding rights against Argentina, as the Bonds’ issuer. The legal
principles had been authoritatively declared by the Corte Suprema di Cassazione in
two decisions of a fundamental character, which had held that the breach by an
intermediary of its duty to inform the client of the specific risks of a security before its
purchase did not entail the nullity of the sale but rather gave the injured purchaser the
option to claim damages or seek the termination of the sale contract. It was not open
to Argentina to avail itself of such breaches of duty in order to extricate itself from its
own liability, especially if one takes into account that it was Argentina itself that

caused the loss of value in the first place.

g. A prima facie Treaty violation
The Counter-Memorial strongly contests the Respondent’s accusation that the
Claimants have failed to establish a prima facie breach of the BIT, pointing out in this
connection that the accusation depends on the assertion that the acts complained about
represent a mere failure by Argentina to pay. It maintains that Argentina’s acts were
emphatically ones of sovereign authority, springing as direct consequences of Law
26,017 (the Ley Cerrojo), and that it is fruitless for the Respondent to argue in these
circumstances that the fact that the bonds were stipulated to be governed by foreign
law put them beyond the reach of Argentina’s legislative jurisdiction, since Argentina
was at one and the same time the debtor and the possessor of sovereign power on its
own territory. It alleges a striking inconsistency between the Respondent’s assertion,
on the one hand, that the State had signed away its ability to control the bonds and on
the other its insistence that the bondholders ought first to have resorted to Argentina’s

domestic courts. It accuses Argentina of misrepresenting the situation in claiming that

52

110.

111.

112.

in destroying the Claimants’ rights it was acting as an ordinary party to a contract. It
asserts that the present case is obviously not one of a contract claim but a Treaty
violation, relying in this context on the well-known dictum of the Impregilo v
Pakistan Tribunal that “the fact that a breach may give rise to a contract claim does
not mean that it cannot also — and separately — give rise to a treaty claim.”™ It cites
also the finding by the Annulment Committee in Compafiia de Aguas del Aconquija v
Argentina that, where the ‘fundamental basis’ of a claim is an independent standard
laid down by treaty, the application of that treaty standard cannot be ousted by an
exclusive jurisdiction clause in the underlying contract. That is exactly the situation

here, where the Claimants are manifestly not pursuing a contract claim.

As to the prima facie test itself, the Counter-Memorial submits that, following the
decisions in Salini v Jordan, Impregilo v Pakistan, and Saipem v Bangladesh,*! it
should be understood to be that the Tribunal must be satisfied that, if the facts alleged
by the claimant(s) ultimately prove true, they would be capable of coming within the
provisions of the investment treaty. In the present case, however, the facts relied on
by the Claimants are laws passed by the Argentine Republic and are therefore
incontestable and uncontested; their link, moreover, to the guarantee of fair and
equitable treatment and the prohibition on expropriation under Articles 2 and 5 of the

BIT (inter alia) has already been demonstrated.

h. Jurisdiction ratione personae

After certain preliminary remarks relating to issues already covered above, the
Counter-Memorial turns to the question whether sufficient evidence has been
provided that the Claimants satisfy the nationality requirements of Article 25 of the

ICSID Convention and Article 1 of and the Protocol to the BIT.

The Counter-Memorial points out that Annex C-2 to the Request contains: in respect
of each Claimant who is a natural person both a copy of that person’s passport or

identity card and also a certificate of Italian citizenship, residence and/or domicile;

°° Impregilo S.p.A. v Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/3, Decision on Jurisdiction, 22
April 2005, (hereinafter “Impregilo v Pakistan”), para 77.

5! Counter-Memorial, para. 337, citing Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan, 1CSID Case No. ARB/02/13, Decision of the Tribunal on Jurisdiction, 29 November 2004, (hereinafter
“Salini v Jordan”); Impregilo v Pakistan; Saipem S.p.A. v People's Republic of Bangladesh, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/05/7, Decision on Jurisdiction and Recommendation on Provisional Measures, 21 March 2007,
(hereinafter “Saipem v Bangladesh”).

53

and in respect of the three Claimants who are corporate entities, either their articles of
association or their accounts or the survey (visura) issued by the Chamber of
Commerce, which demonstrate their Italian nationality and the absence of any link to
Argentina. The Counter-Memorial asserts that all of the certificates of citizenship
were issued shortly before the filing of the Request and continue in force, thus
demonstrating the necessary link of nationality both at the date of the Claimants’
consent to arbitration and at the date on which the Request was registered by ICSID,
and asserts further that the above constitute sufficient proof of the Italian nationality

of all Claimants for the purposes of both the Convention and the BIT.

113. The Counter-Memorial submits that, against this background, if the Respondent seeks
to contest this, it is up to the Respondent to produce the necessary evidence. It
submits further that the Respondent’s position is not supported by the Awards in
either Mihaly v Sri Lanka or Soufraki v Egypt, since in the first case the company at
issue had the nationality of a State that was not party to the arbitration, and the second
case turned on the question of a change of nationality.” It asserts moreover that the
Respondent’s allegations as to dual nationality or the acquisition of Argentine
nationality are pure speculation without any showing of proof of the registration that a
change of nationality would require under the applicable law. Likewise, the
certificates of residence that had been produced with the Request sufficed to show the
lack of merit in the Respondent’s arguments. It asserts that, at all events, it is clear
that some of the Claimants satisfy the nationality requirement, which had been

deemed sufficient for the Tribunal to uphold jurisdiction in other cases.

i. The connection between the Claimants and the investment

114. |The Counter-Memorial denies that the arrangements by which the Claimants acquired
their security entitlements attenuate the necessary connection between them and the
investment. It asserts that the arrangements for the onward sale and purchase of the
security entitlements to private investors, and their free negotiability on secondary and
tertiary markets was entirely normal and within Argentina’s contemplation from the
outset, and describes as “outrageous” the argument that Argentina never received any
funds from the ultimate bondholders, when it was they who suffered the loss resulting

2 Mihaly InternationalCorporation v Sri Lanka, 1CSID Case No. ARB/00/2, Award, March 15, 2002, Hussein

Nuaman Soufraki v United Arab Emirates, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/7, Award, July 7, 2004, (hereinafter

“Soufraki”).

54

from Argentina’s repudiation of its debt. The Counter-Memorial specifically rejects
the argument according to which, for a system of indirect holdings, there must be a
cut-off point beyond which investor claims would not be permissible. It denies the
applicability to the present case of the decisions in PSEG v Turkey and Enron v
Argentina, which were on a different point, namely the standing to bring claims by
minority or collateral interests; but invokes instead the dictum of the Enron tribunal
that “‘in the present case the participation of the Claimants was specifically sought and
that they are thus included within the consent to arbitration given by the Argentine
Republic ..[and].. are beyond any doubt the owners of the investment made and their
tights are protected under the Treaty as clearly established treaty-rights and not

merely contractual rights related to some intermediary.” 38

115. The Counter-Memorial likewise denies the pertinence of the fact that the Claimants
may have a right of action against the seller banks, which some of them may have
exercised. It asserts that, even though in any case only a minority of the Claimants
have brought actions of this kind, many of which remain undecided and the outcomes
of which differ from one case to another, the underlying relationships (with the seller
banks and with Argentina) are different as are the rights accruing under them. It
concedes that no Claimant would be entitled to recover more than its total loss
resulting from Argentina’s unlawful actions, but asserts that that is an issue going

only to quantum, not to jurisdiction.

31H Article 8 of the BIT

116. The Counter-Memorial rejects Argentina’s argument that Article 8 provides for a
“multi-layered, sequential dispute resolution system,” failure to comply with which
results in a bar to ICSID jurisdiction. It asserts that similar clauses are commonplace
in investment treaties, and that the prevailing view is that they do not lay down any
jurisdictional requirement but merely provide for “a reasonable prior step to avoid an
international arbitration which could prove useless if other simpler or less costly

solutions to the dispute could be found.”

They represent no more than an
opportunity for the parties to reach an agreed settlement, but need not be pursued

when attempts at a negotiated solution prove futile. For ICSID cases following this

3 Enron v Argentina, para. 56.
* At para. 381, citing in support also The Oxford Handbook of International Investment Law.

55

approach, the Counter-Memorial cites Ethyl Corp. v Canada, Lauder v Czech
Republic,*° Bayindir v Pakistan,” and SGS v Pakistan,* while rejecting the two
authorities relied upon by the Respondent, because in one of them (Enron”) it had
been held that the consultation period in the relevant BIT had actually been complied
with, and in the other (Wintershall) there was a significant difference in the BIT,
which provided that a dispute “shall” be submitted to the local courts, whereas here
the word used was “may”.

117. The Counter-Memorial submits that the Respondent’s attempt to evade the issue by
invoking the general rules of treaty interpretation backfires in the light of the express
wording of Article 8: under paragraph (1) amicable settlement is to be pursued only
“insofar as possible”™!; whereas under paragraph (2) (see above) it is merely the case
that disputes “may” be submitted to local courts. The Counter-Memorial submits
specifically that resort to the prior mechanisms of Articles 8(1) and 8(2) would have

62

proved “of the utmost futility,”°” and is in any case rendered beside the point by the

most-favoured-nation clause contained in Article 3.

118. The Counter-Memorial cites as evidence of the pointlessness of any attempt at
negotiation by bondholders, including the Claimants, on the one hand, the strategy
adopted by Argentina during the POE process, and on the other, the terms of Law
26,017. It recalls, in connection with the POE, its allegations as to how the terms of
the offer were elaborated unilaterally by Argentina and imposed on bondholders. It
recalls also the express provision in the POE that securities not offered for exchange
would ‘remain in default indefinitely,’ showing that this was clearly a take-it-or-
leave-it offer incompatible with involving bondholders in drawing up its terms. It
recalls also Article 3 of Law 26,017, passed on the initiative of the executive branch

even while the POE was open for acceptance by creditors, which prohibited Argentina

°5 Ethyl Corp. v Government of Canada, NAFTA/UNCITRAL, Award on Jurisdiction, 24 June 1998,
(hereinafter “Ethyl Corp. v Canada”), para. 85.

* Ronald S. Lauder v Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Award, 3 September 2001, (hereinafter “Lauder v Czech
Republic”), para. 187.

*” Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/29,
Decision on Jurisdiction, 14 November 2005, (hereinafter “Bayindir v Pakistan”), para 100.

* SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v Islamic Republic of Pakistan, CSID Case No. ARB/O1/13,
Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction, 6 August 2003, (hereinafter “SGS v Pakistan”), para.
184.

® Enron v Argentina.

© ‘podra’ in Spanish, and ‘potra’ in Italian.

°' ‘en la medida de lo posible’ in Spanish, and ‘per quanto possibile’ in Italian.

© At para. 390.

 

 

56

119.

from entering into any form of settlement with bondholders who declined to accept
the POE, as well as Article 2 of the same Law which barred the POE from being
reopened. Under the Argentine Criminal Code, non-compliance with this by any
public official would constitute a crime punishable with imprisonment and
disqualification from office. It followed from this that, even if (as Respondent now
says) amicable consultations remained theoretically possible, they could not have led
anywhere. Proof of this is provided by the failure in the attempts by other groups of
bondholders, as reported in the press, to achieve a negotiation. The Counter-Memorial
calls it paradoxical that Argentina, after adopting a law as harsh as the Ley Cerrojo,

should now criticise the Claimants for not attempting to negotiate.

a. The most favoured nation clause

The Counter-Memorial invokes the provisions of Article 3 of the BIT, inasmuch as
they guarantee to an investment and to “all other matters” regulated by the Treaty
treatment by the host State no less favourable than that accorded to its own investors
or investors from third States, as entitling the Claimants to pray in aid Article VII(2)
and (3) of the BIT between Argentina and the USA of October 1994. Article VII(2)

and (3) read, in relevant part, as follows:

“(2) In the event of an investment dispute, the parties to the dispute
should initially seek a resolution through consultation and negotiation.
If the dispute cannot be settled amicably, the national or company
concerned may choose to submit the dispute for resolution:

(a) to the courts or administrative tribunals of the Party that is a party
to the dispute; or

(b) in accordance with any applicable, previously agreed dispute-
settlement procedures; or

(c) in accordance with the terms of paragraph 3.

(3) (a) Provided that the national or company concerned has not
submitted the dispute for resolution under paragraph e (a) or (b) and
that six months have elapsed from the date on which the dispute arose,
the national or company concerned may choose to consent in writing
to the submission of the dispute for settlement by binding arbitration:

(i) to the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment
Disputes ... ...”

S7

The consequence is, according to the Counter-Memorial, that there is no need for the
Claimants to satisfy an 18-month waiting period before the local courts in Argentina,
but merely to show that six months had elapsed before the dispute arose, which is

plainly satisfied since the dispute arose on the enactment of the Ley Cerrojo.

120. The Counter-Memorial rejects the Respondent’s counter-argument that an MFN
clause cannot extend to a dispute resolution mechanism on the grounds that this “is
contradicted by constant ICSID case-law which admits that MFN clauses also apply

63 Ty

to dispute resolution mechanisms unless this is ruled out by their wording.
invokes in support the Gas Natural SDG, S.A. v Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/10), Emilio Agustin Maffezini v Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/7), and Suez v Argentina cases, which held that dispute settlement was an
essential element of investor protection which could not be severed. It argues further
that, accepting the proposition that much depends on the wording of the particular
MEN clause, in the present case Article 3(1) calls for a broad interpretation since it

contains no exceptions (e.g. for dispute settlement); this contrasts sharply with the

specific exceptions laid down in Article 3(2).

b. The futility of resort to the local courts

121. The Counter-Memorial finally asserts that resort to legal action in the local courts for
payment of the amounts due under the Bonds would (apart from being costly) have
been doomed to failure in view of the categorical terms of the Ley Cerrojo, as
confirmed in clear terms by the reversal, by the Argentine Supreme Court in April
2005, of an appellate court decision ordering the Argentine government to pay the
amounts due under the bonds to certain Argentine nationals, on the grounds that the
restructuring process was a policy question not subject to judicial review, and that in
any event non-participation in the POE was a conscious act, the consequences of
which were clear at the time. This was then reaffirmed by the Supreme Court in two
subsequent terse judgments relying on the Galli precedent. In one of these cases
(Lucesoli), the Argentine Government had argued expressly before the Supreme Court

° At para. 406.

“ Galli, Hugo G. y otro ¢ Poder Ejecutivo National s/amparo, Corte Suprema de Justicia de la Naci6n, Final

Decision of 5 April 2005 (Fallos:328:690), Case No. G. 2181 XXXIX (CLA-37).

°5 tn the Lucesoli, Daniel Bernard c Poder Ejecutivo National s/amparo, Corte Suprema de Justicia de la
Nacién, Decisién of 9 September 2008, Case No. L. 542. XL III (CLA-38), and Rizzuti, Carlos Pablo c. Poder

Ejecutivo National sfamparo, Corte Suprema de Justicia de la Nacién, Decisién of 22 December 2008, Case No.
R. XLIV (CLA-39).

  

58

122.

123.

124.

that the bonds not surrendered in 2005 no longer represented Argentine debt and that
claims under them had been rendered unenforceable, which sat ill with the present
insistence that the Claimants ought to have brought an action in the local courts. It
was, moreover, in any case unrealistic in the light of actual experience to imagine that
a suit of that kind could have been brought to judgment within the 18-month time
frame laid down in Article 8(2) of the BIT, as, in the cases just mentioned, where the
remedy was the speediest one known under Argentine law, the time taken had been
between three and six years; some other cases were still outstanding after seven years.
To argue, on the other hand, that cases merely had to be ‘submitted’ to the courts,
without any expectation of an outcome, would be a pointless vexation. Finally,
Argentinian law put barriers in the way of foreign litigants, who were required, in
addition to paying the judicial tax at the rate of 3% of the amount claimed, to offer a
costly garantia de arraigo and moreover would be liable for the cost of the entire

proceedings if, after 18 months had elapsed, they abandoned them to go to arbitration.

The Counter-Memorial accordingly asks the Tribunal to reject all of the Respondent’s

objections and to decide that it has jurisdiction over the Claimants’ claims.

4. The Respondent’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

On 5 February 2010, the Respondent submitted its Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction
and Admissibility, accompanied by Witness Statements from Enrique H Boilini,

Noemi C La Greca, and Federico Molina.

41 The background to Argentina’s default

The Reply Memorial begins by recapitulating the essential elements of the
Respondent’s argument. It asserts that the Claimants underestimate the sheer scale of
the debt crisis that overwhelmed Argentina, and distort reality by portraying it as a
problem of Argentina’s own making. It reiterates that Argentina’s sovereign default
was not a case without precedent, but followed the example set by previous sovereign
debt restructurings, adding that the way in which it was managed laid the ground for a
cycle of renewed growth together with a greater prospect of the ability to face up to
the current financial crisis. It rejects the Claimants’ ‘take-it-or-leave-it’ description
of the POE and claims that Argentina held a number of meetings with groups and

associations representing both institutional and retail holders of security entitlements,

59

to a total of at least 61 meetings with at least 21 separate creditor groupings between
May 2002 and April 2004. These were good faith efforts to arrive at the formulation
of a framework for the restructuring of Argentina’s debt, and included taking expert
advice from both the public and private sectors and discussions with (amongst others)
the IMF, and a policy of the greatest possible clarity and transparency towards both
the Argentine public and foreigners. It was a cardinal point of policy not to raise
false expectations by promising more than Argentina would be able to deliver, so that,
although the attempt was made to accommodate creditors, Argentina resisted the
temptation to offer overly generous terms that would not be sustainable in the long
run. Some of the proposals put forward on behalf of Italian (or other European)
bondholders were indeed incorporated into the exchange offer, such as including of
par bonds, avoiding language that might have been interpreted as a waiver of claims
against the selling banks, and the removal of certain discrepancies between bonds and
interests sold on in Europe and in the United States. The result was that, although the
POE was ‘unilateral’ in the sense that it did not represent agreement with any
particular bondholder group, it had in fact been “the subject matter of frequent

consultations with Argentina’s creditors.”

a. The Exchange Offer and Law 26,017

125. The Reply Memorial sets out the circumstances of the POE, in order to demonstrate
that, contrary to the assertion of the Claimants, it was feared that the holders of
eligible securities “could attempt to impede the progress or completion of the Offer by
seeking an injunction or resorting to other legal remedies,” thus demonstrating that
the offer was “simply a stage of a process that would only be successful upon the

completion of later stages,”°”

in other words that its purpose was not to satisfy
everyone but to achieve as much as possible so that the process could move forward.
In the Respondent’s view, this disposes of the Claimants’ assertions, such as that the
discount was the lowest in history, past interest was repudiated, Argentina did not pay
all that it could, etc., which can be seen not to be true when the outcome of the 2005

POE is assessed today.

® At para. 56.
© At paras. 64-65.

60

126. Coming to the subject of Law No. 26,017, the Reply Memorial points out in the first
place that its enactment had no effect on negotiations that had taken place beforehand;
moreover it neither sought to or was capable of barring negotiations or legal action
based on the BIT. Nor indeed did it oblige any creditors to accept the offer,
providing merely that the Executive Branch could not unilaterally reopen the

exchange offer process but would first have to seek suspension of the Law.

b. Italian law

127. The Reply Memorial next reverts to the Respondent’s criticism of the serious defects
in the sale of the security interests by Italian banks to unsophisticated retail holders,
which it says has not been denied by the Claimants, but none of which can be laid at
the door of Argentina, which had no responsibility of any kind for the placement of
the bonds in the secondary market. The Reply Memorial goes on to describe how the
sale of the security entitlements to unsophisticated investors infringed not only the
terms expressly agreed with Argentina at the time of the issuance of the Bonds, but
also infringed a number of Italian legal provisions laid down in the Italian Financial

Act®® and Intermediaries Regulations.”

These infringements have been established
by a number of legal decisions handed down in the Italian courts, and have led to
judgments ordering the reimbursement of the purchase price to the banks’ customers.
It alleges that infringements also took place of Italian securities regulations, and of the
general duty of the banks to inform their customers. It further alleges that there is
evidence that some Italian banks deliberately offloaded a large portion of their own
exposure to Argentine bonds onto unsuspecting customers once they became aware of
the increased risk of an imminent default. None of these actions was known to
Argentina, which had itself taken steps to avoid the entanglement of inexperienced

purchasers, as explained in the expert evidence of Daniel Marx.

4.11 Jurisdiction and Admissibility

a. The collective nature of the claim

128. The Reply Memorial recalls the Respondent’s earlier submissions relating to the
nature of the claim as a collective action which, it alleges, the Claimants have not

rebutted. It rejects the Claimants’ description of the action by countering that the

°8 Legislative Decree No. 58 of 24 February 1998.
© Regulation No. 11522.

61

Claimants are not acting personally for the enforcement of their rights, as it is in fact
NASAM which is acting on their behalf, and that that is not a “regular or permissible
feature of discretionary joinder” either in Argentine national law or before
international tribunals. Moreover the NASAM mandate itself talks in terms of an
‘azione di gruppo,’ which will only proceed if a sufficient group can be assembled.
It should therefore be understood to mean a ‘collective’ or ‘class’ action; although
that does not correspond to any recognized legal category in international law or in
the laws of Italy or Argentina, it shows that it is at the least not an individual action.
In the Respondent’s submission, it is a collective proceeding without precedent and
amounts to a representative action (class action) that is not valid under the ICSID
Convention. The Reply Memorial asserts further that a whole list of factors goes to
contradict the Claimants’ assertions; among others: that the Claimants were actively
recruited by NASAM; that they have become no more than passive onlookers in a
proceeding which they cannot influence or modify; that their counsel, Sig. Parodi,
was chosen for them; that NASAM claims to be acting as their ‘agent’ although they

have no ability to direct or control its actions.

129. As regards the identification of the Claimants themselves, the Reply Memorial takes
issue with the lists submitted, drawing attention to the fact that the Counter-Memorial
states their number as 120, whereas 177 names appear in the Request for

Arbitration, 70

a discrepancy of 57. It surmises that, if there has not been an
arithmetical mistake, it must be either that the Claimants’ side did not in fact know
how many Claimants were included in the arbitration, or else that one-third of the
Claimants have unilaterally (and therefore inadmissibly) withdrawn from the
proceedings. It sets out further discrepancies of a more minor character which,
whatever the explanation for them may be, go to show that “from the very beginning,
it has been entirely unclear who the true Claimants bringing a claim against the
Argentine Republic are, an issue that undoubtedly affects the guarantee of due process

71

and the right to defence”’ and, it asserts, amounts to an abuse of process.

130. The Reply Memorial then returns to the Respondent’s argument that the silence of
both the ICSID Convention and the BIT on the subject of collective proceedings is

enough on its own to demonstrate that Argentina has not consented to them; consent

7 At para. 96.
7 At para. 101.

62

131.

132.

to international jurisdiction has to be both clear and express, given its voluntary
nature. The cases cited by the Claimants support, at most, the proposition that in
some instances ICSID tribunals have entertained single proceedings at the instance of
a small number of claimants who were intimately linked in some concrete way — but
only provided that the respondent’s consent had been given. That is however entirely
different from saying that the ICSID Convention authorizes class, group, or collective

proceedings.

As to the correct interpretation of the ICSID Convention, its text regularly uses
singular nouns (e.g. ‘national’ or ‘party’), and there is no justification for looking
beyond the text in the absence of ambiguity. The silence of the Convention in
respect of collective proceedings does not mean that such proceedings are permitted,
but the opposite, a contrast that can readily be seen by comparison with the express
language in other treaties such as the Inter-American Convention on Human Rights.
There is no evidence that the drafters of the ICSID Convention ever considered
including collective claims within its scope, and the absence of specific procedural
rules to deal with the issues that would arise in the case of multiple claims is an

additional reason for saying that they do not fall within the scope of the Convention.

As regards the BIT, the Reply Memorial submits that the same conclusion follows
from the absence of any reference to mass, class, or collective proceedings;
specifically, Article 8(1) defines the category of disputes where Argentina has given
its consent to arbitration as those relating to investments “that may arise between an
investor from one of the Contracting Parties and the other Party”. Article 8(1) thus
limits Argentina’s consent to arbitrate to claims filed by a single investor.
Conversely, in the present case there are over 100 separate disputes, each of them
with a different object, because each Claimant acquired the security entitlement in
issue at a different time, in a different amount and a different currency, governed by
different domestic laws and created under different programmes, with the result that —
except for the case where more than one Claimant jointly acquired the same security
entitlement — each Claimant is involved in a different and independent legal
relationship. The consequence must be, the Reply Memorial submits, that the claim

is inadmissible even under the BIT itself.

63

133.

134.

The Reply Memorial argues further that, in the rare cases where collective
proceedings are permitted, they are provided for by explicit decision, embodied in
detailed procedural mechanisms, and that this is designed to put the parties on notice
that they may be subjected to class actions or other collective proceedings and
specifically to allow a State to decide whether it wishes to be bound by such
provisions. It draws attention to the fact that collective proceedings remain highly
controversial except in the USA, and contrasts the case where States wish to establish
a single tribunal to adjudicate on classes of claims or multiple unrelated claims, in
which case they do so explicitly by way of a tailored instrument, such as the Iran-US
Claims Tribunal. That Tribunal declined to allow multiple claimant actions except
where there was a pre-existing close relationship between the claimants, and that
practice was in turn similar to that followed in the limited examples of prior ICSID
practice. Nor is the absence of procedural rules just a gap that could be filled
ambulando as there is nothing in the ICSID Convention to authorize a tribunal to
develop on its own the procedures for mass claims; that would stand in the sharpest
contrast with the exhaustive formal processes employed for the 2006 changes to the
ICSID Rules, and moreover those changes only applied to subsequent proceedings
where the date of consent came after the rule change. At precisely the same period,
what is more, other arbitral institutions were considering formal rule revisions to
permit consolidation of claims under properly defined circumstances. The Reply
Memorial submits that none of the ICSID cases on which the Claimants rely involved

a collective claim with the features of the present one.

The Reply Memorial further invokes the context and circumstances surrounding the
conclusion of the ICSID Convention and the BIT; it points to the limitation or
outright prohibition at the time of mass or class claims in the domestic legal systems
of many of the States concerned as evidence that the ICSID Contracting Parties could
not have intended to give their tacit consent to such proceedings, and points further in
this respect to the expert evidence of Professor Kielmanovich that the joinder of the
present parties would not have been permitted in Argentina as their action does not
derive from a single legal relationship linking them to the defendant and to one
another. So far as Italy is concerned, it points out that class actions have only very
recently become available by virtue of new legislation post-dating the Respondent’s

Memorial, but even then standing to sue depends on specific authorization by the

64

court, and the procedure is limited moreover to business claims of specified types. It
thus draws the conclusion that there is no basis for any suggestion that either Italy or
Argentina tacitly consented to collective arbitrations of the present type in signing the
Convention or the BIT, and rejects in this connection the Claimants’ response based

solely on insisting that the arbitration is not a ‘class action’.

135. As regards the claim that there is nothing extraordinary or unprecedented in the
present procedure, the Reply Memorial assumes that this must be a reference to the
Giovanna a Beccara v Argentina arbitration” but that that case was at that stage still
only at its first phase and could therefore hardly be cited as a precedent.”*
Conversely, the Reply Memorial asserts that the proceeding in Alpi v Argentina” may
be less exceptional, but there is no rational economic explanation for it, whereas the
other ICSID arbitrations cited by the Claimants are not factually similar. The first
edition of the Schreuer Commentary on the ICSID Convention indicates that multi-
party claims should arise from one investment operation, and are normally the
consequence either of joint claims by companies within a corporate group or of partial
assignment of an original investor’s rights. The Reply Memorial notes the
concession by the Claimants that there should be a reasonable and significant link
between the individual claims, but contests that this condition is actually satisfied in
the present case for the reasons already stated and refers in this connection to the

evidence of Professor Kielmanovich.

136. In particular, the Reply Memorial contests the comparability of the Funnekotter v
Zimbabwe and Goetz v Burundi cases, on the basis that the number of claimants in
Funnekotter was much smaller and the respondent State raised no objection; and that
in Goetz the number was smaller still, the claimants were all co-shareholders, and
again there was no objection by the respondent. As to the NAFTA cases of Bayview
and Canadian Cattlemen, in Bayview the tribunal denied jurisdiction and was not
therefore required to look into other aspects of the respondent’s objections; whereas
in Cattlemen (in fact a case under the UNCITRAL Rules) there was agreement

between the Parties to consolidate 109 arbitrations that had been initiated separately.

2
Abaclat.

™ The Beccara (now Abaclat) tribunal has since given a decision upholding its jurisdiction which is extensively

discussed below.

™ Ambiente Ufficio.

65

137.

138.

The Respondent therefore maintains its submission that in no case had a State been
forced by an ICSID tribunal to participate in a consolidated or multiparty proceeding
without its consent, and asserts that the underlying reason is supported by general
opinion, and that it would be a substantial departure from currently accepted practice
to extend consolidation from the case of a single investment operation with closely
related parties to a case in which unrelated operations and claimants are linked only

by the State measure or measures against which they complain.

The Reply Memorial finally takes issue with what it terms the Claimants’ policy
arguments designed to appeal to the Tribunal “to legislate in support of what is
claimed to be a desirable policy goal,””> and asserts that these arguments must fail in
law against the background of ICSID as a consent-based institution. That said, it
takes issue equally with the Claimants’ assertions on the factual level, submitting to
the contrary that the proceedings will be hugely inefficient and unmanageable and
would raise serious concerns about due process.”° Pursuing the question of
inefficiency, the Reply Memorial asserts that it is not merely a question of comparing
one number of claimants against another, but rather that on the facts the present
arbitration would appear to involve 177 claims which are neither identical nor even
similar (for the reasons already given). It asserts further that the attendant
complications, even in ascertaining the critical facts in respect of each Claimant, as
well as leading to costly inefficiencies would impair Argentina’s fundamental right to
analyse and address each claim individually, in a way that would touch not only the
merits but also threshold questions as to whether the Tribunal has jurisdiction at all,
e.g. whether the investments were made in accordance with applicable law and the
issue of nationality. As regards due process, the prejudice to Respondent’s rights
arises out of the interposition of NASAM as the entity which is in complete control of
the claimant’s side of the arbitration, yet is insulated from discovery as a nominal
‘non-party’ to the action. The Reply Memorial denies further the supposed cost
efficiency of the proceedings, pointing out that action in the relevant national fora,
where jurisdiction is explicitly stipulated, would by definition save litigation costs,

and is the reason why claims over sovereign debt have always been resolved there in

At para. 144.

7° It cites in this context the Decision on the Admi

 

ibility of Ancillary Claims of 4 December 2009 in Itera

International Energy LLC and Itera Group NV v Georgia, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/07, holding that efficiency
considerations could not in themselves be decisive for admitting an ancillary claim.

66

139.

140.

the past; in other words, it is the exact converse of the situation in which a foreign

investor is forced to sue nationally because ICSID arbitration is not available.

b. The NASAM Mandate and the Power of Attorney

The Reply Memorial next addresses the Claimants’ answers to the questions raised as
to the status and effect of the NASAM Mandate and the Power of Attorney. It denies
that the Request for Arbitration in fact represents valid consent by the Claimants since
the Request was filed without individual Claimants’ signatures despite the fact that
the NASAM Mandate requires them, and the Request itself in turn states that the
Claimants accepted ICSID arbitration “by signing and filing” the Request. It denies
moreover that counsel had, in the particular circumstances, been validly authorized to
consent to arbitration on their behalf, since the Power of Attorney which the
Claimants’ assert governs exclusively their relationship with their Counsel, mentions
neither ICSID nor the BIT, and there is nothing else in the NASAM Mandate Package
to provide a separate expression of Claimants’ consent; in particular, the recitals
relied on in the Counter-Memorial merely contain information which NASAM
provided to the Claimants, not any expression of will on their own part, nor is there
any evidence that the Claimants’ individual payments of their shares of the expenses
were in fact made with express reference to ‘Arbitrato ICSID’ as the Counter-
Memorial claims. The Reply Memorial submits that these are not matters of mere
form, since the implication behind the requirement in the NASAM Mandate that the
Claimants were expected to sign was, firstly, that they would have a further
opportunity to decide whether to consent or not to any particular arbitration, and,
secondly, that they would be duly informed that a Request for Arbitration was being
signed in their names. The Reply Memorial alleges further that the Claimants’
submissions have failed to furnish sufficient documentary evidence that the Mandates

were in fact signed by the Claimants in the case.

The Reply Memorial repeats the Respondent’s earlier allegations that both the
Mandate and the Power of Attorney are legally defective, and that their defects infect
one another as negozi collegati. It asserts that this distinguishes the case from AMTO
v Ukraine, as that case was under the Energy Charter Treaty, where the applicable law
was therefore different. In the present case, following Article 42(1) of the ICSID

Convention, the applicable law is determined by Article 8(7) of the BIT, under which

67

141.

142.

143.

pride of place is given to the law of Argentina, including therefore its rules of private
international law which refer the validity and nature of contracts to the law of the
place where they were made. The application of Italian choice of law rules would

lead to the same result.

The Reply Memorial cites commentaries on Italian civil law to show that it is normal,
indeed expected, that a power of attorney should go hand-in-hand with some form of
underlying contractual relationship or mandate. That, together with the factual and
legal structure set up by NASAM, stands in the way of the attempt to characterize the
Power of Attorney and NASAM Mandate as separate legal instruments; in the

Respondent’s submission, the two documents stand or fall together.

The Reply Memorial repeats the Respondent’s earlier assertion that the Power of
Attorney fails to meet the formal requirements laid down in Article 83 of the Italian
Code of Civil Procedure. It marshals authoritative scholarly opinion against the
assertion in the Counter-Memorial that there is complete freedom for the appointment
of representatives in arbitration, arguing to the contrary that if a power of attorney is
granted in writing to a lawyer, the signature requires authentication under Article 83,
which means by a notary or public official. The consequence, it is submitted, that the
Powers of Attorney do not provide a basis for consent, which is all the more important
in a case in which the Claimants are unknown to the Respondent and to the Tribunal

(never having appeared in person at any session) but are only names on a list.

The Reply Memorial further claims that the NASAM Mandate Package also falls foul
of the substantive requirements of Italian law, in that it transfers to NASAM all of the
powers a client should be able to exercise in an attorney-client relationship; the only
basis under Italian law on which NASAM would be able to pursue a claim on behalf
of third parties would be if it were a procuratore generale or a preposto a determinati
affari under Article 77 of the Code of Civil Procedure, which is not the case. It
asserts that the Respondent has never argued that, under Article 82 of the Code, a
party must be represented by a lawyer in arbitration, but conversely that the Supreme
Court judgment cited in the Counter-Memorial does not relate (as claimed) to Article
77, but rather to Article 75, paragraph 3, relating to the representation of companies in
judicial proceedings. It denies that NASAM’s role is as limited as the Counter-

Memorial asserts, since it was NASAM, and NASAM alone, which decided to initiate

68

the present ICSID arbitration and instructed the Claimants’ counsel accordingly. The
question is therefore, not where the basis is for saying that the NASAM Mandate
gives NASAM complete control over the Claimants’ claims, but the converse: where
is the basis for asserting (as in the Counter-Memorial’’) that the Claimants “are in full
control of the relationship with Counsel”? Indeed, how could it be possible for 178

different Claimants each to control the prosecution of the case?

144. The Reply Memorial denies further that this is a normal case of third-party funding,
since the funder is anything but unconnected with the litigation and, under the
Mandate Package, has become a real party in interest in the case. It points out that in
fact the Claimants have irrevocably assigned to NASAM the right to collect on the
claim in full, and to be paid out in fact, in return for a claim against NASAM by each

Claimant for such amounts as remain after NASAM has retained its entitlement.

145. The Reply Memorial concludes finally that, even if the Mandate Package did
constitute a valid consent in writing, that would still not represent Claimants’ consent

to a collective proceeding, as opposed to individual proceedings.

c. The absence of an investment...

146. The Reply Memorial further continues to dispute the jurisdiction of the Tribunal
ratione materiae, on the basis that there is no investment, and therefore no dispute
arising directly from an investment, for the purposes of the ICSID Convention and the

BIT.

147. It begins by reverting to the question of the precise nature of ‘bonds’ and ‘interests in
security entitlements,’ starting from the proposition that what the Claimants present as
their investments are security entitlements acquired from third parties (not Argentina)
in the secondary market and freely tradable in that market; conversely, Argentine
State bond issues are typical transactions in which the State made a single issuance to
the bond underwriter (or underwriters) in return for a single payment of a global
amount equal to the agreed offer price, and the single payment was not transferred to
the territory of Argentina but usually to an account in a foreign bank in the name of
the Argentine Republic or its Central Bank; all responsibility and risk for the sale of

the bonds on the open market passed to the underwriter(s). The consequence is that

7 At para. 97.

69

148.

the Claimants are not themselves the bondholders, but at best holders of indirect
interests in them, under a well-established system known as the ‘indirect holding
system’. Under this system, recognized depositary entities act as registered holders
of a single global bond representing the total amount of the bond issue, and banks and
brokerage firms which take an individual position in them acquire a large number of
fungible ‘security entitlements’, the effect of which is to grant each such participant
an undivided and differential pro rata interest reflected (as is any subsequent change)
in book entries to the credit or debit of the participant’s account with the depositary.
These security entitlements are then generally the subject of repeated division and
resale on the secondary market through other security intermediaries (usually other
banks or brokerage firms) reflected once again in book entries without any change in
the physical possession of the security. In consequence the eventual holders of
security entitlements, such as the present Claimants, have no direct relationship with
the sovereign bond issuer, or even with the bond underwriter, but only with the
participant in the system from whom they acquired their interests, with the further
result that neither the bond issuer, nor the underwriter, nor the depositary knows
whether the participant is a holder for its own account, for the account of its clients, or
for the account of clearing firms. Moreover the bonds themselves remain in the
exclusive ownership of the depositary, and each new holder of a security entitlement
does not replace its predecessor but acquires a new piece of property coined
specifically for it; likewise, on sale or liquidation the security holding in question
simply disappears. The Reply Memorial asserts that it is a necessary inference that
the present Claimants acquired their security entitlements from banks as described
above, in other words that they made no payment to Argentina and their purchases are
represented only by the credits to their own accounts with their banks or with other

securities intermediaries.

i. ... under the ICSID Convention

The Reply Memorial maintains that, because (in accordance with the above) there has
been no loan by Claimants to Argentina, nor in fact any agreement between them and
Argentina, the Claimants are wrong in their attempt to apply to the present case the
decision in Fedax that promissory notes are equivalent to bonds, and fall within the

scope of the term “investment” as used in the ICSID Convention, on the basis that a

70

promissory note is evidence of a loan.” It points out, moreover, that the Fedax
tribunal held no more than that the purchase of bonds qualifies as an investment
“under given circumstances” and that the question has to be examined in the context
of the specific consent of the parties and other relevant circumstances; in that case,
the definition of ‘investments’ in the relevant BIT was broader and expressly included
rights deriving from bonds etc., and the tribunal specifically noted that the promissory
notes were not ‘volatile capital’ advanced to take a quick profit before immediate

departure.

149. The Reply Memorial then sets out at length and in detail the authorities supporting the
proposition (contrary to what it says is the Claimants’ argument) that the
establishment of an investment for the purposes of an ICSID arbitration is subject to a
dual test, namely whether the particular asset falls within the overall concept of
‘investment’ under the ICSID Convention and whether it falls within the consent of
the parties to arbitrate. It accuses the Claimants of inadmissibly attempting to elide
the first limb of the test, by asserting tout court, without any reasoning, that the notion
of ‘investment’ must be interpreted broadly, and that bonds, as financial instruments,

qualify as an investment for the purposes of the Convention.

150. The Reply Memorial rejects the account given by the Claimants of the Respondent’s
position as to the significance of the so-called ‘Salini criteria’ for the existence of an
investment, pointing out that the Respondent’s argument was in fact that, when the
situation in the present case is analysed under the prism of the ‘Salini criteria’ and the
decision in Joy Mining, the conclusion had to be that the Claimants’ assets satisfied
none of them, which led inexorably to the conclusion that they were not capable of
qualifying as ‘investments’ for Convention purposes. More specifically: the
Claimants’ individual holdings clearly do not amount to a substantial commitment or
contribution to Argentina, and it is not admissible to aggregate the individual holdings
so as to bring them across this threshold; the duration of these holdings is
indeterminate, and it is not admissible to reckon the duration as running until the final
maturity of the underlying bonds; there is no risk other than the risk of default or
downgrade typical of an ordinary commercial transaction, when measured against

Argentina’s record by comparison with other countries; there is no contribution to

"8 Fedax, para. 29.

71

151.

152.

153.

economic development quite simply because there was no transfer of funds to
Argentina on the purchase of the security entitlements, as Argentina had already

received the full proceeds from the bond issue at the time of issue.

ii. ... under the BIT

Coming to the concept of ‘investment’ under the BIT, the Reply Memorial submits
that Claimants’ argument depends on the assertions that they are bondholders and
these bonds are included in the definition of “investment” under the BIT; that the
investment is a foreign investment made in the territory of Argentina; and that it was

made in accordance with Argentine laws and regulations.

As to the question of ‘bonds’ under the BIT, the Reply Memorial suggests that the
Claimants rely on the argument that “bonds” are expressly included within the BIT’s
definition of “investment”, and that in support the Claimants seek to translate the
Italian term “obbligazioni” into Spanish as “bono” and into English as “bond”, and at
the same time to translate the Spanish term “obligacidn” the same way into English.
It asserts that the two Spanish terms have distinct meanings, and gives examples of
where only the one term, or the other, could properly be used, from which it draws the
conclusion that, as the term “bonos” was not used in the BIT, the treaty cannot be
understood as including bonds. It adds that, if it is correct (as the Claimants submit)
that there is no specific word in Italian to refer to a ‘bond’, then the choice in the
Spanish text of “obligaciones” should be determinative. It points out in this context
that neither the NASAM Mandate nor the Power of Attorney makes use of
“obbligazioni” to describe bonds, but on each occasion these documents say either

“titoli obbligazionari” or just “titoli”.

The Reply Memorial dismisses as immaterial the Claimants’ argument that it would
have been possible to have excluded bonds via Article 25(4) of the ICSID
Convention. It likewise dismisses the Claimants’ arguments from the juxtaposition
in the Spanish text of Article 1(1)(c) of the BIT of “obligaciones” with “titulos
ptiblicos y titulos privados’”, since on the Claimants’ argument it would have been
unnecessary to include the catch-all phrase “or any other right to benefits or services
with an economic value” which would have duplicated “credits directly linked to an
investment.” Each term used ought to be given its proper meaning in context, and in

the light of the object and purpose of the treaty, which did not include bonds and

72

154.

155.

156.

interests governed by a law other than that of the host State and which made no

contribution to its economic development.

The Reply Memorial takes issue with the Claimants’ argument that it is wrong to
focus attention entirely on the transaction by which they acquired their individual
security entitlements, to the exclusion of the overall transaction, i.e. the sale of the
bonds by Argentina to the underwriters. That is shown to be false, the Reply
Memorial asserts, once one considers the time at which each Claimant in fact acquired
his investment, which coincides with what would be each Claimant’s subjective
understanding, and would clearly correspond to a date or dates later than the issue of
the Bonds, and could in fact be several years later. This aspect would be particularly
striking if (as for example in the case of the Claimant Bruno Turchi) the security
entitlement was acquired at a time when the bonds were already in default, so that the
investment could not under any circumstances have been thought of as a contribution

to Argentina’s economic development.

The Reply Memorial asserts that in general, however, the Claimants cannot be
understood to have made ‘foreign’ investments, in that both the bonds and the security
entitlements were governed by a law other than the law of Argentina and subject to
the jurisdiction of non-Argentine courts; while the BIT offers no definition of a
foreign investment, it should be understood as one governed by a law other than the
law of the investor’s State of nationality. A large body of precedent establishes that
debt governed by foreign law, and payable and enforceable outside the debtor State in
foreign currency is regarded as located outside the debtor State, and this stands in
contrast to the case of a foreign investor acquiring shares in an Argentine company,
even under a contract subject to non-Argentine law and jurisdiction, since the exercise

of rights as a shareholder would be governed by Argentine law and jurisdiction.

iii. ... lawfully made under the applicable law

The Reply Memorial rejects the Claimants’ denial that their investments were
acquired in violation of the applicable law, on the basis that the Claimants’ argument
focuses only on the issue of the bonds, not on the onward sales of interests in them on
the secondary market. It invokes in this respect Article 8(7) of the BIT with its
choice of law provision that leads inexorably to the application of Italian law, and

invokes as well the decision of the tribunal in Jnceysa v El Salvador which shows that

73

provisions of this type apply at the jurisdictional stage, not merely on the merits. The
‘in accordance with law’ condition in Article 1(1) should be understood as “an
expression of public policy, which embodies the principle of respect for law,””? and
would therefore have been applicable in any case, even without the express reference
in the BIT, as demonstrated by the Decision in Plama v Bulgaria.®° The effect of the
renvoi is that Argentine law was itself infringed by the breach of Italian law. The
Reply Memorial denies that the three conditions put forward by the Claimants
represent established law. It rejects specifically the Claimants’ contentions based on
the wording of one of the Offering Circulars, since the disclaimer in the latter
expressly indicated the suitability of the security entitlements only for speculative
investors able to assess risk, and to bear it. It asserts that all the Offering Circulars
for the Bonds denominated in Italian Lira contained selling restrictions of that type,
noting in this context the actions by the Claimants who have sued their Italian
financial intermediaries; and asserts further that it is irrelevant whether the illegalities
were committed by third parties, not by Argentina, and whether it affected the legal
relationship between the holders and the bond issuer, since what the BIT addresses is

the illegality of the investment as such.

157. The Reply Memorial accuses the Claimants of inconsistency with their own Request
for Arbitration in now excluding from the ‘true cause’ of their claim the default on the
Bonds and focussing instead only on the POE and Law No. 26,017, in an attempt to
show that this is a treaty claim not a contract claim, but asserts that, even so, it is still
the case that no prima facie violation has been shown since it is well established that
non-payment is not in itself a violation of international law. It asserts that it is not
enough to say that Claimants may have been affected by Argentina’s acts unless there
existed a relevant legal connection, which was in fact missing because the Bonds and
rights derived from them were not governed by Argentine law and were not under the
jurisdiction of the Argentine authorities. It reiterates that the POE was voluntary and

no-one could oblige the Claimants to accept it.

79
At para. 332.

*° Plama Consortium Limited v Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction, 8

February 2005, (hereinafter “Plama v Bulgaria”).

74

158.

159.

160.

161.

iv. _... ‘in the territory of Argentina’
As to the matter of whether the security entitlements were investments made ‘in the
territory of Argentina,’ the Reply Memorial contests the Claimants’ argument that the
relevant transaction was the issue of the bonds themselves, given the “entire series of
intermediaries” between that transaction and the acquisition of the security
entitlements by the Claimants themselves whose activities Argentina is not in a
position to monitor, which in turn is why the issue documents contain an exclusion of

any liability on Argentina’s part.*!

The Reply Memorial rejects the Claimants’ reliance on the Fedax Decision for the
proposition that an advance to finance governmental needs ranks of itself as an
investment in the latter’s territory, since in this case the injection of funds had already
taken place, and in any event the Claimants could not demonstrate whether or not the
proceeds offered any durable value to the economic development of Argentina since
the moneys simply went into the general treasury from which point on their use could
not be tracked. Conversely, as indicated in SGS v Philippines and Mitchell v Congo,
investments made outside the territory and not reinvested within the territory are not
covered; the mere fact that there may be benefit to the recipient does not suffice
against the explicit indication in the preamble to the BIT that its purpose is to promote

investments by investors of one Contracting Party “‘in the territory” of the other.

The Reply Memorial describes the purpose of Law No. 26,017 as being no more than
to state a commitment not to reopen the restructuring on better terms later on, so as to
assure creditors who accepted it that their acceptance would not become a ‘floor’

from which holdouts would seek to better the terms on offer.

As to the Claimants’ assertion that Argentina, as both the debtor and the holder of the
sovereign power, cannot hide behind the fact that the bonds and the security
entitlements are governed by foreign law, the Reply Memorial reiterates that the
Claimants have failed to show how it would have even been possible for Argentina to
have altered, modified, or extinguished Claimants’ rights, since a State’s sovereign

power to prescribe and enforce legal rights is by definition limited to its own

*! Reply Memorial, para. 353.
® Patrick Mitchell v Democratic Republic of the Congo, \CSID Case No. ARB/99/7, Decision on the
Application for the Annulment of the Award, 1 November 2006, (hereinafter “Mitchell v Congo”), (AL RA 43),

para. 33.

75

162.

163.

164.

165.

jurisdiction and does not extend to property rights located outside its borders. This is
confirmed by the fact that holders of defaulted debt have received judgments in their

favour in foreign courts.

The Reply Memorial rejects the allegation of inconsistency arising out of the
Respondent’s assertion that the Claimants should have resorted to the Argentine
courts in lieu of arbitration, since this does not alter the fact that there is no proper
link to investments protected by the ICSID Convention and the BIT; it asserts that
Argentina has acted in the same way as any debtor unable to pay its debts, and (their
colourful language set to one side) the Claimants’ claim is for failure to pay, which is
not a breach of the BIT but a contractual claim jurisdiction for which lies elsewhere.
This is confirmed by the phraseology of the NASAM Mandate itself, with its
reference to “rights and interests in relation to the property and possession of the
abovementioned bonds [and] ... the recovery of my/our credit with related interests
and damages”, and the way in which the Mandate regulates its relationship with legal

actions brought by individual Claimants in domestic courts.

The Reply Memorial reiterates the Respondent’s earlier argument to the effect that the
Claimants have not offered sufficient proof of nationality, invoking in support
academic and other evidence that a State’s claim as to the nationality of an individual
is not determinative for an international tribunal. It reiterates likewise its earlier
accusations as to the inconsistencies in the presentation of the Claimants’ identities in
their own pleadings which, it says, now amount to a difference of 60 when the
Counter-Memorial is compared with the Request for Arbitration, and which in turn
constitutes a violation of Article 36(2) of the Convention and Rules 2(1)(a) of the

Institution Rules.

The Reply Memorial submits that the failure to show any investment in Argentina
also raises an issue ratione personae, since Article 1(2) of the BIT itself incorporates
the phrase “in the territory of the other Contracting Party” into the definition of

“investor” itself.

d. The Claimants’ lack of standing

The Reply Memorial finally submits that the Claimants in any event lack standing

because of the remoteness of their connection with the underlying Bonds and their

76

166.

underwriters. It asserts that the fact that Argentina was fully aware of the process by
which entitlements in the Bonds would be sold on secondary markets does not change
this situation, it merely demonstrates why Argentina never regarded the security
entitlements as investments under the BIT or the ICSID Convention; the mere fact
that Argentina may owe sums of money to the present Claimants does not of itself
render them “investors”. It submits that arbitral awards, such as those in PSEG v
Turkey and Enron v Argentina, recognize that there is a cut-off point beyond which
claims become inadmissible as too remotely connected with the underlying
investment, which is clearly passed in this case as the Claimants are not direct
creditors of Argentina; cancellation of the Bonds would require payment to be made
to the holder of the global bond which would then owe its own responsibilities to
downstream investors. It draws attention to the fact that in Fedax there was only one
layer of intermediaries, and the endorsements of the promissory notes had passed on
the full rights of the original holder, quite unlike the present case where (as

demonstrated in the Memorial) each holder acquired a newly-created item of property.

The Reply Memorial further submits that, if any amongst the Claimants seek to
pursue their rights by legal actions against the seller banks in national courts (as some
have already done), this would lead to the loss of any status to which they lay claim as
investors under the BIT, and hence their standing in the arbitration. It cites as an
example the Claimant Claudia Santi, whose action in the Italian courts has sought
inter alia the voiding of her sales contract with the vendor bank; if that remedy were
granted, it would have the consequence in law that she had never been the owner of
her security interest and could not therefor a fortiori lay claim to being an investor
under the BIT. It submits that this consequence cannot be avoided by the argument,
put forward by Claimants, that their claims against the banks are separate from their
claims against Argentina, since the latter can only have arisen in the first place out of
a valid purchase and sale transaction with the bank. It rebuts the Claimants’ counter-
argument that the Italian Supreme Court had ruled in 2007 that nullity was not a
general remedy against the banks, by submitting that the Supreme Court had left the
remedy open under specific statutory provisions, and that it was under these
provisions that Sig. Santi had claimed. The Respondent does not accept that these
are matters for later resolution, as Claimants say, as it is the Claimants’ burden to

establish jurisdiction ratione personae over their claim.

77

167. Moving to the funding arrangements through NASAM, the Reply Memorial submits
that the named Claimants are impermissibly pursuing claims on behalf of a third
party. It cites a Judgment of the United Kingdom Privy Council, to the effect that, if
the outside funder in addition substantially controls the proceedings or at any rate
stands to benefit from them, it is not so much facilitating access to justice by others as
itself gaining access to justice for its own purposes and is ‘the real party’ to the
litigation, and lists the ways in which the arrangements with NASAM meet these

criteria.

e. The prerequisites under Article 8 of the BIT

168. The Reply Memorial reiterates the Respondent’s earlier description of Article 8 of the
BIT as creating a multi-layered and sequential system for the resolution of disputes
between investors and the host State. It rejects the three excuses put forward by the
Claimants for not resorting either to amicable consultations or to the local courts
before requesting ICSID arbitration, as follows. In the first place, the Respondent
insists that Articles 8(1) and 8(2) must be jurisdictional prerequisites or else they
would be rendered meaningless, it cites in this regard the decision in Maffezini; in the
second place, the argument that local recourse would be futile is rejected both
factually and as legally irrelevant; in the third place, the MFN argument is rejected
both because the clause does not apply to dispute resolution, and because it is
improper to invoke the clause without having made any attempt at meeting the above
prerequisites because, without that, Argentina’s consent to BIT arbitration has never

come into operation at all.

169. As to the prerequisites under Articles 8(1) and 8(2), the Reply Memorial draws
attention once again to the way in which their text is structured, in particular in the
conditional form, and draws attention to what it says is a clear contrast between this
and genuine ‘fork-in-the-road’ clauses such as in Article VII of Argentina’s BIT with
the USA. It contests the relevance of the use of the word ‘may’ in Article 8(2), since
the door to arbitration is opened by the next paragraph, Article 8(3), which in turn is
conditioned on the initiation of proceedings before local courts, and in any event

‘may’ in Article 8(2) carries the sense of permission not that of optionality.** It

® Citing the Award in TSA Spectrum de Argentina, S.A. v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/5, (AL
RA 49), para. 101.

78

asserts further that the reading of Article 8(2) as a mandatory requirement is the only
one that gives full effect to Article 8(4), under which the initiation of arbitration
proceedings requires each party to the dispute to take the measures necessary to
withdraw from the pending domestic lawsuit, and relies upon the award in

Wintershall v Argentina.

170. As to the ‘futility’ argument, the Reply Memorial points out that Article 8(1) is cast in

mandatory terms,®° and submits that the following phrase “insofar as possible”**
plainly applies to the outcome of consultations not to their initiation; this does not
mean that must lead to a result, but there is ample authority to show that clauses of

this kind do mean that consultations cannot be sidestepped.*”

171. The Reply Memorial asserts that the Claimants bear the burden of establishing that
they complied with the requirement to pursue amicable consultations, and had done so
in good faith, in pursuance of a general principle of international law. The conduct of
creditors, in the event of a default, was to be evaluated against the agreed framework
principles worked out under the aegis of the G-20 for sovereign debt restructurings
and required debtors and creditors to cooperate “to ensure that the terms for amending
existing debt contracts and/or a voluntary debt exchange are consistent with market
realities and the restoration of growth and market access”.** The advocacy of

obviously unsustainable restructuring terms would not represent good faith.

f£ Consultations would not have been futile

172. The Reply Memorial denies that amicable consultation would have been futile, since
Argentina had conducted consultations in good faith with innumerable purchasers and
creditor groups since the 2001 default; conversely, the authorities relied on by the
Claimants were cases where the respondent was unwilling to enter into consultations

or where they were doomed from the outset, but in fact Argentina had made

 Wintershall v Argentina, para. 115.

85 <serd’ in the original Spanish, ‘sara’ in Italian, and ‘shall’ in the English translation.

en la medida de lo posible’ in Spanish, ‘per quanto possibile’ in Italian.

§7 At para. 475, citing the Decision in Enron v Argentina, para. 88, in which an ICSID tribunal found a similar
requirement in the Argentina-U.S. BIT "very much a jurisdictional one", such that “a failure to comply with that
requirement would result in a determination of lack of jurisdiction”, and citing also the Judgment of the
International Court of Justice in the case of Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo (Democratic
Republic of Congo v Rwanda), ICJ Rep. 2006, 6, paras. 88-93.

§§ Principles Consultative Group, Principles for Stable Capital Flows and Fair Debt Restructuring in Emerging
Markets: Report on Implementation by the Principles Consultative Group, October 2007, (A RA 346), p.18.

79

 

86 6

 

 

substantial efforts over several years and the POE was a product of these exchanges.
As to Law No. 26,017, it merely established an internal process that would prevent
the Executive Branch from reopening the POE without legislative authorization. The
Reply Memorial asserts that, after the Law’s enactment, there were very many
meetings with groups of bondholders who wanted the POE reopened, and the Law
was never thought to stand in the way of these meetings, which were still continuing

at the time at which the Reply Memorial was being prepared.

173. The Reply Memorial likewise denies that a futility exception could be raised against
the obligation to resort to the local courts, since the authorities relied on by the
Claimants all look to the futility of the available remedies, not to the recourse itself,
nor to the possibility that resort to the domestic courts might cost money and might
not be completed within the 18 months stipulated under the BIT. The intention of the
Contracting Parties had been to afford the judicial authorities the opportunity to
review and correct governmental acts, not to guarantee that there would be a final
resolution of the disputed issues within 18 months. Other tribunals had only been
prepared to countenance avoidance of local remedies provisions where no remedy
was available; none of the cases in the Argentine courts which were invoked by the
Claimants involved allegations of treaty breach, but under Argentine law treaties rank
higher in the legal hierarchy than domestic legislation, and the Argentine courts had

the power to render a law inapplicable.

g. The MFN clause does not apply

174. Finally, the Reply Memorial denies the applicability of the MFN clause to procedural
requirements, notably dispute resolution, while pointing out that in any case the clause
only applies to investments ‘in the territory of’ Argentina, and asserting that the
Claimants have not shown that the dispute settlement provisions of the Argentina-US
BIT are in fact more favourable. It cites the statement by the Wintershail tribunal
that the Germany-Argentina BIT contained no provisions allowing an investor to
choose at will not to pursue local recourse, since that would simply fail to engage the
terms of Argentina’s consent to arbitration; as the tribunal put it “Argentina’s
integrated ‘offer’ for ICSID arbitration ... must be accepted by the investor on the

same terms”.*° It refers also to the criticism that had followed the Maffezini Decision

® At para. 162.

80

175.

176.

90 6

and submits therefore that the Plama line of cases ought to be preferred, as more

accurately reflecting the intention of States when entering into BITs.

The Reply Memorial further denies that the addition in the MEN clause of the BIT of
a reference to “all other matters regulated by this Agreement” is not apt to include the
dispute resolution provisions, as is shown by the use of the self-same phrase in the
very Article dealing with dispute resolution to describe its scope, therefore ‘matters
regulated by [the] Agreement’ cannot mean both the matters subject to dispute
resolution and dispute resolution itself. It asserts that the phrase, as used in the MFN
clause, should be interpreted eiusdem generis, so as to cover only the treatment of
investments, return on investments, associated activities, and the like, which it says is
consistent with the conclusions reached in Plama, Salini, and Wintershall. It submits
that the dispute resolution clause in the Argentina-US BIT constitutes a “different
system of arbitration” by comparison with the present BIT, and therefore falls within
the exception even in the Maffezini Decision. It recalls finally that the MFN clause

° which

only covers treatment by each Contracting Party within its own territory,”
therefore excludes the threshold conditions for ICSID arbitration, whereas other BITs
do not include the same limitation. Last of all, the Reply Memorial denies that the
requirement to have recourse to the local courts does not axiomatically constitute less
favourable treatment, and recalls that the clause in the Argentina-US BIT in any case

itself requires prior amicable consultations.
41H _ The relief sought
The Reply Memorial accordingly seeks the following relief:-

(a) a determination that the Tribunal lacks competence and that ICSID lacks

jurisdiction to entertain collective actions of this nature;

(b) in the alternative, a determination that it lacks competence and ICSID
lacks jurisdiction because both Argentina and Claimants have not provided

valid consent to this proceeding, and, further, that Claimants’ abuse of right in

‘en el dmbito de su territorio” in Spanish, “nel proprio territorio” in Italian.

81

177.

178.

179.

bringing the claims in this proceeding —in the name of a third party—renders

invalid such consent as Claimants may have offered;

(c) in the alternative, a determination that there is no prima facie violation of

the Argentina-Italy BIT;

(d) in the alternative, a determination that it lacks jurisdiction ratione

materiae;

(e) in the alternative, a determination that it lacks jurisdiction ratione

personae or that Claimants lack standing;

(f) in the alternative, a determination that Claimants have not satisfied

necessary prerequisites to bringing a claim under the Argentina-Italy BIT;

(g) an order that Claimants pay all of Argentina’s costs, expenses, and

attorneys’ fees (plus interest thereon); and
(h) any further relief that the Tribunal deems fit and proper.

5. The Claimants’ Rejoinder

The Claimants filed their Rejoinder on 1 September 2010. It reverts briefly to the
account of the factual background offered by the Respondent in the Reply Memorial,
and to the two witness statements submitted in support, all of which is asserted to be
relevant only to the merits, and which does not therefore receive further comment by

the Claimants, without prejudice to their right to do so later at the appropriate stage.

The Rejoinder begins by recapitulating the grounds for concluding that the Claimants

have validly expressed their consent in writing to ICSID arbitration.

St The NASAM Mandate Package

The Rejoinder submits that the Claimants gave their consent by filing the Request for
Arbitration through their duly authorized Counsel, and that that consent was perfectly
valid, as there are no grounds whatever for the Respondent’s argument that the
Powers of Attorney did not cover recourse to ICSID, since its wording extends to ‘any
notice of dispute’, and ‘any request of arbitration’. It likewise rejects any assertion of
impropriety or invalidity in the Powers of Attorney under Italian law. | While

82

180.

181.

agreeing that the relationship between the Claimants and their Counsel is governed
exclusively by the Powers of Attorney, it submits that the NASAM Mandate is
relevant for their interpretation, in indicating the intention of the Claimants in
granting them, notably (in the present context) the express mention of ‘arbitrato
ICSID’ in connection with the payment of the Claimants’ contributions to expenses.
To rebut the Respondent’s assertions in this regard, the Rejoinder annexes five
samples of money transfers showing a clear reference to ‘arbitrato ICSID’ and five

samples of executed NASAM Mandates.

The Rejoinder submits further that the NASAM Mandate and the Power of Attorney
are separate and unrelated instruments. It reiterates that NASAM is merely a third-
party funder and not a party to the arbitral proceedings, that both the Powers of
Attorney and the Request were executed and filed by the Claimants through their
Counsel, not by NASAM, and that the NASAM Mandate is a valid contract, but one
that regulates only the relationship between Claimants and NASAM and is irrelevant
to the present proceedings (except to the extent that it evidences Claimants’ intention
to bring ICSID proceedings); it points out in particular that the Counsel acting in the
arbitration are not party to the NASAM Mandate and therefore not bound by it.
While accepting the difference under Italian law between the ‘procura’ (conferring
the power to represent) and the ‘mandato’ (the undertaking to perform an activity on
behalf of another), it notes that the normal Italian practice is to combine the two into
one in a single document referred to as the ‘power of attorney’ and that the present
instance is no exception, pointing in that context to the explicit conferment of broad
powers of representation and to the specific instructions to undertake a whole series of
actions from signing and submitting any request for arbitration through to collecting
any amount which is the outcome of the arbitral proceedings. Without conceding
that Italian law is in fact the governing law in the present context, the Rejoinder says
further that the attorney is not required to formalize his acceptance in any particular

way, but simply proceeds to perform the specified tasks.

The Rejoinder denies that the NASAM Mandate and the Powers of Attorney
constitute negozi collegati but says that, even if they did, that would have no impact

on consent to ICSID arbitration, since both documents are valid and legitimate.

83

182. As to the Powers of Attorney, the Rejoinder reiterates that Italian procedural law is
not applicable but only the self-standing provisions of Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention; there is no valid distinction from the Amto v Ukraine case since Article
42 of the ICSID Convention covers only substantive law, not procedure. It accuses
the Respondent of over-formalism in trying to suggest on the strength of academic
commentary that, even though the Powers of Attorney would have ranked as perfectly
valid for non-lawyer attorneys, there was a defect in authentication that rendered them
invalid for attorneys who were members of the Italian bar; if that was intended to
insinuate that some of the Claimants’ signatures might have been forged, there was

not a shred of evidence for it.

183. The Rejoinder rejects the allegation of an impermissible barrier between the
Claimants and their Counsel, since this relationship is exclusively governed by the

Powers of Attorney which in fact establish a “direct and transparent”!

relationship
between each Claimant and Counsel; it repeats the reasons for asserting the non-
applicability of Italian law, and rejects the Respondent’s arguments based on Articles
75 and 77 of the Italian Code of Civil Procedure. It denies specifically the claim that
the Claimants have ‘assigned’ their rights to NASAM when, to the contrary, all that
NASAM has been entrusted with is the function of collecting damages on Claimants’
behalf, which in itself implies no control over the arbitration proceedings, and is in
addition a practical solution given that individual Claimants would be quite unable to

collect the amounts due themselves.
SI The question of multiple claimants

184. Moving to the subject of multiple claimants in one arbitration, the Rejoinder refers
back to the Claimants’ earlier written argument. It denies that the present arbitration is
a class action, the characteristic feature of which is a class of unidentified plaintiffs,
whereas here each Claimant is identified and is acting personally for the protection of
his or her own rights. It repeats its refutation of the argument that NASAM is a party
to the proceedings, and denies that the language used in the NASAM Mandate
(‘azione di gruppo’) can be dispositive for the nature of the proceedings, especially
when it is used in a clearly non-technical sense which refers to the organization and

funding of proceedings on condition that a minimum number of bondholders would

*' Rejoinder, para. 42.

84

agree to commence them. NASAM’s role is a straightforward one in line with
normal third-party funding practice; this includes the role in choosing Counsel which

is “intrinsic to the role of a third party organizer funder”?

and represents in fact a
significant part of the service provided by NASAM to the Claimants. None of this
detracts from the fact that Counsel’s obligation is to follow the Claimants’
instructions, not NASAM’s, so that direct instructions, or even revocation of the
mandate, would have to be given effect by Counsel. Although it is not contested that
the individual Claimants do not take an active part in defining the arbitration strategy,
this is no different from most legal proceedings, which tend to be conducted directly
by the lawyers involved, with little or no client input. This is obviously the case in
investor-State arbitration, even with sophisticated claimants, but inevitable where the
claimants are small investors, and it is only in that very indirect sense that the present
Claimants ‘have no control over’ the proceedings. The Rejoinder insists that it is
simply not true that the strategy in the arbitration is dictated by NASAM; NASAM’s
financial interest in the outcome of the proceedings no more makes it a party to them

than Counsel themselves.

185. The Claimants maintain their submission that the consent given under the ICSID
Convention and the BIT covers the present arbitration; the fact that neither treaty
explicitly mentions claims by multiple claimants does not preclude their interpretation
by the standard rules in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties so as to include
such claims. No law or contract ever expressly mentions every possible situation that
may fall under it, and the same goes for treaties, and the principles of ‘good faith’ and
‘object and purpose’ in the Vienna Convention support the inclusion of multiple
claims inasmuch as the purpose of both the ICSID Convention and the BIT is to
provide meaningful protection to investors, including those who could not support the
financial and administrative burdens of bringing individual actions. The Rejoinder
contests the relevance of the [tera v Georgia decision, and draws attention to the

argument made by the dissenting arbitrator, which it finds convincing.

186. As regards the BIT, the Rejoinder rejects as beside the point whether or not collective
actions are within the contemplation of the domestic legal systems of Italy or

Argentina at the time of its conclusion, since the practice of investment arbitration is

* Rejoinder, para. 54.
85

replete with situations that were arguably not contemplated at the time, and in any
case the Vienna Convention approach focuses on ‘ordinary meaning’ without regard
to the intention of the parties. Nor does the Rejoinder find the Respondent’s textual
arguments convincing, notably because it is a common drafting convention that the
singular (in casu “investor”) is deemed to include the plural. The same goes for the
Respondent’s argument from the fact that the claims of the individual Claimants
spring from a number of different bond issuances, since the question at issue in all
cases is the same, namely the illegal interference with the rights of all bondholders by
a single action on the part of Argentina; the case is therefore not one of
‘consolidation’ of claims. The Rejoinder further rejects the relevance of the Plama
and SOABI decisions as these latter cases dealt with consent expressed in a number of
successive agreements. Conversely, the cases of Funnekotter, Goetz, Canadian
Cattlemen, and Bayview, despite their factual differences, all contain elements

supporting the Claimants’ position.

187. The Rejoinder maintains that the Respondent’s argument as to the lack of consent by
the Claimants to multiple proceedings is devoid of sense in circumstances in which
each Claimant obviously knew that its claim would be prosecuted along with those of
others, not to mention by the terms of the NASAM Mandate itself. It denies that any
issues of manageability or of due process arise that could not be dealt with within the
scope of the Tribunal’s powers to determine the appropriate procedural rules, without
any violation of Argentina’s rights as respondent. It rejects the Respondent’s
argument that the relevant facts at issue vary as between Claimants and are not even
similar from one case to another, since the differences between the individual Bonds
held by Claimants are totally immaterial to the issues in dispute; if any such
difference were to become relevant it would “certainly not require a consideration of
each single bond held by each Claimant, but at most consideration of some general
issues which the Tribunal will certainly be in a position to address properly and with
due respect for the rights of all concerned.”*? Nor would the verification of the
nationality of individual Claimants be particularly complex, in the light of the ample

evidence already submitted.

°S Rejoinder, para. 77.

86

SAM Jurisdiction and Admissibility

a. Jurisdiction ratione materiae under the ICSID Convention and the BIT

188. When it comes to the question of jurisdiction ratione materiae, the Rejoinder
reiterates the Claimants’ acceptance that they need to satisfy a ‘double-barrelled test’
for the existence of an investment under both the ICSID Convention and the BIT; all
the relevant approaches to this question have been applied. For the avoidance of
doubt, the Rejoinder specifies that “the investment at issue here is the overall loans
which made funds available to Argentina and which are represented by the bonds
issued in respect thereof. Each Claimant holds a proportionate share of that

”°4 The absence

investment corresponding to the face value of the bonds held by it.
of a definition of the notion of “investment” in the ICSID Convention means that the
notion should be interpreted broadly, having regard primarily to the consent expressed
in the BIT by the Contracting Parties.> In particular, arbitrators should not impose
fixed criteria, but should rather refer for guidance to the typical characteristics that
have been identified in the case law and commentary, which may vary from one
situation to another. The Salini criteria are not rules but only guidance, and
experience shows them to have been interpreted with great flexibility, as
demonstrated in particular by the recent Award in Saba Fakes v Turkey, where the
Tribunal’s detailed examination culminated in only three elements as being necessary,
and at the same time sufficient, to define an ‘investment’ for the purposes of the
ICSID Convention: a contribution, a certain duration, and an element of risk, all of

which are clearly met in the present case.

189. The Rejoinder resumes the Claimants’ conclusion, based on the Fedax, CSOB, ADC,
and CDC precedents, that financial instruments are “investments” within the meaning
of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. While accepting the Respondent’s
description of the mechanisms for issuance and circulation of sovereign bonded debt,
it contests strongly the Respondent’s argument based on drawing a distinction in kind
between bonds and security entitlements, which it regards as no more than a play on
words. For the Respondent, the initial purchase of the Argentine Bonds by the banks
and underwriters is indisputably an investment satisfying all of the necessary

** Rejoinder, para. 83.

°S Referring in this connection to the Decision of the ad hoc Committee of 16 April 2009 in Malaysian

Historical Salvors, SDN, BHD v Malaysia, I\CSID Case No. ARB/05/10.

87

190.

191.

conditions, but the subsequent circulation of the bonds on the secondary market did
not, and could not, deprive the initial investment of its quality as such, nor modify its
nature; it follows that the individual ‘security entitlements’ held by the Claimants are
evidence of entitlements to a proportionate share of the initial investment made in
Argentina, undisturbed by the chain of transactions which led to the eventual
purchases by the Claimants, and it is these shares of the initial investment that the
Respondent has expropriated. The Rejoinder submits that there is no contradiction
involved in looking at the individuals to identify them and determine the amount of
their shares, and looking to the initial transaction as a whole to determine its nature as
an ‘investment’; under investment treaty law, there is no limitation on the possibility
of subsequent acquirers of an initial investment benefitting from BIT protection, as in
Fedax. The Rejoinder claims that, had the original purchasers of the Bonds brought
suit, the Respondent would have resisted on the argument that they were no longer the
holders of the investment, but cannot at one and the same time deny liability towards
the subsequent and eventual holders. The Claimants therefore rest on the
demonstration in their Counter-Memorial that their holdings satisfy all of the
necessary requirements to rank as ‘investments’ under both the ICSID Convention

and the BIT.

The Rejoinder rejects as specious and absurd the Respondent’s attempt to argue that
the terms ‘obbligazioni’ and ‘obligaciones’ in the original language versions of the
BIT should be rendered in English not as ‘bonds’ but as ‘obligations’, citing various

texts and publications that have used the terms interchangeably.

The Rejoinder refers back to the Counter-Memorial for a comprehensive
demonstration that the Claimants’ investments were indeed made ‘in the territory of
Argentina,’ reiterating in this context that, where an investment consists simply in the
provision of funds, regard need only be had to the beneficiary of the funds, and that
for this purpose it is correct to look to the initial payments to Argentina and not to the
subsequent transfers on the secondary markets; it submits that cases like SGS v
Philippines and Mitchell v Congo are not in point, as they involved the provision of
services. Moreover the characterization of an investment as ‘foreign’ does not depend

on the governing law, but on the nationality of the investor which, once again, refers

88

192.

193.

194.

back to the initial provision of funds, not to questions such as the subjective

consciousness of subsequent purchasers.

The Rejoinder once more rejects the Respondent’s claim that the ‘compliance with
law’ criterion is to be judged by reference to Italian law, and rejects the argument that
Article 8(7) of the BIT brings into play the application of foreign rules of public law,
citing in this context the dictum of the Saba Fakes tribunal that it would run counter to
the object and purpose of investment protection treaties if one were to deny
substantive protection to investments because they violated domestic laws if those
laws were unrelated to investment regulation as such. It denies moreover that there is
any contradiction between the position of those Claimants who have also brought
actions before the Italian courts, since the nature of their claims there against financial
intermediaries is totally different. It stigmatizes as malicious any attempt by
Argentina to take advantage of reputed illegalities committed by third parties such as

the banks, at the expense of the investors.

b. A prima facie treaty violation

The Rejoinder declines to accept that the Claimants have failed in their obligation to
state a prima facie treaty violation, since it is preposterous to maintain that what
Argentina had done was no different from the actions of an ordinary party which was
unable to meet its debts; the actions — and specifically the take-it-or-leave-it
exchange offer imposed by law — were indisputably sovereign acts; as shown in the
previous pleadings, the illegality complained of was the sovereign actions that
brought about and consolidated the taking of the Claimants’ property, i.e. the POE
and Law No. 26,017, and that position has never changed, which shows in turn that

the subjection of the Bonds to foreign law did not put them beyond Argentina’s reach.

c. The 2010 POE

The Rejoinder refers to the revised POE of April 2010 and the consequent suspension
of the present proceedings granted by the Tribunal, and refers further in this
connection to the NASAM press release invoking the terms of the NASAM Mandate
and discouraging Claimants from accepting the revised POE without NASAM’s prior
consent. It asserts that this neither could nor did prevent Claimants from accepting

the revised POE, and some had already communicated their intention to do so. It

89

refers also to the correspondence between the Parties on the discontinuance by some

among the Claimants, which will be dealt with below.

d. The nationality requirement

195. The Rejoinder recalls the proofs previously furnished to demonstrate the Italian
nationality of each of the Claimants. It rejects once more the discrepancies alleged
by the Respondent in the number, names, and entitlements of the individual
Claimants, pointing to the earlier explanation that the discrepancies (small in number)
arose entirely out of the fact that, in the few cases where corporate entities were
among the Claimants, the list annexed to the Request for Arbitration contained the
names of the entity’s legal representatives; but the detailed documentation submitted
with the Request was accurate. The Respondent’s other criticisms of the lists are
rejected as unfounded, because they derive only from the fact that the tables in the
Request for Arbitration were arranged by the currency denomination of the Bonds,
with the result that a Claimant holding Bonds in more than one currency would appear
in more than one table; but the number of Claimants set out in the Counter-Memorial

was correct, as shown in a new table now attached.

e. The Claimants’ standing

196. The Rejoinder maintains that the arguments set out in the Reply Memorial are mere

repetitions which have been dealt with before, or are immaterial to the case.

f The domestic court proceedings in Italy

197. Once again, the Rejoinder maintains that the points made in the Reply Memorial are
mere repetitions of earlier arguments. It annexes a list®® which already takes account
of those Claimants who had lost title to their Bonds for reasons other than acceptance
of the 2010 POE and undertakes to produce bank certificates if required certifying the
ownership of each Claimant, and reiterates that each Claimant is acting in his or her

own name and not for any third party.

g. Amicable consultations and recourse to the local courts

198. The Rejoinder rehearses once again the Claimants’ reasons for asserting that the

failure to comply with Articles 8(1) and 8(2) of the BIT is not a bar to the Tribunal’s

°° Exhibit CA-73.

90

jurisdiction. It submits in this connection that any negotiation with Argentina would
have been not only futile, but also impossible once the Ley Cerrojo had been enacted.
It presents the evidence for saying that between 2001 and 2004 there had been several
attempts by bondholder groups to enter into negotiations, all of which failed since
Argentina simply held to its own terms unilaterally imposed. The unreasonableness
of the Respondent’s present suggestion that the Claimants have not shown why they
did not attempt to open consultations flies in the face of the Respondent’s own
argument in the Memorial that it is impossible to negotiate separately with each
person who claims an interest under the bonds or even with groups of them.°’ The
Respondent’s claims that it negotiated with bondholder groups and put together the
POE in the light of that is rebutted by the evidence that the meetings referred to were
minimal in their content, consisting more of presentations or ‘road shows’ than actual
negotiation, and the Respondent has declined to produce evidence such as minutes

and records of these meetings to sustain its own account.

199. The Rejoinder further argues that the enactment of the Ley Cerrojo in February 2005
put the final seal on Argentina’s refusal to negotiate, and that the Respondent’s
account of the effect of the law is inaccurate and misleading; it is not simply that
Article 2 of the Law prohibits reopening the restructuring process and Article 3
forbids negotiation with holdout investors, but that Article 4 requires the Executive to
do everything in its power to secure the de-listing of Bonds not surrendered, and that
Article 6 brings about the exchange, by operation of law, of un-surrendered Bonds
caught up in litigation for new par bonds denominated in Argentine pesos and
maturing in 2038. It recalls that the Ley Cerrojo was enacted 14 days before the
expiration of the 2005 POE, and that its aim was to coerce the remaining bondholders
to accept the POE. It sees further confirmation of this analysis in the recent
suspension of the Ley Cerrojo to permit the 2010 POE (not mentioned by the
Respondent in the Reply Memorial) because of the condition in the new suspending
law that the terms offered to non-acceptors of the 2005 POE had to be less favourable
than the terms of that offer, and because of the wide-ranging waivers of right which it
demanded. It adds that the new 2010 POE had nothing to do with any wish to make

up for the illegalities suffered by bondholders, but was directed at speculation in

°7 See Memorial, paras. 59-79.

91

200.

201.

Argentine bonds by banks against the possibility that the exchange process might be

reopened.

The Rejoinder underlines the Claimants’ earlier argument as to the futility of recourse
to the Argentine courts, but repeats that recourse to the local courts was not
mandatory in the light of the MFN clause in Article 3 of the BIT, and dismisses as
irrelevant that this argument had not been expressly advanced in the Request. It cites
the jurisdictional decision in Rosinvest as recent authority for the application of MFN
clauses to dispute settlement, and dismisses out of hand the Respondent’s attempt to
give MEN treatment a limited geographical scope, by arguing that the ‘less favourable
treatment’ that would be set aside by the MFN clause was the burden of pursuing
fruitless litigation precisely within the territory of Argentina. It rebuts also the
argument that Article VII(3) of the US-Argentina BIT invoked by the Claimants is not
necessarily ‘more favourable’, by arguing that all that that Article requires is a pure
lapse of time, a condition which was undoubtedly satisfied in the present case. It
reiterates that the futility argument is not a purely empirical one based on time,
trouble, and expense, but is squarely based on the effect of the Ley Cerrojo in shutting
out any prospect of success in local litigation, as indicated by the seminal judgment of
the Supreme Court in the Galli case, where the Court declared the question non-
justiciable, thus ruling out a fortiori any later attempt to argue that international
obligations overrode domestic statute law. It recalls also that the Respondent has not
explained how its present arguments in the arbitration can be reconciled with the
diametrically opposite argument it made before the domestic courts. It refers finally
to an official survey carried out in 2007 of 1600 judicial proceedings of a similar
character, which took on average 6 years and 1 month to reach judgment at first
instance, and that none of the cases before the Administrative courts was resolved
within 18 months. It adds that the Respondent’s argument that proceedings must
have been commenced, but not necessarily completed, within 18 months leads to an

absurd result putting in question the purpose behind the clause.

The Rejoinder accordingly requests the Tribunal to dismiss all of the Respondent’s
objections, and to decide that it has jurisdiction and that the proceedings are
admissible. It further requests an order for reimbursement of the Claimants’ legal

fees and the costs of the arbitration.

92

202.

203.

THE ORAL HEARING

As indicated above, the Tribunal held a hearing on jurisdiction in Paris on 7 and
8 June 2011, during which the following witnesses for the Respondent were presented
for cross-examination: Mr Federico Molina and Mr Daniel Marx. As the matters
canvassed in the oral argument for both Parties consisted for the greatest part of a
recapitulation of the arguments that had been set out at length in the written
memorials described above, the Tribunal feels that it can properly dispense with an
account of the legal argument, and concentrate instead on summarizing the tenor of
the evidence of Messrs Molina and Marx. This is on the basis that the oral arguments
have been taken fully into account by the Tribunal, which will refer to them

specifically, so far as may be necessary, in the later parts of this Decision.

1. The evidence of Mr Molina

Mr Molina had been the Director of Argentina’s National Office for Public Credit
until February 2004, after which he became the Financial Representative of the
Ministry of Economy in the USA, a post he held until October 2006. He testified that
the Public Credit Office was the financial agent of the Government, entrusted with the
conduct of all public credit and debt operations, including the placement of Bonds or
any other securities. He described the method used for the placement of Bonds in the
international markets through contracts with the chosen investment Banks, on the
basis of competitive proposals put forward by the Banks, which entailed that the
Banks bore the sole responsibility to decide whether to retain the Bonds for their own
portfolios or to sell them on to other institutions such as investment funds or in some
instances to retail investors. All this would be specified in the prospectus for the
particular Bond issue; he had never seen a prospectus containing a mention of
investment protection treaties, nor to his experience had the question ever been raised.
The terms used were standard ones and he had never seen the inclusion of an ICSID
arbitration clause, and the standard pattern was to confer jurisdiction on the courts of
the place where the issue was centred, such as New York, London, Frankfurt, or
Tokyo. He referred to the many negotiations (“constant negotiations”) that had taken
place between 2003 and the 2005 POE, and the fact that creditor groups had put
forward ideas of their own; this again was a standard procedure, not special to

Argentina. Argentina had first retained Lazard Fréres to try to locate the investors,

93

204.

205.

206.

and after that had engaged three Banks to take the operation forward. After the
expiry of the POE, bondholders who did not accept the exchange remained in the
same situation as before, i.e. they continued to be the holders of securities that were in
default. The 2005 POE was accepted by 76.1% of bondholders, and when it was

reopened in 2010 the acceptance rate rose to about 92%.

Under cross-examination by Counsel for the Claimants, Mr Molina expanded on the
reference in his witness statement to ‘candid discussions’ with creditors regarding
Argentina’s initial outline proposals (“the Dubai Outline”), and explained that the
essential element of this discussion, which took place with many groups because there
were creditors practically all over the world, was Argentina’s capacity to pay over a
30-year period; the most active participants were the US mutual funds, but there were
Italian groups, and at some point a group was formed by an association of Italian
banks, claiming to represent Italian private persons, which for a while acted together
and negotiated. There was also a group representing German creditors which was
together for a time and then separated, and there were Japanese banks and American
creditors. Two significant creditor demands eventually incorporated into the POE
were the recognition of unearned interest and the determination of interest rates, but
there were other elements as well, such as a most-favoured-creditor clause and the
inclusion of a Par Bond (which was not subject to any discount in the capital amount)
where there was much discussion of the total limit. Although different creditor
groups had different priorities, when any recommendation was accepted it was

applied throughout.

Mr Molina was unable to say whether there were ever negotiations with small groups
of bondholders, e.g. of one hundred, because it was never clear how many creditors
each group represented; the most organized group was the German group acting under
a specific Mandate, whereas the Italian groups were much more heterogeneous and
different groups were sometimes at odds with one another. He repeated that the
mechanisms used for the original Bond issues were standard ones, very similar to
those used by any other country or by large private debtors such as IBM or General

Motors, since anything different from that generally did not work well.

Asked about the position of holdout creditors after the 2005 POE, in the light of the

fact that the annual Argentine budget law no longer includes the bonded indebtedness,

94

207.

208.

Mr Molina confirmed that but pointed out that the Boletin Fiscal, an official
publication of the Ministry of the Economy, sets out full debt statistics, which he
could say from his own experience always mentioned the number of securities that
had not been surrendered in the Exchange. He confirmed that the Bonds defaulted on
before the POE continued to be defaulted on after the POE, but stated that he could
remember some discussions with creditor groups happening after that, although they
came to nothing. He referred also to the 2010 POE, which was the subject of
negotiations at the specific initiative of Banks that had been involved in the 2005 POE

and insisted that it be reopened.

In further examination, Mr Molina confirmed his evidence that channels had existed
for discussion or negotiation with minority investors, and gave as examples contacts
in Buenos Aires and during the touring roadshow with Dr Nielsen, the Secretary for
Finance, as well as the existence of a network of financial advisers who were
available to all retail or wholesale investors to convey their concerns, which to his
knowledge included the London representation, which met with at least one Italian
group claiming to represent retail bondholders, and the Washington representation
(which he himself was in charge of) covering North America, though there were
virtually no retail investors in that region. He confirmed also that some of the
questions raised in these contacts, such as the par bonds and the most-favoured-
creditor clause, had been of particular interest to minority investors, because of their
anxiety that their inevitably weaker voice in the negotiations might lead to their being
discriminated against in the outcome. There had also been the inclusion of interest as
well as capital, in response to general investor feeling that the original proposals had
been too hard-nosed. He confirmed also that the reopening of the Exchange process
leading to the 2010 POE had originated out of negotiations initiated by the Banks, and

that that had been after the passage of the Ley Cerrojo.

In answer to questions from the Tribunal, Mr Molina agreed that the annual budget
law had not been including the defaulted Bonds, but that was because it only provided
for payments that were foreseen for the budget year in question, and no payments
were foreseen on the defaulted Bonds; conversely, the budget laws had been

providing for payments in respect of the Exchange Bonds issued under the POE, and

95

209.

210.

211.

212.

213.

interest under these was being regularly paid, though the principal had not yet

matured.

As regards what he had referred to as the most-favoured-creditor clause, Mr Molina
explained that it had been inserted to deal with the surrounding suspicion and mistrust
about the possibility of a later, more favourable exchange offer, and the associated
anxiety that this might impair the effectiveness of the Exchange if creditors held out
waiting for that possibility; so the clause provided that if there were a further
Exchange, and it was more favourable, participants in the first Exchange would also
be eligible to benefit from the second Exchange. He clarified that this clause was put
into operation in respect of the 2010 POE but very few creditors took it up, because it

was not really better.

Mr Molina clarified further that the task given to Lazard Fréres of locating the
bondholders was completed around the early part of 2004, and it was after that that
Merrill Lynch, UBS and Barclays had been retained to act as intermediaries, in the
normal way, between Argentina and those who were potentially interested in an
exchange and to bring about a rapprochement between the positions of both sides.
Their task included looking at the degree of interest there was in the offer and at the
claims of the various creditor groups, so as to act as intermediaries in orienting the

negotiation.

In connection with the remark in his Witness Statement that the original Bonds were
always considered high-risk investments whose ratings never approached ‘investment
grade’ and carried an interest rate corresponding to that, Mr Molina explained that the
decision on the interest rate the Bonds would bear had been taken in the usual way
after consultation between the potential underwriters with potential institutional

investors followed by ‘expressions of interest’ at a range of prices.

Mr Molina further explained how the securities laws of the countries where Bonds
were to be marketed might encourage — or in some cases (e.g. the USA) actually
require — that the Bonds be exclusively subject to their laws and jurisdiction, to the

exclusion of that of the country of issue.

Mr Molina finally clarified that when he had referred in his evidence to Bonds being

‘in default,’ that meant that no payments were being made on the Bond, including

96

214.

215.

216.

after maturity had been reached; that applied to all of the Bonds issued before
31 December 2001, though as already indicated approximately 92% had been
surrendered for exchange, and only the remaining 8% remained in the same situation

as obtained prior to the 2005 POE.

2. The evidence of Mr Marx

Mr Marx had been Argentina’s Secretary of Finance in 1999-2001, and before that at
one stage Argentina’s Financial Representative in Washington and a member of the
board of directors of the Central Bank. His expert evidence related on the one hand
to the historical and economic background to and the strategy for Argentina’s raising
of international capital in the 1990s and until 2001, and the efforts to avoid a default
in 2001, and on the other hand to the bond placement mechanism, both in the public

and the private sector, with specific reference to the case of Argentina.

In his oral evidence, Mr Marx confirmed that, as was normal, the bond issuer was
directly involved in the initial placement but had no control over the secondary
market which is very fluid and also very diverse for bonds issued by emerging
economies; this was true in Argentina’s case as well. He made the point that the
main reason why Argentina was issuing debt towards the end of the 1990s was to pay
off debt that had previously been issued, most of it in foreign currency. He reiterated
the fundamental principle of non-discrimination embodied in the pari passu rule, and

also the central role played in debt restructurings of the debtor’s capacity to pay.

Under cross-examination, Mr Marx explained both his public roles (including at the
time of a particular bond issuance in 2000, when he was Secretary of Finance and Mr
Molina the National Director of Research and Debt Negotiations of the National
Office for Public Credit) and in the private sector. He declined to offer definitive
answers to questions about the legal operations of the secondary bond market or the
legal characterization of security entitlements, as these were legal questions lying
outside the field of his expertise. He agreed however that the holder of a Bond from
time to time would acquire by transmission the same rights as the initial underwriter,
and that, when funds were paid on the issue of a Bond and placed in foreign accounts
in the name of the Republic of Argentina, the accounts reflected these funds as assets
of Argentina. Referring to the ‘road shows,’ Argentina targeted its presentations at

those who it understood were qualified investors and never sought to make these

97

217.

218.

presentations to retail investors, but subsequently there were contacts with
representatives of individual bondholders, whose adherence to the POE Argentina
was seeking. In cases of restructuring the process always starts with an offer made
by the debtor, but after consultations with interested parties, so as to gain a significant
take-up of the offer. A restructuring obviously had, in the aggregate, negative
consequences for those holding bonds at the time, but other investors might have
bought up defaulted bonds at depressed prices and then made a profit out of a

restructuring.

In further questioning, Mr Marx confirmed the essential differences between the role
of the underwriter as principal purchaser of a bond and that of purchasers in the
secondary market, including the due diligence obligations that apply to the
underwriter would not apply to mere participants in the secondary market. He
confirmed also that it was possible for a security to have a market value below face
value, even well below, without any declaration of default, for a whole range of
possible reasons. He confirmed finally that the market was not a single market, so
that different operators might be working from different screens showing different
prices, particularly when an unsophisticated operator resorting to an agent might find
himself faced with a price different from (sometimes substantially so) the price that
could have been available on a larger platform, and that the transfer of purchase price
on the secondary market took place simply between the actual buyer and seller on that

market.

In answer to questions from the Tribunal, Mr Marx referred to some of the
circumstances under which, in the ‘new financial architecture,’ sophisticated investors
might have protected themselves against losses through defaults, for example through
credit default swaps, which would not necessarily have been acquired from insurance
companies. He explained further that, in a secondary market, the price of an asset
like a security interest in a bond might change for reasons other than the ability of the
bond issuer to pay; that would depend largely on the transparency and liquidity of the
particular market, but when those characteristics were not fully present in any given
market, there could be any number of circumstances in which prices were neither

clear nor obvious.

98

219.

220.

3. Closing statements of the Parties
a. The Respondent

In closing for Argentina, Counsel for the Respondent reiterated the arguments of law
and fact that had been put before the Tribunal. They submitted that the testimony of
Mr Molina demonstrated not only that Argentina conducted market surveys before
making its restructuring proposals, but that it did hold numerous meetings with groups
and associations representing the holders of different securities, both institutional and
retail, which were conducted transparently and in good faith. They stressed that,
under Article 75 of the Argentine Constitution, debt restructuring lies within the
prerogatives of the national Congress, which had over the years delegated this power
to the Executive under various legislative acts, such as the Budget Law and the
Financial Administration Law; what Law 26,017 did, accordingly, was to reassume
the exercise of that prerogative, but in no sense did it forbid the undertaking of
consultations or negotiation with foreign creditors, it simply forbade the Executive to
reopen the Exchange process without Congressional authority. As to the judicial
decisions in cases such as Galli and Ghiglino Zubilar, they concerned the conversion
into Pesos of public debt governed by Argentine law, not securities governed by
foreign law and jurisdiction. In any case, judgments of the Supreme Court were
binding only in respect of the case in hand, and the jurisprudence of the courts could
subsequently be reversed, as indeed had happened precisely in respect of the
emergency laws which laid down the pesification of bank deposits and the staggering
of financial obligations. Moreover, the Galli case was an amparo action in which the
claimant had indeed obtained favourable decisions both at first instance and on appeal
within the 18-month period stipulated in the BIT, nor was it true to say that this case
was eventually disposed of as non-justiciable, as the Supreme Court did go into the

substantive merits.

As to the definition of ‘investment,’ the Respondent accepted that it was not decisive
whether the word ‘bono’ (‘bond’) did or did not appear in the text of the BIT; the
point was rather that, because the word ‘bono’ exists in Spanish, but was not used in
the Spanish text of the BIT, there was no sound basis for the Claimants’ argument that
‘obbligazioni’ in the Italian text was intended to include bonds. The Parties were

also in agreement that the ascertainment of an ‘investment’ had to meet a double-

99

221.

barrelled test, under both the ICSID Convention and the BIT. But, even if one were
to adopt an extreme position, and argue that the only thing that mattered was the
agreement between the Parties expressed in the BIT, the numerous references in the
BIT to ‘territory’ showed that territoriality was a fundamental criterion that had to be
satisfied; this could be seen from Article 1(1), on definitions, Article 2, which
included the provision on fair and equitable treatment, Article 3(1), on most-favoured-
nation treatment, and Article 5(1), on expropriation. It remained therefore the
Respondent’s position that the assets in this case, purchased as they were and paid for
outside Argentina, and not purchased from or paid to Argentina but from persons
unknown to Argentina, and subject to foreign law and jurisdiction, not that of
Argentina, contained no element of territoriality. The ultimate argument by the
Claimants, that if Argentina benefited from the securities it could not deny its link to
them, could not stand in the face, for example, of the indication by the SGS v
Philippines tribunal that a loan to a State to build an Embassy abroad could not
qualify as an investment: “in accordance with normal principles of treaty
interpretation, investments made outside the territory of the Respondent State,
however beneficial to it, would not be covered by the BIT.”*> ~~ The Claimants
appeared however to recognize that the individual Claimants did not have an
investment, but only shares in an investment, in which the actual investor was the
underwriter bank. However the problem with that line of argument was that under
the ICSID Convention any claimant had to have an investment at the time the
arbitration procedure began and could not construct an artificial ‘investment’ by
joining together with others, any more than a piece of an apple could be regarded as
itself an apple. There was moreover no provision in the treaties, nor in customary
international law, giving rise to a compulsory joinder of actions without the consent of

the respondent State.

Finally, it remained the Respondent’s position that the Claimants had given no valid
reason for ignoring the preconditions to arbitration laid down in Article 8 of the BIT.
The factual evidence before the Tribunal showed that negotiations had been possible
and had led to more generous offers to creditors. The point was, however, that the
particular Claimants resorting to arbitration had to have satisfied these preconditions

themselves.

°8 SGS v Philippines, para. 99.

100

222.

223.

224.

225.

b. The Claimants

For the Claimants, Counsel drew attention to the formalistic approach which the
Respondent was taking on many issues. He submitted further that Mr Marx, given
his personal involvement in the questions at the centre of the dispute, should be

regarded as an ordinary witness of fact, not as an expert.

Commenting generally on the evidence, Counsel submitted that, while it showed that
there had been meetings and discussions with bondholders in some form before the
2005 POE, the witnesses had not been able to show that there had been any real
substance to them leading to significant improvements for bondholders. He
submitted further that the evidence showed that it would not have been possible for
the present Claimants individually, or even as a group, to have entered into
negotiations with Argentina to achieve the results sought in the arbitration. He
objected to the Respondent’s assertion that negotiations should have taken place
before the 2005 POE, since it was precisely that event that had the most decisive
detrimental effect on the Claimants’ position. As to the supposed reopening of the
offer post-2005, he submitted that all it had led to (in the 2010 POE) was a reiteration

of the same absolutely unacceptable terms.

Commenting on the evidence that the issue of the Bonds on the international financial
markets had followed a usual, standard procedure, Counsel submitted that this was
further proof that they had to be understood as covered by the references to bonds in
the BIT, if the latter was to have any meaning, and proof also that the Bonds were
intended right from the beginning to have been indebtedness that would circulate in
the market. Conversely, however, the fluctuation in their market price was irrelevant
for the purposes of what is owed by the issuer, as the indebtedness remains
throughout the Bonds’ lifetime, until maturity. He noted Mr Marx’s confirmation
that the proceeds of the Bonds were considered to be part of Argentina’s foreign
reserves and general assets. He dismissed the argument that arbitration was
intrinsically unsuited to investment arbitration, as breaching the pari passu principle,

because, if so, the same argument would apply to legal action before national courts.

The Claimants’ case was that the initial transfer of the funds made by the underwriters
to Argentina was part of a gigantic outlay of money which was lent to Argentina for a

very considerable duration of time, and it went straight to the benefit of Argentina for

101

226.

227.

228.

the purposes of servicing its foreign debt etc., the Bonds being simply evidence of the
loan. It was undisputed that loans are investments in the ICSID case law, and it was
irrelevant that the investment was divided up into smaller bits and pieces and
distributed, by reason of the universally accepted concept of the unity of the
investment; nor could the mere size of individual holdings be decisive, or else it
would be a licence to interfere with small investments, while large ones would be
protected. There was a compelling analogy with the situation of shareholders, who
would obviously be entitled, in the case of the expropriation of a company, to
whatever protection the relevant BITs opened to shareholders, and this would be
regardless of the number or size of each shareholding and the length of time for which
it had been held. And the situation would have been the same had the company
issued bonds instead of shares. The Respondent’s argument as to territoriality was
rejected as out of keeping with the realities of today’s world, in which so many assets
and interests are de-materialized; the argument would have the effect of ruling out

most forms of financial protection.

The Claimants’ position was, accordingly, that all that is relevant for the entitlement
to protection under a BIT is the situation at the moment at which arbitration is
brought, and that each holder of a portion of the total investment has a right to bring

proceedings if it falls under a relevant BIT.

As to the Respondent’s argument — that BIT protection and ICSID coverage was
unsuitable for bond holdings and damaging to bond markets — it was largely an
argument of policy not law, and was counter-intuitive; it would entail that a borrower
like Argentina could escape liability simply by spreading the holders of a Bond
amongst different nationalities. The case was in any event the same as for
shareholders; the fact that claims might emerge under different BITs was an inherent
feature of the system, but did not make it unworkable, nor would it affect the pari

passu principle any more than lawsuits before national courts.

The Claimants accepted that the Ley Cerrojo did not prohibit negotiations, but
regarded that as beside the point, because negotiations that were, by definition,
doomed to failure could not in good faith be something that creditors were required to

pursue. It was difficult to imagine that Argentina would have been particularly

102

229.

230.

231.

232.

233.

impressed if 100-odd claimants had asked to negotiate for the modification of the

exchange offer.

Coming to the case law of the Argentine Supreme Court, Counsel for the Claimants
drew attention to the Ghiglino Zubilar and Pico Estrada decisions (not mentioned in
the Respondent’s oral argument) which had indeed held that the principle in the Galli
case applied to foreign Bonds as well as those in local currency.” To litigate in the
local courts would, the Claimants submitted, be utterly futile and in addition an

expensive and complicated burden.

With reference to the fact, which featured so largely in the Respondent’s argument,
that the individual Claimants had not signed the Request for Arbitration, Counsel
submitted that this argument addressed the NASAM Mandate, but that was a
document that established the relationship between the individual Claimants and

NASAM, and had nothing to do, therefore, with their consent to ICSID jurisdiction.

Finally, Claimants denied that Argentina was acting like any other debtor unable to
pay its debts, as it had repudiated its liabilities by law, which was the archetypical
case of State action and quite different from ordinary contractual behaviour; in their
submission, it was pure sophistry for the Respondent to argue that the subjection of
the bonds to foreign law and jurisdiction prevented the State from interfering with the
enjoyment of the investment, irrespective of whatever consequences the foreign

governing law might or might not attribute to that interference.
POST-HEARING
1. The Post-Hearing Briefs
As indicated above (paragraph 22), the Tribunal authorized a single round of post-
hearing briefs, which were duly submitted by each side on 8 August 2011.
a. The Respondent

In its post-hearing brief, the Respondent reiterated in summary form the arguments it
had put forward (as recorded above) to sustain its preliminary objections. The

Respondent submitted: that the proceedings were a collective action that fell outside

® Ghiglino Zubilar v Argentina, Supreme Court decision of 20 April 2010, (hereinafter “Ghiglino Zubilar”) and
Pico Estrada v Argentina, Supreme Court decision of 4 August 2009, (hereinafter “Pico Estrada”).

103

234.

ICSID jurisdiction and the competence of the Tribunal; that the Claimants had not
duly consented to ICSID arbitration in view of their failure to sign the Request, the
specific invalidity of the Powers of Attorney, and the lack of a reference to ICSID in
the NASAM Mandate Package, coupled with the absence of evidence of the
Claimants’ true identity; that the Claimants had in any case not complied with the
specific requirements laid down in Article 8 of the BIT before resorting to arbitration,
and were not entitled to rely on the most-favoured-nation clause in Article 3 to evade
those requirements; that the Claimants had failed to state a prima facie treaty
violation; that the Claimants’ claims were not within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal
ratione materiae as their assets did not qualify as investments under either the ICSID
Convention or the BIT, and were in any case claims of a contractual nature not falling
under the BIT; and that the Claimants’ claims were not within the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal ratione personae owing to the failure of the Claimants to demonstrate
sufficiently that they met the nationality requirements of Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention and Article 1(2) of, taken together with the Additional Protocol to, the
BIT.

On that basis, the Respondent asked the Tribunal to:

(a) Decide that it lacks competence and that the ICSID lacks jurisdiction to entertain

collective actions of this nature;

(b) Decide in the alternative that it lacks competence and that ICSID lacks jurisdiction
because neither the Argentine Republic nor Claimants gave valid consent to these
proceedings, and, further, that Claimants’ abuse of rights in bringing these
proceedings —in the name of a third party— renders any consent they may have

given null and void;

(c) Decide in the alternative that there is no prima facie violation of the Argentina-

Italy BIT;
(d) Decide in the alternative that it lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae;

(e) Decide in the alternative that it lacks jurisdiction ratione personae or that

Claimants lack legal standing to institute these proceedings;

104

235.

(f) Decide in the alternative that Claimants have not satisfied the conditions necessary
to bring a claim under the Argentina-Italy BIT and, therefore, Argentina has not

consented thereto;

(g) Order Claimants to pay all costs, expenses, and attorneys’ fees incurred by the

Argentine Republic (plus interest); and

(h) Grant any further relief against Claimants as may be deemed fit by the Tribunal.

b. The Claimants

In their post-hearing Brief, the Claimants limit themselves to some of the most
important issues raised at the hearing. The Claimants reject as belated the
Respondent’s complaint about Sig. Parodi’s not having taken an active part in all
stages of the proceedings, against the background of its acceptance hitherto of Prof.
Radicati as duly representing the Claimants. The Brief denies that there is any
discrepancy in the listing of the Claimants’ standing and identity other than a few
clerical mistakes. It points to the efforts made after the hearing, at the Tribunal’s
request, to agree on a consolidated list of the remaining Claimants in the arbitration,
and attaches an updated table containing their names and indicating separately those
original Claimants who had accepted the 2010 POE and those who had sold their
bonds, as a result of which there were now 79 individual Claimants (or 52 ‘centres of
interest’ if co-owners were taken into account). Copies of the passports and of the
certificates of residence and citizenship for each of them are also attached. As
regards NASAM, the Brief submits that its letter of 17 May 2010 inviting claimants
not to accept the new POE, far from proving NASAM’s control, shows exactly the
opposite. It recites the steps that would have been taken by each Claimant, in order to
demonstrate the consent of each of them to ICSID arbitration, and explains the
inclusion in the preamble to the NASAM Mandate of the reference to signing the
request for arbitration on the basis that NASAM understood only later that ICSID
Rules did not require individual signatures, and the Claimants had been promptly
informed of this. It reiterates its denial that the ‘stigma of a class action’ can be
attached to the proceedings, which lack the representative nature characteristic of a
class action, and asserts that to make the acceptability of multiple-claimant actions
dependent on the consent or non-objection of the respondents would be to engraft a

condition that is not present in Article 25 of the ICSID Convention; what counts, on

105

236.

237.

the contrary, “is that the Claimants are all pursuing identical relief for the same
illegality on the strength of the same factual and legal grounds.” It rejects once more
the Respondent’s due process objection “particularly ... now that the number of
Claimants has dropped significantly,” and repeats the converse argument from

consistency and efficiency.

The Brief recalls the Claimants’ earlier arguments as to the deliberate illegality of
Argentina’s conduct, as to the breach of the provisions of the BIT, and as to the nature
of each Claimant’s investment and its characterization within the terms of the BIT
definitions, as confirmed by the fact that the 2010 POE itself described the assets at
issue interchangeably as “Bonds” and “securities” in English (and correspondingly
obbligazioni and titoli in Italian, and titulos and bonos in Spanish). It submits that
the Respondent’s denial that the investment was made in the territory of Argentina
falls to the ground once it is registered that both the purpose of the underlying
transaction and its actual effect was to bring about a large flow of foreign currency
into the Argentine Treasury, against the background of the widespread recognition
that the physical location of investment has to be treated with a degree of flexibility
especially in the case of financial instruments, whereas the Respondent’s arguments
based on the breach of the conditions of resale would simply produce an unjustifiable

windfall for Argentina as the debtor.

The Brief argues that the doctrine of the ‘general unity of an investment operation’
makes it wrong to focus solely on individual holdings to the exclusion of the broader
picture; if (hypothetically) the entire bond issue had been underwritten by a single
financial institution or a wealthy individual, it would never have been contested that
there would be an ‘investment’ which met each one of the Salini criteria, but nothing
in this picture changed if the ownership was split between a few or even several

owners. '”

In the present case, all of the separate transactions involved in the initial
underwriting and subsequent circulation of the Bonds were part of an interdependent
whole, which is the whole nature of a bond issue. The Brief draws the analogy with
shareholders who, like bondholders, hold individual interests in an investment, but it
is uncontested that shareholdings are a form of investment under the ICSID

Convention, whatever the number of shareholders or whether they are majority or

1 Citing the Award in CSOB v Slovakia at para.72, and a series of subsequent arbitral decisions, as well as
Prof. Schreuer.

106

238.

239.

240.

minority shareholdings, '! and the latter can fall within the definition of ‘investment’
in a BIT which could extend also to portfolio investors. The Brief argues that, once
there exists an ‘investment’, its legal nature does not change when entitlement to it (or
to a share of it) circulates on the market, nor is there any limitation under investment
treaty law to the possibility that a subsequent acquirer has standing as an investor,'°
and particularly so when the host State is aware of the assignment and accepts it in
advance, which would lead to an assumption that the extension of jurisdiction ratione

personae is approved.

The Brief contests that there was any violation of the preconditions to jurisdiction
under Article 8 of the BIT, as the futility of recourse to local means of settlement is
established by comparable local situations that are directly in point, and the
Respondent’s argument fails to bring into account the practical and legal effects of the
Ley Cerrojo, or the real consequences of the Argentine Supreme Court’s decision in
the Galli case. Finally, as confirmed by the Award in Impregilo v Argentina, such

obstacles as might remain would be set aside by the operation of the MEN clause.

On that basis, the Brief reiterates the Claimants’ earlier prayers for relief, and asks the

Tribunal to:

(a) Reject all of the Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction and admissibility;
(b) Declare that it has jurisdiction over the case;

(c) Order the Respondent to reimburse the Claimants’ costs and legal fees.

2. The Abaclat Decision

As indicated in paragraph 24 above, the respective comments of the Parties on the
Abaclat Decision (hereinafter “the Decision”) were received on 29 November and

19 December 2011.

'! Citing CMS Gas Transmission Company v Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/O1/8 and several
subsequent cases, a number of them against Argentina.

102

At para. 149, citing Fedax and African Holding Company of America, Inc. and Société Africaine de

Construction au Congo S.A.R.L. v Democratic Republic of the Congo, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/21, Award on
Jurisdiction, 29 July 2008 (AL RA 153).

107

241.

a. The Respondent

In its comments, the Respondent indicates that, despite certain similarities, there are
fundamental differences between the Abaclat case and the present case, and
stigmatizes the Abaclat Decision as arbitrary and biased and as prejudging issues both
of jurisdiction and substantive merits that were not for determination at that stage. It
submits that the Decision confuses the question of the extent of an attorney’s
representative power with the separate question of the scope of a party’s consent to
arbitration, but alleges that (even on the analysis adopted in the Decision) it would not
cover the situation of Avv. Parodi, who had never appeared before the present
Tribunal. It takes issue also with the Decision’s references to the ‘spirit’ of the
ICSID Convention and objects to those areas in which (so it asserts) the tribunal
decided ex aequo et bono without the consent of the parties. It criticizes the
Decision’s characterization of the nature of the proceedings since there was no
separate filing of individual proceedings that were later aggregated, and takes
particular issue with the Decision’s reference to the acceptability under certain
circumstances of the ‘group examination of claims’. It rejects also the Decision’s
treatment of the ‘silence’ of the ICSID Convention with regard to multiple claims,
where it points out that the majority’s approach would use the supposed ‘purpose’ of
the Convention and other treaties as a means of setting aside the jurisdictional
limitations which they expressly include, preferring instead the way this issue is
treated in the Dissenting Opinion. It insists that there is a qualitative difference, not
merely a quantitative one, between individual and mass proceedings, from both the
jurisdictional point of view and also that of due process. It criticizes the Decision’s
over-reliance on the economic aspects of the underlying transactions without properly
considering their legal structure, as other tribunals had done in other cases, and in
doing so the Decision “completely ignored the operation of sovereign debt
placement”, even while conceding that security entitlements have no value per se but
at the same time failing to apply its own conclusion that the determinative factor was
the place of performance, since the facts show that under this kind of security
instrument the place of performance is invariably outside Argentina. If the forum
selection clause is treated as a purely contractual stipulation which does not sound in a
treaty-based BIT arbitration, it remains the case that a treaty claim has to be based on

the violation of a right, which in this case is a debt, and that debt (and the rights

108

242.

243.

244.

attached to it) were created and governed by the contract, from which it must follow
that the alleged investment was not ‘in the territory of Argentina’. When it comes to
the preconditions to arbitration under the BIT, the Respondent points to the
differences between the Abaclat situation and the present one, in which no attempt
was made either to negotiate or to resort to the local courts, even though these are part
of the jurisdictional title and condition the consent to arbitration. The Respondent
criticizes finally the Abaclat tribunal’s decision to engage in a weighing of interests,
and the result to which that led in the way of striking out a clear treaty requirement, as
pointed out by the dissenting arbitrator; at all events, however, that was a different
basis for decision than the ‘futility’ argument being advanced in the present

arbitration.

b. The Claimants

In their comments, the Claimants focus on what they consider to be the three most
controversial issues, which, in their view, arise in almost identical terms in the present
arbitration, namely whether the failure to engage in the prior steps set out in the BIT
has an impact on the Tribunal’s jurisdiction or the admissibility of the Claimants’
claims; whether the bonds held by the Claimants constitute a protected investment
under the BIT and the ICSID Convention; and whether the arbitration is a ‘mass’ or
‘collective’ proceeding which gives rise to problems in regard to the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction; and argue in this connection in favour of consistency in arbitral

decisions.

As to the prerequisites of amicable consultations and resort to local courts under
Article 8 of the BIT, the Claimants support the Decision’s conclusion that these are
not mandatory jurisdictional requirements, and contest the dissenting arbitrator’s view
that such admissibility criteria have since become ‘conventionally jurisdictional’ in
the light of Article 26 of the ICSID Convention because the BIT contains no
exhaustion of local remedies requirement as a condition of consent to arbitrate. The
Claimants associate themselves with the Decision’s finding that resort to these prior

measures would have been futile in view of the Ley Cerrojo.

As to the status of bonds and security entitlements, the Claimants note the conclusions
reached in the Decision that the BIT and the ICSID Convention focus on different,

although complementary, aspects of what constitutes an ‘investment’; that both bonds

109

245.

and security entitlements fit within the BIT definition and arise from a ‘contribution’
that satisfies the requirements of the Convention; and that the associated investment
was “made in the territory of Argentina” because the funds generated were ultimately
made available to Argentina, whereas the forum selection clauses were irrelevant for
the purpose of determining the place of the investment. They criticise the dissenting
arbitrator’s view as deriving from an unduly restrictive core notion of ‘investment’,
and cite in this regard two recent Trade Promotion Agreements concluded by the USA
to show that the restructuring of public debt can indeed be covered by ICSID unless
expressly excluded. The Claimants further criticize the distinction adopted by the
dissenting arbitrator between the initial bond issue and dealings on the secondary
market, for the reason approved by the Decision itself, namely that, despite their
technical differences, they are part of one and the same economic operation and only
make sense together, recalling in this connection their argument that the instruments
issued on the secondary market are simply portions of the initial global bond issue and
are analogous to shares for the purpose of jurisdiction (the Claimants being
assimilated to minority shareholders in this respect). The Claimants reject the
dissenting arbitrator’s requirement that the investment be linked to some specific
project in the host country as the interpolation into the BIT of an element it does not
contain, and as met in any event on the facts given the requirements of Argentine law
and the way in which receipt from the bond issues were dealt with in the Argentine

national accounts.

As to the multiparty nature of the proceedings, the Claimants note the enormous
difference between the present proceedings and those in Abaclat (74 claimants as
against 60,000) and the Decision’s finding that the multiparty aspect relates solely to
modalities and implementation, and therefore to admissibility not jurisdiction. The
Claimants do not however accept that the Decision’s characterization of the Abaclat
case as a hybrid collective proceeding applies to the present arbitration since —
“possibly unlike the Abaclat case where the TAF perhaps plays a more intrusive role
in directing the litigation” — in the present arbitration each bondholder acts
individually and has a direct relationship with its attorneys. The Claimants repeat
their argument that consent to multiple claims is automatically implied by acceptance
of arbitral jurisdiction in respect of bonds, which by definition are mass instruments,

and support in that regard the conclusion reached in the Decision; they reject the

110

246.

247.

248.

249.

dissenting arbitrator’s analysis of the meaning of the ‘silence’ in this connection in the
treaty instruments, and make the point that, if jurisdiction would undoubtedly exist
had the proceedings been brought by the original underwriters, it is difficult to see
why that jurisdiction would disappear as a result of the placement on the secondary
market to a plurality of creditors. They finally accuse the dissenting arbitrator of
exaggerating the extent of the procedural adaptations that the Tribunal might have to
make in order to cope with the multiplicity of claimants, and especially in this case
where the number of the latter is relatively small, and contests the dissenting
arbitrator’s view that in general prior multi-party arbitrations had proceeded with the

express or implied consent of the respondent.

The Claimants finally deal briefly with a few less central issues on which the
Decision, in their view, endorses the case put before them in the present proceedings,
namely the irrelevance of Italian law to the Claimants’ consent to arbitration, the role
of NASAM, and the existence of a prima facie breach of the BIT (as opposed to a

mere contractual claim).

3. The BGS, ICS, Daimler, and RosInvest arbitrations

As indicated in paragraphs 25 and 28 above, brief comments were admitted by the

Tribunal on the BGS, ICS, Daimler, and RosInvest arbitrations.

a. The Respondent

By letter dated 17 February 2012, the Respondent invited the Tribunal’s attention to
the fact that, in a decision the previous month, a US Court of Appeals had vacated the
award of the tribunal in the BG Group plc v Republic of Argentina arbitration for the
claimant’s failure to observe the 18-month period for resolution in the local courts, as
laid down in the relevant BIT, before resorting to arbitration. It also asked the
Tribunal to note that the tribunal in the JCS v Argentine Republic arbitration had
rejected the claimant’s argument that the requirement to resort in the first instance to
the local courts was merely permissive and not mandatory, and had denied
jurisdiction on that basis, holding in that connection that ‘futility’ was different from

‘unlikelihood’ and had not been established.

By further letter dated 14 September 2012, the Respondent drew attention to the

emphasis laid by the tribunal in the Daimler Financial Services AG v Argentine

111

250.

251.

103

Republic arbitration!” on the need to establish State consent to arbitration, and the
scope of such consent, neither of which could be presumed, as well as to the tribunal’s
finding that, until the preconditions to consent to arbitration had been fulfilled, an
appeal to the most-favoured-nation clause in the BIT was not properly before the
tribunal. It drew attention also to the fact that the jurisdictional finding of the
tribunal in the RosInvestCo UK Ltd. v The Russian Federation arbitration, based upon
the application of a most-favoured-nation clause in a BIT, and referred to by the

Claimants in their pleadings, had been set aside by the Swedish courts. to

b. The Claimants

In response, the Claimants, by letter of 5 March 2012, asserted that the BG decision
was by a US court, applying US law, and related to a different BIT not identical in its
wording to the present one. The /CS award, on the other hand, was distinguishable,
not only as being under a different BIT with different wording in the jurisdictional

and MEN clauses, but also because the effect of the Ley Cerrojo was not in issue.

By further letter dated 16 October 2012, the Claimants contested the relevance of the
Daimler Award, which was also based on a different BIT with non-identical wording,
including in its MFN clause, and drew attention to the dissenting arbitrator’s criticism
of the tribunal’s requirement of ‘affirmative evidence’ of the respondent State’s
consent to arbitration. The letter asserted that the issue of the futility of pre-
arbitration measures had not been decided in the case, which had been argued simply
on the likelihood or otherwise of a decision from the Argentine courts within an 18-
month period. As regards the RosInvest case, it pointed out that the Swedish court
decision was in the form of a default judgment which did not enter into the merits of
the issue, and asserted that the passages quoted by the Respondent were taken from
the respondent’s submissions to the Swedish court, not from the court’s own

judgment.

Daimler Award of 22 August 2012, upholding Argentina’s objection to jurisdiction based upon the

claimant’s failure to comply with the condition of prior submission of the dispute to local courts.
1 Stockholm District Court, Department 4, Case No. T 24891-07, Default Judgment, 9 November 2011.

112

Il.

252.

253.

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE ARBITRATION

The Tribunal recalls that the present Decision relates only to the Respondent’s
objections of a general character to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to hear the Claimants’
claims and to the admissibility of those claims. As recorded in the Minutes of the

First Meeting:

The parties agreed that there should first be a preliminary phase in the

proceedings covering jurisdiction and admissibility. The preliminary

phase would deal with preliminary objections of a general character

only, but not with any jurisdictional issues that may arise in relation to

individual claimants, which would be dealt with at a later stage as

necessary and appropriate.
The Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction and Admissibility accordingly raised a
series of formal objections to jurisdiction ratione personae as well as ratione
materiae, based upon the nature of the proceedings brought by the Claimants, on the
nature of Claimant’s representation in the proceedings, on alleged defects in the
consent to arbitration of both the Claimants and the Respondent, on whether the
necessary preconditions to the bringing of proceedings had been fulfilled, and on
whether the dispute, as brought before the Tribunal, is one that can lawfully and

properly be heard by it under the schema of the ICSID Convention.'”°

15 Memorial, para. 304. The Respondent's Objections, which were maintained unchanged at the oral hearing
and in the Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, read in full as follows:

Respondent Argentine Republic respectfully requests that the Tribunal issue an

award:

(a) Determining that it lacks competence and that ICSID lacks jurisdiction to

entertain collective actions of this nature;

(b) In the alternative, determining that it lacks competence and ICSID lacks

jurisdiction because both Argentina and Claimants have not provided valid

consent to this proceeding, and, further, that Claimants’ abuse of right in

bringing the claims in this proceeding —in the name of a third party—

renders invalid such consent as Claimants may have offered;

(c) In the alternative, determining that there is no prima facie violation of the
Argentina-Italy BIT;

(d) In the alternative, determining that it lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae;

(e) In the alternative, determining that it lacks jurisdiction ratione personae or

that Claimants lack standing;

(f) In the alternative, determining that Claimants have not satisfied necessary
prerequisites to bringing a claim under the Argentina-Italy BIT;

(g) Ordering Claimants to pay all of Argentina’s costs, expenses, and attorneys’ fees; and
(h) Granting any further relief requested against Claimants that the Tribunal deems fit and proper.

113

254.

255.

The issues for decision by the Tribunal at this Preliminary Objections phase are not
new. They (or some of them) have been canvassed in a whole series of recent arbitral
decisions in proceedings brought by investors against the same Respondent, the
Argentine Republic. The two most closely in point are the Decision on Jurisdiction
and Admissibility of 4 August 2011 in Abaclat and Others v Argentine Republic,'°°
and more recently still the Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility dated
8 February 2013 in the case of Ambiente Ufficio SPA and Others v Argentine

Republic,”

both of which concern assets of exactly the same type as those in issue in
the present Arbitration, and both of which are taking place under the same treaty as
the present Arbitration, namely the Agreement of 224 May 1990 between the
Argentine Republic and the Republic of Italy for the Encouragement and Protection of
Investments. The Tribunal singles out for particular mention the Ambiente Ufficio
case, since not only does it have these elements in common, but a further common
feature is that the Claimants are represented both in that case and in this by the same
Counsel, and the Respondent is in its turn defended by the same legal team in both
cases. None of this is in any way confidential; the existence of these exactly parallel
arbitration proceedings was well known to all concerned throughout the present case,
and indeed Counsel on both sides acknowledged more than once during the oral
proceedings that the arguments being advanced in the present arbitration were to all
intents and purposes identical to those that had been advanced in Ambiente Ufficio (or,

as it was then known, Giordano Alpi).

This state of affairs called forth the following comment from the Ambiente Ufficio
tribunal (referring primarily to the earlier decision on jurisdiction rendered by the

Abaclat tribunal):

10. In light of the substantial parallels between the present case and the
Abaclat case, in particular of the fact that the Respondent used to a
large extent the same or similar arguments to those it put forward in
the present case, and given that both Tribunals have come to the same
conclusion, i.e. to affirm that the Tribunal has jurisdiction and that the
claims brought forward by the Claimants are admissible, it would be
artificial for this Tribunal to ignore the Decision taken by its sister
Tribunal.

16 Formerly Giovanna a Beccara and Others v Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/07/5. See also the
Dissenting Opinion of 28 October 2011.
‘7 Formerly Giordano Alpi and Others v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O8/9.

114

256.

11. Quite evidently, it is highly common for arbitral tribunals in
general and ICSID tribunals in particular to take inspiration from the
decisions of other tribunals having faced similar questions or
situations. However, there can be no doubt that there is a special,
particularly close relationship between the present and the Abaclat
cases — most obviously, as has already been pointed out, due to the
substantial overlap of the questions of fact and law the two Tribunals
are confronted with in their respective cases.

12. The present Tribunal will therefore not hesitate to benefit, where
applicable and appropriate, from the reasoning of the Abaclat
Tribunal. Far from adhering to any doctrine of stare decisis or
considering itself legally bound by the findings of the Abaclat
Tribunal, this implies a process of critically engaging with the majority
decision, but also with the counter-arguments contained in the
dissenting Opinion of Professor Abi-Saab. It will become manifest
throughout the subsequent reasoning that the present Tribunal agrees
with many, though not all, considerations and views expressed in the
Abaclat Decision, and the Tribunal will refer to these parallels in the
pertinent context.

13. The Tribunal wishes to emphasize, however, that it is well aware
that it is called upon to decide the case submitted to it by the Parties on
its own needs and merits. The reasoning of the Abaclat Decision can
thus be of relevance to that of the present Tribunal only if and to the
extent that the Parties in the present case have submitted arguments
similar to, and compatible with, those marshaled in the Abaclat case.

The Tribunal regards these comments as constituting simple wisdom, and has taken
them duly into account in carrying out its own task in the circumstances that confront

it.

These are unusual circumstances. It can hardly be doubted that, given these
circumstances, it would have been more efficient, and would almost certainly have led
to savings in time and expense, had the present case and the Giordano Alpi case been
brought together as one single case, or, even if initiated separately, if the general
issues presently under consideration had been joined into one single set of arbitration
proceedings, or if arrangements had been made for the two tribunals to be composed
identically, or at least for the two sets of identical arguments to have been heard
together. All that transcends, however, the powers of an individual ICSID tribunal,
and depends on the wishes and procedural rights of the parties; a tribunal can do no
more than respond constructively in pursuit of its own autonomous duty of efficiency

and economy within the boundaries of its own jurisdiction. Given, however, the

115

257.

258.

actual course of events, the Tribunal is of the opinion that it can dispense with the
need to set out in detail the factual background to the present Arbitration or to recite at
undue length the arguments advanced before it by the Claimant and Respondent
Parties. As to the first (the factual background), the Tribunal can simply adopt for
present purposes the description given by the Abaclat tribunal in paragraphs 8 - 97 of
its Decision of 4 August 2011 both of the process by which the Argentine Republic
placed bond issues on the market and the subsequent default and exchange offers in
respect of those bonds. As to the second (the arguments of the Parties) the Tribunal
notes the careful and comprehensive account given in paragraphs 68-110, 173-203,
279-296, and 355-414 of the Decision of 8 February 2013 by the Ambiente Ufficio
tribunal, which corresponds closely to the way in which the argument has been
presented in the present proceedings, give or take some small shades of emphasis to

which no substantive significance attaches.

JURISDICTION AND ADMISSIBILITY

The Tribunal, as appears above, is confronted in these proceedings with a series of
preliminary objections of a general kind entered by the Respondent, on the basis that
acceptance by the Tribunal of any or all of these objections as well-founded would
bring the arbitration to an end. In the other comparable arbitral proceedings referred
to repeatedly herein, the tribunal in question has debated at length whether some of
these objections should be classed under the heading of ‘admissibility’ rather than that
of ‘jurisdiction’. The present Tribunal is not convinced that the distinction between
the two concepts, such as it may be, raises any major difficulty; but nor is it convinced
that the distinction is of any particular importance in disposing of the issues presently

before it.

The starting point is Article 41 of the ICSID Convention, read in conjunction with
Rule 41 of the Arbitration Rules. Article 41, which appears at the head of the Section
of the Convention dealing with the powers and functions of a tribunal, first makes the
Tribunal into the judge of its own “competence”, before going on to provide for
“Ta]ny objection by a party to the dispute that that dispute is not within the jurisdiction
of the Centre, or for other reasons is not within the competence of the tribunal”. In
elaborating on the procedural aspects, Rule 41 is cast in similar terms: “Any

objection that the dispute or any ancillary claim is not within the jurisdiction of the

116

259.

Centre or, for other reasons, is not within the competence of the Tribunal shall be
made as early as possible etc. etc. etc.” In the French version, the equivalent texts
refer to the Tribunal’s ‘compétence’, to a ‘déclinatoire de compétence ... fondé sur le
motif que le différend n’est pas de la compétence du Centre ou, pour toute autre
raison, de celle du Tribunal’, and to ‘Toute déclinatoire de compétence fondé sur le
motif que le différend ou toute demande accessoire ne ressortit pas 4 la compétence
du Centre ou, pour toute autre raison, 4 celle du Tribunal’. The Spanish texts talk

about the ‘jurisdiccién’ of the Centre and the ‘competencia’ of the Tribunal.

It will be seen that the terminology is not entirely uniform, nor is it consistent as
between the languages. Nevertheless, these provisions taken as a whole, and
appreciated within their context, serve plainly to reflect the two types of limiting
factor that go to determine whether a particular case may properly be heard by a
tribunal established under the ICSID system, the first being the overall scope of
ICSID arbitration, and the second being the factors germane to the seizing of a
specific tribunal to hear a specific dispute. The first refers, that is to say, to
Article 25 of the Washington Convention, as the foundation text, which like
Article 41 is also phrased in terms of the “competence of the Centre” (‘compétence’
and ‘jurisdiccién’ in French and Spanish, respectively); the second, by contrast, bears
primarily on factors such as the consent of the parties, the nature of the particular
dispute and the like, which would normally be thought of, in common parlance in
English, as the elements necessary to ground the ‘jurisdiction’ of the tribunal. The
question that remains therefore is whether there exist other conditions, over and above
these more strictly ‘jurisdictional’ ones, that can properly be invoked before an ICSID
tribunal as grounds for it to decline to hear a case, even though the case falls within its
‘jurisdiction’. Whether any such ought usefully to be given the label of
‘admissibility’ is open to question. The term, as Schreuer points out, is not used

8

either in the Convention itself or in the Rules; !” moreover both Convention and

Rules put the ‘other reasons’ on exactly the same footing as those relating to the
Centre’s ‘jurisdiction’, and treat both as raising issues going to the tribunal’s

‘competence’. 109

18 Schreuer Commentary (2nd ed.) at p. 86.
'® See, in a similar vein, the Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility of 8 February 2013 of the Ambiente
Ufficio tribunal at paras. 572-575.

117

260.

261.

262.

263.

The Tribunal will therefore make the following broad division in coming to a
consideration of the barrage of preliminary objections that have been raised before it
by the Respondent: between those objections that raise the issue whether the Parties
have duly consented to the dispute being brought to ICSID arbitration (which fall
more on the ‘jurisdictional’ side of the line) and those objections that raise the
question whether, even if the Parties have duly consented, there nevertheless exist
reasons why the Tribunal should decline to hear the dispute in the form in which the
dispute is brought before it, even though it possesses the formal competence to do so
(which thus fall more on the ‘admissibility’ side of the line). Once the position is

stated in that way, logic dictates that the ‘jurisdictional’ objections be taken first.

1. “Mass claims”: the ICSID Convention

For the reasons given above, and benefitting from the comprehensive analyses on the
record from the Abaclat and Ambiente Ufficio tribunals, the Tribunal does not
consider it necessary to approach the ‘jurisdictional’ objections seriatim in the way in
which they have been set out in the Respondent’s written pleadings, but has grouped
and selected them as follows below. Before proceeding to that point, however, the
Tribunal will deal with an objection put forward by the Respondent which is of a
more fundamental character, namely that the continuation of the arbitration is
precluded altogether, because it constitutes a form of mass or collective arbitral
proceeding that is simply not within the scope of the ICSID Convention. This is an
objection that has occupied a considerable part of the written and oral pleadings of the
Parties on both sides. It is also one to which the Abaclat and Ambiente Ufficio
tribunals devoted substantial attention. The Tribunal accordingly finds it better to

deal with the matter at the very outset of its decision.

The conflicting arguments of the Parties are set out above and need not be repeated;
the extensive pleadings have not led to any perceptible narrowing of the gap between
them. The Abaclat and Ambiente Ufficio tribunals have both found against the

Respondent on the point at issue.

In the view of the Abaclat tribunal, the fact that the case before it had been brought on
behalf of 180,000 claimants, even though the number later reduced to 60,000, made it
into a “mass claims” proceeding, and indeed the first such in the history of ICSID. It

characterizes the case before it as “a sort of a hybrid kind of collective proceedings, in

118

264.

265.

the sense that it starts as aggregate proceedings, but then continues with features
similar to representative proceedings due to the high number of Claimants
involved”.'!° It finds that the failure of the ICSID Convention to mention
proceedings of this kind should not be regarded as what the tribunal refers to as a
‘qualified silence’ but instead as a gap, and a gap which an individual ICSID tribunal
is endowed with the inherent power to fill through making the necessary procedural
dispositions under Article 44 of the Convention. It further finds that the respondent
State’s consent to the jurisdiction of the Centre includes claims presented by multiple
Claimants in a single proceeding, and that there was sufficient homogeneity between

1

the claims before it to justify treating them together by way of an adapted

procedure.

These conclusions were vigorously contested by the dissenting arbitrator, who
accuses the majority of evading the real issues as to the nature of the proceedings and
the homogeneity or otherwise of the claims; of illegitimately invoking considerations
such as the ‘spirit’ of the ICSID Convention; of failing to focus due attention on the
critical question of the respondent’s specific consent to arbitrate, as well as the ‘strict
and exacting’ requirements for consent at the international level; and of arrogating to
itself unwarranted powers of ‘procedural improvisation’ without the consent of all
parties, and without due regard to its impact on the due process rights of all parties, by

adopting an inappropriate ‘balance of interests’ test.

In Ambiente Ufficio on the other hand, the tribunal, confronted with 119 original
claims, later reduced to 90, approached the matter in a somewhat different way. It
rejects the labels ‘mass claim’ or ‘class action’ in favour of the factually objective
descriptions ‘multiple claimants,’ or ‘multi-party proceeding,’ and treats the matter as
a question going, firstly, to the scope of the ICSID Convention and, secondly, to the
extent of the respondent State’s specific consent under the BIT, and notes in this
connection that the case was not one in which separate claims had first been brought

individually (with the question of their formal joinder or consolidation arising

"0 Abaclat Decision, para. 488.

" On the basi

 

 

of: the identity of the rights and obligations at issue for all claimants; the fact that the claimants

were claiming in respect of the same events, which affected them all equally; the fact that Argentine legislation
and the POE arrangements affected all of the claimants in the same way (Abaclat Decision, para. 543). The
tribunal makes a particular point in this connection of the fact that, in its view, the claims before it are treaty
claims under the BIT, not contract claims (Abaclat Decision, para. 541).

119

266.

subsequently), but rather one in which claims had been brought on a joint or
collective basis from the outset. As to the significance of the fact that neither the
ICSID Convention nor the BIT expressly addresses situations of this kind, the tribunal
holds that the use in each of these treaty instruments of the term “investor”, in the
singular, should not be taken, on normal principles of treaty interpretation, to exclude
the plural, not least because it has never been read this way by past ICSID tribunals
and because Article 8 of the BIT does indeed use the term in its plural version on two
occasions. It reinforces this conclusion by marshalling some evidence that the
possibility of (at least rudimentary) multi-party proceedings was known at the time
the Convention was under discussion, and by the argument that multi-party
proceedings must in any event have been known to both States when they
subsequently negotiated the BIT, as is borne out by the large number of ICSID
arbitrations involving multiple parties, on occasion more than 100 parties, and by the
fact that in most of them no objection had even been raised on that score, whereas, in
the few cases in which an objection had been raised, the tribunal had not upheld it. It
refers in this connection specifically to the Kléckner Industrie-Anlagen GmbH and
others v United Republic of Cameroon and Société Camerounaise des Engrais
(ICSID Case No. ARB/81/2), Goetz v Burundi, Bayview v Mexico, Alasdair Ross
Anderson and others v Republic of Costa Rica (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/07/3), and
Canadian Cattlemen cases, while at the same time noting that in none of these cases
did the tribunal in fact find in favour of its own jurisdiction (though always on
grounds other than the present issue); the converse had however been true in the
Funnekotter v Zimbabwe case, involving 14 separate claimants, where the tribunal

had investigated its own jurisdiction proprio motu and upheld it.

These conclusions were once again vigorously contested by a dissenting arbitrator,
who, although he shares the view of the majority that the case is neither a ‘mass
claim’ nor a ‘class action’, nor any kind of representative proceeding, parts company
with them over its true nature, which in his view has to be recognized as “‘a ‘joinder of
actions’ under the form of an ‘aggregate proceeding’” for which either the consent or
at least the acquiescence of the Respondent is needed, as demonstrated by the

Wintershall award.''? He takes issue with the way the majority derives its

'? Dissenting Opinion of Santiago Torres Berndrdez to the Ambiente Ufficio Decision, para. 73, referring to the
Wintershall award.

120

267.

interpretation of the ICSID Convention as permitting collective proceedings simply
because it does not exclude them, which he finds tantamount to the same reasoning as
adopted by the majority in Abaclat. He is particularly critical of an interpretative
approach which uses the terminology of a subsequent BIT as a means of illuminating
the intention behind Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention; in his view, the
applicable ‘context’ (for the purposes of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties) is the individual context of each of these two treaty instruments taken on its
own. He gives a different interpretation to Article 8 of the BIT, since the one sub-
paragraph (paragraph 3) that does use ‘investors’ in the plural nevertheless refers back
to the earlier sense of ‘dispute’, and that is one involving an ‘investor’ in the singular;
similarly for Article 5(1)(c) which also forms part of the relevant ‘context’. He
analyses in detail the seven cases cited by the majority, which in his view fail to
establish either that multi-party arbitration is a generally accepted practice in the
ICSID system or that the specific additional consent of the respondent State is not a

requirement.

The present Tribunal sees no advantage whatsoever in entering into a battle of
terminology. None of the terms that have been bandied about in argument is to be
found in the two treaties that govern this Arbitration or in the applicable procedural
rules, and none of them has a recognized and defined technical meaning in
international law. To some extent these terms may derive from national legal
systems or practices, though even there not with any consistency or uniformity;
moreover, even in the domestic context, some of the terms seem to be used
descriptively, rather than normatively, as in the employment of ‘mass claims’ as an
indicator of their very considerable quantity — though possibly with the underlying
implication that the sheer number of claims demands special procedural arrangements
without which they could not be satisfactorily handled. All that the Tribunal need
note is, firstly, that the number of Claimants in this Arbitration, somewhere between
183 and 74 (see below) does not in ordinary usage fit the descriptor ‘mass’; whether
in the specific circumstances the present claims would require special procedural
arrangements is a different question which will be considered below. And, secondly,
that (as the Ambiente Ufficio tribunal observed in relation to the circumstances of that
case) the present proceedings are not of a representative character; each Claimant

claims in his own name, advancing his own personal loss in respect of his own

121

268.

269.

identified investment. It is not a case in which a person claims to represent the
interests of others, as well as his own, or in which an attorney claims or seeks

authority to act on behalf of persons who have not instructed him.

As to the linked question of the consent required on the part of the respondent State,
the Tribunal is not impressed by either of the two opposing arguments: either that a
multi-party arbitration can only be brought where there has been a second, special
consent to that effect; or (conversely) that the parties’ (or the respondent’s) specific
consent is of no special relevance, in the particular context of a multi-party

arbitration, to the establishment of the tribunal’s jurisdiction.

The first of these two arguments (the need for a second, special consent) could either
be conceived of as deriving from the general framework of the ICSID Convention or
else as relating to the investment treaty or other instrument or instruments establishing
the specific consent of the parties to arbitrate. The inference which the Tribunal
draws from the way the argument is put forward by its proponents in these
proceedings is that it attaches itself most naturally to the ICSID Convention. Even if
so, however, the Tribunal fails to grasp its legal substance: if a particular proceeding
does not, by reason of its nature, fall within the system set up by the ICSID
Convention, then it could not by definition be brought within that system through the
medium of an extra consent given to that effect by one of the States Party to the
Convention, whether on its own or jointly with an investor or group of investors of
another State Party. The law of treaties would not permit it, and the ICSID
Convention, talking as it does in its Article 25 of “consent in writing” and “consent”
nowhere lays down a staged process by which some kinds of consent are to be
established differently from others. If, conversely, the argument attaches itself to the
specific coincident consent of the parties to the arbitration, then it seems plain to the
Tribunal that there is no separate question; the issue simply folds itself into the normal
ascertainment of the parties’ consent which is the bedrock of all arbitration. Either
the actions of the parties establish “consent in writing” or they do not; consent is not
more valid by being given twice, any more than it is less valid for having been given
only once. In a BIT case, therefore, where the consent of the respondent State is in
issue, the question for consideration remains simply: on the proper interpretation of

the BIT, has the respondent, or has it not, given a consent which is wide enough in

122

270.

scope to cover the proceedings brought (as in this case) by the multiple group of co-

claimants?

Nor is the present Tribunal attracted by the approach taken by the Abaclat tribunal in
posing itself the question whether the fact that neither the ICSID Convention nor the
BIT deals in express terms with multi-party arbitrations constitutes what the tribunal
termed a ‘qualified silence’ or instead was merely a ‘gap’ waiting to be filled.
Having heard all of the arguments addressed to it by the Parties on the question, the
Tribunal finds it hard to arrive at the conclusion that one of the essential points in
contention at this preliminary phase of the Arbitration turns on whether the two
treaties employ a particular noun in the singular rather than the plural. This is not
simply because it is a well understood drafting convention at both the international
and national level that the singular can be used to include the plural, and vice versa.'"3
At a far more fundamental level, this singularly arid and formalistic approach to treaty
interpretation finds no basis in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties which
the Tribunal, like the Parties in their argument before it and the tribunals in both
Ambiente Ufficio and Abaclat, takes as the applicable standard. The standard set out
in Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention, that a treaty is to be interpreted in good
faith ‘in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the

treaty’ ! 4

can by no stretch of the imagination be read as imposing a sort of
lexicographical literalism. When the Article talks in terms of the ordinary meaning
“to be given to” the terms of the treaty it is clear just on the face of it (without even
resorting to the preparatory work of the International Law Commission which makes
this explicit) that there can in a given case be more than one ‘ordinary meaning’, and
the question for the interpreter is to decide which among them was intended by the
negotiators, and for that purpose he must be guided by context (in its widest sense)
and object and purpose, and also by the additional and where appropriate the
supplementary means enumerated in Article 31(3) and (4) and Article 32. This
means, to the mind of the Tribunal, that the question to be answered in this case is:
are the words “dispute arising directly out of an investment, between a Contracting
State ... and a national of another Contracting State” as they appear in Article 25(1)

of the ICSID Convention to be understood as meaning ‘dispute between a Contracting

"3 See para. 186 above.
"4 Tn their context and in the light of the treaty’s object and purpose.

123

271.

15

State and one, but only one, national of another Contracting State’? If the answer is
no, no further question arises under the Rules (either the Institution Rules or the
Arbitration Rules), since they are not able to change the scope of the Convention, but
must instead be read in harmony with its terms. But finally, even if the answer is no,
that would still not dispose of the separate question of what the Respondent had
consented to in its ‘standing offer’ under the BIT. That follows from the fundamental
fact that the procedure under the Convention can be employed only if the parties to
the dispute have consented to submit their dispute to ICSID arbitration, so that in a
case like the present the Respondent’s treaty-based consent must be matched by the

consent(s) of the party or parties who seek such arbitration.

Once it is correctly posed, it seems to the Tribunal that the question at issue answers
itself. The Tribunal can see no reasonable basis for implying into the text as it stands
of Article 25(1) the additional words ‘but only one’. The Tribunal is of course aware
that the question of disputes involving more than two parties was at one stage raised
at a regional meeting during the Convention’s drafting process but was not reflected
in terms in the text. It is also aware of anecdotal evidence from a former staff
member of the World Bank that consideration was at one stage given to the possibility
of collective claims but not pursued, and that in a meeting of the Administrative
Council on 29 September 1969 the Secretary-General adverted to the desirability of
developing rules and regulations to govern multi-partite disputes that might be put

before the Centre.'!*

The second of these items may not rank as ‘preparatory work’
at all, for the purposes of Article 32 of the Vienna Convention, but in any case none
of these items is decisive enough to serve for the particular purpose stated in Article
32(a). 116 The Tribunal therefore concludes that there is nothing in the context — nor
in the additional or supplementary materials described in the Vienna Convention — to
support importing into the text of Article 25(1) the additional phrase mentioned
above. The Tribunal reaches this conclusion by the application of the normal
principles of treaty interpretation without the need to call in aid any general

proposition culled from a potentially contestable assessment of the ‘object and

Remarks of Secretary-General Aron Broches to the Third Annual Meeting of the ICSID Administrative

Council, 29 September 1969.

116 «

..to determine the meaning when the interpretation according to article 31: (a) Leaves the meaning

ambiguous or obscure...”.

124

purpose’ of the ICSID Convention, still less to invoke concepts not mentioned in the

Vienna Convention of which the Respondent in this case has been sharply critical. "7

272. Nor does the Tribunal see that this conclusion would lead to any difficulty either in
the direct application of Articles 27, 36, 38, or 39 of the ICSID Convention (each of
which refers to “national” in the singular), or if those Articles are regarded (as they
should be, following Article 31(2) of the Vienna Convention) as part of the ‘context’
for the interpretation of Article 25: in each case the application of the Article adjusts
itself naturally to the fact of there not being simply one claimant party but more than
one. Article 36, for example, concerns the request for arbitration, and is purely
procedural, not substantive. Article 27, which contains the obligation not to give a
claimant diplomatic protection, is more substantive; it would however operate
seamlessly in the case of a plurality of claimants all holding the same nationality,
since the parent State’s obligation would be equal and identical for all of them. That
applies equally to Articles 38 and 39, so far as they regulate the nationality of the
members of a tribunal, in a situation where (as here) all of the claimants present

themselves as holding the same nationality.

273. The above having been said, the Tribunal is not unmindful of the essential point
underlying the Respondent’s complaint. However, in the Tribunal’s view the key to
this, and to related aspects of the preliminary objections, lies in the notion of ‘a
dispute’, and this is an issue to which it will return in connection with the

interpretation and application of the BIT.

2. The ‘jurisdictional’ objections

274. That question having been disposed of, the Tribunal will now analyse the

Respondent’s remaining jurisdictional Objections according to the following schema:-

''7 It appears also to be the case that, after the Convention’s entry into force, the then-Secretary-General, Aron
Broches, informed the Administrative Council that consideration was being given to developing model clauses
for insertion in investment contracts to cover multi-party disputes and that it would be “useful” for special rules
and procedures to be developed for such cases. In the end, it appears that no such clauses or special rules and
procedures were proposed to the Administrative Council for its approval. The fact that the Secretary-General
considered that the Convention could support multi-party (albeit contractual) arbitration suggests that he for one
did not see Article 25’s use of the wording “a national of another Contracting State” as barring such arbitrations.
The very fact that the Secretariat was considering such clauses indicates its view that multi-party ICSID
arbitration would turn on the consent of the parties.

 

  

125

275.

276.

a. the Claimants have not properly authorized these proceedings, and therefore

have not validly consented to arbitration;
b. there is no consent to arbitration on the part of the Respondent;

c. there is no jurisdiction ratione materiae as the Claimants’ assets do not
constitute ‘investments’ under the terms of the BIT, nor were they ‘made in

the territory of Argentina’;
d. the Claimants have not established a prima facie breach of the BIT;

e. the Claimants have not duly met the preconditions to arbitration laid down in

the BIT.

The Preliminary Objections are listed in that way for convenience only. They do not,
moreover, exist in watertight compartments; in particular, there is an overlap between
b. and e. Nevertheless, given the sheer mass of objections that have been raised by
the Respondent, it will assist their rational disposition if the objections are dealt with

in that pattern.

a. No valid authorization or consent by the Claimants

The root of this objection lies in the manner in which the arbitration proceedings were
brought on behalf of a multiplicity of otherwise unrelated Claimants. The
Respondent has mounted a spirited attack against what has come to be known as ‘the
NASAM Mandate package’, on the grounds more fully described in paragraphs 45,
51-52 and 139-145 above. The essence of the Respondent’s complaint, as the
Tribunal understands it, is that, although the proceedings stand in the name of each of
the Claimants individually, this is in reality a smoke-screen obscuring the facts that
the Claimants were recruited into a joint proceeding under terms in which not only
they had no effective voice over who would represent them and their interests in the
arbitration, but they had also expressly renounced any control over the presentation or
handling of their case. The Respondent further complains, in narrower and more
specific terms, that the Powers of Attorney by which the individual Claimants are said
to have authorized counsel to represent them in these proceedings contain defects
which render them invalid under Italian law, so that they should not be accepted by

this Tribunal for the purposes of ICSID arbitral proceedings according to Rule 1 of

126

277.

the Institution Rules; and that the failure to procure the signature of the individual
Claimants on the Request for Arbitration, as required by the terms of the NASAM
Mandate package, and the fact that the documents in the package do not explicitly
foresee ICSID arbitration, have as their combined effect that the Claimants have not
validly given sufficient consent to arbitrate so as to satisfy the requirements of Article

36(2) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 2 of the Institution Rules.

These are not negligible objections, but the Tribunal does not regard them as strong
enough to sustain the proposition that the Respondent seeks to derive from them,
namely that the circumstances before it do not suffice to establish that the Claimants
have given their formal consent to arbitrate. This is for two reasons. The first is that
the Tribunal shares the concordant view of the Abaclat and Ambiente Ufficio tribunals
that there is nothing in the terms of the ICSID Convention and Rules, nor in the
evident intention underlying those terms, that would subject to the technical rules of
any system of national law either the giving of claimant consent to arbitration or the
capacity of counsel to appear before an ICSID tribunal. Nor indeed, other than the
requirement that consent be in writing, do the Convention itself or the Institution
Rules lay down any technical requirements as to consents or as to the authorization of
counsel or other representatives of the parties to an arbitration. The inference must
be that both ‘consent’ and ‘authorization’, as these concepts are used in the
Convention and the Institution Rules, are to be given their natural and ordinary
meaning — which is in any case what the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
requires as a matter of treaty interpretation. To take the sole word “duly”, as it
appears in front of “authorized” in Institution Rule 1(1), and read into it the intention
to incorporate technical incidents derived from any given system of national law
seems to the Tribunal to strain credibility. That is an entirely different matter from
the question whether qualified legal practitioners might find themselves, under their
own national professional rules, subject to requirements defining the circumstances in
which they were entitled to represent clients in legal proceedings; but, if such rules
were to exist, neither their policing nor the question whether they applied to an
international dispute settlement process are matters for an ICSID tribunal. Nor would
it make sense, for example, to imagine an ICSID tribunal demanding that one party to
an arbitration follow one set of legal rules, and the opposing party another set, for the

purpose of validly establishing the capacity of their representatives to appear against

127

278.

one another before it. All that the Convention requires is ‘consent’ and
‘authorization’, and there is nothing in the factual circumstances as presented to it that
leads the present Tribunal to the conclusion that both are not present as a matter of
fact, so far as the Claimants are concerned. In signing up to the NASAM Mandate
package, and contributing the cash payment required from each of them under its
terms, the Claimants must each have expected that some action would follow in
pursuit of the vindication of their legal rights, and the Tribunal entertains no doubt
that the field of action contemplated was amply wide enough to include the bringing
of an ICSID arbitration. That is enough, in the Tribunal’s considered view, to

dispose of the question of the Claimants’ consent to the present arbitration.

The above having been said, however, the Tribunal feels bound to make mention of
some aspects of the arrangements for the representation of the Claimants in these
proceedings. The Tribunal does not accept the full range of the criticisms made by
the Respondent in this regard, since many of the aspects criticized are merely
characteristic of the incidents of third-party funding in international investment
arbitration. Individual views may differ as to whether third-party funding is or is not
desirable or beneficial, either at the national or at the international level, but the
practice is by now so well established both within many national jurisdictions and
within international investment arbitration that it offers no grounds in itself for
objection to the admissibility of a request to arbitrate. The present is not however a
typical example of third-party involvement; the third party has neither bought up
claims in order to pursue them, nor has its involvement come in response to an
application by investors for funding in return for a success bonus. That the Claimants
in this arbitration are not sophisticated international investors is admitted on both
sides; that they were recruited by NASAM is equally common ground between the
two sides; that Avv. Parodi has an interest, apparently of a financial nature, in
NASAM, and at the same time appears as an individual bondholder on the list of
Claimants, would appear to emerge from the documents submitted in the arbitration.
None of that is of itself necessarily cause for concern. What does give rise to a
degree of anxious concern in the mind of the Tribunal, however, is the combination of
those features with the fact that the individual claimants, in giving their mandate to
NASAM, at the same time not only sign away their right to obtain more than a

percentage of the pro rata outcome of an eventual Award in their favour, but in

128

279.

addition abandon any right of control over the conduct of the arbitration (including
the potential settlement of their claims); and that they give their Power of Attorney to
represent them for these purposes to a named individual who has never appeared
before the Tribunal on their behalf nor played any part in the proceedings after the
Request for Arbitration.''® Instead, their representation as Claimants has been
arranged for them through the designation of co-counsel by Avv. Parodi, and all
submissions to the Tribunal thereafter!'? have been signed by the co-counsel (often
signing for Avv. Parodi as well per pro); attendance at all hearings and meetings,
from the first Session of the Tribunal onwards, has similarly been by the co-counsel,
or some of them, alone. When this situation came under question from the
Respondent at a fairly advanced stage in the proceedings, a letter of authority in
favour of Profs. Radicati and Barra was produced by Avv. Parodi as an attachment to
an e-mail, but was not in the event submitted as a numbered document in the

arbitration until it was annexed to the Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief.

The Tribunal cannot refrain from expressing a degree of surprise at the above,
including at the fact that a key document establishing the authority of the counsel
before it was not produced as a matter of course by the Claimants’ representatives at
the very outset. The Tribunal’s discomfort is not lessened by the fact that, although
the Request for Arbitration cites, as one of the small number of key attachments to it,

7120 that is

a “power of attorney accorded to the attorneys mentioned in para. 6 below,
simply not correct, as the only attorney mentioned in the signed Power of Attorney is
Avy. Parodi, and the authorization of Profs. Radicati and Barra (as indicated) results
uniquely from a sub-delegation by Avv. Parodi in pursuit of one of the lengthy list of
powers conferred on him under the Power of Attorney. Nothing in the papers
submitted to the Tribunal shows whether the Claimants were in any way involved in
this process, nor has any mention been made whether they had been informed of it;
this notwithstanding the fact that the designation purports to confer on the co-counsel
‘all of the powers’ under the Power of Attorney to represent and defend the Claimants
(including presumably, therefore, the powers to drop an action at law or abandon the

dispute or discharge the debtor, and to dispose of moneys received), and permits these

''8 With the exception of a limited amount of correspondence dated 24 June 2010, 21and 26 July 2010, and a
signature at the foot of the Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief (cf. the Decision in Ambiente Ufficio at para. 271).
''° Except for the limited correspondence mentioned above.

120 Request, para. 5.

129

280.

281.

121 A bparently by revocation of the power of attorney, Claimants’ Pos
The Tribunal not
Jurisdiction and Ad.

122

delegated powers to be exercised jointly or severally. If one adds the facts that these
far-reaching consequences are said to flow from the signature of the individual
Claimants, who are presented as all being small investors of Italian nationality, and
that the signed powers of attorney are in English, it is hardly surprising that the
Respondent has probed hard to see whether these arrangements do meet the
requirements for ICSID arbitration. Had it not been for the fact that there does exist
among the papers submitted in the case an Italian language version of the power of
attorney, and the fact that events have shown that individual Claimants did indeed
retain the effective power to control their interests at least by discontinuance under
Arbitration Rule 44,'?! the Tribunal might indeed have found itself confronted by a
real question as to due authorization and therefore as to the solidity of the Claimants’

consent to this arbitration. '?

As it is, the Tribunal is satisfied that any absence of
real consent would have manifested itself in one way or another, and therefore sees no
reason to deflect from its conclusion in paragraph 271 above. But it does feel bound
to record its feeling that there has been in some respects a cavalier disregard of the

niceties that falls below the standards normally expected in ICSID arbitration.

b. No consent to arbitration on the part of the Respondent

The Tribunal has already disposed above of the argument that some form of special
consent from the Respondent is required on account of the allegedly ‘mass’ nature of
the claims in the present Arbitration. As indicated in paragraph 270 however, that
leaves intact the question of the Respondent’s specific consent for the purpose of the
present proceedings, and, as indicated in paragraph 273, that question is intimately
wrapped up in the notion of a ‘dispute’. To the mind of the Tribunal, that is one of

the essential issues in this phase of the case.

The Claimants’ argument is simply that, in bringing the Arbitration, they are availing
themselves of the Respondent’s standing offer conveyed by Article8 of the
Italy/Argentina BIT. The Respondent’s reply is that the standing offer does not

extend to the circumstances of this case. The relevant terms of Article 8, under the

 

Hearing Brief, para. 51.
in this connection the comments of the Abaclat tribunal, at para. 466 of its Decision on
lity, on possible vitiating factors relating to the individual consent of individual

 

  

claimants in that case.

130

282.

23 Tn the joint translatio

124 «

heading ‘Dispute Resolution between Investors and Contracting Parties’ read as

follows'?*:-

Any dispute relating to investments that arises between an investor
from one of the Contracting Parties and the other Party, with respect to
matters regulated by this Agreement shall be, insofar as possible,
resolved through amicable consultations between the parties to the
dispute.

If such consultations do not provide a solution, the dispute may be
submitted to a competent administrative or judicial jurisdiction of the
Contracting Party in whose territory the investment is located.

Tf a dispute still exists between investors and a Contracting Party, after
a period of 18 months has elapsed since notification of the
commencement of the proceeding before the national jurisdictions
indicated in paragraph 2, the dispute may be submitted to international
arbitration.

For this purpose, and in conformity with the terms of this Agreement,
each Contracting Party hereby gives its advance and irrevocable
consent that any dispute may be submitted to arbitration.
Subsequent paragraphs deal with the termination of domestic legal proceedings, the
choice of arbitral framework, relationship to insurance compensation, applicable law,

enforcement of arbitral awards, and the like.

It will be seen that the crux of this Article is the concept of a ‘dispute relating to
investments that arises between an investor from one of the Contracting Parties and
the other Party, with respect to matters regulated by this Agreement’ .!74 The
Respondent says that the concept does not extend to cover a collective or group claim;
it says that in all cases in which investment tribunals have been prepared in principle
to accept multiple claims, that has either been on the basis of express consent by the
Respondent in casu, or at least tacit consent by the failure to raise express objection
on that score. It adds more specifically that joinder of multiple claims could only
enter into possible consideration if the claims derived from a single legal relationship
linking the several claimants. The Claimants reply that it is a generally

acknowledged principle that multiple actions can be brought in a single proceeding

 

submitted by the Parties.

‘controversia relativa a las inversiones que surja entre un inversor de una de las Partes Contratantes y la
otra Parte, respecto a cuestiones reguladas por el presente Acuerdo’ in the original Spanis

3 “controversia

 

relativa agli investimenti insorta tra una Parte Contraente ed un investitore dell’altra, riguardo problemi
regolati dal presente Accordo’ in the original Italian.

131

283.

284.

having the same title and the same object, and that this is particularly appropriate to a
BIT in which a State makes the offer of arbitration to an indefinite number of
potential victims of its actions. They invoke the fact that Article 8(3) of the BIT
covers ‘any dispute’ and say that what counts is that the Claimants are all pursuing
identical relief for the same illegality on the same factual and legal grounds. They
dismiss the relevance of the Respondent’s argument as to the presence of specific
consent in previous arbitrations, on the grounds that it seeks to introduce an additional
jurisdictional requirement that is nowhere to be found in the ICSID Convention or the

case law.

The Abaclat and Ambiente Ufficio tribunals were faced with similar arguments. In its
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, the Abaclat tribunal fails to confront the
issue directly, and would appear to have treated it as largely subsumed in the
argument over ‘mass claims’; to the extent that it does address the matter, it seems to
have regarded the potentiality for multiple claimants as arising automatically out of
the kinds of investment included in the coverage of the BIT. The Ambiente Ufficio
tribunal deals with the matter in a more direct and satisfactory way. Having drawn
attention in limine to the fact that the situation before it (like the one in the present
Arbitration) is neither one of ex post joinder of separate claims nor one of
consolidation of individual actions, the tribunal focuses on the question whether the
proceedings before it were or were not covered by the Respondent’s consent to
arbitration, and draws the conclusion that the proceedings did indeed fall within the
terms of Article 8 of the BIT on a proper interpretation of that provision, as a matter
both of its own terms and the relevant context. As between the two, the present
Tribunal inclines more closely to the approach taken by the Ambiente Ufficio tribunal,
although it feels that an even closer attention to the meaning and effect of Article 8 is
needed, given the central significance of Article 8 as the locus of the Respondent’s

specific consent to arbitrate.

The Tribunal begins with the point that it is not within the power of either a claimant
or a respondent party in an ICSID arbitration to bring about, of its own sole volition, a
joinder or consolidation of separate arbitral proceedings. As the Ambiente Ufficio
tribunal pointed out, this is not provided for in the Convention or the Rules, nor does

it correspond to general principles of international arbitration, based as it is on party

132

285.

consent. But this is not, in any event, the situation in the present Arbitration, where
there never existed a series of separate and parallel arbitral proceedings, but only one
single proceeding instituted against the same Respondent by a multiple group of
Claimants. If, all the same, joinder, or alternatively consolidation, would not be
admissible as a unilateral move by a group of claimants in separate but parallel
arbitrations, the question inevitably arises, in what way is the position different if the
grouping takes place beforehand, i.e. at the stage of the initiation of the arbitral
proceedings at the unilateral initiative of a number of individual claimants? In the
Tribunal’s view, the answer lies — as already indicated above — in the fundamental
principle of consent that underlies the entire institution of arbitration. This does not
however mean that consent should be understood in a simplistic or mechanistic way;
consent can be manifested in numerous ways, and ascertained by various means. It is
a commonplace, for example, in the law of treaties — which is equally based on the
bedrock principle of consent — that the giving of consent is not limited to some unique
formal process at the time of adhering to a treaty, but that valid mutual agreement can
be construed from other sources, including acquiescence and events occurring after
the conclusion of the treaty; the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties is replete
with situations in which the necessary consent or mutual agreement is ‘otherwise
established’. That includes also cases in which the ‘agreement’ does not come about
simultaneously, but is constructed in attenuated form out of disaggregated acts of
consent by the different parties. This is a common process which is no stranger to
investment arbitration; the entire institution of dispute settlement under bilateral and
multilateral investment treaties is based on a standing offer made generally by host
States of investment subsequently taken up after a dispute has arisen by individual
investors, the whole then being understood to constitute the necessary mutual consent

to arbitration or other settlement processes.

These basic principles apply themselves equally well, in the opinion of the Tribunal,
to the legal situation before arbitral proceedings are brought as they do to the situation
afterwards. This is why the Tribunal cannot accept the submissions of the Claimants
according to which respondent consent is of no essential relevance in those prior cases
in which arbitrations have proceeded on a multi-party basis; nor indeed does the
Tribunal feel that the Ambiente Ufficio tribunal itself paid sufficient attention to the

matter. In the Tribunal’s judgement, there are three sets of circumstances in which

133

125

arbitration is possible with a multiplicity of parties. One is (hypothetically) when it is
specifically provided for, e.g. in an applicable treaty or set of arbitration rules, or in
the other instrument establishing the parties’ consent to arbitration, as for example
where NAFTA Chapter Eleven and several later treaties contain a specific provision
under which a “consolidation tribunal” may order that claims be consolidated with
others on the ground that there are common issues of law and/or fact. Another is
when it receives the particular assent of both parties ad casum, which could be
express, for example in the procedural arrangements made by the tribunal at the
commencement of the arbitration, or it could be inferred, for example by the
respondent answering the claimants’ claim and continuing with the arbitration without
raising objection to the fact that there is a multiplicity of claimants. This second
possibility has been the most common in practice, and is what the Tribunal
understands to have happened in the Kléckner v Cameroon, Goetz v Burundi, and
Funnekotter v Zimbabwe, and also in the Gemplus, S.A., SLP, S.A. and Gemplus
Industrial, S.A. de C.V. v United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/04/3)
and Talsud, S.A. v United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/04/4)
Arbitrations. A variant on this possibility is the situation where, faced with multiple
individual claims, a respondent agrees, at least for preliminary objection purposes, to
have the individual claims heard in one proceeding (on the reasoning that if its
objection is upheld, that will dispose of all of the claims). This is what occurred in
Bayview v Mexico and Canadian Cattlemen v United States Arbitrations (and appears
to have occurred in the Anderson v Costa Rica proceeding which, like Bayview and
Canadian Cattlemen, was also dismissed after a jurisdictional hearing was held). In
Bayview, although the Award does not record the fact, Mexico’s pleadings (available

on the internet!?°

) show that notwithstanding Mexico’s objection to the claimants’
having unilaterally joined their claims in a single proceeding, it consented to having
the tribunal’s jurisdiction determined for all claims in a single proceeding. In
Canadian Cattlemen, the tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 1 recorded the fact that the
jurisdictional phase was being conducted as a single proceeding by the consent of all

parties.

Mexico’s Memorial on Jurisdiction (cf. para. 126) is available at the Secretary of the Economy’s website:

 

http://ww ia. gob. controversias/i

1 iew/esc_excep_mxbv_060419 _ing.pdf.

134

286.

287.

288.

In between those two classes of cases lies however a third. This is the case in which
it is asserted that the instrument setting up the arbitration or establishing the
Respondent’s consent to it can properly be interpreted, on the particular facts of the
case, as covering the particular multiplicity of claimants within that consent. This is
the situation which the Tribunal finds itself facing here. It requires the Tribunal to

analyse Article 8 of the BIT and apply it to the specific facts of the present case.

As appears above, the concept around which Article 8 revolves is a ‘dispute relating
to investments’. That is what is referred to at the beginning and end of Article 8(1),
in article 8(2), and in both paragraphs within Article 8(3). Article 8(3) indicates, by
the use of the term ‘investors’ in the plural in both the Spanish and Italian authentic
versions, that it was within the contemplation of the Contracting Parties at the time
that there might in appropriate circumstances be more than one investor involved in ‘a
dispute’. The Tribunal draws from this usage entirely the opposite inference from
that propounded by the dissenting arbitrator in Ambiente Ufficio. 126 That there can be
more than one investor does not, however, in and of itself determine whether that is so
in any given case. Nevertheless, whether there is only one investor, or more than
one, there must be ‘a dispute’. In that respect, the terminology of Article 8 is
uniform: the term ‘dispute’ appears in the singular, and its singular connotation is not
altered by the fact that the word preceding it is sometimes ‘a’, sometimes ‘the’, and
sometimes ‘any’. Given the context, it is plain that — just like the situation under
Article 25 of the ICSID Convention (paragraphs 266 above and 288 below) — the use
of the singular must be read as presupposing a substantive unity in the ‘dispute’

submitted to arbitration.

The Tribunal must therefore proceed to determine whether what the multiple
Claimants have brought before it in this case is ‘a dispute’. In many cases that
question (or its equivalent under the governing legal instrument) is one that answers

itself. The cases are the ones referred to in Schreuer’s Commentary'?’

as being
‘normally the consequence of companies claiming jointly with their parent companies
or their subsidiaries and the assignment, in part, of the investor’s rights to an
additional investor’. Other cases, of which the present is an example as are the

Abaclat and Ambiente Ufficio arbitrations, involve a series of claimants claiming in

126 See paras. 266-267 above.
17 Second edition (2001) at §§25.277-280.

135

parallel under the assertion that their individual claims are identical, or so similar in
their essence as to make it proper to treat them as a single dispute. The most striking
examples are the Bayview, Canadian Cattlemen, and Funnekotter arbitrations. None
of them are, however, of assistance in the present case: Bayview and Canadian
Cattlemen because there was agreement between the parties at the outset on the
consolidation of the claims, at least for the purposes of the jurisdictional phase, and
Funnekotter because, as the tribunal recites in its Award, the respondent declared in
its written pleadings that it took no objection to the jurisdiction, so that the case in fact

fell within the second category described in paragraph 281 above.

289. The Abaclat tribunal failed to address its mind to the matter. It posed itself the
question, “Assuming that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over the claims of several
individual Claimants, it is difficult to conceive why and how the Tribunal could
loose [sic] such jurisdiction where the number of Claimants outgrows a certain
threshold. First of all, what is the relevant threshold? And second, can the Tribunal
really ‘loose’ a jurisdiction it has when looking at Claimants individually?” 7° As the
present Tribunal sees it, that was the wrong question, since that way of addressing the
matter presupposed that the existence of jurisdiction (= consent) in respect of each
individual automatically entailed the existence of jurisdiction (= consent) in respect of
a multi-claimant proceeding. By approaching the matter in this way, the Abaclat
tribunal begged the question as to jurisdiction that required an answer, and sublimated

ar : - ce tcctpiig 12
it into an issue of mere ‘admissibility 9

The Ambiente Ufficio tribunal, likewise,
although its treatment of the issues raised by multiple claims is more persuasive than
that in Abaclat, did not address its mind directly to this central point either. Having
disposed of the general arguments against the admissibility of multi-party proceedings
under the ICSID Convention and the BIT, the Ambiente Ufficio tribunal moved on to
the rubric, The question of the need of a link between the claims in dispute, in order to
answer what it described as a further submission by the Respondent. The Tribunal

has received a similar submission from the Respondent State in the present case,'*°

 
      

et.
2° Thid., paras. 515 ff.; see also paras. 256-260 above.
130 there is no link among the Claimants. Owners of security entitlements are persons (physical or juridical)
that have undertaken their transactions in a unilateral fashion. Neither the claims nor Claimants here share the
characteristics that are typically required to permit joint treatment under collective action regimes. Claimants are
suing on 50 different series of bonds, which have different governing rules, issuance dates, type of currency, and
amounts. In addition, these bonds were acquired in different places, at very different prices, and on different
dates”, Memorial on Jurisdiction, para.111.

 

 

   

 

136

290.

and the Parties have reached agreement in their subsequent written argument that
there ought to be a “reasonable and significant link” between the claims of the
individual claimants, with the Claimants conceding that it would not be possible to
adjudicate unrelated claims in a single arbitration. But they parted company at that
point: for the Claimants, the applicable criterion is amply satisfied, because all of the
claims arise out of what in their submission is a substantially identical legal and

factual situation; Bl

whereas for the Respondent, it would be a substantial departure
from currently accepted practice to extend consolidation from the case of a single
investment operation with closely related parties to a case in which unrelated
operations and claimants who acquired their investments at different times and under
different conditions are linked only by the State measure or measures against which

they complain. 12

The Ambiente Ufficio tribunal deals with the matter in a somewhat tentative way at
paragraphs 152-163 of its Decision. At paragraph 153 it recites that it would “indeed
have its doubts” whether completely unrelated claims could be brought by a plurality
of persons in one and the same arbitral proceeding, referring in this context to the
prerequisites normally encountered in domestic legal systems, but then appears
immediately to set that aside as irrelevant to an international proceeding under the

ICSID Convention. It records its conclusion in the following terms:

Whatever minimum standard may apply under Art. 25 of the ICSID
Convention as to a necessary link between the claims in a multi-party
proceeding, and whether such requirement exists at all, can be left
open by the present Tribunal. In particular, it does not consider it
necessary or useful to elaborate on the question in abstracto whether it
is required that the claims be “homogeneous” or whether it suffices
that they are “sufficiently comparable”, etc. and to try to devise a
general standard or threshold in that regard.

That once said, the tribunal proceeds into a discussion of whether a contractual link
between multiple claimants is a necessary requirement, which it determines not to be
the case, citing in this connection the Bayview v Mexico and Goetz v Burundi
arbitrations, and finding final confirmation in the Award of the Funnekotter v
Zimbabwe tribunal. Its final conclusion is in two parts: that the necessary link

between the parties before it lies in their treaty claim, based on the same allegation of

'3! See para. 92 above.

132

See paras. 132-133 above.

137

291.

133

illegality, the same prayer for relief, and the same factual background; and that the
differences between the situation of individual claimants stressed by the respondent
State all relate to the claimants’ potential contract claims, which are not relevant to the

arbitral proceedings.

The majority of the present Tribunal does not however believe, with all the respect

that is due to the Ambiente Ufficio tribunal, '°

that that is an adequate way of
disposing of a question that it considers to be fundamental to the present phase of this
case. In the first place, the question is one that calls for an answer; it is not, as the
present Tribunal sees it, a question that can be set aside on the basis of ‘doubts’ nor
one that can be left open within the context of a binding decision in favour of
jurisdiction. Nor does it find that the distinction between treaty and contract claims,
put together with the identity of the illegality alleged, the relief sought, and the factual
background, offers an entirely adequate solution either. Indeed, the Parties’ very
agreement restricting the scope of this phase of the proceeding'™ recognizes that the
circumstances of individual claimants can differ, and that such differences might have
jurisdictional consequences. At this stage of the proceedings it cannot be ruled out,
for example, that the timing and circumstances of a claimant’s acquisition of its
investment might raise issues going to the nature of the claimant’s expectations which
in turn might bear on a treaty claim. But leaving the facts of the instant case aside, if
the Ambiente Ufficio tribunal’s criterion were to be applied to a hypothetical situation
in which a host State, in an act of conscious discrimination, decided to levy a penal
tax on all investments of citizens of a particular foreign country, in retaliation for a
political disagreement between the two States in an unrelated area, it would permit all
of the affected but otherwise differently situated investors to join together in a
common arbitration proceeding with the invocation of the anti-discrimination and fair
and equitable treatment clauses in the bilateral investment treaty between the two
States. Similarly for an alternative hypothetical scenario in which the host State
simply expropriated all foreign property, and in response all the nationals of a given
foreign State owning property in the first State brought joint arbitration proceedings
against it. It is however common ground between the present Parties that these

situations would not be admissible, nor, quite obviously, was that the intention of the

As indicated above, the Tribunal believes that the Ambiente Ufficio tribunal was mistaken in its view that the

Bayview decision supported its finding.
'4 See para. 252 above.

138

292.

135

A point that remains somewhat unclear, because the present is:

Ambiente Ufficio tribunal either. It follows, in the present Tribunal’s view, that the
criterion is not fully up to the task it has to perform, and needs therefore to be
strengthened. The Tribunal is reinforced in this conclusion by the consideration that
the three arbitral decisions invoked by the Ambiente Ufficio tribunal do not in reality
sustain the proposition it draws from them; as indicated in paragraph 288 above, in all
three cases the tribunal was in the presence of consent, express or implied, by the
respondent State to the hearing of the claims together. Moreover, to the extent that
the Funnekotter tribunal went beyond that in the investigation of its own jurisdiction

propriu motu, 185

its decision on the matter of jurisdiction appears as part and parcel of
its Award on the merits — a point which the present Tribunal considers to be of some
significance, as will appear below. Co-Arbitrator Béckstiegel, who is also a member
of the Ambiente Ufficio tribunal, does not share the above criticism and considers the

considerations of the Ambiente Ufficio tribunal as correct and sufficient.

In searching, therefore, for an element that more satisfactorily defines the link that
must exist between a group of claimants and between their claims, in the absence of
consent by the respondent to the hearing of their claims together, the Tribunal has
come to the conclusion that the answer lies in the notion of a ‘dispute’. To go back to
basics, the jurisdiction created by Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention ‘extends to’
(which in context means, is confined to) ‘any legal dispute arising directly out of an
investment’. ICSID tribunals have always treated this requirement with deliberate
importance. They have considered whether the parties are in fact in dispute; whether
the dispute is a legal dispute; whether the dispute arises out of an investment; and
whether it arises ‘directly’ out of an investment. The cases are listed in Schreuer’s
Commentary at pp. 93 ff. The rubric in Article 25(1) contains however a further
condition which may not be as immediately obvious, namely that it must be ‘a’
dispute. The focus on ‘a’ dispute is continued in both the ICSID Institution Rules
(Article 2) and the ICSID Arbitration Rules (Rule 1). There is an exact match with
the terms of the dispute settlement clause in Article 8 of the BIT, under which the

Respondent issued its standing consent to arbitration, which refers sequentially to

 

ie was not one of those which the tribunal

canvassed at paras. 91-95 of its Award, confining itself to the questions of nationality, the nature of investment,
and timeliness.

139

‘any dispute’, ‘a dispute’ and ‘the dispute’ °°

The intention and effect are obvious.
These treaty clauses provide a mechanism for the settlement of individual disputes;
they do not (absent either special agreement to that effect or joinder) provide a
mechanism for the joint settlement of a collection of separate disputes. This does not
however mean that the concept of ‘dispute’ has to be given a narrow or over-technical
meaning. The Tribunal has already indicated that it is perfectly possible, in its
opinion, for ‘a dispute’ to have more than one party on the claimant’s side. But the
interest represented on each side of the dispute has to be in all essential respects
identical for all of those involved on that side of the dispute. In most cases hitherto,
that question has virtually answered itself. One reason is that there has normally
been a single investment, even though more than one person or entity may have
participated in that investment’s making or in its management. Another reason is that
there has in most cases been some form of pre-arbitration discussion or negotiation
with the respondent party, which has served the purpose of establishing with greater
or lesser precision what the ‘dispute’ is, and therefore who are party to it. The
problem in the present case is that neither of those factors is present: on the one hand,
it is in contention between the Parties both whether the individual Claimants should
be regarded as investors in their own right or as participants in an original investment
or investments in Argentina, and also whether those rights of the individual Claimants
that are relevant to this Arbitration, are effectively the same irrespective of which
particular investment they bought into and of the terms of their individual purchase;
and on the other hand it is common ground between the Parties that the steps prior to
arbitration had not been pursued as foreseen in the literal terms of Article 8 of the
BIT.

293. As and when the Tribunal were to come to the point of adjudicating on the merits of
the ‘dispute’ brought before it in this Arbitration, it would have to consider the rights
of the Claimants and how those rights were affected by the actions (or omissions) of
the Respondent, in order to decide whether that effect was or was not contrary to
entitlements which the Claimants possessed under the BIT. Where, as here, the
essence of the Claimants’ claim is a deprivation of rights or a breach of expectations,

the Tribunal would have to determine what those rights and expectations were and

 

ontroversia’, ‘una controversia’ and ‘la controversia’ in the Italian; ‘toda controversia’ ‘una
controversia’ and ‘la controversia’ in the Spanish.

140

294.

whether or how far each of the Claimants had been deprived of them. In order to do
so, the Tribunal would be required to apply to the facts of the case the law specified in
Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention, i.e. (unless otherwise agreed between the
Parties) “the law of the Contracting State party to the dispute (including its rules on
the conflict of laws) and such rules of international law as may be applicable.” This
is not, in the view of a Tribunal, a matter that can be pre-empted by invoking a
supposed distinction between contract claims and treaty claims. '57 Nor can it merely
be subsumed into the discussion of jurisdiction ratione materiae (see further below)
by drawing a presumed inference as to party intent from the scope of the definition of
‘investment’.'** Until it has been put into a position to do this, the Tribunal is unable
to determine, with the force that a formal preliminary Decision requires, whether the
actual rights of all of the Claimants (under Argentine law and such rules of

international law as may be applicable) and whether the actual effect (under Argentine

 

law and such rules of international law as may be applicable) on those rights (or
associated expectations) of Argentina’s conduct were sufficiently the same as to
amount to a single ‘dispute’ over Argentina’s obligations under the BIT, even within
the broad and non-technical understanding of a ‘dispute’ that is appropriate to Article
8 of the BIT read in conjunction with Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. That is
however merely a complicated way of saying that the substance of that jurisdictional
issue is so closely entwined with the substantive disagreement between the Parties,
both factual and legal, that it has to be joined to the merits. The Tribunal so decides

pursuant to Article 41(2) of the Convention and Rule 41(4) of the Arbitration Rules.

Given the impact of that conclusion, the Tribunal has of course given anxious
consideration to how it compares with the earlier cases — earlier, that is, than the
present Argentine bond cases — in which investment tribunals had faced, not a single
investment nexus, but bundles of parallel claims. Having done so, it finds no
contradiction. The Bayview case, a NAFTA ICSID Additional Facility case,
involved 46 claimants, some individuals, some public institutions, all alleging
interference by Mexico in their water rights by diverting the waters of the Rio Grande.

139

As noted above, ~~ the jurisdictional phase of the Bayview case proceeded by the

consent of all parties (the respondent otherwise reserving its objection to the

'57 Cf, Ambiente Ufficio at para. 162.
188 Cf, Abaclat at paras. 331-332.
'° Para. 285.

141

295.

claimants’ self-consolidating their claims) and in any event the respondent succeeded
in its jurisdictional objection. In the Canadian Cattlemen case, a NAFTA case under
the UNCITRAL Rules, there were 109 claimant ranchers complaining against a US
animal health measure, but there had been separate notices of arbitration by each
claimant which were subsequently formally consolidated by agreement into a single
proceeding, as recorded in #4 of the tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 1,'° and in any
event the tribunal once again declined to uphold its jurisdiction on other grounds. A
closer parallel may perhaps be found in the Funnekotter case, an ICSID case,
involving 14 claimants complaining about separate acts of dispossession of their
farms in Zimbabwe, since there the tribunal confirmed its jurisdiction and proceeded

to an award on the merits. But, as noted above, '*!

the Funnekotter tribunal expressly
noted the respondent State’s acceptance of its jurisdiction. More significant,
however, is that the Funnekotter tribunal’s ex officio confirmation of its own

? Tn other words, to the

jurisdiction took place as part of its Award on the merits. '*
extent that the Funnekotter tribunal may be said to have decided to treat as
unproblematic a joint claim by multiple unrelated claimants against the same
government policy of the respondent, it did so only after it had put itself in a position,
in the light of full factual and legal argument and evidence, to assure itself that the
various claims before it did indeed constitute ‘a dispute’. That is exactly on all fours
with the approach which the Tribunal intends to follow in this case. In approaching
the case in this fashion, the Tribunal must record its view that to be in a position to
make the determination just discussed, it must have a sufficient appreciation of each
Claimant’s individual circumstances and any other potentially relevant claimant-
specific evidence. This will be the subject of a procedural order to be issued after the
Tribunal receives the Parties’ views on the logistics of the combined jurisdictional and

merits phase.

The fact that the Tribunal has joined this specific preliminary objection to the merits
is without prejudice to whatever consequences would follow if it were in due course
to find substantive merit in the objection. Nor, furthermore, does it dispense with the
need to investigate the Respondent’s remaining preliminary objections, each of which

is theoretically capable, if upheld, of bring the arbitration to an end.

° See the Canadian Cattlemen Award, para. 14.
141 See para. 288 above.

142

See para. 291 above.

142

296.

143

c. No jurisdiction ratione materiae

The central issue here is whether the Claimants’ assets constitute ‘investments’ within
the meaning of the BIT. It is not however a matter that need detain the Tribunal long,
as it is one on which the Tribunal finds itself in agreement with the comprehensive
treatment given to it by the Abaclat and Ambiente Ufficio tribunals. Nothing in the
ICSID Convention itself presents an obstacle to considering that bonds are capable of
constituting investments; the Tribunal notes in this regard that, when the Convention
was under negotiation, sovereign bonds were actually used as an example of the
potential breadth of the Convention’s reach in terms of what sorts of future dispute
could be put before an ICSID tribunal.' Insofar as the BIT is concerned, the
Respondent’s argument rests essentially on its wish to give decisive significance to
the fact that neither of the authentic language texts of the definitions clause in Article
1 of the BIT uses a term referring expressly to ‘bonds’, even though such a term
(“bonos”) does exist in the Spanish language. '** The Claimants argue, to the
contrary, that the more general phrasing used in Article 1(1)(c) is entirely adequate to
encompass bonds along with other similar forms of investment. The disagreement
between the Parties on the point is encapsulated in the variant translations into
English offered by them: for the Claimants, “bonds, public or private securities or
any other right to performance or services having an economic value, as well as
capitalized income”, and for the Respondent, “obligations, public or private securities
or any other right to benefits or services with an economic value, as well as
capitalized income”. The Tribunal, for its part, is unable to read either version of the
phrase, taken on its own (i.e. including the version put forward by the Respondent), as
containing an implicit restriction that would rule out investments taking the form of
bonds, > assuming of course that the other criteria laid down in the BIT are satisfied.
This conclusion, which is the same as that reached by the Abaclat and Ambiente
Ufficio tribunals, is powerfully reinforced by the fact that the whole construction of
Article 1(1) expressly treats the cases described in its subparagraphs (a) — (f) as

illustrative examples only, which are stated not to be exclusive, and which are

During the consultations with legal experts in Bangkok, Thailand, in the context of a discussion of
applicable law, the Bank’

 

s General Counsel, Aron Broches, observed: “There was no doubt that a foreign bond

issue by a country constituted an investment by the foreign investors in that country but it would not necessarily
be governed by local law,” Documents Concerning the Origin and Formulation of the Convention, Volume II,
Part 1, p. 514.

'4 Though not, apparently, in Italian.

145

Whether issued by the State itself, or by other public or private institutions.

143

297.

298.

expressly placed under the broad rubric at the head of the paragraph: “independently
from the legal form adopted or from any other connected legal system, any
contribution or asset invested or reinvested by physical or juridical persons of one
Contracting Party in the territory of the other, in accordance with the laws and
regulations of the latter”. ‘46 Tt seems to the Tribunal in any case that, with the whole
issue remaining in dispute between the Parties whether what the Claimants hold are
‘bonds’ or instead some derivative asset of another kind, there would be no basis for it
to rest its determination of the jurisdictional issue on whether the definition in the BIT
did or did not expressly refer to ‘bonds’ as such. It is sufficient for the Tribunal to
hold that the original asset held by the underwriting banks was undoubtedly capable
ratione materiae of falling within the definitions in Article 1;'7 all further questions
as to the precise nature of the individual assets of the individual Claimants fall under
the same analysis as in paragraph 293 above, and could only be assessed by the

Tribunal on the basis of full argument at the merits stage.

There is a further issue between the Parties as to whether the Claimants’ assets (even
assuming them to be ‘investments’ within the meaning of both the ICSID Convention
and the BIT) were investments ‘made in the territory of Argentina’ as Article 1(1)
requires. The Respondent has made a number of substantial arguments in this regard
(see paragraph 60 above). These are however matters that would need detailed
evaluation on the basis of full argument. They are moreover so intimately linked
with the question of the exact nature and classification of the property rights of the
individual Claimants that, for the reasons already given in paragraph 293 above, this

examination must be postponed to the merits.

d. No prima facie breach of the BIT

Relying on established arbitral jurisprudence, the Respondent argues that a claimant
in an ICSID arbitration must show prima facie that the matters of which it complains,
if duly established, are capable of constituting a breach of the BIT; for that purpose a
tribunal will assume pro tempore the correctness of the claimant’s factual allegations,
but without prejudice to the burden on the claimant to establish the facts on which it

relies, to the appropriate standard of proof, if and when the proceedings come to a

4 Respondent's translation; the Claimants’ translation is substantially similar.
‘7 Even though most, if not all, of the underwriting banks would not have been entitled ratione personae to
protection under the Italy-Argentina BIT, as not having Italian nationality.

144

299.

300.

“8 The Claimants ass

merits phase. Likewise, the demonstration that the duly established facts do indeed
constitute a breach of the BIT is also a matter for the merits. The Claimants do not
contest this, but assert that in their arguments and evidence presented to the Tribunal,

they have made the requisite prima facie showing.

The Claimants’ principal argument in this connection (which the Tribunal accepts) is
that the facts relating to the formal default by the Argentine Republic on its external
bonded debt and the subsequent Exchange Offers are notorious and not seriously in
dispute. On that basis they assert breaches of the guarantees under the BIT of fair
and equitable treatment and of the prohibition on expropriation except against

payment of adequate, effective and timely compensation. 48

The Tribunal entertains no doubt that, simply on the admitted facts alone, and on the
further assumption that the Claimants are indeed investors within the meaning of the
BIT, the complaints raised by them in this arbitration are capable of constituting a
breach of one or more of the provisions of the BIT referred to in the preceding
paragraph. Whether in the specific circumstances they would in fact constitute a
breach is pre-eminently a matter for the merits, and has no impact as a matter of
jurisdiction. The Respondent’s answer, summarized in its Post-Hearing Brief, lies
in the distinction it makes between contract claims and treaty claims; the present
claims, it says, are claims for breach of contract, as shown by the fact that the
underlying bonds were consciously and deliberately placed beyond Argentine
jurisdiction; the Respondent adds that the Argentine State merely behaved in exactly
the same way as any private debtor that was unable to meet its debts. The Tribunal is
unconvinced by the conclusions which the Respondent seeks to draw. While the
distinction between contract claims and treaty claims is undeniable and well
established, the mere fact that there is a contractual remedy available to a claimant
does not of itself rule out the existence of a treaty claim for actions by the State, in its
capacity as such, that affect private rights in a way that implicates a treaty guarantee.
Depending on the exact nature of their property rights in the underlying bonds, it may
well be that some or all of the Claimants do have a contractual remedy in a particular

non-Argentine jurisdiction under an exclusive jurisdiction clause in the bond

rt also (via the most-favoured-nation clause in Article 3 of the BIT) a breach of the

 

obligation to maintain full protection and security contained in the bilateral investment treaty between Argentina
and the USA, Counter-Memorial, para. 403.
149 At paras. 115-126.

145

301.

instruments, as is indeed suggested by the references made in the pleadings to
lawsuits brought in Italy by certain bondholders. 'S0 But there is no denying that, by a
combination of governmental policy and legislative action — thus quintessentially
sovereign acts — the Republic of Argentina went beyond a mere failure to pay the
sums contractually due to its creditors, and that this happened under circumstances
which lay outside the normal legal remedies and controls that exist for the benefit of
creditors in the case of private bankruptcy. The Tribunal does not believe that it can
seriously be argued that this combination of circumstances is not capable of
constituting a breach of the treaty guarantees (whatever defences might in due course
be advanced as a legal excuse) and that is all that is required at the jurisdictional
phase. It goes without saying that, in the event of a successful treaty claim, a
claimant would only be entitled to the remedies appropriate to a breach of treaty; the
fact that the remedy the present Claimants are seeking is, in the eyes of the
Respondent, a remedy of the same kind as that which they might seek in a domestic

court under a contract claim, is neither here nor there.

e. The preconditions to arbitration laid down in the BIT have not been duly met

The standing Argentine offer to arbitrate is contained in Article 8(3) of the BIT, but is
preceded by two paragraphs bearing on the settlement of disputes between an investor
and the host State of the investment: under paragraph (1) any dispute shall be
resolved through amicable consultations “insofar as possible”; under paragraph (2) if
these consultations do not lead to a resolution, the dispute “may be submitted” to a
competent administrative or judicial process of the host State. This leads on to
paragraph (3), under the first part of which “If a dispute still exists between investors
and a Contracting Party, after a period of 18 months has elapsed since notification of
the commencement of the proceeding before the national jurisdictions indicated in
paragraph (2), the dispute may be submitted to international arbitration.”, which is
then completed by the second part of the paragraph under which each Contracting
Party gives “its advance and irrevocable consent” to arbitration. On its face therefore
Article 8 sets up three prior steps before opening the way to arbitration: amicable

consultations — then domestic proceedings — then 18 months.

‘50 Though the Tribunal is not apprised of the exact nature of the cause of action or the remedies sought.

146

302.

303.

The Claimants concede that they have not made efforts to go through these prior
stages. They justify this by arguing: in relation to amicable consultations, that on the
evidence these would have proved fruitless and, after passage of the Ley Cerrojo,
were effectively excluded by the actions of the Respondent; in relation to domestic
proceedings, that there was (again on the evidence, citing in particular the Galli case
before the Supreme Court of Argentina) no realistic prospect of redress from any
Argentine administrative or judicial proceeding, and in any case not within a time
span of 18 months. They also seek, via the most-favoured-nation clause in Article 3
of the BIT, to invoke the benefit of the dispute settlement clause in the Argentina-US
BIT, which does not contain a requirement to have recourse to the local courts.!>!
The Respondent rejects both the factual and legal basis for these explanations,
pointing out that in addition the Claimants made “not even the slightest attempt” to
meet the requirements of the Article. It rejects also the invocation of the most-

favoured-nation clause both in itself and as out of time.

The prior requirements described above — either those laid down in this particular
treaty or in other bilateral investment treaties with equivalent wording — have been the
subject of consideration and decision in a lengthy series of arbitral decisions in recent
years. Tribunals have divided on the question. Some tribunals have taken the view
that the prior requirements are directory not mandatory and can therefore be
overridden in appropriate circumstances; others have held that the requirements apply
in all cases, but are subject to a general exception under international law that
recourse to domestic remedies is not mandatory when it would be futile. The Abaclat
tribunal finds there to be a difference between conditioning consent to ICSID
jurisdiction on the fulfilment of a pre-condition, and conditioning the effective
implementation of such consent on the fulfilment of such a pre-condition. Since it
considers that there is no doubt as to Argentina’s acceptance of ICSID arbitration, the
Abaclat tribunal finds that the preconditions relate merely to the effective
implementation of Argentina’s consent, and therefore fall under the heading of
admissibility not jurisdiction. Having done so, it finds that the failure to comply with
the preconditions does not constitute a barrier to admissibility of the claims, on a
mixture of factual findings and futility, invoking in this context broader

considerations of ‘fairness and efficiency’ as a guide to the interpretation of Article 8

'S! Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 165-185.

147

304.

of the BIT. It rephrases the question for decision as being, ‘was Argentina deprived
of a fair opportunity to address the dispute within the framework of its own domestic
legal system because of Claimants’ disregard of the 18 months litigation
requirement?’ and proceeds to answer that question through balancing what it finds to
be the interests of the parties on each side of the dispute. This aspect of the tribunal’s
Decision comes in for particularly strong criticism on the part of the dissenting

arbitrator.

The Ambiente Ufficio tribunal, on the other hand, adopts an altogether more nuanced
approach to the question, with which the present Tribunal aligns itself almost in its
entirety. The Ambiente Ufficio tribunal begins by drawing attention to the different,
and in some respects inconsistent, approaches taken by investment tribunals, and in
international dispute settlement more generally, towards preconditions of the kind
contained in Article 8, paragraphs (1) and (2), of the BIT, before recalling that the
task of each individual tribunal or judicial body is to apply the particular legal
provisions governing the case before it, and to do so within the context of those
provisions, including the specific institutional and procedural framework within
which they are embedded. The present Tribunal agrees. Its task is not to establish
any general legal regime for provisions of this kind, but to decide the very specific
question whether Argentina has or has not given its irrevocable consent to arbitrate in
the circumstances in which the present Claimants have brought the present arbitration.
That question is governed entirely by Article 8 of the BIT, which contains the offer to
arbitrate by both of the States party to the treaty, and which (as the Ambiente Ufficio

tribunal pertinently observes!)

“does not differentiate between ‘mandatory’ and
‘non-mandatory’ requirements as well as ‘jurisdictional’, ‘admissibility’ or
‘procedural’ prerequisites.” The Tribunal is also clear in its own mind that the
question for decision here is not affected one way or the other (as the Abaclat tribunal
appeared to think) by the fact that both Parties to the BIT are Parties to the ICSID
Convention. As the dissenting arbitrator in that case pointed out, the ICSID
Convention cannot properly be interpreted as granting some form of pre-consent to
arbitration — neither on its own terms nor, particularly, in the light of the categorical
statements, both in its Preamble that “no Contracting State shall by the mere fact of its

ratification, acceptance or approval of this Convention and without its consent be

'82 Ambiente Ufficio Decision, para. 572.

148

305.

deemed to be under any obligation to submit any particular dispute to ... arbitration,”
and in Article 25(4) that an indication by a State Party of the classes of dispute it
would consider submitting to the jurisdiction of the Centre “shall not constitute the
consent required by paragraph (1)”. It follows inexorably that the necessary
operative consent has to be sought elsewhere; and that, in the present case, means
Article 8 of the BIT, which is — to the Tribunal’s eyes — precisely drafted with that
aim in view, notably in the second paragraph in Article 8(3), which reads: “For this
purpose, and in conformity with the terms of this Agreement, each Contracting Party
hereby gives its advance and irrevocable consent that any dispute may be submitted to
arbitration.” This phrase puts it beyond any conceivable doubt that it is Article 8
which embodies the standing consent of each Contracting Party, as a potential
respondent State, to the initiation of arbitration by investors. The wording establishes
with equal clarity that the consent there given is ‘in conformity with the terms of the

treaty’.

This does not, in the Tribunal’s view, entail that an investor is under any sort of
‘obligation’ to pursue the prior steps outlined in paragraphs (1) - (3) of Article 8; it is
not the purpose of Article 8 to impose obligations on investors, who are by definition
not parties to treaties of this kind. What the Article does is to generate and record the
standing offer to arbitrate delineated in the paragraphs just mentioned. It is trite law
that the jurisdictional link is then completed by the acceptance of the offer by an
investor, manifested implicitly by the investor’s commencing arbitration proceedings
in reliance on its terms. The process is a sequential one, but its legal effect is now
universally recognized, on the basis that the claimant’s acceptance of the respondent’s
offer brings into being the necessary legal relationship between them in the same way
as if they had concluded between themselves a specific agreement to that effect. But
it surely requires no further demonstration that this legal effect can only be produced
if the investor accepts the offer on the terms specified by the host State; it cannot
either re-write the offer or ‘accept’ an offer other than that which the host State has
made. It is only in that sense that the conditions laid down in Article 8 are binding on

a potential claimant. But it equally follows that, to the extent that the Claimants

149

argue that the prior steps in Article 8(1) and (2) are ‘not mandatory’, that argument
4.153

must be rejecte
306. The right conferred on Italian investors to take a dispute with Argentina to arbitration
under Article 8(3) is in other words a contingent one, and it should be observed that
the conditions attached to it are not the product of some unilaterally restrictive act of
will on the part of Argentina, but are the outcome of an agreement between Italy and
Argentina conditioning the resort to arbitration. Not merely is this a formal
agreement, but it is a reciprocal one; exactly the same conditions would attach to an
Argentine national wishing to commence arbitration against Italy over an investment
dispute. The Tribunal can see no warrant for amending or setting aside any of the
elements of their consent to arbitration which the Contracting Parties have expressed
in the BIT, nor indeed does it consider itself to have been given any mandate in either
the ICSID Convention or the BIT to do so. Yet this is what the Abaclat tribunal
seems to have proceeded to do. It is also what the Claimants are in effect asking the
present Tribunal to do when they argue that, when Article 8(2) of the BIT says that a

154

dispute ‘may’ be submitted to a competent local jurisdiction ,~” this means only that

that represents one possible course of action alongside others. The Tribunal does not
find this line of argument convincing. The whole structure of Article 8 is against it;
the Tribunal accepts the Respondent’s argument that Article 8 was plainly intended to
set up a structured sequence of steps leading ultimately to arbitration. The Tribunal
is unable to give any other meaning to the words which appear at the beginning of
Article 8(3) and immediately before the consent to arbitration: “If a dispute still

exists between investors and a Contracting Party, after a period of 18 months has

a 155

elapsed since notification etc. etc. The Tribunal notes that exactly the same

'53 Tt is possible also to draw an analogy, as is done by the dissenting arbitrator in Ambiente Ufficio, with
Article 36(2) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, according to which a third State may only avail
itself of a right conferred by a treaty inter alios acta if it complies with the conditions laid down for the right’s
exercise, fn. 312 of the Dissenting Opinion of Santiago Torres Berndrdez to the Ambiente Ufficio Decision.

154 Hodra ser sometida’ in the original Spanish, ‘potra essere sottoposta’ in the Italian.

The Tribunal has some difficulty in following the Claimants’ argument based on a distinction from ‘fork in
the road’ provisions, since Article 8 is so clearly sequential. It likewise finds little assistance in the authorities
cited by the Claimants (Ethyl Corp. v Canada, Lauder v Czech Republic, Bayindir v Pakistan, and SGS v
Pakistan) all of which appear on closer examination, with due allowance made for their particular factual
circumstances, to turn in reality on the question of the probability, or alternatively futility, of friendly settlement
through consultations. The same is patently true of the Joint dissenting opinion of President Owada, Judges
Simma, Abraham and Donoghue and Judge ad hoc Gaja in the ICJ case Georgia v Russian Federation,
Judgement of | April 2011, which the Claimants rely on in their Post-Hearing Brief, fn. 245.

155

 

 

   

 

150

307.

308.

phrase, ‘may be submitted to’ is used by the Contracting Parties in Article 8(3)'°° for
the consent to arbitration itself. This double use of the phrase is therefore a relevant
contextual element in its interpretation under the basic rule laid down in Article 31(1)
of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties; to put the matter another way, in
the absence of any contrary indications, the phrase should be understood as having the
same sense in both the first paragraph and the one that succeeds it. This is however a
conclusion that would leave the Claimants floundering when they seek to rely on the
phrase as the foundation for their argument that Article 8(3) gives them an
indefeasible right to arbitration at their option. The Tribunal is in no doubt that
Article 8(3) is the controlling provision, and that its meaning, in context, is: ‘once
this condition is satisfied in respect of a given dispute, it is then legally possible for an
investor to submit the dispute to international arbitration’. Similarly, paragraphs (1)
and (2) of Article 8 mean, taken in context: ‘an attempt must be made to settle a
dispute by amicable consultations but, if they do not succeed, the host State or its
organs are not permitted to resist the investor’s referring it to a local court or
administrative jurisdiction, on pain of recognizing that, if a settlement is not achieved
via that route either, within the stated period, the matter may go on to international

arbitration at the investor’s option’.

The Claimants’ substantive defence against their admitted failure to pursue the routes
indicated in paragraphs (1) and (2) of Article 8 boils down, therefore, to two
alternative arguments: first, that it is not compulsory to pursue those routes if it is
sufficiently established that resort to them would be futile; second, in the alternative,
that they are entitled to invoke, via the most favoured nation clause in Article 3 of the
BIT, the benefits of arbitration clauses in other Argentine BITs which do not contain

the same preconditions.

The first of these defences is an argument of treaty interpretation. It maintains that
the underlying intention of the Contracting Parties cannot reasonably be understood,
in good faith, as requiring an investor to exhaust an avenue of redress that would be
(or had been proved to be) unavailing. The Claimants say that the futility of
attempting a negotiated settlement before the 2005 POE has been amply demonstrated

on the facts, and that after the passage of Law 26,017 (the Ley Cerrojo) a negotiated

'56 Tn both of the authentic languages.

151

309.

settlement became formally impossible. They dismiss as substantially immaterial
that there may have been the theoretical possibility that the Argentine legislature
might at some future time change its stance and approve a revised offer to
bondholders, given in particular the criminal penalties brought in by the Ley Cerrojo.
As to the question of recourse to the local courts, the Claimants maintained the
position throughout that a series of actual judicial decisions in the courts of Argentina,
reaching all the way up to the Supreme Court,'*” had established as early as 2005, not
merely the improbability of legal proceedings being brought to a conclusion within
the 18-month period stipulated in Article 8(2) of the BIT, but more importantly still
had demonstrated the absence of any effective remedy for bondholders in the courts
of Argentina. The Respondent’s answers, as summarized in the Post-Hearing Brief,
are: that the futility of negotiation cannot be established without it first having been
tried; that the Ley Cerrojo precluded only settlement without Congressional approval,
not negotiation leading up to it, as demonstrated by the revised POE; and that there
was a difference before the Argentine courts between rights under law and rights

under treaty.

Confronted with the same arguments, the Ambiente Ufficio tribunal dealt with the
matter as follows. It classified the obligation to consult under Article 8(1) as an
obligation of means not an obligation of result. It then assessed the significance of
the inclusion of the qualifying phrase ‘insofar as possible’, and concluded that
Article 8(1) should be so interpreted on its own terms that the obligation was not
violated “if it is established that (a) the sufficient minimum amount of consultations
was actually conducted, or at least offered, or that (b) amicable consultations in order
to resolve the case at stake were not possible in the first place”.!°8 It found it to be
established on the facts that, while there had indeed been attempts by bondholder
groups to enter into negotiations with Argentina, the particular claimants in that
arbitration had made no such attempt directly, and it therefore proceeded to consider
whether meaningful consultations for resolving the dispute would have been possible;
as to that, the tribunal concluded that the effect of Law 26,017 (the Ley Cerrojo),

passed while the 2005 POE was open for acceptance, was “that no realistic possibility

'57 Galli, Pico Estrada, Ghiglino Zubilar, and Claren Corporation v Argentina, decision of the Court of First
Instance of 2 March 2010, and Claren Corporation v Argentina, decision of the Court of Appeals of 15
February 2011.

158 At para. 583.

152

310.

311.

of meaningful consultations to settle the dispute with the Argentine Government
existed”.'*? It further found that it could not be held against the claimants in that
arbitration that they had not initiated consultations under Article 8(1) before the Law
was passed, since there was nothing in the Article to impose a temporal condition of

that kind.

Given that the relevant factual circumstances are to all intents and purposes identical
in the two arbitrations, the present Tribunal shares all of the above conclusions,
subject to one small shade of difference, in that the present Tribunal is inclined to
interpret the qualifying phrase ‘insofar as possible’ as relating more directly to the
prospect of arriving at a friendly settlement of the dispute than to the possibility of
bringing consultations into being. But that minor difference of assessment only goes
to reinforce the conclusion reached by the Ambiente Ufficio tribunal that Article 8(1)
of the BIT, properly interpreted, incorporates what might be called a ‘futility

exception’.

To the mind of the Tribunal, once that conclusion is reached, it logically follows that
a similar analysis pertains to Article 8(2), with its requirement of recourse to local
courts or administrative jurisdictions. This is so even though Article 8(2) contains no
phrase directly equivalent to the ‘insofar as possible’ of Article 8(1), since the absence
is easily explained by the reason given in paragraph 306 above, namely that the
limiting phrase attaches itself to the outcome of the process (i.e. the resolution of the
dispute), and that is a concept that does not figure directly in Article 8(2). But the
underlying logic is the same. On the one hand, it cannot be supposed that two
sophisticated governments could have intended that foreign investors be required to
begin an action before the local courts or administrative authorities just for show.
The underlying assumption must logically have been that the local courts or
administrative authorities would be in a position to pronounce a definitive and binding
solution to the dispute; that much is evident from the opening words of Article 8(3)
with their obvious implication that, within the specified time period, the dispute might
have ceased to ‘exist’. On the other hand, the specification of the time period itself

shows unambiguously, to the mind of the Tribunal, that the Contracting States had in

'59 At para. 585.

153

312.

313.

314.

view as the intervening step a process that would be potentially effective to settle the

issue in dispute.

It remains, therefore, for the Tribunal to consider whether the evidence before it
shows (as has been held on similar facts by the Abaclat and Ambiente Ufficio
tribunals) that neither prior course of proceeding held out any realistic likelihood of a

settlement of the dispute.

The Tribunal begins by noting that it is the Claimants who are advancing a justifying
excuse for their admitted failure to pursue literally the course of action foreseen in
Article 8, paragraphs (1) — (3), of the BIT. It follows on standard principles that the
Claimants carry the burden of establishing to the Tribunal’s satisfaction the facts on

which they base their justification as outlined in paragraph 307 above.

The Claimants’ argument is, firstly, that there was no realistic prospect of settling the
dispute by amicable consultations in the light of the policies espoused by the
Argentine government and (post-2005) of the legal effect of the Ley Cerrojo;
secondly, that there was no realistic prospect of securing an effective remedy from the
Argentine courts in light of the judicial decisions that had been handed down by those
courts before the present arbitration was initiated. They base the first limb of this
argument essentially on the assertion that the 2005 POE (like the revised POE of
2010) was presented on a take-it-or-leave it basis, with a very short time period for
acceptance, and involved a sacrifice of alternative legal remedies, and was very soon

set in stone by the Ley Cerrojo.'°

They accept that there had been discussions with
bondholder interests in various formations before the POE was made, but point out
that the POE was not the outcome of agreement with bondholder representatives, and
involved only certain limited concessions to the interests that had been advanced on

the part of bondholders. '*!

They base the second limb of the argument squarely on
the judgment of the Argentine Supreme Court in the Galli case, as reinforced by the
other cases cited,'® in which the Supreme Court declared that the restructuring of the
national debt lay within the purview of the political power, to which the judicial

power had to defer so long as the actions of the political power were reasonable and

'® Para. 34 above.
'6! para. 223 above.
'© See fn.157 above.

154

315.

non-discriminatory, and held moreover that failure by a bondholder to accept the POE
was a voluntary act which therefore entailed as a consequence that the entitlement to
raise a claim in Argentina had been forfeited. The Respondent’s answer depends on
drawing a distinction of principle between contract claims (under the bond
instruments themselves) and treaty claims (e.g. under the BIT). It maintains that Law
26,017 only affects contractual claims under the bond instruments but has “no impact
on any negotiation that may be conducted in connection with such treaty claims” and
adds that the Law merely took back for the Legislature the power to settle claims
(‘transar’ in Spanish) but did not preclude the Executive from negotiating settlements
that would then have to go back to the Legislature for approval — which is precisely
what happened over the revised POE in 2010. It refers in this context to the
evidence of its witness Dr Molina about the extensive contacts between the

Government and bondholder interests.

Faced with similar, or indeed identical arguments, the Abaclat and Ambiente Ufficio
tribunals dealt with the matter as follows. The Abaclat tribunal treated the
discussions that had taken place prior to 2005 between the Argentine authorities and
Task Force Argentina (‘TFA’) as in effect covering the interests of all Italian
bondholders, whether or not the particular claimants in the arbitration were party to
the TFA’s formal mandate. On that basis, it held that Argentina was precluded from
raising any failure of the claimants before it to pursue consultations under Article
8(1). As to the requirement for local litigation under Article 8(2), apart from various
other considerations which are not here material, the tribunal reached the conclusion
that actions before the courts of Argentina were doomed to fail in the light of the
terms of the Emergency Legislation. The Ambiente Ufficio tribunal, on the other
hand, found as a finding of fact that “at least since the adoption of [Law 26,017] it
was clear that no realistic possibility of meaningful consultations to settle the dispute
with the Argentine Government existed,” and found equally that that result was not
affected by the fact that the Argentine Congress could have at any time suspended or
eliminated the ban on consultations and negotiations and that it actually did so in 2010
in order to open the way for the new Exchange Offer. It found the crucial
consideration to be that the potential negotiating partner was not in a position so to act
while the law was in force (i.e. from 2005 onwards), and that the very reason for the

non-availability of meaningful consultations was above all the Argentine Congress’s

155

316.

adoption of Law No. 26,017.'% As to the question of prior recourse to the local
courts, the tribunal cites the Draft Articles of the International Law Commission
(ILC) on Diplomatic Protection 2006 as evidence of a general rule that requirements
of this kind are treated in international law as being subject to a futility exception.
The tribunal finds a strong structural parallel between the typical clause found in the
dispute settlement provisions of investment treaties and provisions for the exhaustion
of local remedies, in that both are designed to allow the domestic legal system to
correct a potential breach before the international legal responsibility of the State
becomes engaged; the significant difference between the two is the existence in the
former case of a time limit, where in the latter case there typically is none, but the
tribunal concludes that the time limit only serves to reinforce the argument for
applying a common futility exception. Putting this together with the facts of the case,
and relying once again on the test enunciated by the ILC,' the tribunal declines to
apply as a criterion either the trouble and expense a claimant would be put to, or the
actual likelihood that judgment would be reached within the 18 months stipulated in
Article 8(3), but focuses its attention on the main issue of substance, i.e. whether
recourse to the Argentine courts would have offered the claimants a reasonable
prospect of effective redress. Its conclusion that there would not in the circumstances
have been such a prospect is based on the decision in the Galli case coupled with the
further holding by the Supreme Court in the Brunicardi case that international
responsibility is precluded in international law where a State suspends or modifies

payment of the external debt for reasons of financial necessity.

The present Tribunal shares the analysis and the conclusions of the Ambiente Ufficio
tribunal. While it finds there to be a slight inconsistency between the passages from
the International Law Commission relied upon and the test actually applied by the
tribunal, it considers that the test applied by the tribunal is the right one, and indeed
the only meaningful one. In the particular circumstances, the effect of Law 26,017 as
interpreted and applied in the Galli case shows that the Argentine judicial system is

not (in the words of the ILC) ‘reasonably capable of providing effective relief’, with

‘63 Ambiente Ufficio Decision, paras. 585-586.

164

“The test is not whether a successful outcome is likely or possible but whether the municipal system of the

respondent State is reasonably capable of providing effective relief. This must be determined in the context of
the local law and the prevailing circumstances.” (Commentary to draft Article 15).

156

the consequence that ‘a successful outcome is [not] likely or possible’; in other words,

the two propositions collapse into one and there is no real contrast between them.

317. For the reasons given above, therefore, the Tribunal concludes that the Claimants
have met the burden on them to show that no substantial purpose would have been
served by attempting either to engage the Argentine authorities in amicable
consultations or in bringing an action before the Argentine courts. The Tribunal
therefore decides that the Claimants’ admitted failure to do so does not act as a
jurisdictional bar to their commencing ICSID arbitration. That being so, there is no
need for the Tribunal to give further consideration to the Claimants’ subsidiary claim
to invoke the most-favoured-nation clause in Article 3 of the BIT, which has

(understandably) been the subject of vigorous contestation between the Parties.

3. The ‘admissibility’ objections

318. The Tribunal accordingly moves to consider those of the Respondent’s preliminary
objections which it has classed (paragraph 260 above) as falling more on the
‘admissibility’ than on the ‘jurisdictional’ side of the line, on the basis that they would
entail the Tribunal deciding not to exercise — for a reason of judicial or other policy —

a jurisdiction which it had found itself to possess. A reason of that kind would of

 

course have to be a strong one, as an ICSID tribunal is under a duty to exercise a
jurisdiction conferred upon it. The reasons which the Respondent has advanced

under this head are the following, which will be considered in turn:-

a. that investment arbitration is an inherently unsuitable and unacceptable way of

dealing with default on sovereign bonded debt;

b. that the multiplicity of Claimants and the variations between them will require
procedural innovations that lie beyond the powers of an ICSID tribunal and will

not be able to protect the due process rights of the Respondent.

a. Sovereign default

319. The Respondent’s argument under this head was not comprehensively articulated in
its Memorial on Jurisdiction and Admissibility. It can however be summarized in the

passage from the Memorial quoted at paragraph 43 above:

157

320.

165

At the same time, the holders of interests in bonds who choose not to
participate in a restructuring cannot reasonably expect that the
sovereign debtor will be able to pay them a sum higher than that
accepted by the creditors who did participate in the restructuring.
Given that the whole process is voluntary in nature, no holder of
interests would choose to participate if he knew, or even had the
reasonable expectation, that another person, in a similar position,
would later receive a better offer. This is why the essential premise of
the debt restructuring process is that the sovereign state will accord the
same treatment to all creditors who are in a similar position.

In the case of Argentina’s 2005 Exchange Offer, this principle was

reflected in a clause, which set forth that if Argentina offered better

conditions to holdouts, it would have to provide the same improved

terms to such creditors as had previously accepted the Offer. In view

of the fact that the Exchange Offer was based upon terms that would

make it possible for Argentina to pay its new debt in the long term,

offering to pay a higher amount to any other creditor at a later time

would have defeated the purpose of the initial restructuring and would

have led Argentina once again to the position of unsustainable debt

existing before the Exchange Offer.
As the argument was not subsequently elaborated in detail, the Tribunal does not feel
obliged to treat it as a formal submission. The point at issue was however canvassed
in some detail in the Abaclat decision and a brief comment on it may be in order.
The Tribunal is sensible of the issues raised by the Respondent which it can well
understand might be regarded as serious matters on the international bond markets.
Even if so, that does not however answer the question of their relevance to this
investment arbitration under the BIT between Italy and Argentina which defines the
role and functions of this Tribunal. As a matter of basic principle, if a claim raised
before an ICSID tribunal is found to lie within its jurisdiction, the tribunal is under a
duty to exercise the jurisdiction. This is the necessary (though often unspoken)
corollary to the principle reflected in the annulment provisions in Article 52 of the
Convention that a tribunal may not exceed its powers. But it is given concrete
reflection in the series of decisions by ad hoc committees that a failure to exercise
jurisdiction can itself constitute a manifest excess of powers for the purposes of
Article 52.'° This means that the only relevant question for the present Tribunal is
whether or not the assets of the Claimants constitute ‘investments in the territory of

Argentina’ within the meaning of the BIT — a question on which the provisional

E.g. Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija, Soufraki, Industria Nacional de Alimentos, S.A. and Indalsa Perii,

S.A. (formerly Empresas Lucchetti, S.A. and Lucchetti Peri, S.A.) v Republic of Peru, CSID Case No.
ARB/03/4; see also the Schreuer Commentary (2nd ed.) at pp. 947-948.

158

321.

analysis of the Tribunal is set out at paragraphs 296-297 above. If the answer is in
the positive, then it is not for the Tribunal — nor indeed is it within the Tribunal’s
powers — to write into the BIT an exception to its terms. What that would entail can
be seen starkly illustrated when the proposition is set alongside the terms of Article 8
of the BIT, which expressly covers ‘any’ dispute relating to investments, and cannot
be interpreted to convey on the Tribunal an implicit power to decide that ‘any’ means
something less. As a fact of international economic life, sovereign bond issues were
plainly within the normal field of contemplation of the Contracting Parties at the time
when the BIT was under negotiation, and they could readily have introduced an
exception in that regard into an appropriate place in the BIT if that had been what they
wanted. The answer to the Respondent’s assertion lies in the first place therefore
(with all due respect to the dissenting arbitrator in Abaclat), not in asking the Tribunal
to import policy considerations into one area while vigorously rejecting them in
others, but rather in a sober analysis of whether, given that the original Bond issues
were plainly capable of falling within the concept of ‘investment in the territory of
Argentina’ under the BIT'®, the same necessarily applies to derivative rights of the
kind held by the Claimants. And, in the second place, in the essential proposition
that (as the Respondent itself has repeatedly insisted) it is not open to the Claimants to
use this arbitration as a means for vindicating their contractual rights as
‘bondholders’, but only such rights (and the associated remedies) as they can properly

lay claim to as ‘investors’ under the BIT.

b. Procedure: Due Process

The Respondent summarizes its objection under this head as being the
unmanageability of the proceedings, given the large number of individual Claimants,
the need to be able to investigate in each case whether the Claimant meets the
nationality requirements of the BIT, and the differentiated nature of the asserted
‘investments’ in the light both of the variety of bond issues involved and the variety
of times and circumstances at or under which individual Claimants can be assumed to
have acquired their ‘investments’. It complains as well about the failure of the
Claimants to respond to justified requests for relevant information in this regard, and

asserts that the combined effect is to deprive the Respondent of its ability to defend

166 Subject to the point in fn.147 above.

159

322.

323.

324.

‘7 Respondent's

itself adequately. ‘87 The particular point as to nationality requirements has to be seen
against the background of the Additional Protocol to the BIT'®, which incorporates

additional criteria (both negative and positive) relating to domicile.

The Claimants’ answer to the above is that sufficient information as to both
citizenship and residence has been offered in respect of each Claimant and that, if the
Respondent wishes to challenge the entitlement of any Claimant, it bears the onus of
establishing the factual basis for any such challenge. Their Post-Hearing Brief
describes the problems over identifying the exact numbers and identity of the
Claimants as purely clerical, but complains also about a lack of full cooperation
between the Parties over registering the discontinuance by some of the original
Claimants. It dismisses the Respondent’s due process concerns as being no more

than questions of case management.

The Tribunal can begin by saying that, if it did find that the inherent circumstances of
the case stood in the way of preserving the equality between the Parties or risked
denying either one side or the other a full and ample opportunity to present its case,
then it would have to give serious consideration to whether it could allow the
arbitration to proceed, or to proceed in its present form. This is because — and quite
irrespective of the fact that Article 52 of the ICSID Convention specifically includes
‘a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure’ among the grounds for
annulment — both the principle of equality of arms and the right to be heard are
fundamental to the judicial process. Both of these are legal principles which
therefore distinguish themselves automatically from issues of financial or economic

policy of the kind discussed in paragraph 320 above.

The above having been said, the Tribunal accepts the view put forward by the
Respondent that mere convenience or cost saving for a claimant or claimants would
not of itself be enough to justify proceedings that would otherwise be questionable —
although the same proposition applies in the reverse direction, ie. that mere
inefficiency (as the Respondent here asserts) cannot justify depriving a claimant or
claimants of a right to be heard that they would otherwise have. The prior question is

however whether there is anything in the nature of the present proceedings that raises

  

ost-Hearing Brief, paras. 37-41.

‘8 Which forms an integral part of the treaty; see the introductory rubric to the Additional Protocol.

160

justifiable doubts from the point of view of due process. This is a question that,
understandably, preoccupied the Abaclat and Ambiente Ufficio tribunals, both of
which decided after due consideration that such particular problems as might arise
could indeed be met (as the present Claimants have suggested) as matters of case
management. The Tribunal is aware from extraneous sources that both arbitrations

are proceeding in a merits phase and that, in the Abaclat case, numerous procedural

169

orders have been made to regulate the proceedings. The overall conclusion

reached in this regard by the Ambiente Ufficio tribunal is expressed in the following

terms in its Decision'”°:-

The Tribunal does not consider that the mere number of Claimants in
the present case would make the proceedings “unmanageable”, as the
Respondent has suggested, or would violate fundamental principles of
due process or would be unfair to the Respondent, neither in the
present jurisdictional phase nor in the merits phase of the proceedings.

In the First Session, the Parties have agreed that the “preliminary
phase would deal with preliminary objections of a general character
only, but not with any jurisdictional issues that may arise in relation to
individual claimants, which would be dealt with at a later stage as
necessary and appropriate”. Given this fact, the criticism on the part of
the Respondent that the impossibility to look at the specific
circumstances of each single Claimant already in the jurisdictional
phase would entail a limitation of Argentina’s defense rights (R II §
149; R IV p. 11; R V p. 6) cannot be upheld by the Tribunal.
Accordingly, in this preliminary phase of the proceedings, the Tribunal
has to restrict itself to a general assessment whether there is
jurisdiction to decide the dispute in question. The fact that there are
several dozens of Claimants involved in these proceedings has no
impact at all on the assessment to be made by the Tribunal at this stage
of the proceedings.

But even in the subsequent merits phase of the proceedings, the
Tribunal cannot see a fundamental problem in taking evidence
regarding, and assessing, the individual case of each and every of the
90 Claimants remaining in the case. Whether it is necessary and
appropriate to call every single Claimant into the witness stand and
cross-examine them there in order to safeguard the fundamental
principles of due process, as Respondent seems to suggest (R I § 109;
RII § 148; R III § 35), is to be decided at the appropriate time on the
basis of the relevant facts and according to the applicable rules of law.
The Tribunal does not take a stand on this question at this moment.

'® Which in the Abaclat case have been published by the Centre.
At paras. 166-170.

161

325.

c.

326.

The Tribunal is in full agreement with the Respondent that, in the
adjudication of the present dispute, it is fully bound by Art. 44 of the
ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule 19, and the Tribunal will be
fully mindful of this legal framework when discharging its duty to
control and direct the unfolding of the proceedings through procedural
orders. In view of the circumstances of the present case, notably the
considerable but nonetheless limited number of Claimants, the
Tribunal would not consider that the specific controversy regarding the
scope of an ICSID tribunal’s power to devise “necessary adaptations”
to the ICSID standard procedure which arose in the context of the
Abaclat case92 and to which the Parties have referred (C III § 88; R III
§ 26; R IV pp. 10, 11; Tr p. 224/17), would be relevant to the present
case.

In particular, the Tribunal cannot see in which manner the obvious
right of both Parties to the proceedings being conducted according to
the principles of fairness and due process would be encroached upon
or what defense right of the Respondent might be curtailed or
otherwise negatively affected by the mere fact of the Tribunal
admitting that 119 or 90 Claimants, respectively, may institute multi-
party proceedings under Art. 25 of the ICSID Convention.

Given the essential similarity between that arbitral proceeding and the present one,
including in respect of the number of claimants before the tribunal in each case, and
taking into account as well that the arguments presented to the two tribunals on the
question of due process were essentially the same, the present Tribunal sees no good
reason for reaching a conclusion any different from that arrived at by the Ambiente

Ufficio tribunal.

The Tribunal determines accordingly that — the still outstanding questions of
jurisdiction aside — the claims as put forward in this arbitration are admissible. A
procedural order will follow, after further consultation with the Parties, setting the
framework for the next phase in this arbitration and in preparing that framework the
Tribunal will carefully consider the views of all parties in order to ensure that the

requirements of due process are fully observed.

PARTIES, CASE TITLE, AND COSTS

The Tribunal must finally deal with an issue that had also raised itself in the Abaclat
and Ambiente Ufficio arbitrations, namely the identification of an accurate and reliable

list of the Claimants who should be regarded as parties to the proceedings at the

162

327.

328.

329.

current stage of the Arbitration, and the consequences that might have for determining

a title by which the case can be known.

It would appear, as explained at the outset of this Decision in paragraphs 1 and 31
above, that at the initiation of the present Arbitration proceedings there were 183
Claimants in all. They are listed by name in a chart included in the Claimants’
Request for Arbitration. According to the Claimants the number now remaining
is 74. The reduction is attributable to a large extent, as in the Abaclat and Ambiente
Ufficio arbitrations, to some amongst the original Claimants having accepted the 2010
POE and tendered their security entitlements in order to benefit from it; that accounts
for 62 of the original 183 Claimants. To a lesser, though not insignificant, extent,
though, the reduction is attributable to original Claimants having sold their security
entitlements (42) or surrendered them to the issuing Bank (2). The documentary
support for the Claimants’ figure of 74 is contained in an annex to their Post-Hearing
Brief and in the submission containing their comments on the Decision of the Abaclat

tribunal.'7!

There remain however certain discrepancies which the Tribunal is unable
to resolve on the basis of the documentation before it, and will have to be taken up

with the Parties in the next stage of the proceedings.

During the suspension of the proceedings on account of the 2010 POE recorded in
paragraphs 14-18 above, the Tribunal issued a Direction on 29 July 2010 in which it
required Counsel for the Claimants to indicate not later than 12 August 2010, on the
instructions of the persons concerned, whether any of the Claimants wished to
discontinue its claim in the proceedings, and to specify such persons by name.
Counsel for the Respondent was then to confirm within two weeks thereafter whether
the Respondent agreed, for the purposes of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, to the
discontinuance of the claims in question. The Tribunal further indicated that it would
then formally order those claims to be removed from the record for the subsequent

stages of the proceedings.

In a further direction of 13 August 2010, the Tribunal indicated that, in the absence of
any response to these requests, the proceedings would continue in the name of all of
the Claimants on record, and that any future request for discontinuance would be

handled in accordance with Rules 43-45 of the Arbitration Rules.

""! Paras. 242ff. above.

163

330.

331.

332.

333.

The Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction was filed on 1 September 2010. It included

the following paragraph:

In response to [the Tribunal’s Direction of 29 July 2014] Counsel for
the Claimants attach hereto ... a list containing the names of the
Claimants who have discontinued the proceedings as of September 1,
2010. Owing to the holiday period in Europe, during which also
NASAM’s offices have been closed for several weeks, which makes it
impossible to verify the complete accuracy of this information,
Counsel respectfully requests permission to update this list in the
coming weeks based on the information they will receive from the
Claimants directly or through NASAM.
It submitted also that the Respondent had already implicitly given its consent to
discontinuance by requiring, as a condition for participation in the 2010 POE, that

bondholders cease all legal proceedings against Argentina.

Having deliberated, the Tribunal decided to grant this request and ordered Counsel to
submit by 21 September 2010 “a complete updated list of the Claimants who have
decided to discontinue the proceeding”. The Respondent was then given until 5
October 2010 to indicate “whether it opposes discontinuance by the Claimants on the

updated list”.

By letter of 21 September 2010, Counsel for the Claimants submitted an updated list
(with identifying details) of Claimants “who have decided to discontinue the
proceeding,” and by letter of 5 October 2010 the Respondent indicated that, pursuant
to Arbitration Rule 44, it did not oppose the discontinuance of the proceedings “in
respect of those Claimants who, among those listed in the Updated List, have entered
into the 2010 Exchange Offer” and in this context requested the Tribunal to instruct
the Claimants to submit prompt information as to which among them had tendered
into the POE. The Respondent’s letter further indicated that, as the terms of the POE
provided that Argentina would not be responsible for any costs in connection with any
proceeding dismissed pursuant to acceptance of the POE, the Tribunal should in due
course order that the discontinuing Claimants should share equally with the

Respondent the costs of the arbitration and each of them should bear their own costs.

By letter of 22 March 2011, as part of the preparation for the oral hearing, the
Tribunal invited the Parties to consult on a process for arriving at a final and agreed

list of those Claimants who were still in the case, and those who had discontinued,

164

334.

335.

and on what changes (if any) should be made to the title of the arbitration given the
withdrawal of Mr. Alemanni. The Parties were to report back to the Tribunal not
later than the end of April. No response having been received, the Tribunal reminded
the Parties during the course of the oral hearing that the matter was still outstanding,
and the Respondent informed the Tribunal that it would react formally to the
Claimants’ list in due course. In the Post-Hearing Briefs, the Claimants submitted a
further updated list and took the position that there was agreement between the two
sides that those Claimants who accepted the 2010 POE were no longer party to the
proceedings, but that an issue remained as to those Claimants who had sold their
security interests to third parties in the intervening period; whereas the Respondent for
its part (without addressing specifically the Claimants’ lists) maintained that there

continued to be “great uncertainty as to who the true Claimants are”.

By letters of 9 September and 8 November 2011 and 11 April 2012, the Tribunal once
again solicited the Parties’ views as to the effect of the changes in the participants on
the naming of the case. Ina further letter of 18 June 2012, the Tribunal put on record
its regret that, despite these repeated requests, there had been neither a response to
that question nor any indication to the Tribunal that the Parties had reached agreement
as to which of the original claimants should be regarded as having discontinued their
claims in accordance with Rule 44 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. The letter
included the following ruling on the subject: “as regards the identification of the
remaining Claimant Parties, if, in the event, the Tribunal’s decision on the
Respondent’s Preliminary Objections has the effect that the case continues to the
merits, the Tribunal will at an early stage thereafter lay down a procedure, after
consultation with counsel, that will place it in a position to determine formally and
conclusively the identities of the Parties to the substantive phase of the arbitral

proceedings”.

It will be apparent from the above that the Tribunal is still not in a position either to
settle in its own mind certain unresolved discrepancies it has itself identified in the
enumeration of those who are said to be the remaining and continuing Claimants in
this arbitration. Nor is it in a position to assess what the ‘great uncertainty’ is to
which the Respondent has referred on more than one occasion or what the exact

nature of the disagreement is between the Parties on this matter, nor — more

165

336.

importantly still — what the reasons behind any such disagreement are. The Tribunal
remains, in other words, in the position foreshadowed in its letter of 18 June 2012,
that it is not able to rule at present on who the Parties to these proceedings are on the
Claimants’ side. This is however a matter of a primary nature that ought to have been
settled with definitive effect at a much earlier stage. The evident difficulty that
Claimants’ counsel have had from time to time in assembling accurate and reliable
information about the persons they represent before the Tribunal must necessarily add
further fuel to some of the anxieties which the Tribunal has expressed in paragraphs
278-279 above; conversely the failure by the Respondent to exert itself to resolve the
outstanding questions over the lists as requested on repeated occasions by the
Tribunal must necessarily raise questions as to how serious the vaunted difficulties
really are. The Tribunal does not see how the interests of either side can be served by
the perpetuation of this uncertainty, and cannot but express its disappointment
therefore at the absence of the minimum degree of cooperation between the two sides
that would have enabled them either to settle these elementary matters by agreement,
or failing that to submit to the Tribunal (by agreement) defined questions on which
the Tribunal was requested to rule. As it is, and even though it is contrary to good
order for this to be so, the matter will have to remain unsettled until resolved in

accordance with the Tribunal’s ruling of 18 June 2012 (paragraph 334 above).

The Tribunal turns finally to the question of costs raised by the Respondent
(paragraph 332 above). Despite the continuing uncertainty over the precise listing of
the continuing Claimants, it is at least accepted on all hands that a substantial number
of the initial Claimants have fallen out of the proceedings on account of their
acceptance of the 2010 POE. The Respondent bases its argument in favour of a
partial costs order against them on the fact that it was the Claimants who initiated the
arbitration and on a clause in the POE (paragraph 332 above). An argument of a
similar kind appears to have succeeded before the Abaclat and Ambiente Ufficio
tribunals. It seems however self-evident to this Tribunal that the question is
premature in the present state of this arbitration; without an authoritative
determination of whom among the original Claimants are to be regarded as having
discontinued, a cost calculation would be difficult if not impossible except in the
abstract, and it would not in any case be possible to make a costs order against

unnamed persons.

166

337.

IV.

Irrespective of the above, the Tribunal remains to be persuaded that it would be
justifiable to make a pro rata cost apportionment as was done in the two arbitrations
cited above. In the first place, the invocation by the Respondent of a clause in the
POE is of no more than incidental relevance to the framework which governs this
arbitration. The POE, like the bonded indebtedness which underlies it, is a
contractual arrangement between creditors and debtor, the terms of which are not
binding on this Tribunal and do not give rise in and of themselves to any right or
remedy in this arbitration. The principles governing the allocation of costs by this
Tribunal are autonomous and subject to the broad discretion which Article 61 of the
ICSID Convention confers upon it. At a more fundamental level, however, the
Tribunal considers that the assumption of a purely numerical proration of costs
according to the number of discontinuing Claimants in relation to the number of
original Claimants is conceptually flawed, given that this initial phase of the
arbitration has been expressly designed to deal with general issues relating to all
Claimants and to exclude the specific consideration of individual Claimants. Under
those circumstances, it is by no means obvious what the marginal cost to the
Respondent has been to fight these issues against 183 Claimants collectively than
against (say) only 74 of them — if indeed there has been any marginal extra cost at all.
These matters remain therefore at large, to be dealt with at the time the Tribunal rules
definitively on the question of discontinuance, at which stage it will if necessary call

for specific argument on costs from both sides.

CONCLUSIONS

For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal decides as follows:-

i.

iii.

The Respondent’s Preliminary Objection based on the absence of consent on the part
of the Claimants is rejected.

The Respondent’s Preliminary Objection based on the nature of the Claimants’ legal
representation is rejected.

The Respondent’s Preliminary Objection based on the multiplicity of claimants is
rejected in part and for the rest joined to the merits as more fully described in
paragraphs 287-294 above.

The Respondent’s Preliminary Objection based on the absence of an investment,
within the meaning of the BIT, in the territory of Argentina is rejected in part and for
the rest joined to the merits as more fully described in paragraphs 293 and 297 above.
The Respondent’s Preliminary Objection based on the absence of a prima facie
showing of breach of the BIT is rejected.

167

vi. | The Respondent’s Preliminary Objection based on the failure to pursue the prior steps
laid down in Article 8 of the BIT is rejected for the particular reasons given in
paragraphs 313-317 above.

vii. | The Respondent’s Preliminary Objection based on considerations of due process is
rejected.
viii. A decision on the allocation of the costs of this phase of the proceedings is reserved.

Done in English and Spanish, both versions being equally authentic.

[SIGNED]

Sir Franklin Berman KCMG, QC
President of the Tribunal

[SIGNED] [SIGNED]
Professor Karl-Heinz Bockstiegel Mr J. Christopher Thomas QC
Arbitrator Arbitrator

168

Concurring Opinion of Mr J Christopher Thomas QC

1. I have found the issues raised by the multi-party nature of the proceeding to be
very difficult indeed, but in the end have subscribed to the course charted by the Tribunal.
Faced with a situation in which the Claimants all prima facie would have had a basis for
invoking the BIT had they filed their claims individually, the issue presented to the Tribunal
has been to decide whether the fact that they filed a single, collective action without the
Respondent’s consent fundamentally changes the nature of the claims such as to deprive the
Tribunal of the jurisdiction to hear them.

2. The Tribunal has concluded that if in fact it is presented with a “single dispute”,
it falls within the Parties’ written consent required by Article 25 of the Convention; the
Tribunal sees no additional requirement for a special consent.'” The claims either fall to be
considered as a single dispute within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction or they do not. Not without
misgivings, I have come to agree with this decision.

3. To begin, in my view, the ICSID Convention is capable of supporting multi-party
arbitration. At the Third Annual Meeting of the ICSID Administrative Council, in 1969, the
then-Secretary-General, Aron Broches, discussed the Secretariat’s intention to develop rules
and procedures for such arbitrations." The stated objective was to draft model “Special
Consent Clauses” and to consider what “special Regulations and Rules” might be required
for multi-party ICSID arbitrations.'™*

4, Although Mr. Broches’ comments were made in contemplation of contractual,
rather than treaty arbitration, they evince the view that the Convention is sufficiently broadly
drafted so as to be able to encompass this type of arbitration and, on my reading of the
Convention, this is the case. They also indicate his view, at least, that special consent clauses
and perhaps special regulations and rules would be required to allow the Convention to
provide proper support to such proceedings.’ In the end, however, no such special clauses,
regulations or rules were developed and approved by the ICSID Administrative Council and
since the beginning of ICSID arbitration the various iterations of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules have not departed from what appears to me to be an assumed predicate of bilateral
disputes.

Im

Decision, paragraphs 280-292.

"3 As noted by the Tribunal at paragraph 271 of the Decision.
1™4 Address by A. BROCHES, Secretary-General, to the Third Annual Meeting of the ICSID
Administrative Council (September 29, 1969): “...as I observed at our meeting last year, many significant

international investment arrangements involve more than just two parties, and for these it would be
desirable to insert into the related agreements provisions for the settlement of multipartite disputes. At
that time I suggested that it might be useful to promulgate special Regulations and Rules to facilitate such
proceedings, but pending such a step by this Council we are now formulating a set of Special Consent
Clauses that parties could insert into multipartite investment contracts.”

175 I am aware that the statements of the Secretary-General do not fit within the normal
interpretative sources set out in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. Allowance must be made,
however, for the seminal role that Mr Broches played in the conception and elaboration of the
Convention. His views are to be accorded special weight.

169

5. Various ICSID tribunals have since considered claims brought by more than one
claimant; as noted by the Tribunal, most of these claims were proceeded on the basis that the
co-claimants had different interests in the same investment vehicle.'”

6. The possibility of arbitrating multi-party investment treaty disputes did not arise
until the early 1990s. Then, starting with the NAFTA, pairs and groupings of states began to
address the possibility of multiple claims by different parties with common issues of fact
and/or law by including consolidation provisions in their treaties. Such provisions allow any
party (one of a number of claimants or a respondent) to apply to a “consolidation tribunal”
for the consolidation of separate claims that share common questions of fact and/or law. '”
Based upon the NAFTA example, many states have subsequently included consolidation
provisions in their treaties.'” The very existence of consolidation provisions recognizes that
the commonalities between treaty claims may be so strong as to justify their being heard
together in whole or in part and that this may dictate forcibly consolidating separate claims
over the objection of one or more disputing patties.'”

"% Decision, paragraph 285.

7 NAFTA Article 1126, Consolidation.

18 Consolidation provisions akin to NAFTA Article 1126 have since been negotiated in many
bilateral investment treaties and free trade agreements entered into by each of the NAFTA Parties with
other ICSID Contracting States and have been adopted by other non-NAFTA States in their treaty-
making practice. States as diverse as Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Brunei, Chile, China, Costa Rica,
the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Germany, Guatemala, Honduras, Iceland, India, Italy, Korea,
Japan, Jordan, Malaysia, Morocco, Nicaragua, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Oman, Panama, Peru, the
Philippines, Rwanda, ‘Thailand, Singapore, Slovakia, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and
Uruguay have all entered into investment treaties with consolidation provisions. For example, the United
States has included a power vested in the tribunal to consolidate proceedings in subsequent free trade
agreements with investment chapters such as the CAFT'A-DR, Chile, Korea, Morocco, Jordan, Oman,
Panama, Peru, and Singapore. All are available at: http://www.ustr.gov/trade-agreements/free-trade-
agreements. See also, Article 33 of the 2012 U.S. Model Bilateral Investment Treaty. For the proliferation
of consolidation clauses, variously labelled as "Consolidation" or "Consolidation of Multiple Claims" in
Mexico's treaties, see various bilateral investment treaties entered into by Mexico with various members
of the European Union and other states such as: Australia, China, Iceland, India, Korea, and Switzerland.
All are available at: http://www.unctadxi.org/templates/DocSearch 779.aspx. Likewise, Canada has
entered into a number of post-NAFTA Foreign Investment Protection Agreements (FIPAs) and free
trade agreements aid provide for consolidation of claims. ‘These can be seen at
hetp://www.int Lge. 5 s

apie/index.aspx?view=d. The ASEAN Comprehensive Investment Agreement also includes a
consolidation provision as does the Agreement establishing the ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free
Trade Agreement (http://www.asean.fta.govt.nz/). The foregoing list of ICSID Contracting States that
have agreed consolidation provisions in recent treaties does not purport to be exhaustive.

'% "In a Discussion Paper prepared for UNCITRAL by Jan Paulsson and Georgios Petrochilos,
when UNCITRAL launched the process of revising its 1976 Arbitration Rules, NAFTA Article 1126 was
described as “remarkably far-reaching” in going so far as to permit consolidation even when the parties
are not the same and allowing consolidation to proceed over the objections of claimants. See “Revision of
the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules”, a Report by Jan Paulsson and Georgios Petrochilos, Freshfields
Bruckhaus Deringer, Paris, paragraph = «126. and_~— footnote ~— 138. Available at:
http://www.uncitral.org/pdf/spanish/tac/events/hond07/arbrules_report.pdf. The authors’ description
is an indication of how radically different a treaty-based consolidation provision was from the existing
practices of international commercial arbitration. As the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules stood at the time of the
revision process, “consolidation [was] possible only where the parties specifically so agree”. UN
Commission on International Trade Law Working Group II (Arbitration), Settlement of Commercial
Disputes: Revision of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, U.N. Doc. A/CN.9/WG.II/WP. 143 (20 July

170

 

7. Such a process contains important procedural features. All parties — claimants
and respondents alike — are able to make submissions to a tribunal in favour of or against
consolidation. This strikes a balance, recognizes the equality of the parties, and takes into
consideration the interests of all parties. Put another way, no party has a dominant say in
whether the claims will be consolidated, because that determination rests in the hands of the
tribunal. It will decide whether the claims will proceed separately or together, in whole or in
part. (In essence, it decides whether there is a “single dispute” in the sense used by the
present Tribunal.'*)

8. However, there are many treaties — including the Treaty governing the present
dispute — that lack such a provision, with the consequence that, faced with a decision by one
side to present the claims collectively, they throw the parties and tribunals back to first
ptinciples.

9. In my view, the Claimants have effectively “self-consolidated” their individual
claims by presenting them as one collective claim. As observed at paragraph 284 of the
Decision, in the present Arbitration, there exist no separate sets of parallel proceedings, “but
only one single proceeding instituted against the same Respondent by a multiple group of
Claimants.” The logic and attractiveness of this approach from the Claimants’ perspective
can be well understood given the issues of fact and law that are evidently common to their
claims (for example, their acquisition of security entitlements derived from bonds issued by
the Argentine Republic, the fact of sovereign default and the enactment of the Ley Cerrojo), as
well as the cost and efficiency gains derived from such a process. It had the added advantage
of presenting the Respondent with a fait accompli (or more precisely, in light of the Tribunal’s
Decision, something close to being a fait accompli) on the proceeding’s unfolding as a
collective one over the Respondent’s vigorously stated objections.

10. As the Tribunal has pointed out, in cases such as Canadian Cattlemen and Bayview,
the respondents insisted that (in the absence of a formal application to a consolidation
tribunal) they had to give their consent to the consolidation of individual claims that were
sought to be heard together."*' In practice, therefore, as the Tribunal has recognized, there
are examples of respondents insisting on their claimed right to consent to individual claims

 

2006), paragraph 68. (A RA 301.) The 2010 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules continue to emphasise the
central role of party consent. Garth Schofield in "The 2010 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules: Changes and
Implications for Practice," p 5. Available at: http://www2.americanbar.org/calendat/section-of-
international-law-201 1-spring-
meeting/Documents/Friday/Changing%20the%20Rules /THE%202010%20UNCITRAL%20ARBITRA
TION%20RULES.pdf, observed that the 2010 UNCITRAL Rules explicitly provide for the joinder of
third parties, subject to the condition that any such additional parties were also party to the underlying
arbitration agreement, but they did not incorporate more expansive proposals, including the non-
consensual joinder of parties not party to the original arbitration agreement, or the consolidation of
related arbitrations arising under different instruments.
180 In the Matter of: The North American Free Trade Agreement; And in the Matter of: A Request for
Consolidation by the United In States of the claims in: Corn Products International, v. United Mexican States (ICSID
Case No. ARB (AF)/04/1) and Archer Daniels Midland Company and Tate & Lyle Ingredients Americas, Inc. v.
United Mexican States ~~ (ICSID. — Case. =~ No. =~ -ARB(AF)/04/5), available at:
i ites/default/ fil ita0242.pdf; Canfor Corporation v. United States of
America and Tembec et al v. United States of America and Terminal Forest Products Ltd. v. United States of America,
Order of the Consolidation ‘Tribunal, available at:
zation/53113.pdf.

 

 

:/ /www.state, documents/organizatio:
rs Decision, paragraphs. 385, 288,

171

182

being heard collectively (and this echoes Mr Broches’ comment on the need for a Special
Consent Clause for multi-party ICSID arbitrations). This is due to the fact that registering a
group of individual claims as one single proceeding can conceivably have an impact, both
positively and negatively, on each Party’s ability to make its case.

11. In the absence of a consolidation provision, the Tribunal has dealt with the issue
as follows. Having noted that there is only one single proceeding begun against the same
Respondent by a multiple group of Claimants, it comments: “Tf, all the same, joinder, or
alternatively consolidation, would not be admissible as a unilateral move by a group of
claimants in separate but parallel arbitrations, the question inevitably arises, in what way is
the position different if the grouping takes place beforehand, ie. at the stage of the initiation
of the arbitral proceedings at the unilateral initiative of a number of individual claimants?”'”
The Tribunal has answered this question by holding, at paragraphs 292-294, that a number of
individual claimants can take the unilateral initiative of filing their claims together if there is a
single dispute between the claimants and the respondent.

12. In my view, the Tribunal’s search for the existence of a single dispute where, on
the one hand, all Claimants have felt the effect of the Respondent’s measures, but on the
other hand, they have acquired different security entitlements in different bond issues at
different times and in different circumstances, represents the best possible solution in the
circumstances, having regard to: (i) the absence of a special consent clause and special rules
and procedures on multi-party ICSID arbitrations; (ii) the absence of a consolidation
provision in the Treaty; and (iii) the fundamental precepts of ICSID arbitration (vz. equality
of arms and a full opportunity to make one’s case). In the event that the Tribunal finds such
a dispute, consent to this multi-party arbitration exists.

13. This leads to my final point, which is to underscore the Tribunal’s recording, at
paragraph 294, of the need to ensure that there is sufficient Claimant-specific evidence on
the record in order to satisfy itself as to the existence, or not, of a single dispute and to
ensure that all parties have a full opportunity to make their respective cases. This, in my view,
is of seminal importance to the proper administration of justice in this case.

[SIGNED]

J. Christopher Thomas QC

Decision, paragraph 284.
172

