DECISION ON APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION BY QUECHAN INDIAN

NATION
September 16, 2005
Glamis Gold, Ltd., Claimant

v.
The United States of America, Respondent

An Arbitration Under Chapter 11 of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA),
in accordance with the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
(UNCITRAL) Arbitration Rules, and administered by the International Centre for

Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID)

Michael K. Young, President
David D. Caron, Arbitrator
Donald L. Morgan, Arbitrator

I. Procedural Background

1,

By letter dated February 24, 2005, to counsel for the Parties, Courtney Ann
Coyle, Esquire, advised that her client the Quechan Indian Nation of Fort Yuma
Arizona and California USA wished to participate in the above captioned matter
as a non-disputing party. On March 9, 2005, Ms. Coyle provided a copy of the
letter to Secretary of the Tribunal Eloise M. Obadia with a request that she
distribute it to the Members of the Tribunal. Ms. Obadia did so on

March 10, 2005.

By letter dated June 21, 2005, Tribunal President Michael K. Young advised Ms.
Coyle that the Tribunal intended to consider her request pursuant to the
ptinciples articulated in the Free Trade Commission’s Statement on non-
disputing party participation. To that end his letter invited her to make
application for leave to file a non-disputing party submission and called her
attention to Section B of the Statement respecting procedures for making such
application and procedures for submitting the submission itself. His letter further
advised that the application and submission should be submitted by

July 26, 2005.

By facsimile transmitted to the Tribunal on July 25, 2005, and dated July 22,
2005, Ms. Coyle requested leave to submit her application and submis
March 2006, after the Parties would have submitted their memorials.

 

By letter dated July 28, 2006, Tribunal President Michael K. Young advised Ms.
Coyle that the Tribunal intended to allow participation by qualified non-parties
but, in doing so, to also avoid disruption of the proceedings and to minimize any
burden to the parties. His letter extended the time for her to submit an
application and submission until August 19, 2005.

DECISION ON APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION BY QUECHAN INDIAN NATION

Page 2

ow

6.

By correspondence dated August 19, 2005, Ms. Coyle submitted an application
and submission to the Tribunal, with copies to counsel for the Parties.

By letter of August 26, 2005, to counsel for the Parties, Tribunal President
Michael K. Young advised that they could submit by September 15, 2005,
comments on whether the Tribunal should accept the application and
submission that Ms. Coyle had made.

On September 15, 2005, the Claimant deferred to the views of the Tribunal on
whether to accept the application and submission. The Claimant took issue with
a number of factual and other aspects of the submission. On the same date the
Respondent asked the Tribunal to accept the application and submission, stating
that they qualified for acceptance under the Statement of the Free Trade
Commission.

II. Applicable Law

8.

9.

This arbitration is conducted under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

The Tribunal need not now decide whether the discretion to accept substantive
materials from non-parties is within the discretion of the Tribunal under Article
15(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules. The Free Trade Commission’s Statement on
non-disputing party participation indicates that the three states in NAFTA accept
such statements. More particularly, the parties in this proceeding do not object to
such statements, at least where consideration of the material is in accordance
with the Free Trade Commission’s Statement.

III.Decision

10. Upon review of the application and submission and consideration of the views

of the Parties, the Tribunal is of the view that the submission satisfies the
ptinciples of the Free Trade Commission’s Statement on non-disputing party
participation.

11. The Tribunal believes that in allowing such participation, it is important

simultaneously to avoid undue burden on the Parties and delay in the
ptoceedings.

12. The Tribunal finds that acceptance of this application and submission would not

ptesent undue burden or cause delay.

13, The Tribunal thus concludes that the submission should be, and hereby is,

accepted.

14. The Tribunal observes that the Statement of the Free Trade Commission on

non-disputing party participation provides among other things that “[t]he
granting of leave to file a non-disputing party submission does not require the
tribunal to address that submission at any point in the arbitration. The granting
of leave to file a non-disputing party submission does not entitle the non-
disputing party that filed the submission to make further submissions in the
arbitration.”

 

DECISION ON APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION BY QUECHAN INDIAN NATION
Page 3

15. The Tribunal further observes that its acceptance does not signify agreement or
disagreement with the substance of the submission. The Tribunal notes that the
Parties have further opportunity to comment on the submission, up to and
including respectively the Memorial and the Counter Memorial.

16. A copy of this order shall be provided to the Quechan Indian Nation of Fort
Yuma Arizona and California USA through their counsel.

Signed September 19, 2005

Michael K. Young
President of the Tribunal on behalf of the Tribunal

David D. Caron, Tribunal Member
Donald L. Morgan, Tribunal Member

