INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT
DISPUTES

In the annulment proceeding between

GLENCORE INTERNATIONAL AG & CI PRODECO SA
(Claimants / Respondents on Annulment)
-v-
REPUBLIC OF COLOMBIA
(Respondent / Applicant on Annulment)

ICSID CASE NO ARB/16/6

 

DECISION ON ANNULMENT

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Sir Christopher Greenwood, GBE, CMG, QC, President
Ms Bertha Cooper-Rousseau, Member of the ad hoc Committee

Professor Doug Jones, AO, Member of the ad hoc Committee

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Ms Alicia Martin Blanco

Assistant to the President
Ms Rosalind Elphick

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 22 September 2021

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

For Glencore International A.G. and C.I.
Prodeco S.A.:

Mr Nigel Blackaby QC

Ms Caroline Richard

Ms Jessica Moscoso

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer US LLP
700 13th Street NW

10th Floor

Washington, D.C. 20005-3960

USA

Mr Elliot Friedman

Ms Paige von Mehren

Ms Elvira Sihvola

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer US LLP
601 Lexington Avenue, 31st Floor

New York, NY 10022

USA

Mr Gustavo Topalian
Dechamps International Law
Juncal 802 6° N

Buenos Aires - C1062ABF
Argentina

Mr José Manuel Alvarez
Alvarez Zarate & Asociados
Calle 82 No. 11-37 Of 501
Bogota D.C.

Colombia

For the Republic of Colombia:

Dr Camilo Gomez Alzate

Ms Ana Maria Ordojiez Puentes

Ms Elizabeth Prado Lopez

Agencia Nacional de Defensa Juridica del
Estado

Carrera 7 No. 75-66, pisos 2 y 3

Bogota D.C.

Colombia

Professor Eduardo Silva Romero
Mr José Manuel Garcia Represa
Ms Audrey Caminades

Dechert (Paris) LLP

32 rue de Monceau

Paris, 75008

France

Mr Amir Ardelan Farhadi
Dechert LLP

1900 K Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20006
USA

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

I. INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES 1
II. PROCEDURAL HISTORY 2
II]. THE BACKGROUND TO THE APPLICATION ...0..c.cccececece eee eeeeeeseeseeeeeesetetseeteeeeeenes 6
A. Summary of the Factual Background ou... cccescessesesseseseeeeeeseeeeeesescseseeteseeeeateeeeeee 6

(1) The Mining Contract 6

(2) The Eighth Amend 9

(a) Initiation of Negotiation: 9

(b) The Pricing Dispute 10

(c) The La Jagua Mine and the Three Hectares Contract .........ccceeseeseseeeeeeeees 11

(d) The Conclusion of the Eighth Amendment ............c.ccceececseesesseesseeeeeeneene 13

(3) The Contraloria Proceeding: 14

B. Glencore’s Claim before the Tribunal and Colombia’s Response .............0:sseseee 16

C. The Tribunal’s Decisions Regarding the Production and Exclusion of Documents.... 18

(1) Colombia’s First Attempt to Introduce Documents Seized from Glencore and

 

 

 

Prodeco 18

(2) Procedural Order No. 2 (4 November 2017) ...ccccceseeeseseessseeneseeeseeeseeeeeenees 21

(3) The Steps taken by the Parties following Procedural Order No. 2.......cseeeeeee 26

(4) Procedural Order No. 4 (24 April 2018)... ceceeeeeeseeseseeeseeeseessseeeseesseeeeeeeaees 32

(5) Developments following Procedural Order No. 4 ......ccceseesseeseseeeseeeseeneeeenees 36

(a) The Claim of Privilege .......scccsccsssesssesseesseesseesseesseesseesssesssesseesssesseesseesseesseeass 36

(b) The FGN Document: 38

(6) The Tribunal’s Letter of 18 May 2018 and Procedural Order No. 6 .......ceeeeee 40

(7) Document R-100 44

D. The Award 46

 

(1) The Payment to Mr Maldonado and Mr Garcia
(2) The fact that Mr Maldonado was a Former Employee of Minercol and Carbocol53

 

 

(3) The Timing of the Payments
(4) The Alleged Concealment of the Transaction ........ccecseseseeseseeeeseeeseeeseeeeeenees 54

 

(5) Alleged Restriction of Knowledge of the Payment to Top Management.
(6) Disregard of Mandatory Regulations

 
 
 
 

(7) Destination of the Payments
IV. THE GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT

(1) The Documents Issue 59

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(2) The Illegality Issue 59
V. THE STANDARD ON ANNULMENT

A. The Positions of the Parties 60
(1) Colombia 61
(2) Glencore and Prodeco 64
B. The Analysis of the Cc i 66
(1) The Nature of Annulment and the Powers of an Ad Hoc Committee... 66
(2) Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure ........ cece 68

(3) Manifest Excess of Power. 71
(4) Failure to State Reasons 74
VI. THE DOCUMENTS ISSUE 76
A. The Positions of the Parties 716
(1) Colombia 16
(a) Procedural Order No. 2 o...ceccecsesseseessseeseseseeseeeseeeseeesesieseseseseseesseeeeeeaets 76
(b) Procedural Order No. 4 ...cccscecssesseesseesseesseesseesssesseesseesseesseesssesseesseesseesseesseeass 80

(c) Procedural Order No. 6 .......scessessessessesseesessecsesssssessesseeseeseesessssssnssseeseeneesess 85
(2) Glencore and Prodeco 88
(a) Procedural Order No. 2 o...ceccecsesseseessseeseseseeseeeseeeseeesesieseseseseseesseeeeeeaets 88
(b) Procedural Order No. 4 .....c.scscsessesecseeseeseesesseessseeseeseeseeseesessssssessneeseeneeness 94
(c) Procedural Order No. 6 .......scsssessesessesseesesseesessesseeseeseeseesessessssssessneeseeneeaess 97
B. The Analysis of the Cc i 98
(1) General Observations 98

(2) Procedural Order No. 2: The Initial Decision to Exclude the Documents obtained

by the SIC 101
(3) Procedural Order No. 4 and its Aftermath: The Tribunal’s Ruling on Privilege and
its Application 108

(a) The Decision that Communications with In-House Counsel are to be Treated
in the Same Way as Communications with External Counsel ............cceeeee 108
(b) The Tribunal’s Decision not to Admit the Annex A Documents................ 113
(4) Procedural Order No. 6: The Exclusion of the FGN Documents ..........0ceeeee 122
(5) The Cumulative Effect of the Tribunal’s Document Decisions.............0csecee 123
VII. THE ILLEGALITY ISSUE 125
A. The Positions of the Parties 125

 

iii

(1) Colombia 125

(2) Glencore and Prodeco

 

B. The Analysis of the Committee.
VIII. COSTS
IX. DISPOSITIF 136

 

 

TABLE OF SELECTED ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINED TERMS

 

 

 

AAE-[#] Applicant’s Exhibit
AAL-[#] Applicant’s Legal Authority
C-Mem. on Ann. Respondents on Annulment’s Counter-

Memorial dated 12 June 2020

 

Annulment Hearing

Hearing on Annulment held 6 November 2020

 

Mem. on Ann.

Applicant’s Memorial on Annulment dated 10
April 2020

 

Rej. on Ann.

Respondents on Annulment’s Rejoinder dated
9 October 2020

 

Reply on Ann.

Applicant’s Reply dated 7 August 2020

 

Annulment Applicant’s SoC

Applicant’ Statement of Costs dated 24
November 2020

 

Annulment Respondents’ SoC

Respondents on Annulment’s Statement of
Costs dated 24 November 2020

 

Applicant

Republic of Colombia

 

Application

Application for Annulment filed on 23
December 2019

 

Arbitration Rules

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings 2006

 

Award

Glencore International A.G. and

CL. Prodeco S.A. v. the Republic of Colombia,
ICSID Case No. ARB/16/6, Award, 27 August
2019

 

BIT

Agreement between the Swiss Confederation
and the Republic of Colombia on the
Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of
Investments, signed on 17 May 2006, which
entered into force on 6 October 2009

 

 

 

Respondents on Annulment Exhibit from the
underlying arbitration

 

 

 

Respondents on Annulment Legal Authority

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CL-L#] from the underlying arbitration
Committee Sir Christopher Greenwood, Ms Bertha
Cooper-Rousseau and Professor Doug Jones
: Convention on the Settlement of Investment
ICSID Convention Disputes Between States and Nationals of
Other States dated 18 March 1965
ICSID or the Centre International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes
Applicant’s Exhibit from the underlying
R-[#] pireal
arbitration
RAE-[#] Respondents on Annulment Exhibit
RAL-[#] Respondents on Annulment Legal Authority
RL-{#] Applicant’s Legal Authority from the

underlying arbitration

 

Respondents on Annulment

Glencore International A.G. and C.I. Prodeco
S.A.

 

Tr. [page:line] [Speaker(s)]

Transcript of the Hearing before the
Committee

 

Tribunal Tr., Day [#][page:line] [Speaker(s]

Transcript of the Hearing before the Tribunal

 

 

Tribunal

 

Arbitral tribunal that rendered the Award
(Professor Juan Fernandez-Armesto, Mr Oscar
M. Garibaldi and Mr J. Christopher Thomas)

 

 

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

This proceeding concerns an Application for Annulment (the “Application”) of the award
rendered on 27 August 2019 in Glencore International A.G. and C.I. Prodeco S.A. v.
Republic of Colombia (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/6) (the “Award”).

The Applicant for Annulment is the Republic of Colombia (“Colombia”), the Respondent
in the proceedings before the Tribunal. The Respondents on Annulment, and Claimants
before the Tribunal, are Glencore International A.G. (“Glencore”), a company
incorporated under the laws of, and having its seat in, Switzerland, and C.I. Prodeco S.A.
(“Prodeco”), a company incorporated under the laws of Colombia and a wholly-owned

subsidiary of Glencore.

The proceedings before the Tribunal had been instituted by Glencore and Prodeco under
the Agreement between the Swiss Confederation and the Republic of Colombia on the
Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments, signed on 17 May 2006 and entering
into force on 6 October 2009 (the “BIT”), and the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States, dated 14 October 1966,
which entered into force between Colombia and Switzerland on 6 October 2009 (the

“ICSID Convention”).

In the Award, the Tribunal held (a) that it possessed jurisdiction; (b) that Glencore and
Prodeco had been the victims of an unreasonable measure contrary to Article 4(1) of the
BIT and had been subjected to unfair and inequitable treatment contrary to Article 4(2) of
the BIT. The Tribunal ordered Colombia to restore to Glencore and Prodeco the sum of

USD 19,100,000 plus costs of USD 625,000 and defence expenses of USD 1,692,900.

Colombia seeks annulment of the Award pursuant to Article 52 of the ICSID Convention
on the grounds that (i) the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers (Article 52(1)(b) of the
ICSID Convention); (ii) there was a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure
(Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention); and (iii) the Award failed to state the reasons
on which it was based (Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention).

Colombia maintains that the Tribunal erred in two important respects (each of which
involves all three of the grounds invoked under Article 52): first, by excluding critical
documents relating to allegations of corruption (the “Documents Issue”), and, secondly,
by rejecting Colombia’s argument that Glencore and Prodeco’s investment was illegal and
thus fell outside the scope of the BIT (the “Ilegality Issue”). While the two issues are
closely related, as will be seen, Colombia maintains that they are discrete and, in particular,
that the Committee would be justified in finding in favour of Colombia on the Illegality
Issue and annulling the Award even if it rejected Colombia’s arguments on the Documents

Issue.

The factual background is set out in greater detail in paras. 135 to 545 of the Award and

those parts relevant to the annulment proceedings are summarized below (paras. 31-62).

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 23 December 2019, ICSID received the Application for annulment filed by the
Republic of Colombia and dated 23 December 2019. The Application contained a request
under Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 54 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure
for Arbitration Proceedings (the “ICSID Arbitration Rules”) for the stay of enforcement

of the Award pending a decision on the Application (the “Stay Request”).

On 30 December 2019, pursuant to Rule 50(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the
Secretary-General of ICSID notified the Parties that ICSID had registered the Application.
On the same date, in accordance with Arbitration Rule 54(2), the Secretary-General

informed the Parties that the enforcement of the Award had been provisionally stayed.

By letter dated 6 March 2020, in accordance with Rules 6 and 53 of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules, the Parties were notified that Sir Christopher Greenwood, a national of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and designated as President of the
Committee, Ms Bertha Cooper-Rousseau, a national of The Bahamas, and Professor Doug
Jones, a national of Australia and Ireland, had accepted their appointments by the Chairman
of the ICSID Administrative Council, and that the ad hoc Committee was therefore deemed

to have been constituted, and the annulment proceeding to have begun, as of that date. On

the same date, the Parties were notified that Ms Alicia Martin Blanco, Legal Counsel,

ICSID, would serve as Secretary of the ad hoc Committee.

In response to a question by the Committee, on 20 and 26 March 2020, the Parties
confirmed their agreement that the Respondents on Annulment would not oppose

Colombia’s Stay Request in exchange for an accelerated timetable for these proceedings.

On 10 April 2020, the Committee informed the Parties that, without prejudice to the
agreement of the Parties on the procedural calendar, and given the time difference between
the various geographical locations of counsel and the Committee members, the Committee
had decided to separate the first session from the preliminary procedural consultation of

the President with the Parties.

In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rules 53 and 13(1), the Committee held its first

session on 20 April 2020 by videoconference.

On 20 April 2020, the President inquired whether the Parties would agree to the
appointment of Ms Rosalind Anne Elphick, a national of South Africa and Ireland, as an
assistant to the President in this case. On 23 and 24 April 2020, the Parties confirmed that
they had no objection to the appointment of Ms Elphick as an assistant to the President, or
to the terms of her appointment. Ms Elphick’s appointment was confirmed by the President

on 22 May 2020.

On 10 April 2020, Colombia filed its Memorial on Annulment (the “Annulment
Memorial” or “Mem. on Ann.”), along with Exhibits AAE-1 to AAE-35, Legal
Authorities AAL-1 to AAL-100, and several exhibits and legal authorities from the

underlying arbitration.

In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rules 53 and 20(1), on 27 April 2020, the President
of the Committee held a preliminary procedural consultation with the Parties by

videoconference.

On 28 April 2020, the Committee issued Procedural Order No. | recording the agreements
of the Parties and the Committee’s decisions on procedural matters. Procedural Order No.
1 provided, inter alia, that the applicable Arbitration Rules would be those in force from

10 April 2006, that the procedural languages would be English and Spanish, and that the

20.

21.

22.

23.

place of the proceeding would be Washington, D.C., United States of America. Regarding
the Stay Request, Procedural Order No. | established as follows:
The Parties agreed that the Respondents on Annulment would not oppose
the Applicant's request for a stay of enforcement of the Award in exchange
for the accelerated timetable in Annex A. The Committee finds that these
circumstances require that enforcement be stayed in accordance with
Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention, and therefore decides to continue
the stay of enforcement that had been provisionally in place pursuant to the
second sentence of Article 52(5).

On 12 June 2020, Glencore and Prodeco filed their Counter-Memorial on Annulment (the
“Annulment Counter-Memorial” or “C-Mem. on Ann.”), accompanied by Exhibit

RAE-1, Legal Authorities RAL-1 to RAL-28, and several exhibits and legal authorities

from the underlying arbitration.

On 7 August 2020, Colombia filed its Reply on Annulment (the “Annulment Reply” or
“Reply on Ann.”), along with Exhibits AAE-36 to AAE-37, Legal Authorities AAL-101

to AAL-133, and several exhibits and legal authorities from the underlying arbitration.

On 21 August 2020, the Committee consulted with the Parties regarding the possibility of

holding the hearing by video link.

On 3 September 2020, the Parties informed the Committee that they did not have any
objection to holding the hearing on annulment by videoconference. On the same day, the
Committee confirmed that the hearing would be held by videoconference rather than in

person.

On 9 September 2020, Colombia wrote to inform the Committee “ofa recent development
relevant to the annulment proceeding”. Colombia noted that it was not bringing this
information to the attention of the Committee in order to request leave to introduce new
evidence within the meaning of Section 15.3 of Procedural Order No. 2, although it

reserved its right to do so if and when appropriate.

On 15 September 2020, the Committee referred to the Applicant’s communication of 9
September, noted that the Republic of Colombia had made no request to admit any new
material to the record of the annulment proceedings, and therefore considered that no action

was required at that stage.

24.

25.

26.

27.

On 9 October 2020, Glencore and Prodeco filed their Rejoinder on Annulment (the
“Annulment Rejoinder” or “Rej. on Ann.”) accompanied by Exhibit RAE-2, Legal
Authorities RAL-29 to RAL-38, and several exhibits from the underlying arbitration.

On 26 October 2020, the Committee informed the Parties that the pre-hearing
organizational meeting had been cancelled following the Parties’ agreement that it was not

necessary.

On 2 November 2020, the Committee issued Procedural Order No. 2 concerning the

organization of the hearing on annulment (“Annulment Hearing”).

The Annulment Hearing was held on 6 November 2020 by videoconference. The list of

participants was as follows:

Committee:
Sir Christopher Greenwood President of the Committee
Ms Bertha Cooper-Rousseau Member of the Committee
Professor Doug Jones Member of the Committee

Assistant to the President:
Ms Rosalind Anne Elphick Assistant to the President

ICSID Secretariat:
Ms Alicia Martin Blanco Secretary of the Committee

For Colombia:

Professor Eduardo Silva Romero Dechert LLP

Mr José Manuel Garcia Represa Dechert LLP

Mr Juan Felipe Merizalde Urdaneta Dechert LLP

Mr Amir Ardelan Farhadi Dechert LLP

Dr Camilo Gémez Alzate Agencia Nacional de Defensa Juridica del
Estado

Ms Ana Maria Ordojfiez Puentes Agencia Nacional de Defensa Juridica del
Estado

Ms Elizabeth Prado Lopez Agencia Nacional de Defensa Juridica del
Estado

Mr Andres Felipe Esteban Tovar Agencia Nacional de Defensa Juridica del
Estado

Mr Giovanny Andrés Vega Agencia Nacional de Defensa Juridica del
Estado

For Glencore and Prodeco:

Mr Nigel Blackaby Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer US LLP

Mr Elliot Friedman Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer US LLP

Ms Jessica Moscoso Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer US LLP

Ms Paige von Mehren Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer US LLP

28.
29.

30.

31.

Ms Elvira Sihvola Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer US LLP

Mr Gustavo Topalian Dechamps International Law
Mr José Manuel Alvarez Zarate Alvarez Zarate & Asociados
Mr Oscar Eduardo Gomez CL. Prodeco S.A.
Ms Natalia Anaya CI. Prodeco S.A.
Mr Jader Yubran CL. Prodeco S.A.

Court Reporter:
Ms Claire Hill English court reporter

The Parties submitted their agreed corrections to the transcript on 18 November 2020.
On 24 November 2020, the Parties filed their respective statements on costs.

The proceeding was closed on 1 June 2021.

THE BACKGROUND TO THE APPLICATION

SUMMARY OF THE FACTUAL BACKGROUND
(1) The Mining Contract

The background to the case before the Tribunal concerned the contracts between Prodeco
and the relevant Colombian State entities for coal mining at the Calenturitas mine, “one of
the largest thermal coal mines in Colombia”.! The Colombian entity with which Prodeco
contracted changed over time due to changes in Colombian law. In 1989 Prodeco
concluded a contract (the “Mining Contract”) with Carbones de Colombia SA
(“Carbocol”),” a State-owned company to which the Colombian Ministry of Mines and
Energy had granted mineral rights.>_ In 1993 Carbocol became the Empresa Colombiana
de Carbon Ltda. (“Ecocarb6n”),* which was later succeeded by the Empresa Nacional

Minera Ltda., Minercol Ltda. (“Minercol”).> In 2004 the Colombian Ministry of Mines

5
P

Award, para.
Award, para. 145.
Award, para. 141.
Award, para. 155.
Award, para. 159.

32.

33.

34.

and Energy designated the Instituto Colombiano de Geologia y Mineria (“Ingeominas”)°

as Minercol’s successor. In 1995 Prodeco was acquired by Glencore.”

Under the original terms of the Mining Contract, Prodeco obtained the right to carry out
the extraction, processing, transport, and sale of up to three million tonnes of coal per year
(“MTA”) for a period of 30 years.* In return, Prodeco agreed to pay compensation to

Carbocol, the calculation of which was based on two elements:

a. A royalty of 5 per cent for each tonne of coal sold, to increase progressively up to

7.6 per cent for the fifth year of production and beyond (the “Base Royalty”);?

b. and a “supplementary compensation”, calculated as a percentage of Prodeco’s
revenue and a fixed amount per tonne of coal sold.!° The supplementary
compensation was payable only if the price of coal rose above USD 40 per tonne,
at which point it was determined, based on the market price of Colombian thermal

coal as it was in 1989, that Prodeco would be in receipt of “extraordinary profits”."!

The basis for calculating the remuneration payable by Prodeco was changed by the third
(the “Third Amendment”) and sixth (the “Sixth Amendment”) amendments to the
Mining Contract, executed in 2001 and 2005 respectively. By the Third Amendment it was
agreed that the Base Royalty rate was to increase by | per cent for every 1 MTA increase
in production beyond 3 MTA." The term “supplementary compensation” was changed to

“Gross Income Compensation” (“GIC”), though in substance it remained the same. '?

The Mining Contract was also altered to explain how the royalties and GIC payments
should be calculated when the coal volume exported consisted of coal from the Calenturitas

Mine blended with coal from other mines (“Blended Coal”).'* This was necessary to

Award, para. 169.

Award, para. 157.
Award, paras. 146-148.
Award, paras. 149.
Award, para. 149.
Award, para. 149.
Award, para. 163.
Award, para. 164.
Award, para. 179.

35.

36.

37.

38.

account for the expansion of Glencore’s mining operations to the La Jagua coal project.
Developments connected with the La Jagua project played an important part in the

proceedings before the Tribunal and are discussed in greater detail at paras. 43-48, below.

These amendments also clarified the “reference price” for calculating the royalties and GIC
payments due: for coal exported exclusively from the Calenturitas Mine, the reference price
would be the higher of (i) the weighted average free on board (“FOB”) Colombian port
price for Colombian steam coal for the respective week as published in the ICR, adjusted
for calorific value, and (ii) the actual sale price; for the export of Blended Coal, the
reference price would simply be the FOB Colombian port price for Colombian steam coal,

for the respective week as published in the ICR, adjusted for calorific value. !°

The Calenturitas mine commenced production in 2004.'° At approximately the same time,
Ingeominas created a Comité de Contratacién Minera (the “Contracting Committee”)
comprising the Secretary-General of Ingeominas, the Director del Servicio Minero, two
sub-directors and the Asesor de la Direccién General. The Contracting Committee became
responsible for making recommendations to the Director del Servicio Minero regarding

any proposed amendments to the Mining Contract.!”

In 2006, Prodeco realised that by diverting a section of the Calenturitas river that ran
through the Calenturitas Mine it would be able significantly to increase the amount of
exploitable resources accessible to it. It submitted these projections to Ingeominas in
November 2006 in its Long-term Programa de Trabajos e Inversiones (the “2006 PTY’),
which provided for the mining of an additional 60 MT of coal over the lifetime of the mine
and an increase of the capacity of the Calenturitas Mine from 2.9 MTA to 10 MTA from

2010 onwards.'®

A further amendment to the Mining Contract (the “Seventh Amendment”), concluded
between Ingeominas and Prodeco on 15 February 2007 following lengthy negotiations,

extended the lifetime of the Mining Contract by fifteen years and increased the production

Award, paras. 180, 195.
Award, para. 171.

Award, paras. 172-175.
Award, paras. 183-185, 193.

39.

40.

levels expected. The basic system for quantifying the compensation to Colombia was left
unchanged but clarified to provide that the royalties and GIC would be paid within ten days
of the shipment of the coal but would be subject to a quarterly adjustment “based on the
definitive prices”.'? The meaning of the term “definitive prices” became important in
connection with the negotiation of the Eighth Amendment which was at the heart of the

proceedings before the Tribunal.

(2) The Eighth Amendment
(a) Initiation of Negotiations

Six months after the conclusion of the Seventh Amendment, Prodeco approached
Ingeominas about a further change to the Mining Contract. Prodeco maintained that the
existing compensation scheme compromised the potential expansion and even threatened
the viability of the mining project, because inflation had led to a considerable increase in
production costs while the reference price of USD 40 per tonne, on which the GIC was
based, had not been altered. Prodeco therefore proposed that Colombia agree to a reduction
in the compensation per tonne of coal sold in return for an increase in overall production.
With the increased production levels achieved thereby, Prodeco argued that the new
compensation scheme would, over the lifetime of the mine, generate much higher revenues

for the State than it stood to gain under the previous regime.”°

The initial Ingeominas reaction was unfavourable and the Subdirector de Fiscalizacion y
Ordenamiento Minero, Mr Edward Franco, advised that the proposed amendment would
not be in Colombia’s interests.”! Nevertheless, the contracting parties continued to discuss
Prodeco’s proposal.” A key figure in these negotiations was Mr Mario Ballesteros, who

was Director General of Ingeominas from 2 March 2007 to 7 September 2010.

Award, paras. 193-196.

Award, paras. 202-204, 209-211.
Award, para. 207.

Award, paras. 201-211.

Al.

42.

(b) The Pricing Dispute
The negotiations took place against the backdrop of two other developments. First, in July
2008 Prodeco raised a question about the way in which the term “definitive price” in the
Seventh Amendment was to be interpreted. Until that date the parties to the Mining
Contract and the Seventh Amendment had proceeded on the basis that the definitive price
was the higher of the FOB price in the week when the coal was shipped and the actual sale
price obtained by Prodeco. According to Prodeco, however, this formula failed to take
account of drastic changes in the market.?* Prodeco maintained that the relevant
contractual provisions could also be interpreted as meaning that the definitive price was
the actual sale price, as evidenced in Prodeco’s invoices to its customers and that this was
the correct, as well as the fairer, interpretation. In August and September 2008 Prodeco
held meetings with the Minister of Mines and Energy. The Tribunal held that the evidence
before it showed that “the Minister agreed that it would be fair and reasonable for the

royalties to be calculated using the actual price received by Prodeco”.”*

Prodeco informed Ingeominas that, with effect from 30 September 2008, it would adjust
all payments to Colombia by reference to the actual sale price it received and did so when
it made its next payment, reducing the amount paid by USD 6 million.2> Ingeominas
countered that Prodeco was not entitled to take this step unilaterally and threatened a
declaration of caducity of the Mining Contract if payment at the original level was not
made.*® Although Colombia asked the Tribunal to conclude that Prodeco had
manufactured the dispute over the definitive price to coerce Colombia into agreeing to the
proposed amendment to the Mining Contract, the Tribunal rejected the suggestion that
Prodeco had fabricated the dispute by pursuing a request despite knowing that it was not

entitled to the rights claimed.’

Award, paras. 214-215.
Award, para. 217.

Award, paras. 221-224.
Award, paras. 222-225.
Award, paras. 218-220.

43.

44.

(c) The La Jagua Mine and the Three Hectares Contract

Secondly, an issue arose regarding the La Jagua mine. The La Jagua mine was located
some twenty kilometres east of the Calenturitas mine. Prodeco had acquired three
companies — Carbones de la Jagua S.A. (“CDJ”), acquired in 2005, Consorcio Minero
Unido S.A. in 2006 and Carbones El Tesoro in 2007 (jointly, the “Prodeco Affiliates”)**
—which held mining rights at La Jagua. The Prodeco Affiliates wished to consolidate their
mining activities at La Jagua. However, located in a small gap between the La Jagua coal
mining titles held by the Prodeco Affiliates was a 3-hectare area of land over which no
concession existed at the time.”’ Given its location, this small area was extremely valuable
to the Prodeco Affiliates. If Prodeco did not acquire the mining rights to the area, Prodeco’s
joint operations and the rational development of the La Jagua mine would be severely
affected.*? Both Parties accept that the development of La Jagua was critical to any
increase in production at Calenturitas, because coal from La Jagua was blended with coal

from Calenturitas and shipped together with it.*!

The value of the 3-hectares had also been noticed by Mr Maldonado, a former employee
of the Ministry of Mines and of Ingeominas’s predecessors. In 2006 he had applied to
Ingeominas for a mining concession in respect of the area, but his application had been
formally rejected in 2007.*? Ingeominas’s decision in that respect was based on a March
2007 report which had determined that the site technically overlapped with other
concessions and would be too small for a stand-alone mining operation.** In June 2008,
however, Ingeominas reversed its finding that the 3-hectare concession would overlap with
other concessions in the area and, in the result, decided to award Mr Maldonado and his

partner, Mr César Garcia, the 3-hectares concession.*4 That decision was formalized with

Award, para. 178.

Award, para. 235.

Award, para. 687; C-Mem. on Ann., p. 19, para. 38(a).
Tribunal Tr., Day 2, p. 317:8-14 (Professor Silva Romero).
Award, paras. 234-236.

Award, para. 236.

Award, para. 239.

4S.

46.

47.

the execution of a mining concession contract in favour of Messrs Maldonado and Garcia

on 16 October 2008 (the “3ha Contract”).*°

Shortly thereafter, in December 2008, Mr Maldonado and his partner approached Prodeco

with an offer to sell the 3-hectares concession to it for USD 11 million.*°

Prodeco and its affiliates strongly opposed the 3ha Contract as contrary to the national
interest, irregular and a misuse of insider information. They formally opposed
Mr Maldonado’s application in March 2008, and appealed to Ingeominas for its
reconsideration of the Prodeco Affiliates’ objections in July 2008.*” In the months between
August and November 2008, the Prodeco Affiliates communicated their complaints in
writing to a range of Colombian authorities, including the Procurador General de la
Naci6n, the Ministro de Minas y Energia, the Ministro de la Presidencia, the Contraloria,
and the Jefe del Registro Minero Nacional.*® Prodeco continued to complain even after the
conclusion of the 3ha Contract, by filing a citizen suit against the parties to it, including
Ingeominas, and by requesting disciplinary action against the Ingeominas officials

involved in its execution.*?

The Tribunal found that, by March 2009, the Prodeco Affiliates were frustrated by the
inaction of the Colombian authorities.*° In a final complaint communicated to the Ministro
de la Presidencia, Prodeco warned that, unless a solution was found to the situation created
by the grant of the 3-hectare title, it would have no option other than to enter into direct
negotiations with Messrs Maldonado and Garcia.*! When it received no response, Prodeco
decided to pursue that option.*? Ultimately, CDJ purchased the concession title from
Messrs Maldonado and Garcia on 4 May 2009, at a cost of USD 1.75 million (the

“Assignment Contract”).**

Award, para. 245.
Award, para. 247.
Award, paras. 238-239.
Award, paras. 241-244.
Award, paras. 240-246.
Award, paras. 248-249.
Award, para. 248,
Award, para. 249.
Award, para. 250.

48.

49.

Messrs Maldonado and Garcia submitted the contract for sale (the “Assignment
Contract”) to Ingeominas for approval, which was granted by Mr Ballesteros on 8 May
2009.** However, the document which they submitted made no mention of the price paid.*°
CDJ paid the purchase price in two separate payments as requested by Messrs Maldonado
and Garcia.*° The Tribunal found that CDJ made the tax withholding required by
Colombian law,*” recorded the sum paid in its audited financial statement,** and declared
to Ingeominas both the contract and the price paid.*? The Tribunal also found that, even
after conclusion of the Assignment Contract, Prodeco continued to complain about the
grant of the 3-hectare concession to Messrs Maldonado and Garcia*” and that, in June 2011,
a new Minister of Mines announced that he had ordered formal investigations into

irregularities within Ingeominas.*!

(d) The Conclusion of the Eighth Amendment

On 21 May 2009 Prodeco and Ingeominas concluded an Acuerdo de Compromiso (the
“Commitment to Negotiate”) in respect of the proposed changes to the Mining Contract,
after which formal negotiations took place between June and December 2009. Prodeco
paid the USD 6 million difference between the definitive price as it claimed it should be
understood and the definitive price as Ingeominas maintained the Mining Contract
required.*? The negotiations are described in detail in paras. 266-322 of the Award and
culminated in the execution of the Eighth Amendment on 22 January 2010. The terms of
the Eighth Amendment are analysed at paras. 323-350 of the Award. For present purposes
it is sufficient to note that it established a new formula for the calculation of royalties and

the GIC which involved a reduction in the amount payable per tonne to Colombia while

Award, paras. 251-252.
Award, para. 251.
Award, paras. 253-254.
Award, para. 255.
Award, para. 256.
Award, para. 256.
Award, paras. 257-258.
Award, para. 259.
Award, paras. 262-265.

50.

Sl.

52.

Colombia would benefit from an increase in production which should lead to an increase

in the overall level of compensation.

In March 2009 Glencore sold Prodeco to the Australian company Xstrata subject to a call
option which allowed Glencore to repurchase Prodeco. In March 2010 Glencore exercised

the option and repurchased Prodeco.**+

(3) The Contraloria Proceedings

In October 2010 the Contraloria General de la Repiiblica (the “Contraloria”), a
Colombian administrative agency, opened an investigation into alleged corrupt practices
in Ingeominas.*° This included an investigation into the conclusion of the Eighth
Amendment. In March 2011 the team conducting the investigation reported that Prodeco
had failed to establish that the mining project would have been unviable without the Eighth
Amendment, that there had been no juridical, technical or financial reasons to modify the
Mining Contract, that Ingeominas had failed properly to analyse the impact of the Eighth
Amendment and that the Amendment had been detrimental to Colombia because it had
reduced revenue from the Mining Contract.*° This Report was not disclosed to Prodeco

until August 2012.°7

Following receipt of the report, in May 2011 the Contraloria instituted a Fiscal Liability
Proceeding (an administrative proceeding) against Prodeco and Mr José Fernando
Ceballos, who was the Ingeominas Director del Servicio Minero and had signed the Eighth
Amendment on behalf of Ingeominas.** Although the procedure before the Contraloria is
an administrative, and not a judicial, one, Colombian law requires that the procedure
respect principles of due process. Prodeco and Mr Ceballos were invited to submit
evidence and were represented by counsel. The proceedings, which involved the

Contraloria taking depositions from various current and former Ingeominas officials, was

Award, para. 230.
Award, para. 360.
Award, paras. 398-409. The status and workings of the Contraloria are explained in paras. 388-397 of the Award.
Award, para. 406.
Award, para. 409.
Award, para. 410.

53.

54.

55.

56.

60.

oy

6B

64

65

66

later extended to include Mr Ballesteros and various other officials.®° It culminated in the
Contraloria issuing an Auto de imputacion de responsibilidad fiscal (the “Auto de
Imputacién”) which formally charged Prodeco, Mr Ceballos and Mr Ballesteros. The
Auto de Imputacion, which was adopted in August 2013 stated that the Eighth Amendment
had caused damage to the Colombian State and accused Prodeco of wilfully causing that

damage.*!

The Contraloria issued its decision regarding these charges on 30 April 2015. The
Contraloria found Prodeco, Mr Ballesteros, Mr Ceballos and the Minister of Mines at the
time that the Eighth Amendment was signed had incurred fiscal liability and sentenced
them to pay, jointly and severally, COP 60 billion (approximately USD 25 million) in
compensation for the damage to the State. The decision largely endorsed the allegations

in the Auto de Imputacién.™

Prodeco took various steps to appeal or otherwise quash the decision.®? None of these had
been successful by the time of the Award. On 19 January 2016 Prodeco paid, under protest,
USD 19.1 million.“

In March 2012 the Colombian authorities initiated proceedings to annul the Mining
Contract before the Tribunal Administrativo de Cundinamarca. At the time that the Award
in the present proceedings was issued, the Tribunal Administrativo had not given a

decision.©

Notwithstanding the various proceedings, the Eighth Amendment was applied on a

provisional basis and Prodeco made payment of royalties in accordance with its terms.

Award, paras. 410-458.

Two other officials were the subject of lesser charges.
Award, paras. 459-466.

Award, paras. 487-506.

Award, paras. 507-524.

Award, paras. 525-526.

Award, paras. 527-535.

Award, para. 545.

57.

58.

59.

60.

1

68

GLENCORE’S CLAIM BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL AND COLOMBIA’S RESPONSE

Glencore and Prodeco first raised the existence of a potential dispute under the BIT in a
letter of 18 September 2013 addressed to the President of Colombia.*” That was followed
by a formal notification of dispute on 28 August 2015,°° which initiated the six-month
consultation period provided for in Article 11 of the BIT. Following the expiry of that

period, Glencore and Prodeco submitted their Request for Arbitration on 4 March 2016.

The relief sought by Glencore and Prodeco is set out at para. 547 of the Award. In
summary, they sought a declaration that Colombia had breached Articles 4(1), 4(2) and
10(2) of the BIT, repayment of the USD 19.1 million which they had paid under protest
(see para. 54, above), cessation of the existing proceedings and an assurance that new
proceedings would not be instituted and, should proceedings not be terminated, forward

looking damages.

Colombia argued that the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction and that the claims were
inadmissible. Although Colombia challenged the jurisdiction of the Tribunal on several
grounds, a central pillar of its case was that the investment made in connection with the
Eighth Amendment was unlawful and thus fell outside the BIT. Colombia maintained that
Articles 2 and 4(1) of the BIT excluded investments made in violation of the law of the
host State and that an investment procured by corruption, fraud or deceit was an instance

of an investment which was tainted by illegality.

According to Colombia, the Eighth Amendment was procured by corruption,
misrepresentation and the concealment of important information from Ingeominas. At the
heart of this argument was an allegation that Prodeco, through its affiliate CDJ, had paid
an exorbitant sum for the concession to three hectares of land in order to obtain the
agreement of Mr Ballesteros, then the Director General of Ingeominas, to the Eighth
Amendment to the Mining Contract which introduced changes seriously detrimental to
Colombia. Colombia’s case was that the price paid — USD 1.75 million — bore no relation
to the value of the land and was an indirect bribe to Mr Ballesteros. Almost immediately

after the conclusion of the Assignment Contract and its approval by Ingeominas (to which,

Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 2, 4 November 2017 (“P02”), paras. 16-17 (AAE-1).
Award, para. 536; PO2, note 67, above, at para. 18 (AAE-1).

16

61.

62.

i)

Colombia argued, the details of the Assignment Contract were never revealed),
Mr Ballesteros approved the adoption of the Commitment to Negotiate (see para. 49,
above) in spite of the recommendation by the Sub-Director that that the terms proposed by

Prodeco were unfavourable to Colombia (see paras. 39-40, above).

Colombia maintained that the terms were so clearly detrimental that only corruption, and
the concealment of relevant information, could have caused Ingeominas to accept them.
According to Colombia, Prodeco falsely affirmed that it was economically unfeasible to
produce beyond 8 MTA when Prodeco’s internal documents proved contemporaneous
plans to increase production up to 10 MTA between 2010 and 2019. Colombia alleged that
the payment which Prodeco had made to Mr Maldonado and Mr Garcia for the three hectare
concession had been a thinly concealed bribe to secure the consent of Mr Ballesteros to the
Eighth Amendment. On the basis of such influence peddling and misrepresentations,
Colombia alleged, Prodeco and the State executed the Eighth Amendment on 22 January
2010.°° The Investment had thus been unlawful and fell outside the protection of the BIT.

Glencore and Prodeco denied the allegations of corruption and gave a very different
account of the circumstances surrounding the three hectare concession (see paras. 46-47,
above). They maintained that the concession had been improperly granted to
Mr Maldonado and Mr Garcia but, despite Prodeco’s complaints, had not been reversed,
leaving Prodeco no choice but to buy the concession through its affiliate CDJ. They
pointed to the fact that Prodeco had been open about the purchase of the three hectare
concession and the price which it had paid and argued that there was no evidence that any
part of the price paid had been passed on to Mr Ballesteros. Their analysis of what had
happened was that, like other mining concerns in Colombia, they had been the victim of
“greenmail”, whereby a person was able to obtain a concession to a small area of land
which had to be bought out at an exorbitant price in order to unlock the potential of the

concessions to the surrounding area.

Application, para. 18(iii).

63.

64.

65.

66.

THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISIONS REGARDING THE PRODUCTION AND EXCLUSION OF
DOCUMENTS

Colombia’s Application for Annulment is premised, in large part, on procedural decisions
of the Tribunal concerning the production of documents and the marshalling of evidence.
Colombia submits that it was wrongly prevented from admitting into evidence certain
documents allegedly pertaining to the conclusion of the three hectare contract and thus to
the legality of Prodeco’s investment.”

2 of 4 November 2017 (“PO2”),”! Procedural Order No. 4 of 24 April 2018 (“PO4”),”
and Procedural Order No. 6 of 31 July 2018 (“PO6”).” The record is a complicated one

The impugned decisions are Procedural Order No.

and it is necessary to set it out in some detail before considering the Parties’ arguments

regarding the application for annulment.

(1) Colombia’s First Attempt to Introduce Documents Seized from Glencore and
Prodeco
Colombia was represented in the arbitration proceedings by the Agencia Nacional de

Defensa Juridica del Estado (the “ANDJE”).

On 7 June 2017, the ANDJE requested a one-month extension of the deadline (of 3 July
2017) set for the submission of its Counter-Memorial.”* That request was premised on the
administrative reorganization of the ANDJE and health issues affecting counsel for
Colombia.”> On 12 June 2017, the Tribunal granted a two-week filing extension to

Colombia.”°

On 13 June 2017, the ANDJE signed an agreement with the Superintendencia de Industria

y Comercio (the “SIC’”), the administrative agency which enforces antitrust law in

Award, para. 74.

PO2, note 67, above (AAE-1).

Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 4, 24 April 2018 (“PO4”) (AAE-9).
Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 6, 31 July 2018 (“PO6”) (AAE-10).
Award, paras. 70-71.

Award, para. 71.

Award, para.72.

67.

68.

69.

Colombia, that the agencies would cooperate to exchange between them information

relevant to the legal defence of Colombia (the “Cooperation Agreement”).””

At an unspecified date in June or July of 2017, the SIC delivered to the ANDJE certain
documents it had seized from Prodeco in the context of an antitrust investigation relating
to Prodeco’s seaport.”* These documents included emails downloaded by SIC from the
computers of a number of Prodeco’s managers (the “Disputed SIC Documents”)”’ during
a search of Prodeco’s offices which the SIC had conducted in August 2014.°°

On 17 July 2017 Colombia filed its Objections to Jurisdiction and Admissibility and

1.3!

Counter-Memorial The exhibits attached to the Counter-Memorial included forty-one

internal Prodeco documents which were part of the Disputed SIC Documents and were

described as having been “recently discovered”.

By a letter to the Tribunal dated 26 July 2017, Glencore and Prodeco expressed their
concern that Colombia’s Counter-Memorial submission included “41 private and internal
email chains exchanged between [Prodeco’s] management and their in-house and external
counsel’, the contents of which were, according to Glencore and Prodeco, privileged.*?
They requested an order that Colombia reveal how the ANDJE had obtained these
documents, and the timing of that acquisition.*? Glencore and Prodeco further requested an
order “declaring inadmissible all documents irregularly obtained or produced by

Colombia in breach of its duty of good faith and rules of privilege, and an order striking

Award, para. 73.
Award, para. 74.

The Tribunal was not always consistent in its use of terms to describe the various documents whose production
was contested. In PO2 it referred to the 41 documents as “the Disputed Documents”. However, in PO4 it refers
to those documents as “the Excluded Documents” and uses the term “the Disputed Documents” to refer to a much
larger collection of documents for which privilege was claimed (see paras. 111-123, below). The Committee has
retained the term “Disputed Documents” for this latter collection but has used the term “Disputed SIC Documents”
to refer to the 41 documents which were the subject of PO2. As will be seen (paras. 95-151, below), there was
an overlap between these categories in that some of the Disputed SIC Documents were later part of the larger
category of Disputed Documents considered in PO4 and in PO6.

Award, para. 74.

Award, para. 76.

Letter from Claimants to the Tribunal, 26 July 2017 (“Claimants letter of 26 July 2017”), p. | (C-275).
Claimants’ letter of 26 July 2017, note 82, above, at p. 7 (C-275).

19

70.

71.

72.

73.

out any statements in Colombia’s Counter-Memorial and/or witness statements and expert

report that relied on such documents” (the “First Application”).**

On 3 August 2017, Colombia wrote to the Tribunal to explain that the Disputed SIC
Documents had been legally obtained by the SIC in the context of a lawful audit of
Prodeco’s acitivities, to argue that the documents were not privileged and to request that

the Tribunal “reject Claimants’ petition outright” ®°

Glencore and Prodeco responded by letter of 22 August 2017, slightly amending their
initial request for relief.*° On 11 September 2017, Colombia filed a rejoinder letter,

reiterating its initial request.*”

On 10 September 2017, the ANDJE filed a criminal complaint with the office of the
Fiscalia General de la Nacién (the “FGN”), based on the Disputed SIC Documents (the
“Criminal Complaint”).** The Criminal Complaint was aimed at certain named persons
who were involved in the execution of the Eighth Amendment, reporting that they “may
have” committed the crimes of bribery, conclusion of a contract lacking legal requirements,
conspiracy to commit a crime, and undue interest of a public servant in the conclusion of
contracts.*? It also requested the deposition of two Prodeco employees, including one of

Prodeco’s in-house counsel.

On 20 September 2017, Glencore and Prodeco submitted a letter to the Tribunal to address
the Criminal Complaint, amongst other issues.°? They requested, in addition to the
exclusion of the Disputed SIC Documents, an order that Colombia “refrain from harassing
or intimidating Claimants, their current and former employees, their current and former

counsel, and their witnesses, through the conduct of the criminal investigations arising

from the ANDJE’s Complaint” (the “Second Application”).?'! On 2 October 2017,

Claimants’ letter of 26 July 2017, note 82, above, at p. 8 (C-275); Award, paras. 24, 77.
Letter from Colombia to the Tribunal, 3 August 2017, p. 2 (C-276); Award, paras. 25, 78.
Award, para. 79.

Award, para. 26.

PO2, note 67, above, at para. 30 (AAE-1); Award, para. 80.

PO2, note 67, above, at para. 31 (AAE-1); Award, para. 81.

Award, para. 27.

PO2, note 67, above, at para. 7 (AAE-1).

20

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

Colombia wrote to the Tribunal to request that it reject Glencore and Prodeco’s Second

Application.”

These exchanges were the first round in a series of procedural disputes which the Tribunal
addressed in three separate stages. Since the three Procedural Orders (the “POs”) in
question are central to the Application for Annulment, it is necessary to set out the issues

considered in each Order and the decisions taken by the Tribunal in some detail.

(2) Procedural Order No. 2 (4 November 2017)

The principal issue which confronted the Tribunal when it adopted PO2 was whether
Colombia could introduce into the record the documents seized from Prodeco’s offices by
the SIC in 2014. By the time the Tribunal issued PO2, certain matters were common

ground between the Parties.

First, the documents had been seized on 4 August 2014 by one Colombian agency, the SIC,
as part of an investigation into allegedly anti-competitive practices prohibited by
Colombian law which were distinct from the matters in issue in the proceedings before the

Tribunal.°?

Secondly, although counsel for Glencore and Prodeco has emphasized the coercive nature
of this seizure,” the Tribunal held that “[i]¢ is common ground between the Parties that the
Disputed Documents were legally obtained by the SIC in the course of an antitrust

investigation against Prodeco”.”°

Thirdly, the documents were handed by the SIC to the ANDJE, which was responsible for

the conduct of the arbitration proceedings, pursuant to the Cooperation Agreement signed

PO2, note 67, above, at para. 8 (AAE-1).

PO2, note 67, above, at paras. 19-20, 44, 54 (AAE-1).

Before the Committee, counsel for Glencore and Prodeco referred to “internal privileged emails of the Claimants
acquired from servers seized during a dawn raid in an entirely unrelated competition investigation” (Tr. p. 79:1-
3 (Mr Blackaby)). Since the “raid” started at 10:37 am (Minutes of the Meeting between the SIC and Prodeco of
4 August 2014, signed by representatives of the SIC and Prodeco (R-205)), the reference to a “dawn raid” must
be taken as an instance of forensic hyperbole.

PO2, note 67, above, at para. 54 (AAE-1).

21

79.

80.

81.

82.

on 13 June 2017. The Parties did not agree then — and do not agree now — whether the

transfer of the documents by the SIC to ANDJE was lawful under Colombian law.

With regard to the law applicable to whether the documents could lawfully be placed on
the record by Colombia, the Tribunal noted that the Parties based their arguments on

international law and, alternatively, on Colombian law.” The Tribunal then held that:

This approach is consistent with the BIT and the ICSID Convention: while
the Colombia-Switzerland BIT has no provision regarding the applicable
substantive law, Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention establishes that, in
the absence of an agreement, the Tribunal shall apply the law of the
Contracting State party to the dispute and such rules of international law
as may be applicable. And Article 44 of the Convention provides that “any
question of procedure [...] which is not covered by this Section or the
Arbitration Rules or any rules agreed by the parties”, shall be decided by
the Tribunal.**

The Tribunal held that it would apply international law and “confirm its findings by
applying municipal law”.°?
The Tribunal defined the issue before it as “whether it is fair to admit into the record of

this arbitration de lawfully obtained by a State’s adi ative antitrust agency

in the course of an antitrust/unfair competition investigation” .!°°

The Tribunal decided that it had to uphold the principle that each Party had an obligation
to arbitrate fairly and in good faith, and to respect the equality of arms. It considered that
the rule that the equality of arms must be respected applied to “the marshalling of evidence”
and that:

... arbitration tribunals are authorized to exclude from evidence documents
for compelling reasons of “fairness or equality of the Parties”.'°!

PO2, note 67, above, at para. 28 (AAE-1).

PO2, note 67, above, at para. 50 (AAE-1).
PO2, note 67, above, at para. 51 (AAE-1).
PO2, note 67, above, at para. 52 (AAE-1).
PO2, note 67, above, at para. 59 (AAE-1).
PO2, note 67, above, at para. 65 (AAE-1).

22

83.

84.

85.

102

103

105

The Tribunal decided that it should exclude the disputed documents “for reasons of fairness

and equality of arms”.‘> It justified that decision as follows:

If the Tribunal were to allow the Disputed Documents, such decision would
upset the balance between the Parties and their equality of arms. Claimants
are private companies, while respondent is a sovereign State, which by law
enjoys wide-ranging powers to investigate and sanction by itself
administrative misbehavior. Through the exercise of these powers
Respondent is capable of legally forcing evidence from Claimants. But such
evidence can only be used for the purpose for which it was coerced: to
further the administrative investigation, which may result in an
administrative sanction.

If the disputed documents were admissible as evidence, so would evidence
coming from other administrative agencies, such as the tax authorities. And
if governments were allowed to submit in investment arbitrations all
evidence seized by their administrative bodies or agencies in unrelated
administrative procedures, this would create an incentive to start
administrative investigations once the investor announces the existence of
a dispute.'°

The Tribunal concluded, with regard to international law:

In summary, the duty to arbitrate in good faith and the principle of equality
of arms preclude a State from coercing evidence through its own
administrative powers and to marshal it thereafter in an investment
arbitration!"

Importantly, however, the Tribunal continued:

The proper procedure to obtain evidence from the counterparty is through
the agreed upon document production exercise. Not having been obtained
through such procedure, the Disputed Documents should be excluded from
the record of this arbitration. '°

The Tribunal added, in a footnote, that:

the Tribunal’s decision does not affect the right or duty of a State or its
civil servants to denounce criminal behavior to the proper judicial

 

PO2, note 67, above, at para. 67 (AAE-1).
PO2, note 67, above, at paras, 68-69 (AAE-1).
PO2, note 67, above, at para. 70 (AAE-1).
PO2, note 67, above, at para. 70 (AAE-1).

23

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

authorities, nor the use of documents seized in the course of administrative
procedures to support such complaints. '°°

The Tribunal then considered Colombian law.'”” It held that:

By handing over the Disputed Documents to ANDJE, even if in compliance
with the Agreement [of 13 June 2017] the SIC may have incurred in a
desviacion de poder: /egally using its investigative powers for an
(additional) purpose different from that for which they were granted.'%

The Tribunal concluded that “[m]unicipal law thus would appear to confirm the conclusion

reached by the Tribunal under international law”.'

The effect of PO2 was that Colombia was not entitled to introduce the Disputed SIC
Documents into the record with the Counter-Memorial. Nevertheless, the Tribunal left

open two other ways in which the Seized Documents might be admitted into the record.

First, it held that Colombia could seek production of the Disputed SIC Documents through
an amended document production process (giving the Parties an opportunity to file new
requests for document production that would “supersede and replace” the Parties’ original
requests, still pending before the Tribunal), during which any dispute about whether or not

a document was protected by legal or settlement privilege could be determined.!!°

The Tribunal also specified that, in asserting legal or settlement privilege over a requested
document, the requested Party could opt either to identify the document in a “Privilege
Log” or to deliver the document to the requesting Party with the privileged information
redacted.''! The Tribunal set out the details of the amended document production phase in
paragraphs 117 to 146 of PO2. Drawing on the International Bar Association Rules on the
Taking of Evidence in International Commercial Arbitration, 2010 (the “IBA Rules”), the
Tribunal laid down criteria and procedural requirements for document production in some

detail, requiring the production of Redfern schedules in which requests for production and

PO2, note 67, above, at footnote 64 (AAE-1).

PO2, note 67, above, at paras, 71-74 (AAE-1).
PO2, note 67, above, at para. 73 (AAE-1).
PO2, note 67, above, at para. 74 (AAE-1).
PO2, note 67, above, at para.113 (AAE-1).
PO2, note 67, above, at para. 129 (AAE-1).

24

opposition based on, for example, legal or settlement privilege could be made.'!? The
annex to the Procedural Order set out an amended timetable (subsequently agreed between

the Parties!'*) to be followed with regard to the new phase of document production.!'*

91. Secondly. the Tribunal held that the rules which it had established “regarding the

 

 

dmissibility of evide btained from Claii in the course of Colombia's
administrative investigation ... do not apply per se with regard to evidence obtained in
judicial criminal proceedings”.''> It distinguished between an investigation by “an
administrative agency which initiates an investigation and uses its powers to coerce the
production of evidence from citizens” and “an independent judicial authority, which
investigates crimes in the public interest and marshals evidence into the criminal

record” ''6
92. It then identified the following dilemma:

Although the Arbitral Tribunal is not bound by the findings of fact or
conclusions of law of the Colombian criminal courts, the criminal
investigation may well result in evidence or findings which are relevant to
this investment arbitration. Consequently, it may well happen that, in the
course of the criminal investigation, decisions are adopted or evidence is
marshalled which any of the Parties may wish to submit to the investment
arbitration tribunal. The question is how to do so, while preserving the
basic principles of fairness, good faith and equality of arms.'\”

93. On that basis the Tribunal adopted the following regime:

decisions of criminal courts: decisions adopted by Colombian criminal
courts, which could potentially impact the present procedure, may be freely
marshalled by the Parties, subject to the rule established in para. 17 (3) of
Procedural Order No. 1;"'8

 

112 PQ2, note 67, above, at para, 127 (AAE-1).
Award, para. 30.

44 PQ2, note 67, above, at pp. 31-32 (AAE-1).
45 PQ2, note 67, above, at para. 87 (AAE-1).
46 PQ2, note 67, above, at para. 87 (AAE-1).
47 PQ2, note 67, above, at para. 88 (AAE-1).

Para. 17.3 of the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. | of 4 November 2016 concerned the timing of filing and
precluded late filing without the permission of the Tribunal (AAE-6).

25

94.

95.

criminal evidence: the situation is more complex as regards evidence, and
the Tribunal has not been sufficiently briefed on this question — the
particular decision may well depend on a document-by-document analysis.
Consequently, as a precautionary measure, the Tribunal finds that any
Party that intends to submit evidence gathered from a criminal procedure
in Colombia, shall first ask permission from the Arbitral Tribunal (briefly
describing the evidence to enable the Tribunal to consider its relevance, but
not submitting the evidence itself). The Tribunal will issue a decision, after
hearing the counterparty.''9

Colombia could therefore apply to submit “evidence gathered from a criminal procedure
in Colombia”.'° The Tribunal, however, recognized that both Parties agreed that
“communications of any type between Claimants and their designated external counsel for
the purpose of seeking or providing legal advice” were privileged and had to be subjected
to a “carved out regime”.'*! The Tribunal considered that it was “of paramount importance
for the integrity of these [ie the arbitral] proceedings” that if such documents came into the
hands of Colombian authorities in the course of the criminal investigation appropriate
measures were put in place to ensure that Colombia’s counsel in the arbitration and the
officials of ANDJE did not see those documents '7? and invited Colombia to set out, within

fifteen days, the measures which it intended to take. !??

(3) The Steps taken by the Parties following Procedural Order No. 2

On 14 November 2017, Colombia wrote to the Tribunal expressing its “serious concerns”
about PO2 and reserving all of its rights.'* It complained that, by excluding the Disputed
SIC Documents, the Tribunal had manifestly exceeded its powers, failed to state the
reasons on which its decision was based and seriously departed from a fundamental rule of

procedure.'?> Colombia maintained that the documents which had been excluded by the

PO2, note 67, above, at para. 89 (AAE-1).

PO2, note 67, above, at para. 89 (AAE-1).

PO2, note 67, above, at para. 90 (AAE-1).

PO2, note 67, above, at para. 92 (AAE-1).

PO2, note 67, above, at para. 94 (AAE-1).

Letter from Colombia to the Tribunal, 14 November 2017 (“Colombia's letter of 14 November 2017”), p. 1 (C-
283/R-275).

Colombia’s letter of 14 November 2017, note 124, above, at p. 2 (C-283/R-275).

26

96.

97.

98.

99.

126

127

128

129

130

132

13

Tribunal in PO2 had lawfully been obtained'*° and that the SIC had acted in accordance
with its duty in handing them to the ANDJE.'2’ Nevertheless, Colombia stated that it
would comply “under protest” with the directions in PO2.'2* In particular, the letter set
out the measures which Colombia proposed to take to ensure that Colombia’s counsel and
the ANDJE did not see any documents which were gathered in the course of the criminal
investigation and were properly the subject of legal privilege. Those measures included
the appointment of an independent counsel to review whether those documents were
“communications of any type between Claimants and their designated external counsel for
the purpose of seeking or providing legal advice”.'?? The independent counsel was
Mr Camilo Enciso, a former Secretario de Transparencia of the Presidency of
Colombia. '*°

On 16 November 2017 Colombia filed a revised Counter-Memorial which omitted any

reference to the Disputed SIC Documents and did not append any of them as exhibits. '7!

In accordance with the procedure laid down by PO2, on 14 December 2017 the Parties
submitted their respective requests for production of documents for decision by the

Tribunal. '3? Colombia made thirty-nine requests for production. !*7

On 4 January 2018, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3 (““PO3”), accepting twenty-

three out of Colombia’s thirty-nine requests, although it narrowed down several of them.!*#

On 5 February 2018, Glencore and Prodeco produced to Colombia a total of 366
documents, stating that they had “undertaken a reasonable review of their files in good

faith, and have identified and produced non-privileged documents in their possession,

Colombia’s letter of 14 November 2017, note 124, above, at p. 2 (C-283/R-275).

Colombia’s letter of 14 November 2017, note 124, above, at p. 3 (C-283/R-275).

Colombia’s letter of 14 November 2017, note 124, above, at p. 4 (C-283/R-275).

Colombia’s letter of 14 November 2017, note 124, above, at p. 5 (C-283/R-275), quoting PO2, note 67, above, at
para. 90 (AAE-1).

Colombia’s letter of 14 November 2017, note 124, above, at p. 5 (C-283/R-275).

Award, para. 32.

Award, para. 33.

Award, para. 94.

Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 3, 4 January 2018 (“PO3”) (AAE-8); Award, para. 99.

27

custody and control pursuant to the Tribunal’s orders” (the “Produced Documents”).!*>
Glencore and Prodeco, however, claimed “/egal or settlement privilege” in relation to 159
documents. '*° Certain of the Produced Documents were delivered to Colombia in redacted
form (the “Redacted Documents”).!*’ In addition, Glencore produced a Privilege Log
(the “Privilege Log”), identifying the date, the issuer, the recipient and a summary
description of the documents which it had identified as responsive to Colombia’s requests
which had been withheld by Glencore on the basis that they were subject to legal or
settlement privilege (the “Privilege Log Documents”). The Privilege Log Documents and

the Redacted Documents will be referred to as the “Disputed Documents”. !**

100. Colombia objected to the assertions of privilege. On 23 February 2018, Colombia wrote

136

13

13

13

140

142

144

to the Tribunal to protest that Glencore and Prodeco had disregarded the procedural
directions set out in PO2 by raising the issue of privilege only after the Tribunal’s decision
in PO3 and not at the exchange of their respective Redfern Schedules on 7 December 2017,
by which stage, according to Colombia, Glencore and Prodeco had “waived any right to
assert privilege”.'*° In any event, Colombia added, there was no entitlement to privilege. '*°
According to Colombia, none of the Redacted Documents and only 18 out of the 159
Privilege Log Documents were sent or received by Prodeco’s external counsel.'*! As such,
only these 18 documents could be construed as privileged under international legal

142

standards. ‘*~ The remainder were, for the most part, sent or received by Prodeco’s in-house

counsel - Ms Natalia Anaya and Ms Maria Margarita (Paca) Zuleta.'4* According to
Colombia, settlement privilege “does not exist’ and only “communications with outside

counsel are protected” by legal privilege under International Law or Colombian Law.'**

Letter from Claimants to Colombia, 5 February 2018 (“Claimants’ letter of 5 February 2018”), p. | (R-283).
Claimants’ letter of 5 February 2018, note 135, above, at p. | and Annex | (R-283).

Letter from Claimants to ICSID, 2 March 2018 (“Claimants’ letter of 2 March 2018”), pp. 2-3 (R-277); PO6,
note 73, above, at para. 46 (AAE-10).

See, however, note 79, above.

Letter from Colombia to ICSID, 23 February 2018 (“Colombia's letter of 23 February 2018”), p. 3 (R-272).
Colombia’s letter of 23 February 2018, note 139, above, at p. 3 (R-272).

Colombia’s letter of 23 February 2018, note 139, above, at p. 9 (R-272).

Colombia’s letter of 23 February 2018, note 139, above, at p. 12 (R-272).

Colombia’s letter of 23 February 2018, note 139, above, at p. 11 (R-272).

Colombia’s letter of 23 February 2018, note 139, above, at p. 11 (R-272).

28

101.

146

4

148

14

15

152

Glencore and Prodeco could not, therefore, have had any expectation of confidentiality in
respect of the majority of the documents.'*° Accordingly, Colombia requested an order
instructing Glencore and Prodeco to produce “within 48 hours” (1) un-redacted copies of
the Redacted Documents; and (2) the Privilege Log Documents, “redacting only in those
documents exchanged with external counsel the relevant portions where legal advice was

sought or given”.'4°

On 2 March 2018, Glencore and Prodeco wrote to the Tribunal in response, stating that
they had fully complied with PO3 and requesting that the Tribunal dismiss Colombia’s
application.'47 They contended that Colombia had not challenged any specific entries in
the Privilege Log. They maintained that it was international law which determined whether
or not a document was privileged and that the decision in Vito Gallo'** established that
under international law privilege extended to communications with in-house legal counsel
for the purpose of seeking or receiving legal advice.'*? Glencore and Prodeco stated that
“{clonsistent with this approach, Claimants have produced 35 documents setting out
communications with in-house counsel that were not prepared for the purpose of obtaining
or providing legal advice”.'*° They added:

Perusal of the individual entries in the privilege log will confirm that

Claimants only asserted privilege over documents or communications

created for the purpose seeking or receiving legal advice, not those merely

related to Prodeco’s general operations. The specific matter in respect of

which the legal advice was sought or received is also identified in the

privilege log.'*!
The letter also challenged Colombia’s assertion that legal privilege did not attach, under

Colombian law, to communications with in-house counsel. '**

Colombia’s letter of 23 February 2018, note 139, above, at p. 11 (R-272).

Colombia’s letter of 23 February 2018, note 139, above, at p. 14 (R-272).

Claimants’ letter of 2 March 2018, note 137, above, at p. 2 (R-277); Award, paras. 37, 104.

Vito G Gallo v. The Government of Canada, Procedural Order No. 3 of 8 April 2009 (““Vito Gallo”) (RL-129).
Claimants’ letter of 2 March 2018, note 137, above, at p. 5 (R-277).

Claimants’ letter of 2 March 2018, note 137, above, at p. 5 (R-277).

Claimants’ letter of 2 March 2018, note 137, above, at p. 5 (R-277).

Claimants’ letter of 2 March 2018, note 137, above, at p. 6 (R-277).

29

102.

103.

104.

On 6 March 2018, the Tribunal wrote to the Parties to instruct that

The challenge to any Redacted Document or to any Privilege Log
Documents must be done on a document-by-document basis. Thus, the
Tribunal cannot entertain Colombia's general Request for Relief either for
all the Redacted Documents or for all the Privilege Log Documents.

In order to solve this incident in the quickest and most efficient way
possible, the Tribunal suggests that the Parties confer and try to reach an
agreement on any disputed document. If, having made the appropriate good
faith efforts to find a solution, it cannot be reached, the Tribunal will gladly
solve any requests on a document-by-document basis.

Under no circumstances shall this incident serve as an excuse to delay the
hearing scheduled for May 28 — June 4, 2018.'°

By a letter to the Tribunal dated 9 March 2018, Colombia reiterated its protest that Glencore
and Prodeco had “openly disregarded” the procedural directions and timetable set forth by
PO2, adding that the Tribunal had, by its communication of 6 March 2018 “implicitly
accepted Claimants’ belated privilege objections without stating any reason”.'*4 In
addition, Colombia argued that at least two of Colombia’s arguments in its communication
of 2 March 2018 did not require the Tribunal to rule on a “document-by-document basis”.
In particular, according to Colombia, a decision on a document-by-document basis was not
required in order to rule that Glencore and Prodeco had failed to comply with the Tribunal’s
established timetable for raising objections to production requests, set out in PO2, and that

documents sent or received by in-house counsel were not privileged. '*>

With regard to communications between Prodeco and its in-house counsel, Colombia
further contended that any privilege to which Prodeco might have been entitled had been

waived when it permitted those counsel to give evidence in proceedings before the

Colombian courts.'*°

Email from the Tribunal to the Parties, 6 March 2018 (“Tribunal’s email of 6 March 2018”) (AAE-26); Award,
paras. 38, 105.

Letter from Colombia to ICSID, 9 March 2018 (“Colombia’s letter of 9 March 2018”), p. | (R-273).
Colombia’s letter of 9 March 2018, note 154, above, at p. | (R-273); Award, para. 106.
Colombia’s letter of 9 March 2018, note 154, above, at p. 3 (R-273).

30

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

15

158

159

160

161

162

163

164

165

Colombia also informed the Tribunal that the ANDJE had recently learned that the FGN'*”
had obtained copies of the files in possession of the SIC “in the context of a domestic
criminal investigation into the illegalities surrounding the Eighth Amendment”'** and that,
in accordance with Colombia’s letter of 14 November 2017,'*? neither Colombia’s counsel
nor the ANDJE had seen these files. However, referring to para. 89 of PO2, Colombia
requested “the Tribunal’s instructions to gather the evidence collected by the General
Prosecutor and marshal it into the record.‘ This issue was distinct from the dispute
regarding privilege and was eventually dealt with by the Tribunal in PO6; it is considered

in paras. 143-151, below.

Colombia added that it understood that “the Tribunal is adamant not to postpone the
hearing scheduled for 28 May — 4 June 2018” (the “Arbitration Hearing”), and stated

that Colombia itself would also “oppose any request that the Hearing be rescheduled” .‘*!

Glencore and Prodeco responded by letter on 12 March 2018.'°? They maintained that
Colombia had mischaracterized the Tribunal’s communication of 6 March 2018, which had

not upheld the claim of privilege but merely established the procedure by which that claim
was to be resolved!

Also on 12 March 2018, Colombia sent to Glencore and Prodeco its comments on the items

in the Privilege Log.'*

On 17 March 2018, the Tribunal wrote to the Parties stating that it had taken no decision
with regard to the claim of privilege and reiterating that, if the Parties were unable to reach

agreement on the individual documents, the Tribunal was ready to “adjudicate the issue on

a document-by-document basis”!

See para. 72, above.

Colombia’s letter of 9 March 2018, note 154, above, at pp. 4-5 (R-273).

Colombia’s letter of 14 November 2017, note 124, above (C-283/R-275); see para. 95, above.
Colombia’s letter of 9 March 2018, note 154, above, at p. 5 (R-273).

Colombia’s letter of 9 March 2018, note 154, above, at p. 4 (R-273).

Letter from Claimants to ICSID, 12 March 2018 (“Claimants’ letter of 12 March 2018”) (AAE-28).
Claimants’ letter of 12 March 2018, note 162, above, at p. 1 (AAE-28).

Letter from Colombia to Claimants, 12 March 2018 (AAE-27).

Email from the Tribunal to the Parties, 17 March 2018 (“Tribunal’s email of 17 March 2018”) (AAE-11).

31

110.

111.

112.

166

167

168

169

170

By letter of 27 March 2018, Colombia informed the Tribunal that the Parties had been
unable to agree with regard to the production of the Redacted and Privilege Log documents,
and requesting that the Tribunal order Glencore and Prodeco to produce the Disputed
Documents.'®° Colombia maintained that Glencore and Prodeco had refused its request to
identify which of the documents in the Privilege Log were among the Disputed SIC
Documents and that this refusal had impeded the process of document production.!%
Colombia attached to the letter an annex comprising the privilege log with two additional
columns containing Colombia’s document-by-document response to the assertion of

privilege and Glencore and Prodeco’s replies. !°*

(4) Procedural Order No. 4 (24 April 2018)
The Tribunal ruled on the privilege dispute in its Procedural Order No. 4 of 24 April 2018.
Having summarised the Parties’ arguments, the Tribunal identified three issues which it
had to decide:

- Whether Claimants failed to follow the appropriate proceedings [sic]
for filing their Privilege Log;

- Whether attorney client privilege extends to in-house counsel; and

- Whether Claimants properly asserted settlement privilege over the
Disputed Documents.'°

The Tribunal concluded that the law applicable to these questions was international law:

The Parties have based their pleadings first on international law,'"° and
alternatively on municipal law. This approach is consistent with the BIT
and the ICSID Convention: while the Colombia-Switzerland BIT has no
provision regarding the applicable substantive law, Article 42(1) of the
ICSID Convention establishes that, in the absence of an agreement, the

Letter from Colombia to ICSID, 27 March 2018 (“Colombia's letter of 27 March 2018”) (RAE-2).
Colombia’s letter of 27 March 2018, note 166, above, at p. | (RAE-2).
Colombia’s letter of 27 March 2018, note 166, above, at Annex A (RAE-2).
P04, note 72, above, at para. 35 (AAE-9).
Citing Claimants’ letter of 2 March 2018, note 137, above (R-277) and Colombia’s letter of 23 February 2018,

note 139, above (R-272).

32

113.

114.

115.

116.

Tribunal shall apply the law of the Contracting State party to the dispute
and such rules of international law as may be applicable.'"

'? tribunal that

The Tribunal went on to agree with the view expressed by the Vito Gallo
“domestic legal concepts of solicitor-client privilege are recognized and protected by
international law”.'” It also held that the concept of settlement privilege was protected

by international law.!”

In addition, the Tribunal referred to Article 44 of the ICSID Convention, under which “any
question of procedure ... which is not covered by this Section or the Arbitration Rules or

any rules agreed by the parties” are to be decided by the tribunal, '” and the IBA Rules.!”°

The Tribunal considered that Glencore and Prodeco had not complied with PO2 in the
timing of their assertion of privilege but that this failure had not deprived Colombia of its
procedural rights or prevented a full presentation of the Parties’ different positions on the
issues requiring resolution.'”’ It therefore rejected Colombia’s argument that the claim of

privilege should be dismissed in limine.'78

With regard to the question whether international law treated communications with in-
house legal counsel for the purpose of seeking or receiving legal advice as privileged, the
Tribunal considered that whether or not lawyer-client communications were privileged
depended not on the status of the lawyer but on whether the communication in question
met four conditions: (i) that the document was drafted by a lawyer acting in their capacity
as a lawyer; (ii) that a solicitor-client relationship based on trust existed between the lawyer
and the client; (iii) that the document had been elaborated for the purpose of obtaining or

giving legal advice; and (iv) that the lawyer and the client, when giving and obtaining the

11 POA, note 72, above, at para. 37 (AAE-9)..
'2 See Vito Gallo, note 148, above, at para. 41 (RL-129).

P04, note 72, above, at para. 38 (AAE-9).
P04, note 72, above, at para. 39 (AAE-9).
P04, note 72, above, at para. 40 (AAE-9).
P04, note 72, above, at para. 41 (AAE-9).
P04, note 72, above, at para. 46 (AAE-9).
P04, note 72, above, at para. 47 (AAE-9).

33

117.

118.

119.

120.

179

180

182

18

legal advice, must have acted with the expectation that the advice would be kept
confidential in a contentious situation. !”

The Tribunal noted that no distinction between in-house and external counsel was
mentioned either in Vito Gallo or in the IBA Rules and cited the decision in Reineccius v.

Bank for International Settlements that privilege extended to “the legal communications

 

between an attorney (whether in-house or outside) and those who are afforded his or her
professional advice for the purposes of making or in contemplation of that decision’”.'*°
The Tribunal concluded that international law made no such distinction, so long as the
documents in question met the conditions set out in the preceding paragraph. It concluded
that “[t]o rule otherwise would imply an unwarranted discrimination towards parties that
choose to be represented in investment arbitration, or that seek advice on matters that may

become relevant in investment arbitration, by in-house counsel”. 181

The Tribunal went on to consider the position under Colombian law, noting the different
conclusions drawn by the Parties from the authorities put before it, and concluded that it
would have reached the same conclusion that communications meeting the four conditions
were protected under Colombian law whether they were with in-house or external

counsel. !8?
In light of its conclusions on international law and Colombian law, the Tribunal held that:

... it is reasonable to presume that when consulted with a view to obtaining
legal advice and then when providing such advice, Claimants’ in-house
counsel acted with the expectation that legal privilege would be protected.
Respondent has not presented any evidence to prove otherwise.'**

The Tribunal also rejected Colombia’s argument that privilege had been waived. While
accepting that a client could “waive the professional secrecy privilege of their in-house or

outside counsel”,'** it held that there had been no such waiver in the present case, either

P04, note 72, above, at para. 54 (AAE-9).

Reineccius v. Bank for International Settlements, Procedural Order No. 6 of 11 June 2002, UNRIAA vol. XXIII,
p. 180 (“Reineccius”).

P04, note 72, above, at para. 55 (AAE-9).

P04, note 72, above, at paras, 57-63 (AAE-9).

P04, note 72, above, at para. 67 (AAE-9).

P04, note 72, above, at para. 68 (AAE-9).

34

by Prodeco’s act of requesting privileged documents from Colombia!*> or permitting its

in-house counsel to testify, since they did not disclose legal advice. '*°

121. The Tribunal upheld the principle of settlement privilege. It noted that settlement privilege

had not been claimed in respect of any document for which legal privilege was not also
asserted.'*7 It held, however, that, given there was a theoretical possibility that settlement
privilege might exist in relation to a document for which legal privilege was inapplicable,
it was appropriate to rule on the claim of settlement privilege.'** The Tribunal considered
that settlement privilege had properly been asserted.'*? It is unnecessary, however, for the

Committee to consider that aspect of the Tribunal’s ruling.

122. Accordingly, the Tribunal directed lead counsel for Glencore and Prodeco:

To submit by April 27, 2018 an affidavit identifying that each of the
Disputed Documents meets all the foregoing Requirements, and

To produce by the same date, in unredacted form, any and all Disputed
Documents that do not meet the Requirements.'°

123. Additionally, the Arbitral Tribunal established a cut-off date for introducing further

186

18

18

18

19

evidence or filing further submissions in this proceeding, stating that:

After May 11, 2018 no new submissions and no additional evidence shall
be admitted into the file, except as provided in the following paragraph.

If in exceptional circumstances and for unexpected reasons any of the
Parties considers that it is of paramount importance that an exception to
the rule be made, it shall file a motion, asking for authorization, stating the
grounds therefor, and without attaching the new submission or evidence.
After hearing the other Party the Tribunal will decide. Any submission made
or evidence marshalled in breach of this provision will be disregarded.'*'

P04, note 72, above, at para. 72 (AAE-9).

P04, note 72, above, at para. 73 (AAE-9).

PO4, note 72, above, at para. 77 (AAE-9), citing the Claimants’ letter of 2 March 2018, note 137, above, at p. 11
(R-277).

P04, note 72, above, at para. 78 (AAE-9).

P04, note 72, above, at paras. 83-91 (AAE-9).

PO4, note 72, above, at para. 95 (AAE-9). The deadline was later extended.

P04, note 72, above, at paras. 98-99 (AAE-9).

35

124.

125.

126.

(5) Developments following Procedural Order No. 4
(a) The Claim of Privilege

On 30 April 2018, lead counsel for Glencore and Prodeco (Mr Nigel Blackaby, QC)
submitted an affidavit in which he stated:
Pursuant to Procedural Order no. 4 dated 24 April 2018, and the Tribunal’s
communication on 27 April 2018, I confirm that I have reviewed all the
Disputed Documents over which Claimants [i.e. Glencore and Prodeco]

have asserted privilege, as identified in the Privilege Log attached to the
Claimants’ letter of 5 February 2018 (Privilege Log).

I confirm that each of the Disputed Documents over which the Claimants
have asserted privilege fulfils the Requirements set out in paragraph 54 of
Procedural Order No. 4, with the exception of ... two documents.'””

The affidavit then gave brief details of two documents which were annexed to the affidavit.
The Committee is not clear whether these documents were later relied on by Colombia, nor

if they were among the Disputed SIC Documents.

By letter dated 7 May 2018, Colombia wrote to Glencore and Prodeco to state that it had
identified twenty-four of the Disputed Documents which, in its view, ought to have been
produced by Glencore in response to the Tribunal’s instructions in PO3. These documents,
according to Colombia, (i) were responsive to its production requests as approved, in
narrowed terms, by PO3; and (ii) were not covered by the requirements, established by the
Tribunal in PO4, for the application of legal or settlement privilege.'°> Colombia
accordingly requested the production of these documents by Glencore. The twenty-four
documents that were the subject of this request were detailed in a list attached as “Annex
A” to Colombia’s letter (the “Annex A Documents”). It appears that all twenty-four

documents were among the forty-one Disputed SIC Documents. !**

12 Affidavit of Mr Nigel Blackaby QC, 30 April 2018, paras. 3-4. The Affidavit, which formed part of the record
before the Tribunal, was not produced in the annulment proceedings but both Parties referred to it at the hearing
before the Committee and the Committee therefore considers it appropriate to quote it in the Decision.

193 Letter from Colombia to ICSID, 11 May 2018 (“Colombia's letter of 11 May 2018”), p. 41 (AAE-12).

194 Colombia’s letter of 11 May 2018, note 193, above, at p. 9, note 1 (AAE-12).

36

127.

128.

129.

196

197

198

199

On 10 May 2018 Glencore and Prodeco wrote to refuse Colombia’s request.'®> In this
communication they stated that:

. only 6 of the 24 Excluded Documents now requested were actually
included in Claimants’ Privilege Log. One of the documents requested has
already been disclosed. Claimants did not assert privilege in respect of the
remaining documents because production was not required. The documents
were not responsive to Colombia's document requests as narrowed by the
Tribunal in Procedural Order No 3. Consequently, Claimants [Glencore]

did not produce them and did not need to decide if it was necessary to assert
privilege over them.'°

On 11 May 2018, Colombia wrote to refer the matter to the Tribunal. By its letter, to which
the above correspondence between the Parties was attached, Colombia requested that the
Tribunal review the Annex A Documents and Colombia’s reasons, as detailed therein, as
to why these should be produced by Glencore.'”” As before, Colombia argued that these
documents were both responsive to its document production requests, and were not
protected by either legal or settlement privilege, and as such ought to have been produced
by Glencore. Colombia asserted that Glencore’s refusal to produce the requested
documents on the grounds that “/t/he documents were not responsive to Colombia’s
document requests” was “disingenuous” given that:

[w]hen preparing its request for production of documents, Colombia was

already aware of the existence of categories of documents (such as the

Disputed Documents) that were material and relevant for its case and, thus,
framed its requests in such a manner as to cover such Documents. '°8

Accordingly, Colombia asked the Tribunal to order Glencore to produce the documents
listed in its Annex A, and to admit them into the record.!? Annex A took the form of a
Redfern Schedule in which Colombia set out its arguments as to why each document was
responsive to one of Colombia’s requests and was not entitled to legal or settlement

privilege. Glencore and Prodeco’s response to these arguments was set out in the final

Colombia’s letter of 11 May 2018, note 193, above, at p. 7 (AAE-12).

Colombia’s letter of 11 May 2018, note 193, above, at p. 7 (AAE-12).

Colombia’s letter of 11 May 2018, note 193, above, at p. 5 (AAE-12); Award, paras. 54, 125.
Colombia’s letter of 11 May 2018, note 193, above, at p. 4 (AAE-12).

Award, para. 54.

37

130.

131.

132.

133.

134.

201

202

203,

column of the Schedule. In the alternative, Colombia indicated that it would not object to
the Tribunal appointing a conflicts counsel (i.e. a privilege inspector) to analyse the

documents.?”

On 14 May 2018, Glencore and Prodeco filed their response to Colombia’s 11 May request
and asked the Tribunal to reject Colombia’s request to admit the Annex A Documents on
the basis that, in each case, the document requested was either privileged or not responsive
to the requests made by Colombia on 14 December 2017 (see para. 97, above) and dealt
with by the Tribunal in PO3.7°!

On 15 May 2018, Colombia wrote to the Tribunal elaborating on its 11 May request
concerning the Annex A Documents.?? Glencore and Prodeco responded to this
communication by a letter to the Tribunal dated 17 May 2018, reiterating their request that
the Tribunal reject Colombia’s request to submit the Annex A documents into the record
and opposing Colombia’s alternative proposal that the matter be referred to a conflicts

counsel.7°3

(b) The FGN Documents

In paragraph 89 of PO2 (para. 93, above), the Tribunal required that if a Party wished to
put into the record “evidence gathered from a criminal procedure in Colombia”, it should

seek the permission of the Tribunal.

As already stated (para. 105, above), in its letter of 9 March 2018, Colombia sought the

“Tribunal’s instructions to gather the evidence collected by the General Prosecutor [the
FGN] and marshal it into the record” .?*

In their letter of 12 March 2018, Glencore and Prodeco protested against Colombia’s

attempt to introduce the documents seized by the SIC on the basis that they were now in

Award, para. 54.

Letter from Claimants to ICSID, 14 May 2018 (“Claimants’ letter of 14 May 2018”) (AAE-33); Award, para. 55.
Letter from Colombia to ICSID, 15 May 2018 (“Colombia's letter of 15 May 2018”) (AAE-34); Award, paras.
56, 128.

Letter from Claimants to ICSID, 17 May 2018 (“Claimants’ letter of 17 May 2018”) (AAE-35); Award, paras.
56, 129.

Colombia’s letter of 9 March 2018, note 154, above, at p. 4 (R-273).

38

the possession of the FGN.2°> They demanded that the documents be reviewed by
Mr Enciso, in accordance with Colombia’s letter of 14 November 2017 so as to exclude
the documents referred to in PO2 and that Colombia provide the Tribunal and themselves

with a detailed log of these documents.
135. The Tribunal addressed this matter in its letter of 17 March 2018, in which it directed that:

All documents collected by the General Prosecutor which Respondent might
wish to marshal into the record of this proceeding should be delivered to
Mr. Enciso, Respondent’s designated special counsel. Mr. Enciso should
exclude from the documents received any Confidential Attorney
Communications (PO 2, para. 94; Respondent's letter of November 14,
2017). The Tribunal recommends that Mr. Enciso keep a written record of
his filtering process.

Once so filtered, the documents may be handed to Respondent's counsel
(Dechert), who will then be free to make a document-by-document
application pursuant to para. 89(2) of PO2. Any such application shall
identify the document by its date, names of sender and recipient, and
subject-matter, and specify whether the document refers or contains legal
advice of any kind and whether it is one of the Disputed Documents (as this
term is used in PO 2). The application shall not include the document in
question.

The Tribunal will issue a decision, after hearing Claimant.?°°

136. In accordance with the Tribunal’s instructions, on 5 April 2018, Counsel for Colombia sent
a memorandum to Mr Enciso, informing him of the Tribunal’s procedural directions to
gather and filter the evidence collected by FGN, and providing him “with a list of key-
words that would enable him to perform searches in the vast amount of information

gathered” 27

137. Thereafter, by its letter dated 11 May 2018, Colombia requested that the Tribunal admit

into the record certain documents, specified in Annex C of the letter, which had been

205 Claimants’ letter of 12 March 2018, note 162, above, at pp. 2-4 (AAE-28).
26 Tribunal’s email of 17 March 2018, note 165, above (AAE-11).
27 Colombia’s letter of 11 May 2018, note 193, above, at p. 2 (AAE-12).

39

138.

139.

140.

141.

gathered by the FGN and filtered by Mr Enciso in accordance with the Tribunal’s directions
(the “FGN Documents”).”°°

On 14 May 2018, Glencore filed its response to Colombia’s 11 May request and asked the
Tribunal to deny the application to admit the FGN Documents.” Glencore stated that these
did not amount to evidence garnered by the Colombian criminal courts and that Colombia

had failed to demonstrate their relevance to the Parties’ dispute.?!°

Also on 14 May 2018, the Tribunal and the Parties held the pre-hearing conference call, in
which Colombia agreed to provide Glencore with the FGN Documents.”!! It was further
agreed that Glencore would submit their comments on Colombia’s request to submit the
FGN documents to the Tribunal by 17 May 2018, and that, given the “time sensitive nature
of the Parties’ requests” the Tribunal would issue a decision on the FGN documents by 18

May, with a “full decision and reasoning” to follow afterwards”!

On 15 May 2018, Colombia wrote to the Tribunal elaborating on its 11 May request
concerning the FGN Documents.”! It argued that, under the Colombian Constitution, the
FGN is defined as an independent organ of the “judicial branch” and that its functions are
akin to those of the jueces de instruccion (juges d’instruction) in the Spanish and French
criminal systems. Colombia added that the FGN could also fall within the definition of an
“Independent Prosecutor” set out in PO2.7'* Glencore and Prodeco responded to this
communication by a letter to the Tribunal dated 17 May 2018, requesting that the Tribunal

reject Colombia’s request to submit the FGN documents into the record.?!>

(6) The Tribunal’s Letter of 18 May 2018 and Procedural Order No. 6

On 18 May 2018, the Tribunal wrote to the Parties regarding the Annex A Documents, the

FGN Documents and a document which Glencore and Prodeco had applied to include in

Colombia’s letter of 11 May 2018, note 193, above, at p. 2 (AAE-12); Application, para. 72.
Claimants’ letter of 14 May 2018, note 201, above (AAE-33); Award, para. 55.

Claimants’ letter of 14 May 2018, note 201, above (AAE-33); Award, para. 55, 126.
Award, para. 127.

2 Award, para. 127.
3 Colombia’s letter of 15 May 2018, note 202, above (AAE-34).

Colombia’s letter of 15 May 2018, note 202, above at p. 4 (AAE-34).

215 Claimants’ letter of 17 May 2018, note 203, above (AAE-35); Award, paras. 56, 129.

40

the record. In view of the fact that the Arbitration Hearing was due to start in ten days’
time, the Tribunal gave its decision on the requests and stated that a reasoned decision
would follow at a later date. The Tribunal stated that:

The Arbitral Tribunal has decided not to admit into the record any of the
documents requested by the Parties for the following reasons:

1. Claimants’ petition to admit the technical report identified in its email of
May 11, 2018 is belated since Claimants were the last to file a main
submission.

2. Respondent's petition to admit the FGN Documents: the FGN Documents
did not make it into the record through Document Production and are not
part of a formal acusacion in a Colombian criminal court proceeding. Thus,
the Tribunal sees no reason to admit them into the record.

3. Respondent's petition to admit Annex A Documents: there are two types
of documents that Respondent wishes the Tribunal to admit into the record:

a. documents that Claimants’ counsel has confirmed are subject to privilege
and

b. documents which — according to Claimants’ counsel — are not responsive
to the Tribunal’s decisions in PO3.

It falls within the responsibility of Claimants’ counsel to determine which
documents are responsive to Respondent's petitions (as narrowed down by
the Tribunal) and which are subject to privilege. The Tribunal has no
reason to second guess these decisions.

A full decision will follow in the next days.?'®

142. The Tribunal set out its reasons in Procedural Order No. 6 on 31 July 2018.
143. With regard to the FGN Documents, the Tribunal held that:
Based on the Tribunal’s ruling in PO No. 2, three conditions must be

satisfied cumulatively in order for evidence from criminal proceedings to
be admissible:

216 Award, para. 130.

4l

- The evidence must be “gathered” or “marshaled” in the course of a
criminal proceeding (i) [citing PO2, para. 89];

- Evidence must not be privileged (ii) [citing PO2, para. 92];

- Evidence must be relevant and material to this arbitration (iii) [citing
PO2, para. 88].7!7

144. The Tribunal recalled that in PO2:

the Tribunal distinguished between documents procured by an
administrative agency and documents “obtained”, “gathered” or
“marshaled” in judicial criminal proceedings, i.e. evidence obtained by
prosecutors or judges that would become the basis of a formal
indictment.?'®

145. The Tribunal found that:

The FGN Documents do not meet this standard. They were not “gathered”,
“obtained” or “marshaled” by the FGN in the course of investigative or
prosecutorial activities: the SIC simply delivered these documents to the
FGN at ANDJE’s behest.?'°

146. The Tribunal held that to allow in documents seized by the SIC which the Tribunal had
excluded in PO2 merely because they had been handed to the FGN “would contradict the

Tribunal’s analysis and decision in PO 2”.??°

147. In addition, the Tribunal observed that criminal complaints in Colombia go through four

separate phases. It held that:

In any case, the criminal proceeding launched by ANDJE’s complaint is
still in the preliminary stage, and the FGN Documents are not part of a
formal acusacion in a Colombian criminal court proceeding. The
Complaint has — as far as the Tribunal is aware — not passed the First
Phase, \ndagacion, and has not resulted in any indictment, which would
eventually trigger the Second Phase: Investigacion, let alone an imputacion

217 PO6, note 73, above, at para. 99 (AAE-10).
218 PQ6, note 73, above, at para. 101 (AAE-10).
219 PQ6, note 73, above, at para. 102 (AAE-10).
220 PQ6, note 73, above, at para. 103 (AAE-10).

42

and later acusacion of any person. Thus, the FGN documents have not yet
given rise to a formal indictment, and may never do so.>*'

148. The Tribunal therefore concluded that the first requirement was not met” and rejected

Colombia’s request to introduce the documents into the record.

149. The Tribunal also rejected the request to include the Annex A Documents from the trove
of documents seized by the SIC. The Tribunal noted that Colombia had argued that,
notwithstanding the submissions of Glencore and Prodeco, these documents were not

privileged and were responsive to Colombia’s requests.
150. | The Tribunal held that:

It falls within the responsibility of Claimants’ counsel to determine which
documents are responsive to Respondent's requests (as narrowed down by
the Tribunal [in PO3]) and which are subject to privilege. Equally, it falls
within the responsibility of Respondent’s counsel to determine which
documents are responsive to Claimants’ requests and which are subject to
privilege.

Claimants’ lead legal counsel, aware of his responsibilities, and prompted
by the Tribunal, has filed an affidavit declaring that all the documents
included in Claimants’ Privilege Log meet the Requirements of para. 54 of
PO No. 4 regarding Confidential Attorney Communications and Settlement
Privilege. Claimants produced to Respondent the two only documents
which did not fulfill the Requirements.

Claimants’ counsel has made its assessment of the responsiveness and
privilege of the Excluded Documents. Respondent has not provided
sufficient grounds to make the Tribunal doubt the correctness or good faith
of that assessment.?>

151. Finally, the Tribunal noted that, if either Party wished to suggest that the Tribunal draw
“adverse inferences based on the counterparty’s decision regarding responsiveness and
privilege of ordered documents”, it should make detailed allegations to that effect in its
post-hearing brief.?7*

22)

221 PO6, note 73, above, at para. 104 (AAE-10).
222 PO6, note 73, above, at paras. 101, 106 (AAE-10).
223 PO6, note 73, above, at paras, 111-113 (AAE-10).
24 PO6, note 73, above, at para. 114 (AAE-10).

43

(7) Document R-100

152. One of the documents originally seized by the SIC and which was also included in both the
Annex A Documents and the FGN Documents did eventually find its way into the record.
This was an email chain, part of which had been submitted by Colombia with the original
Counter-Memorial that was later withdrawn.?*> After discussion at the hearing before the
Tribunal, Glencore and Prodeco agreed to waive the privilege which they had asserted in
respect of this document provided that the whole email chain was admitted into the

record.”

153. That came about as follows. On Day 2 of the Arbitration Hearing, the President of the
Tribunal raised the question whether there was any evidence which suggested a
relationship between Mr Maldonado and Mr Ballesteros, a matter which he suggested was
central to the allegation that the payment for the three hectare concession caused
Mr Ballesteros to accept the Eighth Amendment.””” Counsel for Colombia replied that the
evidence which the Tribunal had not seen established the link between the three hectare
concession and the Eighth Amendment, although he added that “it doesn’t establish a
relationship between Maldonado and Ballesteros”.”** He then added that:

There is an email that shows, pursuant to our submission, that the Eighth

Amendment was possible because the 3-hectares Contract pleased
Ballesteros.”°

154. | The Tribunal requested clarification as to whether the document referenced by counsel for
Colombia in this statement was the document originally submitted by Colombia with its
Counter-Memorial as exhibit R-54, and a discussion followed about whether there were
any “other documents”.>° In response it was confirmed by counsel for Colombia that:

That will be the only document.*'

225 The partial email chain was Document R-54. Award, para. 658.

226 It became Document R-100. Award, para. 659.

227 Tribunal Tr., Day 2, p. 363:5-364:16 (President Fernandez-Armesto).
Tribunal Tr., Day 2, p. 365:8-12 (Professor Silva Romero).

29 Tribunal Tr., Day 2, p. 366:20-22 (Professor Silva Romero).

230 Tribunal Tr., Day 2, p. 372:12-17.

Tribunal Tr., Day 2, p. 373:2-3 (Professor Silva Romero).

22

23

44

155. Colombia had specifically raised R-54 in its letter to the Tribunal dated 11 May 2018,
addressing its request for the production of the Annex A documents.”*? At that time it

described the content of the document as follows:

By way of illustration, the Disputed Document formerly submitted as exhibit
R-54 is responsive to Colombia's request No. 9 (“Documents reflecting any
link between the assignment of the 3ha Contract (R-97) and the
Commitment to Negotiate (C-91)”). In this chain of emails, Mr. Nagle
shared his views with Prodeco’s management on how Prodeco had secured
Mr. Ballesteros’ support in the negotiations that led to the execution of the
Commitment to Negotiate and, later, to the Eighth Amendment. But
Claimants refuse to produce this document, even though it does not comply
cumulatively with the Requirements. In fact, while Mr. Nagle replied to an
email by Natalia Anaya, such email was not “elaborated for the purpose of
obtaining or giving legal advice” (Requirement No. 3). Instead, Ms Anaya’s
email simply provided Prodeco’s management team with an account of a
conversation that she had with Ms. Marcela Estrada (then member of
Ingeominas’ legal department). For the same reason, exhibit R-54 is not a
document “drafted by a lawyer acting in his or her capacity as lawyer”
(Requirement No. 1). Neither can Claimants claim that a solicitor-client
relationship based on trust existed (Requirement No. 2), nor that Ms. Anaya
and Mr. Nagle had an expectation that this document would be kept
confidential in a contentious situation (Requirement No. 4). In addition, in
no way does R-54 disclose Claimants’ settlement position in regard to the
interpretation of “definitive price” under the Seventh Amendment.
Claimants implicitly admit that R-54 is not privileged when they assert that
they are claiming privilege over a “broader email chain,” which may
contain legal advice sought or given by Prodeco’s in-house counsel.
Claimants, however, cannot assert legal privilege by extension over the
De identified by Colombia if such d in itself, does not
cumulatively comply with the Requirements. In any case, Claimants could
have produced redacted versions of this chain of emails. But they did not.?*

 

156. In response to the allegations made at the oral hearing, counsel for Glencore and Prodeco
maintained that “R-54 is an incomplete e-mail chain” and that the “complete chain is R-
100”.7>4 He added that

We have no objection to the document going in effectively on two conditions.

One is that we have the complete chain. We don't have the cut-off chain of
54, which is an incomplete conversation, that that is fully incorporated

232 Colombia’s letter of 11 May 2018, note 193, above (AAE-12).
233 Colombia’s letter of 11 May 2018, note 193, above, at pp. 3-4 (AAE-12).
24 Tribunal Tr., Day 2, p. 373:17-18 (Mr Blackaby).

45

157.

158.

159.

236

237

23

23

within the full e-mail chain, which is--which was R-100, on the
under ding that our submission of that d into the record does
not constitute a broader waiver of privilege with regard to the other
privileged documents in respect of which we assert it since it contains the
opinion of Ms. Anaya with regard to certain issues. In particular, that was
the discussion about the escrow account. You will recall the discussion
about the dispute on Amendment 7, with regard to whether or not the fact
that we believe the clear language of the text permitted us to make a
certain calculation, and there was a dispute because we had been
performing it in another way, then a middle was an escrow account. That
was a point of hot debate and in the middle of that discussion effectively we-
-this is when that e-mail exchange took place.[...] and a second condition,
because it was not a document that was on the record for purposes of the
arbitration yesterday when we gave our opening speech, so the other
condition would be obviously that we be allowed to address that document
in the same way as we would have been able to address that document in
our opening speech.

 

Following this exchange, The Tribunal requested that the Parties agree that the email in
question, which seemed a highly relevant document, be introduced into the record.”*° Both
Parties agreed to the request, and it was further agreed to include the complete email chain

in which the email was inserted as Document R-100.757

Colombia asserts that “/t/his was the only document obtained in the 2014 SIC investigation
that was admitted into the record”.”*® That is not, however, the case as one of these
documents had earlier been provided by Glencore and Prodeco during the document

production phase.???

THE AWARD
In the dispositif of the Award, the Tribunal ruled that it:

Dismisses Respondent’s Illegality Objection, Fork in the Road Objection,
and Inadmissibility Objection, upholds Respondent's Umbrella Clause

Tribunal Tr., Day 2, pp. 374:4-375:11 (Mr Blackaby).

Tribunal Tr., Day 2, pp. 376:15-378:6; Award, para. 659.

Tribunal Tr., Day 2, p. 378:3-15 (President Fernandez-Armesto); Award, para. 659.

Mem. on Ann., para. 96.

See Colombia’s letter of 11 May 2018, note 193, above, at p. 7 (AAE-12), quoted at para. 127, above. It is not
possible for the Committee to determine whether any of the other documents produced by Glencore and Prodeco,
e.g. the two documents in respect of which Mr Blackaby stated that the requirements of privilege were not met
(para. 124, above) were among the Disputed SIC Documents.

46

Objection, and declares that the Centre has jurisdiction and the Tribunal is
competent to adjudicate claims grounded on breach of Arts. 4(1) and 4(2)
of the Treaty.

Declares that that the Contraloria’s conduct in calculating the damage
allegedly suffered by the Republic of Colombia as a result of the execution
of the Eighth Amendment constitutes (i) an unreasonable measure which
has impaired Claimants’ investment in Colombia in breach of Art. 4(1) of
the Treaty and (ii) a breach of fair and equitable treatment, in violation of
Art. 4(2) of the Treaty.

Orders the Republic of Colombia to restitute to C.I. Prodeco S.A. the Fiscal
Liability Amount in the sum of USD 19,100,000.

Orders the Republic of Colombia to pay interest over the amount
established in para. 3 from 19 January 2016 until the date of actual
payment, at the rate of LIBOR for six-month deposits plus a margin of 2%,
capitalised semi-annually.

Declares that the payment of restitution and interest awarded to Prodeco in
accordance with this Award must be neutral as regards Colombian taxes,
with the consequences set forth in para. 1630 of this Award, and orders the
Republic of Colombia to indemnify Prodeco with respect to any Colombian
taxes in breach of such principle.

Orders the Republic of Colombia to reimburse Claimants (i) the Costs of
the Proceedings (net of any final reimbursements by ICSID) and (ii) USD
1,692,900 as Defense Expenses, plus interest on both amounts at a rate of
LIBOR for six-month deposits with a margin of 2%, capitalised semi-
annually from the date of this award until the date of actual payment.

Dismisses all other claims, objections and defences.**°

160. The reasoning of the Tribunal which led it to these conclusions runs to over 300 pages. For
present purposes, however, it is necessary to consider only two parts of that reasoning.
First, the Tribunal repeated in the Award the reasons which had led it to make the decisions

contained in PO2, PO3, PO4 and PO6.”4! As the Committee has already discussed those

240 Award, para. 1687.
241 Award, paras, 68-134.

47

Procedural Orders and their reasoning in some detail (see paras. 63-151, above), it is

unnecessary to analyse these parts of the Award as well.

161. Secondly, the Tribunal considered at length and then rejected Colombia’s argument that
the investment had been made in breach of Colombian law and was therefore outside the
scope of the BIT with the result that the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction (the “Illegality
Objection”). Colombia’s case on annulment is bound up with the way in which the
Tribunal approached and decided the Illegality Objection so that it is necessary for the
Committee to set out the Tribunal’s reasoning in detail before examining whether the

Award is subject to annulment.

162. There were two strands to the Illegality Objection: (a) the allegation that Glencore and
Prodeco had procured the Eighth Amendment by corruption, on the basis that the payment
to Mr Maldonado had also benefitted Mr Ballesteros; and (b) that the Eighth Amendment
was not concluded in accordance with the requirements of Colombian law regarding the
operations of Ingeominas and that Prodeco was guilty of bad faith, misrepresentation and

concealment in the negotiations.

163. The Tribunal began by setting out what it held were the proven facts in connection with
these allegations. It found that the three-hectare area was located in the middle of the

concessions held by the Prodeco Affiliates”? and that:

It seems that the three-hectare gap was the result of clerical errors in the
mapping of the concessions granted in the 1990s and 2000s. While it
remains uncertain whether these errors were accidental or intentional, it
should be noted that Mr. Maldonado worked in Carbocol and in the
subsequent mining agencies from 1988 through 2002 and was accordingly
in a position to obtain insider information on the three-hectare gap."

164. In November 2006 Mr Maldonado (who was by then a former employee of the Ministry of
Mines and of Carbocol, the predecessor of Ingeominas) and Mr Garcia applied to

Ingeominas for the grant of a concession contract for the three-hectare area.24> In March

22 Award, paras. 553-860.

43 See the sketch map at para. 596 of the Award.
244 Award, para. 597.

245 Award, para. 596.

48

165.

166.

246

247

248

249

250

25

252

2007, Ingeominas concluded that such a contract would overlap with existing concessions
and that the area was too small for a stand-alone concession. It therefore rejected the

6

application.4° Mr Maldonado subsequently challenged this decision in May 2007 but

nothing happened until April 2008.74”

In early 2008, the Prodeco Affiliates obtained from Ingeominas agreement for integrated
operations on the La Jagua site. The existence of the three-hectare gap, however,
threatened the viability of integrated operations. The Prodeco Affiliates therefore
petitioned Ingeominas either to correct the errors which had created the three-hectare gap
or reject the Maldonado request for a separate contract for that area.“* In June 2008,
however, Ingeominas changed its assessment of the Maldonado request, found that the
three-hectare area did not overlap with other concessions and revoked its rejection of
Mr Maldonado’s application." A request for reconsideration by the Prodeco Affiliates

was rejected in August 2008.?°°

The Tribunal then found that Prodeco complained to various Colombian authorities about
the proposed grant to Messrs Maldonado and Garcia of a concession for the three-hectare
area. It held that, between August and October 2008, the Prodeco Affiliates complained
to: the Procurador General de la Nacion, the Ministro de la Presidencia, the Contraloria,
the Ministry of Mines and Energy and the Jefe del Registro Minero Nacional.”*! The

Tribunal observed that:

Respondent has not provided evidence of any reaction from any of the
Colombian authorities to whom Prodeco complained. There is also no
written record of any of these authorities taking any action to rectify the
situation.?>?

Award, para. 598.
Award, para. 600.
Award, para. 601.
Award, para. 602.
Award, para. 603.
Award, paras. 605-608.
Award, para. 610.

49

167.

168.

169.

253

254

255

256

257

258

259

260

The three-hectare contract was granted to Mr Maldonado and Mr Garcia on 16 October
200875 and Prodeco and its Affiliates continued to complain thereafter.7** The Tribunal
found, however, that Prodeco was left with the choice of either buying out the three-hectare
concession from Mr Maldonado and Mr Garcia or “to mine around the area, which would
imply losing up to 11 million tonnes of coal”.?>> Prodeco made a further complaint to the
Ministro de la Presidencia in March 2009 but, having received no answer, it bought the

three-hectare concession for USD 1.75 million in May 2009.75”

The Tribunal found that CDJ had made the payment in Colombian currency to accounts
with Colombian banks, had made the tax withholding required by Colombian law and had
reflected the payment in its audited accounts. In February 2010 CDJ had informed
Ingeominas of the price paid.*** The Tribunal also found that Prodeco had continued to
raise the question whether the grant of a concession to Mr Maldonado and Mr Garcia had

been irregular after it had bought out their rights.°?

Following a change of government in Colombia in August 2010, the new Minister of Mines
and Energy gave a press conference at which he referred to the way in which “[c]ertain
well-connected individuals had been able to register mining licenses in small strategic
areas, in order to ‘greenmail’ owners of adjacent mining exploitations”.?® The Tribunal
observed that:
It is noteworthy that during this press conference Minister Rodado used a
PowerPoint presentation in which Prodeco’s three-hectare concession was
clearly visible, and that in his public statement there is no allegation that
Prodeco had bribed any public official or had otherwise engaged in

improper conduct. To the contrary, he explicitly stated that most mining
companies working in Colombia were responsible enterprises. At that time,

Award, para. 611.
Award, para. 612.
Award, para. 616.
Award, paras. 617-618.
Award, para. 250.
Award, paras. 622-624.
Award, paras. 625-626.
Award, para. 627.

50

170.

171.

261

262

263,

264

265

266

267

criticism was directed at the former Ingeominas employees who had

granted the irregular mining contracts.*>!

Nor was there any suggestion of corruption on the part of Prodeco in the Fiscal Liability
proceeding (see para. 52, above) and there was no reference to the three-hectare contract
in the files of the Contraloria.? Similarly, no suggestion of corruption on the part of
Prodeco or Glencore was made during the Procedure for Contractual Annulment (see para.
55, above). The first such suggestion appeared in September 2017, when the ANDJE

filed a criminal complaint to the FGN against unnamed officers of Prodeco and Glencore
and against various named Ingeominas officials (see para. 72, above).?°+
After reviewing the procedural history regarding the Disputed SIC Documents and the

),265

contents of Document R-100 (see paras. 152-157, above),*® the Tribunal set out its

decision on the allegations of corruption.”® It began by making clear that it regarded the

allegation as one of the utmost gravity:

Corruption is morally odious: the proper governance of public affairs and
the correct assignment of public goods is substituted by favour and
arbitrariness. Corruption is also economically deleterious: it restrains
economic development and subdues nations into under-development and
poverty, as bribes enriching well-connected civil servants or politicians are
financed via inflated prices paid or reductions in income suffered by the
poorest citizens. Scarce public funds are misdirected by enriching
privileged individuals, at the expense of the common good.

The Tribunal agrees with Respondent that, provided that there are prima
facie grounds for susp an international arbitration
tribunal has the duty to investigate the facts, even sua sponte, and to take
appropriate measures under the applicable principles of law.?°

Award, para. 628.
Award, paras. 630-632.
Award, para. 633.

Award, paras. 634-637.
Award, paras. 639-661.
Award, paras. 662-747.
Award, paras. 663-664.

Sl

172.

173.

174.

175.

176.

268

269

270

27

2

273

274

The Tribunal held that an investment made in breach of Colombian law would not be within
the scope of the BIT, with the result that the Tribunal would lack jurisdiction.”°° According

to the Tribunal:

... if Claimants have bribed Mr Ballesteros, disguising the corrupt payment
as the consideration for the acquisition of the 3ha Contract, the necessary
consequence will be the loss of international law protection.?

The question, therefore, was whether corruption had been proved.?” The Tribunal
considered that the burden of proving that Mr Ballesteros had been bribed was on Colombia

and the standard of proof was the preponderance of the evidence.?”!
With regard to the criminal proceedings in Colombia, the Tribunal held that:

The Criminal Complaint and this procedure operate in different legal
spheres, are subject to diverging standards of proof, and may reach
conflicting results. The fact that the Colombian criminal system has not
punished (in fact, in accordance with the available record, has not even
investigated) the alleged corrupt practices surrounding the Eighth
Amendment, does not preclude a hypothetical finding by this Tribunal that
corruption has occurred. And vice-versa.?””

That said, the conclusions of the justice system at the municipal level, or
absence thereof, which have a much higher capacity of investigation than
this Arbitral Tribunal, is one of the various elements that must be
considered when evaluating the available evidence.*”

The Tribunal then considered six “red flags” which Colombia suggested proved that there

had been corruption.

(1) The Payment to Mr Maldonado and Mr Garcia

The Tribunal noted the size of the payment but held that the transaction had to be viewed

in its proper context.?” It pointed to the fact that, although he had referred to the three-

Award, para. 665.
Award, para. 666.
Award, para. 667.
Award, paras. 668-670.
Award, para. 673.
Award, para. 674.
Award, paras. 678-679.

52

177.

178.

275

276

277

278

279

hectare contract as an example of “greenmail”, the Minister of Mines had made no

275

suggestion that Prodeco or Glencore had behaved in a corrupt fashion,~’° to Prodeco’s

repeated complaints about the grant to Mr Maldonado and Mr Garcia and the lack of any

response from the Colombian authorities.?”° The Tribunal concluded that:

The Tribunal does not see any illegality or impropriety in the transaction.
It is true that Prodeco yielded to greenmail - but it was a greenmail caused
by Ingeominas’ inappropriate registration of the 3ha contract in favour of
Mr. Maldonado, and the Colombian authorities’ unwillingness or inability
to react, notwithstanding repeated warnings and complaints.

Finally, the Tribunal notes that Prodeco’s behaviour is exactly the opposite
to that normally adopted in cases of bribery. Corruption requires secrecy.
In this case, Prodeco announced urbi et orbi that it was being subjected to
greenmail and requested assistance from the public administration. When
the authorities offered no support, Prodeco informed ex ante not less than
the Ministro de la Presidencia that it was being forced to buy the 3ha
Contract.2”

(2) The fact that Mr Maldonado was a Former Employee of Minercol and
Carbocol

Colombia had argued that the fact that Mr Maldonado was a former official of the

predecessors of Ingeominas showed that he was “closely connected?” with

Mr Ballesteros. However, the Tribunal found that:
Colombia has failed to marshal any evidence suggesting that there was any
connection, let alone a close one, between Mr Maldonado, or his associate

Mr Garcia, and Mr Ballesteros. They worked at different agencies, in
different locations, with a time gap of five years.>”

(3) The Timing of the Payments

The agreement assigning the three-hectare concession was executed on 4 May 2009, the
Commitment to Negotiate (see para. 49, above) was concluded between Prodeco and

Ingeominas on 21 May 2009 and the Eighth Amendment was executed on 22 January

Award, para. 680; see also para, 169, above.
Award, paras. 681-683.

Award, paras. 684-685.

Award, para. 688.

Award, para. 691.

53

179.

180.

181.

280

281

282

283,

2010.7*° The Tribunal did not find this timetable suspicious. On the contrary, it concluded
that “the evidence shows that the date of the Assignment Agreement [i.e. the contract for
purchase of the three hectare concession] was triggered by the fact that Prodeco’s mining
activities were fast approaching the 3ha strip. There is no evidence linking the Assignment

Agreement with the Commitment to Negotiate”.?*!

(4) The Alleged Concealment of the Transaction

The Tribunal rejected Colombia’s allegation that Glencore and Prodeco had attempted to
conceal the transaction. It had been a lawyer acting for Mr Maldonado and Mr Garcia, not
Prodeco, who had removed the price from the contract documents when sending them to
Ingeominas for approval and there had been no obligation to disclose the price in the
request for approval. Moreover, CDJ had been frank in its disclosure of the price it had
paid, both in its dealings with Ingeominas and in its accounts, and had withheld the required

amount of tax.78?

(5) Alleged Restriction of Knowledge of the Payment to Top Management

With regard to Colombia’s allegation that Prodeco’s decision to confine knowledge of the
purchase of the three-hectare concession to a small group of top management, the Tribunal
held that this restriction had applied only during the period of contract negotiation and was

standard practice. Once the agreement had been concluded, there had been no secrecy.?*?

(6) Disregard of Mandatory Regulations

While primarily about the second strand in Colombia’s argument (see para. 162, above),
Colombia also invoked the alleged failure to follow mandatory requirements on the part of
Ingeominas before approving the Eighth Amendment as evidence of corruption on the part
of Glencore and Prodeco. The Tribunal concluded, however, that “Director Ballesteros

did not disregard any mandatory regulation in the way that he handled the negotiation and

Award, paras. 695-696.
Award, para. 730; see also Award, paras. 728-729.
Award, paras. 697-700.
Award, paras. 701-703; see also Award, para. 685.

54

approval of the Eighth Amendment’.?*+ The Tribunal considered that the fact that the
procedure for annulment of the Eighth Amendment (see para. 55, above) did not refer to
any alleged failure to respect mandatory requirements by Ingeominas reinforced this

conclusion.7*5

(7) Destination of the Payments

182. The Tribunal also considered, as a possible additional “red flag”, Colombia’s suggestion

183.

184.

284

285

286

287

288

289

that Glencore and Prodeco had failed to provide any details of the destination to which they
had transferred the USD 1.75 million. The Tribunal held that Glencore and Prodeco had
in fact provided evidence both of the accounts into which the money had been paid and the

withholding of tax as required by Colombian law.?*° The Tribunal thus concluded that, far
from being a “red flag”, this evidence amounted to a “green flag”.**”
Weighing the evidence overall, the Tribunal concluded that:

If Prodeco’s intention had been to corrupt Ingeominas, it would not have
filed multiple administrative appeals to prevent the grant of the 3ha
contract, it would not have repeatedly complained to the highest Colombian
authorities, and it would not have made the payments on-shore, subject to
the mandatory tax withholding.

The Tribunal's conclusion is confirmed by the fact that the Colombian
criminal prosecutor and the Colombian criminal courts, which have a much
higher capacity for investigation than this Arbitral Tribunal, have not
initiated an investigation into the alleged corrupt practices surrounding the
Eighth Amendment either in tempore insuspecto or even after the start of
this arbitration.***

Finally, the Tribunal considered in detail*? the effects of Document R-100. Colombia had
relied, in particular, on one part of this email chain. On 7 May 2009, Natalia Anaya (one

of Prodeco’s team of in-house lawyers) had emailed Gary Nagle (then CEO of Prodeco)

Award, para. 718. The analysis which led to this conclusion is set out at paras. 704-717 of the Award.
Award, para. 719.

Award, paras. 720-722.

Award, para. 734.

Award, paras. 737-738.

Award, paras. 739-747.

55

and three other senior officials of Prodeco that “Marcela Estrada [an official of
Ingeominas] confirmed today that she agreed with Ballesteros that they will accept our
proposal for the trust and with that they will end the caducity process”. The reference to
“the trust” was a reference to a proposal from Prodeco that the USD 6 million which
Prodeco had withheld as part of the pricing dispute (see para. 42, above) be paid into an
escrow account in order to avoid caducity proceedings. Later that day, Mr Nagle replied
to Ms Anaya “[o]f course he now supports us, we have bought the 3has”. There followed
further emails up to and including an email from Ms Anaya dated 15 May 2009 regarding

meetings with Ingeominas.”””

185. The Tribunal quoted at some length from the testimony of Mr Nagle, who had been cross-
examined about this email chain.?°! The Tribunal held that Mr Nagle’s explanation, in his
testimony, of the words “[o]f course he now supports us, we have bought the 3has” was

convincing:

Respondent construes these words to be an acknowledgement that Prodeco
had bribed Mr Ballesteros through the purchase of the 3ha Contract. Mr.
Nagle's construction is totally different. He explains that Prodeco had been
writing to various Ministries and authorities within the Colombian public

laining that I inas’ decision to grant the 3ha
Contract to Messrs. Maldonado and Garcia was highly irregular and
requesting that steps be taken to undo such decision. Eventually, Prodeco
gave in, and decided to acquire the 3ha Contract. In that context, Mr. Nagle
thought that Mr. Ballesteros would be relieved that Prodeco had “solved”
the situation by yielding to the greenmail.

 

The Tribunal finds Mr. Nagle's explanation of his words convincing. Such
construction is also confirmed by the following messages in the R-100 email
chain: Mr. Nagle's assumption that Mr. Ballesteros would be satisfied
proved totally wrong. Ms. Anaya, an employee of Prodeco, held a meeting
at Ingeominas a week later and was told that Mr. Ballesteros was not happy
at all with the execution of the 3ha Contract, because the matter had
reached President Uribe, and the President was not satisfied at all as to
how the problem had been solved.

Summing up, Doc. R-100, and particularly Mr. Nagle's email of 7 May
2009, do not undermine the conclusion reached by the Arbitral Tribunal

290 Award, paras. 654-657.
29 Award, para. 742.

56

that Respondent has failed to marshal any evidence proving that Prodeco
corrupted Ingeominas’ Director Ballesteros in order to procure the Eighth
Amendment.”

186. The Tribunal also dismissed the separate argument, forming the second strand of the
Illegality Objection, that Prodeco had negotiated in bad faith with regard to the Eighth
Amendment.” After analysing at length the evidence advanced by both Parties, the

Tribunal concluded that the evidence did not sustain the argument that Glencore and

Prodeco had negotiated in bad faith. The Tribunal rejected the allegations that the

companies had already developed plans for the expansion of production and had concealed

material information from Colombia.
187. The Tribunal finished its discussion by holding that:
In conclusion, the Tribunal finds that Respondent has failed to prove its
accusations that Prodeco acquired the 3ha Contract as a means to bribe
Mr Ballesteros into executing the Eighth Amendment or that it
misrepresented the economic situation of the project and deliberately and

in bad faith withheld material information from Ingeominas in order to
secure the Eighth Amendment.

Consequently, the Tribunal dismisses Respondent’s Illegality Objection.?°*

IV. THE GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT

188. Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention provides that:
Either party may request annulment of the award by an application in

writing addressed to the Secretary-General on one or more of the following
grounds:

(a) _ that the Tribunal was not properly constituted;
(b) _ that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers;

(c) _ that there was corruption on the part of a Member of the Tribunal;

292 Award, paras. 745-747.
293 Award, paras. 748-858.
24 Award, paras. 859-860.

57

(d) that there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure; or

(e) _ that the award has failed to state the reasons on which it is based.

189. Colombia asserts that:

The Award contains fatal flaws that warrant its entire annulment.

Most alarmingly, the Tribunal knowingly disregarded clear evidence of
corruption and illegality orchestrated by Claimants. This is particularly
surprising and disquieting in light of the prevailing consensus in the
international community of the need to combat and condemn the scourge of
corruption in all its forms. This Award, the likes of which have been
annulled by municipal courts for lack of serious consideration of corruption
allegations, cannot be allowed to stand in the ICSID system.””°

190. Specifically, Colombia maintains that the Tribunal ignored two instances of corruption and
illegality on the part of Glencore and Prodeco. First, Colombia alleges that the Tribunal
closed its eyes to evidence that Glencore and Prodeco (with the Prodeco Affiliates) had
paid Messrs Maldonado and Garcia a grossly excessive price (USD 1.75 million) for the
3-hectare concession as an indirect bribe to Mr Ballesteros, who was then the Director of
Ingeominas, in order to secure his agreement to the negotiation of the Eighth Amendment
to the Mining Contract. Secondly, Colombia maintains that, quite apart from the corruption
of Mr Ballesteros, Glencore and Prodeco concealed the true capacity of the Calenturitas
mine and their intentions regarding output in order to obtain a system compensation for
Colombia which was significantly more favourable for them and which was to the

disadvantage of Colombia.

191. Colombia seeks annulment of the Award for manifest excess of power (Article 52(1)(b) of
the ICSID Convention), serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure (Article
52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention), and failure to state reasons (Article 52(1)(e) of the
ICSID Convention). These three grounds for annulment are each invoked in respect of two

distinct aspects of the Tribunal’s behaviour.

295

Application, paras. 2-3.

58

192.

193.

296

(1) The Documents Issue

First, Colombia maintains that the Tribunal erred in excluding from the record documents

which, it maintains, would have proved that Glencore and Prodeco had corrupted

Mr Ballesteros and that they had concealed and misrepresented the true position in order

to obtain the agreement of Ingeominas to the Eighth Amendment. The documents in

question fall into three categories.

a

2)

(G)

the forty-one documents which had been seized by the SIC from Prodeco in 2014
(the “Disputed SIC Documents”) which Colombia had sought to introduce as
annexes to its Counter-Memorial but which it was barred from doing by PO2.7°°
Twenty-four of these documents were subsequently listed as the Annex A
Documents in Colombia’s letter to the Tribunal of 7 May 2018.?%” It appears that
at least one of the forty-one documents was disclosed voluntarily (para. 127, above)
and one (which became Document R-100, see paras. 152-158, above) was

introduced into the record at the hearing;

the documents for which Glencore and Prodeco maintained a claim of legal
privilege on the basis of communications with Prodeco’s in-house legal counsel,°*
in respect of which the Tribunal allowed the claim of privilege in PO4 and PO6.

Some of these documents were part of the Disputed SIC Documents;

the FGN documents which were taken from the files of the FGN and filtered by
Mr Enciso,”” which the Tribunal excluded by PO6. Some of the FGN documents

were also Annex A documents.

(2) The Illegality Issue

Secondly, Colombia maintains that, even if the Tribunal did not err in excluding the

documents referred to above, it nevertheless manifestly exceeded its powers, committed a

serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure and failed to state its reasons when

See paras. 64-94, above.

257 Colombia’s letter of 11 May 2018, note 193, above (AAE-12), p. 41. See paras. 124-131, 141-151, above.
28 See paras. 95-123, above.
29 See paras. 132-151, above.

59

194.

195.

it ruled against Colombia’s objection that the investment was unlawful under Colombian

law and thus outside the scope of the BIT.

THE STANDARD ON ANNULMENT

The Committee will begin by considering the standard to be applied by an ad hoc

committee in an application for annulment. It will then (Part VI) consider the Documents

Issue (see para. 192, above) before turning (Part VII) to the Illegality Issue (see para. 193,

above).

The Positions of the Parties

The Parties are in broad agreement about the principal features of the standard to be applied

by an ad hoc committee in annulment proceedings. Thus, they agree that:

a

Q)
G)

4)

6)

(6)

an award may be annulled only if one of the five conditions in Article 52 has been

met;
an annulment proceeding is not an appeal;

the purpose of annulment proceedings is to protect the integrity of the arbitration, not
to determine whether the tribunal was right or wrong in its findings of fact or

decisions on law;

that for an award to be subject to annulment under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID
Convention, it is necessary to establish that the Tribunal exceeded its powers and that

the excess of power was “manifest”;

that for an award to be subject to annulment under Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID
Convention, the Tribunal must have departed from a rule of procedure of a

“fundamental” character and that the departure must have been serious; and

that Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention is concerned not with whether a
tribunal’s reasons are convincing but whether they satisfactorily explain the decision

at which the tribunal arrived and address each question put to the tribunal.

60

196.

197.

198.

199.

200.

The Parties take very different views, however, both about the nuances of these
propositions on which there is apparent agreement and about other aspects of the standard

to be applied.

(QQ) Colombia

Colombia maintains that Article 52 of the ICSID Convention should not be restrictively
interpreted. The purpose of annulment proceedings extends beyond what is needed to
protect the interests of the parties to a particular arbitration and safeguards the public
interest in the integrity and quality of the arbitral process, preventing an unprecedented
award from serving as a green light to further irregular awards by other tribunals.*°!
According to Colombia, there is no presumption of the validity of the award and no special

burden or standard of proof.*°”

Colombia accepts that annulment is not an appeal but maintains that it is not a superficial
exercise.
Where the award reflects a complex legal and factual background, a review

of that background is required. Moreover, ... certain grounds for
annulment necessitate a particularly searching review >

Colombia rejects the assertion that procedural orders are not pertinent to annulment
proceedings. It submits that annulment committees will “obviously” be required to refer
directly to procedural orders in cases where these are the “instruments of that breach”
alleged.*°* Moreover, where the defect giving rise to grounds for annulment in a procedural
order has been “incorporated into the award”, the procedural order itself can rightly form

the basis for the annulment of the award.3°°

With regard to Article 52(1)(b) Colombia argues that a tribunal commits an excess of power

if it purports to exercise a jurisdiction which it does not have, fails to apply the applicable

Application, paras. 22-37; Mem. on Ann., paras. 108-169; Reply on Ann., paras. 43-81.
Mem. on Ann., para. 110; Reply on Ann., para. 47.
Reply on Ann., paras. 49-50.

Mem. on Ann., para, 112, citing Duke Energy International v. Republic of Peru (1CSID Case No. ARB/03/28),
Decision on Annulment of | March 2011, para. 85 (“Duke”) (AAL-14). See also Reply on Ann., para. 51.

Tr. p. 161:18-24 (Professor Silva Romero).
Tr. p. 162:6-11 (Professor Silva Romero).

61

201.

202.

law, commits a fundamental error in its application of the applicable law, or makes
egregious errors of fact or weighs the evidence irrationally.*°° In particular, it contends
that a tribunal which acts ex aequo et bono without the consent of the parties exceeds its
powers.*°? Colombia also maintains that a gross misapplication or misinterpretation of the
applicable law amounts to a failure to apply the law*”* and justifies annulment as a manifest
excess of power:

... if a tribunal distills a hitherto unknown rule from a given legal order, it

would be within the remit of an ad hoc committee to inquire into whether or

not the tribunal is actually applying the law it claims to be applying. This

is a logical imperative. Otherwise, a tribunal would be free to define, from

whole cloth, putative legal principles and attribute them to whatever legal
order happened to be applicable.*®°

According to Colombia, the requirement that the excess be “manifest” relates not to the

gravity of the excess but to whether or not it can readily be determined.>"°

The requirement
that it be manifest does not, however, prevent an ad hoc committee from inquiring into the
facts of the case to check whether the tribunal could come to the conclusion which it

reached.*!!

On annulment for serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, under Article

52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention, Colombia maintains that the proper treatment of

Mem. on Ann., para. 119; Reply on Ann., para. 72; Tr. p. 19:16-20 (Professor Silva Romero).
Mem. on Ann., paras. 124-126.
Mem. on Ann., paras, 127-128, citing the decisions on annulment in Hussein Nouman Soufraki v. United Arab

Emirates (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/7), Decision of 5 June 2007, para. 86 (“Soufraki”) (AAL-2); Sempra Energy
International v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16), Decision of 29 June 2010, para. 164 (AAL-

9); Caratube International Oil Co. LLP v. Republic of Kazakhstan (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/12) Decision of 21
February 2014, para. 81 (“Caratube”) (RL-184); Victor Pey Casado and Foundation President Allende v.

Republic of Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2) Decision on Annulment of 18 December 2012, para. 67 (“Pey

Casado”) (AAL-34); MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/7)
Decision of 21 March 2007, para. 47 (“MTD”) (AAL-28) and Iberdrola Energia, S.A. v. Republic of Guatemala
(ICSID Case No. ARB/09/5) Decision of 13 January 2015, para. 97 (AAL-20).

Mem. on Ann., para. 129.
Reply on Ann., paras. 63-66.
Reply on Ann., para. 68, citing Duke, note 303, above, at para. 99 (AAL-14).

62

203.

204.

evidence is a fundamental rule of procedure.*'? That rule includes the right of a party to

submit evidence to the tribunal.>!? Colombia also refers to the right of a party to be heard.

To constitute a serious departure, “the fundamental rule must have been flouted in a
meaningful way that deprived the rule of its intended effect”.*'* However, Colombia
maintains that an applicant for annulment is not required to establish that the departure had
a determinative effect on the outcome of the case but only that it could potentially have
affected the outcome.*'> In Colombia’s view, modelled after Churchill Mining v.
Indonesia, “the injury is inherent in the due process violation”.*'° Colombia submits that
this approach is appropriate to the ICSID annulment mechanism’s object and purpose of
“ensuring the fundamental integrity of the ICSID system”.>'’ Moreover, Colombia asserts
that it would be a highly speculative exercise to “attempt to divine the outcome” of a case

but for a fundamental procedural breach.*!*

With regard to Article 52(1)(e), Colombia accepts that an ad hoc committee is not entitled
to annul an award merely because it finds the reasoning unconvincing.*!? However, it
maintains that the reasoning must constitute a chain which enables the parties to understand
why the tribunal reached the conclusion on a particular question. That chain would be
broken if no reasons were provided, if the reasons were frivolous or manifestly irrelevant
or if the tribunal gave incoherent or contradictory reasons.*”° If a tribunal were to apply
an inapplicable legal framework, for example, Colombia submits that it would have offered

reasoning that was so manifestly irrelevant as to constitute a failure to state reasons.*?!

Mem. on Ann., para. 145.

Mem. on Ann., para. 147.

Mem. on Ann., para. 152.

Mem. on Ann., paras, 154-157.

Tr. p. 26:8-10 (Professor Silva Romero), referring to Churchill Mining Ple and Planet Mining Pty Ltd v. Republic

of Indonesia (ICSID Cases Nos. ARB/12/14 and ARB/12/40), Decision on Annulment of 18 March 2019, para.
204 (“Churchill”) (AAL-48).

Tr. p. 26:10-12 (Professor Silva Romero).
Tr. p. 26:13-16 (Professor Silva Romero), citing TECO Guatemala Holdings LLC y. Republic of Guatemala

(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/23), Decision on Annulment of 5 April 2016, para. 85 (“TECO”) (AAL-47).

Mem. on Ann., para. 163.

20 Mem. on Ann., paras. 165-168.
21 Ty, p, 46:5-13 (Professor Silva Romero).

63

205.

206.

207.

208.

(2) Glencore and Prodeco

Glencore and Prodeco take as the starting point in analysing Article 52 of the ICSID

Convention that annulment is an “extraordinary remedy”.

Consistent with this design, annulment is reserved for “unusual and
important cases”, in which “egregious violations of certain basic
principles” threaten the very legitimacy of the decision-making process.
Any grievance falling short of this exceptionally high standard cannot be a
ground for annulment.*>*

They argue that Colombia’s approach of a “searching review” would transform annulment

into an appeal,>*” and cite the Daimler case:

If [an ad hoc committee] were to undertake a careful and detailed analysis
of the respective submissions of the parties before the Tribunal ... and annul
the award on the ground that its understanding of facts or interpretation of
law or appreciation of evidence is different from that of the tribunal, it will
cross the line that separates annulment from appeal.***

Glencore and Prodeco maintain that Article 52 of the ICSID Convention should be
interpreted neither restrictively nor expansively but in line with the object and purpose and

the text of the provision.**> They contend that an applicant for annulment bears a heavy
burden but deny that this has anything to do with a burden of proof.*”°
They argue that:

. in determining whether a tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers:
(i) an ad hoc committee cannot second-guess a tribunal’s assessment of the
evidence; (ii) an award cannot be annulled on the ground that a tribunal

C-Mem. on Ann., para. 48, citing Postovd Banka, A.S, and ISTROKAPITAL SE y. Hellenic Republic (ICSID Case
No. ARB/13/8), Decision on Partial Annulment of 29 September 2016, para. 127 (RAL-128); CDC Group ple v.
Republic of the Seychelles (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14), Decision on Annulment of 29 June 2005, para. 34
(“CDC”) (RAL-7) and Tulip Real Estate and Development Netherlands BV y, Republic of Turkey (ICSID Case
No. ARB/11/28), Decision on Annulment of 30 December 2015, para. 39 (RAL-17).

C-Mem. on Ann., para. 50.

Daimler Financial Services A.G. v. Republic of Argentina (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1) Decision on Annulment
of 7 January 2015, para. 186 (“Daimler”) (RAL-16).

Rej, on Ann., para. 15.

Rej, on Ann., para. 16.

64

made a mistake of fact, regardless of how serious that error is alleged to
be; and (iii) an error of law is not an excess of powers.??"

Accordingly, Glencore and Prodeco submit that annulment proceedings cannot lawfully
revisit a tribunal's rulings on the admissibility or probative value of evidence, as
Colombia’s Application urges the Committee to do.** An annulment of an Award for
procedural orders on evidentiary issues, as such, “would be unheard of?.*” Indeed,
Glencore and Prodeco assert that, having “searched the decided cases”, they were unable

to find a single instance of an award being annulled for a decision in a procedural order.**°

Glencore and Prodeco maintain that the number of rules of procedure which have the
fundamental character required by Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention is limited,
that it does not include the rules on burden of proof,**! or the rule of “liberal admissibility

of evidence” advanced by Colombia.***

They also contend that even a serious departure
from a fundamental rule of procedure warrants annulment only if it would have determined

the outcome of the case.>°3

With regard to Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention, Glencore and Prodeco maintain
that “[t]his ground for annulment only concerns the complete absence of reasons, not the
quality or correctness of those reasons ... to rise to the level of annullable error, a failure
to state reasons must relate to a point that is essential to a tribunal’s decision” >*+ For
“routine” procedural orders, in particular, Glencore and Prodeco challenge the suggestion
that detailed reasons are necessary.**> Again relying on the Daimler decision, they argue

that “when considering alleged contradictions ad hoc committees should ‘prefer an

Rej, on Ann., para. 60; C-Mem. on Ann., Section V.A.

Tr. p. 78:16-21 (Mr Blackaby), p. 117:20-23 (Mr Friedman).
Tr. p. 117:23-24 (Mr Friedman).

Tr. p. 117:24-118:1 (Mr Friedman).

Rej, on Ann., para. 23.

Rej. On Ann., para. 25; C-Mem. on Ann., paras. 60, 62, 66.

Rej, on Ann., para. 21, citing OF European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No.
ARB/11/25), Decision on Annulment of 6 December 2018, paras. 248-249 (“Ol European Group”) (RAL-21).

Rej, on Ann., para. 95.
Tr. p. 140:16-19 (Mr Friedman).

65

interpretation which confirms an award’s consistency as opposed to its alleged inner

contradictions ””°°

B. THE ANALYSIS OF THE COMMITTEE
(1) The Nature of Annulment and the Powers of an Ad Hoc Committee

212. The text of Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention and the decisions of past ad hoc
committees establish that there are four general principles regarding the nature of
annulment proceedings and the power of an ad hoc committee which are pertinent to the

present case.
213. First, as the ad hoc Committee in MTD Equity and MTD Chile v. Republic of Chile put it:

Under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention, an annulment proceeding is not
an appeal, still less a retrial; it is a form of review on specified and limited
grounds which take as their premise the record before the Tribunal.”

214. The ad hoc Committee in Soufraki went on to analyse this role of an ad hoc committee as

the safeguard of the integrity of the proceedings in greater detail.

In the view of the ad hoc Committee, the object and purpose of an ICSID
annulment proceeding may be described as the control of the fundamental
integrity of the ICSID arbitral process in all its facets. An ad hoc committee
is empowered to verify (i) the integrity of the tribunal — its proper
constitution (Article 52(1)(a)) and the absence of corruption on the part of
any member thereof (Article 52(1)(c)); (ii) the integrity of the procedure —
which means firstly that the tribunal must respect the boundaries fixed by
the ICSID Convention and the Parties’ consent, and not manifestly exceed
the powers granted to it as far as its jurisdiction, the applicable law and the
questions raised are concerned (Article 52(1)(b)), and secondly, that it
should not commit a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure (Article 52(1)(d)); and (iii) the integrity of the award — meaning
that the reasoning presented in the award should be coherent and not
contradictory, so as to be understandable by the Parties and must
reasonably support the solution adopted by the tribunal (Article 52(1)(e)).
Integrity of the dispute settlement mechanism, integrity of the process of

336 ej. on Ann., para. 97, citing Daimler, note 324, above, at para. 78 (RAL-16).
37 MTD, note 308, above, at para. 31 (AAL-28). See also Soufraki, note 308, above, at para. 20 (AAL-2).

66

215.

216.

217.

dispute settlement and integrity of solution of the dispute are the basic
interrelated goals projected in the ICSID annulment mechanism.?**

Secondly, as the Soufraki Committee also explained —

Article 52 of the ICSID Convention must be read in accordance with the
principles of treaty interpretation forming part of general international law,
which principles insist on neither restrictive nor extensive interpretation,
but rather on interpretation in accordance with the object and purpose of
the treaty.*?

The reference to principles of treaty interpretation is to the principles laid down in Articles
31 to 33 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 1969. The Vienna Convention
is not, as such, applicable to the ICSID Convention, which predates it. Nevertheless, the
provisions of the Vienna Convention on treaty interpretation are generally regarded as
declaratory of customary international law and thus applicable to the interpretation of any

treaty.

Thirdly, it is clear from the text of Article 52 that an award may be annulled only on one
or more of the five grounds set out in Article 52. An ad hoc committee is not entitled to
range beyond those five grounds. Its function is not to consider whether or not it agrees
with the reasoning or the conclusions of the tribunal but only to determine whether or not

one or more of the five grounds has been made out.

Lastly, it is important to bear in mind that Article 52(3) of the ICSID Convention states
that an ad hoc committee “shall have the authority to annul the award or any part thereof
on any of the grounds set forth in paragraph (1)”. The fact that the Convention speaks of
a committee having the authority to annul indicates that, even where an ad hoc committee
determines that one of the grounds for annulment is made out, the Committee has a

discretion whether or not to annul the award.*“ That discretion is by no means unlimited

338 Soufraki, note 308, above, at para. 23 (AAL-2) (emphasis in original).

3 Soufraki, note 308, above, at para. 21 (AAL-2).

40 See Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia (ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1), Decision on
Annulment of 3 December 1992, para. 1.20 (AAL-35); Maritime International Nominees Establishment y.
Republic of Guinea (ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4), Decision on Partial Annulment of 22 December 1989, paras.
4.09-4.10 (“MINE”) (AAL-7); Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3), Decision on Annulment of 3 July 2002, para. 66 (“Vivendi I”) (CL-99).

67

218.

219.

220.

and must take account of all relevant circumstances, including the gravity of the
circumstances which constitute the ground for annulment and whether or not they had —
or could have had — a material effect upon the outcome of the case,**! as well as the

importance of the finality of the award and the overall question of fairness to both Parties.

These principles have been repeated by numerous other ad hoc committees**” and can be
regarded as well established. They are not in issue between the Parties in the present

proceedings.

An application under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention can be brought only with regard
to an award, not a prior decision or procedural order of a tribunal.*“?_ Nevertheless, it is
open to an applicant on annulment to contend that the award is tainted by a prior procedural
decision or procedural order which entails a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure or a manifest excess of power, or that there has been a failure to state reasons
for a ruling. Moreover, in the present case, the decisions taken by the Tribunal in the three
Procedural Orders which are at the heart of Colombia’s Application are carefully recorded
in the text of the Award itself.**+ The Committee therefore concludes that the Application
is a perfectly proper application to annul the Award, although Colombia — as it is entitled
to do — refers at length to the three Procedural Orders in its attempt to show that the Award
is tainted by annullable error and the Committee will follow the same course in examining

whether the Tribunal committed an annullable error.

(2) Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure

Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention provides that an ad hoc committee may annul an
award on the ground that “there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of

procedure”. It is clear from this language that not every procedural default can provide

See also Schreuer and others, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, Cambridge University Press, 2 ed., 2009
(“Schreuer”), Article 52, paras. 466-485 (AAL-1).

This question is considered in greater depth in paras. 222-227, below.

32 See, e.g., EDF International S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/23), Decision on Annulment
of 5 February 2016, paras, 61-73 (“EDF”) (AAL-4); TECO, note 318, above, at para. 73 (AAL-47); CEAC
Holdings Ltd. v. Montenegro (1CSID Case No. ARB/14/08), Decision on Annulment of | May 2018, para. 84
(“CEAC’) (AAL-3).

Schreuer, note 340, above, at Article 52, para. 61 (AAL-1).
Award, paras. 68-134.

68

221.

222.

223.

345

346

347

grounds for annulment. For an ad hoc committee to annul an award under this provision,
it must identify the rule of procedure from which the Tribunal allegedly departed and be
satisfied (a) that this rule was of fundamental importance;**° and (b) that the departure was

serious.

With regard to the first requirement, the Committee does not consider it necessary or
appropriate to set out a list of those procedural rules which fall into the category of
“fundamental” rules of procedure, but it has no doubt that the rules of natural justice,
including the right of a party to present its case, the right of a party to be heard and the right

to equal treatment, fall into that category.

On the second requirement, the Committee agrees with the observation of the MINE

Committee that:

In order to constitute a ground for annulment the departure from a
“fundamental rule of procedure” must be serious. The Committee considers
that this establishes both quantitative and qualitative criteria: the departure
must be substantial and be such as to deprive a party of the benefit or
protection which the rule was intended to provide.***

It also shares the view of the Committee in Pey Casado that:

The applicant is not required to show that the result would have been
different, that it would have won the case, if the rule had been respected.
The Committee notes in fact that in Wena, the committee stated that the
applicant must demonstrate ‘the impact that the issue may have had on the
award’. The Committee agrees that this is precisely how the seriousness of
the departure must be analyzed.**"”

The Committee is, therefore, not persuaded by the suggestion, in Wena that “the violation

. must have caused the Tribunal to reach a result substantially different from what it

EDF, note 342, above, at para. 199 (AAL-4), discussing, inter alia, a difference between the Spanish text of the
Convention and the English and French texts and concluding that, in accordance with the principle stated in
Article 33 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 1969, the meaning which best reconciles the three
authentic texts of the ICSID Convention is that only a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure
affords grounds for annulment. See also MINE, note 340, above, at paras. 5.05 to 5.06 (AAL-7).

MINE, note 340, above, at para. 5.05 (AAL-7).

Pey Casado, note 308, above, at para, 78 (AAL-34), citing Wena Hotels Ltd. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/98/4, Decision on Annulment of 5 February 2002, at para. 61 (“Wena”) (AAL-41), See also
Orascom TMT Investments S.a.r.l. v. People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/35),
Decision on Annulment of 17 September 2020, paras. 142-143 (“Orascom”) (AAL-134).

69

224.

225.

would have awarded had [the relevant procedural] rule been observed”.*** It shares the

view of the TECO Committee that:

Requiring an applicant to show that it would have won the case or that the
result of the case would have been different if the rule of procedure had
been respected is a highly speculative exercise. An annulment committee
cannot determine with any degree of certainty whether any of these results
would have occurred without placing itself in the shoes of a tribunal,
something which is not within its powers to do. What a committee can
determine however is whether the tribunal’s compliance with a rule of
procedure could potentially have affected the award.*”

The Committee is therefore unable to accept the suggestion, advanced by Glencore and
Prodeco, that Colombia must show that the eventual outcome of the case would have been
different had it not been for the alleged departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.**°

It is sufficient for Colombia to establish that it could have been different.*>!

Nor, however, can the Committee accept Colombia’s argument that “the injury is inherent
in the due process violation”.*** That argument is based upon the decision of the ad hoc

committee in Churchill Mining v. Indonesia.>*?

It is, however, important to see the
statements of the Churchill committee in their context. The committee in that case stated,
in the passage relied on by Colombia, that:
. where there has been a grave violation of a fundamental rule of
procedure, including denial of a reasonably full opportunity to be heard,
the injury is inherent in the due process violation without the need to
demonstrate that the outcome of the case would have been different
otherwise.**4

But in an earlier passage, the Churchill committee had said:

The test turns on the fundamental nature of the rule of procedure and the
seri of its viol A grave violation of a fund l rule is likely
Wena, note 347, above, at para. 58 (AAL-41). See also Ol European Group, note 333, above, para. 248 (RAL-

TECO, note 318, above, at para. 85 (AAL-47).
C-Mem. on Ann,, paras. 53, 55.

351. See, e.g., CEAC, note 342, above, at para. 93 (AAL-3).
32 Tr, p, 26:9-10 (Professor Silva Romero).

33 Churchill, note 316, above, at para. 204 (AAL-48).

34 Churchill, note 316, above, at para. 204 (AAL-48).

70

to more or less automatically result in an injury inasmuch as such party is
deprived of the due process protections which the rule is intended to
provide.>*°*

226. Ifa tribunal heard argument and evidence from only one party before giving its decision,
it would be no answer to say that this violation of the rule of equality of arms could have
made no difference to the outcome on the ground that the other party’s case was wholly
lacking in merit. If, however, a party has been heard but particular items of evidence have
been excluded, the possible effects of the exclusion are relevant both to whether there has
been a departure from a fundamental rule of procedure and, if so, whether that departure is

to be regarded as serious.

227. Colombia has also argued that the Committee “must take as a given” that the exclusion of
the illegality documents affected the outcome of the proceedings,**° since the Committee
has not seen the documents which were excluded by the Tribunal. The Tribunal will return
to this matter later (see paras. 364-370, below), when it examines the application of Article

52(1)(d) to the facts of the present case.

(3) Manifest Excess of Power

228. Article 52(1)(b) provides that an ad hoc committee may annul an award on the ground that
“the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers”. The paragraph lays down two
requirements, both of which must be met if an Award is to be annulled on this ground.
First, the tribunal must have exceeded its powers and, secondly, that excess of power must
be “manifest”. The most obvious instance of an excess of power by a tribunal is the decision
of an issue which falls outside the jurisdiction of the tribunal under the ICSID Convention
or the relevant BIT (or other instrument conferring jurisdiction) but the term has also been

held to include the failure by a tribunal to exercise a jurisdiction which it possesses.*>’

385 Churchill, note 316, above, at para. 180 (AAL-48).
386 Ty, p, 26:21-22 (Professor Silva Romero).
337 See, e.g., Vivendi I, note 340, above, at para. 86 (CL-99).

71

229. The requirement that the excess of powers be “manifest” refers to how readily apparent the
excess is, rather than to its gravity. In the words of one leading commentary on the ICSID

Convention:

In accordance with its dictionary meaning, “manifest” may mean “plain”,
“clear”, “obvious”, “evident” and easily understood or recognized by the
mind. Therefore, the manifest nature of an excess of powers is not
necessarily an indication of its gravity. Rather, it relates to the ease with
which it is perceived. ... An excess of powers is manifest if it can be
discerned with little effort and without deeper analysis.>**

This view has been endorsed in several decisions of ad hoc committees. Thus, in Wena

Hotels Ltd. v. Egypt, the committee stated that:

The excess of power must be self-evident rather than the product of
elaborate interpretations one way or the other. When the latter happens
the excess of power is no longer manifest.>?

Similarly, the committee in CDC Group v. Seychelles stated:

As interpreted by various ad hoc committees, the term “manifest” means
clear or “self-evident”. Thus, even if a Tribunal exceeds its powers, the
excess must be plain on its face for annulment to be an available remedy.
Any excess apparent in a Tribunal’s conduct, if susceptible of argument
“one way or the other” is not manifest. As one commentator has put it, “If
the issue is debatable or requires examination of the materials on which the

tribunal’s decision is based, the tribunal’s determination is conclusive” >

230. Nevertheless, the Committee agrees with the observation of the committee in EDF v.

Argentina that:

While the Committee agrees that an excess of powers will be manifest only
if it can readily be discerned, it considers that this does not mean that the
excess must, as it were, leap out of the page on a first reading of the Award.
The reasoning in a case may be so complex that a degree of inquiry and
analysis is required before it is clear precisely what the tribunal has
decided. In such a case, the need for such inquiry and analysis will not
prevent an excess of powers from being “manifest”. *6!

 

358 Schreuer, note 340, above, at Article 52, para. 135 (AAL-1).
39 Wena, note 347, above, at para. 25 (AAL-41).

3 CDC, note 322, above, at para. 41 (RAL-7).

361 EDF, note 342, above, at para. 193 (AAL-4).

72

231.

232.

233.

Decisions of ad hoc committees in other cases have made clear that it is also an excess of
power for a tribunal to fail to apply the law applicable to the case or to the particular issue

2

in the case.*? That situation must, however, be distinguished from the case where a

tribunal has misapplied the applicable law, since annulment proceedings are not an appeal.

Colombia suggests that there are cases in which the misapplication of the law is such that
it must be treated as a failure to apply the law.*® Glencore and Prodeco disagree.** The
Committee considers that there are circumstances in which misinterpretation or
misapplication of the law can be so gross that it amounts to a failure to apply that law. That
must, however, be clearly distinguished from cases of ordinary error and must amount, in
the words of the AES committee, to “a failure to apply the proper law in toto”.°® The
Committee considers that the standard is, therefore, a very high one in the sense that only
the most serious cases of misinterpretation or misapplication will fall within the concept of
a manifest excess of powers.*°° It is certainly not enough that the committee considers that

the interpretation or application of the law was wrong.

The Parties also differ over whether what Colombia describes as “egregious errors of fact
or ... an irrational assessment of the evidence” on the part of the tribunal can amount to a
manifest excess of power.” The Committee considers that the assessment of the evidence
is a matter for the tribunal and not one which can normally be revisited by an ad hoc
committee. While an ad hoc committee is not entirely excluded from any role in reviewing
atribunal’s assessment of the evidence and the findings which it bases upon that assessment

(see paras. 406-408, below), its role is a very limited one.

38 Soufraki, note 308, above, at para, 45 (AAL-2); EDF, note 342, above, at para. 191 (AAL-4).
Mem. on Ann., para. 123.
C-Mem. on Ann,, para. 83.

365 AES Summit Generation Ltd. v. Republic of Hungary (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/22), Decision on Annulment of
29 June 2012, paras. 33-35 (AAL-23).

366

See Caratube, note 308, above at para, 81 (RL-184); and Joan Micula, Viorel Micula and others v, Romania

(ICSID Case No. ARB/05/20), Decision on Annulment of 26 February 2016, para. 130 (AAL-19), both of which
refer to a “high” standard.

367

Mem. on Ann., paras. 131-132; compare C-Mem. on Ann., paras. 80-81.

73

234.

235.

236.

368,

(4) Failure to State Reasons

The provision of Article 52(1)(e) that an award may be annulled if it “fails to state the
reasons on which it is based” is closely tied to the provision of Article 48(3), which requires
that “the award shall deal with every question submitted to the Tribunal, and shall state

the reasons upon which it is based”.

The requirement to state reasons is an important one but it is equally important that an ad
hoc committee is not drawn into using Article 52(1)(e) as a means for conducting an appeal.

The point was very clearly made by the Vivendi J Committee in the following passage:

A greater source of concern is perhaps the ground of “failure to state
reasons,” which is not qualified by any such phrase as “manifestly” or
“serious.” However, it is well accepted both in the cases and the literature
that Article 52(1)(e) concerns a failure to state any reasons with respect to
all or part of an award, not the failure to state correct or convincing
reasons. It bears reiterating that an ad hoc committee is not a court of
appeal. Provided that the reasons given by a tribunal can be followed and
relate to the issues that were before the tribunal, their correctness is beside
the point in terms of Article 52(1)(e). Moreover, reasons may be stated
succinctly or at length, and different legal traditions differ in their modes of
expressing reasons. Tribunals must be allowed a degree of discretion as to
the way in which they express their reasoning.

In the Committee's view, annulment under Article 52(1)(e) should only
occur in a clear case. This entails two conditions: first, the failure to state
reasons must leave the decision on a particular point essentially lacking in
any expressed rationale; and second, that point must itself be necessary to
the tribunal's decision. It is frequently said that contradictory reasons
cancel each other out, and indeed, if reasons are genuinely contradictory
so they might. However, tribunals must often struggle to balance conflicting
considerations, and an ad hoc committee should be careful not to discern
contradiction when what is actually expressed in a tribunal’s reasons could
more truly be said to be but a reflection of such conflicting
considerations.*°

The Committee therefore agrees with the observation of the EDF committee that “Article

52(1)(e) empowers a Committee to annul an award if there has been a failure to state the

Vivendi I, note 340, above, at paras, 64-65 (CL-99).

74

237.

238.

369

reasons on which the award is based; it does not entitle a Committee to annul an award
because it finds the reasoning unconvincing” °°

Two further observations regarding Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention are
appropriate. First, a tribunal is required to answer each “question” put to it and to give
reasons which enable a reader to discern how it reached that answer. It is not, however,
required to respond to every aspect of each argument advanced by a party with regard to a

particular question. As the Enron committee put it:

This requires the tribunal to state its pertinent findings of fact, its pertinent

findings as to the applicable legal principles, and its conclusions in respect
of the application of the law to the facts. If the tribunal has done this, the
award will not be annulled on the basis that the tribunal could have given
more detailed reasons and analysis for its findings of fact or law, or that
the tribunal did not expressly state its evaluation in respect to each
individual item of evidence or each individual legal authority or legal
provision relied upon by the parties, or did not expressly state a view on
every single legal and factual issue raised by the parties in the course of the
proceedings. The tribunal is required to state reasons for its decision, but
not necessarily reasons for its reasons>"°

Secondly, the Committee notes Colombia’s argument that an award may be annulled if the
reasons given are “frivolous” or “manifestly irrelevant’.*"! The Committee accepts that if
the reasons are manifestly irrelevant to the issue to be decided, then they will not be reasons
for the decision. It considers, however, that an ad hoc committee must proceed with very
great caution in this regard since allegations that reasons are irrelevant, and even more that
they are “frivolous” can easily become an invitation to annul an award on the basis that the
committee disagrees with the reasons given. To accept that invitation would be to convert

1,372

annulment proceedings into an appeal.*’~ While the Committee accepts that there might be

a case in which an award could be annulled because the reasons given were frivolous or

manifestly irrelevant, the threshold is a very high one indeed. In particular, a reason is not

EDF, note 342, above, at para. 195 (AAL-4) (emphasis in original); see also TECO, note 318, above, at para. 87
(AAL-47). See also Orascom, note 347, above, at paras. 164-165, 170 (AAL-134).

Enron Creditors Recovery Corp. and Ponderosa Assets, LP v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3),
Decision on Annulment of 30 July 2010, para. 222 (AAL-26).

Mem. on Ann., para. 166.
Orascom, note 347, above, at para. 165 (AAL-134).

75

VI.

239.

240.

241.

242.

373

374

“frivolous” because many — including an ad hoc committee — consider it wrong; to justify
annulment, it must be such that no reasonable tribunal could possibly take it seriously.
Moreover, an award cannot be annulled because one of the reasons given is frivolous or
manifestly irrelevant, so long as the remaining reasons are a coherent explanation of the

decision reached.

THE DOCUMENTS ISSUE

THE POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES
() Colombia

Colombia first challenges the Tribunal’s decision in PO2 not to admit into the record the
Disputed SIC Documents and its subsequent decisions regarding Glencore and Prodeco’s

assertion of privilege (PO4 and PO6) and the FGN documents (P06).

Colombia maintains that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers through a failure to
apply the law; that it seriously infringed Colombia’s fundamental procedural right to be
heard, on all of its evidence; and that it failed to provide coherent or logical reasoning to
justify its decision.*7? Colombia argues that these errors were committed in the procedural
decisions which the Tribunal took in the relevant procedural orders and that they were
incorporated into, and have “tainted” the Award, which should therefore be annulled in its

entirety.>”*

For Colombia, these failings are rendered the more serious because the evidence which the
Tribunal excluded was, in Colombia’s view, relevant to allegations of corruption which a

tribunal has a duty to investigate with particular rigour.
(a) Procedural Order No. 2
(i) Manifest Excess of Power
Colombia asserts that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by disregarding the

proper legal framework for assessing the admissibility of evidence, and, in the alternative,

Mem. on Ann., para. 207.
Mem. on Ann., para. 208.

76

243.

244.

that it committed such gross and egregious misapplications of the law as to amount to a
failure to apply the applicable law.>”> More specifically, Colombia argues that the Tribunal
erred: (i) in its choice of law to govern the Parties’ dispute over the admissibility of the
Disputed SIC Documents; (ii) in its misapplication of Colombian law; and (iii) in its failure

to apply, or egregious misapplication of international law.*”°

According to Colombia, the ICSID Convention and Rules establish that procedural issues
— such as the admissibility of evidence — are to be governed by international law in the
absence of an express renvoi to municipal law agreed upon by the parties or mandated by
the rules of international law.*”’ As such, Colombia argues, the Tribunal’s reference to
Colombian municipal law in PO2 was highly irregular. In addition, the Tribunal’s
reasoning, in purported justification of its reference to municipal law, constituted an
“obvious misapplication” of Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention, which, according to
Colombia, has “nothing to do with” the law applicable to procedural issues.*”* To add to
this, Colombia argues that in its misguided application of Colombian law, the Tribunal
grossly misinterpreted the notion of “desviacién de poder”, which had been briefed by
neither Party.*”? Had the Tribunal conducted a “proper analysis”, Colombia submits, it
would have concluded that the ANDJE was authorised to request the Disputed Documents
from the SIC, and that the SIC was legally required to turn these over to the ANDJE upon

the latter’s request.>*°

Colombia acknowledges that the Tribunal did at least profess to apply international law,
and that it made reference to certain international law concepts such as “equality of arms”
and “good faith”**' but maintains that this was mere window-dressing.**? Colombia argues

that an analysis of PO2 in fact reveals a complete failure to apply “anything resembling

Mem. on Ann., para. 217.
Mem. on Ann., para. 218.

Mem. on Ann., para. 223.

Mem. on Ann., paras, 220-226, 285.
Mem. on Ann., para. 252.

Mem. on Ann., para. 255.

Mem. on Ann., paras, 235-237.
Mem. on Ann., paras, 235-237.

77

245.

international law”.**° According to Colombia, the Tribunal’s reasoning was both circular
and lacking in the methodological imperatives of an application of international law.***
Instead of engaging with the legal norms which traditionally govern admissibility under
international law, the Tribunal made the “unprecedented” decision to apply its own
subjective notion of “fairness”.**> As such, Colombia considers that PO2 constitutes an ex
aequo et bono ruling which the Tribunal was not empowered to make.**° Even if the
decision to apply the standard of “fairness” is not considered a failure to apply international
law, Colombia maintains, the Tribunal’s departure from the accepted tenets of international
law was so egregious as to “constitute, in practice, the non-application of the proper

law? 387

(ii) Serious Departure from Fundamental Rules of Procedure

Colombia submits that the Tribunal’s decision in PO2 constituted a serious departure from
Colombia’s fundamental procedural rights to be heard and to adduce lawfully obtained
evidence in its defence. Whereas Colombia accepts that Rule 34(1) of the ICSID Rules
gives tribunals the discretion to exclude evidence, it submits that the exercise of that
discretion must nevertheless be “informed somehow”.*** In this respect the Applicant cites
the principle that “no evidence should be excluded a limine”.**? As a consequence of this
tule, Colombia argues that, except in a very narrow set of exceptional circumstances
(evidence obtained illegally or which is subject to legal privilege), any evidence produced

by the parties should “automatically” be admitted.*”°

Mem. on Ann., para. 231.

Mem. on Ann., paras. 235-237.

Application, para. 46; Mem. on Ann., para. 232; Tr. pp. 17:3-5 and 16: 20-22 (Professor Silva Romero).
Application, para. 52; Mem. on Ann., para. 235; Tr. p. 17:3-5 (Professor Silva Romero).

Mem. on Ann., para. 239.

Tr. p. 165:22-24 (Mr Farhadi).

Mem. on Ann., paras. 174-175, citing from H. Lauterpacht, The So-called Anglo-American and Continental
Schools of Thoughts in International Law, British Yearbook of International Law, Vol. 12, 1931, p. 42 (AAL-
59).

Reply on Ann., para. 90, note 149 citing Preparation of the Rules of Court, PCI, Series D, No. 2, 1922, p. 210
(AAL-106) (“M. Anzilotti: [...] the Court ha[s] accepted the principle that any evidence produced by the parties
should be admitted automatically.”); Reply on Ann., paras. 92-93; Mem. on Ann., paras. 200-201.

78

246. According to the Applicant, this “rule of liberal admissibility of evidence” derives from the

right to be heard,*?! a fundamental procedural right, and is itself “best classified” as a
general principle of international law within the meaning of Article 38(1)(c) of the Statute
of the International Court of Justice (“ICJ”).*?? In support of this proposition, Colombia
submits various legal authorities, which, it claims, show that the liberal admissibility rule
has been “universally embraced” by legal scholars and in the practice of international
courts and tribunals for over a century.*?* Despite its status and relevance to the matter
under consideration in PO2, however, the liberal admissibility rule was completely ignored

by the Tribunal.°°*

247. Separately, and in addition to its failure to apply the liberal admissibility rule, Colombia

248.

submits that the Tribunal seriously departed from Colombia’s fundamental right to be

heard by its application of the Colombian law principle “desviacién de poder”.*°>

Colombia maintains that the decision to exclude the Disputed SIC Documents had a
profound effect on the course of the arbitration. Had they been admitted, Colombia asserts,
the Tribunal would “have had no other choice” but to find that Glencore and Prodeco’s
investment was unlawful and thus outside the protection of the BIT.*°° Colombia maintains
that the emails “uncontrovertibly demonstrate [Glencore and Prodeco’s] corrupting of Mr
Ballesteros” and, further, provided proof of their “calculated efforts to misrepresent the

hnical

ic and rationale for a further di

to the Mining Contract?” so as
to “wrongly induce” Ingeominas to accept the Eighth Amendment.*”” As such, Colombia
argues, it cannot be denied that the Tribunal’s departures from fundamental rules of
procedure were “serious” within the meaning of Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID

Convention.*** In any event, Colombia adds, the Committee is not required to determine

Colombia’s Opening Statement, 6 November 2020 (“Colombia’s Opening Statement before the Committee”),
slide 14 (AAE-38), referring to Orascom, above, note 347, at paras. 138, 144 (AAL-134); Reply on Ann., para.
94; Tr. pp. 15:13-15, 17:1-3, 11-15 (Professor Silva Romero).

Mem. on Ann., para. 174.

3 Mem. on Ann., paras. 173-187; Reply on Ann., para. 90, note 146.

Mem. on Ann., para. 241.
Mem. on Ann., para. 252.
Application, para. 40.
Application., para. 40.

Mem. on Ann., paras. 276-280.

79

249.

250.

that the departure from a fundamental rule of procedure would have been outcome
determinative in order for it to be “serious”, given that the injury is inherent in the due
process violation.*°? Moreover, as a practical matter, Colombia argues that “it is entirely
unclear” how it “could even go about establishing” that the Disputed SIC Documents

would have been outcome-determinative, given their exclusion.*°°

(iii) Failure to State Reasons

Finally, Colombia asserts that the Tribunal failed to state reasons to justify its decision in
PO2.*°! According to the Applicant, the Tribunal’s scant reasoning was “not only frivolous
and contradictory, but also incoherent’. By way of example, the reference to Article 42(1)
of the ICSID Convention in the Tribunal’s analysis of applicable law is said to be frivolous
in that it is “manifestly irrelevant’ and “cannot logically explain the decision” of the
Tribunal.4? Moreover, as above, Colombia argues that the Tribunal failed to “even
acknowledge” Colombia’s invocation of the rule of liberal admissibility of evidence and
ignored the legal authorities cited by Colombia in support of its application. As such,
according to Colombia, its decision to exclude the Disputed Documents is “insufficient
from a logical point of view to justify the tribunal’s conclusion”.*° In support of this
assertion, Colombia recalls the finding in CEAC that “in order to give a fully reasoned

award, a tribunal is required to answer every ‘question’ put to if’, and not just provide

reasoning for the final outcome.**

(b) Procedural Order No. 4

Colombia accepts that in PO2 the Tribunal left open two ways in which the Disputed SIC
Documents might nevertheless become part of the record in the case: first, through the
normal document production process and, secondly, if they came to form part of the record

in criminal proceedings in the Colombian courts and were not legally privileged. Colombia

Colombia’s Opening Statement before the Committee, note 391, above, slide 21 (AAE-38), referring to Churchill,
note 316, above, at para. 204 (AAL-48).

Reply on Ann., para. 57.

Mem. on Ann., para. 238.

Mem. on Ann., para. 285.

Mem. on Ann., para. 287.

Mem. on Ann., para. 287.

80

251.

252.

253.

254.

40s

asserts, however, that having seemed to leave the door ajar in this way, the Tribunal

slammed it shut with its decisions in PO4 and PO6.*°5

Colombia claims that the Tribunal’s decision in PO2 to give each Party the opportunity to
file new document production requests gave it “some hope” that the Tribunal would cure
the effect of its decision to exclude the Disputed SIC Documents in PO2.*°° According to
Colombia, it was for this reason that it duly complied with the procedure established by

407 so as to obtain from Glencore

>> 408

PO2 for a new phase of document production requests,

and Prodeco the Disputed SIC Documents “already in Colombia’s possession

In response to Colombia’s document production requests, Colombia claims that Glencore
and Prodeco put up a further “roadblock” to the discovery of the Disputed SIC Documents
by asserting privilege over documents which “manifestly did not enjoy any such privilege”,
including all correspondence involving in-house counsel.*” According to Colombia, legal
privilege does not apply to communications with in-house counsel and, even if it did, “it

did not apply to the documents over which [Glencore and Prodeco] had asserted it”.*'°

Nevertheless, Colombia claims that it “continued to navigate the Tribunal’s procedural
labyrinth” by bringing these issues to the Tribunal for their resolution in PO4.*!! Colombia
asserts further that, in its appeals to the Tribunal, it “express/y” requested to have the
privileged nature of Disputed Disclosure Documents ruled on by the Tribunal itself, or by
a conflict counsel (privilege inspector), on a document-by-document basis.*!”

Colombia asserts, however, that having seemed to leave the door open to the admission of
the Disputed SIC Documents through the “proper procedure”, the Tribunal slammed this
door shut with its decision in PO4 (and, later, PO6).*!? Not only did the Tribunal rule

against Colombia on the issue of the applicable law, Colombia submits that it went on to

Tr. pp. 23:21-25:9 (Professor Silva Romero).

406 Mem. on Ann., para. 293.

Tr. p. 24:5-7 (Professor Silva Romero).

Tr. p. 24:7-9 (Professor Silva Romero).

Mem. on Ann., paras. 295-296; Tr. p. 24:9-14 (Professor Silva Romero).
Tr. p. 62:18-19 (Professor Silva Romero); Mem. on Ann., para. 298.

Tr. p. 24:15-16 (Professor Silva Romero).

Tr. pp. 24:16-19, 67:24-68:2 (Professor Silva Romero).

Tr. p. 24:22-23 (Professor Silva Romero); Mem. on Ann., para. 323.

81

255.

256.

257.

add “insult to injury’ by refusing its request for an independent assessment of the
privileged nature of the Privilege Log Documents.*'* Its decision in this regard, in
Colombia’s view, was flawed by a manifest excess of power, serious departures from a

fundamental rule of procedure and a failure to give reasons.

(i) Manifest Excess of Power

According to Colombia, the Tribunal failed to apply the applicable law to the question of

whether or not in-house legal communications were subject to legal privilege.*!°

Colombia asserts that Colombian law ought to have governed the Tribunal’s decision.
According to Colombia, the existence of privilege requires, “at a minimum, ascertaining
the expectations of the parties to the communication at the time it was made”.*'® In the
circumstances of the present case, Colombia submits, the expectations of Prodeco’s
executives’ in-house communications in Colombia would have been set by Colombian
law.*!” On this basis, international law, which according to Colombia is the law applicable
to questions of procedure, mandates a renvoi to the municipal law of the State in which the
relevant legal advice was given. Despite this, Colombia asserts that the Tribunal made its
assessment based on its assessment of international law, making reference to Colombian

law only as an afterthought. *!*

Secondly, Colombia definitively asserts that Colombian law does not extend privilege to
communication with in-house counsel.*!? As such, according to the Applicant, the
Tribunal’s analysis of Colombia’s domestic law shows that it “manifestly and egregiously
misunderstood the basic authorities” cited by Colombia.*”° Moreover, the Tribunal failed
to refer to a single source that explicitly supported its contention that Colombian law

recognizes as legally privileged communications with in-house lawyers.*”!

Mem. on Ann., para. 300.
Mem. on Ann., paras. 303-314; Reply on Ann., para. 229; Tr. pp. 20:24-21:8 (Professor Silva Romero).
Reply on Ann., para. 233.

Reply on Ann., para. 233.

Mem. on Ann., para. 312; Reply on Ann., para. 233.

Mem. on Ann., paras. 312-313; Reply on Ann., para. 233; Tr. pp. 20:24-21:3 (Professor Silva Romero).
Mem. on Ann., para. 314; Reply on Ann., para. 233.

Mem. on Ann., para. 312.

82

258.

259.

260.

Thirdly, even in its “purported application” of international law Colombia asserts that the
Tribunal egregiously misapplied the law.*?? Colombia considers that the Tribunal seriously
erred in its determination that in-house counsel privilege is protected by “a general
principle of law within the meaning of Article 38 of the Statute of the International Court

of Justice” 3

Colombia argues that the Tribunal did not actually engage in an analysis of the existence
of a relevant general principle of law.*?4 Had it done so, Colombia submits, it would have
determined that the practice of States in their treatment of in-house counsel
communications varies widely, making it impossible to discern a principle of general
application.*”> Rather, the Tribunal simply applied the Vito Gallo criteria.*?° Colombia
claims on this basis that the Tribunal essentially “found no other legal justification than to
quote themselves” given that the Tribunal members in the present case overlapped by two-
thirds with that in Vito Gallo, “including the same president”.”’ Colombia concludes as
such that the Tribunal not only chose the wrong law to govern the question before it, but
that it did not even apply the law it had wrongly identified as applicable.*”* The “hallmarks
of an analysis of international law” being so absent from the Tribunal’s decision, Colombia
submits, “that it cannot be said that the Tribunal objectively applied international law in

the circumstances”.”?

Colombia concludes that the Tribunal’s failures in these respects constitute a manifest

excess of powers since “it amounts to effective disregard of the applicable law” and “is of

422. Reply on Ann., para. 234; Tr. p. 21:8-10.
23” Reply on Ann., para. 234, referring to PO4, note 72, above, at para. 38 (AAE-9).
24 Tr. pp. 64:15-24, 65:17-25-66:1 (Professor Silva Romero).

Mem. on Ann., para. 310; Reply on Ann., para. 234; Tr. p. 66:1-10 (Professor Silva Romero), referring to Akzo

Nobel Chemicals Ltd and Akcros Chemicals Lid v. European Commission, ECJ, Judgment of 14 September 2010,
paras. 72, 74 (“Akzo”) (RL-116).

26 Tr, p. 65:2-11 (Professor Silva Romero), referring to PO4, note 72, above, at paras. 38, 51, 53-54 (AAE-9); and
Vito Gallo, note 148, above (RL-129).

ar

42

a2

Tr. p. 65:11-15 (Professor Silva Romero).
Tr. pp. 21:8-10, 66:11-16 (Professor Silva Romero).
Tr. p. 66:16-19 (Professor Silva Romero); Reply on Ann., para. 234.

83

261.

262.

263.

430

432

433,

such a nature or degree as to constitute objectively (regardless of the Tribunal’s actual or

presumed intentions) its effective non- application”.*°

(ii) Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure

Colombia argues that the Tribunal’s decision to rely upon an affidavit from Glencore and
Prodeco’s counsel to determine which documents met the criteria for legal privilege, rather
than referring the question to an impartial third party (which Colombia refers to as a
“conflict counsel” but is more commonly known as a “privilege inspector”) ignored
Colombia’s fundamental rights to equal treatment, to be heard and to submit evidence in

its defence, constituting a further annullable error.**!

Colombia recalls that the documents over which Glencore and Prodeco had asserted
privilege were also within Colombia’s possession as a result of their seizure by the SIC.4*?
As such, Colombia was just as qualified as Glencore and Prodeco’s counsel to assess
whether or not they complied with the Tribunal’s definition of legal privilege.*> Colombia
argues that, in these circumstances, a privilege inspector should have been appointed to
resolve the matter.**+ Colombia maintains that, as neither side was neutral or objective, and
both had access to the evidence at issue, either both or neither of the Parties should have
been involved in the privilege assessment ordered by the Tribunal.**> By allowing the
matter to be determined by an affidavit from counsel for Glencore and Prodeco, the
Tribunal violated Colombia’s fundamental right to be heard and its right to equality of

arms, as well as depriving Colombia of critical evidence.**°

(iii) Failure to State Reasons

Colombia also maintains that the Tribunal failed properly to state the reasons for its

decision. It maintains that the Tribunal misunderstood the plain meaning of the authority

Mem. on Ann., para. 314.

Tr.
Tr.
Tr.
Tr.
Tr.
Tr.

. p. 25:19-24 (Professor Silva Romero).

. p. 21:19-20 (Professor Silva Romero); Mem. on Ann., para. 300.

. pp. 62:17-22, 67:6-10 (Professor Silva Romero).

. p. 67:22-24 (Professor Silva Romero).

. p. 68:9-13 (Professor Silva Romero).

. pp. 25:19-24, 68:14-18 (Professor Silva Romero); Mem. on Ann., paras. 315-316.

84

on Colombian law to which it referred.*” Additionally, Colombia asserts, as an instance
of “frivolous” reasoning, that “the Tribunal effectively cited a lack of judicial and

administrative precedent as an affirmative indication of the existence of a rule of law”.**

Colombia submits that the Tribunal did not explain its reasoning as to why it refused to
examine the privilege issue on a document-by-document basis.? Colombia refutes the
suggestion that PO4 was a mere routine procedural decision on document production
which, in the result, did not require detailed reasoning.” According to Colombia, in the
unusual circumstance where both Parties had access to the documents at issue, it was an
abdication of the Tribunal’s duty to answer all questions posed to it when it delegated the
task of the document-by-document assessment of privilege to one of the Parties to the
dispute.**! By deferring to Glencore and Prodeco’s assessment on privilege, therefore,
Colombia claims that the Tribunal “essentially ignored 159 questions posed to it, namely,

whether or not each of the documents in question was subject to privilege”.+”

Finally, Colombia argues that the Tribunal’s reasoning in PO4 was “contradictory” to its
decision in PO2.4#? Whereas in PO2 the Tribunal excluded the Disputed SIC Documents
on the premise that it would “establish the ‘proper procedure’ for allowing a fair chance

for them to be admitted onto the record”, it failed to establish any such objective and proper

procedure in PO4.*#

(c) Procedural Order No. 6

Colombia argues that, in its PO2 the Tribunal promised that Colombia could marshal into
the record evidence gathered by law enforcement authorities in the context of criminal

proceedings, but that it “broke that promise” in PO6.**° Colombia submits that, in that

Mem. on Ann., para. 320; Reply on Ann., para. 252.
Mem. on Ann., para. 320.

Mem. on Ann., para. 321.

Reply on Ann., para. 253.

Reply on Ann., para. 254.

Mem. on Amn., para. 321; Reply on Ann., para. 256.
Mem. on Ann., para. 322.

Reply on Ann., para. 257.

Application, para. 70.

85

267.

268.

269.

decision, “the Tribunal, once more, issued a contradictory ruling by inventing new legal

rules” to exclude the Disputed Documents. *“°

(i) Manifest Excess of Power

Colombia asserts that the Tribunal did not apply “any /aw at all” in Procedural Order No.
6.7 Colombia maintains that the Tribunal did not even “attempt to explain what law (if
any) it was applying” to reach its decision.’ In the place of the “habitual” section on
applicable law, Colombia asserts that the Tribunal instead included a section entitled
“Applicable Provisions” wherein it simply cited the relevant paragraphs of PO2.*?
According to Colombia, the Tribunal then went on to interpret its own obiter dictum in
order to attempt to “distil a legal ‘standard’ from the penumbrae of the word

‘gathered’”.*°° In so doing, Colombia asserts that the Tribunal failed “even to consider, let

alone apply” the law.**!

(ii) Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure

Colombia asserts that the Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure
in PO6 by excluding the FGN Documents and the Annex A Documents, these being
“relevant, non-privileged, and lawfully obtained” .** It submits that the Tribunal’s decision
in this regard denied Colombia its fundamental right to be heard and its concomitant right

to produce evidence in its defence.**

Colombia asserts that the Tribunal’s decision on the criteria for admissibility in PO6
differed from the criteria it had itself set out in PO2. Colombia complains that the
Tribunal’s decision to exclude the FGN Documents on the grounds that these were “not

part of a formal acusacion in a Colombian criminal court proceeding” imported a

+46 Application, para. 46.

447

448

449

450

Mem.
Mem.

Mem.

Mem.

on Ann., para.
on Ann., para.
. on Ann., para.
Mem.
Mem.

on Ann., para.
on Ann., para.
. on Ann., para,

Mem. on Ann., para.

. 343 (emphasis added).
343,

86

270.

271.

272.

4s

456

4s

458

459

requirement that had never been stipulated by the Tribunal.**4 Colombia characterises that
requirement as “simply another invention designed to exclude the [Disputed]
Documents”.**> According to Colombia, no rule exists under either international law or
Colombian law “which would support such test to exclude evidence and, tellingly, the

Tribunal simply provided no reasons or support for its conclusion” °°

As to the Annex A documents “allegedly subject to privilege”, Colombia repeats the
complaints it had made about PO4. In particular, Colombia notes that the Tribunal
expressly rejected Colombia’s request that these documents be admitted on the ground that
it was not its role to “second guess” the determination of counsel for Glencore and Prodeco

that documents were privileged. In this regard Colombia argues that

.. if the Tribunal did not want to believe Colombia — who had the documents, or
Mr Enciso, an independent conflict counsel retained by Colombia -, it should have
requested that a Tribunal-appointed conflict counsel review these documents as
requested by Colombia. Again, the Tribunal instead decided that Claimants’ word
was enough, thereby leaving no door open to Colombia to produce documents that

Colombia knew were not privileged.**”

Colombia asserts that the Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure
in PO6 by excluding the FGN Documents and the Annex A Documents. According to
Colombia the Tribunal “refiis[ed] to abide by its own prior ruling, and instead impos{ed]
unforeseeable byzantine requirements on Colombia” with respect to document production,

thereby “act[ing] so arbitrarily as to offend ‘rules of natural justice”.**

(iii) Failure to State Reasons

Finally, Colombia submits that the Tribunal failed to state reasons for its decision not to

admit the FGN Documents.**? Colombia claims that the Tribunal did not provide “a single

Application, para. 73.
Application, para. 73.
Application, para. 73.
Application, para. 74.
Mem. on Ann., para. 343.
Mem. on Ann., para. 344.

87

273.

274.

275.

276.

460

461

462

463,

464

authority” for its decision to impose the requirement that “the evidence must be ‘gathered’
or ‘marshaled’ in the course of a criminal proceeding” in order to be submitted before the
Tribunal.4 According to Colombia this is because no such rule exists under either

international law or Colombian law.**!

Colombia asserts further that the Tribunal’s reasoning simply “cannot be followed ‘from
Point A to Point B’”.* It characterises PO6 as not just lacking a “logical chain of
reasoning,” but as “devoid of any chain of reasoning at all”.*° The Tribunal, according to

Colombia, “simply provided no reasons or support for its conclusion” 4+

(2) Glencore and Prodeco

Glencore and Prodeco reject all of the challenges based upon the Tribunal’s decisions on
the admission and exclusion of evidence. For them, a tribunal’s decisions on such matters
are ones which fall wholly outside the scope of the annulment process. While accepting
that corruption is an issue of the utmost gravity, they argue that Colombia’s allegation of
corruption was without any foundation and warn that the principles by which an arbitration
should be conducted cannot be discarded merely because a respondent State chooses to

make an allegation of corruption.
(a) Procedural Order No. 2

(i) Manifest Excess of Power

Glencore and Prodeco refute the assertion that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers
by its failure to apply the law in PO2, responding to each of the excesses alleged by

Colombia in turn.

On the issue of the Tribunal’s choice of law, Glencore asserts that, within the bounds of

due process, the Tribunal has “absolute discretion” over issues of evidence, and thus “is

Mem. on Ann., para. 344; Reply on Ann., para. 258.
Application, para. 73.

Reply on Ann., para. 258.

Mem. on Ann., para. 344.

Application, para. 73; Mem. on Ann., para. 344,

88

277.

278.

465

466

467

468

469

470

not bound to follow one rule or another in making evidentiary determinations” 4°

Nevertheless, Glencore argues that Colombia’s assertion that the Tribunal did not apply
international law to this issue is “demonstrably false” .*% The decision in Procedural Order
No. 2 “made clear” that the Tribunal chose international law to govern the Parties’ dispute,

and looked to Colombian law only to confirm its conclusions.*”

Similarly, in relation to Colombia’s assertion that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its
powers in PO2, Glencore and Prodeco submit that “[a]// Colombia does here is claim that
the Tribunal made mistakes of Colombian law”. They assert that even if the Tribunal made
mistakes in relation to Colombian law (which they deny), such errors of law are not an
excess of power and are no basis for annulment.*®* In any event, Glencore and Prodeco
add, given that the Tribunal’s reference to Colombian law was carried out only to confirm
the Tribunal’s application of international law, “it had no bearing on the outcome of the

proceeding” and therefore cannot constitute an excess of power.*”

As regards Colombia’s assertion that the Tribunal “failed to apply anything resembling
international law”, Glencore and Prodeco counter that Colombia’s case is in essence one
that the Tribunal committed “an error of law’.4” According to Glencore and Prodeco,
however, the erroneous application of the law is not a manifest excess of powers.*”! Indeed,
the drafters of the ICSID Convention rejected a proposal to include “incorrect application
of the law” as a ground for annulment.‘ According to Glencore, an excess of power for
failure to apply the applicable law is applicable only if there has been a failure to apply the
law in toto.*” Glencore submits that this criterion is clearly not met by PO2, which applied

the “international legal principles of fairness, good faith and equality of arms”.4™

C-Mem. on Ann,, para. 89.

C-Mem. on Ann,, para. 89.

C-Mem. on Ann,, para. 89; Tr. p. 135:6-8 (Mr Blackaby).

C-Mem. on Ann., para. 96.

C-Mem. on Ann., para. 96.

C-Mem. on Ann,, para. 91.

C-Mem. on Ann., paras. 83, 91.

C-Mem. on Ann., para. 83, referring to A. Parra, The History of ICSID, Oxford University Press, 2012, p. 87

(RAL-14).

C-Mem. on Ann., para. 85.
C-Mem. on Ann., para. 94.

89

279.

280.

281.

475

476

47

478

47

480

48

Furthermore, Glencore and Prodeco maintain that, as a matter of logic, the Tribunal cannot
have manifestly exceeded its powers when it reached a decision that was consistent with
the very international law rule that Colombia says should have been applied.*”> Glencore
asserts in this regard that whereas the documents were lawfully obtained by the SIC for the
purposes of its antitrust investigation, these were transferred to the ANDJE for use in this
arbitration in violation of both international and Colombian law. In other words, the
Disputed SIC Documents “had not been lawfully obtained for the purpose of use in this
arbitration”.*”° As such, even under the liberal admissibility rule as formulated by
Colombia, the Disputed SIC Documents fell to be excluded as illegally obtained

evidence.*””

(ii) Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure

Glencore and Prodeco deny the assertion that the Tribunal seriously departed from a
fundamental procedural rule by its decision in PO2. They maintain that Colombia has failed
to show that any of the criteria for the application of Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID

Convention have been met.*78

First, Glencore and Prodeco contend that Colombia has failed to identify an applicable -
let alone fundamental - procedural rule which was violated by the decision in PO2.*”
According to them, the liberal admissibility rule cited by Colombia either “does not exist”,
or at least “does not exist in the absolute form that Colombia urges”.**° Glencore and
Prodeco assert that the sources which Colombia cites in support of its “Jiberal
admissibility’ rule have been misconstrued. Properly understood, these stand for the
uncontroversial proposition that international tribunals are not bound by the rules of
evidence that shape proceedings in national courts, and are free to adopt flexible procedures

1

to deal with evidence.**! However, the fact that tribunals are not bound to follow strict

Tr. p. 132:4-7 (Mr Friedman).

Tr. p. 130:15-17 (Mr Friedman).

Tr. p. 130:17-18 (Mr Friedman).

C-Mem. on Ann., para. 55; Tr. p. 119:10-16 (Mr Friedman).
Tr. p. 120:12-15 (Mr Friedman).

C-Mem. on Ann,, para. 57; Tr. p. 129:9-13 (Mr Friedman).
C-Mem. on Ann., para. 62; Tr. p. 120:16-21 (Mr Friedman).

90

282.

283.

482

4s

486

487

488

tules of evidence from municipal legal systems does not support the proposition that they
are “prohibited from excluding evidence under appropriate circumstances” .“*? Moreover,
Glencore and Prodeco criticise the legal authorities relied upon by Colombia as “almost
exclusively” relying on rules applicable to inter-State cases where “the parties have equal
powers to obtain evidence”. Such cases, they maintain, are readily distinguishable from
investor-State litigation in which only one party — the State — has at its disposal coercive

powers for obtaining evidence.***

Glencore and Prodeco also contend that the existence of a limit on the Tribunal’s discretion
to determine admissibility would contradict the terms of Rule 34(1) of the ICSID Rules.
Under this provision, ICSID tribunals are granted “full discretion” in considering the
admissibility of evidence.**+ As such, they must be taken to be empowered to decide that
certain evidence is inadmissible.*** According to Glencore and Prodeco, tribunals “need”
to have the ability to exclude documents, “to protect the integrity of the proceeding and
safeguard principles of due process”.**® If, on the other hand, ICSID tribunals were bound
to admit “virtually all evidence sought to be introduced, lest [they] run afoul of denying a
party the right to be heard”, Rule 34(1) would have no purpose.**’ From this they conclude
that Rule 34(1) “displaces any claimed international law rule of ‘liberal admissibility’ that

requires Tribunals to admit all evidence”.***

Secondly, even if, arguendo, the general admissibility rule did exist, and even if it could
be construed as a fundamental procedural right, Glencore and Prodeco submit that
Colombia would still need to establish that the Tribunal’s decision amounted to a serious

departure from the rule in order to bring it within the scope of Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID

C-Mem. on Ann., para. 62; Tr. p. 125:10-13 (Mr Friedman).
Tr. pp. 121:19-122:6 (Mr Friedman).

Tr. p. 120:2-6 (Mr Friedman); C-Mem. on Ann., para. 61, citing ConocoPhillips Petrozuata BV, ConocoPhillips
Hamaca BV, ConocoPhillips Gulf of Paria BV and ConocoPhillips Company v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30), Award of 8 March 2019, para. 264 (RAL-24); El Paso Energy International
Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/15) Decision on Annulment of 22 September 2014,
para. 191 (RAL-15).

C-Mem. on Ann., para. 60.

C-Mem. on Ann., para. 62 (emphasis in original).
Tr. pp. 120:23-121:1, 121:7-8 (Mr Friedman).
C-Mem. on Ann., para. 61 (emphasis in original).

91

284.

496

497

498

4s

Convention.**° In this respect, they argue that “we heard nothing from Colombia’.*

According to Glencore and Prodeco, as outlined above in paragraph 279, the Tribunal’s
decision to exclude documents that were illegally obtained was entirely consistent with the
liberal admissibility rule, as formulated by Colombia.*”! If indeed the general admissibility
tule existed, it would not exist “in a vacuum” and, as such, it would have to be reconciled
with other fundamental rules of procedure.*” In this case, Glencore and Prodeco submit
that the principle of liberal admissibility would have had to be weighed against the
principles of equality of arms and fundamental fairness, which “were pulling in the
opposite direction”.*”> The reasonable exercise of the Tribunal’s discretion in this regard,
they contend, cannot constitute a basis for annulment.*** Moreover, as long as a tribunal
respects the rules of due process in its decisions on admissibility “then the substance of its
decision cannot be subject to annulment review”.*°> According to Glencore and Prodeco,
PO2 “respected the parties’ due process rights in full’.°° Although, on the one hand, the
Tribunal excluded the Disputed SIC Documents to preserve equality between the Parties,
on the other, it protected Colombia’s right to request the admission of the documents via

the proper procedure for the production of evidence.*””

Thirdly, Glencore and Prodeco maintain that the claimed violation must “at /east” have
had the “potential to affect the outcome of the arbitration”.°* According to them, however,
that condition cannot be satisfied by PO2, insofar as it left the introduction of the evidence

at issue open through other, “appropriate” channels.*”° As such, the Tribunal's decision to

Tr.
Tr.
Tr.

129:16-17 (Mr Friedman).

129:25 (Mr Friedman).

130:11-18 (Mr Friedman).

Tr. p. 128:12-19 (Mr Friedman).

Tr. p. 129:1-2 (Mr Friedman).

Tr. p. 127:2-3, 18-21 (Mr Friedman).

C-Mem. on Ann., para. 62; Tr. p. 127:15-18 (Mr Friedman), referring to Bernhard von Pezold v. Republic of
Zimbabwe (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/15), Decision on Annulment of 21 November 2018, para. 253 (“Bernhard
von Pezold”) (RAL-20).

C-Mem. on Ann., para. 69.

C-Mem,. on Ann., paras. 64, 69; Tr. pp. 130:24-131:9 (Mr Friedman).

C-Mem. on Ann,, para. 55; Tr. p. 136:8-11 (Mr Friedman).

Tr. p. 136:13-18 (Mr Friedman).

7 PP PD

92

285.

286.

exclude the Disputed SIC Documents in PO2 “did not have and could not have had any

impact on the outcome of the dispute” >

Finally, as to the issue of the Tribunal’s application of the desviacién de poder principle,
Glencore and Prodeco submit that both sides had argued whether Colombia’s use of the
Disputed SIC Documents complied with Colombian law, and, as such, “Colombia had the
ability to address the principle of desviacion de poder in its submissions and it chose not
to do so”.**! In any event, Glencore and Prodeco add, the Tribunal made clear that it was
looking to Colombian law, including the concept of desviacién de poder, merely to
“confirm” the decision that it had already reached under international law.°°? The
Tribunal’s analysis of desviacién de poder therefore could not have had the potential to
affect the outcome, and therefore “cannot, by definition” be taken to have violated Article

52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention.*

(iii) Failure to State Reasons

Glencore and Prodeco argue that the Tribunal provided “clear, straightforward, coherent
reasons” for its decision in PO2.*** They contend that, properly understood, Colombia’s
claim is not that the Tribunal failed to state reasons or stated contradictory reasons, but that
the Tribunal adopted the wrong reasons, which is “not a basis for annulment”.* By way
of example, Glencore and Prodeco refer to Colombia’s complaint that the Tribunal wrongly
relied on ICSID Convention Article 42(1) in its reasoning. They make the argument that
Colombia’s case in this regard is “not an allegation that reasons are missing; it is a claim
that the Tribunal made an error of law”, which cannot form the basis of a violation of

Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention.*°°

Tr. p. 136:19-21 (Mr Friedman).

C-Mem.
* C-Mem.
C-Mem.
C-Mem.
C-Mem.
C-Mem.

on Ann.,

on Ann.

on Ann.,

on Ann.

on Ann.,

para. 68.

., para. 68, referring to PO2, note 67, above, at para. 52 (AAE-1).
on Ann.,

para. 68.
paras. 116-120.

., para, 115.

para. 121,

93

287.

288.

289.

Glencore and Prodeco deny that the Tribunal was obliged to address every argument made
by Colombia.*°’ They distinguish between the arguments raised by the Parties, on the one
hand, and the issue that the Tribunal is asked to decide.*** In this respect Glencore invokes
the decision of the ad hoc committee in CEAC as establishing the principle that, although
a tribunal is indeed required to answer every question put to it, it is “not, however, required
to deal explicitly with every detail of every argument advanced by the Parties or to refer
to every authority which they invoke”.°®? In this case the Tribunal was asked to determine
the admissibility of the Disputed SIC Documents. That was the question put to it, and it

was answered by PO2, which was “all that [the Tribunal] was required to do”.*'°

(b) Procedural Order No. 4
(i) Manifest Excess of Power

On the matter of the applicability of international law in the test for privilege, Glencore
and Prodeco submit that, despite Colombia’s assertion that domestic law applies, during
the arbitration, Colombia itself made international law arguments in relation to the
matter;>!! and that the Tribunal also based its decision on its assessment that “Colombian

law likewise protects professional secrecy of in-house counsel”.>!”

In response to Colombia’s argument that the Tribunal erred in its assessment of the test for
legal professional privilege under international law, Glencore and Prodeco note that the
Tribunal “established the relevant criteria for determining whether a document is
privileged under international law” by reference to the factors listed in Vito Gallo which,

513

they maintain, is frequently cited by other tribunals. In addition, they assert that

507 Tr. p. 132:8-9 (Mr Friedman).

Tr. p. 132:12-19 (Mr Friedman).
Tr. p. 132:12-16 (Mr Friedman), citing CEAC, note 342, above, at para, 98 (AAL-3).

Tr. p. 132:18-19 (Mr Friedman).

Tr. p. 97:2-15 (Mr Blackaby).

Tr. p. 98:17-18 (Mr Blackaby).

Tr. p. 137:17-23 (Mr Friedman), referring to PO4, note 72, above, at para. 54 (AAE-9), citing Vito Gallo, note
148, above, at para. 47 (RL-129); Tr. P. 188:18-21 (Mr Blackaby); Glencore and Prodeco Reply Presentation
before the Committee, 6 November 2020 (RAE-4), citing Carlos Rios and Francisco Javier Rios v. Republic of
Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/17/16), Procedural Order No. 7 of 4 October 2018, note 10; Global Telecom Holding
SAE v. Canada, 1CSID Case No. ARB/16/16, Procedural Order No. 5, Decision on Outstanding Issues of Legal
Privilege of 13 December 2018, pp. 27-28; Gramercy Funds Management LLC and Gramercy Peru Holdings

94

290.

291.

Colombia's complaint as to the Tribunal’s reasoning in this regard amounts to no more than
a disagreement with the Tribunal's substantive legal decision on whether or not certain
documents were privileged, which disagreement is not the appropriate basis for an
annulment.*'* They highlight the determinations of other international tribunals that in-
house counsel communications are subject to professional privilege, and assert that there
can be no manifest excess of powers when the underlying issue is subject to more than one

interpretation.*!°

Glencore and Prodeco recall their argument that the Tribunal enjoys “absolute discretion”
over evidentiary matters, and that the Committee has no power to review those evidentiary
rulings.*'° If a tribunal’s application of one privilege rule or another were subject to
annulment committee review, they argue, then so too would all procedural and evidentiary
rulings made by a tribunal, including, for instance, decisions on Redfern Schedules.*!” As
such, the scope for the Committee’s oversight is limited, such that “[a]bsent a fundamental

denial of due process, none of those issues are the proper subject of annulment review”.>!8

(ii) Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure

Glencore and Prodeco deny that Colombia’s due process rights were ignored in the
assessment of whether each of the Disputed Documents met the requirements for legal
privilege set out in PO4. They assert that the submission of a sworn affidavit, as required
by the Tribunal, is normal and sufficient under the applicable procedural rules.*!? They

maintain that “[y]ow may agree with that practice, or you may disagree ... but it is not an

annullable error” >”

LLC v. Republic of Peru (UNCITRAL), Procedural Order No. 3 (On Document Production) of 12 July 2018, para.
24; Lone Pine Resources Inc v. Government of Canada (UNCITRAL) Procedural Order on Witheld and Redacted
Documentation of 24 February 2017, para. 5; William Ralph Clayton et al v. Government of Canada (PCA Case
No. 2009-04), Procedural Order No. 12 of 2 May 2012, para. 21.

Tr. p. 137:25-138:5 (Mr Friedman).

Tr. p. 140:3-7 (Mr Friedman), relying on Daimler, note 324, above, at para. 187 (RAL-16).
C-Mem. on Ann., para. 97.

C-Mem. on Ann., para. 97.

C-Mem. on Ann., para. 97.

Rej, on Ann., para. 57; Tr. p. 104:13-18 (Mr Blackaby).

Tr. p. 138:22-24 (Mr Friedman).

95

292.

293.

294.

295.

Glencore and Prodeco submit further that the fact that the Tribunal refused to order the
production of the Disputed SIC Documents was not a violation of Colombia’s right to be
heard. They argue that Colombia had no right to be heard on the content of privileged
documents, and that Colombia was able to access all of the evidence to which it was entitled
— namely the “non-privileged documents” — in accordance with the supplementary

document production phase that the Tribunal ordered.*?!

According to Glencore and Prodeco, moreover, the fact that different national legal systems
take different approaches to in-house counsel privilege demonstrates that any rule on the
subject cannot be “fiundamental’.*” A tribunal’s resolution of discovery disputes and
privilege determinations, according to the Respondents on Annulment, are far from the
kind of minimal standards and fundamental rules of procedure that Article 52(1)(d) is
intended to safeguard. If it were otherwise, then every ruling on a privilege log could be
subject to annulment committee review.** That is not, and cannot be, the proper function

of review in the ICSID system. **

(iii) Failure to State Reasons

As to Colombia’s assertion that the Tribunal failed to give reasons, Glencore and Prodeco
assert that Colombia has failed to explain why detailed reasons are even required for

“routine procedural orders on which privilege rules may apply”.>*°

Moreover, they maintain that “[n]o independent observer” could look at PO4 and conclude
that the Tribunal failed to state reasons.**”7_ Responding to the argument that the Tribunal
misunderstood Colombia’s legal authority cited in order to conclude that in-house legal
counsel communications are privileged, Glencore and Prodeco submit that Colombia’s

disagreement is with the Tribunal’s finding, rather than a failure to state reasons.>**

C-Mem. on Ann,, para. 71.
2 C-Mem. on Ann., para. 72.
C-Mem. on Ann,, para. 72.
C-Mem. on Ann,, para. 72.
C-Mem. on Ann,, para. 72.

Tr. p. 140:17-19 (Mr Friedman).
Tr. p. 140:12-16 (Mr Friedman).
C-Mem. on Ann., para. 126.

96

296.

297.

298.

299.

300.

Finally, Glencore and Prodeco deny that there was any contradiction between the
Tribunal’s decision in PO2 and PO4. They contend that the decision to permit a new
document production process did not “impose a waiver of privilege” over the

documentation sought through that process.*”?

(c) Procedural Order No. 6
(i) Manifest Excess of Power

Glencore and Prodeco deny that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by its decision
in PO6. In that decision, they submit, the Tribunal referred to the principles it had set out
in PO2, in which the Tribunal had ruled on the applicable law and addressed various related
issues.**° In both procedural orders the Tribunal addressed Colombia’s improper attempts
to introduce the Disputed SIC Documents into the record.**! The assertion that the Tribunal
failed to apply the law, in excess of its powers, is as devoid of merit with regard to PO6 as

it is with PO2.°*

Responding to the assertion that the Tribunal failed to apply the applicable law governing
privilege, Glencore and Prodeco reiterate their position that the Tribunal is given absolute
discretion — within the bounds of due process — over issues of evidence.** In the result,
they contend, the Tribunal’s application of one privilege rule or another is not subject to

annulment review.*4
As to the assertion that the Tribunal misapplied Colombian law, Glencore and Prodeco
respond that an error of law, even if shown to exist, is not a basis for annulment.**°

(ii) Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure

Nor, according to Glencore and Prodeco, did the Tribunal seriously depart from a

fundamental rule of procedure in PO6 by excluding the FGN Documents. By that decision,

C-Mem. on Ann., para. 129.
C-Mem. on Ann., para. 100.
C-Mem. on Ann., para. 100.

2 C-Mem. on Ann., para. 100.

C-Mem. on Ann., para. 97.
C-Mem. on Ann., para. 97.
C-Mem. on Ann., para. 98.

97

301.

302.

303.

Glencore and Prodeco reason, the Tribunal simply applied the standards that it had already
set out in PO2.°*° They maintain that, in making its argument, Colombia “does not even
attempt to identify a rule of procedure from which the Tribunal departed, much less that
the rule is fundamental and the departure serious”, and that, as the party seeking
annulment, Colombia bears the burden of demonstrating that the Award must be annulled

under Article 52(1)(d),°*’ which it has failed to do.**8

Finally, Glencore and Prodeco assert that the Tribunal did not need to cite legal authority
in reaching routine procedural decisions on admissibility of evidence, but that in any event
the Tribunal “did apply legal principles” by referring to the principles set out in its PO2.>
Colombia’s “real” complaint is that “the Tribunal erred in the application of that law”,

which is not a proper ground for annulment.*“°

(iii) Failure to State Reasons

Glencore and Prodeco argue that PO6 stated “clear reasons” for the decision to exclude
the FGN Documents, which “is all that Article 52(1)(e) requires”.**! Responding to
Colombia’s submission that the Tribunal had failed to cite any legal authority in
justification of its decision in PO6, Glencore and Prodeco refute the very notion that a
tribunal is required cite legal authority when issuing evidentiary determinations, citing

Arbitration Rule 34(1) in support of their position.*”

THE ANALYSIS OF THE COMMITTEE
(1) General Observations

Colombia’s complaint regarding the exclusion of the illegality documents concerns three

separate, but closely related, steps taken by the Tribunal:

C-Mem. on Ann,, para. 75.
C-Mem. on Ann., para. 75, citing Bernhard von Pezold, note 495, above, at para. 238 (RAL-20).
C-Mem. on Ann,, para. 75.

Tr. p. 141:9-13 (Mr Friedman).

Tr. p. 141:19-22 (Mr Friedman).

C-Mem. on Ann., para. 130.

2 C-Mem. on Ann., para. 130.

98

304.

305.

PO2, adopted on 4 November 2017, by which the Tribunal ruled that Colombia was not
to introduce the disputed documents seized by the SIC into the record. Although the
Tribunal ruled that Colombia was not entitled to submit these documents with its Counter-
Memorial, it provided for a new round of document production which permitted Colombia

to request the production of the excluded documents;

PO4, adopted on 24 April 2018, by which the Tribunal, holding that legal privilege
extended to communications with both in-house lawyers and outside counsel and finding
no evidence that Glencore or Prodeco had waived any legal or settlement privilege,
rejected Colombia’ request to introduce the disputed documents by way of document
production, provided that counsel for Glencore and Prodeco submitted an affidavit
confirming that each of the documents in respect of which privilege was claimed met all
of the requirements identified by the Tribunal. The subsequent affidavit stated that all but
two of the documents in respect of which privilege had been claimed met the requirements

set out by the Tribunal; and

PO6, adopted on 31 July 2018, by which the Tribunal confirmed, and gave reasons for, its
decision (originally given in a letter of 18 May 2018) rejecting Colombia’s request to

introduce the remaining disputed documents as evidence of criminal conduct.

Annulment is, of course, available only with regard to the Award itself; there is no scope
under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention for an application to annul a Procedural Order
or a Decision. Nevertheless, as the Committee has already explained (see para. 219,
above), procedural decisions are, in effect, incorporated into the Award. If the Tribunal
did indeed manifestly exceed its powers or commit a serious departure from a fundamental
rule of procedure in one of its procedural decisions, or if it failed adequately to state the

reasons for its decisions, then that would be a ground for annulment.

In the present case, the Tribunal recited at some length in the Award the earlier procedural
decisions which it had taken (see para. 219, above). Before the Committee, Colombia was
critical of the Tribunal’s behaviour in this regard. Colombia argues that the space which
the Tribunal devoted in the Award to what the Tribunal described as “certain procedural

incidents” “can only be explained as an ex post facto attempt to cure what the Tribunal

99

306.

307.

had done, drafted not for the parties but for you, members of the Committee”. The
Committee does not agree with this criticism. It was both logical and helpful for the
Tribunal to incorporate into the Award an account of its decisions on the admission or
exclusion of documents, particularly in view of the fact that Colombia had made clear in
correspondence its view that those decisions amounted to errors which would render an

award annullable under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention.*4

There is nothing in the
relevant portions of the Award to suggest that the Tribunal “massaged” the reasons given
in the Procedural Orders for its decisions regarding the Disputed Documents. On the
contrary, the Award recites or summarises those decisions; any difference between these
parts of the Award and the Procedural Orders is due to the fact that the Tribunal in its

Award was able to add reference to the events which followed the adoption of those Orders.

Colombia maintains that, by denying it the opportunity to rely upon the Disputed
Documents in the arbitration proceedings, the Tribunal committed a serious violation of a
fundamental rule of procedure, manifestly exceeded its powers and failed to state reasons
for its decision. These are separate grounds for annulment and Colombia maintains that,
even if the Committee finds that there was no serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure, it should still annul the Award if another ground of annulment is made out.*4°
Nevertheless, the three grounds are closely related and the allegation that there was a

serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure lies at the heart of the case.

In addition, while it is necessary to begin by examining each Order separately, it is
important not to lose sight of two overarching considerations. First, it is the combined
effect of the three Orders in excluding documents on which Colombia wished to rely which
is alleged to constitute the annullable error. Secondly, the context is an allegation by
Colombia of corruption and illegality on the part of Glencore and Prodeco and their
officials. That is an allegation of the utmost gravity which, had the Tribunal accepted it,

would have led to a finding that the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction.

Tr. p. 25:12-18 (Professor Silva Romero).

See, for example, Colombia’s letter of 14 November 2017, note 124, above (C-283/R-275) expressing its views
on PO2, note 67, above (AAE-1).

Tr. pp. 162:23-163:5 (Professor Silva Romero).

100

308.

309.

310.

The Committee notes the Tribunal’s comments about corruption being “morally odious”
and emphasising the importance of a rigorous investigation of corruption allegations (see
para. 171, above). The Committee agrees. A tribunal faced with allegations of corruption

has a duty to investigate those allegations with rigour.

(2) Procedural Order No. 2: The Initial Decision to Exclude the Documents
obtained by the SIC
As has already been summarized (see paras. 239-249, above), Colombia maintains that
PO2 contains several serious irregularities which went on to taint the Award. There is
considerable overlap between these different alleged irregularities; in substance, Colombia

makes three main points:

(a) The Tribunal failed properly to identify the applicable law, since it should have applied
international law and not Colombian law;*#°

(b) Its conclusions about Colombian law were based upon a misunderstanding of a

principle which neither party had argued;**”

(c) The Tribunal did not apply the applicable law, since it ignored the rules of international
law, especially the rule of “/iberal admissibility of evidence”, and substituted its own
ex aequo et bono concept of fairness. In doing so it manifestly exceeded its powers
and was guilty of a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure since it

denied Colombia the opportunity to present its case.*#*

The Committee does not accept that the Tribunal erred in its identification of the applicable
law. It agrees with Colombia that the issue of admissibility of evidence is governed by
international law but so did the Tribunal, which held that international law was the
applicable law*“? and went on to rule that the disputed documents were inadmissible as a
matter of international law.**° The purely secondary role played by Colombian law is

illustrated by the fact that the Tribunal devoted twenty-four paragraphs of PO2 to a

Reply on Ann, para. 205.

Tr. pp. 58:6-8, 59:19-25 (Professor Silva Romero).
Tr. p. 17:1-5 (Professor Silva Romero).

PO2, note 67, above, at para. 52 (AAE-1).

PO2, note 67, above, at paras, 57-70 (AAE-1).

101

311.

312.

313.

ssi

552

consideration of international law but only four to Colombian law and that its conclusion
was merely that Colombian law “would appear to confirm the conclusion reached by the
Tribunal under international law”.**' The fact that the Tribunal confirmed its conclusions
by reference to Colombian law in no way alters the fact that it treated international law as

the basis for its decision to exclude the disputed documents.

That makes it unnecessary to consider whether the Tribunal erred in its findings regarding
Colombian law. The Committee sees no basis on which to conclude that the Tribunal made
such an error but, even if it did, that error was confined to a law which the Tribunal
considered only so as to confirm a finding which it had reached by reference to international
law. In those circumstances, such an error would not come anywhere near constituting
either a manifest excess of power or a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure. Nor would it affect the reasoning of the Tribunal in such a way as to amount to

a failure to state reasons.

With regard to Colombia’s argument that the Tribunal egregiously misapplied international
law, the Committee recalls that the threshold is a high one and that an error by itself is not
enough.*°? Colombia’s criticism of the Tribunal for referring to Article 42(1) of the ICSID
Convention — on the ground that this provision deals with the substantive law applicable to
the resolution of the underlying dispute and not the law to be applied to questions of
procedure — does not begin to cross that threshold. While Colombia may be correct about
the scope of Article 42(1), the matter is open to argument either way. Moreover, even if
the Tribunal was incorrect in its interpretation and application of the provision, it made no
difference to the outcome, since the choice of applicable law by the Tribunal was no

different from that suggested by both Parties.

Turning to Colombia’s argument that the Tribunal substituted its own subjective judgment
for the rules of international law, the Committee sees two strands to this argument. First,
Colombia maintains that the Tribunal disregarded what it describes as the rule of liberal
admissibility of evidence. Secondly, Colombia contends that, notwithstanding its

references to the equality of arms, the Tribunal did not apply a rule of law but only a

PO2, note 67, above, at para. 74 (AAE-1).
See para. 232, above.

102

subjective concept of fairness, thus deciding the question of admissibility on an ex aequo

et bono basis, something it had no jurisdiction to do.

314. Colombia maintains that the technical rules on admissibility of evidence found in different
systems of national law have no place in international law. It relies, inter alia, on the award
of the Mexico-United States General Claims Commission in Parker v. United Mexican
States, which includes the following statement:

For the future guidance of the respective Agents, the Commission
announces that, however appropriate may be the technical rules of evidence
obtaining in the jurisdiction of either the United States or Mexico as applied
to the conduct of trials in their municipal courts, they have no place in
regulating the admissibility of and in the weighing of evidence before this
international tribunal. There are many reasons why such technical rules
have no application here, among them being that this Commission is
without power to summon witnesses or issue processes for the taking of
depositions with which municipal tribunals are usually clothed. The
Commission expressly decides that municipal restrictive rules of adjective
law or of evidence cannot be here introduced and given effect by clothing
them in such phrases as “universal principles of law”, or “the general
theory of law”, and the like. On the contrary, the greatest liberality will
obtain in the admission of evidence before this Commission with the view
of discovering the whole truth with respect to each claim submitted.**

315. It is certainly the case that international tribunals have considered themselves not to be
bound by the restrictive rules on admissibility of evidence frequently found in municipal
legal systems and have not considered themselves as under a duty to exclude evidence
which would not be admissible in the legal systems of the States appearing before them.
Nevertheless, the fact that international tribunals have rejected the application of restrictive
rules taken from national law does not mean that there is a rule of international law that
requires an international tribunal to admit all of the evidence which a party wishes to
submit. The passage from Parker, quoted above is a rejection of the technical rules of
national law (particularly in the common law countries) and a recognition that an
international tribunal may admit a much wider range of evidence, not an espousal of a

general rule that an international tribunal must admit whatever a party puts before it.

53 William A. Parker (U.S.A.) v. United Mexican States, General Claims Commission, Decision of 31 March 1926,
Reports of International Arbitral Awards, Vol. IV, p. 39(AAL-66).

103

316.

317.

318.

319.

320.

Even Colombia accepts that there are limits to the supposed rule of liberal admissibility,
since it maintains that this rule does not require the admission of evidence which has been
illegally obtained or which is covered by legal privilege (a concept which, according to
Colombia, applies only to correspondence with external counsel and not with in-house

lawyers).

The Committee considers that even with these qualifications, Colombia’s argument goes
too far. First, it ignores the broad discretion which the ICSID Convention and Arbitration
Rules accord a tribunal. Thus, Article 44 of the Convention provides that:
Any arbitration proceeding shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of this Section and, except as the parties otherwise agree, in
accordance with the Arbitration Rules in effect on the date on which the
parties consented to arbitration. If any question of procedure arises which

is not covered by this section or the Arbitration Rules or any rules agreed
by the parties, the Tribunal shall decide the question.

Rule 34, paragraph 1, of the ICSID Arbitration Rules provides that:

The Tribunal shall be the judge of the admissibility of any evidence adduced
and of its probative value.

An ICSID tribunal is thus entrusted with a broad discretion regarding the admissibility of
evidence which a party wishes to put before it. The Committee agrees with Colombia that
this discretion is not unlimited and that it is to be exercised reasonably but does not accept
that it is limited to excluding illegally obtained evidence or evidence protected by legal
privilege.

At the most basic level, the power of the Tribunal to control the procedure and timetable
of the proceedings extends to a power to exclude late-filed evidence, evidence which has
not been translated as required and evidence which in other respects does not comply with

procedural directives given by the tribunal.

More importantly, an ICSID tribunal is required to ensure that fundamental rules of
procedure are complied with. That duty includes ensuring the equality of arms. Indeed, it

is well established that the fundamental rules of procedure, a serious departure from which

104

321.

322.

323.

324.

is a ground for annulment, include “the principle of equal treatment of the parties”.*** It

follows that, in exercising its discretion under Arbitration Rule 34(1), a tribunal must have
regard to whether the admission or exclusion of evidence would affect the equality of the

parties.

In this respect a highly material factor in investor-State arbitration is that one party, the
State, has powers of compulsion not possessed by the other party, the investor. That is one
of the factors which distinguishes investor-State arbitration from both purely commercial

arbitration and State-to-State arbitration.

This was a central issue before the Tribunal in the present case. Colombia wished to submit
with its Counter-Memorial documents which had come into its possession as a result of the
exercise by Colombia of State powers to compel Prodeco to surrender to the SIC documents
taken from its servers by SIC officials. Glencore and Prodeco, on the other hand, had no
such power to compel any Colombian agency to surrender to them documents held by the

State.

The Tribunal recognized the inequality to which that situation gave rise and held that it was
entitled to exclude the disputed documents in order to prevent such inequality.** It is
important, however, to recall that the Tribunal did not rule out all possibility of the
documents being admitted into the record. On the contrary, it provided for a further round
of document production in which Colombia could seek production of the disputed
documents and the question whether or not any of those documents were covered by legal
or settlement privilege (which Colombia accepts would be a reason for their exclusion)
could be argued and decided. In addition, it provided for the possibility of their
introduction into the arbitration proceedings if they came to form part of the record in

criminal proceedings before a Colombian court.**°

The Committee sees no error, let alone an annullable error, in the way the Tribunal dealt

with matters in PO2. Contrary to what Colombia suggests, there is no rigid rule of

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID
Case No. ARB/09/1), Decision on Annulment of 29 May 2019, para. 164 (RAL-26).

PO2, note 67, above, at paras, 68-69 (AAE-1), quoted at para. 83, above.
See paras. 88-94, above.

105

325.

326.

international law requiring a tribunal to admit any documents not covered by privilege or
obtained by unlawful means. Instead, an ICSID tribunal has a discretion with regard to the
admission of evidence and a duty, in the exercise of that discretion, to take into account the
need to maintain equality between the parties, one of the most fundamental rules of due
process. As the committee in CEAC v. Montenegro explained “[i]t is, of course, a rule of
the utmost importance that each party must be given an equal opportunity to put evidence
before a tribunal”.**” Colombia quoted this passage in support of its argument that the
Tribunal had erred by excluding the evidence which Colombia had obtained through the
SIC’s use of coercive powers.*** The Committee, however, sees the passage from CEAC
as supporting the Tribunal’s decision that, where only one party could obtain information
by coercive means, to admit evidence thus obtained simply because that party was in

possession of that evidence would be contrary to the principle of equality of arms.

The Committee considers that it was well within the bounds of the Tribunal’s discretion
for it to determine that documents obtained by Colombia by the use of compulsory powers
(albeit wielded lawfully), for a different purpose and which did not form part of the record
in criminal proceedings in Colombia, should not be admitted outside the normal document

production process.

The references to fairness by the Tribunal in PO2 are not an indication of the abandonment
of rules in favour of an ex aequo et bono approach. The Committee accepts that an ICSID
tribunal is not entitled to decide a case (or procedural issues ancillary to a decision on the
outcome of the case) on an ex aequo et bono basis unless the parties so agree.**? What the
Tribunal was doing, however, was not setting aside the rules of procedure but applying

them. Fairness is central to the rule of equality of arms, so it is unsurprising to find the

CEAC, note 342, above, at para. 110 (AAL-3).
Mem. on Ann., para. 147.
In the words of the ICSID Secretariat Updated Background paper on Annulment of 5 May 2016 (AAL-24), para.
93:
Ad hoc Committees agree that a Tribunal’s complete failure to apply the proper law or
acting ex aequo et bono without agreement of the parties to do so as required by the ICSID
Convention could constitute a manifest excess of powers.

See also MTD, note 308, above, at para. 44 (AAL-28).

106

327.

328.

329.

330.

Tribunal referring to it, and an appreciation by the Tribunal of what is fair to each Party is

an essential element of the exercise of the discretion vested in it by Arbitration Rule 34.

Three other matters require brief reference in passing. First, Colombia draws attention to
the fact that the Tribunal, in paragraphs 16 to 18 and paragraph 19 of PO2, referred to the
fact that the seizure of the disputed documents took place between the service on Colombia
of the first and second notices of dispute. The Committee considers that this reference is
simply part of the Tribunal’s account of the factual background; there is no indication that
it affected the Tribunal’s decision and the Tribunal makes clear that the documents were

not seized for the purpose of using them in possible future arbitration proceedings.°°°

Secondly, Colombia maintains that it would be ridiculous if one State agency could not
seek assistance from another. That is doubtless true but the Tribunal’s decision does not
suggest otherwise. What the Tribunal dealt with in PO2 was not the propriety of the
ANDIE seeking assistance from the SIC but the narrower question of whether documents
coercively obtained by the SIC for one purpose could be used for the different purpose of
advancing Colombia’s case in the entirely separate arbitration proceedings. There is no
suggestion that the ANDJE could not have sought and obtained other assistance from the

SIC or any other State agency.

Lastly, Colombia suggests that the Tribunal wrongly reversed the burden of proof. The
Committee does not agree. Under normal principles, it was for Colombia to prove that
Glencore and Prodeco had acted unlawfully. PO2 does not change that position.**' It was,
of course, for Glencore and Prodeco to establish that any document was privileged but PO2
does not reverse the burden of proof on that either; the Tribunal deferred that question to

the extended production process.

The Committee thus concludes that PO2 involved no departure — let alone a serious
departure — from any fundamental rule of procedure and no excess of power on the part of

the Tribunal.

560 PQ2, note 67, above, at para. 62 (AAE-1).
561 The Tribunal reiterated that point at paras. 668-670 of the Award.

107

331.

332.

333.

Nor is the Committee persuaded by Colombia’s argument that the Award should be
annulled for failure to state reasons. The Tribunal’s reasons for its decisions in PO2 are
clearly stated and easy to follow. There is nothing incoherent or contradictory about them.
They address in detail the question which the Tribunal was required to answer and are in
no sense “frivolous” or irrelevant. Colombia may not find those reasons convincing but

that is not a reason for annulment under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention.

(3) Procedural Order No. 4 and its Aftermath: The Tribunal’s Ruling on
Privilege and its Application

Colombia criticises the Tribunal’s decisions on Glencore and Prodeco’s assertion of
privilege on two grounds. First, it contends that the Tribunal was wrong to hold that
privilege applied to communications between the companies and their in-house legal
counsel and maintains that such privilege extends only to communications with
independent external counsel. Secondly, Colombia argues that the Tribunal erred in
permitting counsel for the companies to certify whether or not individual documents met
the criteria for legal privilege and should have appointed a privilege inspector (referred to

by Colombia as a “conflict counsel’) to carry out this task.

(a) The Decision that Communications with In-House Counsel are to be

Treated in the Same Way as Communications with External Counsel
With regard to the first argument, Colombia maintains that the Tribunal did not apply the
applicable law. While Colombia accepts that the procedure before the Tribunal is governed
by public international law, it argues that, on the issue of privilege, international law
requires a renvoi to the law of the country within which the legal communication is situated.
In Colombia’s view, such a renvoi is required because the central question in determining
whether or not a document is privileged is whether those who created or requested that
document had a reasonable expectation of confidentiality. That expectation could only be
derived from, and shaped by, the law of the State in which the document was created. In
the present case, Prodeco’s lawyers were Colombian nationals working in Colombia and
all of the communications in question took place in Colombia. The Tribunal, it is said,
therefore committed an annullable error when it decided to apply public international law

rather than Colombian law.

108

334.

335.

336.

337.

562

563

564

The Committee can see the force of Colombia’s argument that the expectations which
underlie the concept of legal privilege are shaped by the relevant local law. In the end,
however, it is not persuaded that the Tribunal committed an annullable error regarding the

applicable law.

First, although Colombia presents what happened as a failure to apply the applicable law,
the Committee does not accept that that is the case. The Tribunal rightly identified
international law as the law governing the procedure before an ICSID tribunal. That was
also the position of both Parties.*°? Colombia’s complaint is that the Tribunal did not
accept that international law contains a renvoi to national law on questions of legal
privilege. Whether or not international law does indeed require such a renvoi is a question
about the content of international law. Even if the Tribunal was wrong (which the
Committee does not accept) to hold that international law did not require a renvoi to
national law, it would have been guilty of a misinterpretation or misapplication of the

applicable law, rather than a failure to apply that law at all.

Secondly, again assuming, arguendo, that the Tribunal erred in its decision about the
supposed renvoi, the Committee does not consider that this error would have been so
egregious as to be equivalent to a failure to apply the applicable law, and only an error on
such a scale could be a basis for annulment (see para. 232, above). Colombia has adduced
no authority in support of its contention that international law requires a renvoi to national

law where legal privilege is being asserted. Indeed, the only authorities directly in point,

563 564

the decisions in Vito Gallo®®’ and Reineccius°™ support the contrary proposition.

Thirdly, the Committee does not accept that the Tribunal erred in deciding the question by
reference to international law. Colombia’s argument rests purely on three propositions:
that legal privilege must depend upon the expectations of those concerned at the time that
the relevant documents were created, that those expectations are determined by the national

law of the country in which the relevant activities took place, and that international law

As indicated above (paras. 242-244), Colombia criticises PO2 on the ground that the Tribunal did not apply

international law exclusively but also considered Colombian law.

Vito Gallo, note 148, above, at para. 41 (RL-129). It should be noted, however, that the decision in that case was
in part motivated by the provision of Article 1131(1) of the North American Free Trade Agreement (“NAFTA”),
which is not applicable here.
Reineccius, note 180, above.

109

338.

339.

340.

341.

565

must therefore, as a matter of logic defer to that national law in order to decide whether the

documents in question are privileged.

The first proposition can be accepted up to a point; legal privilege is indeed closely bound
up with the expectations of those who seek or give legal advice, although it should also be
recognized that legal privilege serves community interests which may be distinct from

those of the client and lawyer.

The second proposition is less straightforward. It assumes that the relevant activities all
take place in one country. Especially given the nature of international investment, that may
not be the case. A manager from State A responsible for an investment in State B may
well take advice by email from a lawyer (whether in-house or external) in State C. It is
true that that was not what happened in the present case, where everything that was done
took place in Colombia and the lawyers were qualified in, and regulated by the law of,
Colombia. However, a search for the approach taken by international law to questions of

privilege cannot be wholly case-specific.

The really problematic proposition, however, is the third one. To assume that international
law defers to national law not only overlooks the limitations on the first two propositions,
it also ignores the essentially international character of ICSID arbitration and the fact that
an ICSID tribunal must ensure equality of arms in litigation between inherently unequal
parties — the State and the investor. The Committee has already considered the significance
of the fact that the State has available to it coercive powers which the investor lacks (see
paras. 320-330, above). There is also the consideration that national law may treat issues
of confidentiality differently when considering the relationship between the State and its
legal advisers, where issues of official secrecy may be material, and communications

between a private party and its counsel.*°

The Committee is not called upon to provide answers to these questions. It is enough to
note that they suggest that it is by no means self-evident that international law should, or
does, require a renvoi to national law on issues of privilege. In these circumstances, and

given that the only authorities produced which address the subject hold that privilege is

See, e.g., Vito Gallo, note 148, above (RL-129), where the State’s claim was based on concepts of Cabinet
confidence under national law.

110

342.

343.

344.

determined by international law with no requirement of a renvoi, the Committee considers
that the decision of the Tribunal that international law did not require it to apply Colombian
law cannot be regarded as an egregious misinterpretation or misapplication of the

applicable law.

In passing, it should be noted that the Tribunal reinforced its decision by reference to
Colombian law.*° Colombia criticises the analysis of Colombian law as based upon a
misreading of the one authority referred to by the Tribunal. The Committee considers that
this authority (an interview with two Colombian lawyers) is equivocal. It cannot, therefore,
conclude that the Tribunal was guilty of an obvious error. More importantly, even if it was
so guilty, that error related only to a law to which the Tribunal referred to confirm the

decision which it had already arrived at by the application of international law.

Colombia also advances a separate basis for challenging the Tribunal’s decision.
Accepting, arguendo, that the question whether privilege attached to communications with
in-house counsel falls to be determined by reference to international law, Colombia argues
that the Tribunal erred in finding that communications with in-house counsel are privileged
under international law. Colombia relies on the fact that the question is treated so
differently by different national legal systems. In this context, Colombia refers in particular
to the rejection by the Court of Justice of the European Union of the concept that

communications with in-house counsel are entitled to privilege.*””

The Committee accepts that practice regarding whether privilege extends to
communications with in-house counsel varies considerably between States. The question
before the Committee, however, is not whether there is an international law rule which
provides for privilege in those circumstances but whether the Tribunal’s conclusion that
such a rule exists was one which amounted to so gross a misapplication or misinterpretation
of international law that it should be regarded as an annullable failure to apply international

law at all.

566 PO4, note 72, above, at paras, 57-63 (AAE-9).
561 Akzo, note 425, above, at para. 74 (RL-116).

111

345.

346.

347.

348.

568,

In that respect, the Committee recalls that the Vito Gallo tribunal®* drew no distinction
between communications with in-house lawyers and those with external counsel and that
the Reineccius ruling*” expressly stated that privilege must be applied to both types of
communication. The Tribunal’s ruling in PO4 cannot, therefore be considered

unprecedented.

Moreover, the Tribunal, recognizing that the matter was not wholly settled, gave a coherent
and persuasive explanation for its decision when it held that to treat communications with
in-house counsel differently would be to “imply an unwarranted discrimination towards
parties that choose to be represented in investment arbitration, or that seek advice on
matters that may become relevant in investment arbitration, by in-house counsel”.*”” This
explanation has a particular resonance in the context of investor-State arbitration because
States regularly take advice from their own government lawyers (even if they later choose,
as here, to be represented in part by external counsel). If government lawyers, as in-house
counsel, are excluded from the ambit of legal privilege, then the respondent State may end

up being treated markedly less favourably than the investor.

In these circumstances, the Committee concludes that the Tribunal’s decision in PO4 that
privilege extended to communications with counsel irrespective of whether the counsel in
question were in-house or external cannot be regarded as an egregious misinterpretation or
misapplication of international law. The application to annul the award on this ground for

manifest excess of power is therefore rejected.

Nor can the Committee accept Colombia’s argument that the Tribunal was guilty of a
serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure. The fundamental rule of
procedure on which Colombia relies is the right to be heard and, in particular, the aspect of

that right which permits a party to submit evidence in support of its case. But, as the

Vito Gallo, note 148, above, para. 47 (RL-129). Colombia draws attention to the fact that two of the members of

the Tribunal in the present case (the President and Mr Thomas) were also members of the Vito Gallo tribunal.

The Committee does not attach any significance to that fact. Mr Thomas was appointed by Colombia and the
President by agreement of the Parties. Moreover, neither Party has shown any hesitation in citing before the
Tribunal cases in which members of the Tribunal were involved or in citing before the Committee cases in which
members of the Committee were involved.

5 Reineccius, note 180, above.
5 PO4, note 72, above, at para. 55 (AAE-9).

112

349.

350.

351.

ST

Committee has already held, the right to submit evidence is not unqualified. Both Parties
recognize that it excludes evidence which is privileged. Colombia’s argument is thus no
more than a restatement of its argument on manifest excess of power. If, as the Committee
has held, the Tribunal did not exceed its powers in determining that privilege under
international law extends to communications with in-house counsel, then the application

of that ruling cannot, in itself, be a departure from the right to be heard.

Finally, the Committee concludes that the Tribunal did not fail to state the reasons for its
decision. Its decision is explained in a coherent way and without contradiction. The
Committee will, however, consider below one aspect of this argument by Colombia,
namely that the Tribunal declined to address each of the 159 documents separately.*’! That
argument goes to the application of the decision in PO4 rather than to the issue of principle

decided in that PO.

(b) The Tribunal’s Decision not to Admit the Annex A Documents
In PO4 the Tribunal set out the conditions which it considered that a document had to meet
in order to qualify for legal privilege. Those conditions were:

- The document has to be drafted by a lawyer acting in his or her capacity
as lawyer;

- A solicitor-client relationship based on trust must exist as between the
lawyer (in-house or external legal advisor) and the client;

- The document has to be elaborated for the purpose of obtaining or
giving legal advice;

- The lawyer and the client, when giving and obtaining legal advice, must
have acted with the expectation that the advice would be kept
confidential in a contentious situation.*””

Colombia does not contest these criteria. It contends, however, that the Tribunal
committed an annullable error when it directed that the lead counsel for Glencore and

Prodeco should submit an affidavit indicating which of the documents in respect of which

Mem. on Ann., para. 321.

52 POA, note 72, above, at para. 54 (AAE-9), quoting Vito Gallo, note 148, above, at para. 47 (RL-129),

113

352.

353.

354.

573

314

315

they claimed privilege met those criteria,*” and when the Tribunal subsequently decided,
in respect of the Annex A documents, that:
It falls within the responsibility of Claimants’ counsel to determine which
documents are responsive to Respondent's petitions (as narrowed down by

the Tribunal) and which are subject to privilege. The Tribunal has no
reason to second guess these decisions.*"*

Colombia complains that no reasons were given for this decision. While the letter of 18
May 2018 is brief, that is hardly surprising in view of the urgency of the matter. The
correspondence between the Parties on this issue had concluded only on the previous day
and the hearing was due to start in ten days’ time.°”° The letter ended by stating that the
Tribunal would give its reasons at a later date. This it did in PO6, paragraphs 108-114.
While the reasons given there are succinct, the Committee considers that they are sufficient
to meet the requirements of Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention in that they enable

the reader to follow the Tribunal and understand the conclusion at which it arrived.

Colombia’s more substantial complaints are that the Tribunal committed a serious
departure from a fundamental rule of procedure and manifestly exceeded its powers by
declining to “second guess” the decisions of Glencore and Prodeco’s counsel regarding

whether the Annex A documents were responsive and whether they were privileged.

Colombia emphasizes three features of the situation which confronted the Tribunal and
which it argues were different from those which normally exist when a dispute regarding
privilege and responsiveness arises. First, it points to the fact that the documents were
already in the possession of Colombia and that there was, therefore, no more reason for the
Tribunal to accept Glencore and Prodeco’s view than to accept Colombia’s. Secondly,
with regard to whether the documents sought were responsive to the requests made,
Colombia argues that, having already seen the documents in question, it had formulated its
requests specifically with a view to obtaining production of those documents, so that there
could be no justification for holding that they were not responsive. Finally, the dispute

regarding the incorporation of the documents into the record of the proceedings arose in

P04, note 72, above, at para. 95 (AAE-9).

Letter from the Tribunal, 18 May 2018, reproduced at Award, para. 130.
See paras. 140 to 141, above.

114

355.

356.

the context of allegations of corruption and, according to Colombia, it was therefore
necessary that the claims that documents were privileged or not responsive be subjected to
scrutiny. According to Colombia, the Tribunal had the power to conduct that scrutiny by
ordering that the claims be reviewed by a privilege inspector or decided by the Tribunal
itself and it should not have declined to “second guess” the views of Glencore and
Prodeco’s counsel. Its failure to use that power was, Colombia maintains, both a manifest

excess of power and a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.

The Committee considers that it is useful to recall the situation which faced the Tribunal
in May 2018, when this issue was presented to it. First, the hearings were due to start on
28 May 2018. The Tribunal had made clear that it did not wish to postpone them*”° and
Colombia had stated that it would oppose any request for a postponement.*”” In the
correspondence of May 2018 neither Party suggested that the hearing be postponed.
Secondly, of the 24 documents listed in Annex A (all of which were among the Disputed
SIC Documents which Colombia had sought to introduce into the record with its original
Counter-Memorial), one had already been disclosed, legal privilege had been asserted in
respect of six, while the remainder were said by Glencore and Prodeco not to be responsive

to the requests of Colombia “as narrowed by the Tribunal in Procedural Order No. 3”.

Annex A, in the form in which it was attached to Colombia’s letter to the Tribunal of 11
May 2018, resembled a Redfern schedule. Each row began by identifying a document by
reference to the number it had been given when attached to the original text of the Counter-
Memorial. The next column identified the request (in Colombia’s document production
request which had been considered by the Tribunal in its PO3) to which Colombia claimed
the document was responsive. The schedule then identified the date of the document, the
person by whom it was sent and the recipients.*”* In the following columns, Colombia
indicated why it did not consider the document in question was covered by either legal or
settlement privilege. In a final column, Glencore and Prodeco explained why they

considered the document to be privileged (in the case of the six documents in respect of

516 Tyibunal’s email of 6 March 2018, note 153, above (AAE-26); see para. 102, above.
577 Colombia’s letter of 9 March 2018, note 154, above (R-273); see para. 106, above.
578 Except for certain spreadsheets which had been attached to an expert report submitted by Colombia.

115

357.

358.

359.

360.

which privilege was asserted) or stated (in the case of the remaining documents) that they

were not responsive.

The Committee considers that different issues arise with regard to the documents said by
Glencore and Prodeco to be non-responsive and those for which privilege was claimed.
The Committee will therefore examine the two categories separately, beginning with the
documents for which privilege was asserted. Although Annex A refers to both legal
privilege and settlement privilege, Glencore and Prodeco stated (in the final column of the
schedule) that settlement privilege was invoked only with regard to what was then
Document R-54. That document was later disclosed at the hearing (see para. 152, above),

where it entered the record as Document R-100.

It is not unusual for a tribunal to accept a certificate from the leading counsel of a party
that a particular document is subject to legal privilege (although the Committee appreciates
that this practice involves assumptions regarding supervision by a national court of local
ethical duties which is not always present in international commercial or investor-state
arbitration). While tribunals frequently refer such disputes to a privilege inspector, there
is no rule of procedure, let alone a fundamental one, which requires that, whenever there is
a dispute concerning such issues, a tribunal should appoint a privilege inspector or conduct

its own investigation into the responsiveness of a particular document.

Nor does the fact that Colombia had already seen the documents by itself persuade the
Committee that the Tribunal should have acted in a different manner. The whole point of
the decision in PO2 (which the Committee has found involved no annullable error) was
that Colombia, having obtained the Disputed SIC Documents through the intervention of a
State agency in the context of an entirely different investigation, should not benefit from
that fact in the context of the arbitration proceedings but instead seek the production of the
documents through the normal means. To hold that the “normal means” should be set aside
and a different procedure adopted merely because Colombia had seen the documents would

be completely counter to the principle underlying that decision.

Nevertheless, the fact that the documents were sought for the purpose of establishing a case

of corruption on the part of the investor puts the dispute regarding privilege in a different

116

361.

362.

363.

light. As both the Tribunal>” and the Committee**’ have made clear, “corruption is
morally odious” and a tribunal has a duty to investigate claims of corruption with rigour.
It is arguable that this duty requires that the use of the certification procedure, though
acceptable in other circumstances, should give way to a more searching inquiry, either
involving the use of a privilege inspector or the scrutiny of the documents by the tribunal

itself.

In the present case, a further cause for concern is that the one document for which privilege
was claimed that was later disclosed, namely what became Document R-100, does not

appear to meet the requirements for legal privilege as those were set out in PO4.

R-100 is a chain of emails (see paras. 184 to 185, above). Most of the emails were from
Ms Natalia Anaya, one of Prodeco’s in-house counsel, to Mr Nagle and other members of
Prodeco’s senior management. They report on meetings which Ms Anaya had with various
officials of Ingeominas. There are very brief replies from Mr Nagle. Ms Anaya does not
give legal advice, nor does Mr Nagle request it. In the last email in the chain, dated 15
May 2009, Ms Anaya reports a conversation with Carlos Gustavo Arrieta (Prodeco’s
external counsel) in the following terms:

I asked Carlos Gustavo to come with me to the meeting on Monday, but he

is busy all day. Anyhow, he told me that he will make all efforts to try to

change some meetings in order to go to Ingeominas, but he will confirm on

Monday. He said that he believes that more than legal pressure, it is
required political pressure through Claudia Jimenez or Mateo Restrepo.**'

In their comments in Annex A, Glencore and Prodeco stated that “Ms Anaya also conveys
to management the advice of Prodeco’s external counsel, Carlos Gustavo Arrieta, on the
issues relating to royalties and caducity addressed in the email chain”. The only part of
the email chain in which the views of Mr Arrieta are discussed is the passage quoted in the
preceding paragraph. The Committee does not consider that that passage conveys legal
advice, nor is there any part of the email chain which seeks legal advice. Nor is the claim

to settlement privilege in respect of R-100 easy to accept, as the email chain records

59 Award, paras, 663-664; see also para. 171, above.

580 See para. 308, above.

58! Email from Natalia Anaya to Gary Nagle and others, 15 May 2009, p. 3 (R-100).

117

364.

365.

366.

positions taken by Ingeominas and does not set out confidential details about the

negotiating position of Glencore and Prodeco.

In these circumstances, it is perhaps surprising that the Tribunal did not subject to closer
scrutiny the claim to legal privilege for the other five Annex A documents in respect of
which that privilege was claimed. Whether the failure to do so amounted to a departure
from a fundamental rule of procedure, however, is more debatable. In the end, the
Committee considers that it is unnecessary to take a decision on that question, because it
has concluded that, even if there was such a departure, it was not a serious one because
Colombia has not shown that the exclusion of those five documents could have affected

the outcome of the proceedings.

There are two reasons for that conclusion. First, the allegation that Glencore and Prodeco
obtained Mr Ballesteros’s agreement to the Eighth Amendment by corruption turns, as the
President of the Tribunal pointed out at the hearing, on the establishment of a link between
the payment to Mr Maldonado and Mr Garcia for the 3-hectare concession and the acts of
Mr Ballesteros. When this issue was discussed at the hearing, counsel for Colombia, who
had seen all of the documents for which privilege was claimed, only put forward R-100 as
proof of that link. The transcript records him as accepting that this was the only document
which went to that issue (see para. 154, above). Document R-100 was then admitted, put
to Mr Nagle in cross-examination, and considered at length by the Tribunal (see paras. 184
to 185, above). The Tribunal’s conclusion was that it did not establish that there had been
corruption. Since Document R-100 was the document which Colombia considered was the
evidence of the link between the 3-hectare payment and the decision by Mr Ballesteros,
there is no basis on which the Committee could conclude that this link could have been
established by the other five Annex A documents for which Glencore and Prodeco claimed
legal privilege.

Colombia complains that the Tribunal failed properly to analyse R-100 and the testimony
of Mr Nagle. However, a tribunal’s assessment of the evidence can seldom, if ever, justify
annulment of an award. The Tribunal considered the documentary evidence in detail and
it had the benefit (which the Committee has not had) of seeing and hearing Mr Nagle’s

testimony under cross-examination. The Committee does not accept that the Tribunal erred

118

367.

368.

369.

in its assessment of that evidence but, even if it had done so, the error would not have been

ground for annulment.

Secondly, the Tribunal concluded (see para. 183, above) that the fact that there had been
no prosecution of Prodeco or any of its officials and that no formal criminal investigation
into them had even been opened confirmed its finding that corruption had not been
established. That is particularly important, because the body responsible for opening such
a formal investigation, the FGN, had been in possession of all the Disputed SIC Documents
since September 2017. This point was put to counsel for Colombia at the hearing and his
reply was that “[a]7 investigation takes time”.**? The Committee has sympathy with this
observation. Nevertheless the fact remains that a public prosecutor, possessed of
documents which Colombia maintains constitute clear evidence of corruption, had not even
opened a formal investigation into the company accused of that corruption eight months

after it came into possession of those documents.

The importance of this consideration is reinforced by the letter which Colombia addressed
to the Committee on 9 September 2020. In that letter, Colombia informed the Committee
that “pursuant to the criminal complaint filed by the ANDJE in September 2017 ...
concerning the events surrounding the execution of the Eighth Amendment to the Mining
Contract between Ingeominas and Prodeco”, the FGN had “formally indicted two former
Ingeominas civil servants, Mr. Mario Ballesteros and Mr. Fernando Ceballos Arrollave,
with the charge of undue interest in the execution of a contract”. That indictment was
made in August 2020, i.e. almost three years after the ANDJE had given the FGN the
Disputed SIC Documents. There had been no prosecution or even formal investigation of
Prodeco or its officials and Colombia accepts that the charges against Mr Ballesteros and

Mr Ceballos are broader than allegations relating to the 3-hectare contract.**?

Like the Tribunal, the Committee recognizes that the standard of proof in a criminal case
is different from that in an international arbitration. Nevertheless, the absence of any action

against Prodeco or any of its officials (past or present) based upon the Disputed SIC

582 Tribunal Tr., Day 2, p. 364:17-18 (Professor Silva Romero).

583

Tr. p. 176:16-19 (Professor Silva Romero).

119

370.

371.

372.

373.

Documents suggests that those documents are not the evidence of corruption on the part of

Prodeco which Colombia contends.

Moreover, these two considerations have to be evaluated in the context of the Tribunal’s
findings regarding the repeated complaints by Prodeco about the grant of the 3-hectare
concession to Messrs Maldonado and Garcia, the fact that the payment was made openly
to them after deduction of tax and declared by Prodeco and the statement by the Minister
which suggested a different explanation of the 3-hectare transaction. In light of all of these
factors, the Committee concludes that it has not been established that, had the Tribunal
handled the question of privilege differently, the outcome of the case could have been
different.

One further matter needs brief attention. Before the Committee, Colombia raises the
argument that privilege does not apply where a party communicates with its lawyer with
regard to a future criminal act in which the lawyer is complicit.*** Colombia suggests that
this was an additional reason why the Tribunal should have rejected, or at least scrutinised
more carefully, the claim of privilege. However, the argument does not appear to have
been raised before the Tribunal and does not feature in the relevant columns of Annex A.

It cannot therefore constitute a basis on which the Award could be annulled.

The Committee thus concludes that the Tribunal’s handling of the privilege claim in respect
of the Annex A documents did not entail a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure. Since the Tribunal had the power to regulate the procedure before it and the
admissibility of evidence, in the absence of such a serious departure, the Tribunal cannot

be said manifestly to have exceeded its powers.

Turning to the question of whether the Tribunal should have taken a different approach to
the issue of responsiveness, the Committee notes that it is normally left to each party in an
arbitration to determine which documents in its possession are or are not responsive to a
request for production. It is rare for such decisions to be subjected to the scrutiny of the

tribunal.

584 Reply on Ann., para. 35, note 46, citing the decision of the United States Supreme Court in United States v. Zoilin,
491 U.S. 554, 21 June 1989 (AAL-101). See also Tr. pp. 170-172 (Mr Garcia Represa).

120

374.

375.

376.

In the present case, Annex A contained very little on the issue of responsiveness. In each
instance, Colombia merely asserted that the document was responsive and indicated the
request to which it was said to be responsive as those requests had been set out during the
document production phase which led up to PO3. Those requests had, however, been
narrowed down by the Tribunal in PO3, so the issue was whether they were responsive to
the requests as thus refined. Colombia maintained that:

When preparing its request for production of documents, Colombia was

already aware of the existence of categories of documents (such as the

Disputed Documents) that were material and relevant for its case and, thus,
framed its requests in such a manner as to cover such Documents.**°

As it has already said, with regard to the documents for which privilege was claimed (see
para. 359, above), to attach decisive weight to the fact that the Annex A Documents had

already been seen by Colombia would defeat the purpose of PO2.

Moreover, Colombia made no attempt to show how the documents which it sought fell
within the scope of the requests as they had been narrowed by the Tribunal in PO3. For
example, in PO3 the Tribunal narrowed Request No. 12 to:

Documents prepared and/or reviewed by Management between 23/03/2008

and 25/01/2010 for use in discussions with Ingeominas in support of

Prodeco’s proposals to amend the Mining Contract, including calculations,
scenarios, or economic models.°86

Yet Colombia’s description of documents R-121 and R-122, which it maintained were

responsive to Request No. 12, spoke of them as accounts by Ms Anaya of conversations

with Mr Espinosa (an adviser to Ingeominas).
In these circumstances, the Committee considers entirely understandable the Tribunal’s
decision that:

Claimants’ counsel has made its assessment of the responsiveness ... of the
Excluded Documents. Respondent has not provided sufficient grounds to
make the Tribunal doubt the correctness or good faith of that assessment.>*”

585 Colombia’s letter of 11 May 2018, note 193, above, at p. 4 (AAE-12).
586 Tyibunal’s Procedural Order No. 3, 4 January 2018, Annex B, p. 28 (AAE-36).
587 p06, note 73, above, at para. 113 (AAE-10).

121

377.

378.

379.

380.

In addition, the considerations set out in paras. 365-370, above, are also applicable here.
The Committee thus rejects the arguments that the Tribunal committed a serious departure
from a fundamental rule of procedure or a manifest excess of power in its approach to the

responsiveness question.

(4) Procedural Order No. 6: The Exclusion of the FGN Documents

The Tribunal’s letter of 18 May 2018 and PO6 also rejected Colombia’s request to
introduce into the record the documents held by the FGN which had been “filtered” by
Mr Enciso. These FGN Documents were all taken from the Disputed SIC Documents and
overlapped with the Annex A Documents but did not include everything which appeared
in Annex A while including documents which were not part of Annex A. The Tribunal
declined Colombia’s request on the ground that the FGN Documents had not been

marshalled in the course of investigative or prosecutorial activities as required by PO2.

The Tribunal distinguished between several different phases of criminal proceedings under
Colombian law: the initial Indagacién in which the FGN investigates the facts which have
come to its attention by a complaint; the Jnvestigacién, which begins with a formal
imputacién or indictment, and the Juicio of three successive hearings leading to a final
judgment.*** The Tribunal held that:
... the criminal proceeding launched by ANDJE’s Complaint is still in the
preliminary stage, and the FGN Documents are not part of a formal
acusacion in a Colombian criminal court proceeding. The Complaint has
—as far as the Tribunal is aware — not passed the First Phase, Indagaci6n,

and has not resulted in any indictment, which would eventually trigger the
Second Phase: Investigacion ...>*

Colombia objects that the requirement that the FGN’s inquiry must have proceeded to a
later stage had not been mentioned in PO2. However, in PO2 the Tribunal made clear that
it had not yet been fully briefed on the issue of incorporation into the record of documents
marshalled in a criminal investigation. The Committee considers that it was clear that the

Tribunal intended to reach a decision only after full briefing.

588 PO6, note 73, above, at paras, 53-55 (AAE-10).
58 P06, note 73, above, at para. 104 (AAE-10).

122

381.

382.

383.

384.

Colombia also emphasizes the status of the FGN as an independent prosecuting authority
under Colombian law. The Committee accepts that the FGN has that status and does not
see anything in the Award or PO6 which is inconsistent with an acceptance of that status.
However, the fact that the FGN is an independent authority does not alter the fact that its

inquiries had not progressed beyond the most preliminary stage.

The Committee can see nothing which begins to approach the level of annullable error in
the Tribunal’s handling of the FGN Documents. It heard argument from both Parties and
gave full reasons for its decision. Its conclusion that, since the FGN proceedings had not
progressed beyond the receipt by the FGN of the complaint from the ANDJE which was
accompanied by the Disputed SIC Documents, to admit the Documents would effectively
circumvent PO2 appears to the Committee entirely reasonable. The Committee has already
held that the decision of the Tribunal in PO2 not to admit documents which the ANDJE
possessed simply because they had been obtained by the SIC for a different purpose
through the use of State powers was neither a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure nor a manifest excess of power. It is therefore axiomatic that declining to admit
the same documents merely on the ground that the ANDJE had passed them to the FGN is

likewise perfectly defensible.

(5) The Cumulative Effect of the Tribunal’s Document Decisions

Before reaching a definitive conclusion on the documents issue, the Committee considers
that it is necessary to stand back and look at the overall picture of the Tribunal’s handling
of the dispute over whether documents initially seized by the SIC should have been

admitted into the record.

Since this is an annulment proceeding, the Committee cannot substitute its own discretion

for that of the Tribunal. All the Committee has to — or can — decide is whether:
(1) The Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by excluding the documents;

(2) The Tribunal committed a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure by

doing so; and

(3) The Tribunal failed adequately to state reasons for its decisions.

123

385.

386.

387.

388.

The third question — whether the Tribunal failed adequately to state its reasons — is easy to
answer. The Committee finds that, at each stage in the proceedings, the Tribunal gave
reasons for its decision which enabled the reader to understand what was being decided

and which were not contradictory, incoherent or frivolous.

The first and second questions are linked in that, on the facts of this case, unless the
Tribunal was guilty of a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, its conduct
would not have been a manifest excess of power. The Committee considers that the
Tribunal’s rulings on general issues of law — namely, whether a respondent is entitled to
rely on documents obtained for another purpose by the use of State coercive powers,
whether communications with in-house counsel are covered by legal privilege, and whether
documents should been admitted on the basis that they had been given to an independent

prosecutor — contravene no fundamental rule of procedure and involve no excess of power.

The only issue which remains, therefore, is whether the way in which the Tribunal gave
effect to those decisions, which resulted in the exclusion from the record of most of the
Disputed SIC Documents, entailed a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure. The Committee has concluded that it did not do so. While Colombia complains
that its right of defence was seriously handicapped by the exclusion which deprived it of
the evidence which would have proved the existence of corruption on the part of Glencore
and Prodeco, the fact remains that the document on which Colombia placed greatest
emphasis was admitted into the record and failed to convince the Tribunal of the truth of
Colombia’s allegations. In addition, the remaining documents have, after a lapse of three

years, led to no proceedings against Glencore, Prodeco or any of their officials.

Accordingly, the Committee dismisses the application for annulment insofar as it is based

on the decisions to exclude documents from the record.

124

VII.

389.

390.

THE ILLEGALITY ISSUE

THE POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES
() Colombia

As an alternative and additional line of argument, Colombia submits that the Award should
be annulled on the basis of the illegality of the alleged investment. It raises this line of
argument as applicable even if the Tribunal’s decisions in PO2, PO4 and PO6 are assumed
to have been irreproachable.*”° Indeed, Colombia submits that the evidence which was
ultimately included in the record of the case — if understood “in accordance with the
necessary inferences to be drawn” — was sufficient to compel the conclusion that Glencore
and Prodeco’s investment was tainted by illegalities and that the Tribunal accordingly

lacked jurisdiction over the dispute.*?!

Instead, the Tribunal reached the opposite
conclusion in a decision which Colombia argues gives rise to two grounds for annulment:
on the one hand, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its power by exercising jurisdiction in
circumstances where it had none; and, on the other hand, the Tribunal’s findings of fact
were so egregious and irrational as to constitute a failure to state reasons and a manifest

- 2
excess of power.*”

Colombia interprets Articles 2 and 4(1) of the BIT as circumscribing its consent to arbitrate
so as to exclude any investment not made in accordance with the laws and regulations of
Colombia.** Colombia argues that this interpretation, whether or not based on the explicit
language of the BIT, is consistent with the general consensus in international law that
tribunals “cannot exercise their jurisdiction over illegal, illicit, or improperly acquired
investments”.*°+ Colombia therefore maintains that a tribunal’s exercise of jurisdiction

ratione materiae over an illegally obtained investment would constitute an obvious excess

Mem. on Ann., para. 345.
Mem. on Ann., para. 348.
Tr. p. 71:16-21 (Professor Silva Romero); Mem. on Ann., para. 349.
Mem. on Ann., para. 352.
Mem. on Ann., para. 353.

125

391.

392.

600

601

602

603

604

of its powers.** In addition, in circumstances where a tribunal’s excess of jurisdiction is

manifest, an annullable error would be established.*”°

For these reasons Colombia asserts that the Committee must conduct a “searching
analysis” of whether or not Glencore and Prodeco’s investment was tainted by illegality,
thereby depriving the Tribunal of jurisdiction.*°” Moreover, Colombia adds, such an
analysis must lead to the conclusion that the alleged investment was illegally obtained.***
On the one hand, Colombia maintains that the evidence on the record was sufficient for the
Tribunal to have drawn the “appropriate inference” that the Eighth Amendment was
tainted by corruption.*” On the other hand, Colombia argues that the evidence shows that
the Eighth Amendment was secured on the basis of fraudulent misrepresentations made by

Prodeco.°?

In this context, Colombia refers to the “highly suspicious” facts surrounding the sale of the
3ha plot. Colombia asserts that the inflated price of the land, the timing of its sale and the
identity of the parties to that contract were an “obvious indicium of corruption”.°! In
addition, Colombia claims that the ultimate production of exhibit R-100 at the oral hearing
placed a “veritable smoking gun” before the Tribunal.” Colombia refers to that document
to show that Prodeco’s CEO had “explained — even bragged” that Mr Ballesteros’
favourable treatment of Prodeco had been obtained as a result of the 3ha transaction.°
Colombia does not accept the alternative explanation that Mr Nagle offered for the content
of his email, submitting that his testimony to this effect was “preposterous” and maintains
that the contents of the email “cannot be explained without raising further questions and

doubts” as to the legality of the Eighth Amendment. °*

Mem. on Ann., para. 354.
Mem. on Ann., para. 354.

Mem. on Ann., para. 355.

Mem. on Ann., para. 355.

Mem. on Ann., para. 358.

Mem. on Ann., para. 379; Reply on Ann., para. 293.
Mem. on Ann., paras. 357-600.

Mem. on Ann., paras, 358-359.

Mem. on Ann., para. 359.

Tr. pp. 72:22-73:2 (Professor Silva Romero).

126

393. In the face of this evidence, and in keeping with the established investment law approach
to cases where at least a prima facie case for corruption is established, Colombia maintains
that the Tribunal ought to have dispensed with the burden of proof on Colombia to establish
its corruption allegations. It not only declined to do so in the circumstances of this case,
Colombia complains, but also refused to draw any adverse inference against Glencore and
Prodeco as a result of their failure to produce the Disputed SIC Documents despite
Colombia’s “herculean efforts” to marshal them into the record.°> Colombia claims that
the Tribunal thereby erected an “insurmountable presumption against” the presence of
corruption, ultimately resulting in its erroneous exercise of jurisdiction over Glencore and

Prodeco’s illegal investment.°”°

394. Colombia also points to Prodeco’s internal reports as evidence that Glencore and Prodeco
deliberately, and in bad faith, withheld geological, technical, and pricing information from
Ingeominas and manipulated the data that it relied on to justify the “purported economic
necessity” of the Eighth Amendment.®’ These documents, according to Colombia, prove
that Prodeco’s true assessment was that the Eighth Amendment was not in fact necessary
for an increase in production at the Calenturitas Mine to have been feasible.°* That
assessment, Colombia argues, stands in “stark contrast” to what Prodeco told Ingeominas
during their negotiations toward the conclusion of the Eighth Amendment.° Colombia
adds that Glencore and Prodeco have yet to address these inconsistencies, and have not
explained “how and why” Colombia would have agreed to the Eighth Amendment without

having been convinced of the economic need for it.°!°

5 Mem. on Ann., para. 363.

6 Mem. on Ann., paras. 360, 364.
7 Mem. on Ann., para. 379; Reply on Ann., para. 293.
8 Tr, p, 74:3-6 (Professor Silva Romero); Mem. on Ann., para. 379, note 494, referring to NPV Calculation
Summary - 2008 Life of Mine Plans June Schedules (G&P0001160) of October 2009, NPV Summary Tab (R-
305.1); Xstrata ple, Circular and Notice of Extraordinary Meeting of 2 February 2009, p. 32 (R-303) (“An
expansion of production of export thermal coal to 12 Mipa is planned to be completed by 2013. {...] This may
increase production to approximately 14 Mipa.”); and Colombia's Opening Statement before the Tribunal, slides
48, 52, 53 (AAE-14).

Mem. on Ann., para. 379; Reply on Ann., para. 293.

6! Colombia’s Opening Statement before the Committee, note 391, above, slide 95 (AAE-38); Tr. p. 74:11-12, 23-

25 (Professor Silva Romero).

609

127

395.

396.

397.

398.

Colombia argues that the Tribunal egregiously, irrationally, and incoherently disregarded
key indicia of the illegality before it. It maintains this position in regard to both its
allegation of the “obvious corruption” underlying the investment, as well as its allegation
of Prodeco’s bad faith conduct and misrepresentations made to secure the Eighth

Amendment.®!!

First, concerning Glencore and Prodeco’s alleged corrupting of Mr Ballesteros, Colombia
argues that the Tribunal either totally “e/ided” or simply “brushed over” several red flags
of corruption.°!? Colombia argues, for example, that the Tribunal refused properly to
analyse the allegations made by “multiple” Ingeominas civil servants that Mr Ballesteros
had exercised “undue pressure” to secure their agreement to the Eighth Amendment.°?
Colombia submits further that the Tribunal “turned a blind eye to corruption” by accepting
Mr Nagle’s “highly implausible explanations” of the content of exhibit R-100, despite the
fact that “many of these explanations consisted themselves in admissions of influence
peddling”. Indeed, Colombia submits, Mr Nagle conceded that Prodeco had “yieldfed] to

the greenmail”.6'4

Secondly, Colombia maintains that the Tribunal failed rationally to analyse many key facts
relating to Glencore and Prodeco’s bad faith and do/o in obtaining the Eighth Amendment
by fraudulent misrepresentations.°!> According to Colombia, the Tribunal “ignored” clear
evidence of illegality, such as Mr Nagle’s admission that Prodeco had made “gross
omissions during negotiations”.°'® Additionally, Colombia submits that the Tribunal relied
on facts that were “patently false, and knowingly so” in order to reach the conclusion that

Prodeco had not acted in bad faith during negotiations.°!”

This approach to the evidence led the Tribunal to a manifest excess of power by asserting

jurisdiction despite what Colombia maintains was the illegality of the investment. In

61 Mem. on Ann., paras. 367-368.
612 Mem. on Ann, paras. 369-382.
613 Mem. on Ann., paras. 369-370.
614 Mem. on Ann., para. 373.

615 Mem. on Ann., para. 376.

616 Mem. on Ann., para. 377.

617 Mem. on Ann., para. 381.

128

addition, Colombia contends that the Tribunal’s explanation of its decision was so flawed

as to involve a failure to state reasons.

(2) Glencore and Prodeco

399. Glencore and Prodeco do not agree that the Tribunal mistreated the evidence of corruption
and misrepresentation raised by Colombia.°!* They characterise Colombia’s Application
in this respect as an attempt to relitigate its allegations of fact, and assert that that type of
enquiry is not permissible under the ICSID Convention annulment regime.*!? Annulment
proceedings, Glencore and Prodeco submit, “are not intended as vehicles to revisit” a

tribunal’s findings of fact.°?°

400. Nevertheless, Glencore and Prodeco add that the Tribunal’s finding of fact were absolutely

correct and Colombia’s allegation of corruption was “fanciful” and “opportunistic”.©!
This, they argue, is confirmed by the fact that Colombia itself has taken no domestic
prosecutorial action against Prodeco in respect of allegations of corruption raised for the
first time only once the arbitration had commenced — some seven years after the alleged

corruption took place.”

401. Responding to the assertion that the Tribunal failed to state reasons, Glencore and Prodeco
argue that Colombia’s allegations of corruption or misrepresentation were “thoughtfully
and comprehensively” addressed by the Tribunal.°” They recall the applicable standard,
requiring that the Tribunal’s assessment would have to be “so irrational that no reasonable
decision-maker could have come to the same conclusion”, and argue that no objective
observer could conclude that that standard was met by the Tribunal’s treatment of the

evidence in this case.°*

S18 ej. on Ann., para. 89.

619 C-Mem. on Ann., para. 101; Tr. pp. 78:16-79:13 (Mr Blackaby).
620 Tr, p. 78:14-18 (Mr Blackaby).

© Tr. pp. 78:14-15, 79:4-7, 80:14-15 (Mr Blackaby).

2 Tr. p. 80:16-24 (Mr Blackaby).

3 Rej, on Amn.,, para. 89; C-Mem. on Ann., para. 131.

4 Rej. on Ann., para. 89.

129

402.

403.

404.

405.

2s

626

07

628

THE ANALYSIS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee considers it necessary to begin with three preliminary observations. First,
Colombia states that it advances its case on the Illegality Issue as one which is wholly
independent of the Documents Issue. As Colombia puts it, even if the Committee does not
annul the Award on account of the exclusion of the illegality documents, “[b]ased on the
facts on the record, understood in accordance with the necessary inferences to be drawn,
the Tribunal should have reached the conclusion that Claimants’ purported investment was

tainted by corruption and other illegalities and declined jurisdiction” .°>

At times, however, Colombia loses sight of the distinction between the two issues and seeks
to boost its case on the Illegality Issue by relying on what it perceives as the Tribunal’s
wrongful decision to exclude documents.®° Colombia cannot, however, repackage its case
on the documents in this way. Since Colombia has advanced its case on the Illegality Issue
on the basis that the Award should be annulled because the Tribunal reached the wrong
conclusion on a jurisdictional issue on the record before it, the Committee must assess this
part of Colombia’s case on the basis of that record alone. This part of Colombia’s case for
annulment cannot be strengthened by allusions to documents which did not form part of

that record.
Secondly, Colombia’s case for annulment on the Illegality Issue is advanced in two ways:

(a) that there was a manifest excess of power when the Tribunal assumed jurisdiction,
since the Tribunal had no jurisdiction unless the investment had been made in
accordance with Colombian law; and

(b) that “the Tribunal failed to state reasons and manifestly exceeded its powers by

reaching egregious and irrational findings of fact”.°*”

In practice, however, these two arguments are inseparable. There is no dispute that, if the
Eighth Amendment had been obtained unlawfully, the investment would have fallen
outside the scope of Article 2 of the BIT and the Tribunal would therefore have lacked

jurisdiction. That was expressly accepted by the Tribunal°* and is not contested by

Mem. on Ann., para. 348.
See, e.g., Reply on Ann., paras. 294-295.
Mem. on Ann., para. 349.

Award, paras. 665, 825.

130

Glencore and Prodeco. Nor is there any dispute about what, as a matter of law, would
render the investment illegal. The dispute is rather one of fact — was the Tribunal entitled,
on the evidence before it, to reach the conclusion that the investment had not been illegally
obtained? Colombia’s first argument, that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by
asserting jurisdiction, is thus dependent on its second argument, that the Tribunal

manifestly exceeded its powers by reaching “egregious and irrational findings of fact”.

406. Thirdly, it is important in this context to be particularly clear about the nature and extent
of the Committee’s powers. Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention permits an ad hoc
committee to annul an award only for a manifest excess of power. The Committee shares

the view of the ad hoc committee in Duke Energy:

An ad hoc committee will not therefore annul an award if the tribunal’s
disposition on a question of law is tenable, even if the committee considers
that it is incorrect as a matter of law. The existence of a manifest excess of
powers can only be assessed by an ad hoc committee in consideration of the
factual and legal elements upon which the arbitral tribunal founded its
decision and/or award based on the parties’ submissions. Without
reopening debates on questions of fact, a committee can take into account
the facts of the case as they were in the record before the tribunal to check
whether it could come to its solution, however debatable. Is the opinion of
the tribunal so untenable that it cannot be supported by reasonable
arguments? A debatable solution is not amenable to annulment, since the

excess of powers would not then be “manifest”.°°

407. In support of its argument that the Committee must conduct a searching examination of the
evidence, Colombia cites the reference in paragraph 158 of the decision of the ad hoc
committee in Caratube to errors of fact which are egregious and weighing of evidence
which is irrational. However, that paragraph needs to be quoted in full:

Factual findings and weighing of evidence made by a tribunal are outside
the powers of review of an annulment committee, except if the applicant can
prove that the errors of fact are so egregious, or the weighing of evidence

so irrational, as to constitute an independent cause for annulment. The
respect for tribunals’ factual findings is normally justified because it is the

®9 Duke, note 303, above, at para. 99 (AAL-14).

131

408.

409.

410.

630

3

632

633,

tribunal who controlled the marshalling of evidence, and had the
opportunity of directly examining witnesses and experts.°°

Moreover, it is important to note that the Caratube committee, in declining to annul the
award in that case, referred to the fact that “the Tribunal carefully analyzed and weighed

the available evidence, and explained in some detail the reasons for its findings”!

The Committee agrees with this analysis. It is not enough that the Tribunal’s findings of
fact and weighing of the evidence are open to debate. For the Award to be annullable on
the ground of manifest excess of power, the finding that the investment had not been
unlawfully obtained must have been so egregious that it was one which no reasonable
tribunal could have reached.

The Committee considers that Colombia has failed to cross this threshold. The Tribunal

632 and

carefully analysed the evidence in the record relating to the allegation of corruption’
that relating to the allegation of bad faith.°? The Committee can find no flaw in that
analysis, let alone an annullable error. Colombia disagrees with the Tribunal’s conclusions
regarding Document R-100 and the evidence of Mr Nagle but the Committee considers
that the Tribunal was perfectly entitled to reach the conclusions which it did and which it
painstakingly set out and explained in the Award. The Tribunal carefully examined all of
the “red flags” in respect of both corruption and bad faith and weighed all of the evidence
in the record before concluding that the totality of the evidence did not justify a finding of

either corruption or bad faith.

Like the Caratube tribunal, the Tribunal explained in detail the reasons for its findings.
That detail is frequently not reflected in Colombia’s critique. For example, Colombia

maintains:

. the Tribunal flouted a further patent indicium of corruption: the
exorbitant sum of USD 1.75 million paid by Claimants for the infamous 3ha
Contract. Despite the exclusion of the Illegality Documents, this
extravagant and inexplicable expenditure should have been analysed in
depth and ascribed great weight, rather than cast aside. Instead, the

Caratube, note 308, above, at para. 158 (RL-184).
Caratube, note 308, above, at para. 159 (RL-184).
Award, paras. 596-747.
Award, paras. 751-858.

132

411.

412.

413.

64

635

636

637

Tribunal reached the bizarre conclusion that, because the money was paid
into Colombian accounts, and not into a shell company located in a tax
haven, the activities must have been above board.**

But the Tribunal did analyse this issue in depth and it was not “cast aside”. On the contrary,
the Tribunal devoted a substantial part of its award to analysing the payment, its size and
circumstances.°** Nor did it find that the sum paid did not indicate corruption merely
because “the money was paid into Colombian accounts, and not into a shell company
located in a tax haven”.©° What the Tribunal emphasized was the fact that Glencore and
Prodeco had been open about the payment. In addition to the fact that they had not sought
to conceal it by using an offshore account, the Tribunal also pointed to the fact that they
had withheld tax, declared the payment in their accounts, declared it to Ingeominas and
had continued to complain (without receiving any answer from the various agencies of the
Colombian Government to whom those complaints were addressed) about what they saw

as “greenmail”.

Colombia argues that, faced with allegations of corruption, the Tribunal was wrong to insist
that the burden of proof was on Colombia. In support, Colombia cites the discussion by

Dr Betz of the award in Spentex v. Uzbekistan, in which she commented:

The Tribunal noted that issues of bribery are notoriously difficult to prove
in arbitration and that ‘there is an inherent danger to dispose of the problem
by resorting to strict evidentiary rules that may make proving or disproving
corruption practically impossible’. It found that the traditional rule of each
party having to prove the facts on which it relied coupled with a heightened
standard of proof of ‘clear and convincing evidence’ made it almost
impossible for a party to prove bribery.°"

But the Tribunal in the present case did not rest its conclusions on the burden of proof but
on an analysis of the whole of the record before it. Moreover, it is worth noting that

Dr Betz continued (immediately after the passage quoted above):

Mem. on Ann., para. 374.
See, especially, Award, paras. 611-626.
Mem. on Ann., para. 374.

K. Betz, Proving Bribery, Fraud and Money Laundering in International Arbitration, Cambridge University
Press, 2017, p. 131 (RL-149).

133

But it also noted that shifting the burden of proof once a party had produced
some corruption indications and then demanding ‘“clear and convincing
evidence” for the absence of corruption from the other party’ amounts to a
‘probatio diabolica or de facto impossibility to disprove the existence of
corruption’ for the latter.

414. Nor is the Committee persuaded that the Tribunal committed an error, still less a manifest
excess of power, in not attaching weight to an alleged conflict of interests on the part of a
lawyer who, Colombia alleges, advised both Ingeominas and Prodeco, or by not drawing
an adverse inference of corruption from the approach taken by Glencore and Prodeco to

the issue of document production.

415. The Committee thus rejects the application to annul the Award for manifest excess of
power. The application based on an alleged failure to state reasons also fails since the
Tribunal gave a clear and coherent statement of its reasons which is neither contradictory
nor frivolous. Those reasons clearly did not convince Colombia but that is not the test

which the Committee has to apply.

VIII. COSTS

416. Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention provides:

In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as the
parties otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the parties in
connection with the proceedings, and shall decide how and by whom those
expenses, the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the
charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre shall be paid. Such decision
shall form part of the award.

417. This provision, which applies mutatis mutandis to annulment proceedings by virtue of
Article 52(4) of the ICSID Convention, gives the Committee discretion to allocate all costs
of the annulment, including attorney’s fees and other costs, between the Parties as it deems

appropriate. *

418. The Committee considers that, in the absence of exceptional circumstances, a party which

has been wholly unsuccessful in an application for annulment — as the Applicants in this

8 See also ICSID Arbitration Rule 47(1)(), applied to annulment proceedings by ICSID Arbitration Rule 53.

134

419.

420.

421.

422.

case have been — should normally bear the entire costs of the proceedings (including the
fees and expenses of its members and the costs of the Centre) and the reasonable costs of
the successful party. The Committee can see no exceptional circumstances in the present

case which would warrant a different decision.

Costs fall into two categories: (i) the costs of the proceedings themselves, namely the costs
incurred by the Centre, and the fees and expenses of the Members of the Committee and
the Special Assistant to the President; and (ii) the costs of representation incurred by the

Parties, together with the expenses which the Parties have incurred.
The total costs of the proceedings (in US dollars) are as follows:-
ICSID Administrative Fees: USD 84,000.00
Fees and expenses of Members of the Committee:
Christopher Greenwood: USD 61,741.05
Doug Jones: USD 49,351.92
Bertha Cooper Rousseau: USD 42,153.15
Total: USD 153,246.12
Fees and Expenses of the Assistant (Ms Elphick): USD 14,562.50
Other Direct expenses: USD 20,775.89
Total: USD 272,584.51

The above costs have been paid out of the advances made by Colombia, as the Party
seeking annulment, in accordance with Regulation 14(3)(e) of the Administrative and
Financial Regulations. Colombia has advanced a total of USD 527,667.91. Colombia shall
bear the entirety of these costs, any sum remaining from the advances will be repaid by

ICSID to Colombia.

With regard to the costs incurred by the Parties for legal representation and associated

expenses, the Parties submitted details on 24 November 2020, as follows:

Colombia:

135

423.

424,

Costs of representation USD 751,137.97%?
Expenses USD 1,326.09

Glencore and Prodeco:
Costs of representation: USD 1,248,680.86
Expenses: USD 23,676.32.

The Committee considers that Colombia, having been unsuccessful in its application to
annul the Award should reimburse Glencore and Prodeco for the costs of representation
and expenses which they have incurred. The Committee notes, however, that Glencore
and Prodeco’s costs of representation are significantly greater than those of Colombia.
Both Parties were represented by major international law firms. The Committee can see
no reason why Glencore and Prodeco should have incurred costs which were more than
half as much again as those incurred by Colombia. In these circumstances, it considers
that it is equitable to award Glencore and Prodeco a sum of USD 1,000,000.00 in respect

of costs and expenses.

DISPOSITIF

For the reasons set forth above, the Committee decides as follows:

qd) The Application for Annulment of the Award of 23 December 2019 is dismissed in
its entirety. In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(3), the stay of
enforcement of the Award automatically terminates with effect from the date of the

present Decision;

(2) Colombia shall bear the entire costs of the proceedings, including the fees and
expenses of the Members of the Committee and of the Assistant, in the amount of

USD 272,584.51;

69 This includes the sum of Colombian pesos 31,739,830 for the costs of the ANDJE personnel involved. This sum
is converted into US dollars as USD 8,714.06.

136

(3) Colombia shall, within sixty days of the date of dispatch of this Decision, pay to
Glencore and Prodeco the sum of USD 1,000,000.00 in respect of the latter’s costs

of representation and expenses.

137

[signed]

 

Professor Doug Jones Ms Bertha Cooper-Rousseau
Member of the Committee Member of the Committee
Date: 18 September 2021 Date:

Sir Christopher Greenwood
President of the Committee

Date:

138

[signed]

 

Professor Doug Jones Ms Bertha Cooper-Rousseau
Member of the Committee Member of the Committee
Date: Date: 21 September 2021

Sir Christopher Greenwood
President of the Committee

Date:

139

 

Professor Doug Jones Ms Bertha Cooper-Rousseau
Member of the Committee Member of the Committee

Date: Date:

[signed]

Sir Christopher Greenwood
President of the Committee

Date: 21 September 2021

140

