INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E.
v.

Canada

(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

PROCEDURAL ORDER NO. 10
DECISION ON GTH’S REQUEST OF 21 NOVEMBER 2019

 

Members of the Tribunal
Prof. Georges Affaki, President of the Tribunal
Prof. Gary Born, Arbitrator
Prof. Vaughan Lowe, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Lindsay Gastrell

8 December 2019

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

Procedural Order No. 10

BACKGROUND

On 1 June 2018, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3 (“PO3”), which set forth the

Tribunal’s decision on each of the Parties’ respective requests for document production.

On 18 March 2019, GTH wrote to the Tribunal, challenging the completeness of Canada’s

document production. GTH made a number of requests for relief, including the following:

in the interest of procedural fairness and propriety, as well as parity
of arms, in the event that Canada produces additional documents as
aresult of its earlier failure to satisfy its disclosure obligations, GTH
respectfully requests permission to submit additional factual
exhibits on the record either as part of the post-hearing submission
process (if any) or as standalone exhibits.!

After Canada had the opportunity to respond, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 9
(“PO9”) on 25 March 2019. The Tribunal decided, inter alia, that:

c. Canada is ordered to produce forthwith on a rolling basis all
responsive documents that are available in a draft version regardless
of the materiality of the difference between the draft and the
produced final version.

d. GTH’s request for leave to produce additional evidence after the
hearing is dismissed absent a sufficiently particularized application.”

On 21 November 2019, GTH submitted a letter to the Tribunal seeking leave to submit

nine new documents (the “New Documents”) into the record (the “Application”). GTH

attached the New Documents as Appendices A to I to the Application.

On 24 November 2019, the Tribunal acknowledged receipt of the Application and provided
instructions to the Parties. The Tribunal noted that GTH had referenced being prejudiced
by not being able to make arguments or to cross examine witnesses on the New Documents.

In this regard, the Tribunal stated:

' GTH’s Letter of 18 March 2019, p. 5.
2 Procedural Order No. 9, 4 16.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

Il.

Procedural Order No. 10

The Tribunal is concerned about allegations of impairment of a
Party’s right to fully state its case. Claimant is invited to specify by
no later than 27 November 2019 whether the Application is limited
to seeking leave to submitting the nine appendices A to I on the
record or is also meant to include any further requests.

In its message, the Tribunal also invited Canada to respond to the Application, noting that

Canada should:

reply precisely and in detail to Claimant’s contention in paragraph
7 of the Application as to whether Respondent (a) has withheld
metadata relating to produced documents, and (b) continues to
withhold documents that should have been produced pursuant to the
Tribunal’s order in PO 9.

By email of 26 November 2019, GTH replied to the Tribunal’s query and confirmed that

“the Application is limited to seeking leave to submit Appendices A to I into the record as

new Factual Exhibits and does not seek other relief.”

On 4 December 2019, Canada submitted its response to the Application, together with

Annex A and Appendices A to F.

SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

The Parties’ positions on each New Document are set forth in Annex A. In this section, the
Tribunal briefly summarizes the Parties’ more general statements regarding Canada’s

document production.

A. GTH’s Position

GTH states that from 17 September to 31 October 2019, Canada produced over 400
additional documents which should have been produced more than a year ago pursuant to
PO3. According to GTH, there are material differences between the drafts recently
produced and the final versions on the record. In addition, GTH alleges that “documents
now produced contain later (more final) versions of some documents previously produced

by Canada — suggesting that Canada may have selectively produced earlier drafts of

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

Procedural Order No. 10

documents without producing the later or final iterations.”? GTH also expresses concern

that Canada continues to withhold documents in violation of PO9, because it “is

inconceivable that there are no drafts” of certain documents that are on the record.*
11. According to GTH:

Canada’s illegitimate withholding of responsive documents has
precluded GTH from citing to highly relevant documents in its
pleadings, referring to them in oral submissions at the hearing, and
cross-examining Canada’s witnesses on their content. [A] number
of the withheld documents directly contradict Canada’s submissions
and the oral evidence of Canada’s witnesses at the hearing. In
particular, GTH has been denied the opportunity to cross-examine
Mr. Peter Hill and Mr. Iain Stewart with respect to the context and
content of these documents and their own conflicting testimony.
There can be no doubt that GTH has been prejudiced by Canada’s
extraordinary delay in disclosing the documents only now produced
in its Supplementary Productions.°

B. Canada’s Position

12. Canada objects to GTH’s Application, arguing that the New Documents contain no new
information and viewing the Application to be “simply an effort by the Claimant to re-

argue its case.”°

13. Canada submits that it has acted in good faith to comply with its document production
obligations. In particular, the only reason that certain documents were not produced prior
to the hearing as part of Canada’s production pursuant to PO3 was that “Canada believed
in good faith, based on conversations with Claimant’s counsel, that the parties had agreed
not to produce working drafts of responsive documents for which a final or more recent

version existed.”

3 GTH’s Letter of 21 November 2019, 7 (GTH’s emphasis).
+ GTH’s Letter of 21 November 2019, 47.

5 GTH’s Letter of 21 November 2019, § 8.

© Canada’s Letter of 4 December 2019, § 4.

7 Canada’s Letter of 4 December 2019, 4 5.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

TIL.

Procedural Order No. 10

According to Canada, after PO9 was issued and the Parties reached an agreement on the
scope of production, Canada “fully complied in good faith with its production
obligations.”® Canada rejects GTH’s suggestion that Canada is in violation of PO9 because
it has not produced drafts of certain documents. For Canada, it is not surprising that drafts,
to the extent they ever existed, were not retained. Moreover, Canada argues that drafts of

exhibits C-449, R-447 and R-464 were in fact produced, contrary to GTH’s assertion.

Canada also confirms that it did not selectively produce drafts or inappropriately withhold
metadata. Given the level of review required to determine whether a document is the final
version, the fact that Canada may have made an error identifying the latest version cannot

be considered evidence of a lack of diligence or good faith.

ANALYSIS

In PO9, the Tribunal noted Canada’s unqualified statement of compliance with all of its
document production obligations stated in its letter of 15 March 2019.° The Tribunal
further notes Canada’s reiteration of the same unqualified statement in its letter of 4

December 2019 addressed to the Tribunal, stating:

Canada already confirmed in communications with Claimant’s
counsel that Canada is not improperly withholding further drafts or
metadata and that it has complied with PO 9.'°

The Tribunal finds it neither to be appropriate nor efficient for it to enter the debate as to
what counsel might have discussed amongst themselves or have believed in good faith.
This includes in particular the telephone call amongst counsel on 2 August 2019 and the
exchange of emails that followed that call.'! The Tribunal has ordered in PO9 that Canada
shall produce forthwith on a rolling basis all responsive documents that are available in a

draft version regardless of the materiality of the difference between the draft and the

® Canada’s Letter of 4 December 2019, § 10.

° POS, 411.

© Canada’s Letter of 4 December 2019, 4.

1! Appendices E and F to Canada’s Letter of 4 December 2019.

4

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

Procedural Order No. 10

produced final version.'? This order remains effective. GTH’s bringing to the attention of
the Tribunal, for the first time, in its letter of 21 November 2019 that the ordered rolling
production only began on 17 September 2019 has not been preceded by protests by GTH
as to the unwarranted lapse of time since PO9 had been issued six months ago. In fact, the
emails exchanged between August and October 2019, produced in Appendices E and F to
Canada’s letter of 4 December 2019, without surprise reflect the collaborative, civil
approach to solving the issue that is expected of counsel in this arbitration. The Tribunal
infers that the production took place in accordance with a timeline that came as of no
surprise to GTH. Whilst GTH now claims that it “has been prejudiced by Canada’s
extraordinary delay in disclosing the documents”,'? the Tribunal can only observe that
GTH seems to have been content to allow the production process to roll over as agreed
with Canada without seeking any injunctive relief of the Tribunal or other forms of
investigation of the reason for the delay in the ordered production. Had GTH considered
Canada’s production process to amount to an “extraordinary delay” as is being now
claimed, the Tribunal would have expected more diligence of GTH in denouncing a
potential breach of PO9 and its consequences on GTH’s case. None of that has happened

before GTH’s Application.

In the same vein, the Tribunal need not go into the debate of whether the allegedly withheld
drafts — assuming in-scope drafts have been withheld by Canada from the ordered
production — fall within the scope of transitory records the destruction of which is
authorised in the policy documents adduced by Canada as Appendices A and B. PO9 is
clear in ordering that responsive documents in draft form must be produced. Intimations
and expressions of scepticisms, however compelling they may appear to the intimater, are
insufficient to rebut Canada’s unqualified statement that it is not improperly withholding

drafts and that it has complied in good faith with its production obligations.'*

2 pO9, 13.
'3 GTH’s Letter of 21 November 2019, 4 8.
4 Canada’s Letter of 4 December 2019, $4, 10.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

20.

21.

22.

Procedural Order No. 10

In Annex A, the Tribunal reviews the arguments averred by each Party in support or in

opposition of the admission of each of the New Documents into the evidential record.

More generally, with respect to all the New Documents, the Tribunal refers to paragraph

16.5 of Procedural Order No. 1, which provides:

Neither party shall be permitted to submit additional or responsive
documents after the filing of its respective last written submission,
unless the Tribunal determines that exceptional circumstances exist
based on a reasoned written request followed by observations from
the other party.

In the present circumstances, the Tribunal accepts that GTH could not have submitted the
New Documents earlier, as their rolling production was only completed on 31 October
2019.'> The Tribunal also considers that GTH has provided a sufficiently reasoned request

showing that the standard in paragraph 16.5 is met.

DECISION

The Tribunal’s decision with respect to each of the nine New Documents is contained in
Annex A. The Tribunal considers that the difference underscored by GTH in its
Application as concerns each of the New Documents compared with the corresponding
document that is on the record speaks for itself, and Canada’s reply in Annex A to its letter
of 4 December 2019 stands as a rebuttal. As a result, the Tribunal stands ready to resume
its deliberations suspended by the submission of the Application. That said, the Tribunal is
open to the Parties potentially agreeing on a limited briefing schedule to discuss the impact
of the New Documents on their case. Any such agreement should be indicated to the
Tribunal by 16 December 2019, stating the filing dates of the respective submissions.

Absent an agreement, each Party is invited to make separate submissions by the set date.

'S GTH’s Letter of 21 November 2019, 4 2.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)
Procedural Order No. 10

On behalf of the Tribunal,

[signed]

Prof. Georges Affaki
President of the Tribunal
Date: 8 December 2019

Procedural Order No. 10

ANNEX A

 

A | Applying Time
Restrictions to
Spectrum Caps:
Decision
Summary, 26
September 2012

Original
Exhibit
Reference:
R-489

 

 

 

This document includes the
following wording that was
amended in the version that
Canada previously disclosed
(on the record as R-489):

Page 2:

“We recommend retaining the
spectrum caps for a period of
five years from the conclusion
of the auction. This timeframe
reduces the attractiveness of
the licences for speculators yet
permits market adjustments
within a reasonable period.”
“Any longer than five years
would impede the ability of
players to adjust to the rapid
transformation in technology
and could impede the efficient
functioning of markets.”

 

In the context of spectrum caps for the 700
MHz auction, this document confirms that
Canada was well aware of the importance of
a viable exit strategy for prospective New
Entrants after a finite 5-year period, and the
corresponding need to set a finite restriction
on the transfer of spectrum licenses to
encourage New Entrants to invest.

This directly supports Claimant’s case and
contradicts Canada’s defenses: see Claimant’s
Memorial on the Merits and Damages, 29
September 2017 (“GTH MoMD”), {¥ 104-
109, Part VII.A.2.a.i; Claimant’s Reply on
Merits and Damages & Counter-Memorial on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 5 November
2018 (“GTH RoMD”), Part IIB, § 277:
Claimant’s Post-Hearing Submission, 24 May
2019 (“GTH PHS”), §¥ 17(a), 17(c)(iii),
20(d), 22(a), 22(c).

Claimant has been prejudiced by not being
able to make arguments or cross-examine
witnesses on this document at the hearing (in
particular, Mr. Hill and Mr. Stewart) to
confirm that Canada was well aware that
potential exit strategies were important to
bidders pre- auction. See, e.g., Day 4 Tr. 35:9-
36:8, 36:2537:2, 201:1-21 (Hill); Day 4 Tr.
227:18-228:3 (Stewart); Day 5 Tr. 113:20-
114:15 (Stewart).

 

(1) The draft adds nothing substantively new to the
record. Language similar to the extract cited by the
Claimant and relating to the time frame of the
spectrum cap and the objective of deterring
speculation and supporting competition in the
wireless telecommunications market is found in R-
489, p. 1, last two bullets, p. 2, first and last bullets.

(2) In the event that the Tribunal allows this draft onto
the record, Canada notes that the draft is of limited
relevance and does not support the arguments
presented by the Claimant. The document discusses
the introduction of measures to support
competition in the 700Mhz auction (which took
place at the end of 2013), not measures introduced
in the 2007 AWS auction. Therefore, the inferences
that the Claimant draws from the document are
questionable. While the document discusses the
rationale for the introduction of measures to support
competition in the 700Mhz, including a spectrum
cap, and whether a spectrum cap should be
accompanied by a time limit, it does not
acknowledge the importance of exit strategies for
auction participants as the Claimant suggests.
Instead, the document confirms that the objectives of
the measures are “to limit non-competitive
behaviour, reduce opportunities for speculation
and ensure that Canadians benefit from a
competitive market.”

(3) The Claimant already had the opportunity to
cross-examine Canada’s witnesses on the issue of the
Government's consideration of exit options for AWS
auction participants. The Claimant questioned Mr.
Hill on exit options. [Day 4, pp. 157:16-158:6 (Hill)].
Professor Lowe did so as well: and the Claimant
chose not to re-exam Mr. Hill after those questions.

 

 

The Tribunal notes the
difference between
Appendix A produced
by GTH and R-489.
Whether the difference
is substantial, relevant,
or is already conveyed
ina document that is on
the record is a matter for
the Tribunal to decide
pursuant to its discretion
to accord the
appropriate weight to
the evidence. Appendix
A is admitted into the
evidential record as C-
466.

 

 

Procedural Order No. 10

ANNEX A

 

[Day 4, p. 213:21-22 (Hill)]. The Claimant also had
the chance to question Mr. Stewart on exit options.
[Day 4, p. 227:13-24 (Stewart)]. Thus the Claimant's
contention that it has somewhat been prejudiced by
the non-communication of this document is ill-
founded. The Claimant also had the opportunity to
cross- examine Canada’s witnesses on the rationale
for a five-year moratorium and what would happen
afterwards. It should be clear by now that what is at
issue is not the time period for which the moratorium
was imposed, but whether Canada made a specific
and unambiguous representation that after five years,
the Minister would approve all applications to
transfer set-aside licences as long as the licensees met
the eligibility criteria.

 

 

 

Industry Canada,
Clarification
Questions to the
Policy
Framework and
Amendments and
Supplements to
the Licensing
Framework for
the Auction for
Spectrum
Licences for
Advanced
Wireless Services
and other
Spectrum in the
2GHz Range
[draft], 19
February 2008

 

This document includes the
following wording that does
not appear in the public
version of the document (on
the record as C-062):

Page 9:

“In addition, the condition that
anew entrant hold a licence
for five years before
transferring to a non-new
entrant is merely to be
consistent with the intent of the
set-aside provision in this
licensing process.”

 

This document confirms that Canada
intended the 5-year transfer restriction to be a
finite period after which set-aside spectrum
licenses could be sold to Incumbents.

This directly supports Claimant’s case and
contradicts Canada’s defenses: see GTH

MoMD, {ff 104-109, 328-30; GTH RoMD, {ff

37-39, 282-85; GTH PHS, {ff 2(b), 22-23.

In addition, this document directly
corroborates the testimony of Mr. Connolly
that the 5-year transfer restriction was put in
place to facilitate new entry and to deter
arbitrage of spectrum licenses: see Day 3 Tr.
137:19-138:5, 142:22143:7, 149:1-149:13,
152:23153:6, 181:12-182:4 (Connolly).

Claimant has been prejudiced by not being

(1) The draft adds nothing substantively new to the
record. Many documents on the record address the
objectives of the five-year moratorium. Exhibit C-
004 states that Canada’s objective in setting the
policy framework for the AWS Auction was to
enhance and sustain competition beyond the
Incumbents. Peter Hill addressed this issue in his
witness statement [RWS-Hill 2, {ff 17-18] and the
Claimant had the opportunity to cross-examine him.
On the objectives of the 2008 AWS Auction, the set-
aside, and of the five-year moratorium, he explained
in cross-examination: “[w]e were always looking for
--and this is from the early days, internal
deliberations in late 2006 and 2007, through our
public consultations -- we were looking for
competition beyond the incumbents” [Day 4, p.
91:13-17 (Hill)] and “[t]he intention was to bring
iti We went

 

 

able to make or Mr. | about to the three i
Hill on this document at the hearing, who in with the full intention to see that through.” [Day 4,
attempted to discount similar p. 117:7-9 (Hill)].

contemporaneous evidence on the record. See
Day 4 Tr. 111:20-112:14, 117:1-11, 122:18-

 

(2) In the event that the Tribunal allows this draft

 

The Tribunal notes the
difference between
Appendix B produced
by GTH and C-062.
Whether the difference
is substantial, relevant,
or is already conveyed
in a document that is on
the record is a matter for
the Tribunal to decide
pursuant to its discretion
to accord the
appropriate weight to
the evidence. Appendix
B is admitted into the
evidential record as C-
467.

 

 

Procedural Order No. 10

ANNEX A

 

Original Exhibit
Reference: C-062

123:16, 124:13-125:17, 146:20-147:3, 154:2-
14, 165:18-166:14 (Hill).

onto the record, it should be given little to no
evidentiary weight. This document is a working draft,
situated in the middle of 17 versions of this
document, and several of the later versions, including
the final public version communicated to the public,
do not contain this language.

(3) Even more importantly, the language cited by the
Claimant and deleted from later drafts does not
support the conclusions drawn by the Claimant. The
sentence does not discuss what would happen at the
end of the five-year moratorium and does not state
that sales to Incumbents would be allowed. It merely
refers to the intent of the set-aside provisions. As
Canada has established, the objective of the AWS
auction, including the set-aside, was to sustain and
enhance competition in the wireless
telecommunications market.

 

 

 

Industry Canada,
Wireless
Telecommunicatio
ns Sector: Update
and Implications,
c. November
2012

Original Exhibit
Reference: C-262

 

This document includes the
following wording that does
not appear in the version that
Canada previously disclosed
(on the record as C-262):

Page 1:

“While all requests to transfer
spectrum licences must be
approved by Industry Canada,

the department has no transfer

conditions relating to
competition, aside from the
Syear restriction on selling
setaside AWS spectrum to
incumbents, which begins to
expire in late 2013.”

This document also includes
the following wording that

 

 

This document confirms that Canada effected
a fundamental change in 2013 by adding
undue spectrum concentration as a new factor
in the review of transfer applications in order
to block the sale of Wind Mobile to
Incumbents after the 5-year transfer
restriction had expired.

This directly supports Claimant's case and
contradicts Canada’s defenses: see GTH
MoMD, Parts IV.C, V.C.2.d; GTH RoMD,
Parts ILB, IV.A.2.a; GTH PHS, {ff 16,

19(e), 20(c), 23(b), 23(d).

Claimant has been prejudiced by not being
able to make arguments or cross-examine key
witnesses on this document at the hearing,
particularly as it directly contradicts Mr.
Hill’s and Mr. Stewart’s testimony that

 

(1) The draft adds nothing substantively new to the
record as it is dated November 2012 and appears to
be a slightly earlier version of C-258 dated December
7, 2012, which does in fact contain similar, or
almost identical, language to the text cited by the
Claimant.

The language in C-258 and the issues raised by the
Claimant in relation to Exhibit C were addressed at
length at the hearing. They were addressed by Mr.
Stewart in his second witness statement [RWS-
Stewart-2, §§ 7-8]. As the Claimant acknowledges, it
has already cross-examined Mr. Stewart and Mr.
Hill on the expiry of the five-year restriction and
what, if any, additional restrictions on spectrum
transfer existed at the time. [Day 4, pp. 139:2-25
(Hill); Day 5, p. 52:16-23 (Stewart)]. For instance, in
response to the Claimant’s questions about
Ministerial discretion, Mr. Stewart explained that
neither the Department nor the Minister could confer

 

The Tribunal notes the
difference between
Appendix C produced
by GTH and C-262.
Whether the difference
is substantial, relevant,
or is already conveyed
ina document that is on
the record is a matter for
the Tribunal to decide
pursuant to its discretion
to accord the
appropriate weight to
the evidence. Appendix
C is admitted into the
evidential record as C-
468.

 

10

 

Procedural Order No. 10
ANNEX A

 

 

 

 

was amended in the version
that Canada previously
disclosed (on the record as C-
262):

Page 5:

“All spectrum licence transfers
require the approval of IC.
However, aside from the from
the 5-year restriction on
selling set-aside AWS spectrum

competition and undue spectrum
concentration were bases upon which Industry
Canada could object to a license transfer prior
to 2013. See, e.g., Day 4 Tr. 133:4-14 (Hill);
Day 5 Tr. 72:7-24, 74:13-

19, 75:917 (Stewart).

In particular, Claimant would have presented
such evidence to cross-examine Mr. Stewart
with respect to his credibility and unfounded
allegation that references to “additional
Ministerial di ” (or similar )

“additional discretion” on the Minister, since only the
legislature has this power. [Day 5, p. 33:3-20
(Stewart)]. The Claimant asked Mr. Stewart about
considering spectrum concentration prior to the
Transfer Framework; he answered: “{t]he policy
framework going back to 1998 and 2001 around
spectrum auctions indicates one of the background
considerations for the department is spectrum
concentration.” [Day 5, p. 18:13-19 (Stewart)]. He
also explained: “the macro policy documents about
how we approach auctions both indicate that spectrum,

ion i itimate area of concern.” [Day

 

to b the

currently has no additional
restrictions on spectrum
transfers. In contrast with the
number of potential spectrum
transfer requests in the near
term, very few (5) mobile
spectrum transfers have been
requested in the last 10 years,
despite the department's stated
policies of encouraging
secondary market transactions.
Spectrum that was effectively
reserved for new entrants in
1995 was transferred to
incumbents in the early 2000s
with the department's
approval.”

“The Competition

Bureau has never

objected to a spectrum
transfer request.”

Page 6:

“IC would not be in a position
to object to spectrum licence
transfers that would reduce

 

in these contemporaneous documents were
his own “error[s].” See, e.g., Day 5 Tr. 27:6-
24, 36:2245:25, 76:8-18 (Stewart).

 

isa
5, p. 20:12-15 (Stewart)]. Moreover, when the
Claimant questioned Mr. Hill on this issue, he
explained: “in fact, spectrum concentration was a
consideration in one of the earlier transfer requests
that the department received”. [Day 4, p. 135:8-12
(Hill)]. He noted that Industry Canada considered
spectrum concentration in providing advice to the
Minister on the Telus-Clearnet transfer. [Day 4, p.
17 (Hill)]. Furthermore, Mr. Stewart was
questioned at the hearing about the roles of the
Competition Bureau and Industry Canada. He
explained in response to questions from Professor
Lowe that while the Competition Bureau could
review proposed mergers or acquisitions involving
spectrum licence transfer requests for their
competitive impacts, this was an “imperfect tool to
rely upon” because it was “not going to protect us
against spectrum accumulation.” [Day 5, pp. 137:10-
139:21] Thus, he noted, in response to questions from
Professor Born, that the Department developed the
Transfer Framework partly to inform the market that
it would brief the Minister on spectrum transfer
requests having regard to spectrum concentration and
competition. [Day 5, pp. 133:3-137:9 (Stewart)] The
Claimant chose not to question Mr. Stewart further
following these answers. [Day 5, p. 142:21-23
(Stewart)]

 

 

 

 

 

Procedural Order No. 10

ANNEX A

 

 

 

 

the limited pool of spectrum
available to new entrants and
increase incumbents’ spectrum
dominance. {TENSE
The Competition Bureau
would be the sole body that
could review spectrum licence
transfer requests with
competitive impacts in mind,
with any objections involving
a lengthy legal process.”

 

 

The Claimant’s suggestion that language in the
November 2012 draft similar to the one in C-258
could impeach Mr. Stewart’s credibility lacks any
basis. As explained during the hearing, the
“additional discretion” language was an error and
was later deleted in the briefing note from Marta
Morgan and John Knubley to the Minister of
Industry, dated January 2013, C-262. [Day 5, pp.
43:18-45:2: 73:14-75:7 (Stewart)].

(3) In the event that the Tribunal allows this draft onto
the record, Canada notes that the draft fails to support
the Claimant’s argument that the Transfer
Framework was a fundamental change of the
regulatory framework. Thetestimonies of Mr. Hill
and Mr. Stewart in response to the Claimant’s
questions on this issue confirm that the Transfer
Framework’s specification of spectrum
concentration as a factor that the Department would
consider in reviewing licence transfer requests was:
(i) consistent with the objectives of the 2008 AWS
Auction; (ii) in line with some of the Department’s
past practices; and

(iii) within the Minister’s statutory authority. In fact,
Mr. Connolly agreed that spectrum concentration is a
valid factor for the Minister to consider in reviewing
transfer applications. [Day 3, p. 154:5-25 (Connolly)]

Finally, the draft’s statement that “very few (5) mobile
spectrum transfers have been requested in the last 10
years” undermines the Claimant’s assumption
that the Department’s past practice meant
Industry Canada would allow the sale of a New
Entrant to an Incumbent. [Claimant’s Memorial,
314]. As Mr. Hill explained when the Claimant
questioned him on the Department’s concerns over
the moratorium’s ending, Industry Canada adopted
the Transfer Framework partly to “deal with the
potential of a number of applications coming to us all
at once; i dented that we had never

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Procedural Order No. 10

ANNEX A

 

seen before.” [Day 4, p. 140:8-17 (Hill). Understood
in this context, the draft’s statement supports
Canada’s position that it was not reasonable to
assume that the Minister would necessarily approve
all license transfers as long as the applicant met the
eligibility criteria.

 

 

 

Letter from Iain
Stewart to Marie-
Josée Thivierge
[draft], 7
November

2012

Original Exhibit
Reference: C-336

 

This document includes the
following wording that was
amended in the version that
Canada previously disclosed
(on the record as C-336):

Page 1:

“Previously,
telecommunications common
carriers were required to be
Canadian owned and

controlled, limiting the ability
of smaller carriers and new
entrants to access the capital
they need to grow and
compete. The objective of the
legislative reform was to
improve access to capital for
these companies that need it
most. The proposed
transaction between Orascom
and Globalive is the type of
investment that was envisioned
when the legislative change
was proposed and is line with
the Government's broader
competition and investment
goals.”

 

This document confirms that Canada
intended to permit transactions like GTH’s
Voting Control Application when it relaxed
foreign ownership restrictions.

This directly supports Claimant’s case and
contradicts Canada’s defenses: see GTH
MoMD, Part V.C.1; GTH RoMD, Parts
ILG, IV.A.3; GTH PHS, 4 58.

Claimant has been Prejudiced by not being
able to make ke
witnesses on this document at the hearing,
particularly Ms. Aitken with regard to
Claimant’s contention that the foreign
ownership restrictions were relaxed in order
to permit transactions like GTH’s Voting
Control Application. See, e.g., Day 5 Tr.
324:13-20 (Aitken).

 

(1) The draft adds nothing substantively new to the
record. The paragraph in this draft that GTH
identifies as containing key new or amended text is
composed of three sentences. The first sentence
starting with the word “previously” was moved in
paragraph 2 of the final version of the document
produced as exhibit C-336 where it can be found in
its entirety.

While the second sentence starting with the words
“The objective” is not found in the final version it is
clear hibit C-336 that the obj f the June
2012 amendments was to improve the ability of
smaller carriers and new entrants to access capital.
This fact is also non-controverted in this arbitration
and a substantially similar sentence may be found in
the news release announcing the legislative
amendment (exhibit C-023): “This will help telecom
companies with a small market share access the
capital they need to grow and compete”.

The third and final sentence in the identified draft
paragraph, starting with the words “The proposed
transaction” was replaced in the final version with
asubstantially similar sentence in the first paragraph:
“From a telecommunications policy perspective, the
proposed transaction is consistent with the goals of
the recent reform to telecommunications foreign
investment restrictions and the government's stated
policy objectives for the industry.” At the hearing, the
President of the Tribunal specifically brought this
sentence to the attention of Canada’s witness, Mr. Iain

 

13

 

The Tribunal notes the
difference between
Appendix D_ produced
by GTH and C-336,
Whether the difference
is substantial, relevant,
or is already conveyed in
a document that is on the
record is a matter for the
Tribunal to decide
pursuant to its discretion
to accord the appropriate
weight to the evidence.
Appendix D is admitted
into the evidential record
as C-469.

 

 

Procedural Order No. 10

ANNEX A

 

Stewart, and asked him to elaborate on it. [Day 5, pp.
140:18-142:19 (Stewart)]. The Claimant could
similarly have questioned Mr. Stewart on this point
but chose not to.

This final sentence is also substantially similar to a
statement Ms. Jenifer Aitken makes in her second
witness statement: “In fact, the information my staff
and I received from the Strategic Policy Sector of
Industry Canada before the initiation of the national
security review was that GTH’s proposed acquisition
of voting control of Wind Mobile was consistent with
Canada’s telecommunications policy objectives.”
[RWS-Aitken-2, 6]. At the hearing, the President of
the Tribunal asked Ms. Aitken to confirm her
statement, which she did. [Day 5, p. 323:12-324:20
(Aitken)]. The Claimant could similarly have
questioned Ms. Aitken on this point but chose not to.

(2) The Claimant’s contention that it has somewhat
been prejudiced by the non- communication of this
document is therefore ill- founded.

In the event that the Tribunal allows this draft onto
the record, its content does not support the
Claimant’s argument that Canada conducted a
national security review of GTH’s proposed
acquisition of voting control of Wind Mobile to
advance telecommunications policy objectives. To
the contrary, the document establishes that GTH’s
proposed investment in Wind Mobile was consistent
with Canada’s telecommunications policy objectives
and hence there would have been no reason to
invoke the pretext of a national security review to
advance those objectives.

 

 

 

Memorandum
from John
Kaubley to

 

This document includes the
following wording that does

not appear in the version that
Canada previously disclosed

 

This document confirms that in order to have
the authority to block spectrum transfers on
the basis of undue spectrum concentration,
Canada had to revise the conditions of the

 

(1) The draft adds nothing substantively new to the
record. The issues raised in the extract from the

draft contained in the third column are addressed by
Peter Hill in his Witness Statements. He explains

 

14

 

The Tribunal notes the
difference between
Appendix E produced
by GTH and C-279.

 

 

Procedural Order No. 10

ANNEX A

 

 

 

Minister of
Industry,
Framework
Relating to
Transfers,
Divisions and
Subordinate
Licensing of
Spectrum
Licences for
Commercial
Mobile
Spectrum, 3
June 2013

Original
Exhibit
Reference: C-

 

(on the record as C-279):
Page 1:

“In order to give regulatory
force to the provisions of this
framework, it is necessary to
add these provisions both the
conditions of licence for
affected commercial mobile
spectrum licences, as well as
to Industry Canada’s
Spectrum Licence Procedures,
CPC 2-123, Licensing
Procedure for Spectrum
Licences for Terrestrial
Services.”

 

set-aside spectrum licenses and in particular
the condition in the licenses relating to
transfer.

This directly supports Claimant’s case and
challenges Canada’s case: see GTH MoMD,
242, Part VIL.A.2.b; GTH RoMD, Part
IV.A.2; GTH PHS, $f 17(4), 23(b)(i),
31(a)(i).

Claimant has been prejudiced by not being
able to make arguments or cross-examine
key witnesses on this document at the
hearing, particularly as it contradicts Mr.
Hill’s and Mr. Iain Stewart’s testimony that
competition and undue spectrum.
concentration were bases upon which
Industry Canada could object to a license
transfer prior to 2013. See, e.g., Day 4 Tr.
133:4-14 (Hill); Day 5 Tr. 72:7-24, 74:13-
19, 75:917 (Stewart). This document would
further have been put to Mr. Hill in relation
to his testimony that revising license
conditions was an “extreme situation” and
would constitute an “extraordinary
circumstance.” See Day 4 Tr. 39:14-20,
48:18-23, 117:18118:3, 198:17-199:20;
201:1-21 (Hill).

 

that Industry Canada amended the Licensing
Circular and the Conditions of Licence of pre-
existing commercial mobile spectrum licences to
reflect the Transfer Framework. [RWS-Hill, § 131;
Annex A: TELUS Communications Company v.
Attorney General of Canada et al., Affidavit of
Peter Hill (Oct. 25, 2013), 67]

(2) As referenced above in section C, the Claimant
had ample opportunity to present arguments and
cross-examine Canada’s witnesses with respect to
competition and spectrum concentration as bases
upon which the Minister could object to a transfer. In
addition, the ability of the Minister to amend
conditions of licences has also been extensively
addressed by the parties and the witnesses in their
submissions and at the hearing [Day 2, p. 11:2-16
(Canada’s Opening); Day 3, p. 160:8-11 (Connolly);
Day 4, p. 48:13-23 (Hill); Day 9, pp. 207:21-25,
208:22-209:6 (Canada’s Closing)].

(3) In the event that the Tribunal allows this draft onto
the record, Canada notes that the language relied upon
by the Claimant does not discuss the existing
authority of the Minister to approve or deny spectrum.
transfers nor does it allow for the conclusion
proposed by the Claimant. The language simply
addresses the manner in which the transfer
framework would be implemented/ operationalized.

As explained at the hearing, the amendments to the
conditions of licences were introduced as a matter of
administrative procedural fairness and because of
the deemed transfer provision. [Day 2. p. 72:4-13
(Canada’s Opening), Day 8, pp. 210:15-211:4
(Q&A session)]. By amending the COLs, which
incorporate by reference the CPC, the framework
would be enforceable against the licensees and
government could ensure compliance with the

framework through enforcement tools under the

 

15

 

Whether the difference
is substantial, relevant,
or is already conveyed
in a document that is on
the record is a matter
for the Tribunal to
decide pursuant to its
discretion to accord the
appropriate weight to
E is admitted into the
evidential record as C-
470.

 

 

Procedural Order No. 10

ANNEX A

 

licence and the Radiocommunication Act. The
Department amended the COLs to incorporate the
elements of the Transfer Framework related to
“deemed transfers”. [RWS-Hill, Annex A: TELUS
Communications Company v. Attorney General of
Canada et al., Affidavit of Peter Hill (Oct. 25,
2013), § 67-69]. As for the explicit clarification in
the Transfer Framework that the Minister would
consider spectrum concentration in licence transfer
reviews, Mr. Stewart states that the Department
considered it advisable to first consult licensees on
this criteria. [RWS-Stewart-2, 7]. Yet it was
always within the scope of the Minister’s statutory
discretion to consider spectrum concentration when
reviewing transfer requests, as noted in row C
above.

 

 

 

Industry Canada,
Wireless
Telecommunication|
s Sector: Update
and Implications
draft], 3
December 2012

Original Exhibit
Reference: C-258

 

This document includes the
following wording that was
amended in the version that
Canada previously disclosed
(on the record as C-258):
Page 11:

Referring to “[AWS]
Spectrum Reserved for
New Entrants Combined”:
“Can be sold to
incumbents starting in late
2013”

Page 13:

“Status Quo — Allow all
spectrum transfers once 5
year rule expires”

Page 15:

 

Claimant repeats the submissions made at
rows A, B & C above, noting in particular
that Claimant has been prejudiced by not
being able to make arguments or cross-
examine key witnesses on this document at
the hearing, including Mr. Hill and Mr.
Stewart regarding the importance of an exit
strategy to investors and Canada’s intention

for the 5-year transfer restriction to be finite.

 

(1) The draft adds nothing substantively new to the]
record,

(2) Canada repeats its submissions in rows A, B, and
C above as they relate to the Claimant’s allegation
that it has not been able to cross-examine key
witnesses at the hearing regarding exit opportunities,
the finite nature of the five-year moratorium, as well
as the Minister’s authority to consider spectrum
concentration when reviewing licence transfer
requests.

(3) In the event that the Tribunal allows this draft
onto the record, this document dated December 3,
2012, a few days prior to the note dated December 7,
2012 and exhibited at C-258, should be given little to
no evidentiary weight because the cited extracts were
revised or eliminated in subsequent briefing notes.

The extract from page 11 of the draft “can be sold to
incumbents” was revised to state that New Entrants

 

“{clan request to transfer to incumbents starting in

 

16

The Tribunal notes the
difference between
Appendix F produced by
GTH and C-258. Whether
the difference is
substantial, relevant, or is
already conveyed ina
document that is on the
record is a matter for the
Tribunal to decide
pursuant to its discretion
to accord the appropriate
weight to the evidence.
into the evidential record
as C-471.

 

 

Procedural Order No. 10
ANNEX A

 

“Extend AWS set-aside
transfer restriction until end
of licence terms

= Would prevent
incumbents from
purchasing set-aside
AWS and increase the
likelihood that it is
acquired by new
entrants

- No additional review
criteria required

Does not provide
criteria for spectrum
transfers in
other
band

s

- 1s DyACes¥CO)N)”

Page 16:

Referring to New Entrants:
“Even still they will want to
keep an exit strategy and an
additional 5 years may be too
long”

Tate 2013”. [Emphasis added. C-258, Exhibit Page 21;
C-264, slide 10; C-260, Exhibit Page 13]

The extract from page 13 which describes the status
quo inaccurately was removed in subsequent drafts.
The description of the status quo in subsequent drafts
focusses instead on whether there would be a review
of spectrum concentration concerns.

The extracts from pages 15 and 16 do not raise new
substantive issues. Canada refers the Tribunal to its
response in row C regarding the Minister’s authority
to consider spectrum concentration in reviewing
licence transfer requests, and row A regarding exit
opportunities.

 

 

 

Industry Canada,
Competition in the
Wireless Sector
[draft], 25 January
2013

Original Exhibit
Reference: C-338

 

This document includes the
following wording that does
not appear in the version that
Canada previously disclosed
(on the record as C-338):

Page 10:

“All licence transfer requests
require approval from

 

Claimant repeats the submissions made at
row C above, noting in particular that
Claimant has been prejudiced by not being
able to make arguments or cross-examine key
witnesses on this document at the hearing,
including Mr. Hill and Mr. Stewart regardi
the fact that adding undue spectrum
concentration as a criteria for transfers
amounted to changing the existing rules.

 

(1) The draft adds nothing new to the record. The
exact language cited by the Claimant “All licence
transfer requests require approval from Industry
Canada. However, aside from the 5 year restriction
on AWS set -aside spectrum, there are no other
specific itions related to ition” is
contained in C-264, slide 12 and C-262, Exhibit Page
15. Canada repeats its submissions in row C above

(2) Inthe event that the Tribunal allows this draft onto

 

 

The Tribunal notes the
difference between
Appendix G produced by
GTH and C-338. Whether
the difference is.
relevant, or is
already conveyed in a
document that is on the
record is a matter for the

 

 

Procedural Order No. 10

ANNEX A

 

Tndustry Canada

- However, aside from
the 5 year restriction on
AWS set-aside
spectrum, there are no
other specific
conditions related to

the record, Canada notes that the draft fails to support
the Claimant's argument that the Transfer
Framework was a fundamental change of the
regulatory framework, as notedin Canada’s response
inrowC.

Tribunal to decide
pursuant to its discretion
to accord the appropriate
weight to the evidence.
Appendix G is admitted
into the evidential record
as C-472.

 

 

 

competition

‘Option’ agreements not

anticipated”
Memorandum This document includes the Claimant repeats the submissions made at (1) The draft adds nothing substantively new to the | The Tribunal notes the
from John following wording that does row C above, noting in particular that record. Canada repeats its submissions in row C | difference between
Knubley and not appear in the version that | Claimant has been prejudiced by not being above. Appendix H produced
Marta Morgan Canada P reviously disclosed able to make fete, or bat the hearine key (2) Moreover, the extract from page 1 of the draft ea Sieg
to Minister of | (on the record as C-265): Peete Rtn cocument atte hearing, | contained in the third column does not address the | 'V ucrer tne Ui erence
Industry, Page 1: including Mr. issues that the Claimant raises in the fourth column, | 1 Substantial, relevant,

. i 7 di : . or is already conveyed

Measures to “ - Hill and Mr. Stewart regarding the fact that | The extract refers to the conclusion that the option | ;
Sustain ‘At that time we concluded adding undue spectrum concentration as a agreement did not breach the existing AWS in a document that is on
Competition in that the pi tit sed vp tion consideration for transfers amounted to conditions of licence (which was communicated to for a
Wireless 28 eh lub changing the existing rules. Rogers and Shaw in R-099, Letter from Peter Hill to | .

. specifically prohibited by the Ken Engelhart and Jean Brazeau (Nov. 19, 2012) decide pursuant to its
Sector, 29 AWS conditions of licence, e om ' | discretion to accord the
January 2013 although we considered the (3) Inthe event that the Tribunal allows this draft onto_ | appropriate weight to

option agreement the record, Canada notes that the language in | the evidence. Appendix
Original Exhibit | inconsistent with the intent paragraph 1 supports Canada’s explanation that the | H is admitted into the
Reference: C-265 | of the conditions and the intent of the AWS framework was not for spectrum | evidential record as C-
framework.” issued to New Entrants to end up in the control of the | 473.

 

Page 2:

“The current procedures for
transfer approvals do not
include an analysis of
concentration/competition. But
announcing a consultation
with stakeholders now will

signal that the new procedures

 

 

 

Incumbents. [RWS-Stewart, f¥ 10-11, 28, 34; Day 4,
p. 258:1-15 (Stewart); Day 4. p. 140:21-22 (Hill).

Further, the extract from page 2 describes “current
procedures” -- it does not address the Minister’s
authority to consider spectrum concentration when
reviewing licence transfer requests. It also supports
Canada’s submissions that (1) the licensees would
have had to request a transfer of set aside licences to

 

 

18

 

Procedural Order No. 10
ANNEX A

 

would be in effect before any
AWS setaside licensees are
able to request a transfer to
any incumbent and before the
700 MH? auction.”

Incumbents (2) the procedures were subject to change
(3) and that Canada was concemed with ensuring
procedural fairness in making these changes.

 

 

 

 

This document includes the
following wording that does
not appear in the version that
Canada previously disclosed
(on the record as C-366):

 

Claimant repeats the submissions made at
rows B & C above, noting in particular that
Claimant has been prejudiced by not being

(1) The draft adds nothing new to the record. An
identical version of this document with the exact
same wording is already on the record at C-420.The

 

able to make or key
witnesses on this document at the hearing,
including Mr. Hill and Mr. Stewart regarding
the importance of an exit strategy to investors
and Canada’s intention for the 5-year transfer
restriction to be finite.

 

only between A dix I and C-420 is
that that C-420 contained a date stamp and signature.

(2) In the event that the Tribunal allows this draft
onto the record, Canada repeats its submissions in
rows A, B, and C above as they relate to the
Claimant’s allegation that it has not been able to
cross-examine key witnesses at the hearing regarding
exit opportunities, the finite nature of the five-year
moratorium, as well as the Minister’s authority to
consider spectrum concentration when reviewing
licence transfer requests.

 

The Tribunal notes the
difference between
Appendix I produced by
GTH and C-366.
Whether the difference
is substantial, relevant,
or is already conveyed
in a document that is on
the record is a matter
for the Tribunal to
decide pursuant to its
discretion to accord the
appropriate weight to
the evidence. Appendix
Lis admitted into the
evidential record as C-

 

 

