INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E.
v.

Canada

(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

PROCEDURAL ORDER NO. 4

DECISION ON THE CLAIMANT’S OBJECTIONS TO
THE RESPONDENT’S CLAIMS OF PRIVILEGE

 

Members of the Tribunal
Prof. Georges Affaki, President of the Tribunal
Prof. Gary Born, Arbitrator
Prof. Vaughan Lowe, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Frauke Nitschke

3 November 2018

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

Procedural Order No. 4

L PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

1. On 1 June 2018, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3, which set forth the Tribunal’s
decision on each of the Parties’ respective requests for document production. In Procedural
Order No. 3, the Tribunal stated that it was “not ordering the production of any document

subject to legal privilege.”!

2. On 9 October 2018, the Claimant submitted a letter to the Tribunal in which it objected to
certain categories of privilege claimed by the Respondent, together with Appendices A

to G (the “Objections”).

3. On 10 October 2018, the Respondent informed the Tribunal by email that it intended to
submit a response to the Objections, pursuant to the procedure set forth in paragraph 5.3 of
Procedural Order No. 1. By email of 11 October 2018, the Tribunal took note of both the

Objections and the Respondent’s email.

4. On 17 October 2018, the Respondent submitted an electronic copy of its response to the
Objections (the “Response”). The Respondent subsequently dispatched a hard copy of the
Response, together with Legal Authorities RL-243 to 255 and Exhibits R-265 to 292, to
ICSID and the Members of the Tribunal. In doing so, the Respondent relied on
paragraph 13 of Procedural Order No. 1, which allows seven days between the electronic
and hardcopy filing of a submission. Consequently, the Members of the Tribunal received

the submission only after 24 October 2018.

5. In the cover letter submitted with the Response, the Respondent informed the Tribunal that
there are outstanding issues related to the Claimant’s production of documents and
privilege claims. The Respondent stated:

Until such time as GTH provides the requested additional details and
completes its document production, Canada is not in a position to

determine whether and to what extent the Claimant’s privilege
claims comply with the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No.1 and the

' Procedural Order No. 3, 14.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

Procedural Order No. 4

IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Arbitration
[(the “IBA Rules”)] and therefore reserves its right to bring a
challenge in this respect.

As the Respondent has not made any application to the Tribunal in respect of the

Claimant’s document production, this Order does not address the matter.

Following receipt of the Response, the Claimant did not seek leave to submit a rejoinder
in response to the Respondent’s defense of its privilege claims. Therefore, the Tribunal has
proceeded with its consideration of the Parties’ submissions on this issue (briefly
summarised in Section II) in light of the applicable standards (Section III). For the reasons

stated in Section IV, the Tribunal issues the Decision contained in Section V.

THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS

A. The Objections

The Claimant’s position is that the Respondent is in breach of its disclosure obligations set
forth in Procedural Order No. 3 because the Respondent has withheld or redacted
documents on the basis of impermissible categories of legal privilege. Specifically, the
Claimant disputes four categories of privilege claimed by the Respondent: “Cabinet
Confidence,” “Deliberative Process,” “Third Parties in Confidence,” and “National
Security.”? The Claimant requests that the Tribunal order the production of the documents

withheld by the Respondent on these bases.*

According to the Claimant, Article 9.2(f) of the IBA Rules,* which can essentially be relied
upon only by a respondent State, must be construed and applied narrowly.> In the

Claimant’s view, a respondent is not entitled to withhold documents merely because they

? Objections, p. 2. The Claimant explains that it first communicated its concerns with the Respondent’s privilege
claims to the Respondent by letter of 21 September 2018 (Objections, Appendix B). The Respondent replied on 26
September 2018, stating that it would not produce any further documents (Objections, Appendix C).

3 Objections, p. 5.
+ See the text at | 35 below.

5 Objections, p. 2, citing Philip Morris Asia Limited v. The Commonwealth of Australia, PCA Case No. 2012-12,
Procedural Order No. 12, 14 November 2014, 4.6.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)
Procedural Order No. 4

 

are “sensitive” under domestic law. Rather, the respondent must show that the documents

have a “special” sensitivity, which is found compelling by the Tribunal.

10. The Claimant asserts that, based on the information it has, there is no indication of a
compelling reason for the Respondent to withhold or redact the documents at issue,

because:

a. Although most of the documents are more than five years old, the Respondent has not

shown why they remain sensitive;

b. In light of the Confidentiality Order governing this proceeding, the Respondent has
“fail[ed] to explain why the protection of a Confidential or even a Restricted Access
designation could not resolve its concerns related to institutional confidence or national

security”;

c. There is no basis for the Respondent’s argument that the Claimant bears the burden of
showing that the documents are important to its case, especially considering that a

determination on the documents’ relevance and materiality has already been made; and

d. The Respondent has provided examples of redacted portions of documents without

explaining how such information falls within Article 9.2(f) of the IBA Rules.°

11. The Claimant also advances specific arguments relating to each of the four challenged

categories of privilege, as summarised in the following paragraphs.

12. Cabinet Confidence: According to the Claimant, this is a principle of domestic law, which
is inapplicable in this case, and the Respondent has failed to show how the documents it
withheld or redacted fall within Article 9.2(f) of the IBA Rules. Indeed, the relevant
documents appear to be less sensitive than documents reflecting the actual deliberations of
cabinet members. The Claimant asserts that the content of these documents relates directly

to aspects of its claim.”

© Objections, p. 3.
7 Objections, p. 4.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)
Procedural Order No. 4
Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (“CRTC”) Deliberative
Process Privilege: The Claimant states that the documents withheld or redacted on this
basis “appear to be memoranda, notes, and presentations relating to legislative amendments
to the Telecommunications Act dating from approximately 3-5 years ago.”* In the
Claimant’s view, the Respondent has failed to show that this information is compellingly

sensitive and cannot be protected under the Confidentiality Order.”

Third Parties in Confidence: The Claimant states that “[t]here is no basis under the IBA
Rules to redact for third parties’ confidential information, and particularly in this case

where there is a confidentiality order in place.” '”

National Security: The Claimant argues that the Respondent has failed to support its

position that it may withhold documents by merely invoking national security. i

B. The Response

The Respondent requests that the Tribunal reject the Claimant’s challenge to the
Respondent’s privilege claims. !? According to the Respondent, the Objections “are based
on a mischaracterization of both the applicable legal standard and Canada’s approach to
asserting privilege.” '*

The Respondent’s position is that its privilege claims fall well within Article 9.2(f) of the

IBA Rules. For the Respondent, this provision “reflects the commonly accepted principle

8 Objections, p. 4.
° Objections, pp. 4-5.

' Objections, p. 5.

 

'! Objections, p. 5.
'? Response, 66.
8 Response, {[ 3.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)
Procedural Order No. 4

 

in international arbitration that the confidentiality of certain particularly sensitive
documents related to decisions made by governments must be maintained and that their
production may be resisted.” '* The Respondent rejects the Claimant’s assertion that Article
9.2(f) must be read narrowly. Rather, as noted by the Tribunal in Bilcon v. Canada, the
correct approach when deciding whether certain information can be withheld is to balance
the public interest in protecting the information against the importance of the information

for the claimant’ s case. '°

18. The Respondent explains that its counsel has therefore “aimed to disclose the maximum
amount of information possible while protecting the institutional sensitivity at issue.”!° For
each document, counsel considered whether to withhold information in light of the

following five factors:

1) the Claimant’s interest in the disclosure of the information to
advance its case as set out in its pleadings including the Claimant’s
Memorial on Merits and Damages; 2) the importance of the
particular institutional sensitivity at issue as reflected in the statutory
protection accorded under Canadian law; 3) the disclosure or
availability of non-privileged evidence with related content; 4) the
provisions of the Tribunal’s Confidentiality Order, particularly
those concerning confidential and restricted access designations;
and 5) the length of time since the creation of the document or
transmittal of the communication. '7

19. The Respondent contends that it has not improperly relied on its domestic law in asserting
privilege, as alleged by the Claimant. In the Respondent’s view, its domestic laws are
helpful in providing evidence of the sensitivity of certain documents and to explain the

Respondent's claims of privilege under Article 9.2(f) of the IBA Rules.'*

'4 Response, {[ 4, citing RL-243, Nathan D. O’Malley, Rules of Evidence in International Arbitration, an annotated
guide (Informa, London, 2012), { 9.92.

'5 Response, { 6, citing RL-244, Bilcon of Delaware et. al. v. The Government of Canada (UNCITRAL) Procedural
Order No. 13, 11 July 2012, (ff 22-26.

'6 Response, 7.
"7 Response, { 6.

'8 Response, {If 8-10.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

Procedural Order No. 4

20. The Respondent then proceeds to explain each of the six categories of privilege it has

asserted under Article 9.2(f) of the IBA Rules, as summarised in the following paragraphs.

21. Confidences of the Queen’s Privy Council for Canada: The Respondent seeks to withhold
“Cabinet confidences” on the basis of their political and institutional sensitivity.'? In the
Respondent’s view, “the importance of safeguarding the confidentiality of deliberative and
decision-making documents of governments is well settled in international investment
law.”?° Cabinet deliberations, in particular, must be kept secret in support of free and frank
discussions among Ministers and their “collective responsibility.” Thus, Respondent
argues that tribunals have consistently held that such information falls within Article 9.2(f)

of the IBA Rules.”!

22. In response to the Claimant’s arguments, the Respondent contends that the Claimant has
mischaracterized the type of documents withheld under this category.?* Further, the
Respondent rejects the Claimant’s view that only documents recording actual deliberations
of the Cabinet may be withheld; rather, in its view, “certain types of information that
surround and feed into the Cabinet decision-making process or prepare a Minister in
relation to that process must also be protected.””* Finally, the Respondent does not accept

that the age of the document is a reason for disclosure.

19 Response, {[ 12.
2° Response, {{ 11, citing RL-248, Glamis Gold, Ltd. v. United States of America (UNCITRAL) Decision on Parties’
Requests for Production of Documents Withheld on the Grounds of Privilege, 17 November 2005, {[ 36.
21 Response, {| 14, citing RL-249, Merrill & Ring Forestry L.P. v. The Government of Canada (UNCITRAL) Decision
of the Tribunal on Production of Documents, 18 July 2008, {{ 16-18; RL-250, United Parcel Service of America Inc.
v. Government of Canada (UNICTRAL) Decision of the Tribunal Relating to Canada’s Claim of Cabinet Privilege, 8
October 2004, { 11; RL-251, Vito G. Gallo v. The Government of Canada (UNCITRAL) Procedural Order No. 3, 8
April 2009, { 54; RL-244, Bilcon of Delaware et. al. v. The Government of Canada (UNCITRAL) Procedural Order
No. 13, 11 July 2012, {if 22-26.
~ The Respondent states that it has withheld the following types of information: “memoranda and briefing material
sals or recommendations to Cabinet; agenda of Cabinet, minutes and records
issions between ministers of the
Crown on matters relating to the making of government decisions or the formulation of government policy;
departmental briefing notes and communications between civil servants concerning material or matters to be discussed
or proposed to be discussed at Cabinet; and draft legislation” (Response, 16).

 
 

23 Response, f 17.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

23.

24.

25.

26.

Procedural Order No. 4

The Respondent’s final point regarding Cabinet confidences is that many documents
withheld under this category are also privileged as attorney-client communications under

Article 9.2(b) of the IBA Rules or national security information under Article 9.2(f).°4

National Security: The Respondent has withheld or redacted a number of documents on
the basis that disclosure of the information would be injurious to Canada’s national
security. The Respondent asserts that there are many different reasons that disclosure of
certain information might threaten national security and provides several examples.
According to the Respondent, such information is particularly sensitive and deserving of
protection. This ground for secrecy is recognized in the domestic legislation of Canada and

many other States, and it has been upheld repeatedly by international tribunals.*>

The Respondent describes the process by which it identified information subject to
privilege on the ground of national security, and asserts that it has “acted in good faith and
undertaken due diligence,” seeking to disclose as much information as possible.”° In the
Respondent’s view, its agencies are best placed to determine what information touches on
national security; the Tribunal must not second guess the Government’s opinion on the

matter.”
In response to the Objections, the Respondent also makes the following arguments:

a. In weighing the Claimant’s interest in disclosure against the risk to national security, it
should be noted that “information in this arbitration relates to purely economic interests

that are by their very nature less fundamental” than interests such as human rights.”*

>4 Response, {[ 21.
°5 Response, {{ 24.
26 Response, {] 30.
27 Response, {{ 32.
28 Response, {] 33.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)
Procedural Order No. 4
b. Disclosure of the information that the Respondent has withheld is unlikely to advance
the Claimant’s case. Thus, the Claimant’s request for an adverse inference is

“premature, unjustified in the circumstances and must be rejected.”??

c. Considering the limited scope of the information withheld, there is no interference with

the Claimant’s right to a fair trial.

d. The Claimant’s arguments concerning the lack of details provided by the Respondent
for its national security privilege claims are misplaced. The Respondent is unable to
provide further details, as that would allow inferences to be made about the privileged

material, thereby threatening national security.*°

27. Confidential Deliberations of the CRTC Commissioners: The Respondent has claimed
privilege over document that “directly relate to the decision making process by the [CRTC]
Commissioners.”*! According to the Respondent, the CRTC is an administrative tribunal,
which performs an adjudicative function. Therefore, information reflecting the confidential
deliberations of the CRTC Commissioners is subject to deliberative secrecy and must be

withheld.** The Respondent’s position is summarised as follows:

There is a compelling institutional sensitivity related to the
independence of the CRTC and its ability to discharge its mandate
that warrants non-production of the documents over which Canada
has claimed privilege. Producing these documents would have the
same chilling effects that courts have consistently warned against.
The disclosure of the confidential deliberations of the CRTC
Commissioners would compromise their decision-making process
on matters falling with the CRTC’s mandate.*?

28. Communication Submitted by Third Parties to the CRTC in confidence pursuant to s. 39 of
the Telecommunications Act: The Respondent has claimed privilege with respect to

commercially sensitive information submitted by third parties in confidence to the CRTC.

2° Response, {] 34.
>° Response, {{ 36.
3! Response, {| 44.
> Response, {{f 37-44.
33 Response, {| 45.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

29.

30.

31.

Procedural Order No. 4

In the Respondent’s view, “disclosure of this information risks harming the financial
position of these enterprises, and may inhibit or discourage third parties from providing
information to the CRTC that it requires to discharge its mandate.”* For this reason, the
Canadian Telecommunications Act prohibits disclosure of this confidential information,
except in very limited circumstances.** Further, the Respondent contends that the Claimant
has failed to show how the confidential information in the CTRC’s possession is material

to its claim.

The Respondent notes that it considered the Confidentiality Order when considering
whether to disclose this information. However, in light of the considerations above, it
determined that the interest in non-disclosure outweighs the Claimant’s interest in

disclosure.*°

Confidential Information in the Possession of the Competition Bureau: The Respondent
has also claimed privilege with respect to “highly sensitive third party confidential
information collected by the Competition Bureau in the context of its work reviewing
mergers and acquisitions.”*’ The Respondent points out that such information is protected
from disclosure under the Canadian Competition Act.** It argues that this information also
falls within Article 9.29(f) of the IBA Rules because of the “institutional sensitivity related

to the Bureau’s ability to carry out its core mandate,”??

as disclosure would discourage
third parties from providing this important information to the Bureau in the future. In
addition, the Respondent asserts that the Claimant has failed to show how the information

withheld is material to its claim.

Again, the Respondent notes that it has considered the Confidentiality Order, but that the

interest in non-disclosure still outweighs any competing interest.

+4 Response, {[ 50.

35 Response, | 49, citing C-046, Telecommunications Act, s. 39.

56 Response, { 53.

37 Response, {| 55.

38 Response, {{[ 57-58, citing R-106, Competition Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-34, s. 29.
% Response, {| 61.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)
Procedural Order No. 4

 

32. Information Obtained by Government Officials with Respect to a Third Party in the Course
of the Administration or Enforcement of the Investment Canada Act: The Respondent has
withheld three documents and redacted two others which “contained information obtained
by government officials with respect to a third party in the course of the administration or
enforcement of the Investment Canada Act.”4° The Respondent argues that the release of
such information is prohibited under Canadian law and raises a “significant systemic
sensitivity.”*! Because the Respondent considers this information immaterial to the
Claimant’s case, it has determined that the interest in non-disclosure outweighs any

potential benefit to the Claimant.

Ill. APPLICABLE STANDARDS

33. This arbitration is governed by (a) the ICSID Convention, (b) the ICSID Arbitration Rules,

and (c) the Tribunal’s procedural orders.

34. The Parties agreed to a procedure for the production of documents in Section 15 of
Procedural Order No. 1. In addition, Section 1.4 of Procedural Order No. | states as

follows:

The Tribunal may seek guidance from, but shall not be bound by,
the 2010 IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International
Arbitration, in particular with respect to:

L..]

(d) The admissibility and assessment of evidence (Article 9 of the
IBA Rules).
35. Thus, in considering the Objections, the Tribunal has referred, where appropriate, to Article
9.2 of the IBA Rules. In particular, the Tribunal has assessed the Respondent’s privilege

claims in light of Article 9.2(f), which provides:

The Arbitral Tribunal shall, at the request of a Party or on its own
motion, exclude from evidence or production any Document,

4° Response, {| 64.
4! Response, {ff 64-65.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

36.

37.

38.

Procedural Order No. 4

statement, oral testimony or inspection for any of the following
reasons:

(f) grounds of special political or institutional sensitivity (including
evidence that has been classified as secret by a government or a
public international institution) that the Arbitral Tribunal determines
to be compelling...

ANALYSIS

The Tribunal notes at the outset that, as stated in footnote 4 of the Objections, the Claimant
does not dispute the Respondent’s claim for solicitor-client privilege at this time.*? The
Tribunal also notes that, as mentioned above, the Respondent’s reference to the Claimant’s
failure to fully comply with its document production obligations** has been made merely
by way of reservation, without asking the Tribunal to decide anything at this stage. The

Tribunal therefore does not take any decision on those matters.

The Tribunal has reviewed and reached a decision on the six categories of privilege claimed
by the Respondent pursuant to Article 9.2(f) of the IBA Rules, namely: 1. Cabinet
confidences, 2. National security, 3. Deliberative process (CRTC), 4. Third parties in
confidence (CRTC), 5. Confidential information in the possession of the Competition
Bureau (Competition Act), and 6. Information obtained by the Government in relation to

the enforcement of the Investment Canada Act (ICA).

In reviewing the Response, the Tribunal found no evidence of bad faith in terms of a
selective assertion of privilege or otherwise. The Tribunal notes that the Respondent has
exhibited a number of government memoranda in support of its Counter-Memorial, and
has stated in the Response that it produced more than 200 additional memoranda, many
without redaction.‘4 Moreover, the Tribunal is given no reason to believe that the

Respondent has acted contrary to its assertion that it balanced its public interest in

* Objections, n. 4.

3 Cover Letter to the Response, pp. 1-2.
44 Response, { 16.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

39.

40.

Al.

Procedural Order No. 4

protecting the information with the Claimant’s need of the information to advance its

case.*

The Tribunal also agrees with the Respondent that Article 9.2(f) of the IBA Rules is
predicated to a certain extent on domestic law directing the classification of evidence as a
secret by a government. In the Tribunal’s opinion, the degree of political or institutional

sensitivity must be measured to a certain extent by reference to domestic law.

Reviewing in turn the Claimant’s objections and the Respondent’s defenses, the Tribunal

decides as follows:

Cabinet Confidences: The Tribunal does not consider that any deliberative and decision-
making documents of governments fall automatically within the scope of Article 9.2(f) of
the IBA Rules. That said, the Tribunal has been given no evidence of a blanket refusal by
the Respondent on this ground. In particular, the Tribunal notes the following relevant

points:

a. The five-year limitation period alleged by the Claimant is not persuasive. A
government document may remain politically sensitive several years after it is issued

depending on its nature and the public interest that it seeks to protect.

b. The Respondent asserts that many documents falling within the scope of Cabinet
Confidence privilege are also solicitor-client-privileged.*° This privilege ground is not

contested by the Claimant and the Tribunal accepts it.

c. The Claimant’s assertion that Ministers’ briefing reports or government staff emails are
unmeritorious of Cabinet Confidence privilege is not persuasive.*”7 The Tribunal
accepts that, depending on their terms and the public interest that they seek to protect,
those documents may directly or indirectly relate to Article 9.2(f) of the IBA Rules

situations and merit protection as such.

4 Response, {ff 6, 15.
46 Response, {[ 21.
47 Objections, p. 4.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

42.

43.

44.

4S.

46.

Procedural Order No. 4

In view of the above, the Tribunal orders the Respondent to review all responsive
documents that it has withheld or redacted on this ground of privilege and to ensure that its
privilege log (a) includes all redacted documents as well as those withheld in full, and
(b) for those documents withheld in full, states that the asserted privilege cannot be

adequately safeguarded through redaction(s).

National Security: In deciding on this matter, the Tribunal notes that the Respondent’s
assertion of national security privilege is not a case of a blanket refusal, as evidenced by
its production of 235 documents responsive i i _
| which excludes bad faith. The Tribunal also notes that, of those
documents, the Respondent redacted 128 and withheld a further 27 on national security
grounds, asserting Article 9.2(f) of the IBA Rules for each instance of withheld
information. The Respondent explains in great detail how it determined that the release of

each withheld information “would” (not “could”) be injurious to its national security.*?

The Tribunal considers that the age of a document alone does not cure national security
concerns; nor has the Claimant provided any persuasive reasoning or compelling authority

to show why the passing of time sets aside any national security interest.

In view of the above, the Tribunal orders the Respondent to review all responsive
documents that it has withheld or redacted on this ground of privilege and to ensure that its
privilege log (a) includes all redacted documents as well as those withheld in full, and
(b) for those documents withheld in full, states that the asserted privilege cannot be

adequately safeguarded through redaction(s).

Deliberative Process (CRTC): The Respondent has asserted this category of privilege
under Article 9.2(f) of the IBA Rules as a basis for redacting the document contained in
Appendix E to the Objections and for withholding additional documents listed in its

privilege log. The Claimant argues that CRTC deliberative process privilege is one of

48 Response, n. 18.
4 Response, J 32.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

47.

48.

49.

50.

Procedural Order No. 4

national law and that the Respondent has not provided evidence that the information is

sensitive or reasons to justify withholding it.

The Respondent submits, without being challenged, that CRTC is a tribunal and performs
an adjudicative function.*° Moreover, the Respondent underscores that it is claiming the
deliberative process privilege only in relation to the CRTC Commissioners’ deliberation to
render an adjudicatory decision, not in relation to the secretariat and staff who are not

involved in the decision-making process.

In view of the above, the Tribunal orders the Respondent to review all responsive
documents that it has withheld or redacted on this ground of privilege and to ensure that its
privilege log (a) includes all redacted documents as well as those withheld in full, and
(b) for those documents withheld in full, states that the asserted privilege cannot be

adequately safeguarded through redaction(s).

Third Parties in Confidence (CRTC): The Claimant summarily dismisses the Respondent’s
assertion of privilege on the ground of Article 9.2(f) of the IBA Rules as concerns
information submitted in confidence by third party to the CRTC. In doing so, the Claimant
only refers to that privilege as being one of domestic law. After considering the Claimant’s
argument, the Tribunal concludes that it cannot exclude a privilege claim merely because
it rests on grounds of domestic law. Depending on the facts and the circumstances of the
case, some of those privileges merit recognition by international tribunals. Legal privilege
is one; so is the case of privileged communication between regulators and the regulated

entities in regulated sectors.

The Tribunal is not convinced by the Respondent’s argument that the Claimant fails to
evidence that the confidential information in the possession of CRTC is material to its
claim.*! The Claimant is not required to do so, given that the Tribunal has previously
ordered the production of responsive documents. Rather, the Tribunal upholds the

Respondent’s defense on the ground that s.39 of the Telecommunications Act allows a

>? Response, {fff 40-41.
5! Response, J 52.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

51.

52.

53.

54.

Procedural Order No. 4

person to submit to CRTC information that it can designate as being confidential, and
assures that person that such information shall not be disclosed.*? Legitimate expectations
of third parties merit protection outside extraordinary circumstances that might compel to

ignorance. No such circumstances have been evidenced to the Tribunal.

In view of the above, the Tribunal orders the Respondent to review all responsive
documents that it has withheld or redacted on this ground of privilege and to ensure that its
privilege log (a) includes all redacted documents as well as those withheld in full;
(b) asserts expressly that each of those documents, or portions thereof, are privileged
because they specifically fall under s.39(1)(a), (b) or (c) of the Telecommunications Act,
as may be the case for each instance of withheld information, and thus fall under Article
9.2(f) and/or Article 9.2(b) of the IBA Rules; and (c) for those documents withheld in full,

states that the asserted privilege cannot be adequately safeguarded through redaction(s).

Confidential information in the possession of the Competition Bureau (Competition Act):
The same argument advanced by the Respondent to protect information collected in
confidence by CRTC is likewise advanced to protect information held by the Competition
Bureau in similar circumstances. The Claimant did not include in its Objections a specific

challenge to the Competition Act protection of confidential information.

Therefore, the Tribunal notes the Respondent’s production of a significant number of
responsive documents pursuant to the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 3 in relation to
document request 15, and upholds the defense that the Respondent advances under the
Competition Act for the same reasons that it upheld the Respondent’s defense in relation

to the Telecommunications Act.

Information obtained by the Government in relation to the enforcement of the Investment
Canada Act: The Claimant also did not include in its Objections a specific challenge to this

ground of privilege.

* €-046, Telecommunications Act, s. 39(2).

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

55.

56.

57.

Procedural Order No. 4

However, the Tribunal notes that, contrary to the situation under the Telecommunications
Act, s.36 ICA does not relate to protecting the legitimate expectation of persons which
have labeled the information that they transmitted to the Ministry of Innovation as
“confidential” in reliance on the statute. The Tribunal also notes that s.36 does not fall
under Part IV.1 of ICA, which deals with National Security. Rather, it falls under Part VI,
General Regulation. Moreover, s.36 ICA provides for a long list of exceptions allowing the
Minister to disclose the information, including, in 3.1, to an “investigative body” for “that
body’s lawful investigation.” Furthermore, contrary to its arguments in relation to its other
claims for privilege listed above, the Respondent only refers to unparticularized potential

hinderance to cooperative disclosure by foreign investors.**

In view of the above, the Tribunal recalls Procedural Order No. 3 and affirms its order for

the Respondent to produce responsive documents.

DECISION
For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal holds as follows:

a. In relation to all responsive documents falling within the six categories listed above,
the Tribunal confirms that if the Respondent, in conducting its review of withheld and
redacted documents, finds any documents that do not fall within Article 9.2(b) or 9.2(f)
of the IBA Rules in light of the Tribunal’s guidance above, those documents must be

produced by Monday, 12 November 2018.

b. Step M of the Procedural Timetable remains unchanged, except that the Claimant is
granted leave to apply for an amendment to its Reply on the Merits should the
Respondent’s production of responsive documents after the filing of the Reply on the

Merits occasion the need for changes.

53 Response, fl 64.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

Procedural Order No. 4

For and on behalf of the Tribunal,
[signed]
Prof. Georges Affaki

President of the Tribunal
Date: 3 November 2018

17

