INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E.
v.

Canada

(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

PROCEDURAL ORDER NO. 5
DECISION ON OUTSTANDING ISSUES OF LEGAL PRIVILEGE

 

Members of the Tribunal
Prof. Georges Affaki, President of the Tribunal
Prof. Gary Born, Arbitrator
Prof. Vaughan Lowe, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Frauke Nitschke

13 December 2018

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

Procedural Order No. 5

I. BACKGROUND

1. On 13 June 2017, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1, setting forth the procedural
tules governing this arbitration. The Procedural Timetable was attached as Annex A of
Procedural Order No. | and set out a schedule for the document production phase of the

proceeding.

2. In accordance with Section 15.1 of Procedural Order No. | and the Procedural Timetable,
on 28 March 2018, each Party served on the other Party a request for the production of
documents. Subsequently, each Party set forth its objections to the other Party’s requests
for documents and then its responses to the other Party’s objections. On 14 May 2018, each

Party submitted its document production schedule to the Tribunal.

3. On 1 June 2018, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3, which set forth the Tribunal’s
decision on each of the Parties’ respective requests for document production. In Procedural
Order No. 3, the Tribunal stated that it was “not ordering the production of any document

subject to legal privilege.”!

4. On 9 October 2018, the Claimant submitted a letter to the Tribunal in which it objected to
certain categories of privilege claimed by the Respondent. On 17 October 2018, the
Respondent submitted its response to the Claimant’s objections. The Respondent also
informed the Tribunal that there were outstanding issues related to the Claimant’s
production of documents and privilege claims, but it made no application to the Tribunal

in this regard.

5. On 2 November 2018, the Respondent submitted a letter in which it argued that the
“Claimant’s document production is incomplete and inadequate, and that the Claimant
withheld or redacted information on the basis of overly-broad and inappropriate privilege
claims.”? The Respondent requested that the Tribunal order the Claimant to conduct a

document-by document review and to produce several categories of documents over which

' Procedural Order No. 3, § 14.
2 Respondent's letter of 2 November 2018, p. 1.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

Procedural Order No. 5

the Claimant had asserted privilege. The Respondent also asked the Tribunal to “modify
the procedural timetable by placing a stay on further proceedings, including submission
deadlines and the hearing, until the Tribunal has an adequate opportunity to address these

issues.”>

6. On 3 November 2018, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4, setting forth its decision
on the Claimant’s objections to the Respondent’s privilege claims. The Tribunal instructed
the Respondent to conduct a review of withheld and redacted documents, and to produce
any documents that did not fall within Article 9.2(b) or 9.2(f) of the IBA Rules in light of
the guidance provided by the Tribunal in that Order.

7. In the cover email to Procedural Order No. 4, the Tribunal invited the Claimant to comment
on the Respondent’s letter of 2 November 2018, regarding both the Respondent’s
objections and the proposed stay. The Tribunal also asked for an update with respect to the

outstanding issue of publication of the procedural orders.

8. On 5 November 2018, the Claimant submitted its Reply on Merits and Damages &

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction and Admissibility.

9. By letter of 8 November 2018, the Respondent (a) sought an extension to the deadline for
its compliance with Procedural Order No. 4; (b) informed the Tribunal that the Parties had
reached agreement on the redaction and publication of Procedural Order No. 3; and (c)
identified a number of disagreements between the Parties regarding the designation of
information as Confidential or Restricted Access Information in Procedural Order No. 2

and the Parties’ submissions.

10. On 10 November 2018, the Tribunal wrote to the Parties in response to the Respondent’s
letter of 8 November 2018. The Tribunal (a) granted the extension requested by the
Respondent; (b) confirmed that Procedural Order No. 3 would be published without its
Annexes as agreed by the Parties; and (c) set a pleading schedule for the issue of the

designation of information as Confidential or Restricted Access Information.

3 Respondent's letter of 2 November 2018, p. I.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

Procedural Order No. 5

One 12 November 2018, the Claimant submitted two letters. The first letter responded to
the Respondent’s letter of 2 November 2018 concerning the Claimant’s production of
documents and privilege claims. The second letter was in response to the Respondent’s
letter of 8 November 2018 concerning the designation of information as Confidential or

Restricted Access Information.

By email of 14 November 2018, the Respondent sought leave to respond to the Claimant’s

letter of 12 November 2018 concerning the Claimant’s privilege claims.

On 15 November 2018, the Tribunal wrote to the Parties, noting its concern with the
multiplication of submissions and replies in relation to privilege claims at this stage of the
proceeding. The Tribunal informed the Parties that it had decided not to grant the
Respondent leave for a further submission, and would instead convene a procedural
telephone conference to discuss with the Parties a means to ensure the production of
responsive documents within a useful time period while retaining the agreed hearing dates

in April 2019.

On 16 November 2018, the Respondent submitted its reply on the issue of confidentiality,

in accordance with the Tribunal’s instructions of 10 November 2018.

On 19 November 2018, the President held the case management teleconference with the
Parties. An audio recording of the teleconference was made available to the Parties and the
Tribunal following the call. During the teleconference, at the invitation of the President,
the Parties agreed to take a number of steps aimed at completing the document production

phase as efficiently as possible.

By email of 21 November 2018, the Claimant provided a list of in-house counsel who
appear on the documents disclosed on the Claimant’s privilege logs, identifying the

jurisdictions in which they are qualified.

By letter of 22 November 2018, the Tribunal reminded the Parties of the various steps

agreed during the case management teleconference.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

20.

21.

22.

Procedural Order No. 5

In accordance with the Tribunal’s letter of 22 November 2018, the Claimant submitted a
letter on 25 November 2018 in which it confirmed its view that each of the in-house
attorneys listed in its email of 21 November 2018 was qualified in at least one jurisdiction
that recognizes that attorney-client privilege attaches to communications with in-house

counsel.

Also in accordance with the Tribunal’s letter of 22 November 2018, the Respondent
submitted a letter on 25 November in which it provided a more detailed explanation
regarding the two remaining documents over which it asserts privilege under the

Investment Canada Act.

On 29 November 2018, the Respondent submitted the Parties’ Stern Schedule addressing
their respective positions on the disputed issues regarding Claimant’s assertion of legal
privilege. The Respondent noted that in accordance with the Tribunal’s instructions, the
Claimant first completed its entries in the Stern Schedule and the Respondent then replied
to the Claimant’s submissions. The Respondent noted that the Claimant had reserved the
right to seek the Tribunal’s leave to respond to new arguments raised in the Respondent’s

submissions.

On 2 December 2018, the Claimant wrote further to the Respondent’s message of
29 November 2018. The Claimant noted that its positions in the Stern Schedule did not
take account of the Respondent’s new arguments or Annex I, and that the Claimant would

be available if the Tribunal wished to hear Claimant’s position on these matters.

On 3 December 2018, the Claimant wrote on behalf of the Parties in response to the
Tribunal’s request to receive an update on the Parties’ discussions concerning the
redactions to Procedural Order No. 2. The Claimant informed the Tribunal that the Parties
were in the process of negotiating the scope of issues that will remain confidential during
the course of the proceedings. The Claimant stated that, in the event the Parties were unable
to reach an agreement in this regard, they expected to narrow the issues for the Tribunal’s

consideration by 7 December 2018.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

23.

24.

25.

26.

Procedural Order No. 5

On 7 December 2018, the Claimant confirmed that the Parties had agreed to the redactions
for Procedural Order No. 2, and provided the non-confidential version of the Order. The

Tribunal commends the Parties for their efforts at reaching a consensus on this matter.

The Tribunal has considered the outstanding issues of legal privilege as set forth in the
Parties’ Stern Schedule. Following its deliberations, the Tribunal has decided on each issue

and included its decision in the Schedule.

With regard to the Respondent’s assertion of privilege under the Investment Canada Act,
the Tribunal has taken note of the Respondent’s further explanation in its letter of
25 November 2018. In light of that explanation, and considering that the Tribunal has not
been asked to determine any dispute regarding the Respondent’s assertion of this privilege,
the Tribunal has decided to reverse its order in paragraph 56 of Procedural Order No. 4
with respect to the two remaining documents that the Respondent has withheld under the
Investment Canada Act. The Respondent is no longer obligated to produce these two

documents.

DECISION
The Tribunal holds as follows:

a. The Tribunal decides on each issue of privilege as stated in the final row of the Stern

Schedule attached as Annex A. This Annex forms an integral part of the present Order.

b. The Parties shall confer and attempt to agree on the deadline for the Claimant’s
production of documents in accordance with the Tribunal’s decisions in Annex A. In
doing so, the Parties should ensure that the hearing dates (Step N on the Procedural
Timetable) are maintained. Absent notification by Thursday, 20 December 2018 to the
Tribunal of an agreed production date, each Party shall submit what it considers to be
a realistic date (keeping in mind Step N) and the Tribunal will set the deadline. In any

event, the Claimant is expected to start its review forthwith.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

Procedural Order No. 5

c. The Respondent is not obligated to produce the ining two d with respect

to which it asserts privilege under the Investment Canada Act.

 

d. The non-confidential version of Procedural Order No. 2 shall be published on the
ICSID website.

On behalf of the Tribunal,
[signed]
Prof. Georges Affaki

President of the Tribunal
Date: 13 December 2018

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A
Global Telecom Holding v. Government of Canada
Stern Schedule of Disputed Issues Regarding the Claimant’s Assertions of Legal Privilege

5 December 2018

 

Outstanding Issue 1'

Applicable law with respect to the scope and waiver of attorney-client privilege, including with respect to each of the following
issues:

i) Extension of attorney-client privilege to in-house counsel under each applicable law;
ii) | Waiver of attorney-client privilege through disclosure of legal advice across separate legal entities, and exceptions for
common interest, if any, under each applicable law; and
iii) | Waiver of attorney-client privilege through disclosure of legal advice to third parties, and limited waiver protections, if
any, under each applicable law.

 

 

Summary of Claimant’s
Position

 

GTH’s position with respect to this Issue is set out in its 12 November Letter at {{[ 20-34.

In summary, international law, the ICSID Arbitration Rules, and the Tribunal’s Procedural Orders govern this Arbitration,
including with respect to privilege. Section 1.4(a) of Procedural Order No. | states that the Tribunal will be guided by the IBA
Rules in relation to the exchange of documents in this Arbitration. Articles 9.2 and 9.3 of the IBA Rules are of particular
relevance here. In addition to the recognition of legal privilege in Article 9.2(b), Article 9.3 identifies well-accepted principles
in respect of privilege in document disclosure and recognizes at sub-paragraph (e) “the need to maintain fairness and equality as
between the Parties, particularly if they are subject to different legal or ethical rules.” This comports with Article 9.2(g), which
states that the Tribunal can exclude from production documents on the basis of “considerations of procedural economy,
proportionality, fairness or equality of the Parties that the Arbitral Tribunal determines to be compelling.” The Commentary to
the IBA Rules explains “Article 9.2(g) is a catch-all provision, intended to assure procedural economy, proportionality, fairness
and equality in the case. For example, documents that might be considered to be privileged within one national legal system
may not be considered to be privileged within another. If this situation were to create an unfairness, the arbitral tribunal may
exclude production of the technically non-privileged documents pursuant to this provision. In general, it is hoped that this
provision will help ensure that the arbitral tribunal provides the parties with a fair, as well as an effective and efficient,
hearing.” Procedural Order No. 1, which reflects the Parties’ agreement, requires this principle to guide the Tribunal’s decision.

 

1

The Outstanding Issues identified in this Stern Schedule are reflected as articulated by Canada.

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

 

 

Other international tribunals have similarly recognized the unique circumstances inherent in international arbitration
proceedings, and have applied a most favored nation approach to privilege where multiple privilege regimes could be applied.
This approach—one which acknowledges the array of domestic legal principles at issue and applies a uniform standard to all
parties involved in the proceedings—is the most appropriate approach in this case. As Canada has well observed, the
documents in question involve (sometimes in the same communication) events, entities, and attorneys with connections to
multiple jurisdictions. The application of Canada’s proposed closest connection test would be inconclusive or otherwise
threaten to introduce inconsistency in the treatment of documents within GTH’s own disclosure as well as between the Parties.
Canada would be able to rely without restraint on its own domestic laws to claim privilege while GTH (an entity with several in-
house Canadian qualified attorneys, dealing with matters of Canadian law, in respect of a business in Canada) would be
prohibited from doing so. It is precisely in circumstances such as the one here where Canada’s proposed approach is
unacceptable and violates the requirements of fairness and equal treatment set out in the IBA Rules and well-recognized in
international law. Even in the context of international commercial arbitrations where it could be argued a “closest connection”
test is more appropriate due to the relevance of a particular domestic law (e.g., the seat of the arbitration), commentators (citing
to the overriding significance of ensuring equality and fairness between the parties) have observed that an adjustment to a
closest connection analysis must be made in cases where it would result in applying different privilege rules across parties or
between different groups of documents (see, e.g., Exhibit CL-189; Exhibit CL-190; Exhibit CL-191).

In addition to Procedural Order No. | and the IBA Rules, the Tribunal may refer to the following authorities:

Exhibit CL-184, IBA Rules, Commentary on the revised text of the 2010 IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International
Arbitration, pp. 25-26;

Exhibit CL-185, Postova banka, a.s. and ISTROKAPITAL SE v. Hellenic Republic, (CSID Case No. ARB/13/8, Procedural
Order No. 6, 20 July 2014, {fj 14, 16;

Exhibit CL-186, Philip Morris Asia Limited v. Commonwealth of Australia, PCA Case No. 2012-12, Procedural Order No. 12:
Regarding the Parties’ Privilege Claims, § 4.6;

Exhibit CL-187, Diana Kuitkowski, The Law Applicable to Privilege Claims in International Arbitration, 32(1) J. INTL ARB.
65 (2015), p. 97;

Exhibit CL-188, Carlos Rios and Francisco Javier Rios v. Republic of Chile, (CSID Case No. ARB/17/16, Procedural Order
No. 7, 4 October 2018 (Unofficial English Translation), {[ 26;

Exhibit CL-189, Fabian von Schlabrendorff & Audley Sheppard, Conflict of Legal Privileges in International Arbitration: An
Attempt to Find a Holistic Solution, in GLOBAL REFLECTIONS ON INTERNATIONAL LAW, COMMERCE AND DISPUTE
RESOLUTION: LIBER AMICORUM IN HONOUR OF ROBERT BRINER (2005), Sections 8.5 and 10;

 

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

Exhibit CL-190, Klaus Peter Berger, Evidentiary Privileges: Best Practice Standards versus/and Arbitral Discretion, 22(4)
ArB. INT’L 501 (2006), pp. 512-13, 515-19;

Exhibit CL-191, Jeffrey Waincymer, PROCEDURE AND EVIDENCE IN INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION (2012), pp. 805-806;

Exhibit CL-192, Jennifer Kirby, Evolution and the Discoverability of In-House Counsel Communications, 35(2) J. INT’L ARB.
147 (2018).

 

Summary of Canada’s
Position

 

 

The Claimant must establish that its assertions of attorney-client privilege qualify under the applicable law.

The applicable law is that of the jurisdiction with the closest connection to the communication: The choice of the applicable law
with respect to attorney-client privilege should be determined by considering the domestic law of the jurisdiction with the
“closest connection” to the communication over which privilege is claimed. The closest connection test has received wide
acceptance in the international arbitration community and been frequently applied by international arbitral tribunals, either
explicitly or by applying the relevant domestic law (RL-256;, RL-257, RL-258, RL-251, RL-248, RL-247, RL-260, RL-261).

Article 9.3(c) of the IBA Rules provides that the Tribunal may take into account “the expectations of the Parties and their
advisors at the time the legal impediment or privilege is said to have arisen” (emphasis added). The Commentary to Article 9 of
the IBA Rules states: “Article 9.3(c) expresses the guiding principle that expectations of the parties and their advisors at the time
the legal impediment or privilege is said to have arisen should be taken into consideration. Often, these expectations will be
formed by the approach to privilege prevailing in the home jurisdiction of such persons.” (CL-184).

With respect to communications between a corporation and its in-house counsel located and providing advice in that same
jurisdiction, the applicable law on attorney-client privilege is undoubtedly the law “prevailing in the home jurisdiction”: Dutch
law for communications between Vimpelcom and its in-house counsel; Egyptian law for communications between GTH and its
in-house counsel (for much of the relevant period i.e. until GTH’s move to the Netherlands); and Canadian law for
communications between Wind and its in-house counsel.” With respect to communications between one of the corporations and
its outside counsel in another jurisdiction, the applicable law should be considered on a case-by-case basis. The applicable law
will inform issues related to scope, waiver, and the application of common interest privilege.

The MEN standard is inadequate and inappropriate: The application of an amorphous MEN standard is unjustified and would
result in an unpredictable and unfair result inconsistent with the parties’ expectations:

(1) The application of an MEN standard to attorney-client privilege has received virtually no support in the jurisprudence in
international investment or commercial arbitration. The Claimant’s assertion that “investment treaty tribunals have

 

 

2 For VimpelCom, the headquarters, base of business operations, and key personal are located in the Netherlani

 

   

The place of incorporation is not necessarily the place of a corporation’s domi that Veon is incorporated in Bermuda.

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

 

 

overwhelmingly moved towards the MEN approach” (Claimant’s Letter of November 12, 2018, {[ 25) relies on two

cases, and one, Philip Morris, did not endorse the MFN approach.

Article 9.3(c) of the IBA Rules refers to the expectations of the parties when the advice was provided and the duty of

confidentiality of privilege arose. It does not refer to the expectations of the Parties at the time of litigation. This

approach would undermine predictability and introduce uncertainty at the time of communications between lawyer and
client.

(3) Far from ensuring the equality of the parties, the application of a MFN approach to privilege would have the opposite
result: it would result in the Claimant being able to claim privilege beyond what is available to Canada under Canadian
law. It would be unfair for a Party to benefit from a higher protection than the relevant national laws, as this would
create a kind of “super privilege”. For such reasons, as Arbitrator Born notes, the MFN approach: “lacks a satisfactory
analytical basis. Privileges are only applied at all because they are created, like other legal rights, by national law. It is
very difficult to justify granting one party legal rights that it does not otherwise possess, merely because its counter-
party enjoys them. That same logic, applied to matters of capacity, authority, corporate organization, impossibility,
force majeure and the like, would produce arbitrary and irrational results; there is no more cogent reason to adopt this
analysis for privileges.” (RL-256) This overly broad interpretation of privilege has led the Claimant to withhold from
production more than three times the number of documents it produced.

(

7)

 

The jurisdiction of Counsel’s bar of call is not the determining factor: The client’s domicile is more appropriate for determining
the closest connection than the jurisdiction of the counsel’s bar of call:

i)

(1) The client’s interest is of prime importance in an arbitration proceeding when the non-disclosure of a document is at
stake (RL-256, RL-259). The issue in this privilege dispute is not counsel’s assertion of confidentiality and expectation
of privilege, but the client’s.

(2) Using the counsel’s bar of call to determine applicable law means that different laws may apply to the same client,
depending on which counsel it contacted for legal advice (RL-256). In contrast, relying on the client’s domicile ensures
a consistent and predictable standard for each client.

(3) Many of the Claimant’s counsel are admitted to multiple bars, creating uncertainty over which law applies (RL-256,
RL-259). Relying on the client’s domicile avoids these issues.

Extension of attorney-client privilege to in-house counsel under each applicable law

Applying the closest connection test, the Claimant must demonstrate that communications with in-house counsel qualify as

privi

ileged under the law of the client’s home jurisdiction.

(1) Dutch law requires in-house counsel to be admitted to the Dutch Bar for attorney-client privilege to protect
communications between a corporation and its in-house counsel (C-415). Since VimpelCom’s headquarters and key
management and legal functions are located in the Netherlands, its communications with in-house counsel that are
admitted to the bar in other jurisdictions, but not the Dutch Bar, are not privileged. Thus VimpelCom’s communications

 

4

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

ii)

(2)

with the following in-house counsel is not privileged: J (admitted: New Zealand, England and Wales),
(Illinois, USA), i (Ecypt), (England and Wales), a) (New York
and D.C., USA), and gg (New York, USA). To the extent that GTH’s communications with the following
in-house counsel occurred after the move to the Netherlands, they are not privileged: NN (New Zealand,
England and Wales), i (Ecypt), i (England and Wales, France), a (England
and Wales), i (Alberta, Canada), and (gg (Texas and New York, USA).
With respect to GTH’s communications with in-house counsel prior to the move to the Netherlands, Canada notes that
Egyptian law does not recognize a distinct doctrine of ‘privilege’. Under Article 65 and Article 79 of the Egyptian
Advocacy Law No. 17 of 1983, lawyers are required to not disclose any confidential information of their client at the
client’s request. This is an obligation on counsel regarding confidential information. Although a party has a right to
prevent disclosure of confidential information to the general public, in international arbitration proceedings such as this
one, a tribunal can order one party to share confidential information to the other party with a requirement to not disclose
it generally. Under Article 20 of the Evidence in Civil and Commercial Matters Law, a party may request the court to
order the other party to produce any written document in the course of the dispute, “if the law permits requesting it”.
The governing law of these proceedings enables the Tribunal to order each Party to produce documents responsive to
the issues in the case. Accordingly, if Egyptian law applies to the Claimant, there is no separate protection for attorney-
client privilege. The result would be the same with respect to communications between GTH and gg. who is
admitted in Egypt, if the Tribunal adopts the counsel’s bar of call instead of the client’s domicile to determine the
applicable law.
Canada does not contest that attorney-client privilege may extend to in-counsel admitted to the bar in Canada, the U.S.,
England and Wales, France, and New Zealand. Yet as discussed below, all of these jurisdictions extend the privilege
only to communications of in-house counsel providing legal advice, not business advice, and provided certain specific
conditions are met.

  

Waiver of attorney-client privilege through disclosure of legal advice across separate legal entities, and
exceptions for common interest, if any, under each applicable law

 

 

Canada objects to the Claimant’s claim of privilege over extensive communications that were shared between separate

corporations, as summarized below and in Canada’s letter to the Tribunal dated November 2, 2018 (see Section II.B). Privileged

communication shared with a third party is no longer confidential, and the privilege is presumed waived.

Article 9(3)(d) of the IBA Rules provides that the Tribunal may consider “any possible waiver of any applicable legal
impediment or privilege by virtue of consent, earlier disclosure, affirmative use of the Document, statement, oral
communication or advice contained therein, or otherwise”. The Commentary to the IBA Rules provides that “Article 9.3(d)
encapsulates an important exception to privilege in many countries, namely waiver.” (CL-184) The Claimant asserts that
because of a “common interest privilege” there is no waiver of attorney-client privilege over the communications shared

 

between different related corporations. Article 9(3) of the IBA Rules does not recognize an exception to the waiver of privilege

 

5

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

 

 

for common interest in the case of commercial transactions, but only recognizes in Article 9(3)(b) an exception with respect to
settlement negotiations.

The onus is on the Claimant to demonstrate: (1) the applicable law of privilege for each communication recognizes common
interest privilege, including any conditions to qualify for it; and (2) that the communication qualifies for common interest
privilege under the applicable law. The Claimant has failed to meet this burden.

Canada notes that the recognition of, and rules on, common interest privilege vary across jurisdictions. For example, the New
York Court of Appeals recently affirmed that common interest privilege does not extend to commercial transactions. Three of
the Claimant’s counsel are admitted to the bar in New York State: es Tf the
Tribunal applies the domestic law of the counsel’s bar of call, the Claimant may not protect communications with these counsel
from disclosure. In other U.S. jurisdictions, the “community of-interest” (or common-interest) privilege is limited to sharing
information between attorneys rather than sharing with or among clients, which destroys the privilege. In Canada, common
interest privilege may protect communications to allow parties to pursue commercial transactions. Yet the parties must have a
“sufficient common interest” (R-294). In both Canada and the U.S., the parties must not be adverse in interests. If a subsidiary is
not wholly owned, there may be no common interest with the parent, particularly where the parent does not have a controlling
interest in the subsidiary (R-303, R-304). Furthermore, Dutch law does not appear to recognize any the concept of common
interest privilege.

iii) | Waiver of attorney-client privilege through disclosure of legal advice to third parties, and limited waiver
protections, if any, under each applicable law

A communication is only privileged if it is made in confidence. If persons other than the client, its attorney, or possibly persons
integral to the attorney-client relationship are present, the communication is not made in confidence, and the privilege does not
attach or is waived. In order for attorney-client privilege to apply to communications shared with third parties, the Claimant
must demonstrate: (1) the applicable law for each correspondence nevertheless treats such communications as privileged, or
protected by limited waiver; and (2) the correspondence qualifies for these protections under the applicable law. The Claimant
has failed to meet this burden.

Canada notes that not all jurisdictions recognize limited waiver or other protections against disclosure following waiver to third
parties. In Canada, a third-party communication may be privileged only if it is “performing a service on the client’s behalf
which is integral to the client-solicitor function.” (R-305). The third party must act as a “translator” or conduit directly between
the client and solicitor, effectively to interpret the meaning of a corporation’s technical materials into terms that are
understandable to the lawyer so as to enable the provision of the legal advice. If the third party’s work is related to a business
function — for instance, as a financial advisor, tax advisor, or public relations firm — but is only ancillary to the solicitor’s
function, the ications are not privileged (R-306). In the U.S., courts tend to restrict the privilege to those agents who are

 

 

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

 

 

closely involved and of great importance in facilitating the attorney-client relationship, such as situations analogous to
interpretation (R-307).

The concept of “limited waiver” — where it is recognized at all — is even more restrictively applied. In Canada, the two main
cases to address limited waiver involved disclosure to only auditors (C-406 and R-308). Limited waiver does not extend to other
third-parties, such as investment banks. In the U.S., the concept of “selective waiver”, which is similar to Canada’s “limited
waiver”, has been rejected in most circuit courts (R-310, R-311, R-312). Dutch law does not appear to recognize a concept of
“limited waiver”. The Supreme Court of the Netherlands recently held that attorney-client privilege may be waived when
communications are sent to a third party, including a professional entrusted with privileged information.

On this issue, we refer the Tribunal to the following exhibits and legal authori
RL-256, Annabelle Méckesch, Attorney-client Privilege in International Arbitration (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017)
(“Mockesch”), {§ 8.110, 8.141, 8.148, 8.202, 8.203;

RL-257, Jiirgen Wirtgen and others v. Czech Republic (PCA Case No. 2014-03) Final Award, 11 October 2017, {| 168;
RL-258, BSG Resources Limited v. Republic of Guinea (ICSID Case No .ARB/14/22) Procedural Order No. 4, 25 November
2015,  6(c);

RL-251, Vito G. Gallo v. The Government of Canada (UNCITRAL) Procedural Order No. 3, 8 April 2009, § 41: (“domestic
legal concepts of solicitor-client privilege are recognized and protected by international law.”)

RL-248, Glamis Gold, Ltd. v. United States of America (UNCITRAL) Decision on Parties’ Requests for Production of
Documents Withheld on the Grounds of Privilege, 17 November 2005, {{ 20;

RL-247, Pope & Talbot Inc. v. Government of Canada (UNCITRAL) Decision by Tribunal, 6 September 2000, {{ 1.9;

RL-260, Merrill & Ring Forestry L.P. v. Government of Canada (UNCITRAL) Decision of the Tribunal on Production of
Documents in Respect of Which Cabinet Privilege Has Been Invoked, 3 September 2008, {[ 15;

RL-261, Windstream Energy LLC v. Government of Canada (UNCITRAL) Procedural Order No. 4, 23 February 2015, {[ 3.1;
CL-186, Philip Morris Asia Limited v. Commonwealth of Australia (UNCITRAL) Procedural Order No. 12 Regarding the
Parties’ Privilege Claims, 14 November 2014, { 4.6 (in fact, the tribunal in Philip Morris declined to rely on any national law at
all in determining the applicable privilege standard);

RL-259, Steven Bradford, Conflict of Laws and the Attorney-Client Privilege: A Territorial Solution (1991), pp. 909, 948, 951;

CL-184, IBA Rules Commentary, p. 25;

 

 

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

 

 

C-415, Decision No. ECLI:NL:HR:2013:BY6101, Dutch Supreme Court, Judgment, 15 March 2013 (Unofficial English
Translation;

R-295, Teleglobe, pp. 28, 29, 37-38: (“The Teleglobe court explained: “[t]he attorney-sharing requirement helps prevent abuse
by ensuring that the common interest privilege only supplants the disclosure rule when attorneys, not clients, decide to share
information in order to coordinate legal strategies.”);

R-299, Delaware Uniform Rules of Evidence, Rule 510;

R-300, Ambac Assurance Corp. v. Countrywide Home Loans Inc., 36 N.Y.S.3d 838 (Ct. App., 2016);

R-301, Ramada Inns, Inc. v. Dow Jones & Co., 523 A.2d 968, 972 (Del. Super. Ct. 1986);

C-409, Maximum Ventures Inc. v. de Graaf, 2007 BCCA 510, 409 W.A.C. 215, J 14;

R-294, Iggillis Holdings Inc v Canada (Minister of National Revenue), 2018 FCA 51 (FCA), {| 41;

R-302, Pitney Bowes [Pitney Bowes of Canada v. Her Majesty the Queen, 2003 FCT 214, 225 D.L.R. (4th) 747];
R-303, Trenwick America Litigation Trust v. Ernst & Young, L.L.P., 906 A.2d 168

R-304, Neuberger Berman Real Estate Income Fund, Inc. v. Lola Brown Trust No. 1B, et al., 230 F.R.D. 398

R-305, General Accident Assurance Co. v. Chrusz (1999), 45 O.R. 3d 321 (Can. Ont. C.A.);

R-306, Camp Dev. Corp. v. S. Coast Greater Vancouver Transp. Auth., 2011 BCSC 88 (CanLII) (Can. B.C. Sup. Ct.);

R-309, Kathryn Chalmers and Andrew Cunningham, Privilege from Canadian and U.S. Perspectives: Reverence vs. Skepticism,
in Law and Business Review of the Americas, Volume 19, Number 3 (2013), pp. 305, 314;

R-307, Cavallaro v. United States, 284 F.3d 236, 247 (1st Cir. 2002);

R-313, United States v. Kovel, 296 F.2d 918, 921 (2d Cir. 1961);

C-406, Philip Servs. Corp. v. Ontario Sec. Comm'n (2005), 77 O.R. 3d 209 (Can. Ont. Div. Ct.);

R-308, Canada (Minister of Nat'l Revenue) v. Grant Thornton et al., 2012 FC 1313, para. 48 (Fed. Ct.).
R-310, United States v. Mass. Inst. of Tech., 129 F.3d 681, 685 (1st Cir. 1997);

R-311, Westinghouse Elec. Corp. v. Philippines, 951 F.2d 1414, 1424-27 (3d Cir. 1991);

R-312, In re Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp. Billing Practices Litig., 293 F.3d 289, 302 (6th Cir. 2002).

 

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

Arbitral Tribunal’s
Order

The abundant, and often contradictory, authorities exhibited by the Parties in support of their arguments
in this Schedule are a reminder that the nature and the scope of legal privilege differ across jurisdictions.
Even though the principle of legal privilege is recognized in most jurisdictions, there is no generally
recognized standard at an international level to which this Arbitral Tribunal could refer. Likewise, there is
no consensus on the characterization of legal privilege in terms of procedural or substantive rules. That
said, in the present proceedings, the issue arises in the context of a procedural matter, namely, the
production of documents as ordered in PO 3. Consequently, legal privilege shall be examined as a
procedural matter. However, the practical consequences of that distinction should not be overestimated.
As can be seen in the Tribunal’s decision below, it is of little importance for the ultimate outcome of the
disputed entitlement to legal privilege whether that issue would have been considered as a_ substantive
matter.

Although the onus of establishing the grounds for legal privilege seems not to be in dispute, the Tribunal
confirms for the avoidance of doubt that claiming an exception to the general duty to produce documents
responsive to the Tribunal’s production order must be established by the party claiming that exception,
here GTH.

In deciding on this first Outstanding Issue, the Arbitral Tribunal will first determine the law applicable to
legal privilege. It shall then address each of the three sub-questions identified by the Parties under this
Outstanding Issue 1.

(i) The law applicable to legal privilege

Canada claims that legal privilege should be determined pursuant to the domestic law of the jurisdiction
with the closest connection to the ication over which privilege is claimed.

 

 

 

 

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

The conflict of laws rule submitted by Canada follows a functional approach. It has been applied by many
tribunals, including in CL-188 submitted by Claimant.* The attractiveness of this test stems from its
reliance on the closeness of the relevant connecting factor — an objective standard — rather than on State
interests. This makes it particularly relevant in international arbitration.

The Tribunal notes with appreciation that the Parties have not indulged in assessing every possible
connecting factor, and they are legion.* Instead, GTH claims the application of a most favored nation
(MEN) approach to legal privilege, with the consequence that a unique standard would thus apply to the
communications of all in-house counsel asserting legal privilege, regardless of their bar of call or of the
law otherwise applicable to the communication giving rise to the privilege claim. Canada counters by
claiming the application of the law prevailing in the home jurisdiction of each counsel as being the
jurisdiction with the closest connection to the relevant communication.

The Tribunal has difficulty in accommodating GTH’s argument that seeks to disconnect legal privilege
from any national law, for legal privilege is first and foremost an entitlement created by national law just
like capacity and authority. It arises only in relation to legal advice extended by counsel pursuant to a
license to practice conferred by her bar of call, the rules or law of which also protect that practice by
conferring legal privilege on communications consisting of legal advice or counsel work product. If MFN

 

 

were to be applied on the basis of granting “the broadest protection” to all in-house counsel as claimed by

 

 

3 CL-188, Carlos Rios and Francisco Javier Rios v. Republic of Chile, \CSID Case No. ARB/17/16, Procedural Order No. 7, 4 October 2018 (Unofficial English Translation),
§25. See more broadly RL-256, Annabelle Méckesch, Attorney-client Privilege in International Arbitration (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017) (“Méckesch”), RL-257,
Jiirgen Wirtgen and others v. Czech Republic (PCA Case No. 2014-03) Final Award, 11 October 2017; RL-258, BSG Resources Limited v. Republic of Guinea (ICSID Case
No. ARB/14/22) Procedural Order No. 4, 25 November 2015; RL-251, Vito G. Gallo v. The Government of Canada (UNCITRAL) Procedural Order No. 3, 8 April 2009
(“Gallo v. Canada”); RL-248, Glamis Gold, Ltd. v. United States of America (UNCITRAL) Decision on Parties’ Requests for Production of Documents Withheld on the
Grounds of Privilege, 17 November 2005; RL-247, Pope & Talbot Inc. v. Government of Canada (UNCITRAL) Decision by Tribunal, 6 September 2000; RL-260, Merrill &
Ring Forestry L.P. v. Government of Canada (UNCITRAL) Decision of the Tribunal on Production of Documents in Respect of Which Cabinet Privilege Has Been Invoked,
3 September 2008; RL-261, Windstream Energy LLC v. Government of Canada (UNCITRAL) Procedural Order No. 4, 23 February 2015 (as submitted by Canada).

  

4 RL-256, Méckesch (the chapter reviewing the multiple possible connecting factors, outside the exhibited excerpts).

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

 

 

GTH, it would lead to the entitlement of any in-house counsel to assert legal privilege even where that
counsel is not admitted in a jurisdiction which allows for privilege to be asserted over in-house
communications, or is not admitted to legal practice in any bar at all.

The Arbitral Tribunal considers that the recommendation set out in the IBA Rules for tribunals to take
into account fairness and equality as between the parties that are subject to different legal or ethical rules?
cannot lead ipso facto to bestowing upon all in-house counsel an identical entitlement to asserting legal
privilege even though, in different circumstances, other tribunals might have preferred a_ different
reasoning. This Arbitral Tribunal considers that applying such an autonomous standard in the abstract
would negate the very foundation of this Tribunal’s decision that each claim for legal privilege should be
determined on the basis of the domestic law applicable in the particular communication over which
privilege is claimed. The fact that international law applies in this arbitration? does not preclude the
Arbitral Tribunal from applying domestic law to a privilege claim. This is all the more so given that
domestic principles of legal privilege are recognized and protected by international law.’ The Tribunal is
satisfied that fairness and equality, as recommended in the IBA Rules, are maintained where the Tribunal
decides, for instance, that Canadian law attaches legal privilege to in-house counsel legal advice subject
to that law and upholds the entitlement of in-house Canadian qualified counsel to legal privilege
regardless of whether the relevant communication involves claimant or respondent, corporate or
government in-house counsel. Conversely, the Tribunal considers that there no convincing justification,
in the particular facts of the present situation, for the claimed application in the name of equity or the

 

5 Article 9(3)(e).

© See CL-185, Postova banka, a.s.
7PO 1, $1.1.

® RL 251, Gallo v. Canada at $41.

and ISTROKAPITAL SE v. Hellenic Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/13/8, Procedural Order No. 6, 20 July 2014, §16.

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

 

 

principle of equal treatment a one-size-fits-all “broadest protection” autonomous standard to all in-house
counsel, regardless of the privilege rules that apply in their bar of call.?

The Tribunal is likewise not persuaded by GTH’s argument that an autonomous common standard should
be applied to avoid the complexities due to the disparity amongst domestic laws pertaining to legal
privilege. Having to consider different laws in relation to a given situation is but a corollary of cross-
border business realities in which GTH thrives. In particular, the Tribunal does not consider that there is
evidence that an autonomous legal standard governing privilege claims has yet crystallized in
international law.

Moreover, there is no evidence that Canada has broadened its national legal privilege rules to
disadvantage GTH in these proceedings.'° Therefore, there is no superior interest to protect by discarding
the national approach rule in favour of the MEN standard. In coming to this conclusion, the Tribunal
notes that, as of today, an MFN approach to legal privilege is far from being upheld as an international
principle of law.'' As such, applying such a standard could defeat the Parties’ expectations, which is a
key feature in the IBA Rules as further discussed in the next paragraph.'? Indeed, were the Tribunal to
indulge in devising a standard of legal privilege after a communication is issued, instead of referring to
pre-existing domestic standards, the parties could be deprived of the possibility to predict at the time of
their communication whether it will be protected.

 

° R-293, Akzo Nobel Chemicals Ltd and Akcros Chemicals Ltd v. European Commission, Case C-550/07, Court of Justice of the European Union (“Akzo Nobel”), 14 September

2010, $58.

10 See GTH Letter of 12 November 2018, §27.

\' The Tribunal notes GTH’s contradictory reference in the same sentence to an “overwhelming” move by tribunals towards the MFN approach to privilege and to an “emerging”
consensus, cf: GTH Letter of 12 November 2018, §25.

'2 Interestingly, the CJEU reviewed the domestic laws of the Member States of the European Union when devising the privilege standard in AM & S and Akzo Nobel.

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

In selecting the law of the jurisdiction with the closest connection to the situation, the Tribunal is mindful
of IBA Article 9(3)(c) which recommends that the tribunal takes into account when considering issues of
legal privilege, the expectation of the parties and their advisors at the time the legal privilege is said to
have arisen.'? The Tribunal considers that, of the many connecting factors that could be considered to
establish a claim to legal privilege, the law of the jurisdiction of the counsel’s bar of call is the more
convincing because it is the more predictable at the time when privilege attaches. Every other factor could
be incidental or manipulatable. Often, that law will be the one prevailing in the home jurisdiction of the
relevant counsel, as pointed out in the Commentary to article 9 of the IBA Rules.'* As Canada submits,
Dutch law would be expected to apply in relation to asserting privilege on communications between
Vimpelcom and its in-house counsel, and Egyptian law would be expected to apply to communications
between GTH and its in-house counsel. The above should remain constant even where counsel offering
the legal advice is based in a different jurisdiction from her bar of call or from the place where the
recipient of the advice is situated. In such a case, the law applicable to privilege in the jurisdiction where
counsel is admitted and which allows counsel to extend the relevant legal advice, should apply as being
the closest to the Parties’ expectation at the relevant time. This is because legal privilege attaches to the
tules of professional secrecy that rest on the admission to the bar rather than to the client receiving the
advice. Accordingly, the Tribunal declines to follow Canada’s submission to the contrary. If there are
limitations to that privilege, counsel is expected to so indicate to her client given that the client is entitled
to assume that it can transmit protected information to its counsel.

Upholding the law of counsel’s bar of call in relation to legal advice given by counsel pursuant to her
admission to that bar is all the more convincing given that lawyers practicing across borders can be
disciplined before their bar of call if they infringe their ethical obligations when rendering legal services
outside of their home jurisdiction. Referring to the relevant bar rules pursuant to which counsel is offering

 

 

 

 

5 Canada refers to subparagraph (c) of Article 9(3)(c) while, surprisingly, GTH omits any reference thereto, preferring instead referring only to subparagraph (e).

'4 CL-184, IBA Rules, Commentary on the revised text of the 2010 IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Arbitration.

13

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

 

 

the particular legal advice over which privilege is claimed likewise sets aside the risk of confusion or of
unpredictability if counsel were to be admitted to legal practice in several jurisdictions.

The presumption that the applicable law is the law of the bar of call of counsel asserting legal privilege
under which the disputed communication was issued, may be set aside in favour of another national law if
it is established that, in the specific circumstances, that the other national law presents a manifestly closer
connection with the situation. The Arbitral Tribunal found no such evidence in the Parties’ submissions in
relation to Claimant’s assertion of legal privilege in respect of in-house counsel’s communications.

(ii) Extension of attorney-client privilege to in-house counsel under each applicable law

GTH claims privilege for the communications of its in-house counsel admitted in the jurisdictions listed
in Appendix A to GTH’s letter of 25 November 2018, namely, Canada, Egypt, the Netherlands, the
United States, England and Wales, and New Zealand.'> Canada denies that any such privilege exists for
in-house counsel in the EU or in Egypt, but does not contest privilege for the other jurisdictions listed
above.'° The ‘Tribunal needs therefor only to determine the entitlement of in-house counsel
communications to legal privilege in the EU (in effect, the Netherlands) and Egypt.

As concerns the EU, Canada bases its argument on the Judgment of the Court of Justice of the European
Union (CJEU) in the Akzo Nobel case. '7 In that Judgment, the scope of the authority of which is disputed
by the Parties, CJEU confirmed an earlier judgment of the Court in AM & S Europe Limited v.

 

'5 GTH Letter of 12 November 2018, §30 er seq.

16

7 R-293, Akzo Nobel.

Canada’s Submission of 2 November 2018, p. 7, and Canada’s submissions in this Schedule, supra.

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

 

 

Commission'® and rejected the claim for attorney-client privilege in relation to communications with in-
house counsel admitted to the bar in the Netherlands. The Court found that the requirement of
independence, which is inherent to the entitlement to legal privilege, “means the absence of any
employment relationship between the lawyer and his client.”'? The Court went on to assert in general
terms:

“An in-house lawyer, despite his enrolment with a Bar or Law Society and the professional ethical
obligations to which he is, as a result, subject, does not enjoy the same degree of independence from his
employer as a lawyer working in an external law firm does in relation to his client. Consequently, an in-
house lawyer is less able to deal effectively with any conflicts between his professional obligations and
the aims of his client.”?°

 

GTH contested the general scope that Canada sought to grant to the Akzo Nobel Judgment of the CJEU.
Relying on the Opinion of Advocate General Kokott,?! GTH submitted that the Judgment “applies only to
competition proceedings and investigations conducted by the Commission; it does not affect the law
governing national proceedings.” GTH also referred the Tribunal to a decision of the Hoge Raad
rendered on 15 March 20137* which decided that the scope of the CJEU Judgment in Akzo Nobel is
restricted to competition investigations by the EU Commission under European law, but recognized
outside that situation in-house counsel’s entitlement to assert legal privilege where those counsel are
admitted to the bar and have their employment contracts guarantee their independence.

 

8 Case 155/79 [1982] E.C.R. 01575, referred to approvingly by the CJEU in R-293, Akzo Nobel at §50.

9 Thid. at $44.
2 Tid. at $45.

21 C-411, Akzo Nobel Chemicals Ltd and Akcros Chemicals Ltd v. European Commission, Court of Justice of the European Union, Case C-550/07, Opinion of Advocate General

Kokott, 29 April 2010, $186.

22 GTH Letter of 12 November 2018, §30(a).
23 C-415, Decision No. ECLI:NL:HR:2013:BY6101, Dutch Supreme Court, Judgment, 15 March 2013 (Unofficial English Translation).

15

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

 

 

While aware of the Hoge Raad decision and referring to it elsewhere in this Schedule, Canada chose not
to address its relationship with the CJIEU Judgment in Akzo Nobel.

After examining the relevant authorities, the Tribunal notes that several paragraphs of the Akzo Nobel
Judgment support its limited scope interpretation advocated by GTH. They include the following
excerpts:

— In §101: “(...) the General Court's interpretation in the judgment under appeal that exchanges within an
undertaking or group with in-house lawyers are not covered by legal professional privilege in the context of an
investigation carried out by the Commission does not give rise to any legal uncertainty as to the scope of that
protection.”

— In §102: “The Commission’s powers under Regulation No 17 and Regulation No 1/2003 may be distinguished
from those in enquiries which may be carried out at national level. Both types of procedure are based on a
division of powers between the various competition authorities. The rules on legal professional privilege may,
therefore, vary according to that division of powers and the rules relevant to it.”

— In §103: “The Court has held in that connection that restrictive practices are viewed differently by European
Union law and national law. Whilst Articles 101 TFEU and 102 TFEU view them in the light of the obstacles
which may result for trade between the Member States, each body of national legislation proceeds on the basis
of considerations peculiar to it and considers restrictive practices solely in that context.”

— In §114: “However, in the present case, the Court is called on to decide on the legality of a decision taken by an
institution of the European Union on the basis of a regulation adopted at European Union level, which, moreover,
does not refer back to national law.”

— In §115: “The uniform interpretation and application of the principle of legal professional privilege at European
Union level are essential in order that inspections by the Cc ission in anti-trust p dings may be carried
out under conditions in which the undertakings concerned are treated equally. If that were not the case, the use of
rules or legal concepts in national law and deriving from the legislation of a Member State would adversely affect

 

 

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

the unity of European Union law. Such an interpretation and application of that legal system cannot depend on
the place of the inspection or any specific features of the national rules.”

— In §117: “In accordance with the provisions of Article 103 TFEU, it is for the European Union to lay down the
regulations or directives to give effect to the principles in Articles 101 TFEU and 102 TFEU concerning the
competition rules applicable to undertakings. That power aims, in particular, to ensure observance of the
prohibitions referred to in those articles by the imposition of fines and periodic penalty payments and to define the
Commission’s role in the application of those provisions.”

All the above lend credence to GTH’s contention that the Akzo Nobel Judgment is of a limited scope: it
only applies to investigations carried out by the Commission under Regulation No. 17 and Regulation No.
1/2003 (i.e., EU competition investigations under articles 101 & 102 TFEU). Importantly, this reading of
the ECJ’s judgment — and of the scope of EU legal privilege — is the only reading that would be consistent
with the Hoge Raad decision and, although not contested by Canada, by English case law as well.”4 If the
CJEU’s principle denying in-house lawyers legal privilege was applicable to all kinds of legal
proceedings on EU territory, the decisions of the Dutch and English courts upholding such privilege for
in-house lawyers would be contrary to EU law. The Tribunal saw no indication that this is the case.

Accordingly, the Tribunal decides that the Hoge Raad decision in C-415, not the CJEU in Akzo Nobel,
applies in this arbitration, outside any EU competition law aspect, for the purpose of determining whether
legal privilege can be claimed by in-house counsel admitted to practice in the Netherlands. However,
GTH’s entitlement to claim legal privilege is predicated on its evidencing that (a) the two relevant in-
house counsel listed in Appendix A were admitted to the bar in the Netherlands as established by the
production of a bar certificate contemporaneous to the date of each communication over which privilege
is claimed, and (b) the employment contract of those counsel provides for guarantee of independence
clauses in compliance with the rules of ethics of the bar in the Netherlands. Absent such an evidence,
GTH is ordered to produce without delay communications with in-house counsel who are only admitted
to the bar in the Netherlands, as ordered in the Tribunal’s PO 3.

 

 

 

 

24 ENRC v SFO [2018] EWCA Civ 2006.

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

 

 

As concerns GTH’s claim for legal privilege under Egyptian law, the Arbitral Tribunal agrees with
Canada’s argument”? that GTH fails to evidence that Egyptian law accords legal privilege to in-house
counsel. In fact, Egyptian Law 17 of 1983 on the Profession of Advocacy”® deals only with the legal
practice of Advocates, i.e., external counsel, as shown passim in the Law.

As concerns the territorial scope of such privilege, the Arbitral Tribunal does not accept that only a
lawyer entitled to practice in the State where privilege has attached to the communication, may invoke
privilege. For the same reasons discussed above in relation with Akzo Nobel, this position held by the
CJEU in in AM & S is limited to EU competition investigations and has no bearing on the present
dispute.’

The Tribunal notes that Canada does not contest the entitlement to legal privilege of in-house counsel
who are members of the Law Society of England and Wales, and of New Zealand.

Based on the above, and after reviewing Appendix A to GTH’s letter of 25 November 2018, the Arbitral
Tribunal upholds the entitlement to legal privilege of in-house counsel admitted in Canada, the USA,
England and Wales, the Netherlands, and New Zealand, subject to other causes leading to the loss of that
privilege as discussed below. Conversely, the Tribunal rejects legal privilege claims by in-house counsel
who are only admitted in Egypt.

Accordingly, the Arbitral Tribunal orders GTH to produce without delay communications with in-house
counsel who is only admitted to the bar in Egypt, as ordered in the Tribunal’s PO 3.

 

°5 Canada’s Submission of 2 November 2018, p. 7, footnote 15.

26 ©-403, Law Governing the Profession of Lawyers, Law No. 17 of 1983 (Egypt) (Unofficial English Translation).

27 Case 155/79 AM & S Europe Limited v. Commission [1982] E.

 

01575, §22 (“Viewed in that context Regulation No 17 must be interpreted as protecting, in its turn, the

confidentiality of written communications between lawyer and client subject to those two conditions, and thus incorporating such elements of that protection as are common to

the laws of the Member States.”).

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

 

 

(iii) Waiver of attorney-client privilege through disclosure of legal advice across separate legal
entities, and exceptions for common interest, if any, under each applicable law

It is uncontested that GTH shared legal advice with separate persons who were not the recipient of said
advice. Yet, GTH claims that the privileged nature of the same remains unchanged.”* Canada disagrees
and claims that such sharing should lead to a finding that GTH has waived legal privilege because a
shared communication is no longer made in confidence. The Tribunal notes support for Canada’s position
in the exhibited authorities holding that sharing privileged communications signals that the client does not
intend to keep counsel’s communication secret, and the privilege ceases to apply.”

GTH’s advocating for a MFN approach to legal privilege has been dismissed by the Arbitral Tribunal
earlier in this Order. Accordingly, it is with reference to the domestic law applicable to the claimed
privilege that the Tribunal shall determine whether a waiver may be found in the present instance.

In that respect, Canada recognises that certain jurisdictions — including Canada — recognise an exception
to the waiver of privilege where parties have a common (or joint) interest in the outcome of the
proceedings or a commercial transaction.*? However, Canada claims that the interests of VimpelCom,
GTH, Wind Mobile and Wind Canada are adverse, with the result that there is no exception to the waiver
once given.*' Canada avers an additional separate argument, namely, that the IBA Rules do not recognise

 

°8 Canada’s Annex 1.

2 R-295, Teleglobe USA Inc v. BCE Inc (2007) U.S. Court of Appeal, Third Circuit, 06-2915 (“Teleglobe”) at p. 29.

3° Canada’s Submi:

 

ion of 2 November 2018, p. 9, citing R-294, [ggillis Holdings Inc v Canada (Minister of National Revenue), 2018 FCA 51 (FCA) (“Iggillis”). See also

Canada’s submission in this Schedule.

5 R-295, Teleglobe.

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

an exception to the waiver of privilege for common interest in the case of commercial transactions, but
only in relation to settlements as stated in Article 9(3)(b).

The Arbitral Tribunal notes GTH’s denial of the existence of adverse interests between the various

entities. Without going as far as endorsing the proposal for “very obviously aligned economic interests”
postulated by GTH,” the Tribunal is not convinced that the use by VimpelCom and Wind Canada of
different counsel for the sale agreement or i] EE HEM constitutes of itself compelling

evidence of adverse interests as Canada claims.

In the absence of evidence of adverse interests, the Tribunal is left with (a) the certainty that privileged
information was shared beyond the strict counsel-client relationship as listed in Canada’s Annex 1 and
(b) the contention by GTH that no waiver should result therefrom given the commonality of interest
between the persons sharing such information.

As Canada submits, the onus is on GTH to demonstrate that the law applicable to privilege for each
communication recognises common interest privilege and that the communication qualifies for common
interest privilege. The Tribunal considers that R-294 demonstrates that Canadian law accords common
interest privilege as does R-295 in relation to the United States. Given that the Tribunal has decided
above that in-house counsel admitted in Egypt is not entitled to assert legal privilege in this arbitration,
GTH is only required to demonstrate the two-pronged qualification as concerns the attachment of
common interest privilege for the relevant communications under the law of England and Wales and,
separately, the law of the Netherlands and that of New Zealand. GTH is granted leave to present such
evidence to the Arbitral Tribunal but this must be done without delay. In the absence of such evidence,
common interest privilege will not attach to communications involving in-house counsel admitted in
England and Wales, in the Netherlands, and in New Zealand, with the result that the relevant
communications must be produced without delay in accordance with PO 3.

 

 

 

 

> GTH Letter of 12 November 2018, §34.a.

20

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

On a final note on this issue, the Arbitral Tribunal finds no reason to limit its finding above on the basis
of Canada’s argument in relation to Article 9(3)(b) of the IBA Rules. The reason is two-fold. First, those
Rules do not provide an exhaustive set of conditions for upholding a claim for privilege. Secondly,
common interest privilege as recognised by courts today is already a significant expansion of the original
concept that initially arose in criminal proceedings to allow co-defendants to coordinate their defense.
The fact that a number of national laws, including in Canada and the United States, accept that common
interest privilege protects all communications shared within a “community of interest” both in civil and in
criminal proceedings permits the Arbitral Tribunal to infer, absent an evidence of a statutory exclusion,
that Article 9(3)(b) of the IBA Rules is not meant to rule out common interest in the case of commercial
transactions.*4

(iv) Waiver of attorney-client privilege through disclosure of legal advice to third parties, and
limited waiver protections, if any, under each applicable law

The Arbitral Tribunal expects that its determinations above in relation to (a) in-house counsel entitled to
assert legal privilege and (b) the attachment of legal privilege to the sharing of information with third
persons under the common interest exception, also deal with the substance of this sub-question of
outstanding Issue 1.

To the extent that the Parties were to consider that it does not, the Arbitral Tribunal requires better
particularised pleadings in this respect. Indeed, the Tribunal found no specific arguments of GTH in
relation to limited or selective waiver. Canada has not addressed this issue either in its submission on 2
November 2018, but added limited developments in this Schedule and a number of authorities (R-305 to
R-312) without referring the Tribunal to the relevant extracts or indicating how it purports to rely thereon.

 

 

 

 

% Respectively R-294, Iggillis and R-295, Teleglobe.

4R-295, Teleglobe at p. 37, citing the Restatement (third) of the Law Governing Lawyers § 76, as opposed to Canada’s affirmation about the law of New York, see Canada’s
submission earlier in this Schedule.

21

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

Pending the Parties’ indication whether they seek guidance or a determination from the Tribunal in
relation to limited waivers of legal privilege, the Tribunal provides its general thoughts as follows:
outside the sharing of information amongst counsel, which is deemed to safeguard the initial legal
privilege (assuming such a privilege attached in the first place), and save for specific statutory exceptions
or exceptions derived from case law that similarly allow legal privilege to persist if the information is
disclosed only to a_ specifically-identified category of recipients such as auditors,*> the Tribunal is
reluctant to uphold privilege when the shared information is no longer confined to the confidence of the
attorney/solicitor-client relationship. It is open to the Parties to provide evidence that privilege has not
been waived in total or in part by such disclosure of information under the relevant applicable law in the
case of each disputed communication. Such evidence can only be contemplated in relation to the rules of
privilege in Canada, the United States, England and Wales, the Netherlands, and New Zealand, as_ the
Tribunal has already determined that privilege rules in Egypt do not allow in-house counsel to claim
privilege, let alone to claim entitlement thereto following disclosure to third persons.

 

 

Outstanding Issue 2

 

 

Scope and application of attorney-client privilege to the facts and issues in this case: distinction between busin:
advice and communication with the dominant purpose of soliciting, providing, or discussing legal advice, in particular as it
relates to the following iss

   

 

es:
i) Correspondence with in-house counsel, including in-house counsel whose responsibilities were not limited to the

provision of legal advice, such as (but not limited tc)

ii) | Correspondence with UBS on business matters and presentations prepared by UBS regarding Wind, including with
respect to the sale process;

 

35 C406, Philip Services Corp. (Receiver of) v. Ontario (Securities Commission), 2005, CarswellOnt 3934; R-308, Canada (Minister of Nat'l Revenue) v. Grant Thornton et

al., 2012 FC 1313.

22

 

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

iii) | Memos and presentations to the Supervisory Board and the Finance Committee, including the redacted sections
reflecting the resolutions or recommendations for the Supervisory Board, as well as minutes of Board of Director
meetings;

iv)

v) Documents discussing the planned restructuring of VimpelCom, GTH, or Wind;

Documents discussing the regulatory framework and regulatory risk, including submissions and communications related

to consultations on the Transfer Framework between March and June 2013; and

vii) | Documents discussing the Investment Canada Act review process.

vi)

 

Summary of Claimant’s
Position

With respect to the distinction between business advice and legal advice, GTH confirms that with respect to the entirety of its
disclosure exercise (including, but not limited to, documents responsive to those specific categories identified by Canada above)
Integreon and Gibson Dunn attorneys were instructed to classify a document as privileged only in instances where: (i) the
document contained legal advice, (ii) contained the substantive discussion of legal advice, or (iii) solicited legal advice. In cases
where only a portion of that communication fell into these categories, Integreon and Gibson Dunn attorneys were instructed to
mark a document partially privileged and therefore subject to redaction.

If the Tribunal takes the position that the in-house counsel privilege is governed for each specific attorney by her or his
jurisdiction of qualification, GTH refers to its correspondence to the Tribunal of 21 November 2018 and 25 November 2018, in
which it has identified the in-house counsel who appear in its privilege logs and confirms that each are qualified in jurisdictions
that recognize attorney-client privilege applies for in-house counsel involved in communications containing legal advice,
discussing legal advice, or soliciting legal advice.

The Tribunal may refer to the following authorities already on the record:

Exhibit C-403, Law Governing the Profession of Lawyers, Law No. 17 of 1983 (Unofficial English Translation), Articles 65
and 79 (Egypt);

Exhibit C-405, Pritchard v. Ontario (Human Rights Commission), Supreme Court of Canada, 2004 S.C.C. 31, {Jf 19-21
(Canada);

Exhibit C-411, Akzo Nobel Chemicals Ltd and Akcros Chemicals Ltd v. European Commission, Court of Justice of the
European Union, Case C-550/07, Opinion of Advocate General Kokott, 29 April 2010, {[ 186 (EU);

Exhibit C-415, Decision No. ECLI:NL:HR:2013:BY6101, Dutch Supreme Court, Judgment, 15 March 2013 (Unofficial
English Translation), {[ 5.5 (Netherlands);

Exhibit C-429, Alfred Crompton Amusement Machines Ltd v Commissioners of Customs and Excise (No 2) [1972] 2 QB 102,
[1972] 2 All ER 353, 376 (England & Wales);

 

 

23

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

Exhibit C-430, Bain v Minister of Justice [2013] NZHC 2123 (21 August 2013), {| 59-73 (New Zealand);
Exhibit C-431, In re Kellogg Brown & Root, Inc., 756 F.3d 754 (2014), 758-60 (US).

 

 

Summary of Canada’s
Position

 

Canada maintains its objections to the Claimant’s assertions of attorney-client privilege as identified in Section II.B.2 of
Canada’s letter to the Tribunal, dated November 2, 2018, and reiterates Canada’s Request Numbers 1, 2, and 4 in that letter, as
they relate to overly-broad and inappropriate assertions of attorney-client privilege in the Claimant’s First Privilege Log,
Amended Privilege Log, and redactions. The Claimant has made overly broad assertions of privilege, as it failed to follow a
rigorous process and apply the proper test:

(1) The Claimant’s counsel did not review all of the assertions of privilege in this arbitration and appears to have left many
determinations to a third party vendor not familiar with the issues in dispute and the Claimant’s business. The Claimant
states “Integreon and Gibson Dunn attorneys” received instructions on privilege without detailing these instructions.
The reviewers were not provided sufficiently clear instructions or lacked the ability to make appropriate privilege
determinations, as evidenced by the recent further productions made by Gibson Dunn. For example about 30
presentations to Supervisory Board of Director meetings and Finance Committee meetings — which were plainly not
legal advice — were produced to Canada on October 28 after a further review of documents withheld in the First
Privilege Log. A comprehensive review of privilege assertions by Gibson Dunn counsel is necessary.

(2) To determine if attorney privilege is applicable, the guidance provided by the Tribunal in Vito G Gallo v Canada (RL-
251) should be applied. The Claimant has not demonstrated that in its review it considered whether: a lawyer drafted the
document in his or her capacity as a lawyer; a solicitor-client relationship based on trust existed as between the lawyer
and client; or the lawyer and client acted with the expectation that the advice would be kept confidential. The fact that
the Amended Privilege Log contains many entries with over 100 participants creates a strong presumption that there
was no intention to keep advice confidential. Furthermore, factual information should be generally separated from legal
advice, where it is not inextricably intertwined with privileged content (RL-248). The Claimant appears to withhold or
redact communications made mainly for business purposes, as Canada documents in its letter of November 2, 2018 (See
Section II.B.2) and in the following sub-sections to Outstanding Issue 2. Finally, it does not appear that the Claimant
instructed its reviewing counsel that privilege is generally waived when shared with separate corporations or third
parties that are not party to the solicitor-client relationship

i) Correspond: with in-house counsel, i se counsel whose responsibilities were not limited to the
provision of legal advice, such as (but not limited to) Lee
|
The Claimant makes overly-broad assertions of attorney-client privilege over communications involving in-house counsel, many
of which Canada identifies in Annexes | to 4 of its letter dated November 2. Although those Annexes concerned the Claimant’s
First Privilege Log, Canada maintains that the Amended Privilege Log likely contains so many instances of communications

 

 

24

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

 

 

mainly for business advice that the Claimant must review all of its assertions of privilege over in-house counsel
communications.

In-house counsel must act in a legal capacity for the privilege to apply (Canada’s Letter dated November 2, 2018, Section
IL.B.2(a)ii). Acting as a corporate officer disfavors the privilege, as communications are essentially business, not legal.
Moreover, determining whether the privilege extends to in-house counsel is best done on a case-by-case basis. In Pritchard,
Canadian Supreme Court Justice Major noted, “[o]wing to the nature of the work of in-house counsel, often having both legal
and non-legal responsibilities, each situation must be assessed on a case-by-case basis to determine if the circumstances were
such that privilege arose. Whether or not the privilege will attach depends on the nature of the relationship, the subject matter of
the advice, and the circumstances in which it is sought and rendered.” (C-405). In its privilege logs, the Claimant makes
sweeping privilege assertions over communications with in-house counsel involving hundreds of documents. This does not offer
a reasonable way to assess each assertion of privilege on a case-by-case basis.

Canada maintains that the Claimant must: (1) ensure counsel from Gibson Dunn reviews the Claimant’s privilege assertions to
ensure that legal advice was confidentially sought and provided between attorney and client; (2) describe the circumstances in
which legal advice was sought and rendered for each document on the privilege logs; (3) demonstrate that the Claimant’s
assertions of attorney-client privilege qualify under the applicable law; and (4) disclose any communications that originated for
the purpose of seeking business advice.

 

ii) Corr di with UBS on busi. matters and pr ions prepared by UBS regarding Wind, including

with respect to the sale process
Canada notes that the subject matter at issue in communications between UBS and Vimpelcom regarding Wind by its nature
does not qualify for attorney-client privilege, as it consists of strategic business advice. In fact the retainer letter for UBS
specifically excludes the provision of legal advice. None of the material produced by UBS or communications between UBS
and Vimpelcom consist of legal advice and are therefore not privileged (the issue of limited waiver with respect to legal advice
shared with UBS is addressed below).

iii) | Memos and presentations to the Supervisory Board and the Finance Committee, including the redacted sections
reflecting the resolutions or recommendations for the Supervisory Board, as well as minutes of Board of Director
meetings

Memos, presentations, resolutions, recommendations, and meeting minutes to the Supervisory Board, the Board of Directors, or
the Finance Committee generally do not constitute legal advice. The nature of these materials is strategic business facts and

decision-making. Redactions should be strictly limited to the contents of legal advice. Given that it is unlikely that the redacted
resolutions or recommendations for the Supervisory Board in these documents constitute legal advice, they should be disclosed.

 

25

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

 

 

For example, Canada wishes to refer the Tribunal to the following documents in the Claimant’s production: (R-315, R-316, R-
317, R-318)

For instance, in its press release on September 21, 2015 announcing
GTH’s plan to move its operations out of Egypt and into the Netherlands, the Claimant described this as a “strategic move”,
because the move to Amsterdam would allow GTH to further leverage “the benefits and economies of scale of being part of

VimpelCom group.” (R-064).

v) Documents discussing the planned restructuring of VimpelCom, GTH, or Wind

Restructuring an enterprise is a business decision based on financial and strategic considerations and facts that may be separable
from any legal advice involved in reaching that decision.

such communication does not receive protection for attorney-client privilege, because it does
not involve the solicitation or provision of legal advice. The Claimant must disclose any of these materials except the
information that constitutes legal advice.

   

vi) | Documents discussing the regulatory framework and regulatory risk, including submissions and communications
related to consultations on the Transfer Framework between March and June 2013

Communications concerning the regulatory framework, changes to the regulatory framework, and regulatory risk do not
necessarily involve legal advice. Correspondence between VimpelCom and in-house counsel or law firms acting in a non-legal
capacity in relation to certain regulatory matters are not protected for privilege.

The distinction between legal and non-legal advice as it relates to regulatory risk can be particularly difficult for counsel not
familiar with the issues. To avoid any strategic disclosure, a careful review of these privilege claims by Claimant’s counsel is
necessary given that redactions disclose a broad, inconsistent approach of some but not all information with respect to
regulatory risk.

In addition, Canada notes that the Claimant provided minimal information concerning its internal discussions on and reactions to
the Transfer Framework. These communications would generally relate to business considerations regarding the applicable
regulatory framework. The Claimant withholds documents it describes as, “relating to GTH’s expectations about the five-year
moratorium.”(Claimant’s Amended Privilege Log, Appendix A to Canada’s November 2 submission, p. 67 of pdf, Participant
List 103). GTH’s expectations about the five-year moratorium do not constitute either the solicitation or provision of legal
advice, and cannot be protected for attorney-client privilege. Much of Wind’s submission on the Transfer Framework
represented its views on a public policy proposal. This is a business fact separable from legal advice. The Claimant must
disclose any of these materials except what is strictly legal advice.

 

 

 

26

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

vii) Documents discussing the Investment Canada Act review process

GTH’s application to acquire voting control of Wind Mobile and its decision to withdraw its application were business
decisions. The strategic considerations regarding those decisions, the discussions regarding the regulatory process and
communications with the regulator do not constitute legal advice irrespective of whether a lawyer was involved. Although GTH
may have received legal advice in reaching this decision, only that advice is protected, not the business factors leading to the
decision. The Claimant must disclose any of these materials except what is strictly legal advice.

On this issue, we refer the Tribunal to the following exhibits and legal authorities:

RL-248, Glamis Gold, Ltd. v. United States of America (UNCITRAL) Decision on Parties’ Requests for Production of
Documents Withheld on the Grounds of Privilege, 17 November 2005, 4] 35-36:

R-314, Upjohn Co. v. United States, 449 U.S. 383, 389 (1981):

C-405, Pritchard v. Ontario (Human Rights Commission), [2004] 1 S.C.R. 809 at § 818;
R-315, Supervisory Board Meeting, August 6, 2013, p. 4;

R-316, Supervisory Board Meeting - TELENOR, August 6, 2013, p. 4;

R-317, Supervisory Board Meeting, January 13, 2014, slides 8-9, 13-14:

R-318, Supervisory Board Meeting, April 29, 2014, slides 6-7;

R-064, Press Release, Global Telecom Holding S.A.E., “GTH To Move Its Place Of Operations To Amsterdam” (Sep. 21,
2015).

 

 

Arbitral Tribunal’s
Order

 

(i) Correspondence with in-house counsel

The Arbitral Tribunal notes that GTH asserts without any qualifications that documents responsive to the
production order in PO 3 were only classified as privileged where: (i) the document contained legal
advice, (ii) contained the substantive discussion of legal advice, or (iii) solicited legal advice. In cases
where only a portion of that communication fell into these categories, GTH asserts that it marked a
document partially privileged and therefore subject to redaction.

Canada contests GTH’s scope of assertion of privilege and claims that it is overly broad.

After reviewing Canada’s arguments, the Tribunal declines to uphold a presumption that GTH acted
deliberately to withhold responsive documents or that counsel representng GTH in this arbitration have

 

27

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

 

 

fabricated groundless privilege arguments. Should any evidence to the contrary surface, it should be
brought forthwith to the Arbitral Tribunal’s attention at any stage of the proceedings for the appropriate
measures to be taken.

In particular, the Tribunal notes GTH’s unqualified assertion that it only withheld “legal advice”. The fact
that in-house counsel delivering that advice might also hold non-legal responsibilities within the company
as pointed out by Canada does not, of itself, justify an inference or a presumption that GTH’s assertion is
disingenuous or that GTH, or its counsel, sought to cover under a privilege blanket all communications of
whatever nature, including business or strategic advice involving that in-house counsel. Specific evidence
to the contrary is required to override the privilege claimed in this respect. The onus of providing such
evidence falls on the contesting party, here Canada.

It is open to Canada to petition the Arbitral Tribunal to apply Article 3.8 of the IBA Rules and organise
the tendering by GTH of non-disclosed unredacted documents either to a Tribunal-appointed neutral
expert or to the Tribunal itself (if the Parties so agree) to determine whether the alleged privilege is
warranted. The allocation of the resulting costs will depend on the result of the determination.

In the meantime, GTH is directed to review thoroughly its withheld or redacted responsive documents in
light of the Arbitral Tribunal’s decisions above in relation to those in-house counsel who are entitled to
assert privilege and are deemed not to have waived privilege. New documents that emerge from the
review as being responsive to PO 3 should be produced by GTH without delay.

To that end, the Parties in this arbitration should consider as relevant guidance for the review exercise the
four prerequisites defined by the tribunal in Gallo v Canada for the application of legal privilege.*° They
are as follows:

- The document has to be drafted by a lawyer acting in his or her capacity as lawyer;
- A solicitor-client relationship based on trust must exist as between the lawyer (in-house or external legal advisor)
and the client;

 

36 RL-251, Gallo v. Canada, $47.

28

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

 

 

- The document has to be elaborated for the purpose of obtaining or giving legal advice;
- The lawyer and the client, when giving and obtaining legal advice, must have acted with the expectation that the
advice would be kept confidential in a contentious situation.”*”

(ii) Correspondence with UBS on _ business matters and presentations prepared by UBS
regarding Wind, including with respect to the sale process

The Arbitral Tribunal has no further guidance to offer or determination to make in addition to what it has
ruled above in this schedule. The Arbitral Tribunal will presume the truthfulness of GTH’s assertion that
documents responsive to the production order in PO 3 were only classified as privileged where: (i) the
document contained legal advice, (ii) contained the substantive discussion of legal advice, or (iii) solicited
legal advice. Again, the prerequisites laid out in Gallo v Canada are relevant guidance for the Parties.**
Obviously, if correspondence of any type with UBS does not strictly fall within the scope of GTH’s
claimed privilege in light of those prerequisites, those documents must be produced forthwith.

The Arbitral Tribunal notes GTH’s bold submission that Article 9.3(c) of the IBA Rules should be
understood as covering advisors “generally”, not only legal advisors.*? The Tribunal cannot accept this
contention absent a supporting authority. Legal privilege only arises in relation to a communication in
confidence with legal counsel enjoying an entitlement to privilege under the applicable bar rules.
Unqualified as it is, the reference to “advisors” in Article 9.3(c) should be read in the context of the
relationship giving rise to legal privilege which is the very subject of Article 9.3, the matching reference
to “legal advice” in Article 9.3(a), and four references to “legal advisors” elsewhere in the IBA Rules. No
reference to a different category of “advisors” may be found in the IBA Rules. In short, GTH has not
demonstrated that legal privilege can attach to communications of non-legal advisors.

 

37 Tbid.

38 Tbid.

3° GTH Letter of 12 November 2018, §35.

29

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

In that respect, the Tribunal notes with perplexity the reference by GTH to “mostly” when referring to
documents involving PwC and outside counsel.“ The Tribunal cannot accept imprecise standards of
diligence of this type. GTH is ordered to produce forthwith any documents that do not exclusively fall
within the scope of the assertion that it made as to withheld or redacted documents. In case of doubt, GTH
is granted leave to request the Tribunal’s guidance.

The Arbitral Tribunal repeats mutatis mutandis its reasoning and decision as concerns items (iii) through
(vii) as listed in Canada’s submission in this Schedule under Outstanding Issue 2.

 

 

 

4° Tbid., §37.

30

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

Outstanding Issue 3

Waiver of attorney-client privilege or exceptions for common interest, if any, under the applicable law, with respect to
communication shared with or between separate corporations, including the following:

i) VimpelCom and GTH;
ii) VimpelCom and OTH;
iii) VimpelCom, GTH, and Wind; and
iv) VimpelCom and its shareholders, Altimo and Telenor.

 

Summary of Claimant’s
Position

GTH’s position with respect to this Issue is set out in its 12 November Letter to the Tribunal at {ff 31-34.

Canada cites to the mere fact that GTH is a separate entity from VimpelCom and the other entities identified above to assert that
there is no common interest privilege. Canada has sought documents involving the entities listed above on the basis of the
alleged inter-relationship between GTH and these entities, and the Tribunal ordered such documents to be produced. Canada
has in fact used this relationship between GTH and VimpelCom (in particular, GTH’s alleged connection to the Netherlands
after the acquisition by VimpelCom) affirmatively in respect of its jurisdictional objections. Moreover, a key component of the
merits of this dispute relates to Canada’s decision to reject GTH’s Voting Control Application, which Canada itself states was
due to GTH’s parent companies and shareholders like Altimo and Telenor.

Canada’s position in respect of common interest is not only inconsistent with its previous arguments, but wrong as a matter of
fact. For all of the issues relevant in this Arbitration, the entities identified by Canada shared a common interest and their
interests were not adverse. Canada’s arguments to the contrary are entirely speculative.

The Tribunal may refer to the following authorities addressing the scope of common interest privilege in Canada:
Exhibit C-405, Pritchard v. Ontario (Human Rights Commission), Supreme Court of Canada, 2004 S.C.C. 31, {Jf 23-24;

Exhibit C-409, Maximum Ventures Inc. v. de Graaf, British Columbia Court of Appeal, 2007 B.C.C.A. 510, 2007 CarswellBC
3231, 11.

 

Summary of Canada’s
Position

 

 

Canada maintains its objections to the Claimant’s assertions of an exception to waiver of attorney-client privilege, as identified
in Section II.B.2(b) of Canada’s letter to the Tribunal, dated November 2, 2018, and maintains Canada’s Request Number 3,
regarding waiver through disclosure of communications to separate corporations, as indicated in the Claimant’s First Privilege
Log, Amended Privilege Log, and redactions.

 

4! Certain other corporations in the Veon group, such as Wind-it, France Télécom, and OT Algeria, are not identified in separate subsections to Issue No. 3 because they appear
in communications shared with the corporations listed in those subsections. However, the same issues arise concerning waiver of attorney-client privilege or exceptions for
common interest, if any, under the applicable law.

31

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

(1) As a matter of law, the Claimant fails to demonstrate that it can benefit from any exception for common interest
privilege under the applicable law.

(2) As a question of fact, the Claimant provides a sparse summary with no support for its conclusory statements that all of
the entities involved and to whom communications were disclosed, shared a common interest and their interests were
not adverse.

(3) The issue of whether documents from other entities should be produced and whether communications with these other
entities at the time are privileged are distinct. The Commentary to the IBA Rules observes that “[a]ccording to some of
the most frequently used general rules, arbitral tribunals are to establish the facts of the case ‘by all appropriate means’.”
(CL-184). This includes producing documents that are relevant and material to the determination of the case. Given the
important role played by the Claimant’s affiliated corporate entities with respect to key material facts related to the
dispute, and the fact that the Claimant itself relied on evidence from VimpelCom, producing only the documents in
GTH’s possession, custody, and control would have deprived Canada of a meaningful opportunity to defend itself
against the Claimant’s allegations. The Tribunal agreed in Procedural Order No. 3, Annex B, Tribunal Decision on
Document Request No. 4. In contrast, the law on attorney-client privilege protects only legal advice sought by and
provided to the “client” on a confidential basis. Due to the separate legal personality of corporations, the “client” does
not extend to corporate affiliates.

 

For the Tribunal’s reference, Canada attaches to this Stern Schedule Annex I, which identifies the categories of documents in
the Claimant’s Amended Second Privilege Log shared with certain separate corporations or third parties, as identified below.”
To avoid repetition, Canada does not include in Annex I categories of documents from the First Privilege Log shared with these
separate corporations or third parties.

i) VimpelCom and GTH
VimpelCom and GTH lacked sufficient common interest with respect to a number of issues. For instance, in both the decision to
move GTH’s headquarters out of Cairo and to exit the Canadian market, VimpelCom and GTH appear to have had divergent
interests.

ii) VimpelCom and OTH

VimpelCom and OTH lacked sufficient common interest with respect to a number of is:

 

 

 

HM (for further detail, see Appendix M of Canada’s November 2 ). The parties were patently adverse in interests in

 

 

 

 

* A list of the categories of documents shared with GTH or OTH has not been included given the number of entries but it would cover approximatively over 8000 documents,
in contrast to about 300 such communications produced to Canada.

32

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

this rept: N« common interest privilege can protect
communications between these entities.

iii) | VimpelCom, GTH, and Wind

Common interest privilege would not protect communications shared between VimpelCom or GTH and Wind in numerous
instances. VimpelCom, GTH, and Wind had separate legal counsel each providing legal advice to its own client. GTH was a
non-controlling shareholder in Wind. VimpelCom was a lender to Wind and a parent of GTH. These enterprises were not part of
a “deal team”. The Claimant’s documents show extensive discussion about the potential different interests of the enterprises and
VimpelCom presentations refer to not sharing information with Wind’s local management. Moreover, the entities lacked
common interest in issues critical to this case, including participation in the 700Mhz auction, consultations on the Transfer
Framework, Wind becoming a fourth player, the national security review, and the sale of Wind. VimpelCom’s interests seem to
have been to minimize funding needs and exit Canada at the best price possible, whereas Wind’s interests were to maximize its
Jong term economic success in Canada. For instance, documents indicate that it was in Wind’s interests to participate in the
700Mhz auction. On the Transfer Framework, Wind represented its interests for the Canadian government to promote
competition in order to pursue the establishment of a fourth player, such as Wind, something that the Claimant is complaining of
in this dispute. On the sale of Wind, a vendor company and the company being sold have distinct interests. If VimpelCom sold
Wind to an Incumbent, there was a possibility that an Incumbent would sit on the spectrum to reduce competition, rather than
grow Wind as a competitor. This would not serve the best economic interests of Wind or some of its stakeholders, such as its
employees. All of these factors demonstrate a lack of commonality among the interests of VimpelCom or GTH and Wind, such
that communications between them do not qualify for an exception to waiver.

Please see Annex I, Section A for a list of the categories of documents on the Amended Privilege Log disclosed to Wind
Mobile.

iv) VimpelCom and its shareholders, Altimo and Telenor

The Claimant has not established common interest between VimpelCom and its shareholders, Altimo and Telenor to qualify for
an exception to waiver for sharing communications to separate corporations.

Please see Annex I, Section B for a list of the categories of documents on the Amended Privilege Log disclosed to Altimo or
Telenor.

 

 

Arbitral Tribunal’s

Order

 

The Arbitral Tribunal has determined the common interest exception under Outstanding Issue 1 above.

 

33

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

Outstanding Issue 4

Waiver of attorney-client privilege or limited waiver protections, if any, under the applicable law, with respect to
communication shared with or between third parties, including the following:

i) Rogers;
ii) UBS;
iii) PWC;
iv) Earnscliffe and other public relations firms; and
v)  Genuity.

 

Summary of Claimant’s
Position

GTH’s position with respect to this Issue is set out in its 12 November Letter to the Tribunal at ff] 35-41.

For the avoidance of doubt, Gibson Dunn attorneys have reviewed each of the documents identified in the privilege logs
involving these third parties. In all cases, GTH has claimed privilege over these documents where the third party was (i)
included on a communication disclosing confidential legal advice for a particular and limited purpose and/or (ii) that third party
played a role in “furtherance of a function essential to the solicitor-client relationship.” Specifically: (i) UBS was privy to
privileged communications only through its role as a financial advisor in relation to the sale of their interest in Wind Mobile; (ii)
PWC was privy to privileged communications relating to tax advice only through its role as a tax advisor; and (iii) Earnscliffe
was privy to privileged communications only through its role as a government and public relations advisor.

The Tribunal may refer to the following authorities addressing the waiver of privilege:

Exhibit C-428, Redhead Equipment v. Canada (Attorney General), 2016 S.K.C.A. 115, { 45(d);

Exhibit C-406, Philip Services Corp. (Receiver of) v. Ontario (Securities Commission), 2005 CarswellOnt 3934, { 57;

Exhibit C-404, Internal Revenue Service Restructuring and Reform Act of 1998, 26 U.S.C.A. § 7525.

 

 

Summary of Canada’s
Position

 

Canada maintains its objections to the Claimant’s assertions of an exception to waiver of attorney-client privilege, as identified
in Section II.B.2(b) of Canada’s letter to the Tribunal, dated November 2, 2018, and maintains Canada’s Request Number 3,
regarding waiver through disclosure of communications to third parties, as indicated in the Claimant’s First Privilege Log,
Amended Privilege Log, and redactions.

i) Rogers
Given the Claimant’s representations, Canada withdraws its objection.

ii) UBS

 

34

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

 

 

Attorney-client privilege does not extend to investment banks or financial advisors when counsel was not relying on the advisor
to translate or interpret information given to counsel by the client (R-319) As an investment bank, UBS’s communications with
VimpelCom cannot receive protection for attorney privilege. UBS was hired to provide financial advice to VimpelCom. There is
no evidence that UBS translated the meaning of VimpelCom’s technical materials into terms that were understandable to the
lawyer for the purpose of informing the provision of legal advice. Instead, most of the Claimant’s redactions over
correspondence from UBS concerns slideshows on financial and strategic matters for the Board of Directors of VimpelCom or
various VimpelCom committees. Moreover, many of the communications were not with or copied to counsel. That is, UBS’s
services for VimpelCom were not integral to the client-solicitor function. At most, UBS’s services were ancillary to the
solicitor-client relationship, and cannot qualify for the privilege. Further, the Claimant has failed to establish that UBS qualified
for limited waiver under the applicable law.
Please see Annex I, Section C for a list of the categories of documents on the Amended Privilege Log disclosed to UBS.

iii) PWC
PWC provided tax advice to VimpelCom. Tax advice does not constitute legal advice when it is not provided by a lawyer. In the
USS., courts have held that if the client seeks an accounting service but not legal advice, or if the advice sought is the
accountant’s rather than the lawyer’s, no privilege exists (R-313). In fact, privilege does not apply where an accountant is hired
merely to give additional legal advice about complying with the tax code, and not to assist counsel in understanding the
financial information (R-320). There is no evidence that PWC provided legal advice, interpreted material facts for counsel, or
somehow facilitated the attorney-client relationship between VimpelCom and its counsel. At most, PWC’s services were
ancillary to the solicitor-client relationship, and cannot qualify for the privilege. Nor could legal advice shared with PWC
qualify for limited waiver, because PWC was not engaged to provide auditing services. Any attorney-client privilege that once
existed over documents shared with PWC was waived and must be disclosed.

 

Please see Annex I, Section D for a list of the categories of documents on the Amended Privilege Log disclosed to PWC.
iv) Earnscliffe and other public relations firms

Earnscliffe and other firms such as GCI provided public relations services. This does not involve translating legal advice or
serving a role that is integral to the solicitor-client relationship. There is no indication that Earnscliffe’s services were even
ancillary to the solicitor-client relationship, which still cannot qualify for the privilege. Moreover, limited waiver does not apply.
Any attorney-client privilege that once existed over documents shared with Earnscliffe and other public relations firms was
waived and must be disclosed.

Please see Annex I, Section E for a list of the categories of documents on the Amended Privilege Log disclosed to Earnscliffe
and other public relations firms.

v) Genuity

 

35

 

Procedural Order No. 5
ANNEX A

 

Given the Claimant’s representations, Canada withdraws its objection.
vi) Other

Furthermore, the Claimant engaged in subject-matter waiver in the course of this arbitration. As Canada explains in Section
ILB.2(b) of its letter dated November 2, 2018, the Claimant has alleged that it relied on the advice of q as part of
its due diligence efforts that informed its expectations prior to investing in Wind Mobile. It implies that the content of the advice
supports its allegations. By disclosing the subject matter of legal advice, the Claimant has waived any attorney-client privilege
that may have applied to the documents relating to this issue.

On this issue, we refer the Tribunal to the following exhibits and legal authorities:

R-319, United States v. Ackert, 169 F.3d 136 (2d Cir. 1999);

R-313, United States v. Kovel, 296 F.2d 918, 921 (2d Cir. 1961);

R-320, United States v. Chevron Texaco Corp., 241 F. Supp. 2d 1065 (N.D. Cal. 2002).

 

 

Arbitral Tribunal’s
Order

 

The Arbitral Tribunal has determined the absence of entitlement of non-legal advisors’ to privilege under Outstanding Issue 2
above.

 

36

 

