INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E.
v.

Canada

(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

PROCEDURAL ORDER NO. 2
DECISION ON RESPONDENT’S REQUEST FOR BIFURCATION

 

Members of the Tribunal
Prof. Dr. Georges Affaki, President of the Tribunal
Prof. Gary Born, Arbitrator
Prof. Vaughan Lowe, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Frauke Nitschke

14 December 2017

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)
Procedural Order No. 2

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION 2
A. The Parties 2
B. The Subject of this Order 2
II. PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 3
III. THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS FOR RELIEP..........:c0cccsccssssssesseseseeseesesseesessesssesesseneeneeaeeees 5
IV. OVERVIEW OF THE UNDERLYING DISPUTE ........0.ccsccscessessessessesseesessessseseeeneeseeseenee 5
V. THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS 10
A. Respondent’s Position 10
(1) Applicable Legal Standard 10
OO —SCSC
(3) Second Objection: Article II(4)(b) of the BIT... 13
(4) Third Objection: Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis .0.........0:ccceeeeeeeeeeeseeneseeneeeenees 15
(5) Fourth Objection: Article IV(2)(d) of the BIT
(6) Fifth Objection: Admissibility ...
Claimant’s Position 20
(1) Applicable Legal Standard 20
() Lagan 7
(2) Second Objection: Article II(4)(b) of the BIT..
(3) Third Objection: Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis
(4) Fourth Objection: Article IV(2)(d) of the BIT... 25
(5) Fifth Objection: Admissibility ....0.00.0.c. ccs eeseseeeseeseseeseseeseseeseateseaneneanenees 25
VI. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS 26
A. Legal Framework 27
B. Analysis 28
VII. DECISION 31
ANNEX A: PROCEDURAL TIMETABLE ....0.....ccccescessessessesssssssseeseeseeseeseeseeseeseesssssanssnseaeeseenees 1

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

Procedural Order No. 2

INTRODUCTION

A. The Parties

The claimant is Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. (“GTH” or “Claimant”), a company
established under the laws of the Republic of Egypt (“Egypt”). GTH is represented in this
proceeding by Ms. Penny Madden QC and Ms. Besma Grifat-Spackman of Gibson, Dunn
& Crutcher LLP in London, and Mr. Rahim Moloo and Ms. Charline Yim of Gibson, Dunn
& Crutcher LLP in New York.

The respondent is Canada (also referred to as “Respondent”). Canada is represented in
this proceeding by Ms. Sylvie Tabet, Mr. Jean-Francois Hébert, Ms. Heather Squires, Ms.
Jenna Wates and Ms. Valantina Amalraj of the Trade Law Bureau (JLT), Global Affairs

Canada.

B. The Subject of this Order

This Order addresses Canada’s request for bifurcation of the proceeding. Canada asks the
Tribunal to address Canada’s jurisdictional objections in a preliminary phase, while GTH

prefers that those objections be joined to the merits.

The Tribunal first sets out the relevant procedural history (Section II), the Parties’ requests
for relief (Section IIT) and a brief overview of the underlying dispute as alleged by GTH to
the extent it is relevant to this Order (Section IV). In Section V, the Tribunal summarizes
the Parties’ positions. It then provides its analysis of Canada’s request for bifurcation

(Section VI) and states its order in Section (VID.

The Tribunal has carefully reviewed and considered all the arguments presented by the
Parties. The fact that a specific argument is not expressly referenced in this Order does not
mean that it has not been considered, as the Tribunal includes only those points which it

considers most relevant for its decision.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

Procedural Order No. 2

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

Following the constitution of the Tribunal on 21 February 2017, the Tribunal consulted
with the Parties and scheduled the first session to be held by teleconference on 21 April

2017.

On 10 March 2017, the Tribunal provided the Parties with a draft agenda for the first
session and a draft procedural order to facilitate the Parties’ discussions on procedural

matters in advance of the first session.

On 7 April 2017, the Parties submitted their comments on the draft agenda and procedural
order. They also informed the Tribunal that they had been able to reach agreement on the
majority of procedural issues. One issue on which the Parties could not agree was the
“number and sequence of pleadings, including whether the proceedings should be
bifurcated to deal with Canada’s preliminary objections on jurisdiction and admissibility.”!
The Parties informed the Tribunal that they would submit their respective comments on
the disputed issues (including bifurcation) later that day. They also proposed to each submit

a response to the other Party’s comments one week later.

Later that day, Canada submitted its Request for Bifurcation, date 7 April 2017, together
with legal authorities RL-001 to RL-0036 (the “April Request for Bifurcation”). GTH
submitted a letter of the same date, addressing the disputed procedural issues, including

bifurcation.

On 10 April 2017, the Tribunal approved the Parties’ proposal that each Party would submit

a response to the other Party’s comments of 7 April 2017.

On 14 April 2017, Canada submitted a letter containing its response to GTH’s letter of 7
April 2017. On the same day, GTH filed a Submission on Bifurcation, Publication and
Place of Proceeding, together with legal authorities CL-001 to CL-0018 (the “April

Response’).

' Email from the Claimant (on behalf of the Parties) to the Tribunal of 7 April 2017.

3

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

Procedural Order No. 2

Also on 14 April 2017, the Tribunal confirmed that the Parties would be given an
opportunity to make oral presentations on the issue of bifurcation during the first session,
and asked the Parties to consult regarding the allotted time for such presentations. The
Tribunal noted that, after hearing the Parties’ presentations, it would consult the Parties

regarding the need for any further procedure.

On 19 April 2017, the Parties informed the Tribunal that they had agreed to allocate 45
minutes for each Party’s presentation on bifurcation. The Tribunal subsequently confirmed

this agreement.

The first session was held by teleconference on 21 April 2017, and each Party made oral

submissions on the issue of bifurcation as agreed.

Following the first session, the Tribunal considered the Parties’ written and oral
submissions on the issue of bifurcation. It determined that it would be premature to decide
whether to bifurcate the proceeding at that stage, and that the Tribunal would be better-
placed to decide after receiving Canada’s jurisdictional objections. By letter of 2 May 2017,
the Tribunal informed the Parties of this determination. It noted that Canada would be
welcome to submit another request for bifurcation together with its jurisdictional

objections.

On 13 June 2017, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1, embodying the agreements
of the Parties and the decisions of the Tribunal regarding the procedure to govern the
arbitration. The Procedural Timetable was attached as Annex A of Procedural Order No.
1. The Procedural Timetable sets out the dates for each procedural step leading to the
Tribunal’s decision on bifurcation (if any). It then provides alternative timetables for the
remaining procedural steps, one of which will apply following the Tribunal’s decision on

bifurcation, depending on the outcome.

In accordance with the Procedural Timetable, on 29 September 2017, GTH filed its

Memorial on the Merits and Damages, together with exhibits C-001 to C-254, legal

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

20.

21.

22.

Procedural Order No. 2

authorities CL-001 to CL-089,? the Expert Report of Santiago Dellepiane A. and Pablo T.
Spiller, and the Witness Statements of Kenneth D. Campbell, Michael C. Connolly, David
L. C. Dobbie and Andrew M. Dry (the “Memorial’”).

On 15 November 2017, Canada filed its Memorial on Jurisdiction and Admissibility and
Request for Bifurcation, together with exhibits R-001 to R-078, legal authorities RL-038
to RL-163 and the Expert Report of Prof. Dr. Mohamed S. Abdel Wahab (the “Jur.

Memorial and Request for Bifurcation”).

On 29 November 2017, GTH filed its Response to Canada’s Request for Bifurcation (the

“Response”).

THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS FOR RELIEF

As part of the request for relief contained in the Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation,
Canada states that it “respectfully requests that the Tribunal hear Canada’s jurisdictional

and admissibility objections in a preliminary phase.”*
In the Response, GTH includes the following request for relief:

On the basis of the foregoing, and in light of the fact that bifurcation
would decrease efficiency and increase cost and the risk of unfair
proceedings, GTH respectfully requests that the Tribunal reject
Canada’s Request for Bifurcation.*

OVERVIEW OF THE UNDERLYING DISPUTE

The purpose of the following overview of the dispute is to provide context for the Parties’
arguments on this issue of bifurcation. It is based on GTH’s submissions filed to date, as
Canada has not yet responded to GTH’s substantive claims. Nothing in this overview

should be considered a finding of the Tribunal with respect to any disputed fact.

? The legal authorities previously submitted with the April Response were refiled with the Memorial.

3 Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, { 297.

+ Response, 33.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)
Procedural Order No. 2

 

23. GTH submitted this dispute to arbitration on the basis of (a) the Agreement Between the
Government of Canada and the Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt for the
Promotion and Protection of Investments (the “BIT”),° and (b) the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (the

“ICSID Convention”).

24. GTH alleges that it invested in the Canadian telecommunications market following a series
of actions by Industry Canada in 2007 and 2008 to encourage investors to participate in an
auction for Advanced Wireless Services spectrum licences (the “2008 AWS Action”).°
According to GTH, Canada’s ultimate goal was to diversify its telecommunications market,

which had historically been dominated by just three players.’

25. To this end, Industry Canada released a policy framework applicable to the 2008 AWS
Auction.* GTH highlights certain conditions set forth in the policy framework, including

that Canada would:
a. set aside a specific spectrum for new wireless operators (“New Entrants”);?

b. prohibit the transfer of set-aside spectrum licences to companies that did not meet the

criteria of a New Entrant for a period of five years from the date of issuance; '°

c. establish certain minimum rollout requirements to be met in the first five years; and

5 CL-001, BIT (English version), CL-002, BIT (French version), CL-003, BIT (Arabic version).

© Memorial, {ff 3-5, 40.

7 Memorial, {{ 3.

* C-004, Industry Canada, Policy Framework for the Auction for Spectrum Licences for Advanced Wireless Services
and other Spectrum in the 2 GHz Range, November 2007.

° €-004, Industry Canada, Policy Framework for the Auction for Spectrum Licences for Advanced Wireless Services
and other Spectrum in the 2 GHz Range, November 2007, p. 5. A new entrant was defined as: “An entity, including
affiliates and associated entities, which holds less than 10 percent of the national wireless market based on revenue.”

 

© €.004, Industry Canada, Policy Framework for the Auction for Spectrum Licences for Advanced Wireless Services
and other Spectrum in the 2 GHz Range, November 2007, p. 6.

6

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

Procedural Order No. 2

d. require incumbent carriers to enter into roaming and tower and site-sharing agreements

with New Entrants at “commercial rates.”!!

26. In addition, the 2008 AWS Auction was subject to Canada’s ownership and control rules
(“O&C Rules”), which limited the proportion of a common carrier’s voting shares that
could be held by a foreign investor.!” Yet, according to GTH, the industry expected that
the O&C Rules would be relaxed in the future.!

27. GTH learned of the 2008 AWS Auction in November 2007 and subsequently entered into
discussions with Globalive Communications Corp. (“Globalive”), a Canadian
telecommunications provider, to explore the possibility of creating a joint venture to
participate in the auction.'* Eventually, GTH and Globalive (through several intermediate
companies) established a new Canadian wireless operator, Globalive Wireless Management
Corp., which would later operate as Wind Mobile, to participate in the 2008 AWS Auction
as a New Entrant.'> According to GTH, the investment was structured to ensure compliance
with the O&C Rules. At the same time, however, the relevant corporate documents
included a provision that would allow GTH to convert its non-voting shares in Wind

Mobile into voting shares when the O&C Rules changed as anticipated. !°

28. Wind Mobile participated in the 2008 AWS Auction and successfully bid for 30 set-aside
spectrum licenses for CAD 442 million, which GTH paid in 2008.!”

“Exhibit C-004, Industry Canada, Policy Framework for the Auction for Spectrum Licences for Advanced Wireless
Services and other Spectrum in the 2 GHz Range, November 2007, pp. 8-9.

2 Memorial, (98, 92.

3 Memorial, { 8.

4 Memorial, 179.

'S Memorial, {4 9, 90-91. The corporate name of Wind Mobile is Globalive Wireless LP.

'6 €.084, Declaration of Ownership and Control, 5 August 2008, pp. 80, 92 (Globalive Holdco Shareholders’
Agreement, Clause 6.6 and Schedule C); C-084, Declaration of Ownership and Control, 5 August 2008, pp. 119, 134-
35 (Globalive Investment Shareholders’ Agreement, Clause 6.8 and Schedule C); C-084, Declaration of Ownership
and Control, 5 August 2008, pp. 137-49 (Globalive Canada Holdings Corp. Articles of Incorporation); C-084,
Declaration of Ownership and Control, 5 August 2008, pp. 150-65 (Globalive Investment Holdings Corp. Articles of
Incorporation).

"7 Memorial, 87; C-082, Letter from Michael D. Connolly to Michael John O’Connor, 22 July 2008.

 

7

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

29.

Procedural Order No. 2

GTH states that, from 2008 to September 2012, it invested more than CAD 1.3 billion in
Wind Mobile, making it the strongest New Entrant in the market.'® However, Canada
allegedly “failed to uphold its end of the bargain, and used its sovereign authority both to
change the rules and to orchestrate the application of existing rules to GTH’s detriment

without any consideration for the extreme unfair consequences for GTH.”!”

First, GTH alleges that Canada subjected Wind Mobile to a seven-month review of its
compliance with the O&C Rules, which was duplicative, inconsistent and unfair.2° After
GTH had paid CAD 442 million for the licenses, Industry Canada conducted an extensive
review and determined that Wind Mobile was in compliance with the O&C Rules.?!
However, the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission
(“CRTC”) then undertook its own review. It established an onerous public review process
specifically targeted at Wind Mobile, and eventually determined that Wind Mobile did not
qualify to operate as a common carrier, contrary to Industry Canada’s earlier
determination.” Ultimately, Wind Mobile was found to be in compliance with the O&C
Rules and entitled to operate, but the regulatory process allegedly hurt Wind Mobile by

preventing it from entering the market at a critical time.”*

Second, GTH alleges that Canada took no action to create the fair, competitive market
conditions foreseen in the policy documents relating to the 2008 AWS Auction until March
2013, “constituting far too little, too late”.24 According to GTH, the result was that New

Entrants had no chance of competing with established carriers.?>

Third, GTH argues that after the O&C Rules were relaxed as expected in June 2012,

'8 Memorial, {4 19, 99, LIL.
'° Memorial, 11.

2° Memorial, § V.A.

2! Memorial, If 120-125.

2 Memorial fff 126-144.

°3 Memorial, 14.

2 Memorial, If 15, 114, 366.
25 Memorial, § V.B.

w
o

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)
Procedural Order No. 2

Fourth, GTH alleges that in March 2013, Canada reversed its previously stated policy and
announced that New Entrants would no longer be permitted to transfer their set-aside
spectrum licenses to an incumbent carrier after the expiration of the five-year period set
forth in the 2008 AWS Auction policy framework.*° GTH states that this action made it
impossible for GTH to recover any value from its investment. Left with no other options,
in September 2014, GTH agreed to sell Wind Mobile to a consortium of non-incumbent
investors for CAD 295 million, an amount “far below the price Wind Mobile would have

been worth but-for Canada’s breaches.”*!

GTH asserts that, through these actions, Canada has breached the BIT by failing to (a)
afford GTH fair and equitable treatment, (b) ensure full protection and security of GTH’s
investment, (c) guarantee the unrestricted transfer of GTH’s investment, and (d) grant

GTH’s investment treatment no less favourable than that which it provides to investments

26 Memorial, § V.C.L.

27 Memorial, | 182;

° Merril, | 25: a.

Dobbie, { 39.
8 Memorial, § V.C.2.
3! Memorial, { 25

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

35.

36.

37.

Procedural Order No. 2

of its own investors.*? GTH seeks compensation “in excess of US$ 1.75 billion to be

updated as of the date of the Award”.**

THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

A. Respondent’s Position

Canada requests that the Tribunal bifurcate this proceeding to address its five objections to
jurisdiction and admissibility in a separate phase prior to considering the merits of GTH’s
claims. According to Canada, bifurcation “will enhance the fairness, efficiency, and

economy of the proceedings.”**

(1) Applicable Legal Standard

Canada submits that, pursuant to Article 41(2) of the ICSID Convention and the ICSID
Arbitration Rules, ICSID tribunals have discretion to hear objections to jurisdiction and
admissibility in a preliminary phase.** Indeed, many tribunals in investor-State cases under
the ICSID Convention, the ICSID Additional Facility Rules and the UNCITRAL Rules

have opted for such a bifurcated proceeding.*®

In Canada’s view, there are several benefits to this approach. It allows “the parties to know

where they stand at an early stage,”*”

and enhances the fairness, efficiency, and economy
of the proceeding.** In addition, Canada states that bifurcation “helps to ensure that the

Tribunal only hears and decides a dispute where the conditions on consent to arbitrate have

32 Memorial, § VII.

33 Memorial, {[ 427.

¥ April Request for Bifurcation, {[ 2.

35 Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, | 283; April Request, {{ 23, citing inter alia RL-003, Bureau Veritas,
Inspection, Valuation, Assessment and Control, BIVAC B.V. v. The Republic of Paraguay, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/9)
Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction, 29 May 2009, {[ 52 (“It is clear from [Article 41(2) of the ICSID
Convention] that the Tribunal may decide to deal with any issue of jurisdiction or admissibility as “a preliminary
question” or by joinder to the merits of the dispute”).

36 Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, {{ 284; April Request, {[ 26.

37 April Request for Bifurcation, | 25, quoting RL-008, Alan Redfern and Martin Hunter, Law and Practice of
International Commercial Arbitration, 4th ed. (London: Thomson, Sweet & Maxwell, 2004), p. 258.

38 Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, {| 284.

10

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)
Procedural Order No. 2

 

been met.”*? For Canada, this point is especially important when a sovereign State is a
party, in light of the “basic rule of international law ... that a State is not obliged [to] give
an account of itself on issues of merits before an international tribunal which lacks

jurisdiction or whose jurisdiction has not been established.”*°

38. Regarding the applicable legal framework, Canada points to three main factors identified
by the tribunals in Philip Morris v. Australia and Emmis v. Hungary to be considered in
determining whether to bifurcate a proceeding.*! Under this framework, bifurcation of a

preliminary objection is appropriate when:

a. the objection is prima facie serious and substantial,

b. the objection can be examined without prejudging or entering the merits, and

c. the objection, if successful, could dispose of all or an essential part of the claims.*”

39. With respect to the first element, Canada argues that “the Tribunal must only make a prima

facie determination that the objections are not frivolous since it is only after having heard

the parties’ submissions on these objections that it can decide on the objections.”**

% April Request for Bifurcation, J 25.

40 April Request for Bifurcation, | 25, quoting RL-010, Shabtai Rosenne, The World Court: What It Is and How It
Works, 5th ed. (Dordrecht: Martinus Nijhoff, 1995), p. 99. See also Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, {| 285,
citing RL-012, Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Ltd. v. Arab Republic of Egypt (106 1.L.R. 531) Decision
on Jurisdiction, 14 April 1988, {{ 63 (“there is no presumption of jurisdiction — particularly where a sovereign State is
involved — and the Tribunal must examine objections to the jurisdiction of the Centre with meticulous care, bearing
in mind that jurisdiction in the present case exists only insofar as consent thereto has been given by the Parties”).

4! RL-022, Philip Morris Asia Limited v. The Commonwealth of Australia (UNCITRAL) Procedural Order No. 8
Regarding Bifurcation of the Procedure, 14 April 2014, | 109; RL-014, Emmis International Holding and others. v.
Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/2, Decision on Respondent's Application for Bifurcation, 13 June 2013, {[ 37(2).
2 April Request for Bifurcation, { 27 and Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, (286, citing RL-022, Philip
Morris Asia Limited v. The Commonwealth of Australia (UNCITRAL) Procedural Order No. 8 Regarding Bifurcation
of the Procedure, 14 April 2014, J 109; RL-014, Emmis International Holding and others. v. Hungary, \CSID Case
No. ARB/12/2, Decision on Respondent’s Application for Bifurcation, 13 June 2013, | 37(2).

43 Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, | 287, quoting RLL-022, Philip Morris Asia Limited v. The
Commonwealth of Australia (UNCITRAL) Procedural Order No. 8 Regarding Bifurcation of the Procedure, 14 April
2014, | 109.

11

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)
Procedural Order No. 2
40. Canada notes GTH’s agreement that these three factors are relevant to the Tribunal’s

determination on the issue of bifurcation.“

Al. According to Canada, each of its five objections satisfies the test for bifurcation because it
is serious, can be decided without entering into the merits of the dispute, and will dispose
of all or an essential part of GTH’s claims.** By significantly reducing the scope of issues
before the Tribunal in the merits phase, bifurcation would reduce the burden of document
production, and lead to cost savings.*° Canada’s arguments relating to each objection are

summarised in the following subsections.

2)

“4 Jur, Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, J 286, citing April Response, 7.

45 April Request for Bifurcation, { 28. The Tribunal notes that, in its April Request for Bifurcation, the Respondent
raised also an objection with respect to the Admissibility of the Claimant’s Most-Favored Nation claim. As noted in
its more recent pleading, the Respondent no longer raises this objection as the Claimant has since abandoned that
claim. Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, {| 288.

46

Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, {[ 295.

   

47.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)
Procedural Order No. 2

(3) Second Objection: Article II(4)(b) of the BIT

*° Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, 4 31.

5° Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, ff 3, 15, 85-99.
5! Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, #{{ 100-105.

%2 April Request for Bifurcation, {{ 32.

53 April Request for Bifurcation, {{ 33.

54 April Request for Bifurcation, {{ 33.
55 April Request for Bifurcation, {| 34.

48.

49.

50.

51.

56

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)
Procedural Order No. 2

According to Canada, even if one were to accept GTH’s allegations fF

unfair, arbitrary and discriminatory, this claim would be excluded from dispute resolution

provisions of the BIT pursuant to Article II(4)(b).>°
Article II(4)(b) states that

Decisions by either Contracting Party not to permit establishment of
a new business enterprise or acquisition of an existing business
enterprise or a share of such enterprise by investors or prospective
investors shall not be subject to the provisions of Article XIII of this
Agreement.*”

In Canada’s view, the Tribunal should hear this objection in a preliminary phase for several
reasons. First, Canada argues that the objection is serious and substantial, as GTH’s

“allegation falls squarely within the scope of the Article II(4)(b) exclusion.”

Second, the objection is a discrete question entirely independent from the merits of the

dispute.°! According to Canada, the relevant it Iz Zi _ ___

are “relatively straight forward”; the Tribunal can carry out its

jurisdictional analysis by relying on GTH’s pleadings and assuming that all the facts pled

are true.°

Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, {| 109.

57 CL-001, BIT, Article 1(4)(b).

58 Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, {141-143
°° Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, {{ 148.

© April Request for Bifurcation, | 38

©! April Request for Bifurcation, { 39

© April Request for Bifurcation, { 39

52.

54.

55.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)
Procedural Order No. 2

Third, Canada submits that this objection, if accepted, would dispose of an essential part
of GTH’s claims. Canada accepts that it could not dispose of the case entirely, but argues
that it would significantly reduce the scope of issues and evidence to be addressed in the

second phase of the proceeding, leading to time and cost savings.

 

(4) Third Objection: Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis

Canada’s objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione temporis relates to two categories
of GTH’s claims: (a) CRTC’s O&C review of Wind Mobile in 2009, and (b) the alleged
failure of Industry Canada to maintain a regulatory framework that would permit New
Entrants to successfully compete in the telecommunications market after the AWS

Auction.%7

According to Canada, these claims are time-barred pursuant to the strict limitations period
contained in Article XIII(3)(d) of the BIT.® That provision states that an investor may

submit a dispute to arbitration only if

not more than three years have elapsed from the date on which the
investor first acquired, or should have first acquired, knowledge of

© Jur, Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, J 290.
© April Request for Bifurcation, 40; Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, | 290.
© April Request for Bifurcation, 4 40

66

April Request for Bifurcation, { 40.

© Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, { 149.
8 Jur, Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, {ff 180-190.

15

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)
Procedural Order No. 2

 

the alleged breach and knowledge that the investor has incurred loss
or damage.°?

56. Canada asserts that the two challenged measures noted above were adopted long before the
critical date of 28 May 2013 (three years before the filing of the Request for Arbitration),
and that GTH either knew or should have known that it would incur the alleged damage as

a result of these measures before that date.”

57. In particular, Canada points out that is undisputed between the Parties that all events
relating to the CRTC review occurred from 2009 to April 2012, when the matter was finally
closed by the Supreme Court of Canada.”! Thus, GTH was aware of alleged damage arising
from the measure no later than April 2012. With respect to the regulatory framework for
New Entrants, Canada argues that the untimeliness of the claim is clear from the allegations
set forth in the Memorial.’? Indeed, the documents filed by GTH show that it had
knowledge of both the alleged breach and loss long before the critical date of 28 May
2013.7

58. Canada denies GTH’s allegation that these two measures form part of a cumulative breach.
In Canada’s view, they are obviously distinct measures, and the Tribunal must reject

GTH’s “blatant attempt to by-pass the strict three-year limitation period.””*

59. Canada asks the Tribunal to bifurcate its objection to jurisdiction ratione temporis, as all
three factors set forth by the tribunal in Philip Morris v. Australia weight in favour of

bifurcation.”* In this regard, Canada asserts that the seriousness of its objection is clear on

 CL-001, BIT, XIII(3)(d).

% Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, {{{ 180-190.
7! Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, {[ 181.

® Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, #{{ 189-190.

3 Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, {| 189, citing, inter alia, Memorial, {{{ 150-161; C-118, Industry Canada,
Roaming and Tower Sharing Review (Jul. 2011); C-134, Issue Brief — Wind Mobile (Jan. 11, 2013); C-213, Wind
Mobile, Domestic Roaming: Presentation by Simon Lockie, Chief Regulatory Officer (Oct. 2013).

4 Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, {[ 150.
5 Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, {{ 291.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

60.

61.

62.

Procedural Order No. 2

the face of GTH’s allegations, which demonstrate GTH’s knowledge of the alleged
breaches and damage long before the critical date under Article XIII(3)(d) of the BIT.”°

In addition, Canada considers that the Tribunal can decide this objection without delving
into the merits. In particular, the Tribunal can identify the measure and the allegation of
loss by relying on GTH’s pleadings alone. There is no need to enter into the substance of
the CRTC’s review process or to consider Canada’s obligations with regard to the

regulatory framework following the AWS Auction.””

Further, Canada asserts that if this objection were upheld in a preliminary phase, the scope
of issues to be addressed in the next phase would be greatly reduced. For example, the

following matters could be avoided, reducing costs:

a. Evidence, including expert evidence, relating to the CRTC review, the conduct of the
CRTC hearings, the substance of the CRTC decision, appeals of the CRTC decision,

and the final decision to overturn the CRTC decision.

b. Factual and evidentiary issues related to Canada’s regulation of the

telecommunications market.

c. The issue of whether GTH’s allegation related to this regulatory framework could

amount to a breach of the BIT.”

(5) Fourth Objection: Article IV(2)(d) of the BIT

Canada’s next objection targets GTH’s claims that Canada breached its national treatment
obligations contained in Article II(3)(a) and Article [V(1) of the BIT. Canada submits that
these claims are precluded by the reservation it made pursuant to Article ITV(2)(d) of the

BIT, and the Tribunal therefore lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae over them.”

% April Request for Bifurcation, {ff 53, 59.
7 April Request for Bifurcation, {ff 55, 60.
8 Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, {[ 291.

9 Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, § IILE.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

63.

64.

65.

66.

Procedural Order No. 2

Article TV(2)(d) permits the Contracting Parties to “make or maintain exceptions within
the sectors or matters listed in the Annex to this Agreement” to which the national treatment
obligations will not apply.*° The Annex, in turn, states that “Canada reserves the right to
make and maintain exceptions in the sectors or matters listed below: social services ...;
services in any other sector ...”*! According to Canada, GTH’s national treatment claim
relates exclusively to the telecommunications sector, which is a service sector and therefore

excluded from the scope of the BIT’s national treatment provisions. **

Canada considers it appropriate to bifurcate this objection because it is prima facie serious
and relates to “a purely legal question of interpretation based on the text of the treaty.”** It
is unrelated to the substance of GTH’s claims and can be resolved without consideration

of factual evidence or witness testimony.**

In addition, Canada asserts that if it were to prevail on this objection, GTH’s national
treatment claims would be disposed of completely. As a result, the merits phase would be
more efficient, with a narrower scope for document production, shorter submissions and

fewer fact and expert witnesses. *°

(6) Fifth Objection: Admissibility
Canada objects to the admissibility of GTH’s claims that, in Canada’s view, relate to the
treatment of Wind Mobile.*° Specifically, Canada submits that GTH lacks standing to bring
its claims concerning measures that allegedly affected (a) Wind Mobile’s competitiveness
as a New Entrant in the Canadian telecommunications market, and (b) the transferability

of Wind Mobile’s licenses.*”

* CL-001, BIT, Article IV(2)(d).

8! CL-001, BIT, Annex.

® Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, #¥{ 225-235.
3 Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, {[ 292.

* Jur, Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, {{ 292; April Request for Bifurcation, | 46.
8S April Request for Bifurcation, | 47.
*6 Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, § IV.

*7 Jur, Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, {[ 238.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

67.

68.

69.

Procedural Order No. 2

Canada argues that GTH and Wind Mobile cannot be equated with one another, following
the principle of international law that an enterprise and its shareholders have separate legal
personality.** Article XIII(12) of BIT provides a narrow exception to this general principle
by allowing a foreign shareholder to bring a claim on behalf of an enterprise incorporated
in the host State. However, Article XTII(12) applies only in specific circumstances which
are not present in the current case, and GTH does not purport to pursue its claims on behalf
of Wind Mobile. Therefore, GTH cannot bring a claim for alleged breaches and damages

suffered by Wind Mobile.*?

For Canada, GTH’s allegations regarding the regulatory framework for New Entrants and
the transferability of spectrum licences “do not concern any impairment of the rights
associated with the Claimant’s shareholding or loans.”*? Rather, GTH alleges that
Canada’s failure to ensure a favourable regulatory framework hurt Wind Mobile and its
operations (not its shareholders).°! Similarly, GTH alleges that the transfer framework

impaired spectrum licenses which are held by Wind Mobile (not by GTH).””

In Canada’s view, this objection to admissibility should be heard in a preliminary phase to
enhance efficiency. In particular, Canada states that the objection can be decided on the
basis of GTH’s Request for Arbitration and Memorial, without entering into the merits of
the case.” In addition, Canada considers that a merits phase would be streamlined if this
objection were upheld in a preliminary phase. For example, the Parties and the Tribunal
would not need to address whether Canada failed to provide a favourable regulatory
framework, whether it repudiated the framework set out in advance of the 2008 AWS

Auction, or whether the alleged measures constitute a breach of the BIT.

88 Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, {ff 241-244, citing, inter alia, RL-138, Case Concerning the Barcelona
Traction, Light and Power Company, Limited (Belgium v. Spain), Judgment, 1.C.J. Reports 1970, pp. 41-44.

® Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, {{ 240.

% April Request for Bifurcation, | 64.

°! Jur, Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, 49] 273-279
°2 Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, {ff 280-281.
%3 April Request for Bifurcation, | 65.

% April Request for Bifurcation, | 66.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)
Procedural Order No. 2

 

B. Claimant’s Position

70. GTH asks the Tribunal to deny Canada’s request for bifurcation because, in GTH’s view,
the result of bifurcation would be delay, duplicative proceedings and “a risk of inconsistent

determinations by the Tribunal,” rather than an increase in efficiency and fairness.”

(1) _ Applicable Legal Standard

71. According to GTH, the Parties “agree that the Tribunal has the discretion to bifurcate
proceedings and that considerations of fairness and efficiency are paramount in
determining whether bifurcation is warranted.”*° In addition, the Parties are in agreement
regarding the three factors that tribunals should consider in assessing a request for

bifurcation.°”

72. GTH states that it is appropriate for a tribunal to decline to bifurcate preliminary objections

when

(i) the objection is unlikely to succeed; or (ii) the stated objection
will not dispose entirely of a case (or an essential part thereof)
making the merits stage in the proceedings inevitable (and more
protracted as a result of bifurcation); or (iii) there is extensive
overlap between the issues relevant to the determination of the
objection and the merits of the proceeding.**

723. Applying that test to the present case, GTH submits that it is not appropriate to hear any of
Canada’s objections to jurisdiction and admissibility in a preliminary phase. According to

GTH, Canada’s attempt to portray these objections as serious and complex must be

°5 Response, 9.

°6 Response, [ 3.

°7 Response, {{ 3, citing Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, {{] 283-284. These factors are set out at J 38 above.
°8 Response, 4, citing, inter alia, RL-011, Christoph H. Schreuer, Loretta Malintoppi, August Reinisch & Anthony
Sinclair, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2nd edition 2009), pp. 538-39 (“In a considerable number of cases
tribunals have joined the consideration of jurisdictional questions to the merits of the cas . The need for a joinder
to the merits is apparent where the answer to the jurisdictional questions depends on testimony and other evidence
that can only be obtained through a full hearing of the case. This would be the case, in particular, if the jurisdictional
questions are closely related to the merits and depend on the same factual questions. In such a case, the decision on
jurisdiction can only be made after a full consideration of the evidence.”).

 

 

20

74.

75.

76.

77.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)
Procedural Order No. 2
rejected. In fact, they are based on incorrect interpretations of the BIT and therefore lack

merit.°?

Po As a result, bifurcation of the objections would add a

year or more to the procedural timetable without eliminating the need for a merits phase.!°!

In GTH’s view, Canada’s request for bifurcation should be rejected on that basis alone. !°

Furthermore, according to GTH, many of the objections would require the Tribunal to enter
into the merits of the claims, as Canada acknowledges. Because such issues would then
need to be re-examined in the merits phase, bifurcation would result in delay, extra costs,
and the risk of inconsistent findings of fact once the Tribunal considers the full

documentary record. !°

Finally, GTH states that it “would also be highly prejudicial to decide these objections
prematurely, before a full hearing of the evidence on the merits, and bifurcation should be

rejected on this basis in any event.”!°

GTH addresses each of Canada’s five objections, as summarised in the following

subsections.

Qs
ee
ee 7
ee

%® Response, | 6.

10 Response, { 7.

‘0! Response, { 18.

102

Response, { 18.

3 Response, {ff 8, 18.
'4 Response, { 19.

105

Response, {| 10, 16.

21

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)
Procedural Order No. 2

106 Response, {ff 11-14.
'°T Response, { 15.

18 Response, { 13.

410 Response, { 13.

411 Response, { 14.

112

Response, { 15.

43 Response, { 15.

84.

85.

86.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)
Procedural Order No. 2

ee
However, in the event that the Tribunal does consider bifurcating this objection, GTH asks

that this be done “on an expedited basis according to a timetable that does not disrupt the

April 2019 hearing dates already set aside by the Tribunal for the hearing on the merits.” !'>

(3) Second Objection: Article II(4)(b) of the BIT

that Canada ignores Article II(4)(a) of the BIT, which is essential to understanding the
alleged exclusion in Article I1(4)(b).!'° As a factual matter, GTH denies that its claim
relates to the “acquisition of an existing business enterprise or a share of such

enterprise.”!!’ According to GTH, its claims relate to the exercise of rights already acquired

at the time it made its investment, Po 118

GTH highlights Canada’s statement that GTH’s factual allegations can be accepted as true
for the purpose of considering this objection.'!? For GTH, it follows that the Tribunal must
accept the fact that GTH was seeking to exercise existing rights. Thus, Canada defeats its

own objection. !7°

In any event, GTH argues that if the facts relating to Canada’s objection were to be
determined in a preliminary phase, those same facts would need to be analysed in relation

to the merits.'*! GTH sees a risk that the Tribunal would need to make factual findings

414 Response, {ff 10, 16.
45 Response, { 17.

116 Response, {{ 22, citing CL-001, BIT (English version), Article I(4)(a) (“Decisions by either Contracting Party,
pursuant to measures not inconsistent with this Agreement, as to whether or not to permit an acquisition shall not be
subject to the provisions of Articles XIII or XV of this Agreement”).

417 Response, { 20, quoting CL-001, BIT Article 11(4)(b).

48 Response, { 22; Memorial, {ff 93, 345, 348

419 Response, { 22, citing Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, 141

20 Response, § II.B.1 (“Canada Vitiates Its Own Objection Under Article 11(4)(b) Of The BIT ...”).
2! Response, { 23.

23

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

87.

88.

122

Procedural Order No. 2

relevant to GTH’s claims “in isolation based on an incomplete factual picture that has been
grossly mischaracterized by Canada, causing substantial prejudice to GTH at the merits

stage.” !?2 Therefore, in GTH’s view, the Tribunal must not bifurcate this objection.

(4) Third Objection: Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis

GTH submits that the Tribunal has jurisdiction ratione temporis over GTH’s claims for
Canada’s failure to provide fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security. !7>

According to GTH, Canada’s breaches involve “a series of measures which crystalized, at

relating to those breaches occurred earlier, the only date relevant to the limitations period

is June 2013, when “Canada’s conduct culminated in a breach.” !?>

GTH argues that this objection is inappropriate for bifurcation because, as Canada
concedes, it will require a detailed inquiry into facts which are relevant to the substance of
GTH’s claims.!”° For example, the Tribunal will need to assess when the alleged breach
occurred, the duration of the breach, and when GTH first knew of (or should have known
of) the alleged breach and the existence of loss or damage.'?’ Furthermore, GTH asserts
that even if certain of Canada’s breaches occurred outside the limitations period, the
underlying measures would still need to be considered in the merits phase, as they are

relevant to GTH’s exit from the Canadian market. !”8

Response, { 23.

23 Response, {{ 24.

'24 Response, {{ 24.

125

Response, { 24.

26 Response, citing Jur. Memorial, | 172 (“As the tribunal in Rusoro noted, a determination of whether a series of

's forms part of a larger composite act ‘is very fact specific and depends on the circumstances of the case.’”). Canada

cites CL-016, Rusoro Mining Limited v. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/5,
Award, 22 August 2016, ff 229-31.

27 Response, J 25.

28 Response, {[ 26, citing CL-016, Rusoro Mining Limited v. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, 1CSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/12/5, Award, 22 August 2016, {| 233 (“this does not imply that the measures underlying [the time-barred]
breaches become irrelevant. They provide the necessary background and context for adjudicating the case, and the
legitimate expectations of an investor may depend crucially on matters that occurred before such Cut-Off Date.”).

24

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

89.

90.

91.

92.

Procedural Order No. 2

Therefore, in GTH’s view, this objection should be heard together with the merits, “when

a detailed review of the facts can be undertaken in their appropriate context.” !?°

(5) Fourth Objection: Article IV(2)(d) of the BIT

GTH submits that Canada’s jurisdictional objection based on Article [V(2)(d) of the BIT
is founded on a flawed interpretation of that provision.'*° According to GTH, Article
TV(2)(d) creates a prospective right for Canada “to make or maintain exceptions” to its
national treatment obligations for any services.'*! Yet, Canada has not made such an
exception; nor can it exercise its right to do so merely “by adopting or maintaining
measures or by according treatment that would otherwise be inconsistent with the national

treatment obligations,” as Canada suggests. !?

In GTH’s view, bifurcation of this objection will not serve the interests of fairness or
efficiency. First, bifurcation would lead to a duplicative review of the facts relating to the
De. which are relevant to GTH’s fair and equitable treatment claim
and to its exit from the Canadian market.'** Second, in a preliminary phase, the Tribunal
might be forced to make premature factual findings on such matters “in the vacuum of
Canada’s jurisdictional objections, prejudicing GTH claims.” !*4
(6) Fifth Objection: Admissibility

Finally, GTH argues that Canada’s objection to the admissibility of certain of GTH’s
claims ignores the fact that, under the BIT, shareholders may claim for both direct and

direct loss.'?° According to GTH, Canada has neither addressed GTH’s description of its

29 Response, { 25.
30 Response, { 28.
5! Response, 29, quoting C-001, BIT, Article IV(2)(d) and Annex.

132

Response, J 28, quoting Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, {[ 209.

33 Response, {{ 30.
'54 Response, { 30.
35 Response, { 31.

25

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

93.

VI.

94.

95.

Procedural Order No. 2

investment as a “bundle of rights” nor dealt with the case law supporting GTH’s

position.

Regarding bifurcation, GTH submits that, as with Canada’s other objections,
considerations of fairness and efficiency weigh in favour of hearing this objection together
with the merits.'3” In this regard, GTH notes that deciding Canada’s objection will require
a fact-intensive inquiry that touches upon the merits, especially relating to Canada’s

transfer policies and how they affected GTH’s ability to sell its shares. !7

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

The Tribunal notes at the outset that the purpose of this Order is to decide whether to
bifurcate the present proceedings. The Tribunal takes no decision on the substance of the
jurisdictional and admissibility objections at this stage but will do so at the appropriate

time as provided in the Procedural Timetable.

Having considered the Parties’ submissions and having deliberated, the Tribunal has
determined that, while each of the Respondent’s objections is prima facie serious and
substantial, there is an insufficient basis for bifurcation in this case, and therefore denies
the Respondent’s request for bifurcation. The Tribunal notes, for the avoidance of doubt,
that its decision, and its comments regarding the Respondent’s specific jurisdictional and
admissibility objections below, are without prejudice to the Tribunal’s eventual
determination of those objections or any issue on the merits. The Tribunal has in no way
prejudged the outcome of any of the preliminary objections raised (which will be joined to
the merits of the dispute in the manner envisaged by Article 41 of the ICSID Convention),

and the Respondent is fully entitled to maintain such objections as it considers appropriate.

36 Response, { 31, citing Memorial, | 386.
57 Response, { 32.
'38 Response, { 32.

26

96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)
Procedural Order No. 2

A. Legal Framework

The Tribunal’s power to rule on the Bifurcation Request is embodied in the ICSID

Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

With regard to the procedural stage at which the Tribunal may address any objection to its

jurisdiction, Article 41(2) of the ICSID Convention states that

[a]ny objection by a party to the dispute that the dispute is not within
the jurisdiction of the Centre, or for other reasons is not within the
competence of the Tribunal, shall be considered by the Tribunal
which shall determine whether to deal with it as a preliminary
question or to join it to the merits of the dispute.

Furthermore, Rule 41(4) of the Arbitration Rules provides in relevant part that the Tribunal

may deal with the objection as a preliminary question or join it to

the merits of the dispute. If the Tribunal overrules the objection or

joins it to the merits, it shall once more fix time limits for the further

procedures.
Neither the ICSID Convention nor the Arbitration Rules sets forth a legal standard
applicable to the decision of whether to join preliminary objections to the merits or instead
to hear them in a preliminary phase. The ICSID Convention and the Arbitration Rules leave

this decision entirely to the discretion of tribunals.

Here, the Parties are in agreement that, in exercising their discretion regarding whether to
order bifurcation, tribunals should be guided by the paramount considerations of fairness
and efficiency and should consider the following three factors, as identified by the tribunals

in Philip Morris v. Australia and Emmis v. Hungary:'*

a. whether the objection is prima facie serious and substantial;

'89 RL-022, Philip Morris Asia Limited v. The Commonwealth of Australia (UNCITRAL) Procedural Order No. 8
Regarding Bifurcation of the Procedure, 14 April 2014, | 109; RL-014, Emmis International Holding and others. v.
Hungary, \CSID Case No. ARB/12/2, Decision on Respondent’s Application for Bifurcation, 13 June 2013, { 37(2).
See also April Request for Bifurcation, { 27, Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, {{f{ 285, 286, and Response,

13.

27

101.

102.

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)
Procedural Order No. 2

b. whether the objection can be examined without prejudging or entering the merits; and

whether the objection, if successful, could dispose of all or an essential part of the

°

claims before the Tribunal.

The Tribunal accepts the Parties’ submissions in this respect. It has been guided in its

analysis by these criteria, as explained below.

-

Analysis

Preliminarily, the Tribunal considers that each of the five objections advanced by the
Respondent is arguable, has been advanced in good faith, and merits the Tribunal’s
consideration. Accordingly, it is the Tribunal’s view that the objections meet the standard

of being prima facie serious and substantial, and not frivolous.

However, the Tribunal does not believe that considerations of procedural economy support

bifurcation in this case. Two principal considerations lead it to this view.

the factual issue appears to be somewhat balanced (and not clearly likely to

40 Jur. Memorial and Request for Bifurcation, | 55.

28

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

107.

108.

Procedural Order No. 2

be resolved in one way rather than another) on the parties’ submissions currently before
the Tribunal (on which the parties will doubtless seek to elaborate at an appropriate stage
in the future in this arbitration, perhaps by adducing relevant travaux préparatoires of the
BIT if they consider it appropriate). In light of this, the possibility that the consideration of
this jurisdictional objection as a preliminary matter through a bifurcated proceeding might
result in the avoidance of years of unnecessary and costly litigation must be weighed
against the possibility that bifurcation to address this jurisdictional objection might simply

result in additional costs and delays if the objection is rejected.

As to the remaining four objections, the Tribunal is not convinced by the Respondent’s
arguments that the resolution of any of those objections in the Respondent’s favour in a
preliminary phase would result in a reduction of the scope of the merits phase significant
enough to warrant bifurcation and the attendant risk of delay and additional expense.
Removing one or more of the specific claims identified in the Respondent’s objections
would not, it appears to the Tribunal, significantly reduce the pleadings which the parties
would still be required to prepare, or the overall scope of the factual matrix and expert

issues that fact witnesses and experts would be asked to address.

Second, the Tribunal considers that preliminary consideration of these objections to
jurisdiction and admissibility appears to require consideration of factual issues that will

inevitably need to be revisited in the merits phase. In particular:

a. The second objection (that claims concerning are excluded

from the dispute resolution provisions of the BIT by virtue of Article II(4)(b)) would
appear to require consideration of the facts surrounding the measures in question (i.e.,
decisions not to permit an acquisition). The Tribunal is not persuaded by the
Respondent’s suggestion that a limited aspect of those facts could be considered in a
preliminary phase, with the broader context surrounding those events falling to the

merits phase.

b. The third objection (to jurisdiction ratione temporis) appears to the Tribunal to
inevitably require a consideration of the facts and context underlying the specific
measures in question to decide whether the four measures should be considered

29

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

109.

110.

Procedural Order No. 2

cumulatively as argued by the Claimant or each separately as contended by the
Respondent, which will then be revisited in a merits phase. Added to this is the
Claimant’s position that even if certain breaches were not cumulative and fall outside
the relevant time period, they are still background facts relevant to the analysis of

alleged breaches that are clearly timely.

c. The fourth objection (that GTH’s national treatment claims are precluded by Article
TV(2)(d) and its Annex of the BIT such that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione
materiae over them) and the fifth objection (to the admissibility of GTH’s claims
stemming from the treatment of Wind Mobile) both appear to require the consideration

of factual issues that may well be relevant to the merits of the case as well.

While the factual questions raised by these jurisdictional and admissibility objections may
to a certain extent be narrower than the facts relevant to the merits of the case, there is
nevertheless a considerable potential for overlap, and the issues appear to the Tribunal to
be intertwined with the merits. This gives rise to the risk that the Tribunal may be required
to decide on issues of fact prematurely. Moreover, the costs associated with further
briefing, tendering of evidence, and undertaking an evidentiary hearing on these issues on
a preliminary basis would not be insignificant. In the Tribunal’s view, the inevitable cost
of multiple hearings therefore needs to actually produce real opportunities for gains in
efficiency in order for bifurcation to be warranted, especially where the objections to be
considered in the preliminary phase end up not to be dispositive of the case. The extent to
which the Respondent’s objections may require the Tribunal to consider facts that are also

relevant to the merits significantly undermines any such real opportunities.

In sum, while the Tribunal accepts that, were the Respondent to succeed on one or more of
its non-dispositive objections in a preliminary jurisdictional phase, the subsequent merits
phase would be somewhat reduced in scope, it is not convinced that this would warrant the

additional costs and time delays associated with a complete two-phase proceeding.

30

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)
Procedural Order No. 2

 

VII. DECISION
111. For the reasons above, the Tribunal holds as follows:
a. The Respondent’s request to bifurcate the proceedings is denied.

b. This arbitration shall proceed in accordance with the Procedural Timetable applicable
to a joined proceeding, which is contained in Annex A of Procedural Order No. | and

reproduced as Annex A of this Order.

c. The question of costs is reserved.

On behalf of the Tribunal,

[signed]

Prof. Dr. Georges Affaki
President of the Tribunal
Date: 14 December 2017

31

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)
Procedural Order No. 2

ANNEX A: PROCEDURAL TIMETABLE

 

 

 

 

 

 

Procedural Step Time Period Date
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits and _ September 29, 2017
Damages
Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility & Request for Bifurcation (if any) 47 days November 15, 2017
Claimant’s Response to (any) Request for 2 weeks November 29, 2017
Bifurcation " ,
Tribunal’s Decision on Bifurcation (if necessary) 2 weeks December 13, 2017

(approx.) (approx.)

 

The following timetable applies in light of the Tribunal’s decision not to b
proceeding:

ifurcate the

 

Procedural Step

Time Period

Date

 

Canada’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits and

103 days after

February 26, 2018

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Parties

 

 

Damages B

Parties’ Requests for Document Production 30 days March 28, 2018
Parties’ Objections to Requests for Document :
Production (if any) 14 days April 11, 2018
Parties Responses to Objections to Produce 14 days April 25, 2018
Documents (if any)

Application to the Tribunal for Order on

Production of Documents (if necessary) 9 days May 4, 2018
Tribunal’s Decision on Document Requests (if 14 days May 18, 2018
necessary) (approx.) (approx.)
Production of Documents to Requests for 63d

Document Production not objected to by the fore May 30, 2018

 

 

 

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. Canada (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16)

 

Procedural Order No. 2

 

Procedural Step

Time Period

Date

 

Production of Documents as ordered by the
Tribunal

60 days
after J

July 17, 2018

 

Claimant’s Reply on Merits and Damages &
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility

59 days after L

September 14, 2018

 

Canada’s Rejoinder on Merits and Damages &

90 days after

December 13, 2018

 

 

 

 

Reply on Jurisdiction and Admissibility M

Claimant’s application for leave to file a

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, on

the grounds that new jurisdictional objections or 1 week December 20, 2018

new arguments were raised in Canada’s Reply

on Jurisdiction and Admissibility (if necessary)

Tribunal s decision on Claimant s application 3 weeks January 10, 2019

for leave to file a Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and (approx.) (approx.)

Admissibility, if necessary PPFOX. PPFOX.

Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and

Admissibility, if leave is requested and granted 29 days February 8, 2019
At least 6

Pre-Hearing Conference Call

weeks before S

TBD

 

Oral Hearing on Jurisdiction, Admissibility,
Merits and Damages

April 1-14, 2019 (2
weeks)

 

 

 

Tribunal’s Award

 

 

TBD

 

 

