International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
1818 H Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20433, U.S.A.
Telephone: (202) 458-1587 Faxes: (202) 522-2615 / (202) 522-2027
Website: http://(ww.worldbank.org/icisd

November 28, 2007
By courier (advance copy by e-mail

Professor James Anaya

Room 245

The University of Arizona

James E. Rogers College of Law
1201 East Speedway Boulevard

P.O. Box 210176,

Tucson, Arizona 85721-0176, U.S.A.

Re: Grand River Enterprises et a/ v. United States of America —
NAFTA/UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules Proceeding

Dear Professor Anaya,

I write in regard to the challenge that the Respondent has raised to your service as an
arbitrator in this proceeding under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. As explained in our letter
of October 23, 2007, a copy of which is attached herewith for your ease of reference, we consider
the challenge to have been made within the time limit set out in Article 11(1) of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules.

In our October 23, 2007 letter, we also explained that our understanding from the
correspondence that we received from you and the parties on the challenge is that you have, in
the course of your service as arbitrator in the present NAFTA proceeding which is aimed at
evaluating compliance by the Respondent with its international commitments under the NAFTA,
also been representing or assisting parties in procedures before the Inter-American Commission
on Human Rights and before the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination (CERD), which also involve evaluating compliance by the Respondent with its
international commitments.

In view of their basic similarity, therefore, we concluded that representing or assisting
parties in the latter set of procedures would be incompatible with simultaneous service as
arbitrator in the NAFTA proceeding, and asked that you inform us whether you would continue
to represent or assist parties in the non-NAFTA procedures during your service as arbitrator in
the present NAFTA proceeding.

In your response of October 25, 2007, you informed us that you are ceasing your
involvement in the procedures before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. We

 

-2-

also understand from your letter that you are not now engaged in any advocacy before the CERD,
although in the course of your work as an Instructor in a clinical course at the University of
Arizona College of Law, you provide orientation to students that is relevant to their work in
connection with the Western Shoshone, other indigenous peoples, and the CERD.

The applicable standard in deciding whether to sustain a challenge of an arbitrator in the
present case is set out in Article 10(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, which provides that
an “arbitrator may be challenged if circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts as to
the arbitrator’s impartiality or independence.” This is an objective standard in that it requires not
only a showing of doubt, but doubt that is justifiable. Further, as the standard requires an
exercise of judgment, it is only logical to conclude that all relevant facts and circumstances must
be considered in reaching that judgment.

A reasonable distinction can be made between: (i) representing parties in international
fora where the underlying aim is similar to the aim of the current arbitration (i.e., assessing
whether the United States is in compliance with its international legal obligations); and (ii)
supervising students as part of a clinical course. The former requires advocacy of a position; the
latter involves instruction and mentoring.

Therefore, the continued provision of orientation to students, as described in your letter of
October 25, 2007 does not, in my view, amount to representing or assisting parties in procedures
before the CERD such as to give rise to justifiable doubts as to impartiality or independence for
purposes of Article 10(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules. This is a finding that has been made after
careful consideration of the totality of the facts and circumstances of this case, including all the
submissions filed in connection with the challenge.

Consequently, I have decided not to sustain the challenge and I am by separate
communication notifying the parties accordingly.

Sincerely yours,

Wa")

Ana Palacio
Secretary-General
Attachment

ce by e-mail (with attachment):
Mr. Fali S. Nariman
Mr. John R. Crook

cc by e-mail (with attachment):

Grand River Enterprises Six Nations, Ltd., United States of America
Jerry Montour, Kenneth Hill and c/o Mr. Ronald J. Bettauer,
Arthur Montour Ms. Andrea J. Menaker,

c/o Mr. Todd Grierson-Weiler
Calgary, Alberta, Canada
and

Mr. Robert Luddy
Windels Marx Lane & Mittendorf LLP
New York, NY, U.S.A.
and
Mr. Arif Hyder Ali
Crowell & Moring LLP
Washington, D.C., U.S.A.
and
c/o Mr. Leonard Violi
Law Offices of Leonard Violi, LLC
Mamaroneck, NY, U.S.A.
and
c/o Mrs. Chantell MacInnes Montour

Inch Hammond Professional Corporation

Hamilton, Ontario, Canada

Mark E. Feldman and

Jeremy Sharpe

Office of International Claims and
Investment Disputes

United States Department of State
Washington, D.C. 20037-2800, U.S.A.

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
1818 H Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20433, U.S.A.
Telephone: (202) 458-1587 Faxes: (202) 522-2615 / (202) 522-2027
Website: http://www.worldbank.org/icisd

October 23, 2007
By courier (advance copy by e-mail)

Professor James Anaya

Room 245

The University of Arizona
James E. Rogers College of Law
1201 East Speedway Boulevard
P.O. Box 210176,

Tucson, Arizona 85721-0176

Re: Grand River Enterprises et al v. United States of America —
NAFTA/UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules Proceeding

Dear Professor Anaya,

I write in regard to the challenge that the Respondent in this proceeding has raised to your
service as an arbitrator in the proceeding.

I wish first to let you know that we consider the challenge to have been made within the
time limit set out in Article 11(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the challenge having
been notified fifteen days after the circumstance mentioned in the Respondent’s letter of March
30, 2007 became known to counsel for the Respondent.

As we understand it from the correspondence that we have received from you and the
parties, you are representing or assisting parties in procedures before the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights and the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discriminati It is our und ding that these proced are ing and are for evaluating
compliance by the Respondent with international human rights norms. The present proceeding in
which you are serving as arbitrator similarly aims at the evaluation of compliance by the
Respondent with its international commitments (under the NAFTA). Without in any way
questioning your integrity or competence as an arbitrator, we have, in view of their basic
similarity, concluded that representing or assisting parties in the first set of procedures would be
incompatible with simultaneous service as arbitrator in the NAFTA proceeding.

In another proceeding under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, we concluded, as
appointing authority, that a challenged arbitrator’s lobbying of the respondent State would be
incompatible with his simultaneous service as arbitrator in the proceeding. We therefore wrote
to the arbitrator, with a copy to the parties and the other arbitrators, asking the challenged

-2-

arbitrator to inform us, before taking a decision on the challenge, whether the arbitrator would
continue to act as lobbyist during his service as arbitrator.

By the present letter, we likewise ask that you inform us whether you will continue to
represent or assist parties in the above-mentioned non-NAFTA procedures during your service as
arbitrator in the present NAFTA proceeding. Our decision on the challenge will be made once
we receive your response.

Sincerely yours,

Nassib G. Ziadé
Deputy Secretary-General

ce:
Mr. Fali S. Nariman
Mr. John R. Crook

ce:
Grand River Enterprises Six Nations, Ltd., United States of America
Jerry Montour, Kenneth Hill and c/o Ms. Andrea Menaker
Arthur Montour Chief, NAFTA Arbitration Division
c/o Mr. Todd Grierson-Weiler Office of International Claims and
Calgary, Alberta, Canada Investment Disputes

and 2430 E Street, N.W.
Mr. Robert Luddy Suite 203, South Building
Windels Marx Lane & Mittendorf LLP Washington, D.C. 20037-2800
New York, NY

and
Mr. Arif Hyder Ali
Crowell & Moring LLP
Washington, D.C.

and

c/o Mr. Leonard Violi
Law Offices of Leonard Violi, LLC
Mamaroneck, NY

and
c/o Mrs. Chantell MacInnes Montour
Inch Hammond Professional Corporation
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada

