INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between
GUARDIAN FIDUCIARY TRUST LTD
f/k/a CAPITAL CONSERVATOR SAVINGS & LOAN LTD
Claimant

and

FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA

Respondent

(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal
Dr Veijo Heiskanen, President of the Tribunal

Prof. Andreas Bucher, Arbitrator
Prof. Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms Milanka Kostadinova

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 22 September 2015

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia

(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing the Claimant:

Juan F. Torres III, Esq
Juan F. Torres III, P. A.
1100 Fleetwood Lane
Fort Pierce, FL 34982
United States of America

and

Petro Janura

Advocate Petro Janura

Orce Nikolov 94

Skopje

Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia

Representing the Respondent:

Sebastian Seelmann-Eggebert
Charles Claypoole

Catriona Paterson

Robert Price

Latham & Watkins LLP

99 Bishopsgate

London EC2M 3XF

United Kingdom

and

Angela Angelovska-Wilson
Reed Smith LLP

1301 K Street, NW

Suite 1000 — East Tower
Washington, D.C. 20005
United States of America

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. INTRODUCTION 1

II. PROCEDURAL HISTORY 3

III. THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS REGARDING JURISDICTION RATIONE
PERSONAE 9
A. The Interpretation of Article 1(b)(IID) of the Treaty ..0.0.0.. eee 10
1. The Respondent’s position 10
2. The Claimant’s position 12
B. Burden of Proof and Relevant Evidence ...........cccccecssceseseeceeeseeeeeeseteeeeseteeseeeeeeneaes 14
1. The Respondent’s position 14
2. The Claimant’s position 17
C. The Claimant’s Corporate Structure oo... cece cess eeeeseeeseeeseseeeseetenseeeeeeeeeee 20
1. The Respondent’s position 20
2. The Claimant’s position 24
D. Exercise of Control over the Claimant 25
1. The Respondent’s position 25
2. The Claimant’s position 30
E. Relevant Arbitral Jurisprudence ...........c cece cscs ceceeeeeseeeesceceeeeeeeeeseeneseeseenenenees 33
1. The Respondent’s position 33
2. The Claimant’s position 35

 

 

IV. THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS FOR RELIEF

A. The Respondent’s request for relief.

 

 

B. The Claimant’s request for relief...

 

 

 

 

Vv. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS. 36
VI. COSTS 44
A. The Respondent’s position 44
B. The Claimant’s position 45
C. The Tribunal’s analysis AT

 

VIL. AWARD 48

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia

(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

FREQUENTLY USED ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

 

Arbitration Rules

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings

 

BIT

Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments between the
Macedonian Government and the Government
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, signed on
7 July 1998 and entered into force on | June
1999

 

CCG

Capital Conservator Group LLC

 

CCSL

Capital Conservator Savings & Loan Limited,
the former name of the Claimant

 

CCT

Capital Conservator Trustees Limited

 

Claimant

Guardian Fiduciary Trust Limited, or GFT,
formerly known as Capital Conservator
Savings & Loan Limited

 

Deed

Deed of Trust dated 1 October 2008 (Exhibit
R-0003)

 

FYROM

The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
or the Respondent

 

GFT

Guardian Fiduciary Trust Limited, or the
Claimant, formerly known as Capital
Conservator Savings & Loan Limited

 

ICSID Convention

Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Between States and Nationals of
Other States dated 18 March 1965

 

ICSID or the Centre

International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes

 

IN Asset Management

IN Asset Management Limited

 

Memorial on Jurisdiction

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction dated
19 September 2014

 

Memorial on the Merits

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits dated 30
December 2013

 

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction
dated 18 November 2014

 

Reply on Jurisdiction

 

 

Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction dated 19
January 2015

 

iii

 

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia

(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

 

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction

Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction dated 19
March 2015

 

Request for Arbitration

Request for Arbitration dated 2 August 2012

 

Respondent

The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia

 

Treaty

Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments between the
Macedonian Government and the Government
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, signed on
7 July 1998 and entered into force on | June
1999

 

Vienna Convention

 

 

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties,
concluded at Vienna on 23 May 1969

 

 

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

I. INTRODUCTION

1. This case concerns a dispute submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) on the basis of the Agreement on
Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments between the Macedonian
Government and the Government of the Kingdom of the Netherlands (the “BIT” or the
“Treaty”), signed on 7 July 1998, and which entered into force on 1 June 1999, and the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other

States, which entered into force on 14 October 1966 (the “ICSID Convention”).

2. The Claimant is Guardian Fiduciary Trust Limited (“GFT” or the “Claimant”). The
Claimant is a company incorporated on 17 September 2007 under the laws of New Zealand,
with headquarters at Level 2, The Public Trust Building, 442 Moray Place, PO Box 3058,
Dunedin, New Zealand 9016, and with an administrative office in Uruguay and a European
representative office in Serbia. The Claimant was formerly known as Capital Conservator

Savings & Loan Limited (“CCSL”).

3. The Respondent is the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (“FYROM” or the
“Respondent”).

4. The Claimant is a trustee company and financial services provider that has operated in the
territory of the Respondent since 2007, through Stopanska Banka, a local bank. According
to the Claimant, Stopanska Banka operated all of its business. The Claimant contends that
in June 2009, following money-laundering investigations initiated in the United States,
Stopanska Banka informed the Claimant that its accounts would be closed. In late August
2009, the Respondent’s authorities arrested one of the Claimant’s directors for money
laundering and issued a press release disclosing the name of the Claimant and the director.
According to the Claimant, the Respondent knew or should have known that the money
laundering allegations were false. The Claimant contends that the measures taken by the
Respondent, in particular the allegedly false statements, forced the Claimant to change the
location of its operations and its name, which caused substantial damage to its business. The
Claimant alleges that the Respondent’s conduct constitutes a breach of the Treaty and claims

compensation for the alleged losses sustained by the Claimant. The claim was initially

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

quantified at over US$ 600 million, but subsequently reduced to approximately US$ 20

million.

5. The Claimant is wholly owned by Capital Conservator Trustees Limited (“CCT”) a trustee
company incorporated on 17 September 2008 under the laws of New Zealand. CCT in turn
is a wholly-owned subsidiary of IN Asset Management Limited (“IN Asset Management”)
a company incorporated under the laws of New Zealand. IN Asset Management is wholly
owned by Stichting Intetrust, a Dutch foundation having its registered office in Velp, the
Netherlands. The founder and director of Stichting Intetrust is Nicolaas Jan Carel Francken,
a national of New Zealand. Stichting Intetrust is the owner and holder of the family interests
of Mr Francken. The Claimant argues that it qualifies as a national of the Netherlands under

the BIT as it is ultimately controlled by Stichting Intetrust.

6. The Claimant illustrates its organizational structure with the following chart:!

     

J gS
JS
Agr
In Asset Management Limited
f/k/a WKF Asset Management Limited
f/k/a Pacific International Asset Management Limited
New Zealand 1995

 

 

 

 

 

 

7. The Respondent denies that the Claimant is controlled by Stichting Intetrust. According to
the Respondent, the beneficial owner of CCT, the immediate holding company of the

Claimant, is not IN Asset Management but Capital Conservator Group LLC (“CCG”), a

! Exhibit C-3 submitted in support of the Request for Arbitration.

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

company incorporated in the Marshall Islands. CCG’s shares in CCT were transferred to IN
Asset Management based on a trust deed executed on 1 October 2008, which provides that
CCG’s shares in CCT are held by IN Asset Management for and on behalf of CCG. Contrary
to the Claimant’s allegations, the Claimant was therefore not indirectly controlled by IN
Asset Management or Stichting Intetrust but by CCG, a Marshall Islands company, and

accordingly it does not qualify as a national of the Netherlands.

As set out in detail below, the proceedings in this arbitration were bifurcated to deal with
the nationality of the Claimant and the Respondent’s preliminary objection to the Tribunal’s

jurisdiction ratione personae over the Claimant as a preliminary matter.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 2 August 2012, Guardian Fiduciary Trust Limited filed a “Request for Arbitration
Proceedings” (“Request for Arbitration”) with the Centre. On 6 August 2012, the Centre

confirmed receipt of the Request for Arbitration and the supporting documentation.

On 28 August 2012, the Secretary-General of ICSID (“Secretary-General’”) requested

additional information from the Claimant prior to registering the Request for Arbitration.

On 22 September 2012, the Claimant submitted its answers to the Secretary-General’s

queries.

On 5 October 2012, the Secretary-General registered the Request for Arbitration pursuant
to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention and Rules 6 and 7 of the Rules of Procedure for

the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings.

By letter of 9 October 2012, the Claimant made a proposal for the selection of arbitrators
and the constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal, and proposed to appoint Professor Andreas

Bucher, a national of Switzerland, as arbitrator.

On the same day, the Centre invited the Respondent to accept the Claimant’s proposals or
to make other proposals regarding the number of arbitrators and the method of their

appointment.

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

15.

20.

21.

On 29 October 2012, the Respondent informed the Centre that it agreed to the constitution
of an arbitral tribunal composed of three arbitrators. However, the Respondent did not agree

to any of the other proposals made by the Claimant.

By letter dated 2 November 2012, the Claimant accepted the Respondent’s proposal for the
method of constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal, but maintained its position that the majority
of the arbitrators be nationals of States other than the State party to the dispute and the State
whose national is a party to the dispute. The Claimant also confirmed its intention to appoint

Professor Andreas Bucher as arbitrator.

On 26 November 2012, the Respondent notified the Centre that it had appointed Professor

Brigitte Stern, a national of France, as arbitrator.

On the same day, the Centre wrote to the Parties, indicating that it would proceed to approach
the party-appointed arbitrators to seek their acceptance as soon as the Parties had reached an

agreement on the method of constitution of the Tribunal.

On 20 December 2012, the Respondent informed the Centre, on behalf of both Parties, that
the Parties had agreed on the method of constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal. According to
the agreement, the Tribunal would consist of three arbitrators, each Party nominating one
arbitrator and the Parties then endeavoring to agree on a president of the Tribunal by

21 January 2013, or such later date as the Parties may agree.

On 18 January 2013, the Centre informed the Parties that Professor Stern and Professor

Bucher had accepted their appointments to the Arbitral Tribunal.

On 11 April 2013, the Claimant informed the Centre that the Parties had been unable to
agree on the presiding arbitrator and requested that the president be appointed by the
Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council pursuant to Article 38 of the ICSID
Convention and Rule 4 of the Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the
“Arbitration Rules”). On the same day, the Respondent confirmed that it had no objection

to the Claimant’s request, although it did “not join the Claimant in making it.”

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

22.

23.

24,

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

On 24 April 2013, the Secretary-General transmitted a list of potential candidates for a
presiding arbitrator to the Parties and invited the Parties to consider them and provide their

views by 6 May 2013 by way of a ballot form.

On 7 May 2013, the Secretary-General informed the Parties that the consultation process
had not resulted in the selection of a mutually agreeable candidate. The Secretary-General
informed the Parties that she intended to propose to the Chairman of the ICSID
Administrative Council that Dr Veijo Heiskanen, a national of Finland, be appointed as the
presiding arbitrator pursuant to Articles 38 and 40(1) of the ICSID Convention. The Parties
were invited to submit their observations on the proposal, including Dr Heiskanen’s

disclosure statement, by 14 May 2013.

On 16 May 2013, the Secretary-General transmitted to the Parties the additional information

provided by Dr Heiskanen in response to the Claimant’s request of 14 May 2013.

On 22 May 2013, the Claimant confirmed that it had no further observations to make on the

Centre’s proposal.

On 24 May 2013, the Secretary-General informed the Parties that Dr Heiskanen had
accepted his appointment as the presiding arbitrator, and that the Arbitral Tribunal was
deemed to be constituted, and the proceedings to have begun, as of that day pursuant to Rule
6 of the Arbitration Rules. The Parties were informed that Ms Milanka Kostadinova had

been designated to serve as the Secretary of the Tribunal.
The first session of the Tribunal was held on 23 July 2013 in Paris.

On 2 August 2013, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1, setting out the rules
governing the proceedings as agreed by the Parties or, insofar as the Parties had been unable

to agree, as decided by the Tribunal, as well as a detailed procedural calendar.

On 29 August 2013, the Tribunal issued a Revised Procedural Order No. 1, amending
paragraph 19.4.5 of the Order, as agreed by the Parties.

On 30 December 2013, the Claimant filed its Memorial on the Merits, together with the

supporting documentary evidence and legal authorities.

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

31.

32.

33.

On 30 January 2014, pursuant to paragraph 14.1.2 of Procedural Order No. 1, the
Respondent filed a request for bifurcation of the proceedings (the “Request for
Bifurcation”), requesting that the Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction, as outlined in the
Request for Bifurcation, be heard as preliminary questions, and that the Tribunal suspend
the proceedings on the merits. The Respondent raised the following three jurisdictional

objections:

(1) | The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae because the Claimant has failed to
demonstrate that it has made any “investment” in FYROM (the “Respondent’s First

Objection”);”

(2) The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione personae because the Claimant does not
qualify as a national of the Netherlands within the meaning of Article 1(b)(III) of the
BIT (the “Respondent’s Second Objection”);> and

(3) The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over the dispute insofar as it relates to the conduct of

the Respondent towards third parties (the “Respondent’s Third Objection”).*

On 20 February 2014, pursuant to paragraph 14.1.3 of Procedural Order No. 1, the Claimant
filed its observations and objections to the Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation, requesting
that the Tribunal deny the Request for Bifurcation for the reasons set out in the Claimant’s

Observations.

On 11 March 2014, the Tribunal issued its Decision on Bifurcation in the form of Procedural
Order No. 2, pursuant to paragraph 14.1.4 of Procedural Order No. 1. The Tribunal rejected
the Respondent’s request to bifurcate the proceedings to hear the Respondent’s First
Objection and Third Objection as preliminary questions, noting that “[t]he determination of
the former issue would require that the Tribunal engage in a detailed analysis of evidence
relating to the manner in which the Claimant operated the relevant bank account and the

nature of the accounts, whereas the latter would require a similar analysis of evidence

? Request for Bifurcation, para. 13.

> Request for Bifurcation, para. 20.

+ Request for Bifurcation, para. 23.

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

34,

35.

36.

37.

relating to the Respondent’s conduct insofar as it concerns its alleged breach of its
obligations under the BIT.”> The Tribunal concluded that, in these circumstances, “a
preliminary determination of these issues would not reduce significantly the scope and

complexity of the dispute and thus would not serve procedural economy.”°

The Tribunal found, however, that the Respondent’s Second Objection was capable of being
dealt with as a preliminary question, and that the bifurcation of the proceedings on this basis

was appropriate:

“The Tribunal does agree however that the Respondent's Second Objection,

ie., as to whether the Claimant qualifies as a national of the Netherlands

within the meaning of Article 1(b)(III) of the BIT, is not inextricably linked

to the merits and is therefore capable of preliminary determination. The

Tribunal considers that this would also serve procedural economy since, if

successful, the Second Objection would be capable of disposing of the entire

case, without the Tribunal having to engage in a detailed review of the

evidence relating to the merits, and if unsuccessful, would reduce the scope

of the subsequent phase.””
Accordingly, the Tribunal ordered that the Respondent’s Second Objection be heard as a
preliminary question and suspended the proceedings on the merits.’ The Tribunal further
directed the Parties to follow the procedural calendar set out in paragraph 14.1.5 of

Procedural Order No. 1.°

On 20 May 2014, the Respondent submitted its request for production of documents, in the
form of a Redfern Schedule, requesting that the Tribunal rule on the Claimant’s objections

to the Respondent’s requests pursuant to paragraph 15.2.4 of Procedural Order No. 1.

On 28 May 2014, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3, setting out its Decision on the
Respondent’s Document Production Request. The Tribunal’s decisions were recorded in

the Respondent’s Redfern Schedule, which was annexed to and formed part of the Order.

5 Procedural Order No. 2, para. 15.

© Procedural Order No. 2, para. 15.

7 Procedural Order No. 2, para. 16.

® Procedural Order No. 2, para. 18 (a) - (c).
° Procedural Order No. 2, para. 18(d).

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44,

45.

The Claimant was ordered to produce the requested documents, as directed by the Tribunal,

within three weeks of the date of the Order.

On 19 September 2014, pursuant to paragraph 14.1.5.1 of Procedural Order No. 1, the
Respondent filed its Memorial on Jurisdiction, together with the supporting documentary

evidence and the legal authorities.

On 18 November 2014, pursuant to paragraph 14.1.5.2 of Procedural Order No. 1, the

Claimant filed its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, together with supporting evidence.

On 17 December 2014, the Tribunal confirmed, after consultation with the Parties, that the

Hearing on Jurisdiction would be held on 6-7 May 2015 in Paris.

On 19 January 2015, pursuant to paragraph 14.1.5.3 of Procedural Order No. 1, the
Respondent filed its Reply on Jurisdiction, accompanied by the Opinion of Francis Barlow,

QC, and the supporting legal authorities.

On 19 March 2015, pursuant to paragraph 14.1.5.4 of Procedural Order No. 1, the Claimant

filed its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction.

The pre-hearing organizational meeting was held by telephone conference on 21 April 2015.
In advance of the call, the Tribunal invited the Parties to confer and agree on the schedule
for the upcoming hearing. The Parties subsequently agreed that the hearing could be

completed in one day and be held on 6 May 2015.

The Hearing on Jurisdiction was held on 6 May 2015 at the World Bank Office in Paris.

In addition to the Members of the Tribunal and the Secretary of the Tribunal, present at the

Hearing on Jurisdiction were:

For the Claimant:

Mr Petro Janura Advocate Petro Janura
Mr Juan F. Torres III (by telephone) Juan F. Torres III, P.A.

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

46.

47.

48.

Ill.

49.

50.

For the Respondent:

Mr Charles Claypoole Latham & Watkins LLP

Mr Sebastian Seelmann-Eggebert Latham & Watkins LLP

Mr Robert Price Latham & Watkins LLP

Ms Angela Angelovska- Wilson Reed Smith LLP

Ms Emilija Radojkova State Attorney’s Office of the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia

Mr Zlato Uzunoski State Attorney’s Office of the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia State

Mr Arlinda Zimeri State Attorney’s Office of the Former

Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia

Mr Francis Barlow, QC, the Respondent’s legal expert, was examined by the Respondent

and cross-examined by the Claimant.

Mr Juan F. Torres III, one of the two Claimant’s counsel on record, participated in the
hearing by way of a telephone conference, due to health issues which precluded him from

traveling to Paris.

On 17 June 2015, the Claimant and the Respondent filed their Submissions on Costs, as

agreed at the Hearing on Jurisdiction.'°

THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS REGARDING JURISDICTION RATIONE
PERSONAE

The Respondent objects to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione personae. The Respondent
argues that the Claimant does not qualify as a national of the Netherlands under Article
1(b)(IID) of the BIT as it is incorporated under the laws of New Zealand and, contrary to
what the Claimant alleges, is not controlled by a legal person constituted under the laws of
the Netherlands. According to the Respondent, the Claimant is controlled by CCG, a

Marshall Island company.!!

The Claimant’s position is that the Tribunal has jurisdiction ratione personae to hear its

claim since it is controlled indirectly by Stichting Intetrust, a legal person constituted under

© Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/175/22-I/177/15.

'! Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 16.

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

the laws of the Netherlands. The fact that the Claimant is owned by CCT, a New Zealand
company, and that the latter company is in turn owned by IN Asset Management, another
New Zealand company, is irrelevant since Stichting Intetrust is the sole owner of IN Asset
Management, just as the latter is the sole owner of CCT, which in turn is the owner of the

Claimant.

A. The Interpretation of Article 1(b)(ID) of the Treaty

1. The Respondent’s position

51. The Respondent argues that the Claimant, a company incorporated in New Zealand, does
not qualify as a “national” of the Netherlands within the meaning of Article 1(b)(II]) of the
BIT. The Tribunal therefore lacks jurisdiction ratione personae over the Claimant under
Article 9 of the BIT, which limits the scope of the Respondent’s consent to arbitrate to legal
disputes “arising between [a] Contracting State and a national of the other Contracting

State.”!?

52. According to the Respondent, Article 1(b)(III) of the BIT, which defines the term “national,”
must be interpreted in accordance with the customary international law rules of treaty
interpretation as set out in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (the “Vienna
Convention”), in particular the general rule of treaty interpretation in Article 31(1) of the
Vienna Convention, which provides that “[a] treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in
accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context

and in the light of its object and purpose.”!*

 

2 Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 19. Article 9 of the BIT, Exhibit C-0005, provides:

“Each Contracting State hereby consents to submit any legal dispute arising between that
Contracting State and a national of the other Contracting State concerning an investment of that
national in the territory of the former Contracting State to the International Centre for Settlement
of I Disputes for by conciliation or ion under the C on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States, opened for
signature at Washington on 18 March 1965. A legal person which is a national of one Contracting
State and which before such a dispute arises is controlled by nationals of the other Contracting
State shall, in accordance with Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention, for the purpose of the Convention
be treated as a national of the other Contracting State.”

 

'3 Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras, 23-24; Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/11/9-14; Article 31(1) of the Vienna
Convention, Exhibit RLA-0022.

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

53.

54.

The Respondent argues that the object and purpose of the BIT, as set out in its Preamble, is
“to extend and intensify the economic relations between [the Contracting States],
particularly with respect to investments by the nationals of one Contracting State in the
territory of the other Contracting State,” and to “stimulate the flow of capital and technology
and the economic development of the Contracting States.”!+ The Respondent argues that
the link between Stichting Intetrust, a Dutch foundation, and the Claimant is not such that it
can be considered to stimulate or facilitate the flow of capital or technology from the

Netherlands to FYROM, or the economic development of either country.'>

The Respondent asserts that the term “controlled” in Article 1(b)(III) of the BIT, when
interpreted pursuant to its ordinary meaning, requires not only evidence of ownership over
the Claimant, but also of exercise of active control over the Claimant’s activities.!° Relying
on Aucoven v. Venezuela,'’ and on the guidance issued in the Final Act of the European
Energy Charter Conference regarding Article I(6) of the Energy Charter Treaty, which both
the Respondent and the Netherlands have ratified,'® the Respondent submits that the
Claimant “must demonstrate with evidence” that it is controlled by Stichting Intetrust.'?
This requires that the Tribunal must look at “all factual circumstances, including evidence
of who controls the management and operation of the company, and who selects the board
members or management of the entity in question.”?” As noted by the tribunal in Plama v.
Bulgaria, “control includes control in fact,”?! and accordingly the purpose of the exercise is

“to ascertain which entity or person is giving ‘instructions’ to the Claimant entity and

'4 BIT, Preamble, Exhibit C-0005.

'S Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 25-26; Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, /11/15-1/12/7.

'6 Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 27-35 and 44; Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/7/25-I/1 1/8.

'” Autopista Concesionada de Venezuela, C.A. (Aucoven) v. Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/O0/5, Decision on

Jurisdiction, 27 Sept. 2001, par

s. 79-119, Exhibit RLA-0003; Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 36-40.

 

'S Final Act of the European Charter Conference, Understanding IV(3), Exhibit RLA-0010; Memorial on Jurisdiction,
paras. 41-42.

° Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 43.

2 Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 43.

2! Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction, 8 Feb.
2005, para. 170, Exhibit RLA-0018.

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

55.

56.

thereby exercising control.””? This implies that “the mere legal ownership of shares is not

sufficient to establish control.”

2. The Claimant’s position

The Claimant argues, in response, that it is sufficient, for the purposes of meeting the
requirements of Article 1(b)(III) of the BIT, that Stichting Intetrust as a legal person
constituted under the laws of the Netherlands is in the end of the chain of ownership in the
structure” of the relevant companies, i.e., the Claimant, CCT and IN Asset Management. 4
Moreover, since a foundation under Dutch law has no owners, and cannot be controlled by
any other entity or natural person, “it is sufficient for the interpretation of the BIT, that the
Stichting is the controlling entity, since it controls and it could not be controlled by other

[sic] legal entity and it is the main vehicle in the structure.””>

The Claimant explains that Stichting Intetrust is “the main vehicle in the structure that
sometimes changes its position from the end legal owner to the end beneficial owner.”?° For

27 the shares of

reasons related to “the area of company law (auditing) and asset protection,
IN Asset Management were on 4 May 2010 transferred from Stichting Intetrust to Mr
Francken and subsequently, on the same day, from Mr Francken to his spouse Irina
Michajlovna Francken and Mr Francken. On 5 September 2012, that is, after the filing of
the Request for Arbitration on 2 August 2012 but before its registration by ICSID on
5 October 2012, Mr and Mrs Francken transferred the shares to Stichting Intetrust.2® Mr and

Mrs Francken are members of the board of directors of Stichting Intetrust as well as directors

of IN Asset Management, and Mr Francken is also director of CCT.” Stichting Intetrust

2 Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 43.

2 Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 44.

2 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 19; Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/57/21-1/58/2.

°5 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 22.

?6 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 24.

27 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 24.

28 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 24-25.

2° Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 28.

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

57.

58.

remained the beneficial owner of IN Asset Management throughout the period when the

shares were held by Mr and Mrs Francken.

According to the Claimant, companies “control the subsidiary companies that they own.”*”

The terms “controlled, directly or indirectly” in Article I(b)(II]) of the BIT include
ownership, but are not limited to ownership. The term “indirectly” in Article 1(b)(III) of the
BIT implies that this term is being used in a much broader sense than ownership, however,
this does not mean that ownership does not amount to “control.”?! The Claimant refers, in
support of its position, to Aguas del Tunari SA v. Bolivia, in which the tribunal held that the

phrase “controlled directly or indirectly” referred to the legal capacity rather than fact.*?

The Claimant denies that the deed of 1 October 2008, pursuant to which IN Asset
Management holds the shares of CCG in CCT as a trustee, is relevant to the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction. According to the Claimant, IN Asset Management as the legal owner of the
shares for and on behalf of CCG, the beneficial owner, “is controlling the shares for the
Beneficial Owner.”** As the legal owner, IN Asset Management holds all the voting rights
in CCT, “which means that it controls its own subsidiary within the meaning of the BIT.”**
The role of CCG in this structure is “passive” as the deed only addresses any transactions
on the shares and the income earned, derived or received from the shares and the associated
benefits.** According to the Claimant, beneficial ownership could be relied upon to prove

control, but it cannot be “applied against nationality.”*°

8 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 30.

3! Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 30; Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/144/11-21.

% Memorial on the Merits, para. 47. See Aguas del Tunari SA v. Republic of Bolivia, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/3,
Decision on Respondent’s Objection to Jurisdiction, 21 Oct. 2005, Exhibit RLA-0002.

8 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 32.

* Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 32.

+5 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 33.

36 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 36.

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

59.

60.

6l.

37 Memorial on Juris
and Clorinda Vecchi v. Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/15, Award, | June 2009, par

B. Burden of Proof and Relevant Evidence

1. The Respondent’s position

The Respondent argues, relying on arbitral jurisprudence, that the Claimant bears the burden
of proving, by preponderance of the evidence, that it was controlled at all relevant times by
Stichting Intetrust and thus qualifies as a “national” of the Netherlands within the meaning
of Article 1(b)(ID of the BIT and Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.*” This it has

failed to do.*

The Respondent argues that the Claimant has not produced any documentary evidence to
show that it was in fact controlled by Stichting Intetrust at the relevant time. The Claimant
merely relies on evidence showing that at certain periods of time, i.e., from around
2002/2003 to 24 June 2005, from 29 October 2008 to 4 May 2010 and from 5 September
2012 onwards, Stichting Intetrust has indirectly, through IN Asset Management and CCT,
held shares in the Claimant. The Respondent submits that the evidence shows that in
September/October 2008 CCG transferred, against nominal consideration, legal ownership
in the Claimant to CCT, while retaining beneficial ownership and control over the Claimant.
CCT had been created shortly beforehand by IN Asset Management for the very purpose of

this trustee arrangement.”

According to the Respondent, the Claimant is a company that specializes in providing asset
protection structures and services to conceal the ownership of funds and assets. Similarly,
based on the information available on its website, IN Asset Management “appears to
specialize in establishing corporate structures that permit its clients to exercise control over

their assets without retaining legal ownership.”*° The relevant mechanisms to achieve this

 

ction, paras. 47-50; Reply on Jurisdiction, paras, 17-22, referring to Waguih Elie George Siag
315-316, Exhibit RLA-0023;

 

Philip Morris Brands SARL, Philip Morris Products SA and Abal Hermanos SA v. Uruguay, \CSID Case No.
ARB/10/7, Decision on Jurisdiction, 2 July 2013, para. 29, Exhibit RLA-0016; National Gas S.A.E v. Egypt, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/11/7, Award, 3 Apr. 2014, para. 118, Exhibit RLA-0026; and Abaclat and Others v, Argentina, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/07/5, Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 4 Aug. 2011, para. 678, Exhibit RLA-0001. See
also Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/13/21-1/14/16.

38 Reply on Jurisdiction, para. 23.

» Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 71.

“© Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 80.

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

62.

63.

64,

4! Memorial on Juris

include “private trustee services” and “foundations,” one of the main purposes of these

mechanisms being “to hide assets from third parties and governments to obscure

‘management and control.””4!

The Respondent also contends that the Claimant has failed to comply with “several aspects”
of Procedural Order No. 3, in which the Tribunal ordered the Claimant to produce certain
documents relating to its ownership requested by the Respondent, including the document
that describes the arrangement pursuant to which Stichting Intetrust allegedly holds the
shares in IN Asset Management, the documents related to the various transfers of shares
between Stichting Intetrust and Mr and Ms Francken, and documents which would prove
the extent to which Stichting Intetrust may have exercised voting rights in respect of the
Claimant.*? The Respondent does not accept the Claimant’s statement that these documents

do not exist, citing corporate regulatory requirements under New Zealand law.*?

The Respondent notes that the Claimant’s refusal is based on Mr Francken’s statement that
the requested documents concern “a private arrangement which has nothing to do with the
Claimant.”“+ According to the Respondent, the Claimant’s refusal to produce the requested
documents is inadequate since the jurisdictional basis of the Claimant’s case hinges on its

allegation that it is controlled by Stichting Intetrust.*°

The Respondent submits that the Tribunal should draw an adverse inference from the
Claimant’s refusal to produce the documents, arguing that “if Stichting Intetrust were to own
the shares in IN Asset Management (and, indirectly, the Claimant) under some form of
‘private arrangement’ details of which have not been disclosed, the Tribunal should infer
from the Claimant’s refusal to disclose the terms of this arrangement that the Claimant is

not in fact controlled by Stichting Intetrust.”*°

 

ction, para. 80.

2 Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 61-62; Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 24-27.

8 Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 64-66; Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 28-31.

4 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 46; Email correspondence with Mr Francken, Exhibit C-0052.

+5 Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 25-26.

“© Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 90.

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

65. The Respondent also submits that the Tribunal should draw an adverse inference from the
Claimant’s failure to produce documents related to the various transfers of the shares in IN
Asset Management between Stichting Intetrust and Mr and Mrs Francken, despite the
Tribunal’s order.*? The Respondent submits that the Tribunal should conclude that “the fact
that ownership of the shares in IN Asset Management Limited was only intermittently held
by Stichting Intetrust further confirms the fact that the Claimant was not in fact controlled

by Stichting Intetrust as the Claimant alleges. “*

66. The Respondent also refers to Item 2 of the Redfern Schedule, under which the Claimant
was ordered to produce “[mJanagement agreement, minutes of board or shareholders
meetings, board or shareholder resolutions or other corporate documents that identify the
persons or entities that hold voting rights or reflect any restrictions on the exercise of voting
rights in respect of (a) IN Asset Management, (b) Capital Conservator Trustees Limited and
(c) the Claimant, and in particular the extent to which Stichting Intetrust holds any such
voting rights (if at all)” Noting Mr Francken’s statement that “[t]he documents as
requested do not exist as there is / was no need,”°° the Respondent does not accept that such
standard corporate documents would not exist,>! on the basis that under the New Zealand

law, companies incorporated in New Zealand are required to keep minutes of board or

shareholders meetings for a period of seven years.**

67. The Respondent further argues that the Claimant’s explanation that the decisions of
Stichting Intetrust could be enforced immediately as a result of Mr Francken’s role as
director of Stichting Intetrust, IN Asset Management and CCT does not provide a legitimate

reason for not holding corporate records for those entities.**

“7 Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 127-129; Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/32/4-18; Procedural Order No. 3,
Item 5 of the Redfern Schedule.

+8 Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 129.

*° Procedural Order No. 3, Item 2 of the Redfern Schedule.

50 Email correspondence with Mr Francken, Exhibit C-0052, p. 4.

5! Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 61-63; Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 27-28 and 31.
52 Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 64-66; Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 29-30.

53 Reply on Jurisdiction, para. 31.

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

68.

69.

70.

71.

The Respondent submits that, as a result of the Claimant’s failure to comply with the
Tribunal’s Order under Item 2 of the Redfern Schedule and to produce standard corporate
documents required to be kept under the New Zealand law, the Claimant cannot be
considered to have discharged its burden to establish that the Claimant was at all relevant

times controlled by Stichting Intetrust.**

The Respondent concludes that the Claimant’s failure to produce any evidence showing that
Stichting Intetrust controls the Claimant demonstrates that it is unable to establish this fact,

and that the Tribunal should, as a result, decline jurisdiction.*>

2. The Claimant’s position

The Claimant argues that the issue of who bears the burden of proving the nationality of the
investor is “vague and questionable in international arbitration legal practice.”°° The
Claimant submits that, in any event, it has submitted sufficient evidence to prove its
Netherlands nationality under the BIT. On the other hand, the Respondent has failed to

establish that the Claimant is not a national of the Netherlands.*”

The Claimant submits that the documents of the New Zealand Company Register regarding
the change of legal ownership in IN Asset Management establish the control of Stichting
Intetrust over the Claimant,>® and the fact that Stichting Intetrust owns the shares of IN Asset
Management demonstrates that it controls the other companies in the  structure.°?
Furthermore, the extracts of registration of CCT in themselves establish that CCT was

actually exercising control over the Claimant.”

54 Reply on Jurisdiction, para, 32.

55 Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 59 and 67-68.

56 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 40.

57 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 40.

58 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 40; Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/6 1/3-24.

8° Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 40.

© Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, I/172/6-1/175/21; Commercial register extracts of Stichting Intetrust, IN Asset
Management Limited, Capital Conservator Trustees Limited and Guardian Fiduciary Trust Limited, Exhibit C-0049.

17

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

72.

73.

74.

©! Counter-Memorial on Ju

The Claimant argues that there is no basis for any adverse inference as it has fully complied
with the Tribunal’s orders to produce documents by addressing these requests to

Mr Francken.°!

As to Item 1 of the Redfern Schedule, under which the Claimant was ordered to produce the
“[d]eed of trust or equivalent document that establishes, or otherwise describes, the terms
of the arrangement pursuant to which Stichting Intetrust holds (a) the family interests of Mr
Nicolaas Francken, (b) IN Asset Management, (c) Capital Conservator Trustees Limited and
(d) the Claimant,” the Claimant explains that Mr Francken “does not agree to provide any
information in respect with the Stichting Intetrust and his family, since it is a private

1.763

arrangement which has nothing to do with the Claiman According to the Claimant, this

information is irrelevant to the case and does not have any connection with the Claimant.™

As to Item 2 of the Redfern Schedule, under which the Claimant was ordered to produce
“[m]Janagement agreements, minutes of board or shareholders meetings, board or
shareholder resolutions or other corporate documents that identify the persons or entities
that hold voting rights or reflect any restrictions on the exercise of voting rights in respect
of (a) IN Asset Management, (b) Capital Conservator Trustees Limited and (c) the Claimant,
and in particular the extent to which Stichting Intetrust holds any such voting rights (if at

all),’”® the Claimant states that the requested documents do not exist.

The Respondent’s
argument that Section 189 of the New Zealand Companies Act of 1993 requires that such
documents be held for seven years does not apply because such documents were not needed
in the first place for a number of reasons, including Mr and Mrs Francken being members

of the board of directors of Stichting Intetrust and directors of IN Asset Management, and

 

sdiction, para. 42.

© Procedural Order No. 3, Item | of the Redfern Schedule.

6 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 46.

© Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 46-49.

© Procedural Order No. 3, Item 2 of the Redfern Schedule.

© Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 50-51.

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

75.

76.

77.

Mr Francken being the director of CCT,’ and because the Claimant was not operating in

New Zealand.*

As to Item 5 of the Redfern Schedule, under which the Claimant was ordered to produce
“the share sale agreements regarding the various transfers of shares in IN Asset Management
between Stichting Intetrust and Mr Nicolaas Francken and/or Ms Irina Francken that took
place in the period between 2002 and 2012, including the share sale agreement relating to
the (most recent) transfer of shares from Mr Nicolaas Francken and Ms Irina Francken to
Stichting Intetrust on 5 September 2012,” the Claimant asserts that, as explained by
Mr Francken, the share transfers were registered as they took place and Stichting Intetrust
was always the beneficial owner of IN Asset Management and the shares were therefore
never sold.” Also, since Mr and Mrs Francken are members of the board of directors of
Stichting Intetrust and directors of IN Asset Management, no formal agreements were

necessary.’!

As to Item 8 of the Redfern Schedule, under which the Claimant was ordered to produce
“services contracts evidencing the nature of the services performed by IN Asset
Management for the Capital Conservator group in respect of the creation of Capital
Conservator Trustees Limited and the corporate structure establishing ownership and/or

072

control over the Claimant,”’~ the Claimant submits that the engagement letter dated

16 September 2008 is the only relevant document.”

As to Item 9 of the Redfern Schedule, under which the Claimant was ordered to produce
“[aJll deeds of trust or other documents related to the private trust or similar structure

through which the shares in Capital Conservator Trustees Limited and/or the Claimant are

6? Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 52.

8 Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/154/7-20.

© Procedural Order No. 3, Item 5 of the Redfern Schedule.

7 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 54-55.

7! Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 56.

® Procedural Order No. 3, Item 8 of the Redfern Schedule.

7 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 43; Engagement letter between IN Asset Management Limited and Capital
Conservator Group dated 16 Sept. 2008, Exhibit R-0025.

19

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

78.

79.

80.

or, since 2008 have been, held””* the Claimant explains that the deed dated 1 October 2008
concerning the shares of CCT,’° produced pursuant to the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 3,
and the share transfer agreement concerning the shares of CCSL dated 17 September 2008,”°
produced in response to the Respondent’s document production request, are the only two
documents responsive to this request.”’ This is in addition to the deed of trust dated 4 May
2010 which the Claimant filed in September 2012 in response to queries from the ICSID

Secretariat.”®

Finally, the Claimant contends that being at the bottom of the corporate chain, it is not in a
position to direct Stichting Intetrust, or the other subsidiary companies in the chain, or any
other person, to produce documents. The Claimant would therefore not be in possession or
custody of the requested documents even when such documents exist.” The Claimant
argues that therefore the Respondent’s request that the Tribunal draw adverse inferences is

unfounded.*°

C. The Claimant’s Corporate Structure

1. The Respondent’s position
The Respondent argues that the Claimant’s representation of its corporate structure, as set

out in Exhibit 3 to the Request for Arbitration,*! is misleading and wrong.*”

First, the Respondent argues that, contrary to what is shown by the chart, the Claimant was

owned prior to 17 September 2008 by CCG, a Marshall Islands company, and not by IN

™ Procedural Order No. 3, Item 9 of the Redfern Schedule.

7 Deed created by IN Asset Management Limited dated 1 Oct. 2008, Exhibit R-0003.
% Transfer of Shares dated 17 Sept. 2008, Exhibit R-0001.

77 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 44.

*8 Documents for Summary of Share Parcels Changes, Exhibit C-0004; Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 45.

” Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 57.

*° Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 57; Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/143/2-24.

8! Chart reflecting the organizational structure of GFT, Exhibit C-3 submitted in support of the Request for Arbitration.

® Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, I/22/9-15; Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 85.

20

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

82.

83.

Asset Management.** On 17 September 2008, CCG transferred its shareholding in the
Claimant to CCT for a nominal price of USD 1.00.** According to the Respondent, only the

legal title, but not the beneficial ownership, was transferred to IN Asset Management.*°

Second, the Respondent contends that the information provided by the Claimant regarding
the periods of time when IN Asset Management was owned by Stichting Intetrust is
incomplete.*° The chart does not mention that the shares in IN Asset Management were
transferred back to Stichting Intetrust only on 5 September 2012, i.e., after the filing by the

Claimant of the Request for Arbitration.*”

Third, the chart suggests that Mr and Mrs Francken are owners of Stichting Intetrust, while
arguing elsewhere that a Dutch foundation has no owners; Mr and Mrs Francken are merely

board members of Stichting Intetrust.**

Moreover, while the Claimant alleges that Stichting
Intetrust is “the owner and holder of all the family interests of Nicolas Jan Carol Francken
[sic],”*? the Respondent notes that the Claimant has failed to provide any evidence in support
of its allegation, despite the Tribunal’s order that the Claimant produce the relevant
documentation. The Tribunal should draw adverse inference and conclude that the Claimant

is in fact not controlled by Stichting Intetrust.*°

Fourth, the Respondent notes that the Claimant has produced a deed dated 4 May 2010 (but
no deeds for the earlier periods) to show that Mr and Mrs Francken held the shares in IN
Asset Management as trustees for and on behalf of Stichting Intetrust, which is defined in

the deed as the beneficial owner of IN Asset Management.”! As according to the Claimant

* Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 84-87; Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/22/22-1/23/4.

* Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 94 (c); Transfer of Shares of Capital Conservator Savings & Loans dated 17 Sept.
2008, Exhibit R-0001; Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/24/12-1/24/15.

8S Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/130/18-24.

86 Memorial on Juri:

 

iction, para. 88.

87 Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 88.

88 Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 89.

8° Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, para. 20.

°° Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 90.

°! Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 91; Deed dated 4 May 2010, Exhibit C-0004; Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript,
1/132/23-1/133/2.

21

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

84.

Mr and Mrs Francken held the shares in IN Asset Management for and on behalf of Stichting
Intetrust, while being board members of Stichting Intetrust, which in turn held the family
interest of the Francken family, the Respondent submits that this “opaque circular
arrangement” is artificial and undermines the Claimant’s submission that Stichting Intetrust

actually exercised any control over IN Asset Management.°”

Finally, the Respondent notes that the Claimant’s chart does not reflect the deed dated
1 October 2008,°? based on which IN Asset Management holds the shares in CCT (which
owns the Claimant) as a trustee for and on behalf of CCG, the beneficial owner of CCT.
The deed shows that IN Asset Management held the shares merely as a nominee, and that
CCG, a Marshall Islands company, “held not only beneficial ownership of, but also
continued to control, Capital Conservator Trustees Limited (and the Claimant).”°* The

ownership structure of the Claimant should therefore be represented by the following chart:?>

®2 Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 92; Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/133/8-18.

°3 Deed created by IN Asset Management Limited dated 1 Oct. 2008, Exhibit R-0003.

° Memorial on Jurisdiction, para, 93; Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/134/1-15.

°5 Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 95.

22

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

For the period prior to 1 October 2008:

 

Capital Conservator Group LLC

Capital Conservator Savings
& Loan Limited / Guardian
Fiduciary Trust Limited

 

 

 

 

 

For the period subsequent to 1 October 2008:

 

 

 

Mr. Nicolaas Francken and Mrs. Irina
Francker

Stichting Intetrust i

 

 

 

85.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2002-2005, 2008-2010,2012-present 2002-2002, 2005-2008,2010-2012
In Asset Management Limited Capital ConservatorGroup LLC
(Inc. New Zealand 22 May 1995) Marshall Islands
Legal Owner Beneficial Owner

 

Capital Conservator Trustees Limited
(Inc. New Zealand 17 September 2008)

 

 

Capital Conservator Savings & Loan Limited /
Guardian Fiduciary Trust Limited
(Inc. New Zealand 16 July 2007)

 

 

 

The Respondent argues that the engagement letter between IN Asset Management and CCG,
which was signed on 16 September 2008, and thus “only days before” the creation of CCT,
shows that IN Asset Management was engaged by CCG, and its director, Mr David Finzer,

to devise and implement a structure whereby CCG would retain beneficial ownership of the

23

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

86.

87.

88.

Claimant, while transferring its legal ownership to CCT, the latter being held by IN Asset

Management as a nominee trustee acting in a professional capacity.°°

The Respondent infers from the evidence that until 17 September 2008, CCG was the legal
and beneficial owner of the Claimant. However, on 17 September 2008, CCT was
incorporated, with IN Asset Management as its sole owner, and Mr Francken as a director,
and CCG transferred its shares in the Claimant to CCT, for a nominal payment of US$ 1 on
the same day. On | October 2008, IN Asset Management executed the deed of trust pursuant

to which IN Asset Management would hold CCT, and the Claimant, on trust for ccc.”

2. The Claimant’s position

The Claimant argues that the fact that Stichting Intetrust is at the end of the chain of
ownership of the Claimant is sufficient to establish its Dutch nationality. Relying on the
summary of the share parcel changes of IN Asset Management registered with the New
Zealand Companies Register, the Claimant asserts that in 2009, when the claim arose,
Stichting Intetrust had 100% ownership of the shares in IN Asset Management, and that the

latter had 100% legal ownership of CCT, which in turn owned the Claimant.”

The Claimant explains that CCT acquired all of the Claimant’s issued share capital on
17 September 2008, and that accordingly, as of this day, Stichting Intetrust, through its
wholly owned subsidiaries IN Asset Management and CCT, held all the shares and voting
rights in the Claimant.°? Under Dutch law, foundations such as Stichting Intetrust have no
owner and cannot therefore be controlled by another entity. This is sufficient for the

purposes of establishing the Claimant’s nationality under the BIT.!

°6 Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 97-101; Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/25/3-1/26/5.

°” Memorial on Jurisdiction, par

       

s. 94 and 95; Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, I/26/6-I/27/2.

°8 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 19-20 and 67 A; Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para. 19; Documents for

Si
1

ul
9.

mmary of Share Parcels Changes of Stichting Intetrust, Exhibit C-0004; Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/62/7-

° Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 20 and 26.

0 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 21-22.

24

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

89.

90.

91.

92.

D. Exercise of Control over the Claimant

1. The Respondent’s position

The Respondent argues that the Claimant has failed to prove that Stichting Intetrust
controlled the Claimant at all relevant times. On the contrary, the evidence shows that the
Claimant was at all relevant times controlled by CCG, a company incorporated in the

Marshall Islands.!°!

The Respondent reiterates its position that the Claimant has failed to comply with the
Tribunal’s order to produce documents evidencing that Stichting Intetrust is the owner and
holder of the family interests of Mr Francken.'°* The Tribunal should draw an adverse
inference from the Claimant’s refusal to disclose such documents and conclude that

Stichting Intetrust never controlled the Claimant.

The Respondent submits that while the Claimant has failed to establish the ownership of
CCG, publicly available information suggests that it was owned by Mr Finzer, until his death
in November 2012, and that Mr Finzer was the sole owner and CEO of CCG until then.!°*
The Respondent concludes that the Claimant must have been controlled by CCG, and
ultimately by its beneficial owner Mr Finzer, from October 2008 until November 2012, and

not by IN Asset Management.!°5

Relying on the information available on the websites of IN Asset Management and CCG,!”
the Respondent notes that both companies are experienced in devising asset protection
structures.!°” Similarly, the purpose of the arrangement between IN Asset Management and

CCG concluded on 16 September 2008 was to provide professional trustee services, and

01 Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/29/9-I/31/5; Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 101-111.

'© Procedural Order No. 3, Item 1 of the Redfern Schedule.

103

Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 90.

6 Communiqué from Capital Conservator Group LLC reported on an internet blog “Expatbob” on 24 Nov. 2012,
Exhibit R-0002; Screenshot of Capital Conservator webpage, 28 Mar. 2013, Exhibit R-0026.

105

Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 103-111.

106 Extracts from Capital Conservator website, Exhibit R-0009; Extracts from IN Asset Management website, Exhibit
R-0010.

‘07 Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 73-75; Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/17/25-1/22/1 and 1/27/3-12.

25

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

93.

94,

95.

accordingly IN Asset Management only acted in a nominee capacity in its dealing with the
Claimant under this arrangement, as it did for some 123 companies.'°° The Respondent
submits that this is consistent with IN Asset Management being a private trustee company,
which, on the face of its website, appears to specialize in establishing corporate structures
that permit its clients to exercise control over their assets without retaining legal

ownership.'”

The Respondent argues that Mr Francken was acting only in a nominee capacity in its
dealings with CCT and exercised no actual control over the Claimant.''!® In support of its
assertion the Respondent relies on a statement of Mr Francken made in a newspaper where
it was reported that he was “acting only as nominee and had no involvement in the Guardian

lil

Fiduciary business, as well as on the fact that Mr Francken was a director of some 174

companies, including numerous trustee companies.!!”

The deed of 1 October 2008 demonstrates that the Claimant remained beneficially owned
and controlled by CCG since this date.''? The deed ensured that IN Asset Management, a
professional trustee, held the shares in CCT in a nominee capacity and that CCG remained
the beneficial owner of CCT.''* Under the terms of the arrangement, IN Asset Management
could not have exercised effective control over the Claimant; beneficial ownership, and

accordingly control, was retained by CCG.!!°

In support of its position, the Respondent relies on the Opinion of Mr Francis Barlow QC.
Mr Barlow opines that the deed was a “bare trust;” a trust arrangement under which the

trustee has no beneficial interest in the trust property, but holds the bare legal title to the

108 Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 113-117.

09 Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 77-83 and 118; Extracts from IN Asset Management website, Exhibit R-0010.

110 Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 115-118; Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/27/13-1/28/15.
‘11 Tim Hunter, “Dunedin firm goes legal in the Balkans”, 3 Feb. 2013, Exhibit R-0039.

2 List of shareholdings of IN Asset Management Limited from website of New Zealand Companies Office, accessed
19 Aug. 2014, Exhibit R-0041.

113

Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 120.

'4 Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 121-123; Deed created by IN Asset Management dated 1 Oct. 2008, Exhibit R-
0003; Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/16/14-I/17/10.

115

Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 124.

26

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

96.

97.

98.

property as trustee for the beneficial owner who retains ownership and control over the trust
property.!'® Mr Barlow concludes that under the terms of the deed, the Claimant cannot be

controlled by CCT, as a result of Stichting Intetrust not being entitled to control CCG.!!7

In response to the Claimant’s assertion that under the deed, the holding of the shares for and
on behalf of the beneficial owner (i.e. CCG) meant that the legal owner (i.e. IN Asset
Management) controlled the shares for the beneficial owner, the Respondent submits that if
it were to be considered that IN Asset Management controlled the Claimant, it did so on

behalf of CCG, not Stichting Intetrust.!!8

The Respondent disputes the Claimant’s argument in support of its assertion that the deed
“does not have an impact on the functionality of the structure that is under the supervision
and control of the Stichting Intetrust.”!!° First, the Respondent argues that if CCG never
appointed a new or additional trustee, it is because CCG never needed to replace IN Asset
Management as a trustee since IN Asset Management acted on the directions of CCG;'?° and
second, while Mr and Mrs Francken are members of the board of Stichting Intetrust and
directors of IN Asset Management, and since Mr Francken is a director of CCT, the Claimant
ignores the fact that Mr Finzer was the sole director of the Claimant until his death in

November 2012.'7!

As for the various transfers of shares of IN Asset Management that occurred between
Stichting Intetrust and Mr and Mrs Francken, the Respondent argues that they support the
conclusion that the Claimant was never controlled by Stichting Intetrust. According to the

Respondent, Stichting Intetrust, a foundation established for the purpose of holding the

446 Opinion of Mr Barlow, para. 15.

417 Opinion of Mr Barlow, para. 24.

48 Reply on Jurisdiction, para. 35.

419 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 33 and 34.

'20 Reply on Jurisdiction, para. 36.

'2! Reply on Jurisdiction, para. 37.

27

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

99.

100.

101.

122

family interests of the Francken family, and whose board members are Mr and Mrs

Francken, could not have directed these changes of ownership. !?*

According to the Respondent, the transfer of ownership of shares in IN Asset Management
that took place on 5 September 2012, from Mr and Mrs Francken to Stichting Intetrust, must
have been made for the sole purpose of establishing ICSID jurisdiction. The Respondent
argues that the relevant date to determine the Claimant’s nationality and therefore the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction is the date of the filing of the Request for Arbitration.'?? The
Respondent notes that this transfer of shares took place after the Request for Arbitration was
filed with ICSID (on 2 August 2012) and before ICSID registered the Request for Arbitration
(on 5 October 2012), and that the timing of the transfer of shares gives rise to a presumption
that it was made in order to attempt to confer Dutch nationality on the Claimant for the

purpose of conferring jurisdiction over the Claimant’s claim.!*+

The Respondent notes that despite having been ordered to produce the documents explaining
these changes of ownership of the shares of IN Asset Management, the Claimant has failed
to provide the documents on the basis that such documents would not exist.!2> The
Respondent does not accept this allegation and invites the Tribunal to draw an adverse

inference that the Claimant was in fact never controlled by Stichting Intetrust.!7°

The Respondent further submits that the Claimant’s failure to produce these documents
should compel the Tribunal to draw adverse inference regarding the motive for the transfer
of shares on 5 September 2012.'?7. The Respondent notes that there is jurisprudence

constante to the effect that transfer of ownership in an investment for the purpose of

Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 125-126.

23 Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/134/23-1/138/11.

'24 Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 130-132; Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 48-49; Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript,
1/32/21-1/35/8.

125

Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 127-129; Procedural Order No. 3, Item 5 of the Redfern Schedule.

26 Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 129; Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/32/4-18.

"27 Procedural Order No. 3, Item 5 of the Redfern Schedule; Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 45-46; Hearing on
Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/32/4-18.

28

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

102.

103.

104.

obtaining ICSID jurisdiction over a claim is an abuse of process, and that the Tribunal should

therefore decline jurisdiction. !7*

The Respondent disputes the Claimant’s allegation that only Stichting Intetrust was aware
of the change of ownership of IN Asset Management, and that in any event, whether or not
it had such knowledge is irrelevant.'° If, as asserted by the Claimant, the Claimant’s
officers were unaware of the transfer of shares in IN Asset Management to Stichting
Intetrust, this means that the Claimant was unaware of the identity and nationality of its
ultimate legal owner, and it would be wrong to invoke the nationality of this ultimate legal

owner for purposes of legal protection.'*°

Citing Banro American Resources, Inc. v Democratic Republic of the Congo,'*' the
Respondent argues that the Claimant must have met the relevant nationality requirement on
both the date it consented to ICSID arbitration (6 August 2012, the date ICSID received the
Request for Arbitration, “if note before”) and the date of the registration of the claim
(5 October 2012). However, on the earlier of these dates legal ownership of the Claimant

was held indirectly by Mr and Mrs Francken, and not Stichting Intetrust.!*?

Finally, relying on Mr Barlow’s interpretation of the deeds of 4 May 2010 and 1 October
2008,'** the Respondent argues that if as expressed by the Claimant, the 4 May 2010 deed
operates to confer control to Stichting Intetrust (the beneficiary of the trust) over the shares
in IN Asset Management, then the October 2008 deed must be interpreted as conferring

control to CCG over CCT and the Claimant, not Stichting Intetrust.!34

28 Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 132; Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 46 and 52, referring inter alia to Banro American
Resources, Inc. v. Democratic Republic of the Congo, 1CSID Case No. ARB/98/7, Award, 1 Sept. 2000, para. 1,
Exhibit RLA-0025; and Achmea B.V. v. The Slovak Republic, UNCITRAL arbitration, PCA Case No. 2008-13, Award
on Jurisdiction, Arbitrability and Suspension, 26 Oct. 2010, para. 223, Exhibit RLA-0024.

'29 Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 45-48. See also Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 61.

'30 Reply on Jurisdiction, para. 48.

5! Banro American Resources, Inc. v. Democratic Republic of the Congo, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/7, Award, | Sept.
2000, para. 1, Exhibit RLA-0025.

52 Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 50-51.
33 Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/94/2-1/96/21.
‘34 Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/132/2-I/134/15.

29

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

105.

106.

107.

108.

2. The Claimant’s position

The Claimant argues that Stichting Intetrust controls the Claimant, through its wholly owned
subsidiaries IN Asset Management and CCT, since 17 September 2008. This is also
reflected in the fact that Mr Francken and Mrs Francken are members of the board of
directors of Stichting Intetrust and directors of IN Asset Management, and Mr Francken is

also director of CCT.'*°

The Claimant argues that the deed of 1 October 2008 does not affect the control exercised
by IN Asset Management over the Claimant and has no impact on the function of the
structure that is under supervision and control of Stichting Intetrust.'*° According to the
Claimant, under the deed, IN Asset Management (the trustee) holds the shares in CCT for
and on behalf of CCG (the beneficial owner) and as a result, IN Asset Management controls
the shares for CCG.'3” Since IN Asset Management is the legal owner of CCT, it holds all
the voting rights in the company and therefore controls it as its subsidiary within the meaning

of the BIT.!8

The Claimant argues that the Opinion of Mr Francis Barlow, filed by the Respondent in
support of its Reply on Jurisdiction, in fact shows that the Claimant has Dutch nationality
under the BIT.'*? According to the Claimant’s reading of the Opinion, Mr Barlow in fact
confirms that Stichting Intetrust has control over CCT and the Claimant, in that it has the
power to change the directors of IN Asset Management, CCT and the Claimant, and that this

is “sufficient for proving that Claimant is a national of the Kingdom of Netherlands.”!4°

The Claimant disputes Mr Barlow’s conclusion that CCT is not controlled by Stichting

Intetrust since Stichting Intetrust has the power to change the directors of all of the

'35 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 67 B and C; Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paras. 17-19.

'86 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 33; Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paras. 18-20; Hearing on Jurisdiction,
Transcript, 1/64/1-1/65/24, 1/145/16-I/149/11, /151/1-11, /159/17-1/160/1 and 1/168/20-1/169/9.

57 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 31-32.

'38 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 32 and 67 D; Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para. 20.

59 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para. 6.

40 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paras. 8-10 and 16, referring to the Opinion of Mr Barlow, paras. 21 and 22.

30

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

109.

110.

11

112.

41 Rejoinder on Juri

142

143

subsidiaries in the structure.'! The Claimant also argues that Mr Barlow is not an expert
on ICSID or investment treaty law, and that his conclusions on the meaning of the term

“control” under New Zealand law are not relevant for the interpretation of the BIT.'4?

The Claimant also points out that, even if the shares of IN Asset Management were
transferred to Mr and Mrs Francken for the period 4 May 2010 to 5 September 2012,
Stichting Intetrust remained the beneficial owner of the shares throughout this period. This
means that the Claimant continued to be controlled, indirectly, by Stichting Intetrust, a
national of the Netherlands, throughout this period.'*? The Claimant adds that the deed only
imposed restrictions on transactions on the shares of CCT, having no impact on the voting

rights, and therefore on the control exercised by IN Asset Management on CCT.!#

The Claimant further argues that the fact that Mr and Mrs Francken were always members
of the board of directors of Stichting Intetrust and directors of IN Asset Management, and
that Mr Francken was the sole director of CCT, clearly shows that the fact that Stichting
Intetrust was the beneficial owner of IN Asset Management at certain times had no effect

on the control it exercised over IN Asset Management.'*

. According to the Claimant, as a result of the broad definition of nationality provided for in

the BIT, beneficial ownership does not amount to absence of control of the legal owner over
its subsidiaries in the structure. The Claimant therefore concludes that the deed of 1 October

2008 is irrelevant in the present case.'4°

In response to the Respondent’s argument that the letter of engagement from IN Asset
Management to CCG dated 16 September 2008 establishes that IN Asset Management was

engaged to divide the beneficial and legal ownership of the Claimant, the Claimant submits

 

iction, para. 11.

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para. 11.

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para. 15.

44 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para. 18.

145

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 28 and 35; Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para. 17; Deed created by IN Asset

Management Limited dated 1 Oct. 2008, Exhibit R-0003; Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/58/3-9.

'46 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 36; Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/1 52/1-9.

31

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

113.

114.

that the fact that IN Asset Management provides asset protection services is irrelevant for
the purpose of the nationality of the Claimant, and that the relevant information is that IN
Asset Management has the power, supervision and control over its subsidiaries and their
subsidiaries and is under the power, supervision and control of Stichting Intetrust, a Dutch

foundation.'7

The Claimant asserts that Stichting Intetrust is the owner of 100% of the shares of IN Asset
Management since 22 May 1995. According to the Claimant, the fact that the registration
of the shares in IN Asset Management has been transferred a number of times to Mr and
Mrs Francken does not affect the fact that Stichting Intetrust remained the beneficial owner

of the shares and retained control of IN Asset Management. '**

The Claimant explains that it is for internal reasons “in the area of company law (auditing)

and asset protection,”!4?

that Stichting Intetrust sometimes changed its position from the end
legal owner to the end beneficial owner of the structure, but that Stichting Intetrust has
always been the beneficial owner of IN Asset Management. The Claimant explains that this
requires the registration of ownership of the shares in IN Asset Management passing to
Mr and Mrs Francken (the director of Stichting Intetrust) and back to Stichting Intetrust.'*°
The Claimant explains that this is how the shares in IN Asset Management were transferred
from Stichting Intetrust to Mr Francken on 4 May 2010 before being transferred on the same
day from Mr Francken to Mr and Mrs Francken. The shares were then transferred from

Mr and Mrs Francken back to Stichting Intetrust on 5 September 2012.'*!

47 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 37.

448 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para. 15; Sworn Statement of Nicolaas Jan Carel Francken, para. 2, Exhibit C-0003;
Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/58/10-19.

49 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 24.

'59 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 24-25.

5! Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 25; Documents for Summary of Share Parcels Changes of Stichting
Intetrust, Exhibit C-0004; Email correspondence with Mr Francken, Exhibit R-0052.

32

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

115.

116.

117.

118.

The Claimant explains that the change of legal ownership of IN Asset Management did not
depend on the Claimant, but exclusively on Stichting Intetrust, and was done, as explained

by Mr Francken, for reasons related to auditing and asset protection.'>*

The Claimant denies the Respondent’s allegation that the transfer by Mr and Mrs Francken
of their shareholding in IN Asset Management to Stichting Intetrust, which occurred on
5 September 2012, was done for the sole purpose of obtaining ICSID jurisdiction. Indeed,
in 2009, which is when the Respondent breached the BIT, the shares of IN Asset
Management were held by Stichting Intetrust. It was only on 4 May 2010 that the
shareholding was transferred first to Mr Francken and then, on the same day, to Mr and Mrs
Francken. Stichting Intetrust was therefore the entity that ultimately controlled the Claimant
at the time the claim arose. The Claimant expressed its consent to arbitrate in several
instruments, including in its letter dated 22 September 2012, and thus after the transfer of
the shareholding in IN Asset Management to Stichting Intetrust and well before the Request
for Arbitration was registered by ICSID on 5 October 2012.'3

E. Relevant Arbitral Jurisprudence

1. The Respondent’s position

The Respondent disputes the Claimant’s argument that the Tribunal should rely on the
majority decision in Aguas del Tunari v. Bolivia.'** There is no doctrine of precedent in
investor-State arbitration, and in any event Aguas del Tunari is distinguishable on the facts

from the present case.!>°

According to the Respondent, the main difference between Aguas del Tunari and the present
case is that in Aguas del Tunari the issue was whether a company that was not at the end of

the corporate chain could be said to “control” the claimant. There was nothing to suggest

52 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 60-61 and 67 G; Sworn Statement of Nicolaas Jan Carel Francken, para.
3, Exhibit C-0003; Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/140/25-1/142/4.

53 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 60-61; Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/139/20-1/140/24.

'84 4 euas del Tunari SA v. Republic of Bolivia, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/3, Decision on Respondent’s Objections to
Jurisdiction, 21 Oct. 2005, Exhibit RLA-0002.

'55 Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 138-139.

33

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

that the ownership of shares and the associated rights would not be synonymous with
control.!*° However, in the present case legal and beneficial ownership do not coincide but
vest in two different entities, as IN Asset Management “merely holds legal ownership of the
shares in Capital Conservator Trustees Limited as a trustee.”!*’ There are therefore “two
corporate chains in issue, one which traces an ownership structure predicated on an indirect
legal (nominee) interest in the Claimant, and one which traces the beneficial ownership in
the Claimant back to Capital Conservator Group LLC, a Marshall Islands Company which

retained control over the Claimant.”!5®

119. The Respondent also argues that the operations of Stichting Intetrust are not transparent, and
“[iJt is unclear how the foundation could have directed or controlled the corporate entities
below it.”!? The Tribunal should look for evidence of control rather than rely on a formal
legal ownership, as ownership “is not synonymous with control, nor is it alone determinative
of control.”!® In support of its position, the Respondent argues that investment arbitral
tribunals look increasingly at actual evidence of control rather than relying on formal legal

161

ownership, in particular for purposes of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention.

120, The Respondent concludes that, when determining whether it has jurisdiction, the Tribunal
should bear in mind that legal ownership is not determinative of control and look into the
specific circumstances of the case, including the nature and the line of business of IN Asset

Management and CCG (asset protection and professional trustee services), the terms of

86 Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 140-146.
‘ST Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 147.

'58 Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 148.

59 Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 149.

160 Reply on Jurisdiction, para. 75.

'6! Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 152-165 and Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 60-73, citing Caratube International
Oil Company LLP and Devincci Salah Hourani v. Republic of Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/13, Award, 5
June 2012, paras. 382-407, Exhibit RLA-0006; Vacuum Salt Products Limited v. Government of the Republic of
Ghana, ICSID Case No. ARB/92/1, Award, 16 Feb. 1994, para. 43, Exhibit RLA-0021; TSA Spectrum de Argentina
S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/5, Award, 19 Dec. 2008, paras. 147-161, Exhibit RLA-0020;
National Gas S.A.E. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/11/7, Award, 3 Apr. 2014, para. 135, Exhibit
RLA-0026; Perenco Ecuador Ltd. v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador, \CSID Case
No. ARB/08/6, Decision on Remaining Issues of Jurisdiction and Liability, 12 Sept. 2014, paras. 216-223 and 522-
529, Exhibit RLA-0027; and Limited Liability Company Amto v. Ukraine, SCC Case No. 080/2005, Final Award, 26
March 2008, paras, 66-67, Exhibit RLA-0013.

34

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

engagement of IN Asset Management by CCG and Mr Finzer for provision of asset
protection and trustee services (following which IN Asset Management established CCT),
the terms of the deed concluded between IN Asset Management and CCG on 1 October
2008, the fact that Mr Finzer was a director of the Claimant from its incorporation, and its
sole director from 2010 until his reported death in November 2012, and the failure of the
Claimant to demonstrate that Stichting Intetrust ever exercised any control over the

Claimant, whether directly or indirectly.'

2. The Claimant’s position

121. The Claimant argues that the Tribunal should follow the reasoning of the Aguas del Tunari
tribunal, which found that “the ordinary meaning of ‘control’ would seemingly encompass
both actual exercise of powers or direction and the rights arising from the ownership of

163

shares. “Control” thus covers both the actual exercise of control and the capacity to

control, that is, the possession of authority over an object.

122. The Claimant argues that the “[p]osition of the Stichting Intetrust in the chain of ownership
totally matches with the findings of the Tribunal in [Aguas del Tunari].”'** According to the
Claimant, the fact that Stichting Intetrust is the end owner of the corporate structure
establishes that it in fact controls all the subsidiaries in the corporate chain, including the

Claimant.'

IV. THE PARTIES’ REQU

 

'S FOR RELIEF

A. The Respondent’s request for relief

123. In its Reply on Jurisdiction, the Respondent requests the Tribunal to:

“(i) dismiss all the Claimant's claims for lack of jurisdiction; and

‘2 Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 166-169; Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 75-78.

63 4 guas del Tunari SA v. Republic of Bolivia, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/3, Decision on Respondent’s Objections to
Jurisdiction, 21 Oct. 2005, para. 227, Exhibit RLA-0002. See also Memorial on the Merits, para. 47.
64 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 64.

65 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 64-65.

35

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

(ii) order the Claimant to bear the costs of this arbitration, including all
fees and expenses of ICSID and the Tribunal as well as the Respondent’s
costs (including but not limited to its legal fees and expenses), with interest
calculated on a compound basis, payable forthwith.”'

The Claimant’s request for relief

124, In its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, the Claimant requested the Tribunal to:

125.

“(i) Declare that Arbitral Tribunal [sic] has jurisdiction over the present
dispute;

(ii) Deny Respondent's objection to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal;

(ii) Order the Respondent to bear the costs of this arbitration, including all
fees and expenses of ICSID and the Tribunal as well as the Claimant’s
costs (including but not limited to its legal fees and expenses), with
interest calculated on a compound basis, payable forthwith.”'®"

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

The sole issue before the Tribunal at this stage of the proceedings is whether the Claimant
qualifies as a national of the Netherlands within the meaning of Article 1(b)(III) of the BIT
and Article 25(1) and (2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, and accordingly whether the Tribunal
has jurisdiction ratione personae over the Claimant. The nationality of the Claimant is a
jurisdictional issue since under Article 9 of the BIT the consent of the Contracting States to
arbitrate is limited to “any legal dispute between the Contracting State and a national of the
other Contracting State.'°® The claim having been brought against the Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, the Claimant must qualify as a national of the Netherlands, in order

to fall within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione personae.

126, Article 1 of the BIT provides, in relevant part:

“For the purposes of this Agreement:

(b) the term ‘nationals’ comprises with regard to either Contracting State:

'66 Reply on Jurisdiction, Section VI.

'67 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para. 22.

'68 Article 9 of the BIT, Exhibit C-0005. (Emphasis added.)

36

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

127.

128.

129.

130.

(II) legal persons constituted under the law of that Contracting State;

(IIT) legal persons not constituted under the law of that Contracting State
but controlled, directly or indirectly, by natural persons as defined in (I) or
by legal persons as defined in (I1).”"®

Article 25(1) and (2)(b) of the ICSID Convention provide, in relevant part:

“(1) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising
directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State ... and a national
of another Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in
writing to submit to the Centre. ...

(2) ‘National of another Contracting State’ means:

(b) any juridical person which had the nationality of a Contracting State
other than the State party to the dispute on the date on which the parties
consented to submit such dispute to conciliation or arbitration ... .”

The Tribunal will first consider whether the Claimant meets the applicable nationality
requirements under the BIT, as this is the issue on which the Parties have focused almost
exclusively in their written submissions and at the Hearing. The Tribunal is nonetheless
mindful that, in order for it to possess jurisdiction ratione personae over the Claimant,

jurisdiction must be established under both the BIT and the ICSID Convention.

The Tribunal notes that there is no dispute between the Parties that the Claimant is organized
under the law of New Zealand and therefore does not qualify as a national of the Netherlands
under Article 1(b)(II) of the BIT. The Claimant argues however that it is controlled,
indirectly, by Stichting Intetrust, a foundation organized under the law of the Netherlands,
and thus qualifies as a national of the Netherlands under Article 1(b)(III) of the BIT. This
is disputed by the Respondent.

The Tribunal notes that the Parties disagree on the interpretation of the term “controlled” in

Article 1(b)(III) of BIT. The Respondent, which is the moving party in this phase of the

169 Article 1 of the BIT, Exhibit C-0005.

37

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

proceedings, argues that the term “controlled,” when interpreted in accordance with its
ordinary meaning, implies that mere ownership, or capacity to control, is not sufficient, but
that evidence of actual exercise of control is required. The Claimant on the other hand takes
the view that the term “controlled” includes ownership, but is not limited to ownership.
According to the Claimant, ownership is sufficient to establish control, although it could
also be established by other means, in particular in case of indirect control. Citing Aguas
del Tunari, the Claimant argues that, in case of ownership, the phrase “controlled, directly
or indirectly” refers to the legal capacity of control rather than the fact of control. As an
indirect owner of the Claimant, Stichting Intetrust has, in the Claimant’s submission, the

legal capacity to control the Claimant, and this is sufficient to establish jurisdiction.

131, The Tribunal notes that, while ownership generally implies the legal right or the capacity to
exercise control, the issue is complicated in the present case by the fact that different aspects
of the ownership of CCT, the Claimant’s immediate holding company, are divided between
IN Asset Management and CCG, a Marshall Islands company that falls outside the corporate
chain of which Stichting Intetrust forms part. Pursuant to the deed of 1 October 2008
between IN Asset Management and CCG, the former became the legal owner of CCT, the
immediate holding company of the Claimant, whereas the latter retained beneficial

ownership over CCT. The deed provides, in relevant part:

“By [IN Asset Management] (herein called the Trust Company) being the
holder of the number and class of shares stated in Part 3 of the Schedule
hereto (herein called the Shares) in [Capital Conservator Trustees Limited]
(herein called the Company) declares and covenants that:

1. The Shares in the Company are held by it as Trustee for and on behalf of
[Capital Conservator Group LLC, Marshall Islands] (herein called the
Beneficial Owner).

2. The Shares will not be encumbered, transferred, assigned or dealt with
in any way by the Trustee without the consent in writing of the Beneficial
Owner being first held and obtained.

3. The Trustee will account to the Beneficial Owner in respect of all income
earned, derived or received from the said Shares and all other benefits in
respect thereof in such manner as the Beneficial Owner may from time to
time direct.

38

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

132.

133.

4. The Trustee acknowledges that the Beneficial Owner may from time to
time appoint a new or additional Trustee and remove any Trustee so
appointed subject to the special provisions and conditions as contained in
the letter of engagement as accepted by the beneficial owner.”

The question therefore arises whether CCT can be said to be “controlled, directly or
indirectly,” by IN Asset Management, given that the beneficial ownership of CCT has been
retained by CCG. The Parties disagree on this point, the Respondent arguing that a legal
owner can never be said to “control” its subsidiary as it is the beneficial owner that retains
the power or the capacity of control, whereas the legal owner merely possesses formal
ownership and operates under the direction and control of the beneficial owner. The
Claimant argues, in turn, that legal ownership is sufficient as the legal owner acts for and on
behalf of the beneficial owner; in the Claimant’s submission, beneficial ownership can be
relied upon to prove ownership, but not “applied against” it. The Respondent further argues
that, in any event, there is no evidence on record that Stichting Intetrust ever exercised any
kind of control, direct or indirect, over the Claimant. The Claimant does not deny that CCT
is beneficially owned by CCG, but argues that this is irrelevant for purposes of the Tribunal’s

jurisdiction over the Claimant.

The Respondent’s argument that the Claimant is not controlled by Stichting Intetrust is
based, in part, on New Zealand law. The Respondent relies on the expert opinion of
Mr Barlow, who takes the view that the deed of 1 October 2008 between IN Asset
Management and CCG “creates what is known in English law and in New Zealand law as a
‘bare’ trust”, the defining features of such bare trust being that “the trustee holds property
in trust for a single beneficiary absolutely and indefeasibly.”'”° Such a bare trustee “has no
beneficial interest in the trust property whatsoever but merely holds the bare legal title to the
property as trustee for the beneficial owner and control over the trust property is vested in
the beneficiary.”!”! While Mr Barlow recognizes that a holding company “may well have
the power to exercise control over its subsidiary and its assets,” either directly or indirectly,

such power “cannot be exercised in relation to assets which do not belong beneficially to the

170 Opinion of Mr Barlow, paras. 13-14.

"7! Opinion of Mr Barlow, para. 15.

39

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

134.

 

'

subsidiary or the subsidiary’s own subsidiary.”'”* Mr Barlow concludes that “under the
terms of the Deed [of 1 October 2008], Capital Conservator Trustees is not ‘controlled’ by

Stichting Intetrust in any sense of the word.”!7

The Tribunal notes that pursuant to the terms of the deed of 1 October 2008, the trustee or
the legal owner (i.e., IN Asset Management) is not entitled to “encumber[], transfer[],
assign[] or deal[]” with the shares of CCT in any way without the written consent of the
beneficial owner (i.e., CCG), and that the beneficial owner may appoint a new trustee and
remove IN Asset Management as a trustee of CCT; IN Asset Management must also account
to CCG in respect of all income earned or otherwise derived or received from the shares of
CCT.'* However, the deed makes no mention of the direction and control of the business
activities of CCT, or the exercise of voting rights.!> The terms of the deed thus appear to
leave open the possibility that IN Asset Management and/or, indirectly, Stichting Intetrust
could have exercised such control over CCT’s activities, by way of exercise of voting rights
or otherwise. When questioned on this issue at the hearing, Mr Barlow testified that the
deed entitled the beneficial owner to exercise voting rights by directing the trustee to vote
as directed by the beneficial owner, even if such right was not specifically mentioned in the
deed.'"° However, while the Tribunal accepts Mr Barlow’s testimony on this point, the right
of the beneficial owner to control the exercise of voting rights by the trustee does not exclude
the possibility that the beneficial owner (i.e., CCG) may have refrained from exercising this
right, and that the legal owner (i.e., IN Asset Management) may have exercised corporate
control over CCT, and thus indirectly over the Claimant. The issue of control is therefore

ultimately a matter of evidence and cannot be determined solely on the basis of an analysis

Opinion of Mr Barlow, paras. 21-22.

"3 Opinion of Mr Barlow, para. 24.
"74 Deed created by IN Asset Management Limited dated 1 Oct.2008, Exhibit R-0003.

"5 Cf. the deed of 4 May 2010 between Mr and Mrs Francken and Stichting Intetrust, which does not contain any
limitations regarding the exercise of voting rights, Exhibit C-0004.

"76 Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/82-86, 1/105-06.

40

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

135.

136.

of the applicable New Zealand law, as also accepted by Mr Barlow.'”” The Tribunal will

next turn to the issue of whether there is any such evidence.

The Tribunal notes that the sole piece of evidence that might qualify as evidence that the
Claimant was controlled, indirectly, by Stichting Intetrust is the “Sworn Statement” of Mr
Francken, submitted by the Claimant in support of the Request for Arbitration.!7* However,
in his Sworn Statement, Mr Francken merely states that “[t]he ultimate shareholder control
of [CCT] was and is with its parent Stichting Intetrust of Velp (Gld) the Netherlands,” and
that “[f]rom 17 September 2008, Stichting Intetrust, through its wholly owned subsidiary IN
Asset Management Limited and through its wholly owned subsidiary Capital Conservator
Trustees Limited held all the shares and voting rights in Capital Conservator Savings &
Loans Limited (now renamed as Guardian Fiduciary Trust Limited).”!”? No further detail
or explanation is provided as to how such shareholder control, including voting rights, were
in fact exercised, if at all. Nor is there any other evidence on record regarding the actual
exercise of control, direct or indirect, by Stichting Intetrust, IN Asset Management or CCT
over the Claimant. Indeed, the engagement letter of 16 September 2008 between CCG and
IN Asset Management provides that IN Asset Management merely provided “trust- and
trustee services” to CCG, and that such services were to be provided “on the basis of full

indemnity to [IN Asset Management].”!*?

At the pre-hearing organizational meeting, the Tribunal noted that the Respondent had not
called Mr Francken for cross-examination at the Hearing, and indicated that it was
contemplating calling Mr Francken for questioning by the Tribunal. The Respondent
explained that it had not called Mr Francken as the Claimant had stated during the Parties’

discussions that Mr Francken’s Sworn Statement was not a witness statement. After further

"77 As recognized by Mr Barlow at the Hearing; Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/102-103, I/108 and I/114-117.

"8 Exhibit C-4 submitted in support of the Request for Arbitration, also filed as Exhibit C-0003. At the Hearing,
Counsel for the Claimant stated that he had no information of any other activities of CCT, apart from holding the
shares of the Claimant. According to the Claimant, what mattered was legal ownership, and that “it is not important
what the companies were doing.” Hearing on Jurisdiction, Transcript, 1/172/22-/173/24.

179 Sworn Statement of Nicolaas Jan Carel Francken, paras. 4 and 5, Exhibit C-4 submitted in support of the Request
for Arbitration.

'80 Engagement letter between IN Asset Management Limited and Capital Conservator Group dated 16 Sept. 2008,
Exhibit R-0025.

41

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

137.

discussion during the pre-hearing organizational meeting, the Claimant eventually
confirmed that Mr Francken’s Sworn Statement was “just an exhibit” and not a witness

' In these

statement, and that Mr Francken had not been presented as a witness.!®
circumstances, and in the absence of any detail or explanation in Mr Francken’s Sworn
Statement regarding the way in which, if any, Stichting Intetrust, IN Asset Management or
indeed CCT might have exercised corporate control over the Claimant, the Tribunal is
unable to conclude that Mr Francken’s statement constitutes evidence of actual exercise of
control. In the absence of any other or further evidence of any exercise of actual control by
IN Asset Management over CCT, or by CCT over the Claimant during the relevant period,
that is, immediately prior to and during the summer of 2009, when the claim allegedly arose,
or at any relevant time thereafter, the Tribunal must conclude that the Claimant was not

controlled, directly or indirectly, by Stichting Intetrust at any time during this period.

Indeed, the limited evidence before the Tribunal suggests that CCT, and therefore indirectly
the Claimant, was in fact controlled by CCG, a Marshall Islands company, and its director
and beneficial owner Mr Finzer, until his reported death in November 2012. This evidence
includes a newspaper report recording Mr Francken’s statement to the press in February
2013 that he “was acting only as nominee and had no involvement in the Guardian Fiduciary
business,” referring to CCG as his “client.”'*? This statement, the accuracy of which has not
been challenged by the Claimant, is consistent with the terms of the deed of 1 October 2008,
according to which IN Asset Management merely held the shares of CCT in trust for and on
behalf of CCG, as well as the fact that Mr Finzer apparently was the sole director and
president of the Claimant from the date of its incorporation until his reported death in

November 2012.'*3 It was also Mr Finzer who authorized the commencement of the

'81 Audio recording of the pre-hearing organizational meeting.

182 Exhibit R-0039.

183 Exhibit C-3 submitted in support of the Request for Arbitration, and Annual Return for the Claimant dated 25 Nov.
2010, Exhibit R-0033; Guardian Fiduciary Trust Limited Consent and Certificate of Director dated Dec. 2012, Exhibit
R-0035.

42

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

138.

139.

140.

arbitration on behalf of the Claimant and signed the powers of attorney of the Claimant’s

counsel. !*4

In light of the above, the Tribunal concludes that the Claimant has failed to prove that it is
controlled by Stichting Intetrust, and that it therefore qualifies as a national of the

Netherlands within the meaning of Article 1(b)(IID) of the BIT.

In the circumstances, the Tribunal need not consider whether Stichting Intetrust controlled
IN Asset Management at any of the potentially relevant dates, including when the claim
allegedly arose, or when the dispute was submitted to ICSID arbitration or, if different from
this latter date, when the Parties consented to submit the dispute to arbitration. In the
absence of any evidence that the Claimant was ever controlled by Stichting Intetrust, IN
Asset Management or indeed CCT, the relationships between these other companies in the
corporate chain are irrelevant for the purposes of determining the Claimant’s nationality.
For the same reason, the Tribunal need not consider whether the fact that the shares of IN
Asset Management, which had been held by Mr and Mrs Francken as trustees for and on
behalf of Stichting Intetrust from 4 May 2010, were transferred to Stichting Intetrust on
5 September 2012, after the filing of the Request for Arbitration, constitutes an abuse of
process on the grounds that its sole purpose was, as argued by the Respondent, to obtain

ICSID jurisdiction.

The Tribunal recalls that, in order for the Tribunal to find jurisdiction ratione personae, the
Claimant would have to qualify as a national of the Netherlands under both the BIT and the
ICSID Convention. As the Claimant has failed to establish that it meets the nationality
requirements of the BIT, the Tribunal need not consider whether the Claimant would meet

the nationality requirements of the ICSID Convention.

'84 Attachment to the Request for Arbitration; Attachment to the letter of the Claimant’s counsel to ICSID dated 22
Sept. 2012.

43

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

VI. COSTS

A. The Respondent's position
141.

The Respondent argues that in the event the Tribunal dismisses the Claimant’s claims for
lack of jurisdiction, the Claimant should pay the Respondent’s costs, including its legal fees
and expenses, with interest.'*° The Respondent submitted the following table summarizing

its costs:!8

 

Legal Fees and Expenses 1,153,508.51 USD
(Latham & Watkins LLP)

 

Legal Fees and Expenses 182,493.89 USD
(Reed Smith LLP)

 

 

 

Fees and expenses of Mr Francis £40,999.50

Barlow QC

ICSID and Tribunal Fees and 175,000 USD

Expenses

Costs of the representatives of the 4,882.60 USD (travel and subsistence)

Republic of Macedonia for (i) hotel
fees for meetings in Skopje with
Latham & Watkins in March 2013;
and (ii) travel and subsistence costs
attending the first session of the
tribunal (23 July 2013) and the
hearing (6 May 2015), both in Paris.

 

Total 1,515,885 USD
and
£40,999.50

 

 

 

 

142, The Respondent argues that the traditional practice whereby the Parties were required to

bear their own costs has changed, and that ICSID tribunals increasingly order the losing

'85 Respondent’s Submissions on Costs, paras. 9-11.

'86 Respondent’s Submissions on Costs, para. 9.

44

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

143.

144,

145.

party to pay some or all of the costs of the prevailing party. This is the case in particular in
circumstances where the unsuccessful party “has engaged in some form of misconduct

which has caused the prevailing party to incur unnecessary costs.”!87

According to the Respondent, this applies in the present case, for several reasons. First, the
Claimant has presented its claim in a confused and disorganized manner, having submitted
irrelevant and unsolicited submissions during the proceedings and having failed to comply
with the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 3 regarding document production.'*® Second, the
Respondent submits that it incurred unnecessary costs also because the Claimant initially
presented the jurisdictional basis of its claim and its ownership structure in a misleading
manner, failing to disclose the deed of 1 October 2008 at an early stage of the proceedings,
and failing to produce any evidence that it was in fact controlled by Stichting Intetrust, thus
forcing the Respondent to undertake extensive investigations.'*? Finally, the Respondent
argues that it should not bear the cost of defending a claim that constitutes an abuse of
process; according to the Respondent, the transfer of legal title to the shares in IN Asset
Management from Mr and Mrs Francken to Stichting Intetrust on 5 September 2012 was

abusive as it was made for the sole purpose of establishing ICSID jurisdiction.'”°

In the event that the Tribunal accepts jurisdiction, the Respondent submits that the Tribunal

should reserve the issue of costs until a later stage of the proceedings. '?!

B. The Claimant’s position

The Claimant requests that the Tribunal deny the Respondent’s claim for costs of arbitration

and submits that, in the event the Tribunal were to accept jurisdiction, the Respondent should

'87 Respondent’s Submissions on Costs, paras. 12-18.

'88 Respondent’s Submissions on Costs, paras. 20, 24-27.

'89 Respondent’s Submissions on Costs, paras. 21, 28-34.

9 Respondent’s Submissions on Costs, paras. 22, 35-41.

"1 Respondent’s Submissions on Costs, para. 42.

45

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

bear the costs associated with the jurisdictional phase of the proceedings.!°? The Claimant

summarizes its costs as follows:!°3

“4. The legal fees of Mr. Torres are specified as follows:

JUAN F. TORRES III, ESQUIRE LEGAL FEES AND COSTS FOR
JURISDICTION

From 30 January 2014 until the present:

Fees Out of Court/Arbitration/Hearings: $100,305.00 USD
Fees In Court/Arbitration/Hearings: $1,260.00 USD

Total Fees: $101,565.00

5. The legal fees of Mr. Petro Janura — Attorney at law are specified as follows:

PETRO JANURA — ATTORNEY AT LAW LEGAL FEES AND COSTS FOR
JURISDICTION

From 30 January 2014 until the present:
Fees Out of Hearings: 76,500,00 EUR
Fees In Hearings: 3.000,00 EUR

Total Fees: 79.500,00 EUR”

146, In support of its position, the Claimant argues that the Respondent filed its objections to

147.

192

created “unnecessary and considerable financial burden for the Claimant.

jurisdiction late in the proceedings, refusing to do so before the Claimant had submitted its
Memorial on the Merits, therefore unnecessarily prolonging the proceedings and not
complying with Article 41(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, which requires that

preliminary objections be made “as early as possible.” The Respondent’s conduct therefore

> 194

The Claimant argues that it would be “fair and proper” for the Respondent, if it were to lose,

to bear the costs associated with the jurisdictional phase, in particular because the present

Claimant’s Submissions on Costs, para. 1.

183 Claimant’s Submissions on Costs, paras. 4-5.

14 Claimant’s Submissions on Costs, paras. 6-8.

46

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

148.

149.

150.

151.

195

dispute is between a sovereign State, with greater financial resources, and a small

company.!°5

C. The Tribunal’s analysis
The relevant rules covering the award of costs of the proceedings can be found in Chapter
VI of the ICSID Convention, and in particular in Article 61(2) of the Convention, which

provides:

“In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as the
parties otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the parties in
connection with the proceedings, and shall decide how and by whom those
expenses, the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the
charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre shall be paid. Such decision
shall form part of the award.”

The Tribunal notes, as recognized by the Respondent which addressed the issue in its cost
submissions, that the practice of ICSID tribunals in awarding costs is not entirely consistent,
some tribunals ordering the parties to bear their own costs and others applying the “costs
follow the event” approach. The divergent practice reflects the considerable degree of
discretion that ICSID tribunals enjoy under Article 61(2) of the Convention, which does not

prescribe any particular approach, in making costs awards.

The Tribunal considers that in the circumstances of the present case, it is appropriate to apply
the “costs follow the event” approach and award the costs of the prevailing party. However,
the Tribunal does not consider that the conduct of either Party in the course of the

proceedings should form an additional basis for awarding costs.

The Respondent is the prevailing party as its objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione
personae has been upheld, resulting in dismissal of all of the Claimant’s claims. In view of
the outcome of the case, and taking into account the substantially disparate amounts spent
by the Parties in the proceedings, the Tribunal considers it appropriate that the Claimant

reimburse 80 per cent of the Respondent’s costs of arbitration. The Tribunal additionally

Claimant’s Submissions on Costs, para. 12.

47

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

considers it appropriate that each Party bear and equally share the fees and expenses of the

Tribunal and the costs of the ICSID facilities.
VII. AWARD
152. For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal decides as follows:
a. The Claimant’s claims are dismissed for lack of jurisdiction ratione personae;

b. The Claimant shall pay the Respondent the amount of US$ 1,072,708 and £ 32,800

as reimbursement of the Respondent’s legal fees and expenses;

c. The Parties shall bear and equally share the fees and expenses of the Tribunal and

the costs of the ICSID facilities; and

d. All other claims and requests for relief by either Party are dismissed.

48

Guardian Fiduciary Trust, Ltd. v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/31)

Ba ble Gem.

¢

Prof. Andreas Bucher Prof. Brigitte Stern
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: Date:
“1419 (201 Me (CULTS

by |

Dr Veijo Heiskanen
President of the Tribunal

Date: 1419 (701s

49

