H&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
(ICSID Case No. ARB/09/15)

Excerpts of the Award of May 6, 2014 made pursuant to Rule 48(4) of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules of 2006

Claimant
H&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. (““H&H”, a California (USA) corporation)

Respondent
Arab Republic of Egypt (“Egypt”)

Tribunal
Bernardo M. Cremades (President of the Tribunal, Spanish), appointed by the Chairman of the ICSID
Administrative Council

Veijo Heiskanen (Finnish), appointed by the Claimant
Hamid Gharavi (French/Iranian), appointed by the Respondent

Award
Award of May 6, 2014

Instrument relied on for consent to ICSID arbitration

Treaty between the United States of America and the Arab Republic of Egypt Concerning the Reciprocal
Encouragement and Protection of Investments, signed on 11 March 1986 and entered into force on 27 June 1992
(‘Treaty”)

 

Procedure

Applicable Arbitration Rules: CSID Arbitration Rules of 2006

Place of Proceedings: Washington, D.C.

Procedural Language: English

Full procedural details: Available at https://www.worldbank.org/icsid

Factual Background

The dispute concerned a management and operation contract (“MOC) concluded between H&H and an Egyptian
government owned company, regarding a resort on the Gulf of Suez. Following arbitration and court proceedings
in Egypt, the Claimant brought ICSID proceedings in 2009 under the Treaty claiming, among other things, that
Egypt’s eviction of H&H from the resort and refusal to recognize its option to buy the resort property (“Option to
Buy”) breached the fair and equitable treatment, expropriation, and full protection and security standards of the
Treaty. The Claimant also alleged denial of justice and denial of effective means concerning the local proceedings.

Egypt raised various jurisdictional objections and the proceedings were bifurcated with the agreement of the parties.
In its Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal dismissed Respondent’s objections based on ratione personae, ratione
materiae, ratione temporis and equitable prescription arguments and joined to the merits, inter alia, the question of
the validity of the Option to Buy and Respondent’s objections based on the Treaty’s fork-in-the-road provision.

The Award concluded that the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction over the dispute because H&H’s previous submission
of claims with ‘the same fundamental basis’ to an arbitral tribunal under the MOC, and to Egyptian courts, had
triggered the fork-in-the-road provision. Claimant’s claims of corruption, denial of justice and denial of effective
means were dismissed on the merits for lack of a causal link between the alleged actions and the loss of the
investment. The Tribunal ordered the parties to bear their own costs, and limited the Respondent’s share of the costs
of the arbitration proceeding to USD 225,000, while ordering the Claimant to bear the remaining costs.

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT
DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the arbitration proceeding between

 

Claimant

and

THE ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/15

 

AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal
Dr. Bernardo M. Cremades, President
Dr. Veijo Heiskanen
Dr. Hamid Gharavi

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Milanka Kostadinova

Date of dispatch to the Parties: May 6, 2014

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing the Claimant:

CROWELL & MORING LLP
Mr. Clifton S. Elgarten

Ms. Kathryn Kirmayer

Ms. Jane Wess
Ms. Meriam Alrashid

Ms. Emily Alban

Ms. Amal Bouhabib

1001 Pennsylvania Ave. N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20004-2595
U.S.A.

Telephone: (202) 624-2500
Facsimile: (202) 628-5116

 

SHALAKANY LAW OFFICE
Dr. Khaled El Shalakany

12 Marashly St.

Zamalek 11211 Cairo

Egypt

Telephone: +20 2 2728 8888
Facsimile: +20 2 2737 0661

WEIL GOTSHAL & MANGES LLP
Mr. Arif H. Ali (until 8 November 2013)
1300 Eye Steet N.W., Suite 900
Washington, D.C. 20005-3314

U.S.A.

Telephone: (202) 682-7004

Facsimile: (202) 857-0940

Representing the Respondent:

Dr. Claudia Annacker

Mr. Robert T. Greig

Mr. J. Cameron Murphy

Mr. Larry C. Work-Dembrowski
Ms. Laurie Achtouk-Spivak

12, rue de Tilsitt

75008 Paris

France

Telephone: +33 1 40 74 68 00
Facsimile: +33 1 40 74 68 88

EGYPTIAN STATE LAWSUITS
AUTHORITY

HLE. Counselor Ezzat Ouda
President of ESLA

Counselor Mahmoud El Khrashy
Counselor Amr Arafa

Counselor Fatma Khalifa
Counselor Lela Kassem
Counselor Yasmine Aziz

42 Gameat El Dowal El Arabiya St.
Mohandeseen, Giza

Egypt

Telephone: +20 2 3762 1357
Facsimile: +20 2 3762 1351

TI.

VI.

VIL.

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

TABLE OF CONTENTS*

THE PARTIES

 

A. THE CLAIMANT

 

THE PROCEDURAL HISTORY .....

 

7
7
B. THE RESPONDENT. 7
7
7

. INITIATION OF THE ARBITRATION...

 

. THE RESPONDENT’S OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION

 

 

A
B
C. DECISION ON JURISDICTION
D. SUBMISSIONS ON THE MERITS AND THE REMAINING JURISDICTIONAL ISSUES .. 12
E.
F.

 

 

. HEARING ON THE MERITS AND THE REMAINING JURISDICTIONAL ISSUES......... 13
. SUBMISSIONS ON COSTS AND THE CLOSING OF THE PROCEEDINGS..... .14
THE AGREEMENTS 15
A. THE OPTION TO BUY 15

 

B. THE MANAGEMENT AND OPERATION CONTRACT..
SUMMARY OF THE FACTS AND DISPUTE...
THE REMAINING ISSUES TO BE DETERMINED AND THE PARTIES’

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

POSITIONS. 15
A. THE OPTION TO BUY 15
B. EXECUTION OF THE MOC .. 16
C. ATTRIBUTION PRINCIPLE ...... 18
D. CORRUPTION CLAIMS 19
TREATY CLAIMS 20
A. THE RESPONDENT EXPROPRIATED THE CLAIMANT’ S INVESTMENT WITHOUT
COMPENSATION. 20

 

B. THE RESPONDENT HAS NOT PROVIDED AN ADEQUATE JUDICIAL SYSTEM TO
HEAR THE CLAIMANT’ S CLAIMS, RESULTING IN A CLEAR DENIAL OF JUSTICE....22

C. THE RESPONDENT VIOLATED ITS OBLIGATION TO PROVIDE FAIR AND

 

 

 

 

EQUITABLE TREATMENT TO THE CLAIMANT’ S INVESTMENT... 122
D. THE RESPONDENT IMPAIRED THE CLAIMANT'S INVESTMENT THROUGH

ARBITRARY AND/OR DISCRIMINATORY MEASURES 124
E. THE RESPONDENT BREACHED ITS MINIMUM STANDARD OBLIGATION ............25
F. THE RESPONDENT VIOLATED ITS OBLIGATION TO OBSERVE OBLIGATIONS

ENTERED INTO WITH OTHER INVESTORS .... 26
RES JUDICATA 26

 

“The page numbers in the Table of Contents of these Excerpts do not correspond to the
original page numbers of the Award.

3

VII.

XI.
XII.

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

THE TRIBUNAL LACKS JURISDICTION OVER THE BULK OF THE
CLAIMANT’S CLAIMS UNDER ARTICLE VII (3) OF
THE US-EGYPT BIT

THE CLAIMANT’S IDENTITY
THE DECISION 31
A. FORK-IN-THE ROAD 31

 

 

 

 

B. THE CORRUPTION CLAIMS
C. DENIAL OF JUSTICE AND DENIAL OF EFFECTIVE MEANS .....
COSTS 46
AWARD 48

 

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

Arbitration Rules

BIT or US-Egypt BIT

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits

Claimant’s Response to Objections
to Jurisdiction

Claimant’s Rejoinder to

Objections to Jurisdiction

Claimant’s Reply on the Merits

Decision on Jurisdiction

EGOTH

GHE

HOTAC

HT

ICSID Convention/Convention

LE.

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings (2006)

Treaty between the United States of America and
the Arab Republic of Egypt Concerning the
Reciprocal Encouragements and Protections of
Investments, signed in Washington on 29
September 1982, with a Related Exchange of
Letters signed 11 March 1985 and a
Supplementary Protocol singed 11 March 1986;
entered into force 27 June 1992

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, dated 15
October 2010

Claimant’s Response to the Respondent’s
Objections to Jurisdiction and Request for
Bifurcation, dated 9 September 2011

Claimant’s Rejoinder to the Respondent’s
Objections to Jurisdiction, dated 15 May 2012

Claimant’s Reply Memorial on the Merits and
Rejoinder on Remaining Jurisdictional Issues,

dated 1 August 2013

Tribunal’s Decision on Respondent’s Objections
to Jurisdiction, dispatched on 5 June 2011

Egyptian General Company for Tourism and
Hotels

Grand Hotels of Egypt

Holding Company for Tourism, Hotels and
Cinema

Transcripts of the Hearing on the Merits and
Remaining Jurisdictional Issues

Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other
States

Egyptian pounds

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

MOC

Parties

POT

Respondent’s Objections to
Jurisdiction

Respondent’s Reply on Objections

to Jurisdiction

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial
on the Merits

Respondent’s Rejoinder on the
Merits

US.

USD

Vienna Convention

[...] Hotel Management and Operation Contract

H&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. and the Arab
Republic of Egypt

Public Sector Organization for Tourism

Respondent’s Jurisdictional Objections and
Request for Bifurcation, dated 6 June 2011

Respondent’s Reply to the Claimant’s Response
to the Objections to Jurisdiction, dated 19
January 2012

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits
and Reply on Remaining Jurisdictional Issues,
dated 16 May 2013

 

Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits and
Surreply on Remaining Jurisdictional Issues, 11
October 2013

United States of America

United States Dollar

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of
May 23, 1969

I.

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

THE PARTIES

. THE CLAIMANT

H&H Enterprises Investments Inc. (““H&H” or “the Claimant”) is a
California corporation established in 1988 by [...], a United States investor of
Egyptian origin. [...] also formed an Egyptian affiliate, the Egyptian American
Company for Development and Tourism — H&H Enterprises (“H&H Egypt”)
which was recognized as such by the Government. Another local affiliate, [...],
was created to help oversee renovations of the Resort, as described further in

this Award.

. THE RESPONDENT

The Respondent is the Arab Republic of Egypt (“the Respondent”). As a
public sector company (or after 1991, a public business sector subsidiary
company), Grand Hotels of Egypt (“GHE”) is owned by the Government of
Egypt and at the time owned and managed certain of the country’s hotels with
the Egyptian Ministry of Tourism. GHE was wholly owned first by the Public
Sector Organization for Tours (“POT”) and later by the Holding Company for
Tourism, Hotels and Cinema (“HOTAC”), a public sector organization
structured as an Egyptian joint stock holding company wholly owned by the
Ministry of Tourism. In 1996, GHE merged into the Egyptian General Company
for Tourism and Hotels (“EGOTH”).

THE PROCEDURAL HISTORY

. INITIATION OF THE ARBITRATION

On 17 July 2009, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) received a request for arbitration (the
“Request”) from the Claimant against the Respondent. The Request was made

pursuant to the Treaty between the United States of America and the Arab

7

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

Republic of Egypt Concerning the Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of
Investments, which was signed on 11 March 1986 and entered into force on 27
June 1992 (the “US-Egypt BIT” or the “Treaty”), and the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States

(“ICSID Convention” or “Convention”).

On 11 August 2009, the Secretary-General of ICSID sent the Claimant and
the Respondent a Notice of Registration in accordance with Article 36(3) of the

ICSID Convention.

On 29 October 2009, the Parties informed the Centre that they had agreed to
adopt a formula similar to the one set out in the provision of Article 37(2)(b) of
the ICSID Convention as their method for constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal.
This letter was acknowledged by a letter from ICSID to the Parties of the same
date. Accordingly, it was confirmed that: (1) the Tribunal would consist of three
arbitrators; (2) one arbitrator would be appointed by each Party; and (3) the third,

presiding, arbitrator would be appointed by agreement of the Parties.

Pursuant to this agreement, the Claimant appointed Dr. Veijo Heiskanen, a
national of Finland, as a member of the Tribunal. Dr. Heiskanen accepted his
appointment on 31 October 2009. The Respondent appointed Dr. Hamid
Gharavi, a dual national of France and Iran. Dr. Gharavi accepted his

appointment on 30 October 2009.

On 21 December 2009, the Claimant requested the appointment of the
presiding arbitrator by the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council as
provided for in Article 38 of the Convention and Rule 4(1) of the Arbitration
Rules, following the Parties’ failure to reach an agreement on the person to serve

as President of the Tribunal.

By letter of 2 February 2010, the Secretary-General informed the Parties that
the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council had appointed Dr. Bernardo
M. Cremades, a national of Spain, as the third arbitrator and President of the

Tribunal.

9.

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

The Tribunal was officially constituted on 2 February 2010, in accordance
with the Convention and the Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings
(“Arbitration Rules”). Ms. Milanka Kostadinova, Senior Counsel, ICSID, was

designated to serve as the Secretary of the Tribunal.

The First Session of the Tribunal was held on 18 March 2010 at the World
Bank Paris office. At the Session, the Tribunal heard, among other things, the
Parties’ proposals for addressing any objections to jurisdiction and a potential
request for bifurcation of the proceeding by the Respondent. The Tribunal also
approved the Parties’ agreed schedule for preliminary submissions, which
included a phase for the Claimant’s request for document production prior to the
filing of the Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits and a phase for the
Respondent’s request for document production prior to the filing of the
Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction. It was further agreed that the Claimant
would file a response to the Respondent’s jurisdictional objections and that a
one-day procedural hearing would be held on the issue of bifurcation of the

proceedings.

On 28 March 2010, the Claimant filed a request for production of documents,
which was subsequently amended on 8 April 2010. On 8 May 2010, the
Respondent filed a reply to the Claimant’s request. Following further exchanges
between the Parties, on 2 June 2010 the Claimant requested that the Tribunal
schedule an oral hearing concerning the Respondent’s refusal to comply with
outstanding document production requests. Having received the Respondent’s
comments on 11 June 2010, the Tribunal rendered its First Production Order
Concerning the Claimant’s Request for Production and Related Questions, dated

17 June 2010.

On 15 October 2010, the Claimant filed its Memorial on the Merits.

On 8 November 2010, the Respondent filed a request for production of
documents. On 13 December 2010, the Claimant submitted observations to the
Respondent’s request objecting to the production of certain documents. By letter
of 30 December 2010, the Claimant wrote to draw the Tribunal’s attention to the

fact that the Respondent had failed to respond to the Claimant’s observations by

9

19.

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

23 December 2010, as required by the agreement for timing of the pleadings in
this matter. No response was received from the Respondent and the Claimant
requested that the Tribunal rule on the Claimant’s objections to the
Respondent’s document production request. The Respondent filed its response
subsequently. On 25 January 2011, the Tribunal rendered the Second Procedural
Order of the Tribunal Concerning the Respondent’s Request for Production of

Documents.

. THE RESPONDENT’S OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION

ion of the

 

On 27 April 2011, the due date for the Respondent’s submis
Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, the Respondent filed a request for a six-
week extension for filing of its jurisdictional objections. By letter of 28 April
2011, the Tribunal granted a four-week extension and determined that the
Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction should be submitted by 26 May 2011.
On the same date, the Respondent informed the Tribunal that the Parties had
agreed on a further extension of one week. The Tribunal confirmed the Parties’

agreement on 27 May 2011.

On 6 June 2011, the Respondent filed its Memorial on Jurisdictional

Objections and Request for Bifurcation.

On 9 September 2011, Claimant filed its Response to the Respondent’s

Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation.

On 13 September 2011, the Tribunal invited the Parties to indicate whether
they still wished to hold a hearing on the issue of bifurcation of the proceedings,
as initially contemplated at the First Session. On 20 September 2011, the
Respondent confirmed that it wished for a one-day hearing on bifurcation of the
proceeding. The Claimant asked the Tribunal to forgo the hearing but deferred

the decision to the Tribunal.

A hearing on the question whether to address the objections to jurisdiction as

a preliminary matter was held on 15 November 2011, in Washington, D.C.

The Parties were represented as follows:
10

20.

21.

22.

23.

24,

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

The Claimant

Mr. Arif H. Ali, Mr. Baiju Vasani, Ms. Marguerite C. Walter, and
Ms. Emily Alban, Crowell & Moring LLP;
Mr. Khaled El Shalakany, Shalakany Law Office, Cairo;

The Respondent
Dr. Karim Hafez, Dr. Dalia Hussein and Ms. Johanne Cox, Hafez, Cairo;
Ms. Fatma Khalifa and Mr. Amr Arafa, Egyptian State Lawsuits
Authority

On 22 November 2011, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3
Concerning Bifurcation of Certain Objections to Jurisdiction. The Tribunal
confirmed the Parties’ agreement at the hearing to bifurcate the proceedings into
a preliminary jurisdictional phase to precede the merits phase. In its Procedural
Order No. 3, the Tribunal outlined the jurisdictional objections to be decided in
the preliminary jurisdictional phase. The Tribunal also fixed a calendar for the

written pleadings and the hearing on the preliminary jurisdictional issues.

Pursuant to the filing calendar set forth in Procedural Order No. 3, on 19
January 2012, the Respondent filed a Reply to the Claimant’s Response to the

Objections to Jurisdiction.

On 15 March, 2012, the Claimant filed a Rejoinder to the Respondent’s

Objections to Jurisdiction.

A hearing on preliminary jurisdictional issues was held on 23, 24 and 25

March 2012, in Washington, D.C.

The Parties were represented as follows:

The Claimant

Mr. Arif H. Ali, Weil Gotshal & Manges LLP;

Mr. Baiju Vasani, Ms. Marguerite C. Walter, Ms. Emily Alban, and
Mr. Ki D. Tallent, Crowell & Moring LLP;

Dr. Khaled El Shalakany and Mr. Adam El Shalakany. Shalakany Law
Office;

 

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

The Respondent
Dr. Karim Hafez, Dr. Dalia Hussein and Ms. Johanne Cox, Hafez, Cairo;
Ms. Fatma Khalifa and Mr. Amr Arafa, Egyptian State Lawsuits
Authority

. DECISION ON JURISDICTION

On 5 June 2012, the Tribunal rendered its Decision on the Respondent’s
Objections to Jurisdiction. The Tribunal dismissed the Respondent’s
jurisdictional objections based on the Respondent’s ratione personae, ratione
temporis and equitable prescription arguments. The Tribunal also rejected the
Respondent’s jurisdictional objections based on the lack of ratione materiae
jurisdiction and joined the question of the validity of the Option to Buy to the
merits. The jurisdictional objections based on the fork-in-the-road provision of
the BIT were also joined to the merits. The Tribunal decided to reserve any
decision on the allocation of costs until the conclusion of the proceedings. The

Decision on Jurisdiction is incorporated herein by reference.

. SUBMISSIONS ON THE MERITS AND THE REMAINING JURISDICTIONAL ISSUES

On 13 June 2012, the Tribunal invited the Parties to propose a procedural
calendar for the remaining steps of the proceedings. By letter of 11 July 2012,
the Respondent requested a two-month extension for submission of its Counter-
Memorial on the Merits and Reply on Remaining Jurisdictional Issues. In its
letter, the Respondent suggested a revised procedural calendar. By letter of 19
July 2012, the Claimant indicated its agreement with the Respondent’ proposal
with a few amendments. On 25 July 2012, the Tribunal confirmed the Parties’

agreed schedule which was attached to the Claimant’s letter of 19 July 2012.

By letter of 23 August 2012, the Respondent informed the Tribunal of Dr.
Karim Hafez’s withdrawal as the Respondent’s counsel and requested a further
extension of the time limit for submission of its Counter-Memorial on the Merits.
On 27 August 2012, the Claimant indicated that it did not object to the

Respondent’s request for a further extension, but was of the view that any such
12

29.

=

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

extension should not exceed one month. On 29 August 2012, the Tribunal set

out a revised procedural calendar.

On 22 October 2012, the Respondent requested that the time limit for filing
of the Counter-Memorial on the Merits be extended until 28 March 2013. By
letter of 31 October 2012, the Claimant agreed on a further modification of the
procedural calendar by the Tribunal under the condition that the Respondent

made an appropriate showing of its substantial effort to appoint new counsel.

By letter of 7 November 2012, the Egyptian State Lawsuits Authority
confirmed that the Respondent was in the process of retaining Cleary Gottlieb
Steen & Hamilton LLP as counsel in this proceeding. The Respondent also
confirmed that, given the circumstances, it would be able to submit the Counter-

Memorial on the Merits by 28 March 2012.

By letter of 15 January 2013, the Claimant informed the Tribunal that the
Parties had jointly agreed and proposed to the Tribunal a revised procedural
calendar. The procedural calendar was subsequently adjusted due to further

requests for extension of time limits.

On 16 May 2013, the Respondent submitted its Counter-Memorial on the
Merits and a Reply on Remaining Jurisdictional Issues. On 1 August 2013, the
Claimant submitted its Reply on the Merits and a Rejoinder on Remaining
Jurisdictional Issues. On 11 October 2013, the Respondent submitted its

Rejoinder on the Merits.

HEARING ON THE MERITS AND THE REMAINING JURISDICTIONAL ISSUES

A pre-hearing organizational meeting was held by telephone conference on
14 October 2013. On 15 October 2012, the Tribunal ruled on certain outstanding

procedural matters.

The hearing on the merits and the remaining jurisdictional issues was held on

5, 6, 7 and 8 November 2013, in Washington, D.C.

13

34.

35.

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

The Parties were represented as follows:

The Claimant
Mr. Arif H. Ali and Ms. Marguerite C. Walter, Weil Gotshal & Manges

Mr. Clifton Elgarten, Ms. Kathryn Kirmayer, Ms. Jane Wessel, Ms.
Meriam Alrashid, Ms. Emily Alban, Ms. Amal Bouhabib, Ms. Randa
Adra, Ms. Derya Tokdemir, Mr. Ian Laird, Mr. John Shuler, Mr. Alex
Erines and Ms. Jasmine Dehghan-Dusch, Crowell & Moring LLP;

Dr. Khaled El Shalakany and Mr. Adam El Shalakany, Shalakany Law
Office;

The Respondent

Dr. Claudia Annacker, Mr. Robert T. Greig, Mr. J. Cameron Murphy, Mr.
Larry Work-Dembowski, Ms. Laurie Achtouk-Spivak, Dr. Affef Ben
Mansour, Mr. Sean McGrew, Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton, LLP;
Mr. Amr Arafa, Ms. Salma Mohy Eldin Khalid Elalaily and Ms.
Yasmine Mohamed Aziz Lotfy Shamekh, Egyptian State Lawsuits
Authority

At the end of the hearing, the President of the Tribunal requested that the
Parties prepare and present to the Tribunal submissions on costs by 25
November 2013. Subsequently, the Tribunal granted the Parties’ request for an

extension of this time limit until 9 December 2013.

. SUBMISSIONS ON COSTS AND THE CLOSING OF THE PROCEEDINGS

On 9 December 2013, each Party filed its submission on costs.

The Claimant seeks to recover fees and expenses for legal representation and
experts totaling USD 9,677,868.84 and reimbursement of its advance payment
of USD 450,000 for the direct costs of the arbitration and any further advance

payments that might need to be made.

The Respondent claims a total of USD 1,583,133.16 for legal and all other
costs, including the Respondent’s advance payment of USD 225,000 for the

direct costs of the arbitration.

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

39. On 15 January 2014, Claimant made an advance payment of USD 200,000
representing the outstanding amount of an advance payment due from

Respondent, following the default of the Respondent on that payment.

40. The Tribunal declared the proceedings closed on 12 March 2014.
Il. THE AGREEMENTS

A. THE OPTION TO BUY

B. THE MANAGEMENT AND OPERATION CONTRACT

45. fd

Iv. SUMMARY OF THE FACTS AND DISPUTE

66. On 17 July 2009, the Claimant filed the present ICSID proceedings.

Vv. THE REMAINING ISSUES TO BE DETERMINED AND THE PARTIES’
POSITIONS

A. THE OPTION TO BUY

Claimant’s Submission!

' See Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, {{145-162, pp. 81-90.
15

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

Respondent’s Submission”

79. fod

B. EXECUTION OF THE MOC
Claimant’s Submission*
94. The Claimant submits that it performed its obligations under the MOC:

a) Formation of H&H Enterprises (Egypt) and H&H

2 See Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction, 1938-63, pp. 16-20.
3 See Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, {{78-144, pp. 42-81.
16

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

e) The Respondent’s Arbitrary Treatment and Interference with the
Claimant’s Investment under the MOC Obstructed the Claimant’s
Ability to Perform under the MOC

Respondent’s Submission*

116. According to the Respondent, the Claimant failed to meet its obligations

under the MOC:

a) The Claimant Promised in the MOC to Improve the Existing Facilities
at the Hotel Site to a Four-Star Level and to Make a Minimum
Investment

b) The Claimant Failed to Improve the Existing Facilities as It Was
Required to Do under the MOC

c) The Claimant Failed to Invest the Minimum of L.E. 5 Million Required
under the MOC

d) The Claimant Failed to Pay Rent as Required under the MOC

137. fd

138. [...] According to the Respondent:

+ See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, {{{1 1-39, pp. 26-95; and Respondent’s Rejoinder on
the Merits, { 20-86, pp. 8-36.

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

i. GHE Handed Over the Hotel Site

ii. GHE Provided the Assistance for H&H’s Licensing Efforts
that the MOC Required, Even Though the Hotel Site Was
Never Entitled to a Permanent Operating License

 

 

GHE Did All That the Cairo Arbitral Tribunal Ordered It to
Do

C. ATTRIBUTION PRINCIPLE

Respondent’s Submission>

144. [...] In this regard, the Respondent submits the following:

a) GHE and EGOTH Are Not State Organs

 

b) GHE and EGOTH Are Not Empowered to and Did Not Exercise
Governmental Authority with Respect to the Allegedly Wrongful
Conduct

5 See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 178-215, pp. 71-85.
18

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

c) The Claimant Has Proffered No Evidence that EGOTH, GHE or the
Individuals Whose Conduct Is Alleged to Amount to a Breach of the US-
Egypt BIT Were Acting under the Instructions, Direction or Control of
the Respondent

Claimant’s Submission®

157. The Claimant submits the following:

a) Both GHE and EGOTH Are Owned and Controlled by the Respondent

 

b) The Ministry Controlled GHE and Made All of the Significant
Commitments to H&H

c) The Ministry of Tourism Directly Participated in the Destruction of
H&H’s Investment
D. CORRUPTION CLAIMS

Claimant’s Submission’

© See Claimant’ s Reply on the Merits, {{{172-203, pp. 89-102.
7 See Claimant’ s Reply on the Merits, (4204-209, pp. 103-105.
19

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

Respondent’s Submission®

 

VI. TREATY CLAIMS

A. THE RESPONDENT EXPROPRIATED THE CLAIMANT’S INVESTMENT WITHOUT
COMPENSATION

Claimant’s Submission’

182. [..]

a) The Claimant’s Rights Were Expropriated by Actions of the
Respondent

 

b) The Respondent Expropriated the Claimant’s Investment through an
Exercise of Sovereign Power

184. [...]
C.J
c) The Rights That Were Expropriated Were Valid under Applicable
Egyptian Law
191. [...]

d) The Respondent Neither Curbed Nor Cured the Bribery Solicitations

195. fd

8 See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 134-138, pp. 53-55.
° See Claimant’s Reply on the Merits, 4{{356-375, pp. 168-177; and Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits,
9256-266, pp. 134-138.

20

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award
e) The Expropriation Was Not Accompanied by the Payment of Prompt,
Adequate and Effective Compensation, Was Not Done for a Public
Purpose, Was Not Made under Due Process of Law and Was Arbitrary
and Discriminatory

Respondent’s Submission'°

200. The Respondent submits that the Claimant’s claim of expropriation fails for

the following reasons:

a) The Bulk of the Conduct Alleged to Be Expropriation Is Not
Attributable to the Respondent

201. fd

b) The Alleged Breaches of Contract Are Not Expropriatory Within the
Meaning of Article III of the US-Egypt BIT

c) The Contractual Rights That Do Not Exist under Applicable Local Law
or Were Properly Terminated by Local Courts in Application of Local
Law Cannot Be Expropriated

d) The Alleged Failure to Provide Relief for the Alleged Solicitation of
Bribes Did Not Cause the Deprivation of the Claimant’s Contractual
Rights to Manage and Operate the Hotel and, In Any Event, Has Not
Been Established

10 See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 49]244-258, pp. 97-104.
21

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

B. THE RESPONDENT HAS NOT PROVIDED AN ADEQUATE JUDICIAL SYSTEM TO
HEAR THE CLAIMANT’S CLAIMS, RESULTING IN A CLEAR DENIAL OF JUSTICE

Claimant’s Submission'!

209. fd

a) The Cairo Court of Appeals’ Decision Was a Denial of Justice

210. fd

b) The Court of Cassation’s Refusal to Entertain the Claimant’s Appeal
Constitutes a Failure of Due Process and a Denial of Justice

2. fd

c) The Respondent Failed to Provide Effective Means

213. fd

Respondent’s Submission!”

214. fd
L.-J

C. THE RESPONDENT VIOLATED ITS OBLIGATION TO PROVIDE FAIR AND
EQUITABLE TREATMENT TO THE CLAIMANT’S INVESTMENT

Claimant’s Submission'>

218. [...] In this regard, the Claimant claims the following:

41 See Claimant’s Reply on the Merits, ff 336-351, pp. 159-165.
"2 See the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 9261-276, pp. 105-110.
'3 See Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, {{267-281, pp. 138-145; and Claimant’s Reply on the Merits,
9 262-307, pp. 126-148.
22

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

a) The Respondent Is Obligated to Provide Fair and Equitable Treatment
to the Claimant’s Investment Pursuant to Article II(2)(a) of the US-
Egypt BIT

219. fd

C.J

b) The Claimant Had Legitimate Expectations Arising from the
Respondent’s Representations

 

Respondent’s Submission'*

238. The Respondent submits the following:

a) Article II of the Germany-Egypt BIT Is Not Applicable

b) The Claimant Has Failed to Establish That the Respondent Violated the
FET Standard or Impaired the Claimant’s Investment through
Arbitrary or Discriminatory Measures

4 See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, ff 288-314, pp. 118-129.
23

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

243. The Respondent submits that the Claimant’s FET claims fail as follows:

i. Claimant Has Failed to Establish That the Respondent Is
Responsible for the Bulk of the Conduct Complained of

244. [...]
ii. The Claimant Has Failed to Establish That the Respondent
Unfairly or Unreasonably Denied Operating Licenses to the
Resort
245. [...]
C.J

iii. The Claimant Has Failed to Establish That the Respondent
Frustrated Legitimate Expectations with Respect to the
Alleged Option to Buy

D. THE RESPONDENT IMPAIRED THE CLAIMANT'S INVESTMENT THROUGH
ARBITRARY AND/OR DISCRIMINATORY MEASURES

Claimant’s Submission'>

256. The Claimant claims that the Respondent breached its international law
obligation to refrain from impairing the Claimant’s investment through arbitrary

and discriminatory measures as follows:

a) The Respondent Impaired the Claimant’s Investment in Developing the
Resort through Arbitrary and Discriminatory Measures

'S See Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, {{311-318, pp. 159-163.
24

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

257. fod

b) The Respondent Impaired the Claimant’s Investment in the
Management and Operation of the Resort through Arbitrary and
Discriminatory Measures

258. [...]
Respondent’s Submission'®

a) Claimant Has Failed to Establish That the Respondent Is Responsible
for the Bulk of the Conduct Complained of

259. [J

b) The Claimant Has Failed to Establish That the Respondent Unfairly or
Unreasonably Denied Operating Licenses to the Resort

E. THE RESPONDENT BREACHED ITS MINIMUM STANDARD OBLIGATION

Claimant’s Submission'”

'6 See Respondent’s Counter Memorial on the Merits, {{297-307, pp. 121-125.

"7 See Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, {{ 341-347, pp. 171-173.

'S See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, $279-287, pp. 112-117.
25

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award
F. THE RESPONDENT VIOLATED ITS OBLIGATION TO OBSERVE OBLIGATIONS
ENTERED INTO WITH OTHER INVESTORS

Claimant’s Submission'?

Respondent’s Submission”

a) The Umbrella Clause Does Not Transform GHE’s or EGOTH’s
Contractual Obligations into the Respondent’s Contractual Obligations

b) In Any Event, the Claimant’s Umbrella Clause Claim Is without Merit

274.

 

LJ

Vil. RES JUDICATA

Respondent’s Submission”!

277. fd

a) The Actions and Legal Claims of Both GHE and the Claimant up to
1995 Were Litigated in the Cairo Arbitration

b) The Actions of GHE and the Claimant Were Further Litigated in
Proceedings before the Egyptian Courts Related to Enforcement and
Validity of the Cairo Arbitral Award

'® See Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, {{329-340, pp. 166-170.

2 See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, {9 279-287, pp. 112-117.

21 See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4141-161, pp. 56-63.
26

°)

284.
C.J

d)

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

The Actions of GHE and the Claimant Were Further Litigated in
Collateral Proceedings before the Egyptian Courts

Led

The Claimant Submitted to the Egyptian Courts Its Allegations about
EGOTH’s Purported Failure to Obtain the Ministry of Tourism’s
Approval of the December 1992 “Plan” and to Obtain an Operating
License for the Hotel

The Claimant Submitted Its Allegations Related to GHE’s Efforts to
Sell the Hotel Site in 1995 to the Egyptian Courts

Led

The Claimant’s Allegations about the Cairo Apartments Were
Submitted to the Egyptian Courts and Finally Resolved through a
Settlement

 

Claimant’s Submission?”

297.

a)

As to res judicata, the Claimant claims the following:

Res Judicata Does Not Bar the Claims in These Proceedings

22 See Claimant’s Reply Memorial on the Merits, (4131-165, pp. 71-86.
27

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

i. Decisions of Local Courts and Tribunals Are Not Entitled to
Res Judicata Effect in International Tribunals

298. fod

ii. The Respondent’s Reliance on Res Judicata Based on the
Effect of Decisions within the Domestic Legal Order Is
Misplaced

 

The Specific Candidates for the Application of Res Judicata in
the Present Case

305. The Claimant submits that the following three contexts are the ones in which
the Tribunal in the present case may consider that some respect may be due to

decisions by national tribunals.

a. The Rulings of the Cairo Arbitral Tribunal in Favor of
the Claimant on Issues of Contract Performance Are
Not Challenged by the Respondent

b. The Ruling of the Cairo Arbitral Award on the Option
to Buy Has No Application in the Present Proceedings

28

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

c. The 2001 Cairo Court of Appeals Decision is Largely
Irrelevant to the Issues Presented in This Case

VIII. THE TRIBUNAL LACKS JURISDICTION OVER THE BULK OF THE
CLAIMANT’S CLAIMS UNDER ARTICLE VII (3) OF THE US-EGYPT
BIT

Respondent’s Submission”

a) The Respondent Did Not Consent to Arbitrate Claims Submitted to the
Cairo Arbitral Tribunal or the Egyptian Courts
316. [...]
C.J

b) The Claimant Cannot Circumvent the Prerequisites of the Respondent’s
Consent to Arbitrate in the US-Egypt BIT through the Operation of the
Most-Favored Nation Clause

Claimant’s Submission”

a) Article VII’s Fork-In-The-Road Provisions Present No Jurisdictional
Bar to the Claimant’s Treaty Claims
329. [...] The Claimant claims the following:
i. The Fork-In-The-Road Provisions of Article VII Are Not

Triggered by the Presentation of Contract Disputes to
Domestic Tribunals

23 See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 49] 328-363, pp. 136-147.
24 See Claimant’s Reply Memorial on the Merits, 4 97-130, pp. 57-71.
29

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

ii. The Cairo Arbitration Did Not Trigger the Fork-In-The-Road
Provision of Article VII(3)(a)

 

The Fork-in-the-Road Does Not Apply to Disputes Brought
Against a Foreign Investor

IX. THE CLAIMANT’S IDENTITY

Respondent’s Submission?>

a) H&H-Egypt Is Neither Identical With Nor Legally Connected to the
Claimant

b) The [...] Partnership Is Neither Identical With Nor Legally Connected
to the Claimant

25 See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, ff 165-177, pp. 65-70.
2 See Claimant’s Reply Memorial on the Merits, 49] 404-405, pp. 191-192.
30

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

X. THE DECISION

354. On 5 June 2012, the Tribunal rendered its Decision on the Respondent’s

Objections to Jurisdiction?’ and decided as follows:

1. The Tribunal rejects Respondent’s jurisdictional objection based on ratione
materiae and joins the question of the validity of the option to buy to the

merits.

2. The Tribunal rejects Respondent’s jurisdictional objection based on ratione

temporis.

3. The Tribunal rejects Respondent’s jurisdictional objection based on ratione

personae.

4. The Tribunal joins Respondent’s jurisdictional objection based on the fork-

in-the-road clause to the merits.

5. The Tribunal rejects Respondent’s jurisdictional objection based on

equitable prescription.

355. Accordingly, the present Award deals with the jurisdictional issues joined to
the merits and, if and to the extent jurisdiction is found, the merits of the

Claimant’s claims.
A. FORK-IN-THE ROAD

356. The Tribunal first deals with the question of whether the fork-in-the-road
clause of the US-Egypt BIT could constitute a bar to its jurisdiction, or whether
the dispute resolution clause contained in the Germany-Egypt BIT, which does
not contain such a requirement, could be imported through the MFN clause
contained in Article II(2) of the US-Egypt BIT. Moreover, the Tribunal assumes
for purposes of deciding on the issue of the application of the fork-in-the-road
clause, that the acts of GHE and EGOTH are attributable to the State of Egypt

ona prima facie basis.

27 The Tribunal’s Decision on Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction, dated 5 June 2012.

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

357. The Claimant argues that the fork-in-the-road clause does not apply in the
present case by virtue of the MFN clause contained in Article II(2) therein, by
reference to the 2009 Germany-Egypt BIT, which does not contain such a
requirement.?®> The Respondent disagrees with the Claimant’s position, on the
basis, inter alia, that MFN clauses may not be used to incorporate arbitration
clauses from other investment treaties or circumvent the host State’s consent to
arbitrate.??

358. The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that the MFN clause contained in
the US-Egypt BIT cannot be used to avoid the application of the fork-in-the-
road clause contained therein. The Tribunal shares in this respect the view of
the tribunal in Plama v. Bulgaria, which noted that dispute resolution provisions
are separable from the remainder of the treaty and “constitute an agreement on
their own”; accordingly, “an MFN provision in a basic treaty does not
incorporate by reference dispute settlement provisions in whole or in part set
forth in another treaty unless the MFN provision in the basic treaty leaves no
doubt that the Contracting Parties intended to incorporate them.”*" However,
nothing in the wording of Article II(2) of the US-Egypt BIT indicates that the
Parties intended that provisions relating to dispute resolution be included within
its scope. Moreover, the Germany-Egypt BIT, on which the Claimant relies,
entered into force only on 22 November 2009, that is, after the Claimant
accepted the Respondent’s offer to arbitrate in its Request for Arbitration filed
on 17 July 2009. In these circumstances, the Tribunal concludes that the
application of the fork-in-the-road clause of the US-Egypt BIT cannot be

avoided in this case.

359. The Tribunal now turns to the question whether the fork-in-the-road clause

of the US-Egypt BIT constitutes a bar to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

360. The Tribunal notes, at the outset, that the basis for the Claimant’s Treaty

claims and its contractual claims, which are based on the Option to Buy and the

28 Claimant’s Response to Objections to Jurisdiction, 4{[246-249; and Claimant’s Rejoinder on Objections
to Jurisdiction, (9266-280.
29 Respondent’ s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 342-353.
30 Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 8 February 2005 [RA-240], (4212, 223.

32

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

MOC as well as

 

ociated correspondence, are fundamentally the same. These
claims were settled by the Cairo Arbitral Award, rendered in Cairo on 28

February 1995.

361. The Tribunal does not agree with the Claimant’s categorization of the
relation between the Treaty claims and the contractual claims as merely an

“overlap”.

362. The US-Egypt BIT contains a fork-in-the road provision (Article VII 3(a)),

which provides the following:

“In the event that the legal investment dispute is not resolved under
procedures specified above, the national or company concerned may
choose to submit the dispute to the International Centre for the
Settlement of Investment Disputes ("Centre") for settlement by
conciliation or binding arbitration, if, within six (6) months of the date
upon which it arose: (i) the dispute has not been settled through
consultation and negotiation; or (ii) the dispute has not, for any good
faith reason, been submitted for resolution in accordance with any
applicable dispute-settlement procedures previously agreed to by the
Parties to the dispute; or (iii) the national or company concerned has not
brought the dispute before the courts of justice or administrative
tribunals or agencies of competent jurisdiction of the Party that is a

Party to the dispute”.

363. The Claimant argues that the principal claims are only barred by a fork-in-
the-road clause when the claims in the domestic proceedings and the claims in
the international proceedings meet the triple identity test: the same parties, the

same object, and the same cause of action.

364. However, Article VII of the US-Egypt BIT does not expressly require that
the triple identity test be met before the fork-in-the-road provision can be

invoked. The triple identity test raised by the Claimant in this case is based on

33

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

its reading of arbitral jurisprudence as opposed to the specific language of the

US-Egypt BIT and/or its interpretation.

365. In order to decide whether the fork-in-the-road provision is triggered in the
present case, the Tribunal must interpret Article VII of the US-Egypt BIT. In
doing so, the Tribunal relies on the general rule of treaty interpretation in Article
31 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, which provides that a
“treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary
meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of

its object and purpose”.

366. Article VII 3(a) (ii) and (iii) provides that “[i]n the event that the legal
investment dispute is not resolved under procedures specified above, the
national or company concerned may choose to submit the dispute to the
International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes ("Centre") for
settlement by conciliation or binding arbitration, if, within six (6) months of the
date upon which it arose: [...] (ii) the dispute has not, for any good faith reason,
been submitted for lution in de with any applicable dispute-

settlement procedures previously agreed to by the Parties to the dispute; or (iii)

the national or company concerned has not brought the dispute before the

courts of justice or admini: i ibunals or ies of

jurisdiction of the Party that is a Party to the dispute” (emphasis added). It is

 

quite clear from the language of Article VII that the State parties provided for an
ICSID arbitration procedure only to the extent the dispute had not been
submitted to dispute settlement procedures agreed to by the Parties or to the
competent domestic courts. ICSID arbitration has not been intended as an
appeals process. In this case the dispute has been submitted to both previously
agreed dispute settlement procedures as well as to competent domestic courts, as

set out below.

367. Additionally, the Tribunal is of the view that the triple identity test is not the
relevant test as it would defeat the purpose of Article VII of the US-Egypt BIT,
which is to ensure that the same dispute is not litigated before different fora. It

would also deprive Article VII from any practical meaning. The Tribunal notes

34

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

that the triple identity test originates from the doctrine of res judicata. However,
investment arbitration proceedings and local court proceedings are often not
only based on different causes of action but also involve different parties. More
importantly, the language of Article VII does not require specifically that the
parties be the same, but rather that the dispute at hand not be submitted to other
dispute resolution procedures; what matters therefore is the subject matter of the
dispute rather than whether the parties are exactly the same. Finally, and in any
event, it would defeat the purpose of the Treaty and allow form to prevail over
substance if the respondents were required to be strictly the same because in

practice, local court proceedings are often brought against state instrumentalities

 

having a separate legal personality and not the state itself.>!_ This is also the
case here, and indeed both the Claimant and the Respondent consistently
considered, in the course of the Cairo Arbitration and Egyptian local
proceedings, GHE and EGOTH as being the competent parties to account for

these claims.

368. In the Tribunal’s view, therefore, instead of focusing on whether the causes
of actions relied upon in the claims brought to the local courts and the arbitration

are identical, one must assess whether the claims share the same fundamental

 

basis.

 

369. Accordingly, in order to decide whether the Claimant’s Treaty claims in the

present case are barred by the fork-in-the-road clause, the Tribunal must

 

as the

 

determine whether the Treaty claims have the same fundamental bas’

claims submitted before the local fora.

370. The “fundamental basis of the claim” test, first set out by the American
Venezuelan Mixed Commission in the Woodruff case (1903), was also adopted
in Pantechniki v. The Republic of Albania, where the Sole Arbitrator, Mr. Jan

Paulsson found that:

5! Jan Ole Vosse, The Impact of Investment Treaties on Contracts between Host States and Foreign
Investors, Martinus Nijhoff, 2011, p.291; the exact wording is: “/WJhilst the claim before local courts is
usually brought by a locally established subsidiary against a regional or local administrative authority,
the investment treaty claim is lodged by the foreign investor itself against the host State”.

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

“Its final submission [...] was that it was entitled to payment of
US$1,821,796 “because the Defendant had recognised and admitted that
this amount is due”. The logic is inescapable. To the extent that this prayer
was accepted it would grant the Claimant exactly what it is seeking before
ICSID — and on the same “fundamental basis”. The Claimant’s grievance
thus arises out of the same purported entitlement that it invoked in the
contractual debate it began with the General Roads Directorate. The
Claimant chose to take this matter to the Albanian courts. It cannot now
adopt the same fundamental basis as the foundation of a Treaty claim.
Having made the election to seise the national jurisdiction the Claimant is

no longer permitted to raise the same contention before ICSID”*?.

371. In the present arbitration, the Claimant’s expropriation claim is based on the
alleged interference by GHE with the Claimant’s rights under the MOC. The
Claimant contends that the Respondent obstructed the Claimant’s ability to
perform the MOC, refusing to accept the Claimant’s development plans and
preventing it from obtaining a permanent operating license, and finally
cancelling the MOC. The Claimant’s expropriation claim is also based on

GHE’s denial of the existence of the Option to Buy.

372. The Tribunal notes that the Cairo Arbitration** concerned (i) the Claimant’s
rights under the MOC; (ii) GHE’s alleged breach of the MOC by way of its
failure to accept the development plans; (iii) the failure of the Ministry of
Tourism to issue a permanent operating license as a result of GHE’s alleged
interference and instructions to the Ministry; (iv) GHE’s alleged right to revoke
the MOC and demand delivery of the Hotel and Land from the Claimant; and (v)
the Claimant’s alleged Option to Buy.

373. These claims were resolved by the Cairo Arbitral Tribunal in its Award

rendered on 28 February 1995, by which it decided among other things, that the

*? Pantechniki S.A. Contractors & Engineers v. Republic of Albania, \CSID Case No. ARB/07/21, Award,
30 July 2009 [RA-36], 167.
% Grand Hotels of Egypt v. H&H Enterprises, 28 February 1995, the Cairo Arbitral Award [RA-2].

36

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

Option to Buy did not exist under the applicable Egyptian law since the parties

had failed to agree on the essentialia negotti.

374. The Tribunal notes that the Claimant also initiated two proceedings in the
South Cairo Court of First Instance on | and 4 June 1995 respectively, claiming
damages for breach of the MOC based, inter alia, on GHE’s alleged refusal to
accept the Claimant’s development plans and interference with the licensing
process, and complaining of GHE’s failure to honor the alleged Option to Buy.
The Cairo Court of First Instance issued a judgment on 15 June 1997°4, which
the Claimant appealed to the Cairo Court of Appeals. The Cairo Court of
Appeals in its judgment of 30 April 2001° terminated the MOC on account of
the Claimant’s failure to perform its obligations under the MOC and the Cairo

Arbitral Award.

375. In addition, the Claimant sought an order from the South Cairo Court of First
Instance requesting that EGOTH be compelled to procure the Ministry of
Tourism’s approval of the December 1992 development plan, and the Ministry’s
issuance of an operating license. These claims were rejected on 27 December

1998.

376. The Tribunal considers that the Claimant’s expropriation claim and its claims
before the Cairo Arbitral Tribunal and the local courts share the same

fundamental bas

 

In both proceedings the Claimant alleged that GHE directly
interfered with the licensing process and instructed the Ministry of Tourism not
to issue a permanent license and further alleged that it had been denied its
Option to Buy. The expropriation claim is based on the alleged interference by
GHE with the licensing process and the denial of its Option to Buy. As
mentioned above, the Claimant’s claim before the Cairo Arbitral Tribunal and
the Egyptian local courts were based on GHE’s alleged refusal to accept the
Claimant’s development plans and interference with the licensing process, and

complaining of GHE’s failure to honor the alleged Option to Buy. The bases of

*4 South Cairo of First Instance, Civil Circuit, Claims Nos. 5451-5549/1995 & No.1963/1996 [RA-3].
+5 Cairo Court of Appeal Claims Nos. 9331/2001 and 9487/2001 [RA-4].
37

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

both the expropriation and the contractual claims are therefore fundamentally the

same.

377. It is also important to note that the Claimant’s expropriation claim does not
have an autonomous existence outside the contract. The Claimant’s
expropriation claim is in reality based on an alleged violation of Articles 2.7, 2.1

and 3.5 of the MOC. As set out by the Sole Arbitrator in Pantechniki v. Albania,

“[the] arbitration cannot proceed on a contractual basis for the simple
reason that ICSID jurisdiction must be founded on the Treaty. [...] Yet
there comes a time when it is no longer sufficient merely to assert that a
claim is founded on the Treaty. The Tribunal must determine whether the
claim truly does have an autonomous existence outside the contract.
Otherwise the Claimant must live with the consequences of having

elected to take its grievance to the national courts”. *

378. For these reasons, the Tribunal finds that the fork-in-the-road clause in
Article VII 3(a) of the US-Egypt BIT is triggered in the present case and bars the
Claimant from pursuing its expropriation claim before the present Arbitral
Tribunal. This also applies to the Claimant’s expropriation claim insofar as it is
based on an alleged lack of support of, and/or failure to intervene by, the
Ministry of Tourism. These allegations share fundamentally the same factual
basis as, and therefore cannot be considered separable from, the Claimant’s

claims against GHE and EGOTH.

379. Similarly, the breaches that allegedly violate the FET standard — the breach
of the Option to Buy, failure to accept the development plans, failure to assist
the Claimant in obtaining licenses as result of GHE’s alleged interference and
instructions to the Ministry of Tourism — were raised as counterclaims by the
Claimant both in the Cairo Arbitration and before the Egyptian local courts.
Moreover, the Claimant’s complaints regarding the Respondent’s purported

refusal to accept the Option to Buy were also raised before the Cairo Arbitral

3 Pantechniki S.A. Contractors & Engineers v. Republic of Albania, \CSID Case No. ARB/07/21, Award,
30 July 2009 [RA-36], 164.
38

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

Tribunal and the Egyptian local courts. In fact the Egyptian local courts did not
decide on this issue, on the basis that it had been held by the Cairo Arbitral

Tribunal that the Option to Buy did not exist.

380. The same reasoning applies to the Claimant’s Observation of Obligations
claim, its Arbitrary and/or Discriminatory Treatment claim as well as the
Minimum Standard of Treatment claim. The Claimant claims that the
Respondent systematically rejected all of the Claimant’s development plans and
refused to grant it a permanent operating license based on GHE’s objections,
which according to the Claimant constitutes a discriminatory and arbitrary
measure under the US-Egypt BIT, and is also in breach of the Respondent’s
Observations of Obligations and the Minimum Standard of Treatment provisions
of the Treaty. As it has been demonstrated throughout the proceedings by the
Claimant itself, the Cairo Arbitration concerned among other things GHE’s
alleged breach of the MOC by its failure to accept the development plans, and
the failure of the Ministry of Tourism to issue a permanent operating license on
the basis of GHE’s alleged interference and instructions to the Ministry.
Additionally, the Egyptian local proceedings, all in which the Claimant was an
active participant, were based on inter alia, GHE’s alleged refusal to accept the

Claimant’s development plans and its interference with the licensing process.

381. Once again, the Tribunal observes that these treaty claims have the same
fundamental basis and share the same factual components as the claims filed

before the Cairo Arbitral Tribunal and the Egyptian local courts.

382. The Tribunal cannot accept claims which are fundamentally based on the
very same facts and, contrary to what the Claimant alleges, on the very same
contract relied upon by the Claimant in support of the claims submitted before
the Cairo Arbitral Tribunal and Egyptian local courts. Accepting the Claimant’s

argument would deprive Article VII 3(a) of the Treaty of any meaning and effect.

39

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

383. The Tribunal also agrees with the Respondent’s argument*” that where, as in
the present arbitration, jurisdiction is allegedly based on the conduct of an entity
with legal personality separate from the respondent State — pursuant to a prima
facie standard that there is a dispute with the respondent State — the same
standard must apply to the tribunal’s assessment of all jurisdictional conditions
and limitations, including a fork-in-the-road clause. This position is reinforced

by the Arbitral Tribunal in Helnan v. Arab Republic of Egypt*® which held that:

“[...] it is HELNAN’s position that the initiation of the Cairo arbitration
proceedings is one of EGYPT’s breaches of its obligations to provide fair
and equitable treatment to the investors. Thus it is not without some
contradiction that HELNAN relies on the own legal personality of
EGOTH, distinct from the Egyptian State, for the sole purpose of denying

the alleged res judicata effect of the Cairo Award”.

384. Whether or not the Respondent was per se a party to the local arbitration, the
Claimant is not permitted to re-litigate issues that were submitted for resolution
to the Cairo Arbitral Tribunal and the Egyptian Courts. Such a finding does not
contradict, for the reasons set out below and those advanced by the Respondent
at the Hearing,*? the Respondent’s position that GHE and EGOTH are not State

entities.

 

385. In conclusion, the fork-in-the-road provision has been triggered in the
present case, and as a consequence the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to decide on

the Claimant’s above-mentioned treaty claims.

386. Also, as a consequence of the operation of the fork-in-the road clause, the
Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to decide on the validity of the Option to

Buy.

and

 

387. In any event, with respect to Claimant’s

omissions of GHE and EGOTH, the Tribunal considers that GHE and EGOTH

 

aims resulting from the ac

37 The Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, (381, p.166.
38 Helnan International Hotels A/S v. Arab Republic of Egypt, 1CSID Case No. ARB/05/19, Award, 3 July
2008 [RA-124], (127.
HT, 8 November 2013, p. 987, 988.
40

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

are commercial companies with a separate legal identity and, as such, do not
constitute State organs even if they are owned by the State. In order for the
Respondent to be responsible for the conduct of GHE and EGOTH, the latter
must have been granted the right to exercise public powers (puissance publique),
and the claims must have arisen out of the alleged exercise of such powers.‘°
The Claimant has failed to provide evidence of either in the present arbitration.
The Tribunal concludes therefore that the Respondent in any event cannot be
held liable for the conduct of GHE and EGOTH, which is not attributable to the

State.

B. THE CORRUPTION CLAIMS

388. Concerning the corruption claims, the Tribunal notes that these claims have
not been brought before the Cairo Arbitral Tribunal or the Egyptian local courts,
and consequently are not excluded by the fork-in-the-road provision. The

Tribunal has therefore jurisdiction to decide on the corruption claims.

389. In this regard, the Claimant argues that the Respondent refuses to address
the issue of the unlawful solicitations made by the GHE and EGOTH officials
within the fair and equitable treatment standard. But according to the Claimant,
these bribery solicitations demonstrate the complete failure of the Respondent’s
State apparatus to protect and defend H&H’s legitimate expectation of a fair
legal framework for its investment. The Claimant claims that “exercising a
State’s discretion on the basis of corruption is a fundamental breach of

transparency and legitimate expectations”.

390. The Tribunal is of the view that the corruption allegations are a very serious
matter, particularly against government officials, as they involve criminal
conduct and therefore cannot be taken lightly. By the same token, because of the

gravity of such allegations, the evidentiary threshold must be high.

391. The Tribunal has reviewed carefully the evidence presented by the Claimant
which includes the statements made by [...], and which the Claimant filed to
4° “Report of the Commission to the General Assembly on the Work of its Fifty Third Session”, Yearbook

of the International Law Commission, UN Doc. A/CN.4/SER.A/2001/Add.1 (Part 2), 2001, p. 39.
41

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

support its corruption allegations against the State of Egypt. The Claimant has

argued throughout the proceedings that the Respondent failed to take any

  

measures against the bribery solicitations made by GHE and EGOTH officials.
However, the Tribunal finds that the Claimant failed to satisfy the burden of
proof because the evidence presented, in the view of the Tribunal fail to support
the corruption claims against the Respondent, and there is no evidence that the
solicitations are attributable to the State. In any event and as concluded in

paragraph 389 above, there can be no liability by the Respondent since the
conduct GHE and EGOTH is not attributable to the State.

392. Moreover, even if the Tribunal were to assume for the sake of argument that
the corruption claims stand and it is established that the Respondent failed to
take the necessary measures against the bribery solicitations, the Tribunal
concludes that these corruption claims would not constitute a breach of the US-
Egypt BIT. Even if the Tribunal were to accept the Claimant’s allegations of

corruption at face value, they do not support a claim for a breach of the Treaty.

393. The Claimant must establish that the bribe solicitations resulted in the
deprivation of its investment, which in the view of the Tribunal the Claimant has

failed to do.

394. The Claimant not only claims that bribery solicitations were made by GHE
and EGOTH officials, but it also alleges that the Respondent did not take the
necessary steps to curb the actions of these officials - which is fundamentally
the basis for the Claimant’s Corruption claims — and, as a consequence, the

Claimant allegedly was not able to realize its investment.

395. The Claimant’s Corruption claim raises the issue of whether the required
causal link exists between the alleged bribery and the Claimant’s loss of its
investment. The evidence does not appear to establish any such link, and the
Claimant does not appear to have alleged that the solicitation of bribes by GHE
officials was linked with the difficulties the Claimant experienced in its attempts
to obtain the operating license and to have the development plan approved. In
other words, the Claimant does not appear to have alleged, and there is no
evidence, that GHE and EGOTH officials intentionally created difficulties for

42

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

the Claimant, in order to put themselves in a position to solicit bribes in
exchange of removing those difficulties. Also, while the Claimant argues that
the Ministry of Tourism, as the competent supervisory authority, failed to take
effective measures to repair the damage caused, it appears that the two
individuals concerned were removed from their positions, and there does not
appear to be sufficient evidence of a causal link between the bribery solicitation

and the Claimant’s loss of its investment.

396. Notwithstanding the Tribunal’s finding that the fork-in-the-road provision
was triggered in the present case in relation to most of the Claimant’s claims, it
has been demonstrated during the proceedings and through the Parties’ own
submissions and evidence that the Claimant was unable to realize its investment
for reasons of its own inability to fulfill its obligations under the MOC, which
included among other things improving the existing facilities and the Hotel to a
four-star standard. One of the reasons behind the Ministry of Tourism’s refusal
to grant the Claimant a permanent operating license that would have permitted
the Claimant to continue its investment on the Resort was that, as demonstrated
by the evidence, the Claimant failed to meet the required conditions to obtain a

permanent operating license.

397. The Tribunal is not persuaded by the Claimant’s argument that the bribe
solicitations had deprived the Claimant of its investment, since there is no
proven connection between the corruption allegations and the Claimant’s alleged
deprivation from its investment. For this, the Claimant would have needed to
demonstrate, as the Tribunal pointed out at the Hearing,*! that the bribes in
question were solicited to undo wrongful acts adverse to the Claimant, as
opposed to undo rightful acts adverse to the Claimant. Yet, this was not

established by the Claimant.

398. Furthermore, the Claimant alleges the solicitation of bribes by GHE and
EGOTH officials, but on the Claimant’s own case, the Respondent has
investigated the alleged bribery attempts by GHE and EGOTH officials reported
by [...], which resulted in the forced retirement of the GHE and EGOTH officials

41 HT, 6 November 2013, pp. 497-498.
43

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

concerned. There are no allegations of damage sustained in the meantime, and

thus here again no causation demonstrated.

399. In other words, assuming for the sake of argument that the conduct of GHE
and EGOTH officials were attributable to the State, this would still not be
sufficient to hold the Respondent liable therefor in the absence of a proven

causal link between the alleged breach and the damage.

C. DENIAL OF JUSTICE AND DENIAL OF EFFECTIVE MEANS

400. As to the Claimant’s allegation of denial of justice and denial of effective
means, the Tribunal points out that its role is not to correct procedural or
substantive errors that might have been committed by the local courts in Egypt.
As explained by Jan Paulsson in his book Denial of Justice in International
Law*, the international obligation on states is not to create a perfect system of
justice but a system of justice where serious errors are avoided or corrected. The
Tribunal also stresses that the evidentiary threshold to establish a claim of denial

of justice is high.

401. In the present proceedings, the Claimant claims that the Cairo Court of
Appeals decided in 2001 that only the Claimant’s claims were res judicata, but
that the same principle did not apply to GHE recession claims, and on this basis
the Cairo Court of Appeals held itself free to determine GHE’s claim seeking the
termination of the MOC.

402. The Tribunal refers to the definition of denial of justice in Article 9 of the
Harvard Law School Draft Convention on the Law of the Responsibility of
States for Damages Done in Their Territory to the Person or Property of

Foreigners:

“A state is responsible if an injury to an alien results from a denial of
justice. Denial of justice exists when there is a denial, unwarranted delay

or obstruction of access to courts, gross deficiency in the administration

* Jan Paulsson, Denial of Justice in International Law, Cambridge University Press, 2005, p. 306.

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

of judicial or remedial process, failure to provide those guarantees which
are generally considered indispensable in the proper administration of
justice, or a manifestly unjust judgment. An error of a national court

which does not produce manifest injustice is not a denial of justice”.

403. The Tribunal is of the view that the Claimant has failed to prove that the
decision of the Cairo Court of Appeals amounted to a denial of justice. Even if
the Tribunal were to assume for the sake of argument that the decision was as
erroneous and defective as the Claimant claims, the Claimant has failed to prove
that the decision of the Cairo Court of Appeals was “manifestly unjust”, or that
there had been a “gross deficiency” in the administration of the process,
resulting in a denial of justice. The evidence presented by the Parties, including
the Claimant’s own submissions confirm, if anything, that the Claimant had the
opportunity not only to participate in the local proceedings but also to present its

claims and counterclaims.

404. The Tribunal finds support for its decision in the interpretation of denial of
justice in the ICSID case Liman Caspian Oil BV and NCL Dutch Investment BV
v. Republic of Kazakhstan, where the Tribunal concluded “that Respondent
can only be held liable for denial of justice if Claimants are able to prove that
the court system fundamentally failed. Such failure is mainly to be held
established in cases of major procedural errors such as lack of due process. The
substantive outcome of a case can be relevant as an indication of lack of due

process and thus can be considered as an element to prove denial of justice”.

405. Concerning the delay by the Court of Ca:

 

tion as a bi for a denial of

 

justice claim, the Tribunal notes that neither the Treaty nor international law
establishes fixed time limits. This position was reinforced by the arbitral tribunal
in Toto Costruzioni Generali S.p.A. v. Republic of Lebanon, which was referred
to by the Claimant*‘. The tribunal rightly stated that “[iJt has to be conceded

that international law has no strict standards to assess whether court delays are

+3 Liman Caspian Oil BV and NCL Dutch Investment BV v. Republic of Kazakhstan, YCSID Case No.
ARB/07/14, Award, 22 June 2010 (Excerpts) [RA-224], 279.
* Toto Costruzioni Generali S.p.A. v. Republic of Lebanon, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/12, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 11 September 2009 [CLA- 87], {155 and 163.

45

XI.

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

a denial of justice. [...] In fact, whether justice is rendered within a reasonable

delay depends on the circumstances and the context of the case”.

406. It appears in the present case that the Claimant did not actively pursue its
claim before the Court of Cassation filed in 2001 until its withdrawal in 2010.
The Claimant has failed to provide any evidence to the contrary, and has also

ition had

 

failed to prove that the delay in the proceedings of the Court of C:
caused any of the losses claimed by the Claimant. In the circumstances, the
Tribunal finds that this delay does not amount to a denial of justice. The same

reasoning applies to the Claimant’s claim for denial of effective means.

COSTS

407. Both Parties have claimed costs in this arbitration and filed short
submissions quantifying their fees and costs. Article 61(2) of the ICSID

Convention provides:

“In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as the parties
otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the parties in connection with
the proceedings, and shall decide how and by whom those expenses, the fees and
expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the
facilities of the Centre shall be paid. Such decision shall form part of the

award”.

408. The Claimant seeks reimbursement of USD 8,301,882.51 in costs of legal

representation and USD 803,988.33 in other costs, USD 571.998 in costs of

 

experts, as well as reimbursement of its advance payment of USD 450,000 for
the costs of arbitration and any further advance payments that might need to be

made.

409. The Respondent claims USD 1,035,911.79 in costs of legal fees and
expenses, USD $279,893.22 in expert fees and expenses and USD 40,328.15 in
other costs, as well as reimbursement of its advance payment of USD 225,000

for the costs of arbitration.

46

410.

411.

412.

413.

414.

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

The Tribunal notes that the Claimant was partially successful in the
preliminary jurisdictional phase of the proceedings on the issues of jurisdiction
ratione materiare, ratione temporis, ratione personae and equitable prescription.
On the other hand, the Claimant has failed to prove that all of its claims are not
fundamentally different from claims already brought in other proceedings, and
therefore not barred by the fork-in-the-road clause. The Claimant also failed to

succeed on its corruption and denial of justice claims.

The Tribunal also notes that the Parties have argued their positions and filed

their submissions diligently and in good faith throughout the proceedings.

The Tribunal decides, based on the above considerations, that each Party

shall bear its own legal expenses and costs.

In relation to the direct costs and expenses of the arbitration, the Tribunal
notes that by letter of 11 April 2012, the Centre requested each Party to make an
advance payment in the amount of USD 200,000. On 28 May 2012, the Centre
received the Claimant’s share in the amount of USD 200,000 as payment for its
share of the third request for funds. On 28 October 2013 and following several
reminders, the Respondent informed the Centre that due to the current situation
in Egypt the Respondent was unable to pay its share of the advance payment. In
light of the Respondent’s default of payment, the Centre, in accordance with
Regulation 14(3)(d) of the ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulations,
invited either Party to proceed with the payment of the outstanding amount. On
17 January 2014, the Centre confirmed receipt of USD 200,000 from the

Claimant as payment of the Respondent’s share.

In light of the outcome of the Award and since the Respondent has been
successful on all the claims on the merits, the Tribunal decides that the
Respondent shall bear direct costs of this arbitration proceeding in the amount of
USD 225,000. The remaining direct costs of the proceeding shall be borne by

the Claimant.

47

XII.

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

AWARD

415. For the forgoing reasons the Tribunal decides as follows:

(a) The Tribunal has no jurisdiction over the Claimant’s claims, with the exception
of the Corruption claim, the Denial of Justice claim and the Denial of Effective

Means claim;

(b) Accordingly, all of the Claimant’s claims with the exception of the Corruption
claim, the Denial of Justice claim and the Denial of Effective Means claim are

dismissed for lack of jurisdiction;

(c) The Claimant’s claim for Corruption is dismissed on the merits;

(d) The Claimant’s claims for Denial of Justice and Denial of Effective Means are

dismissed on the merits;

(e) The Claimant and the Respondent shall each bear their own costs in full, without

recourse to each other; and

(f) The Respondent shall bear direct costs of this arbitration proceeding in the
amount of USD 225,000. The remaining direct costs of the proceeding shall be

borne by the Claimant.

48

HA&H Enterprises Investments, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
Excerpts of Award

The Tribunal

[signed]

Dr. Bernardo M. Cremades
President

Date: 30 April 2014

 

[signed] [signed]
Dr. Hamid G. Gharavi Dr. Veijo Heiskanen
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Date: 28 April 2014 Date: 25 April 2014

