Case 1:16-cv-00140-RC Document 1-9 Filed 01/28/16 Page 1 of 8

Exhibit 7

Case 1:16-cv-00140-RC Document 1-9 Filed 01/28/16 Page 2 of 8

BEFORE THE HON’BLE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

Hon’bie Mr. Justice S.P. Bharucha [Former Chief Justice of India],
Presiding Arbitrator

Hon’ble Mr. Justice G.B. Pattanaik [Former Chief Justice of India],

Arbitrator
Hon’ble Mr. Justice V.N. Khare [Former Chief Justice of India],
Arbitrator
Between
Hardy Exploration & Production (India) Inc, nnn el Claimant
and

Government of India, Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas

Nn

 

ISSUES

 

. Whether the PSC does not cover disputes regarding exploration alone?

. Whether the disputes raised in the of claim are matters and

 

outside the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal

. Does the nature of the discovery in the block CY-OS/2 qualify under the terms of the

Production Sharing Contract (“PSC”) as Non- Associated Natural Gas (“NANG”)?

. Is the claimant entitled to the time period under article 21.4.4 of the PSC for declaring

commerciality of such discovery under the PSC?

. a) Is the Claimant entitled to extension of time under the PSC for the purpose of completing

the appraisal work programme?

b) If so, was the same wrongfully denied by the Respondent?

. Was the decision of the Respondent in relinquishing the block CY-OS/2, solely in terms of

Article 9.5 of the PSC, in accordance with the terms of the PSC?

Is the Claimant entitled to any compensation?

. To what relief is the Claimant entitled to?

Is the Claimant entitled to costs?

Dated on this the 17" day of February 2011.

Presiding Arbitrator

 

   

Case 1:16-cv-00140-RC Document 1-9 Filed 01/28/16 Page 3 of 8

 

ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL
Consists of

Justice S. P. BHARUCHA |: Former Chief Justice of Supreme Court of India
Presiding Arbitrator

Justice G. B. PATNAIK : Former Chief Justice of Supreme Court of India
Co — Arbitrator

Justice V. N. KHARE : Former Chief Justice of Supreme Court of India
Co — Arbitrator

In the matter of Arbitration Dispute between:

Mé Hardy Exploration & Production India (Inc.): Claimant
Versus

Government of India, Ministry of Petroleum &

Natural Gas Respondent

28" May, 2011

At the behest of the Respondent, Government of India, Ministry of
Petroleum and Natural Gas) two issues were framed being Issue No.I & 2 and
those two issues were argued as preliminary issues, since it was contended that
the disputes raised are excepted matters and therefore outside the jurisdiction of
Arbitral Tribunal. On 16" of May, 2011, Mr. Jagjit Singh, Learned Counsel for
the Respondent was heard and on behalf of the Claimant Learned Counsel Mr.

Sudipto Sarkar was heard. The Tribunal passed the order as under:

“Heard Learned Counsel for the parties on issues (Nos. I and 2)
which were to be tried as preliminary issues. They are answered
in the negative and against the Respondent. Accordingly, the
Tribunal has jurisdiction to entertain and try the disputes raised
in the Statement of Claim. Detailed reasons for this conclusion
shall follow”

Since the detailed reasons in support of the aforesaid order was to be given later,

this order is being passed.

 

Sf

 

Case 1:16-cv-00140-RC Document 1-9 Filed 01/28/16 Page 4 of 8

: two:

The only relevant pleading in Written Statement in this connection is to
the effect that “alleged disputes are excepted matters outside the purview of the
Arbitral Tribunal in terms of Article 5.4 and 5.5 of the Production Sharing
Contract”. The other relevant portion, which was also brought out by way of
amendment is to the effect that “Arbitration Agreement contained in Production
Sharing Contract covers areas explicit and commercial discovery, said clause can
not cover areas of exploration alone”. The relevant Arbitration Clause is Clause
33 and for our purpose sub-articles 1, 2 & 3 are relevant, which are quoted here

under in extenso:

33.1. The Parties shall use their best efforts to settle amicably all disputes,
differences or claims arising out of or in connection with any of the terms
and conditions of this Contract including the validity and existence hereof
or concerning the interpretation or performance thereof.

33.2. Matters which, by the terms of this Contract, the Parties have agreed to
refer to a sole expert and any other matters which the Parties may agree to
so refer shall be submitted to an independent and impartial person of
international standing with relevant qualifications and experience,
appointed by agreement between the Parties. Any sole expert appointed
Shall be acting as an expert and not as an arbitrator and the decision of
the sole expert on matters, referred to him shall be final and binding on
the Parties and not subject to arbitration.

If the Parties fail to agree on the sole expert, then the sole expert shall be
appointed, upon request by one of the Parties, by the Secretary General of
the Permanent Court of Arbitration at the Hague, from amongst persons
who are not nationals of the countzies of any of the Parties.

33.3 Subject to the provisions herein, the Parties hereby agree that any
unresolved dispute, difference or claim which cannot be settled amicably within a
reasonable time may except for those referred to in Article 33.2, be submitted top
an arbitral tribunal for final decision as hereinafter provided”.

Mr. Singh, Learned Counsel for the Respondent referred to Article 5 & 9
of the Production Sharing Contract and contended that those provisions can not

be invoked for invoking Arbitration Clause. Mr. Singh also contended that

 

 

(0140-RC Document 1-9 Filed 01/28/16 Page 5 of 8

: three :

though there is no specific clause in the contract stipulating that it is the
Managing Committee who has to decide as to what is discovered is whether
NANG as contended by the Claimant or Crude Oil as found by the Department,
the intention is apparent from a reading of Clause 5.4 that it is the Managing
Committee who has to decide the question and that decision is supposed to be
Final, as agreed to by the parties. The Learned Counsel specifically referred to

Article 5.5 (b), which says “proposals for the declaration of a Disco very as a

 

Ce ial Dis ry and the app l of D IE Plans as may be
required under this Contract, or revisions or additions to a Development Plan”.
According to Mr. Singh having regard to the powers and duties of the
Management Committee enshrined in Article 5 and the procedure indicated in
Article 9 when a Discovery is made within the contract area, it is explicit that
Parties agreed that decision of the Management Committee on the question of the
nature of Discovery is to be regarded as final and any dispute pertaining to it
must be held to be an excepted matter and as such beyond the purview of the

Arbitration Clause.

Mr. Sarkar, Learned Counsel appearing for the Claimant on the other
hand drew our ion to the in paragraph 10 of the St of
Claim and reply there on by the Respondent in the Statement of Defence. The
Learned Counsel contended that there is no provision in the contract conferring
power and jurisdiction on the Management Committee to decide the subject
matter of the Discovery, as to whether it is NANG or Crude Oil and Article 5 on
which the reliance is placed by the Learned Counsel for the Respondent merely
provides for some matters required to be submitted to Management Committee for
approval. That apart, the Counsel says that Sub-Article (b) refers to proposal of
declaration of a discovery as a commercial discovery, which is not at all the

subject matter of the dispute in the present case and would arise only at a later

 

i

 

3

Case 1:16-cv-00140-RC Document 1-9 Filed 01/28/16 Page 6 of 8

: four :

stage and in this view of the matter and having regard to the provisions of Article

33.1, the present dispute can not be held to be an excepted matter.

The crux of the dispute in the present case is whether the discovery made
by the Claimant is NANG, as contended by the Claimant, and in which case the
period of 60 months would be available for finding out the commercial viability of
the product or the discovery is only Crude Oil, as held by the Director, Hydro
Carbons and in which case shorter period of 24 months is available to find out
the commercialability of the product. From a bare reference to Article 33 (2)
and (3), referred to earlier, it is crystal clear that all disputes and differences
except those referred to Article 33.2 are arbitrable and have to be submitted to
Arbitral Tribunal for final decision. Reading Sub Article 2 of Article 33 we are
unable to come to the conclusion that the dispute in the present case is covered by
that Sub Article and in fact Mr. Singh appearing for the Respondent fairly stated
that it is not covered by 33.2, but it would come within the ambit of 5.4 and Article
9 of the contract and therefore would be held to be not arbitrable. Examining
the provisions of Article 5.5 (b) as well as Article 9 we are unable to accept the
submission made by Mr. Singh for the Respondent and agreeing with the
submission of Mr. Sarkar, Learned Counsel appearing for the Claimant, we hold
that the said article provides for certain matters to be submitted to the
Management Committee for approval and (b) refers to proposal for declaration of
discovery as commercial discovery and that stage has not yet reached in the case
in hand. The present dispute, which we have quoted earlier, can not therefore
be held to be an excepted matter within the ambit of Article 33.2 nor there is any
clause in the contract conferring any decision making power either to the
Management Committee or the Director of Hydro Carbons to hold that what was
discovered is crude oil and not NANG. Consequently, a dispute between the
parties as to the nature of the product of discovery is neither covered under

Article 33.2 or nor any other provisions of the contract. Since neither under

 

   

Case 1:16-cv-00140-RC Document 1-9 Filed 01/28/16 Page 7 of 8

: five:

33.2 nor under any other provisions of the contract such a decision making power
is provided either with the Management Committee or with the Director of Hydro
Carbons, the dispute can not be held to be outside the purview of Arbitration
Clause and consequently the Tribunal holds it has the jurisdiction to decide the
dispute on merits. We make it clear we have not expressed any opinion on the

merits of the dispute.

My Co- Ab hatnetvowe apdtd amd Pigred :

Justice V.N. KHARE Justice G. B. PATNAIK Justice S. P. BHARUCHA
Co - Arbitrator Co — Arbitrator Presiding Arbitrator

cc;

i Mr. Sunil J. Mathews,
Advocate,
114, Lawyers’ Chambers,
R. K. Jain Block,
Supreme Court of India,
NEW _ DELHI - 110 001

2 Mr. Jagjit Singh,
Advocate,
303, Lawyers’ Chambers,
High Court of Delhi
Sher Shah Road,
NEW DELHI —110 003

3. Ms. Simran Dhir,
H. O. D. (Legal),
Directorate General of Hydrocarbons,
(under Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas),
C-139, Sector — 63,
NOIDA-—201 301

 

 

i

Case 1:16-cv-00140-RC Document 1-9 Filed 01/28/16 Page 8 of 8

Hon’ble Mr. Justice S. P. Bharucha,
Former Chief Justice of India,

C/o Maneksha & Sethna,

Raja Bahadur Mansion,

I® Floor, A. Doshi Marg,

(8, Hamam Street),

FORT -MUMBAY — 400 023

Hon’ble Mr. Justice V. N. Khare,
Former Chief Justice of India,
B-247, Sector — 26,
NOIDA~201 301

