ho

HELNAN INTERNATIONAL HOTELS A/S

Decision of the ad hoc Committee

Judge Stephen M. Schwebel (President)

Professor Campbell McLachlan QC.

Representing the Applicant:

Mr. Michael P. Lennon, Jr.
Mr. Alejandro Escobar
Ms. Ania Farren

Baker Botts (UK) LLP
London, England

Mr. Jay Alexander
Baker Botts LLP
Washington D.C., U.S.A.

Mr. Peter Griffin
Slaney Advisors
London, England

ICSID Case No ARB/05/19

 

and
ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

{Annulment Proceeding)

Members of the Committee

Judge Bola Ajibola

Secretary of the Committee

Natali Sequeira

Representing the Respondent:

Mr. Jan Paulsson

Applicant

Respondent

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer

Paris, France

Councillor Sidky Kalousy
Councillor Anmed Saad
State Lawsuits Authority
Cairo, Egypt

Mr. Karim Hafez
HAFEZ
Cairo, Egypt

Date of dispatch to the parties: June 14, 2010

Table of Contents

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

LP ‘al History 3
I. 9) 4
Ill. Treaty quences of plan to it the Contract. 6
(a) __Helnan’s case. 6
(b) ~ Egypt’s Reply 7
(c) The Tribunal’s Approach... 8
(d) The C ittee’s Analysis 8
IV. Effect of failure to the in the ian Court: 12
(a) Helnan’s case. 12
(b) — Egypt's Reply 13 -

 

(c) | The Committee’s Analysis

 
 

V. Characterisation of the dispute as contractual

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(a) Helnan’s Case 21
(b) Egypt's Reply 22
(c) Thec ittee’s Analysis 22
VI. Lack of legal ity 24
(a) _ Helnan’s Case. : 124
(b) Egypt's Reply 24
(c)  TheC ittee’s Analysis 25
VIL. Egypt's A ive Plea 25
Vill. Decision of the ad hoc C it 26

 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

- On 30 October 2008, the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment

Disputes (‘ICSID’ or ‘the Centre’) received from Helnan International Hotels A/S
(formerly Scandinavian Management Co. A/S) (‘Helnan’ or ‘the Applicant’)’, an
Application for Annulment of the Award rendered on 3 July 2008 in the arbitration
proceeding between Helnan and the Arab Republic of Egypt (‘Egypt’ or ‘the
Respondent’), by the Arbitral Tribunal comprised of Mr. Yves Derains (Chairman),
Professor Rudolf Dolzer and Mr. Michael Lee (‘the Tribunal’), in a dispute arising
under the Bilateral Investment Treaty dated 24 June 1999 between the Arab
Republic of Egypt and the Kingdom of Denmark (‘the BIT’).

. The Application for Annulment was submitted within the time period provided for

by Article 52(2) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States (‘the ICSID Convention’). On 10
November 2008, the Centre registered the Application for Annulment.

- On 22 December 2008, an ad hoc Committee composed of Judge Stephen M.

Schwebel (President), Judge Bola A. Ajibola, and Professor Campbell A.
McLachlan, was constituted to pass upon that Application. Ms. Natali Sequeira
was designated by ICSID to serve as Secretary of the Committee.

. The Committee held its first procedural session with the parties at the seat of the

Centre in Washington, D.C. on 6 February 2009. During the session, the parties
confirmed that they did not have any objections to the proper constitution of the
Committee and that its members had been validly appointed in accordance with
the arbitration agreement, the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Rules of
Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (‘the Arbitration Rules’). During the session
the parties also agreed on a number of procedural matters reflected in the
minutes signed by the President and the Secretary of the Committee. In
particular, these matters concerned: i) the representation of the parties; ii) the
ii). the fees and expenses of the Committee

 

 

advance payments to the Centre;
Members; iv) the applicable Arbitration Rules; v) the place of proceedings; vi) the
procedural language; vii) the records of the hearings; viii) the means of
communication and copies of instruments; xix) the presence and quorum for

a

a

of the Ci ittee; x) the decisi of the C i by
correspondence; xi) the delegation of power to the President of the Committee to
fix time limits; xii) the written and oral phases of the proceeding; xiii) number,
sequence and schedule of written pleadings; xiv) scheduling of a pre-hearing

; xv) the p ion of evi and wi ” i 5, xvi) the
dates and nature of subsequent hearings; xvii) publication of decisions related to
the proceeding.

. Helnan’s Memorial on its Application for Annulment (‘Memorial’) was filed on 21

April 2009. Egypt's Counter-Memorial (‘Counter-Memorial’) was filed on 22 June
2009. Helnan’s Reply Memorial (‘Reply’) was filed on 22 July 2009 and Egypt’s
Rejoinder (‘Rejoinder’) was filed on 13 August 2009. A Hearing was held in the
Peace Palace at The Hague on 19 October 2009.

BACKGROUND

. The dispute addressed in the Award concerned Helnan’s eviction from the

management of the Shepheard Hotel in Cairo (‘the Hotel’), following:

(a) a decision on the part of the Ministry of Tourism to downgrade the Hotel's
classification from the five star status required under Helnan’s long-term
Management Contract (‘the Management Contract’) with the Egyptian
Organisation for Tourism and Hotels (‘EGOTH’); and,

(b) an award of 20 December 2004 by an arbitral tribunal appointed under the
aegis of the Cairo Regional Centre for International Commercial Arbitration to
decide the contractual dispute between Heinan and EGOTH (‘the Cairo
Arbitration’).

That latter award, in the making of which appointees of the parties took part,
unanimously terminated the Management Contract on the ground that it was
impossible to execute, and that both parties were responsible for failing to
execute the contract. The tribunal awarded a sum to Helnan in settlement of
debts, which Helnan encashed. The Cairo tribunal did not consider any claims for
breach of treaty, no such claims having been submitted to it.

7. During the ICSID arbitration proceeding, the Tribunal decided that it had
jurisdiction over Helnan’s claims, and that those claims were admissible.
However, it dismissed all of Helnan’s claims on the merits.

8. Helnan now seeks annulment of the ICSID Award, invoking three grounds
specified under Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention: (e) that the award has
failed to state the reasons on which it is based; (b) that the tribunal has manifestly
exceeded its powers and (d) that there has been a serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure. It challenges four findings made in the Award as
meriting annulment:

(a) the finding that Egypt’s plan to terminate the Management Contract cannot

constitute a treaty violation;

(b) the finding that all Helnan's claims are disqualified because .it did not
challenge the downgrade in the Egyptian courts;

(c) the finding that conduct of EGOTH and Ministry of Tourism officials did not go
beyond contractual matters and commercial motivation; and,

(d) the finding that Helnan’s claims fail due to lack of legal causality.’

©

. For the reasons set out below, arguments (a), (c) and (d) do not justify annulment
of the Award. The position is different in relation to argument (b) (failure to
challenge the decision in the Egyptian courts). The Tribunal’s finding on this issue
(principally found in the Award at paragraph 148) was a manifest excess of its
powers. An ICSID tribunal may not decline to make a finding of breach of treaty
on the ground that the investor ought to have pursued local remedies or
otherwise validated the substance of its claims by recourse to the courts of the
host State. Although this part of the Award must be annulled, it was not essential
to the Tribunal’s decision to dismiss Helnan’s claims. Therefore, there is no
ground to set aside the Tribunal’s decision on the merits of the dispute as
provided in operative paragraphs 169 and 170 of the Award.

* Memorial, Part V.

10. This Decision sets out the reasons for this ‘conclusion, taking each of the
impugned bases of the Tribunal’s Award in turn, and summarizing the parties’
respective submissions, followed by the Committee’s evaluation of them.

Ml. TREATY CONSEQUENCES OF PLAN TO TERMINATE THE MANAGEMENT
CONTRACT

(a) Helnan’s case

11. Helnan seeks annulment of the Award on the ground that the Tribunal
characterized the inspection of the Hotel on 4 September 2003 as ‘a semblance,
conceived as a mere formality deprived of any substance, and part of the
implementation of an already taken decision to immediately downgrade the
Shepheard Hotel’.2 The Tribunal found the circumstances of the September
inspection to be ‘very suspicious’.° Nevertheless the Tribunal held that Egypt had
not breached its treaty obligations, relying for this purpose on the June 2003
inspection.‘ The Tribunal held that :

{This does not necessarily lead to the conclusion that because of
this suspicious inspection and the following downgrade, Egypt is
responsible for breaches of the Treaty provisions. It must be
recognized that the decision to downgrade the hotel. could as well
have been taken after the 14 June 2003 inspection, as suggested by
the subsequent Memorandum submitted to the Minister of Tourism...
This was not done and, instead, the Egyptian administration decided
that it had to organise a semblance of an inspection to produce a
report which reached the same result as the June report. The
Tribunal cannot ignore that after the 28 June letter of the Ministry of
Tourism, Helnan never seriously challenged the conclusions in
favour of the downgrading of the hotel. Its main line of argument was
to put the responsibility on EGOTH. As already pointed out, the
allocation of the responsibility for the downgrading was of a
contractual nature outside the scope of jurisdiction of this Arbitral
Tribunal. Under these circumstances, the downgrading as such
cannot amount to a breach of Egypt's obligations under the Treaty,
even if the procedure followed was rather suspicious. *

 

? Award, paragraph 154.

* Award, paragraph 144.

“ Memorial, paragraph 99, citing the Award, paragraph 147.
5 Award, paragraph 148.

12. Helnan contends that the foregoing holding was a serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure, since the legal status and consequences of the
June 2003 inspection was not an issue submitted by either party for decision.© A
tribunal is not entitled to adjudge a dispute on a ground not argued by either of
the parties. Second, the Tribunal failed to state the reasons on which its
conclusion in this respect was based; its reasoning in this respect being
inconsistent and contradictory.” Third, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its
powers. Helnan relies in this respect on the foregoing points. It also submits that
the Tribunal exceeded its powers by applying Egyptian law rather than
international law as an excuse for non-compliance with the Treaty.? Helnan
criticises in this respect the Tribunal’s reliance on the June 2003 Memorandum of
the Ministry of Tourism® as an instrument of Egyptian law, contending that it
should instead have considered and applied the treaty standard. °

(b) Egypt’s Reply

13. Egypt replies to Helnan’s arguments by submitting that in fact the. Tribunal’s

 

 

flectit on the ion were fit since it had already
legitimately found that grounds existed for the downgrade following t the June
" Egypt's app in the was

 

unsurprising since {cJountless parties around the world every day consider how
they might put their co-contractants formally in breach when they are confident
that material grounds therefore are extant’.”* It argues that Helnan’s submission
on failure to be heard on the import of the June inspection mistakes the nature of
the Award’s findings. The Award did not find that the June inspection was itself a
breach of the Treaty. It rather held that Helnan’s loss of the Management
Contract resulted from the contractual termination ordered in the Cairo

Arbitration.

© Memorial, paragraphs 99-111.
7 Memorial, paragraphs 112-123 and the Transcript of the Hearing of 19 October 2009 (‘Transcript’), pp. 41/15-
438.
® ibid., paragraphs 124-138.
® Exhibit R-18-K.
1" Transcript, pp. 43/
* Counter: nNemotal, peragraph 25(C).
* Bide paragraph 25(f).
* Ibid., paragraph 30.

(c) The Tribunal’s Approach

14. The Tribunal dealt with the relationship between the June and September
inspections in the following way in its Award:

(a) It observed that the essence of Helnan’s claim was that Egypt had
orchestrated a series of events which ultimately led to Helnan’s eviction from the
Hotel, because Egypt considered that the Management Contract was an obstacle
to the privatisation of the Hotel. Both the June and September inspections were
alleged by Helnan to be part of that single strategy. As a result of it, Helnan
claimed that its investment had been expropriated and that it had been treated
unfairly and inequitably.

(b) As to the June inspection itself, the Tribunal recorded Helnan’s observation
that this inspection did not follow customary practice. But the Tribunal also found
that the inspection had concluded that the Hotel was not of a five star standard.
This finding was not challenged by Helnan at the time — a fact that was
unsurprising since the problems with the Hotel had persisted for some years,
there being an outstanding and longstanding dispute between Helnan and
EGOTH as to which of them was financially responsible for the investments
required to upgrade and maintain the Hotel at a five-star standard. Given this
broader context, the June inspection did not violate the principle of fair and

equitable treatment."

(c) Against this background, the September inspection was a ‘mere formality,’
since the decision to downgrade could have been taken after the June inspection.
Helnan never challenged the substantive findings of the June inspection, since its
real dispute was a contractual one — that EGOTH and not Helnan had financial
responsibility for the necessary works."®

(d) The Committee’s Analysis
15. Helnan’s argument takes the June inspection out of the context in which the issue
arose for decision and was decided by the Tribunal. Helnan invited the Tribunal

to consider the June inspection as part of its narrative of complaint as to an

‘4 Award, paragraphs 138-143.
*8 Award, paragraphs 144-147

orchestrated campaign by Egypt to evict Helnan from the Hotel. It figures as part
of Helnan’s allegation of an orchestrated 2003 inspection and downgrade in its
Memorial on the Merits (paragraphs 119-121). In Helnan’s Post-Hearing
Memorial, the June and September inspections are dealt with collectively under
the heading: ‘The Summer 2003 Inspections and Downgrade Breached Egypt's
Treaty Obligations’ (paragraphs 68-79). After devoting some ten paragraphs to
the June inspection and report, Helnan then adds a section under the heading:
‘The September Inspection Also Did Not Conform To Standard Procedure.’
(emphasis added).

16. Thus, Helnan correctly accepted before the ad hoc Committee that the parties did
refer to the June inspection in their arguments."® But the June inspection
evidently played a role in Helnan’s submissions which went beyond it being
merely part of a sequence of facts which led ultimately -to the September
inspection. Rather, the June inspection was itself part of Heinan’s claim of unfair
and inequitable treatment.

17. Egypt, for its part, denied that the downgrade was collusive, claiming instead that
it was ‘the culmination of a long series of inspectoral condemnations stretching
over several years’."”

reports and the alleged failure to provide a reasonable opportunity to cure the

Helnan's objections to the June and September 2003

violations referred to in them was ‘self-defeating because the 2003 reports

basically reiterate violations already reported in previous years’.'®

18. The Report on the June inspection of the Hotel, which was part of the evidence

before the Tribunal’ concludes at paras. 3(d)-(e):

(d) The management of the hotel previously received a notice
and it was notified several times with remarks in order to act
accordingly. However, the management of the hotel does not
respond and does not observe such remarks. Consequently, the
hotel will be downgraded to Four Stars....

*® Transcript, pp. 46/18-47/17.

*7 Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 9 June 2007, paragraph 73.
*° ibid, paragraph 88,

*° Exhibit R-18-K.

(e) Because the hotel is owned by the State (Egoth Company)
and because there was a contract between the owning company and
the management company, we suppose the following:

To consider the hotel position with the owning company before
imposing penalties (by downgrading its class), so that such penalties
are not used for the benefit of one of the parties in such a manner as
to adversely impact the public interest. (emphasis added.)

19. Helnan devoted extensive evidence and submissions to rebutting this element of
Egypt's defence, arguing that the July and September 2003 reports were different
in kind from those rendered in 2000” and further contending that the Hotel was
of a five-star standard.”

20. It is no part of the function of an annulment committee to reconsider findings of
fact made by an ICSID arbitral tribunal. Rather the issues for this Committee are
circumscribed by the terms of Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention and relate to
the Tribunal itself: its powers; its process; and the reasoning of its Award.

21. The above exposition demonstrates that the June 2003 inspection and report was
the subject of detailed submissions and evidence, because Helnan had included
it as part of its complaint of failure to provide fair and equitable treatment under
the Treaty.

22. Each of the parties presented a very different theory to the Tribunal as to the
significance of the June inspection. For Helnan, it was another instance of its
allegation of Egypt’s orchestrated campaign to oust it from the Hotel in order to
prepare for privatisation. For Egypt, it was merely confirmatory of the inadequate
standard of the Hotel, which was the subject of an ongoing and unresolved
contractual dispute between Helnan and EGOTH.

23. The task for the Tribunal was thus to decide upon its own interpretation of the
significance of factual events in order to decide the claims of breach of Treaty

before it. In this context, the observations of the ad hoc committee in the first

decision on Iment in Vivendi v. Argentina”, p hs 84-85, are

? Heinan's Post-Hearing Memorial, 26 November 2007, (‘Heinan’s Post-Hearing Memorial), paragraphs 101~109.

2 ibid, paragraphs 91-100. ;

2 Compaiiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/3), Fitst Decision on Annulment, 3 July 2002 (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3) (‘Vivendi v. Argentina’), 6 ICSID
Rep 328.

It may be true that the particular approach adopted by the Tribunal in
attempting to reconcile the various conflicting elements of the case
before it came as a surprise to the parties, or at least to some of
them. But even if true, this would by no means be unprecedented in
judicial decision-making, either international or domestic....

From the record, it is evident that the parties had a full and fair
opportunity to be heard at every stage of the proceedings. They had
ample opportunity to consider and present written and oral
submissions on the issues, and the oral hearing itself was
meticulously conducted to enable each party to present its point of
view. The Tribunal’s analysis of the issues was clearly based on the
materials presented by the parties and was in no sense ultra petita.

24. In the present case, the June inspection was plainly within the ambit of the
dispute. Indeed, it was central to each party’s larger case. As a consequence, the
Tribunal cannot be said to have exceeded its powers in giving dispositive weight
to its interpretation of the evidence presented. Nor did it fail to afford the parties
an opportunity to present their case.

25. The Tribunal was obliged to reach a view as to whether it accepted Helnan’s
claim or Egypt's defence in this respect. In summary, it rejected Helnan’s claim of
an orchestrated campaign. Instead, it accepted Egypt's defence that the Hotel
had for long failed to reach a five-star standard, in view of the contractual dispute
between EGOTH as owner and Helnan as manager over which of them bore
financial responsibility for investing in the Hotel’s maintenance.

2

a

. In explaining why it came to that view, the Tribunal was not obliged simply to
choose en bloc between each of the rival theories and the evidence in support of
them adduced by the parties. It was itself ‘the judge’ of the probative value of any
evidence adduced: ICSID Arbitration Rule 34(1). It was therefore entitled to reach
the view, relying as it expressly did** on the June Inspection Report, that the
September 2003 was a mere formality, because it was already clear in June that
the Hotel did not meet five-star standard and should be downgraded.

Award, paragraph 147.

27. This was not a maiter of applying Egyptian law to a question of international law.
It was simply a matter of determining on the evidence which of the two rival
arguments as to the overall significance of the summer 2003 inspections should
be preferred. The Tribunal is not to be faulted for reaching its own conclusions as
to the correct interpretation and significance of the evidence before it.

IV. EFFECT OF FAILURE TO CHALLENGE THE DOWNGRADE IN THE EGYPTIAN
Courts

(a) Helnan’s case

28. Helnan seeks annulment of the finding in paragraph 148 of the Award that:

The ministerial decision to downgrade the hotel, not challenged in the
Egyptian administrative courts, cannot be seen as a breach of the
Treaty by EGYPT. It needs more to become an international delict for
which EGYPT would be held responsible under the Treaty.

29. Helnan alleges that this finding is unsupported by reasons; fails to mention its
pleadings and therefore seriously departs from a fundamental rule of procedure;
and fails to apply the relevant Treaty standard to the measures, thereby
manifestly exceeding the Tribunal's powers.**

30. Helnan pleads that the impugned paragraph in the Award fails to explain why if,
as both parties accepted, and as the Tribunal records, there is no requirement to
exhaust local remedies, Helnan was nevertheless obliged, in order to have a
valid treaty claim, to challenge the Ministerial decision before the Egyptian
administrative courts.”° It submits that the Tribunal does not give reasons to
explain why the sole legal authority which it relied upon for its proposition
(Generation Ukraine Inc v. Ukraine”®) was applicable to the instant case, when on
a proper analysis it was not.”” Helnan submits that, by failing to refer to Heinan’s
submissions on the point (contained in its Post-Hearing Memorial, paragraphs
321-342) the Tribunal failed to observe the fundamental rule of procedure
requiring each party to have an opportunity to present its case, which must
include the reasonable consideration by the tribunal of the party’s arguments.

* Memorial, paragraph 140; Transcript, pp. 50/6~55/11

5 Ibid, paragraph 144. |

° Generation Ukraine v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/9), Award, September 16, 2003, (‘Generation Ukraine v.
Ukraine’) 10 ICSID Rep 236

7” Memorial, paragraphs 146-157.

31. Finally, Helnan submits that the Tribunal's failure to apply’ the clear provisions of
the applicable law (the BIT and the ICSID Convention) in imposing such a
requirement on Helnan constituted a manifest excess of power.”* Citing the First
Decision on Annulment in Vivendi v. Argentina, paragraph 102, Helnan submits
that:

{I]t is not open to an ICSID tribunal having jurisdiction under a BIT in
respect of a claim based upon a substantive provision of that BIT, to
dismiss the claim on the ground that it could or should have been
dealt with by a national court.

(6) — Egypt’s Reply

32. Egypt replies that this point was merely confirmatory rather than decisive in the
Tribunal’s reasoning.” The duty to give reasons does not, in its submission,
require the Tribunal to give express consideration in its Award to Helnan’s
arguments. Helnan was heard on the point, even if its arguments did not
ultimately persuade the Tribunal.

33. In its oral pleading before the ad hoc Committee, Egypt developed its explanation
of the Tribunal’s approach on this point.°° It submitted that the Tribunal was
entitled to reject the investor's complaints of unfair and inequitable treatment if it
had not resorted to the local courts as the obvious form of recourse for a disputed
downgrading of the hotel.*" Such a finding went to the materiality of the investor's
complaint — whether it could amount to a breach of the international obligation if
no step had been taken locally to correct the act of maladministration.” In any
event, such a finding by the Tribunal was not reviewable on annulment.

(c) The Committee’s Analysis

34. Paragraph 148 of the Award (and the subsequent repetition of the same point at
paragraphs 159 and 162) raises a question of importance to the arbitration of
investment treaty claims under the ICSID Convention, namely the extent to which

®° Memorial, paragraphs 160~ 405

= ou inter-Memorial, paragraph

2 Transcript, pp. 93/10-16, pp. 06710-12215
® ibid., pp. 106/17-107/6, pp. 114/5~115/2
ATI6-119/17

 

an investor may be required, as a matter of substance rather than jurisdiction, to
pursue local remedies in order to sustain a valid claim for breach of treaty.

35.In the context of the present annulment application, Heinan’s objections that
there has been a failure to give reasons and failure to observe a fundamental rule
of procedure are not persuasive.

36. Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention permits annulment on the ground ‘that
the award has failed to state the reasons on which it is based.’ (emphasis added).
Thus, the object of this ground is the reasoning which leads to the Tribunal’s
Award. It does not permit annulment simply because the tribunal has not
deemed it necessary to discuss every argument raised by one of the parties.*

37. In the light of this standard, paragraph 148 of the Award does enable the reader
to follow the process of the Tribunal's reasoning. The paragraph may not deal
with every contrary argument raised by Helnan. It may not resolve every further
question which the Tribunal’s formulation raises. But the factor which the Tribunal
regarded as germane to its reasoning is clear enough, as is the legal basis and
authority upon which it relied.

38. By the same token, there was no failure to observe a fundamental rule of
in this regard. Although Egypt did not app: raise the point until its
Rejoinder, ® Heinan was afforded an opportunity to advance its arguments on the
point, both at the Hearing®® and in its written Post-Hearing Memorial®’. Its
arguments were plainly considered by the Tribunal. They are summarised in the
Award at paragraphs 87-88. The right to be heard does not require a tribunal to
consider seriatim and evaluate expressly in its award every argument raised by
each party. Helnan’s essential submissions on this point were heard by the
Tribunal, but they were rejected in favour of those advanced by Egypt.

 

® Maritime International Nominees Establishment (MINE) v. Republic of Guinea (ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4),
Decision on Annuiment, 22 December 1989, (‘MINE v. Guinea’) 4 ICSID Rep 73, paragraph 5.08 cf. the same
approach taken by the international Court of Justice (1CJ') in Case Concerning the Arbitral Award made by the King
gf Spain on 23 December 1906 (Honduras v. Nicaragua) [1960] IC Rep 192, 216, 30 ILR 457, 476.

% The analysis of Professor W. Michael Reisman ‘The Breakdown of the Control Mechanism in ICSID Arbitration’
[1989] Duke L R 739, 791, to the effect that the requirements of Article 48(3) of the Convention are not to be carried
iio Aticle 62(1)(e)is accepted by tts Committee as correct. The earker contrary positon of the ad hac committe in
Kiéckner Indusirie-Anlagen GmbH and others v. United Republic of Cameroon and Camerounaise des Engrai
(ICSID Case No. ARB/81/2), First Decision on Annulment, 3 May 1985, (‘KlSckner v. Cameroon’) 2 (SID ep 95,
eso 4115, is in this Committee's view untenable.

Repinder paragraphs 45-48. Confirmed by counsel for Egypt at the annulment hearing: Transcript, pp. 124/9 —

Hearing Transcript, October 8, 2007, pp. 17/8-21/16.
* Heinan’s Post-Hearing Memorial, paragraphs 320-342.

14

39. However, the rejection of each of these grounds for annulment does not dispose
of this issue. It leaves the question whether the Tribunal’s finding in paragraph
148, in reliance on a passage of the Award in Generation Ukraine, constituted a
manifest excess of its powers.

40. The question whether an ICSID arbitral tribunal has exceeded its powers is
determined by reference to the agreement of the parties. It is that agreement or
compromis from which the tribunal's powers flow, and which accordingly
determines the extent of those powers. In the case of an investment treaty claim,
this agreement is constituted by the BIT and by the ICSID Convention (which the
agreement to arbitrate incorporates by reference) as well as by the filing of the
investor's claim. Read together, these three elements constitute the arbitration
agreement and therefore prescribe the parameters of the Tribunal's. powers. As
the International Law Commission put it in formulating its seminal Draft Rules on
Arbitral Procedure, from which Article 52 was derived:

The question of excess of power or jurisdiction is, in essence, a
question of treaty interpretation. It is a question which is to be
answered by a careful comparison of the award or other contested
action by the tribunal with the relevant provisions of the compromis.
A departure from the terms of submission or excess of jurisdiction
should be clear and substantial and not doubtful and frivolous. **

41. The concept of the ‘powers’ of a tribunal goes further than its jurisdiction, and
refers to the scope of the task which the parties have charged the tribunal to
perform in discharge of its mandate, and the manner in which the parties have
agreed that task is to be performed. That is why, for example, a failure to apply
the law chosen by the parties (but not a misapplication of it) was accepted by the
Contracting States of the ICSID Convention to be an excess of powers,“ a point
also accepted by annulment committees.*' Further, a failure to decide a question
entrusted to the tribunal also constitutes an excess of powers, since the tribunal

*° Accord Christoph Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2 ed., 2009) p. 938.
* international ‘Law Commission, ‘Commentary on the Draft Convention on Arbitral Procedure’ UN Doc A/CN.4/92,

% istry of the Convention, Documents Concerning the Origin and the Formulation of the Convention, Vol Il, Part 1,

Re Eg. Hussein Nuaman Soutraki v. United Arab Emirates (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/7) (Decision on Annulment),
June 5, 2007, (‘Soufraki v. UAE’), paragraph 85.

15

has also in that event failed to fulfil the mandate entrusted to it by virtue of the
parties’ agreement.”

42. By virtue of Article 9 of the BIT in the present case, the parties agree to submit
‘[aJny dispute which may arise between an investor of one Contracting Party and
the other Contracting Party in connection with an investment’ to international
arbitration, inter alia, under the ICSID Convention. Article 9 does not refer such
disputes to host state courts.

43. The parties having chosen arbitration under the ICSID Convention pursuant to
Article 9 of the BIT, the jurisdiction of the Centre is determined under Chapter I!
of the ICSID Convention (Articles 25-27) Article 26 within that Chapter expressly
provides:

Consent of the parties to arbitration under this Convention shall,
unless otherwise stated, be deemed consent to such arbitration to
the exclusion of any other remedy. A Contracting State may require
the exhaustion of local administrative or judicial remedies as a
condition of its consent to arbitration under this Convention.

44. The Report of the Executive Directors of the World Bank on the Convention

explains the purpose of this provision in paragraph 32 as follows:

Arbitration as an Exclusive Remedy

it may be presumed that when a State and an investor agree to have
recourse to arbitration, and do not reserve the right to have recourse
to other remedies or require the prior exhaustion of other remedies,
the intention of the parties is to have recourse to arbitration to the
exclusion of any other remedy. This rule of interpretation is embodied
in the first sentence of Article 26. In order to make clear that it was
not intended thereby to modify the rules of international law regarding
the exhaustion of local remedies, the second sentence explicitly
recognizes the right of a State to require the prior exhaustion of local
remedies.

45. Thus, by Article 26, the Contracting States agreed upon a fundamental reversal
of the local remedies rule as it applies in customary international law, unless the
relevant State expressly imposed such a condition. Article 26 represents one of

 

“2 Ibid paragraph 44; Vivendi v. Argentina paragraph 86.

16

the singular progressive advantages of the ICSID Convention. It ‘create[s] a rule
of priority vis-a-vis other systems of adjudication in order to ‘avoid contradictory
decisions and to the preserve the principle of ne bis in idem.’* Article 26
operates as a key element of the parties’ agreement to arbitrate — confirming the
exclusivity of ICSID arbitration as the means of dispute resolution, where the
parties have agreed to that forum for the resolution of their dispute.

46. The Tribunal accepts in paragraph 148 of its Award that there was no
requirement for Helnan to exhaust local remedies before starting the arbitration.
But it then proceeds, relying on a passage in Generation Ukraine, to find as a
matter of substance that the failure of Helnan to challenge the Ministerial decision
in the administrative courts means that that decision ‘cannot be seen as a breach
of Treaty.’

47. The problem with the Tribunals reasoning is that this is to do by the back door
that which the Convention expressly excludes by the front door. Many national
legal systems possess highly developed remedies of judicial review. Yet it would
empty the development of investment arbitration of much of its force and effect, if,
despite a clear intention of States parties not to require the pursuit of local
remedies as a pre-condition to arbitration, such a requirement were to be read
back in as part of the substantive cause of action.

48.In numerous ICSID cases, tribunals have. rendered awards in favour of the
claimants as a result of administrative decisions, in which no such application to
the local courts had been made. Of course, a claimant's prospects of success in
pursuing a treaty claim based on the decision of an inferior official or court, which
had not. been challenged through an available appeal process, should be lower,
since the tribunal must in any event be satisfied that the failure is one which
displays. insufficiency in the system, justifying international intervention. But that
is a very different matter to imposing a requirement on the claimant to pursue
local remedies before there can be said to have been a failure to provide fair and

equitable treatment.

* Schreuer, supra note38, 381. Where a State has agreed with a foreign investor that arbitration of disputes arising
under a contract between them shall be the exclusive remedy, the exhaustion of local remedies is inferentially
excluded. jt was so argued in four cases before the Permanent Court of Intemational Justice and the International
Court of Justice, but settlements (or finding of lack of jurisdiction) supervened. See Losinger & Co., PCli, Series C,
No. 78, pp. 7-8, ff. ; Anglo-lranian Oi! Company Case, ICJ Pleadings, pp. 18-19, 122-123, 288, 291; Electricité de
Beyrouth Company Case, ICJ Pleadings, pp. 14, 58; Compagnie du Port, des Quais and des Entrepots de Beyrouth,
ICJ Pleadings, pp. 9 39, 67, 70, 89, 91-923. See also, Stephen M. Schwebel and J. Gills Wetter, ‘Arbitration and the
Exhaustion of Local Remedies (1966) 60 AJIL 484.

17

49. In the light of these precedents and considerations, the Award in Generation
Ukraine — at any rate, as applied in these proceedings ~ stands somewhat
outside the jurisprudence constante under the ICSID Convention in the review of
administrative decision-making for failure to provide fair and equitable treatment.
On its facts, the decision of the tribunal in that case is understandable. The
impugned decision was that of an inferior official in the Kyiv City State
Administration in omitting to grant a lease agreement and construction permit,
which it was alleged amounted to expropriation.“* In these circumstances, it is
unsurprising that the tribunal in Generation Ukraine should observe that:

Yet again, it is not enough for an investor to seize upon an act of
maladministration, no matter how low the level of the relevant
governmental authority; to abandon his investment without any effort
at overturning the administrative fault; and thus to claim an
international delict on the theory that there had been an

virtual atic In such i an
international tribunal may deem that the failure to seek redress from
national authorities disqualifies the international claim, not because
there is a requirement of exhaustion of local remedies but because
the very reality of conduct tantamount to expropriation is doubtful in
the absence of a reasonable ~ not necessarily exhaustive - effort by
the investor to obtain correction.”

50. But it does not at all follow from this conclusion that, in order to succeed in a
claim of failure to provide fair and equitable treatment based upon a Ministerial
decision, the investor must challenge that decision in the local administrative
courts. To be sure, the Treaty standard of fair and equitable treatment is
concerned with consideration of the overall process of the State’s decision-
making. A single aberrant decision of a low-leve! official is unlikely to breach the
standard unless the investor can demonstrate that it was part of a pattern of state
conduct applicable to the case or that the investor took steps within the
administration to achieve redress and was rebuffed in a way which compounded,

rather than cured, the unfair treatment.

 

* Generation Ukraine v. Ukraine, paragraphs 20.27-20.33.
“8 ibid., paragraph 20.30.

18

51. But it is an entirely different matter to impose upon an investor, as a condition ‘to
become an international delict for which [the Contracting State] would be held
responsible under the Treaty," a requirement that the decision of a Government
Minister, taken at the end of an administrative process, must in turn be
challenged in the local courts. Such a decision is one for which the State is
undoubtedly responsible at international law, in the event that it breaches the
international obligations of the State.*” Moreover, the characterisation of such an
act as unlawful under international law is not affected by its characterisation as
lawful under internal law.“® Thus a decision by a municipal court that the
Minister's decision was lawful (a judgment which such a court could only reach
applying its own municipal administrative law) could not preclude the international
tribunal from coming to another conclusion applying international law.

52. The consequences of the adoption of the approach of the Tribunal in question in
investment treaty law could be serious. It would inject an unacceptable level of
uncertainty into the way in which an investor ought to proceed when faced with a
decision on behalf of the Executive of the State, replacing the clear rule of the
Convention which permits resort to arbitration. As Schreuer has rightly observed:

Once it is accepted that the investor should make an attempt at local
remedies it is only a small step to require that the attempt should not
stop at the level of the lowest court. Once we require that reasonable
appeals be taken we are close to demanding that these be
exhaustive.”

53. A requirement to pursue local court remedies would have the effect of disentitling
a claimant from pursuing its direct treaty claim for failure by the Executive to
afford fair and equitable treatment, even where the decision was taken at the
highest level of government within the host State. It would leave the investor only
with a complaint of unfair treatment based upon denial of justice in the event that
the process of judicial review of the Ministerial decision was itself unfair. Such a
consequence would be contrary to the express provisions of Article 26,
incorporated into the parties’ compromis, since it would have the effect of

 

“° Award, paragraph 48. |
47 art 4, International Law Commission, Draft Articles on the Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts

2001.
* ibid., Art 3. i
“ Schreuer ‘Calvo's Grandchildren: the Return of Local Remedies in Investment Arbitration’ (2005) 4 LPICT 1, 15.

19

substituting another remedy for that provided under the BIT and the ICSID
Convention.

54. Such a requirement would also have the effect of leading to the dismissal of
claims precisely on the ground that they should have been submitted to a
national court. It was the unjustified imposition of such a requirement which led to
the annulment of the first Award in Vivendi v. Argentina, cited above.

55. In order to annul this part of the Award, the ad hoc Committee must of course be
satisfied that the Tribunal’s excess of powers is manifest. This means that the
excess must be obvious or clear. An ad hoc committee will not annul an award if
the Tribunal’s disposition is tenable, even if the committee considers that it is
incorrect as a matter of law. But in the present case, the requirements of the
parties as to the powers of the Tribunal in this respect are manifest. They are
stated in the plain words of Article 9 of the BIT and Article 26 of the ICSID
Convention, being provisions which confer jurisdiction upon the Tribunal, and
thus describe the mandate or powers conferred upon the Tribunal by the
agreement of the parties. Accordingly, in failing to observe those clear
requirements, the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers within the terms of
Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention.

56. An ad hoc committee is expressly empowered to annul any part of an Award on
the grounds specified in Article 52(1) by virtue of Article 52(3), a power which
Committees have used in other annulment applications.°' The consequence of
such a finding is that ‘severable parts of an award which are not themselves
annulled will stand.’

57. In the instant case, it is clear from the text of the Award that the ratio of the
Tribunal’s decision was that the allocation of responsibility for the downgrading of
the Hotel was a contractual matter and, as a result, Egypt's actions in this regard
could not amount to a breach of Treaty. The impugned passage at paragraph
148 opens with the word ‘[mJoreover’, which, as Egypt correctly observed in its

® Kiéckner v. Cameroon, paragraph 52; and see, to ike effect, Case conceming the Arbitral Award of 31 July 1989
(Guinea-Bissau v. Senega) 1CJ Rep. 1991, 83, paragraphs 47-48; Government of Sudan v. Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement/ Army (the ‘Abye'’ arbitration) (PCA, 22 July 2009), paragraphs
5"’See, e.g., CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case NO. ‘ARBIO1), Decision on
Annulment, 25 September 2007 (‘CMS v. Argentina).

& 5, bid, paragraph 99; Vivendi v. Argentina, paragraph 68.

®° award, paragraph 147

20

submissions, demonstrated that the paragraph was merely. confirmatory not
decisive. In these circumstances, the annulment of the Tribunal’s finding in
paragraph 148 can have no effect on the rest of the Award, including the
dismissal of the Claimant's claims in paragraph 3 of the dispositif, which must
continue to stand.

Vv. CHARACTERISATION OF THE DISPUTE AS CONTRACTUAL IN NATURE
(a) Helnan’s Case

58. The third element of the Award which Helnan alleges gives rise to an annullable
error is the Tribunal’s finding in paragraphs 152-157 and 160-161 that underlying
cause of the claim was EGOTH's plan (in which Ministry of Tourism officials
participated) to terminate the Management Contract, which did not give rise to a
treaty breach by Egypt.

59. Helnan objects that the Tribunal’s reasoning is internally contradictory. The rules
of state responsibility at international law are held applicable by the Tribunal at

 

the jurisdicti stage, yet by a rule requiring g rather
than contractual conduct when determining a treaty breach.™ The reasoning of
the Tribunal as to the involvement of Ministry of Tourism officials is particularly
contradictory, since the Award at once accepts that such officials were involved in
the implementation of the plan, but at the same time concludes that this
involvement is not sufficient to entail a breach of treaty.

60. Helnan further objects that it was denied the right to be heard because the
Tribunal wrongly restricted the scope of the case advanced by Helnan against
Egypt, requiring it to prove that the plan had been engineered in order to enable
Egypt to privatise the Hotel, whereas Helnan had in fact advanced a much
broader claim of breach of treaty.

6

. Thirdly, Helnan claims that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by failing
to apply the applicable law, and specifically the law of state responsibility in the

* Memorial, paragraphs 174-178.
5S Ibid, paragraphs 179-182.

21

interpretation of the Treaty, imposing instead a requirement of ‘commercial
motivation’ which led it to abdicate its jurisdiction.©

(b) — Egypt’s Reply

62. Egypt replies that the Tribunal simply found that Egypt committed no breach of
treaty. That is what a fair reading of paragraphs 152, 157 and concluding at
paragraph 169 confirms.5’ The Tribunal’s findings that the dispute was in
essence a contractual dispute between EGOTH and Helnan, finally resolved by
the Cairo arbitration, were made in the context of explaining why the termination
of the Management Contract and Helnan’s eviction from the Hotel was not a
breach of Treaty. In any event, even if the Tribunal could be shown to have been
in error as to this, it could not amount to an annullable error under Article 52.°°

(c) The Committee’s Analysis

63. The finding of the Tribunal in this aspect of its Award, so far from giving rise to an
annullable error, in fact appears to be an orthodox application of settled principle
to the facts of the case. A comparison with the First Decision on Annulment in
Vivendi v. Argentina is instructive. In that case, the ad hoc committee was critical
of the tribunal's decision that it was impossible to make a finding of breach of
treaty, given the extent to which the claims were founded upon the Concession
Contract.®° The ad hoc committee emphasised the difference between a contract
cause of action and a treaty cause of action. It cited with approval the dictum in

Oppenheim that:

It is doubtful whether a breach by a state of its contractual obligations
with aliens constitutes per se a breach of an international obligation,
unless there is some such additional element as denial of justice, or
expropriation, or breach of treaty, in which case it is that additional
element which will constitute the basis for the state’s international

responsibility.

°° Memorial, paragraphs 195-99.

*” Transcript pp. 94/18-106/8

® Counter-Memorial, paragraph 30.

°° Vivendi v. Argentina, paragraph 110

© Jennings & Watts (eds) Oppenheim’s Intemational Law (9" ed, 1992) 927, cited in ibid, paragraph 110, fn 78.

22

It then observed:

A treaty cause of action is not the same as a contractual cause of
action; it requires a clear showing of conduct which is in the
circumstances contrary to the relevant treaty standard. The
availability of local courts ready and able to resolve specific issues
independently may be a relevant circumstance in determining
whether there has been a breach of international law (especially in
relation to a standard such as that contained in Article 3 {fair and
equitable treatment]). But it is not dispositive, and it does not
preclude an international tribunal from considering the merits of the
dispute. ©

64.In the present case, the Tribunal did consider the merits of the dispute. It
considered and adopted the distinction between breach of treaty and breach of
contract. It did make an express finding that Egypt was not in breach of treaty.
It was entitled to, and did, find that there was no such breach. Such a finding is
not amenable to reconsideration on annulment. The Tribunal then found that the
root cause of Helnan’s eviction from the Hotel was not a breach of the BIT by
Egypt, but rather a contractual dispute with EGOTH, which dispute was
determined by the Cairo Arbitration.

65. None of this demonstrates any lack of coherence in reasoning. Nor does it
represent a failure to hear Helnan’s contrary arguments. Those submissions were
heard, but were rejected on the merits in the Tribunal’s determination on the
applicable facts and law. The Tribunal’s reference to, and reliance upon, the
contractual dispute and its disposition does not represent any excess of power on
the ground of failure to apply the applicable law. On the contrary, it was an
essential part of the Tribunal’s analysis of breach of treaty to decide whether the
acts complained of ‘individually nor collectively rose to the level of a breach of the
BIT." It was entirely legitimate, indeed essential in the circumstances of the
case, for the Tribunal to consider in that regard whether those acts were properly
to be explained as simply as a contractual dispute, which is what it did.

66. Accordingly, this ground for annulment must be rejected.

°" Vivendi v. Argentina, paragraph 112.
® Award, paragraphs 102-103.

°° ibid, paragraph 152.

* Vivendi v. Argentina, paragraph 113.

23

Vi. LACK OF LEGAL CAUSALITY
(a) Helnan’s Case

67. The fourth element in the Award to which Helnan objects is the Tribunal's finding
that there was no ‘legal causality’ between the decision to downgrade the Hotel
and the termination of the Management Contract, since the Cairo Arbitration
terminated the Contract for reasons independent of the downgrade decision.
Helnan contends that ‘[o]n this point the Award is wrong, lacks reasons, and is
produced by a manifest excess of power’: Memorial, paragraph 202.

68. Helnan criticises the reasoning of the Tribunal on the ground that international
law, as the applicable law, requires no causal link between the grounds triggering
the Cairo arbitration and those relied upon by that tribunal. It requires simply
conduct attributable to Egypt that was inconsistent with its obligations under the
Treaty: ibid., paragraphs 203-211. By the same token, Helnan claims that this
finding constitutes a manifest excess of powers, since the Tribunal applied
Egyptian law and not the applicable international law to the resolution of the
issue.

(b) Egypt's Reply

69. Egypt replies that the Tribunal simply found that the dispute was resolved at a
contractual level between EGOTH and Helnan by the Cairo Arbitration. Thus,
even if there had been a plan of the kind alleged by Helnan, it would have failed
because the termination of the contract and the eviction was not caused by the
downgrading, it was caused by the resolution of the contractual dispute by the
Cairo arbitration, a process in which Helnan had participated. The Award in the
Cairo Arbitration was res judicata between the parties to it as regards the
contractual dispute. It was. that Award which had led to the eviction of Helnan
from the Hotel, and which also resulted in the payment by EGOTH to Helnan of
the sum awarded by the arbitrators.°”

®5 Award, paragraphs 150, 168; Memorial, paragraphs 200-202.
® Transcript, pp.
°’ Transcript, pp. 122/6~129/23

24

(c} The Committee’s Analysis

70. This ground of objection is closely related to the previous ground. The Tribunal
was entitled to, and did, come to the view that the real cause of the termination of
the Management Contract and of Helnan’s eviction from the Hotel was its
contractual dispute with EGOTH. That dispute was finally resolved by the Cairo
Arbitration.

7

. In any event, the Tribunal’s findings on that issue are matters of substance, which
it forms no part of the function of an annulment committee to review under Article
52 of the ICSID Convention. Helnan cites no authority for its argument under this
head, and no basis for objection under the specific heads of Article 52 can be

discerned.

Vil. Eaypt’s ALTERNATIVE PLEA

72. In view of the fact that the Award requires annulment only in respect of one part
of the Tribunal’s decision, which does not affect the dispositif, it is not necessary

to rule upon Egypt's alternative plea seeking annulment of the Decision on
Jurisdiction.

25

Vill.

DECISION OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE

73. For the foregoing reasons, the Committee DECIDES:

(1)

(2)

(3)

To annul the holding of the Arbitral Tribunal in paragraphs 148 and
162 of its Award which, while disclaiming a requirement of exhaustion
of local remedies before ICSID arbitral recourse may be implemented,
nevertheless accepts that challenge by Helnan of the decision to
terminate its Management Contract in competent Egyptian
administrative courts was required in order to demonstrate the
substantive validity of its claims.

To deny the claims of Helnan otherwise to annul the Arbitral
Tribunal’s Award of July 3, 2008.

To require the parties equally to share the costs and expenses of
ICSID and the fees of the members of the ad hoc Committee, each
party being left to meet the costs of its representation in the
annulment proceedings.

26

THE AD HOC COMMITTEE:

Bola A. Ajibola
Date: Ty 24 JC10

Campbell A. McLachlan

Date: May 27, 20/0.

b yl

‘Stephen M. Schwebel

Date: Hy 4, d/o

