 

 

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF
INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

 

IN THE PROCEEDINGS BETWEEN

HELNAN INTERNATIONAL HOTELS A/S,
(Claimant)

AND

THE ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

(Respondent)

CASE n° ARB 05/19

DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL ON OBJECTION
TO JURISDICTION

Members of the Tribunal
Me. Yves DERAINS (Chairman)
Professor Rudolf DOLZER (Arbitrator)
Mr. Michael LEE (Arbitrator)

Secretary of the Tribunal:
Mrs. Gabriela Alvarez-Avila

Representing the Claimant Representing the Respondent

Mr. Peter R. GRIFFIN, Dr. Ahmed EL KOSHERI
Mrs. Ania FARREN Dr. Mohamed Abdel RAOUF
Mr. Devashish Krisham Dr. Karim HAHEZ

Date of Decision: October 17,2006

I- LEGAL AND FACTUAL BACKGROUND:

1. The Scandinavian Management Company A/S (Hereinafter " Scandinavian")
and the Egyptian Hotels Company (Hereinafter " EHC"), entered into a contract
for the management and the operation of the Shepheard Hotel (Hereinafter " the
Contract") on September 8, 1986 (Hereinafter "the Contract") whereby
Scandinavian was entrusted with the management of the Shepheard Hotel in
Cairo, owned by EHC.

2. Two annexes and a protocol to the Contract were signed by the parties on
December 31, 1986, May 11, 1989 and July 23, 1987 respectively.

3. On June 24, 1999, a Bilateral Investment Treaty (Hereinafter "the Treaty")
was concluded between the Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt
(Hereinafter " EGYPT") and the Kingdom of Denmark (Hereinafter Denmark)
as to the promotion and reciprocal protection of investments. Article 9 of the
Treaty provides that "any dispute which may arise between an investor of one
Contracting Party and the Other Contracting Party in connection with an
investment in the territory of that other Contracting Party shall, as far as
possible, be settled amicably". However, Article 9 adds that the investor is
entitled to submit the case to arbitration and inter alia to the International Centre
for Settlement of Investment Disputes (Hereinafter "the Centre") in the
hypothesise where the dispute continues to exist after a period of six months.

4. On March 7, 2000, the Egyptian Company for Tourism and Hotels
(Hereinafter " EGOTH") succeeded to EHC’s rights and obligations as the result
of a merger.

5. The Contract was originally to remain in force for a period of 26 years. On
October 15, 2002, a further Annex to this Contract (Hereinafter " the Annex ")
was signed between EGOTH and HELNAN INTERNATIONAL HOTELS A/S
(Hereinafter " HELNAN"), the latter being described as the successor in interest
of Scandinavian. The Annex indicated that, as part of the privatisation program
of the State of Egypt, the Shepheard Hotel could be sold by EGOTH, under
terms that respect HELNAN’s rights under the Contract or its rights to receive
appropriate compensation.

6. On September 7, 2003, pursuant to a notification to HELNAN on July 30,
2003 of an inspection of the Hotel and pursuant to a report of September 4, 2003
of a second inspection, the Shepheard Hotel was downgraded by the Minister of
Tourism from 5 stars to 4 stars. On October 2", 2003 EGOTH initiated an
arbitration procedure against HELNAN pursuant to the arbitration clause
included in the Contract providing for arbitration under the aegis of the Cairo

Regional Center for International Commercial Arbitration. An Award was
issued on December 4, 2004 which, inter alia, decided to terminate the Contract,
ordered the Claimant to hand over to EGOTH the Shepheard Hotel and
condemned EGOTH to pay HELNAN the amount of EGP 12,5 Million.
HELNAN’s request to set aside this Award was dismissed by the Cairo Court of
Appeal on June 7, 2005. On July 12, 2005, the Cour de Cassation also refused to
order enforcement stayed. On July 19, 2005, the Cairo Court of Appeal granted
exequatur. Finally, the juge des référés dismissed two objections to enforcement
brought by HELNAN.

7. On March 23, 2006, EGOTH took over the Shepheard Hotel.

Iil- THE PROCEDURE

8. On March 8, 2005, on the basis of the 1965 Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and nationals of other States (Hereinafter
“the Convention") and the Treaty, HELNAN filed a Request for Arbitration
against EGYPT before the Centre asserting that Egypt had violated Article 2,
Article 3 and Article 5 of the Treaty which provide investments in another
contracting party with "full protection and security", "fair and equitable
treatment" and prohibit expropriation "except for expropriations made in the
public interest (...) against prompt, adequate and effective compensation" .

In its Request for Arbitration, HELNAN requested the following:

"A. Provisional Measures

71. Claimant, Helnan, respectfully requests that, upon constitution, the Arbitral Tribunal
provide urgent interim relief:

(7) recommending that Egypt refrain from taking any action (through EGOTH or any
other instrumentalities) to evict Helnan from the Shepheard Hotel on or after 30
March 2005; and

(ii) recommending that Egypt (through EGOTH or any instrumentalities) ceases
immediately all procedures to sell the Shepheard Hotel to any third party, on terms
that directly or indirectly interfere with Helnan's management and operation of the
Shepheard Hotel, until the issuance of the final award in this arbitration.

B. Final Award

72. In the event that the urgent interim relief requested above is granted, and the
Shepheard Hotel is not confiscated, Claimant shall seek an award on the merits:

@

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

73.

@

(7)

(iii)

()

)

(vi)

(vii)

declaring that Helnan should be free to continue to enjoy its management rights to the
Shepheard Hotel under the Management Contract until its expiry in December 2012
with similar co-operation and investment from EGOTH as accorded to other foreign
hotel chains;

ordering the Respondent to pay to Helnan damages, in an amount to be determined, as
compensation for its share of the profits lost as a result of the downgrade of the
Shepheard Hotel;

ordering the Respondent to pay damages, in an amount to be determined, in
compensation for reputional damages suffered by Helnan; and

ordering the Respondent to pay interest on the amounts awarded in (ii) and (iii) above
at an appropriate rate.

In the alternative, in the event that the Shepheard Hotel is confiscated from Helnan
prior to the outcome of this arbitration, Helnan respectfully requests that the Arbitral
Tribunal enter an award:

ordering the Respondent to pay (a) damages in the amount of €10 million, subject to
further revision, to indemnify Helnan for loss of its share in the total operating profits
of the Shepheard Hotel during the remaining period of the Management Contract; or,
in the alternative (b) damages in an amount to be quantified in respect of Helnan's lost
investment in the Shepheard Hotel;

ordering the Respondent to pay damages in the amount of €15 million, subject to
further revision, in compensation for reputional damages suffered by Helnan;

ordering Respondent to pay €15 million, subject to further revision, representing the
balance in the accounts owing to Helnan for servicing the head office and financing
the development and renovation works and the debt written off by Helnan on 15
October 2002;

ordering the Respondent to pay all of Helnan's costs associated with the defence of the
arbitration proceedings taken against it by EGOTH in Egypt, in the amount of
approximately €150 thousand;

ordering the Respondent to pay all of Helnan's costs associated with this arbitration,
including the arbitrator's fees and administrative costs fixed by ICSID, the expenses of
the arbitration, any expert's fees and expenses, and the legal costs (including
attorney's fees) incurred by the parties, in an amount to be quantified;

ordering the Respondent to pay interest on the amounts awarded in (i) to (v) above at
an appropriate rate; and

granting Helnan any other relief that the Arbitrator sees fit.”

9. On February 10, 2006, an Arbitral Tribunal composed of Professor Rudolf
DOLZER, appointed by the Respondent, of Mr. Michael LEE, appointed by the

 

Claimant and Me. Yves DERAINS, Chairman, appointed by the two above
mentioned arbitrators was constituted in accordance with article 6 (1) of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules (Hereinafter "the Arbitration Rules").

10. On April 6, 2006, the ICSID Secretariat transmitted a letter from Respondent
indicating its position regarding the jurisdiction of the Centre to which it had
expressed objections.

11. On April 14, 2006, the First Session was held in the World Bank’s offices in
Paris. At the session the parties expressed their agreement that the Tribunal had
been properly constituted in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
ICSID Convention and the Arbitration Rules and that they did not have any
objections in this respect. The parties also agreed on a number of procedural
matters reflected in written minutes signed by the President and the Secretary of
the Tribunal. In particular it was agreed that the Respondent’s objections on
jurisdiction would be dealt with as follows:

" (...) the Tribunal, after deliberation, informed the parties that, on the basis
of the Arbitration Rule 41 (3), the proceeding on the merits was suspended and
that a time limit for the parties to file a Memorial on jurisdiction and a Counter-
Memorial on jurisdiction will be fixed. The President also informed the parties
that the Tribunal could then decide, pursuant to Arbitration Rule 41 (4) whether
to have a hearing on jurisdiction or to join the objections to the merits".

12. During the first session, the parties presented their respective oral arguments
as to the Request for Provisional Measures. Such presentation was followed by
rebuttals from both parties as well as by questions from the Arbitral Tribunal.

13. On April 26, 2006, Claimant transmitted to Respondent its First Request for
Production of Documents.

14. On May 17, 2006, the ICSID Secretariat transmitted an electronic version of
the Arbitral Tribunal's Decision on Provisional Measures whereby the Arbitral
Tribunal decided to:

 

"L) Dismisses Clai 's Request for Provisional Me es;
2) Declares that the costs of this phase of the proceedings will be allocated in
its Final Award".

 

15. On the same day, the ICSID Secretariat transmitted a letter from Respondent
regarding its objection to Claimant's First Request for Production of Documents.

On May 22, 2006, the ICSID Secretariat transmitted certified copies of the
minutes of the First Session held on April 14, 2006 as well as certified copies of
the Arbitral Tribunal's decision on Provisional Measures.

16. On May 31, 2006, Respondent transmitted an electronic copy of its
Memorial on Jurisdiction to the Arbitral Tribunal and to Claimant.

17. On May 31, 2006, the ICSID Secretariat acknowledged receipt of
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction and reminded that every communication
among the parties needed to pass through the Centre.

18. On June 6, 2006, the ICSID Secretariat transmitted hard copies of the
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction. In this Memorial, the Respondent
requests that:

"The Tribunal declare that Claimant's Request for Arbitration does not fall
within the jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of the Tribunal and
order Claimant to reimburse to Respondent all costs reasonably incurred by it
in connection with this proceeding."

19. On June 12, 2006, the ICSID Secretariat transmitted a letter from Claimant
providing its observations on Respondent's objections to its First Request for
Production of Documents.

20. On June 15, 2006, the ICSID Secretariat transmitted to the parties a letter
from the Arbitral Tribunal whereby it invited Respondent to indicate by June 20,
2006 whether it maintained its objections to the Production of Documents.

21. On June 20, 2006, the ICSID Secretariat transmitted an e-mail from
Respondent indicating that it reiterated its objections to the Production of
Documents.

22. On June 23, 2006, the ICSID Secretariat transmitted, on behalf of the
Arbitral Tribunal, an electronic version of Procedural Order No. 1 stating the
following:

"WHEREAS, on April 26, 2006, Claimant sent Respondent a Request for Production of
Documents;

WHEREAS, on May 17, 2006, Respondent objected to the foregoing production of documents
and refused to comply with this Request;

WHEREAS, on June 12. 2006. Claimant requested that the Arbitral Tribunal order the

roduction of documents if E3 intained its objections to this productio

WHEREAS, under Article 43 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 34 of the ICSID, the Arbitral
Tribunal is empowered, absent contrary agreement and if it deem it necessary, at any stage of
the proceeding, to request from the parties that they produce documents; it may alse do it
further to a request by one of the parties;

WHEREAS, "the IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Commercial
Arbitration" (and particularly Articles 3 and 9), even though not directly applicable in this
proceeding, can be considered as a guidance as to what documents may be requested and
produced;

WHEREAS, the Arbitral Tribunal examined the first category of documents tied to the ICSID
Case No. ARB/98/4 Wena Hotels Ltd. v. Egypt;

WHEREAS, in order’ to reject the production of t these documents, es = to
lation 22 of ti i and Fi ions stating the followii

"(l) The Secretary-General shall appropriately publish information about the
operation of the Centre (...)

(2) If both parties to a proceeding consent to the publication of:

(a) reports of Conciliation Commissions;
(b) arbitral awards; or
(c) the minutes and other records of proceeding,”

WHEREAS, in the light of these provisions, Respondent considered that "a party to
arbitration can not solely decide to disclose any information relating to such arbitration
unless the consent of the other party is expressly reached”;

WHEREAS, the Arbitral Tribunal considers that Regulation 22 is not applicable to the
present case on the ground that it deals with publication of Awards and other procedural
documents -i.e. making them available to the public in general - but do not concern the
production of documents to a third party who might have a legitimate interest to have access
to these documents to establish its rights;

WHEREAS, additionally, the Arbitral Tribunal notes the fact that the documents in the ICSID
Case No. ARB/98/4 Wena Hotels Ltd. v. Egypt have already been subject to generous
publications, even though partial ones which have already been submitted in the instant case;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Article 3 of the "IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International
Commercial Arbitration", the documents to be produced need to be relevant and material to
the outcome of the case and need to be precisely identified;

WHEREAS, the Arbitral Tribunal finds that it is the case of the first category of requested
documents provided they deal with the Arbitral Tribunal jurisdictional issues that need to be
examined by it at this stage of the proceedings and will order their production;

WHEREAS, however, the Arbitral Tribunal considers that this Production of Documents
should be subject to the execution of a confidentiality undertaking by Claimant;

WHEREAS, the second category of documents requested generally refer to the Egyptian's
policy to privatize enterprises in the Tourism Sector;

WHEREAS, they are not precisely identified and no precise explanation is given as to their
relevancy to the problem of jurisdiction that the Arbitral Tribunal has to solve;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Article 9 of the "IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International
Commercial Arbitration", the Arbitral Tribunal will not order their production;

THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL HAS DECIDED THE FOLLOWING:

1) The foregoing documents:

- Transcript of Tribunal's session held on 25 May 1999;

- Transcript of Tribunal’s session held on 25-29 April 2000;

- Transcript of Tribunal'’s session held on 22-23 October 2001;
- Transcript of Tribunal's session held on 14 June 2005;

- All expert reports/opinions (in relation to the Egyptian Tourism industry) and any
accompanying document thereof,

in the ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4 Wena Hotels Ltd shall be produced by Respondent, in their
part or in totality, provided they are relevant for issues of jurisdiction that the Arbitral
Tribunal needs to examine at this stage of the procedure and upon execution by Claimant of
the text of an undertaking of confidentiality worded on the basis of the model attached to this
decision.

2) The request for production of all documents and written communications relating to efforts
to privatize enterprises within the Egyptian Tourism Sector pursuant to the United States

Agency for International Development (USAID) Egypt Privatization Implementation Project
is denied "

23. On July 7, 2006, the ICSID Secretariat transmitted a letter from Respondent
dated July 6, 2006 whereby it indicated that it complied with Procedural Order
No. | concerning the requested production of documents.

24. On July 14, 2006, the ICSID Secretariat transmitted an electronic version of
Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction.

25. On July 18, 2006, the ICSID Secretariat transmitted a hard copy of
Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, which was received on July 24,
2006. In this Counter-Memorial, the Claimant requests that the Arbitral Tribunal
decides:

© "That the Tribunal has jurisdiction over the claims presented in
[Claimant's] Request for Arbitration, and that they are admissible; and
correspondingly

© That Egypt's objections to jurisdiction be rejected in their entirety.

Since each of Egypt's objections fail (and indeed some, if not all, are
manifestly contrived) [Claimant] respectfully requests that Egypt pay
[Clai 's] costs iated with these pr dings, to be determined by
the Tribunal in the final award."

In order to save time in the proceedings, Claimant also requested that EGYPT's
jurisdictional objections be addressed in the Final Award on the Merits.

26. On July 20, 2006, the ICSID Secretariat transmitted a letter from Claimant
correcting a typographical error as to the number of Exhibits submitted.

27. On July 25, 2006, the ICSID Secretariat transmitted a letter from the
President of the Arbitral Tribunal whereby he indicated the involvement of its
law firm in a case with the Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation of the
Republic of Egypt.

On July 26, 2006, Counsel for Respondent indicated that the foregoing case did
not have any impact on the Chairman's independence and impartiality in the
present case. On July 28, 2006, Counsel for the Claimant indicated the same.

28. On August 1, 2006, the ICSID Secretariat transmitted, on behalf of the
Arbitral Tribunal, a letter indicating to the parties that in the absence of
witnesses or experts to testify, the scheduled hearing on jurisdiction would be
held solely on August 17, 2006 instead of August 17, 2006 and August 18, 2006.
It also transmitted a provisional agenda of the session and requested that
Claimant clarify its position on whether the Tribunal should join the objections
to the jurisdiction to the merits of the case.

29. On August 2, 2006, Claimant indicated that it accepted the provisional
agenda transmitted by the ICSID Secretariat and indicated that it requested that
the Arbitral Tribunal joined the issue on the jurisdiction with the merits.

30. On August 17, 2006, a session on the issues of jurisdiction was held at the
World Bank's offices in Paris.

IlI- DISCUSSION

31. The Respondent objects to the jurisdiction of the Centre and of the Arbitral
Tribunal on the following grounds:

- ratione temporis: the Claimant’s claims would fall beyond the temporal
scope of the Treaty;

- ratione materiae: there would be no dispute directly arising out of an

investment and involving EGYPT;

- ratione personae: EGOTH would not be an emanation of the Egyptian

State.

32. Pursuant to Article 41 of the Arbitration Rules, the Arbitral Tribunal is
authorized to take a decision regarding the jurisdiction of the Centre and its own
jurisdiction. Due to the fact that the objections raised by the Respondent are not
frivolous and that there is no need to enter into the merits of the case to deal
with them, the Arbitral Tribunal decides not to join them to the merits of the
dispute and to resolve them as a preliminary issue in this Decision.
Consequently, the Arbitral Tribunal will deal successively with each of the
Respondent’s objections to its jurisdiction.

A. Do the Claimant's claims fall beyond the temporal scope of the Treaty?
a) The Respondent’s position:
33. The Respondent relies on Article 12 of the Treaty which reads:

"The provisions of this Agreement shall apply to all investments made by
investors of one contracting party in the territory of the other contracting
party prior to or after the entry into force of the Agreement by investors of
the other contracting party. It shall, however, not be applicable to
divergences or disputes, which have arisen prior to its entry into force."

It points out that the Treaty entered into force on January 29, 2000, thirty days
after Egypt had notified to Denmark that it had fulfilled the constitutional
requirements.

Indeed, Article 15 of the Treaty states that:

"[t]he Contracting Parties shall notify each other when the constitutional
requirements for the entry into force of this Agreement [are] fulfilled. The
agreement shall enter into force thirty days after the date of that last
notification."

34. The Respondent underscores that the parties have determined precisely the
scope of the Treaty and that, while they agreed that it would apply to any
investment made by the parties notwithstanding the moment at which it
occurred, it is clear that the Treaty does not apply to "divergences or disputes,
which have arisen prior to its entry into force", thereby exempting the State
from liability for past conduct. According to Respondent, "existing and new
investments would be afforded full Treaty protection, but that as at 29 January
2000, the slate was utterly and completely clean'.”

35. The Respondent emphasizes that Egypt and Denmark deliberately excluded
from the application of the Treaty not only "disputes" that were prior to its entry
into force but also mere "divergences". Referring to Prof. Ch. Shreuer, it
contends that a “dispute must go beyond general grievances and must be
susceptible of being stated in terms of a concrete claim’." "Divergence" is, in its
mind, a very significantly broader concept, which need not go beyond general
grievances and may very well not be susceptible of being stated in terms of a
concrete claim’. Respondent added at the hearing of August 17, 2006 that facts
and situations qualified as divergences shall also be excluded from the
application of the treaty provided they occurred before January 29, 2000.

To support its argumentation, the Respondent also referred, at the hearing, to the
following canons of interpretation:

- the rule of no retrospective effect;
- the rule of literal meaning;
~ the rule against redundancy.

36. Moreover, the Respondent relies on Article 28 of the Vienna Convention
stating that the provisions of a treaty "do not bind a party in relation to any act
or fact which took place or any situation which ceased to exist before the date of
the entry into force of the Treaty".

‘Respondent’, 's Memorial on its objections to jurisdiction, May 31, 2006, p.5, paragraph 28.

? Prof. Christoph H. Shreuer, Commentary on the ICSID Convention, Article 25, 11 ICSID Rev,- FILJ 318
1996), at 337.

Respondent’s Memorial on its objections to jurisdiction, May 31, 2006, page 6, paragraph 30,

37. The Respondent is convinced that the Claimant’s claims are based on
divergences which pre-dated January 29, 2000.

Indeed, it considers that the divergences started in 1993, at the time of the state's
privatisation which allowed the Shepheard Hotel to be sold to a third party. This
is not denied by Claimant which stated in its Request for Arbitration that: "after
1993 EGOTH refused to invest further in the Shepheard Hotel and offered
property for sale" and added that "any initial efforts made by EGOTH to
contribute to the upkeep of the Shepheard Hotel were abandoned after 1993

(..)".

The Claimant also admitted in a letter to the Centre dated September 28, 2005
that "the origins of this dispute date as far back as 1993, at which point Egypt-in
a coordinated effort with EGOTH-embarked on a coordinated strategy to
terminate prematurely the Management and Operation Contract of 8 September
1986 (....) These efforts to evict Helnan culminate, however, in the improper
downgrade of the Shepheard from five-to four stars establishment by the
Ministry of tourism in September 2003 (... dD As a result of such downgrade,
EGOTH i d arbitration pr dit Clai in October 2003. As
already explained above, Claimant put Egypt on notice of its grievances in July
2004."

38. In the light of the above arguments, it seems obvious, from the Respondent's
point of view, that the divergences pre-dated the Treaty's entry into force of
January 29, 2000 and that the claims are outside the scope of the Treaty.
Consequently, in the instant case the Tribunal cannot have jurisdiction under the
ICSID Convention.

b) The Claimant’s position:

39. First, Claimant rejects Egypt's allegation that divergences giving rise to the
claims arose prior to the entry into force of the BIT i.e. prior to January 29,
2000. The Claimant explains that:

"The real source of Claimant's dispute with Egypt is:

the State-orchestrated downgrade of the Shepheard Hotel from five to
four stars on 7 September, 2003; and

the threatened eviction of Claimant from the Shepeard Hotel following

that orchestrated downgrade; and
the final eviction of Claimant on 23 March 2006‘" .

“ Helnan’s counter- Memorial on jurisdiction of July 14, 2006, p.5, paragraph 8.

 

40. The Claimant considers that even though the dispute between the parties
arose in 2003-2004 and at the latest on July 29, 2004 -i.e. when the President of
HELNAN first raised its grievances against EGYPT (see letter to ICSID dated
September 28, 2005),- it may rely on relevant events or conduct of EGYPT prior
to the entry into force of the Treaty in order to explain the background of the
dispute.

41. The Claimant agrees that the Treaty, pursuant to Article 12, applies to
divergences or disputes that arose after its entry into force, i.e. after January 29,
2000. However, Article 12 does not exclude relying on facts that occurred prior
to January 29, 2000.

Indeed, clauses restraining jurisdiction ratione temporis may be divided into two
main groups:

- in the first group, the clauses relate to the date on which a dispute arises,
- in the second group, the clauses relate to the date on which events took place
or facts at the origin of the dispute arose.

Article 12 solely requires the dispute to have arisen after the critical date
(January 29, 2000). There are no consequences if the dispute relates in part to
certain facts or situations prior to that date.

Moreover, when States want to exclude from the scope of a treaty facts and
situations occurring prior to its entry into force, they say so expressly. Article
27(a) of the European Convention for the Peaceful Settlement of Disputes is an
example of such express exclusion. The so-called " Belgian type reservation" to
the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice is another example. The
Treaty does not include any wording of that kind.

42. Additionally, the Treaty "applies to all investments, including those made
prior to its entry into force". Consequently, Claimant is of the view that "since
the express terms of the Treaty contemplate coverage of investments made
before January 2000, then the factual matrix of disputes relatin; ing to such
investments will-unavoidably-also date back to before January 2000° ".

The Claimant finds support in the Decision in the Tecmed S.A. v. Mexico's case
where the Tribunal declared that:

 

Pee di acts or omissions of the Respondent which, though they h d
before the entry into force, may be considered a constituting | part, concurrent

* Helnan’s.counter- Memorial on jurisdiction of July 14, 2006, p.8, paragraph 19.

factor or aggravating or mitigating elements of conducts or acts or omissions of
the Respondent which took piace after such date do fall within the scope of this
Arbitral Tribunal's jurisdiction’.

43. In this respect, the Claimant contends that even though EGOTH has not,
since 1993, respected its obligation to invest money for the upkeep of the
Shepheard Hotel which led Claimant to base its claims on factual behaviours
prior to 2000, other facts or events have led Claimant to file this arbitration
against EGYPT and further actions to interrupt the Management Contract that
continued long after January 2000 were taken by EGYPT.

44. Further, the Claimant objects to EGYPT's interpretation of the term
"divergence" which would be a very significantly broader concept than
"dispute". First, in the Claimant's view, the term "divergence" cannot cover facts
or situations pre dating the dispute since the term "divergence" necessarily
requires the existence of a disagreement whereas facts and situations do not.
Therefore, it is necessary to distinguish facts and situations, on one hand, and
divergence and dispute, on the other hand. Second, the term "dispute" relies on 3
determining elements that are the following:

"() a disagreement on a point of law or fact, conflict of legal views or of
interests between the parties, which (ii) manifests itself in claims of the parties
positively opposing each other; these claims in turn (iii) serving as the point of
departure for the Tribunal itself to determine on an objective basis the existence
of a dispute between the parties’."

45. The Claimant does not give a different meaning to the term "divergence"
which would be "ejusdem generis", i.e. are of a like nature. By definition, the
term "divergence" also requires an "opposition" or "a conflict of view" between
the parties. As the Claimant s' first grievances were solely communicated in
2004 to Egyptian ministers, the divergence cannot have arisen before the year
2000.

46. The Claimant also argues that, in the hypothesise where the Tribunal would
accept that the term "divergence" is broader than the term "dispute", which
opinion Claimant does not share, a restrictive view is adopted under case law as
to the scope of a temporal limitation to jurisdiction. Further, the relevancy of the
facts to the outburst of the dispute is to be taken into account when interpreting
and applying the ratione temporis limitation.

£43 LL.M. 133, at para. 66.
7 Helnan’s counter- Memorial on jurisdiction of July 14, 2006, p.10, paragraph 27.

As stated by the Permanent Court of International Justice in 1939 in Electricity
Company of Sofia and Bulgaria, (...)" it is true that a dispute may presuppose
the existence of some prior situation or fact, but it does not follow that the
dispute arises in regard to that situation or fact. A situation or fact in regard to
which a dispute is said to have arisen must be the real cause of the dispute

(..)8"

Therefore, "to summarise, in applying ratione temporis limitations to facts or
Situations (if it is accepted that "divergence" covers facts or situation), an
international tribunal looks at the facts or situations directly associated with the
outbreak of the dispute itself: There must be a direct and proximate link between
the facts or situations and the dispute: it is not enough that earlier facts or
situations may have in a sense predisposed the parties in respect of a dispute’"

47. In any case, in the present dispute, the triggering event was the downgrade
of the Shepheard Hotel which started on September 7, 2003 and the two other
critical dates were the official notification by Claimant to Respondent of a
dispute (February 14, 2005) and the submission of the Request for Arbitration
(March 8, 2005). The dispute thus cannot have arisen before 2003.

¢) The Arbitral Tribunal’s decision:

48. The parties both agreed in their submissions as well as during the hearing of
August 17, 2006 that the Treaty entered into force on January 29, 2000.

49. They however have opposite views on the interpretation of Article 12 which
deals with the temporal scope of the Treaty.

Indeed, this Article states that:

"The provisions of this Agreement shall apply to all investments made by
investors of one contracting party in the territory of the other contracting party
prior to or after the entry into force of the Agreement by investors of the other
contracting party. It shall, however, not be applicable to divergences or
disputes, which have arisen prior to its entry into force."

50. It results from this wording that whereas any investment falls within the
scope of the Treaty irrespective of the date it was made, the Treaty applies only

* Electricity Company of Sofia and Bulgaria, 1939 PCIJ., Ser. A/B, n°77, at p. 81
° Helnan’s counter- Memorial on jurisdiction of. July 14, 2006, p.13, paragraph 35.

to those divergences or disputes which have arisen subsequently to its entry into
force.

51. The parties mainly disagree on the meaning to be given to the two key terms
in the second sentence of Article 12 i-e "divergence" and "dispute". The
Respondent makes a clear distinction between both. The Claimant considers that
the terms divergence and dispute are ejusdem generis, of a "like nature".

52. The Arbitral Tribunal cannot follow the Claimant’s interpretation in that
regard and agree with the Respondent that, whenever possible, terms must be
interpreted literally and given practical effect, which excludes redundancy. As
the parties to the Treaty referred both to "divergence" and "dispute", it must be
assumed that they were not giving the same meaning to these two distinct terms.

The Tribunal is satisfied that such an assumption is correct. Although, the terms
"divergence" and "dispute" both require the existence of a disagreement between
the parties on specific points and their respective knowledge of such
disagreement, there is an important distinction to make between them as they do
not imply the same degree of animosity. Indeed, in the case of a divergence, the
parties hold different views but without necessarily pursuing the difference in an
active manner. On the other hand, in case of a dispute, the difference of views
forms the subject of an active exchange between the parties under circumstances
which indicate that the parties wish to resolve the difference, be it before a third
party or otherwise. Consequently, different views of parties in respect of certain
facts and situations become a " divergence" when they are mutually aware of
their disagreement. It crystallises as a "dispute" as soon as one of the parties
decides to have it solved, whether or not by a third party.

53. On this basis, the Arbitral Tribunal considers that three hypothesises must be
distinguished in order to determine whether or not the Claimant's claims fall
within or beyond the temporal scope of the Treaty:

- First, if the dispute has crystallised after January 29, 2000 on the sole basis of
divergences prior to that date, the Claimant’s claims cannot be submitted to the
Centre under the Treaty since divergences prior to 2000 are clearly excluded by
Article 12.

- Second, if the dispute has crystallised after January 29, 2000 but on the sole
basis of divergences that occurred after that date, it falls within the temporal
scope of the Treaty as the divergences, source of the dispute, occurred after the
entry into force of the Treaty.

- Third, if the dispute has crystallised after January 29, 2000 as a continuation of
divergences that occurred prior to that date but evolved and changed of nature
after that date, it falls within the temporal scope of the Treaty as the divergences
which are its source are not any longer the divergences which were existing
before January 29, 2000.

54, The instant dispute is based on Heinan’s allegations that Egypt has violated
its obligations under the Treaty i.e. an obligation of full protection and security
and fair treatment as set forth in Article 2 and 3 of the Treaty as well as an
obligation not to expropriate Helnan’s investments without providing prompt,
adequate and effective compensation, as set forth in Article 5. These alleged
violations are made in the context of the privatisation of the Shepheard Hotel.

It cannot be disputed that the Claimant refers to facts and situations prior to
January 29, 2000- as far as 1993- which may be seen as having been the objects
of divergences. However, they are not and could not be at the origin of the
dispute which gave rise to the Claimant's claims.

55. Indeed, on October 15, 2002, the parties agreed to modify the terms of their
Contract by signing an Annex to the Management Contract which put them in a
completely different contractual situation than the one prevailing before, as the
Annex, inter alia, referred to the State’s privatisation program.

Consequently, the divergences that occurred before the agreement on the Annex
of October 15, 2002, even if they originated from disagreement prior to January
29, 2000, could not be of the same nature as the divergences which crystallised
into the instant dispute which occurred under the Management Contract as
modified by the Annex. This situation corresponds to the third hypothesis
contemplated above.

56. On October 15, 2002, HELNAN acknowledged in the Annex that the
Shepheard Hotel formed part of EGYPT’s privatisation project. The divergences
which may have existed before, in particular before January 29, 2000, could not
focus on this issue. As the Arbitral Tribunal is satisfied that the instant dispute
is grounded on alleged violations of the Treaty within the process of the
Shepheard Hotel privatisation, it is as well satisfied that the crystallisation of the
relevant divergence did not occur prior to the entry into force of the Treaty.

57. For these reasons, the Arbitral Tribunal dismiss the Respondent’s objection
to jurisdiction based on Article 12 of the Treaty.

B. The alleged absence of a dispute arising directly out of an investment
and involving EGYPT

a) The Respondent's position:

58. The Respondent alleges that the Claimant made no investment in Egypt. It
underscores that pursuant to Article 25 (1) of the ICSID Convention, the dispute
must arise " directly out of an investment". Even though the ICSID Convention
does not contain any definition of the term "investment", its guiding principle
relies on "a desire to strengthen the partnership between countries in the cause
of the economic development. Ott

59. Moreover, referring to recent ICSID arbitral decisions (in particular the
Decision on jurisdiction in the Salini v. Kingdom of Morocco case) and to the
Commentary by Prof. Ch. Schreuer'', the Respondent suggests that for being
defined as an investment "a qualifying project must show a certain duration, a
regularity of profit and return, an element of risk, a substantial commitment,
and a significant contribution to the host State's development'?".

60. The Respondent points out that the transaction object of the dispute does not
fulfil these criteria since:

"The Management Contract underlying the present proceedings is a standard
commercial agreement featuring ordinary commercial terms, regulating the
management of an unremarkable property of no particular consequence to the
host state's development. The duration of the Contract is well within industry
standards. The nature of Claimant's remuneration it envisages is typical of its
kind. The transaction involves no more than the ordinary degree of commercial
risk inherent in everyday transactions (...) and managing a hotel on behalf of its
owner can hardly be said to contribute to the host state's development’’. "

61. Moreover, the Respondent relies on the Award on Jurisdiction in the Joy
Mining v. A.R.E. case where the Tribunal held that "The parties to a dispute
cannot by contract or by treaty define an investment, for the purpose of ICSID
jurisdiction, which does not satisfy the objective requirements of Article 25 of
the Convention.'*"

'© Report of Executive Directors of the ICSID Convention., | ICSID Reports, at page 25,

"' Christoph H. Shreuer, The ICSID Convention: a Commentary (2001), at 140.

® Respondent's Memorial on its objections to jurisdiction, May 31, 2006, p.9, paragraph $1.

© Respondents Memorial on its objections to jurisdiction, May 31, 2006, p.9, paragraph 52.

* Toy Mining Machinery Ltd v. the Arab Republic of Egypt. ICSID case n° ARB/03/11, Award on Jurisdiction
of August 6, 2004, para. 50, p.11.

19

62. In view of the foregoing contentions and on the ground that Claimant has
failed to demonstrate the existence of an investment, the Respondent asserts that
the transaction cannot be qualified as an investment and simply constitutes a
commercial transaction.

63. The Respondent further argues that the Claimant also failed to prove the
existence of a prima facie dispute directly arising out of an investment and
involving EGYPT, although this is the first necessary step in order to determine
the jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of the Arbitral Tribunal.
Indeed, the Claimant has solely indicated in its Request for Arbitration that
EGYPT had violated its obligations towards HELNAN under the Treaty but did
not provide any additional evidence as to this allegation preventing therefore the
Arbitral Tribunal of determining whether or not the alleged violations felt within
the provisions of the Treaty.

64. The Respondent invokes several ICSID cases'’ in order to contend that
failing to establish prima facie violations of the Treaty by EGYPT, the Claimant
cannot resort to arbitration under the Treaty. It refers also, i in the same spirit to
the approach adopted by the International Court of Justice’®,

65. Moreover, to the extent that the refusal of EGOTH to finance the renovation
of the Shepheard Hotel, its negligence in the maintenance of the hotel and the
downgrading of the Hotel are the causes of the dispute, Claimant has no valid
cause of action in front of this Tribunal.

Indeed, the essential basis of the claim concerns a contractual dispute with
another party that has already been resolved by the Award rendered under the
aegis of the Cairo Regional Centre for International Commercial Arbitration.
The Claimant is attempting to dress up contractual grievances as Treaty claims.
The Claimant thus failed to determine the cause of action capable of founding
the Tribunal's jurisdiction under article 25 of the ICSID Convention. It
concludes, quoting the above-mentioned Award in the Joy Mining v. A.R.E.
case, that " Jn the absence of a Treaty-based claim, and the evidence that, on the
contrary, all claims are contractual, justifies the finding that the Tribunal lacks
jurisdiction.!”

'S SGS v, Pakistan, ICSID Case n° ARB/01/13, Decision of the Arbitral Tribunal on objections to jurisdiction of
August 6, 2003; SGS v. Republic of the Philippines, ICSID Case n° ARB/02/6, Decision of the Arbitral Tribunal
on objections to jurisdiction of January 29, 2004; Salini Costruttori S.P.A. and Italstrade, S.P.A. v Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, ICSID Case n° ARB/02/13, Decision on jurisdiction of November 29, 2004,

“Yugoslavia v. Italy, ICJ Reports 1999-1, p. 490. 4

"’ See note 14, para. 82 of the Award.

20

b) The Claimant’s position:

66. The Claimant rejects EGYPT’s allegation that no "investment" was made by
HELNAN in Egypt. It denies that the Contract is "a@ standard commercial
agreement". On the contrary, it meets the criteria adopted by the Respondent to
define an " investment", in spite of their excessive narrowness. Indeed, it shows
certain duration, a regularity of profit and return, an element of risk, a
substantial commitment and a_ significant contribution to EGYPT’s
development.

~ duration: the Management Contract was concluded for a period of 26 years.

- a regularity of profit and return: it results from article 1.7 of the Contract
which defines Total Operating Revenue as follows: "Means the sum of
revenues realized (directly or indirectly) during any given fiscal year, by
operating the hotel and its facilities, including the revenue realized through
resident or transit hotel guests, or through other activities or leases or
privileges approved by the manager."

- element of risk: the Claimant covered the initial expenditure required to
regenerate the Shepheard Hotel and undertook the operational risk, deductible
from the hotel's revenues.

- substantial commitment: the aim of the contract was to transform the
Shepheard Hotel into a five-star establishment and HELNAN invested
considerably to reach this goal and invest further amounts for maintenance and
repair.

- contribution to development: the Contract has contributed to EGYPT’s
tourism industry. Moreover, HELNAN was the first company investing in the
popular areas of Egypt such as Sharm El Sheikh, Ras Sudr, Nuweiba, Port Said
and Fayed and that, by its marketing, it induced other companies to invest. In
this respect it has largely contributed to the development of the country.

67. Consequently, the Contract qualifies as an "investment", even though the
above mentioned criteria "should not necessarily be understood as jurisdictional

requirements but merely as typical characteristics of investments under the
Convention", as pointed out by Prof. Ch. Schreuer'®.

8 Christoph H. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: a Commentary (2001), at 140.

21

68. The Claimant also relies on decisions of ICSID Tribunals which, according
to it gave a broad interpretation to the term "investment" in article 25 of the
ICSID Convention".

69. The Claimant asserts that its contractual rights under the Contract fall within

the definition of the term "investment" provided in Article 1 of the Treaty i.e.
"every kind of asset". This precludes Egypt from rejecting that definition on the
basis of the principle alegans contraria non est audientur. The Respondent
reliance on the Award issued in Joy Mining v. A.R.E” is misplaced as in this
case, the jurisdictional issue was that of " whether or not bank guarantees are to
be considered as an investment". Furthermore, in this Award, it was found that
the bank guarantee did not meet the definition of an "investment" contained in
both the relevant bilateral investment treaty and the ICSID Convention.

70. Therefore, the Claimant concludes that the Respondent’s objection to
jurisdiction grounded on the notion of investment should be dismissed.

71. The Claimant analyses the Respondent’s argument that the Claimant failed
to prove the existence of a prima facie dispute directly arising out of an
investment and involving EGYPT as an assertion that HELNAN has not
sufficiently substantiated its claims. According to it, this matter pertains to the
merits of the case rather than to the jurisdictional phase and to bring such
evidence and such substantiation at this stage of the proceedings is neither
required by the ICSID Convention nor by the Arbitration Rules.

72. The Claimant contends that its Request for Arbitration meets all the
requirements pursuant to Article 36 (2) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 2 (e)
of the Arbitration Institution Rules. Indeed, the Claimant's Request for
Arbitration (i) contains information concerning the issues in dispute (ii)
indicates the existence of a legal dispute between Claimant and Egypt pertaining
to an investment (iii) provides an overview of the factual and legal issues.
Therefore, Egypt can not object to Claimant's lack of substance within the
Request for Arbitration.

73. In any case, for the prima facie standard to be satisfied, it is sufficient that
the facts alleged by the Claimant's, provided they are ultimately proven true, be
capable of constituting a breach of the Treaty. The Claimant relies in this respect
on the Decisions on Jurisdiction made in the ICSID cases Bayindir Insaat

' Fedax v, Venezuela, ICSID Case n° ARB/96/4, Decision on jurisdiction of July 11, 1997; COSB v. Slovak ,
IcsID Case n° ARB/97/4 , Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction of May 24, 1999. F
See note 14.

22

Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S.v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan”! and Jan de Nul
N.V. and Dredging International N.V. v. A.R.E.™.

¢) The Arbitral Tribunal Decision:

74. It is common ground that the Arbitral Tribunal has jurisdiction only if the
requirements of Article 25 of the Convention are met. This Article reads as
follow:

"The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly
out of an investment, between a Contracting State (...) and a national of another
Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit
to the Centre."

75. The Arbitral Tribunal has already found that this dispute falls within the
temporal scope of the Treaty which includes the consent of the parties to the
jurisdiction of the Centre. It must now decide whether this dispute is a legal
dispute and arise directly out of an investment between a Contracting State and a
national of another Contracting State.

76. It is not disputed that the dispute is a legal dispute. It is not disputed either
that the Claimant is a national of a Contracting State, Denmark, but the
Respondent denies that it arises from an investment and that it involves a
Contracting State, EGYPT.

77. The Arbitral Tribunal is satisfied that the dispute arises directly out of an
investment. It disagrees with the Respondent’s view that the Contract can solely
be "a standard commercial agreement featuring ordinary commercial terms,
regulating the management of an unremarkable property of no particular
consequence on the Host State's development". The Arbitral Tribunal accepts
the Respondent’s suggestion, based on ICSID precedents, as summarized in the
unchallenged statement by Prof. Ch. Schreuer, that to be characterized as an
investment a project " must show a certain duration, a regularity of profit and
return, an element of risk, a substantial commitment, and a significant
contribution to the host State's development." But the Arbitral Tribunal also
agrees with the Claimant that the Contract meets these requirements. Twenty six
years is definitely a " certain duration", the Claimant’s activity was supposed to
provide it with a regular remuneration, refurbishing the Shepheard Hotel to

*' Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S.v. Islamic republic of Pakistan, , ICSID Case n° ARB/03/29,
Decision on jurisdiction of March 14, 2005.

® Jan de Nul N.V. & Dredging International N.V. v. A.R.E., ICSID Case n° ARB/04/13, Decision on
Jurisdiction of June 16, 2006. .

® see note n°12

23

transform it into a five-stars hotel implied the risk of no commercial success and
the amount of money necessary to achieve that goal and keep such classification
for years qualifies as a substantial commitment. As for the contribution to the
development of the EGYPT’s development, the importance of the tourism
industry in the Egyptian economy makes it obvious.

78. Moreover, Article 1 of the Treaty reads as follow:

" The term "investment" means every kind of asset and shall include in
particular, but not exclusively:

(i) tangible and intangible, moveable and immoveable property, as well as any
other rights such as leases, mortgages, liens, pledges, privileges, guarantees
and any other similar rights,

(ii) a company or business enterprise, or shares, stock or other forms of
participation in a company or business enterprise [...],

(iii) returns reinvested, claims to money and claims to performance pursuant to
contract having an economic value [...]

(iv) industrial and intellectual property rights [...]
(v) concessions or other rights conferred by law or under contract [...]."

79. The Contract falls without any doubt within this broad definition and, in
particular, under Article 1(v). Most significantly also, words as "assets", "any
other rights", "any other similar rights", "pursuant to contract having an
economic value", "under contract" shows that Article 1 encompass wide
concepts that include undoubtfully the contractual obligations contained in the
Contract.

80. In this case, both the requirements of ICSID precedents, as referred to by the
Respondent and the definition of Article 1 of the Treaty are satisfied.
Consequently, the Arbitral Tribunal concludes that the dispute arises out of an
investment. There was no contention by the Respondent that the relation
between the Claimant’s claims and the Contract would not be direct. Thus the
Arbitral Tribunal is satisfied that the dispute directly arises out of an investment.

81. Has the Claimant made a prima facie case that its case is against EGYPT?
The Arbitral tribunal has no doubt in this regard. The Claimant alleges that
through a conspiracy, various emanations of the Egyptian State planned the
‘downgrading of the Shepheard Hotel from five-stars to four-stars and the

24

termination of the Contract in order to facilitate the privatisation of the Hotel. If
it was true, and it remains to be proved, HELNAN would have a case against
EGYPT. The Tribunal here follows the approach adopted by others ICSID
Tribunals“. To ascertain the reality of the situation would require entering
further into the merits of the case. This is what the Claimant suggested as it
requested that the Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction be dealt with the
merits of the case. The Respondent took the contrary view and this view was
accepted by the Tribunal. The consequence is that it must remain at a prima
facie level and, at this level, it is satisfied that the Claimant has established the
existence of a prima facie dispute directly arising out of an investment and
involving EGYPT.

Thus, the Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction on the ground that the Claimant
has failed to prove such a prima facie case is dismissed.

C. The status of EGOTH
a) The Respondent’s position:

82. In order to further help the Tribunal to decide whether Claimant provided or
not prima facie evidence as to the violation of the Treaty, the Respondent
contends that it needs to clarify the legal situation of EGOTH which is
considered by Claimant as an emanation of the Egyptian State.

The Respondent refers to the dispute that opposed SPP and Southern properties
Itd to the Arab Republic of Egypt and EGOTH, known as the "Pyramids
Plateau" case. In this case, an Arbitral Tribunal under the aegis of the
International Court of Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce
decided that " (....) bearing in mind EGOTH's separate legal entity, we find it
impossible to say that the breach committed by the Government was also ipso
facto a breach of a joint obligation by EGOTH or that the Act of Government in
cancelling the Project was an act that may be attributed also to EGOTH. (...).
We accordingly hold that EGOTH was not liable for the cancellation".

The Court of Appeal of Paris, which set aside the Award, agreed on that
particular subject and held that EGOTH had:

"“indiscutablement une personnalité morale et un statut juridique distincts de
!'Etat, qu'il pouvait, en conséquence, agir en son nom et avoir un patrimoine

4 Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S.v. Islamic republic of Pakistan and Jan de Nul NV. and
Dredging International N.V. v. A.R.E., see notes n° 21.and 22. , “

25

propre avant que sa transformation en société anonyme, courant 1976, mette
250

encore en évidence son caractére autonome".

83. The Respondent further asserted at the hearing of August 17, 2006 that even
though EGOTH is within the ownership of the Egyptian government, its
administration remains independent. Accordingly, none of its contracts or acts is
attributable to the government.

Nevertheless, Claimant's claims are addressed to EGOTH, which is not an entity
of the Egyptian State, and thus cannot justify the jurisdiction of the Centre.

b) The Claimant’s position:

84, The Claimant rejects EGYPT’s objections to jurisdiction on the basis of
EGOTH’s status. Indeed, the claims it brings against Egypt do not solely involve
EGOTH but also, inter alia, the Egyptian government, the Ministry of Tourism,
the Department of Health, the Civil Defence Department, the Tourist Police, the
Ministry of Justice, the Judicial Authority Police and the Ministry of Investment
that have all contributed to the termination of Contract. The objection to
jurisdiction should therefore be rejected.

85. In any case, however, the Claimant contends that EGOTH 's actions or
omissions are attributable to Egypt. The Claimant refers to Article 4 to 11 of the
ILC Rules applicable in all international obligations of States in order to
determinate whether a State is responsible for the action or omission of an
entity.

Claimant explains that:

"Article 4 addresses conducts of organs of a State [and] (...) stipulates that the
conduct of any State organ, whether exercising legislative, ive, judicial or
any other function shall be considered an act of that State under international
law, irrespective of the position the organ in question holds in the organisation
of the State and whatever its character as an organ of the central government,

or of a territorial unit of the State.

Article 5 regulates the conduct of persons or entities which are not an organ of
the State, but which are empowered by municipal legislation to exercise
elements of governmental authority. These acts are considered acts of the State-

* Quotation in French in the Respondent's Memorial on.its objections to jurisdiction, May 31, 2006, p.15,
paragraph 91.

26

and thus attributable to it- under international law, provided the person or
og . , Le:
entity is acting in such capacity in the particular situation””".

86. In this light, Claimant contends that EGOTH was de jure and de facto an
emanation of the Egyptian State and that consequently EGYPT should be held
responsible for EGOTH’s acts.

87. As asserted during the First Session of April 14, 2006, HELNAN recalls that
EGOTH's predecessor - EHC- was a public sector company, wholly owned by
the Egyptian Government, pursuant to Law No. 97 of 1983 that governed Public
Sector Companies and organisation.

88. A new law named the Public Sector Companies Law was enacted in 1991
(hereinafter "the Law") which pooled the public sector companies into twelve
State owned holding companies supervised by the Minister for the Public Sector.
Claimant emphasizes that the Holding Company, that is 100% owned by
EGYPT, also owns 100% of the share capital of EGOTH.

Even though the 1991 law purportedly aimed to. separate legal entities from the
State, Claimant underscores that the Holding Company is still 100% owned by
the State since it appears from the statute that its role is to "contribute to the
development of national economy in its field of activity and through its
subsidiary companies [i.e. EGOTH] within the framework of the public policy of
the state*’".

89. Further, the Claimant insists on the role of the ministers and their impact on
the Holding Company.

90. The Claimant also contends that pursuant to provisions from the 1991 law it
is also entirely controlled by the Egyptian State via the Holding Company.
EGOTH is then naturally, as the Holding Company, not an independent entity in
view of the controls made by Egypt on any action the Holding Company and
EGOTH attempt to do on their own.

Therefore, EGOTH is an emanation of the Egyptian State, acting under its entire
control.

3) Helnan's counter- Memorial on jurisdiction of July 14, 2006, p.29, paragraph 76.
Helnan’s counter- Memorial on jurisdiction of July 14, 2006, p.31, paragraph 84,

27

The Claimant also underlines that, as a matter of fact, after the taking over by
EGOTH, the Shepheard Hotel was immediately listed on the Egyptian Ministry
of Investment's website, showing, once more, the role of EGYPT.

¢) The Arbitral Ti ribunal’s decision:

91. The Arbitral Tribunal does not need to decide on the status of EGOTH in
order to assess its jurisdiction in this case. It has already found that the Claimant
has established the existence of a prima facie dispute directly arising out of an
investment and involving EGYPT and that the dispute falls within the temporal
scope of the Treaty. However, since the parties have thoroughly discussed this
point, it considers ex abundanti cautela that it is its duty to solve this disputed
issue in this Decision.

92. The Arbitral Tribunal is of the opinion that Claimant has convincingly
demonstrated that EGOTH, through the Holding Company (which owns
EGOTH at 100%), is under the close control of the State. Indeed, the following
points must be underscored:

- The purpose of EGOTH is "to contribute to the development of national
economy in its field of activity and through its subsidiaries companies [i.e
EGOTH] within the framework of the public policy of the State" (article 2.2 of
the Law);

- EGOTH’s memorandum and articles of association are reviewed by the State
Council (article 11);

- EGOTH’s general assembly is headed by the Chairman of the Holding
company’s board of directors. Moreover, the Minister exercises administrative
and executive powers on the Holding Company;

- Funds of EGOTH are public funds;

- The Manager and Director of EGOTH may be imprisoned if he/she does not
distribute State’s share of profits (Article 49.3).

However, all these gathered clues are not sufficient to conclude that EGOTH’s
conduct is attributable to EGYPT. Indeed, as pointed out by M. Crawford”® "the
fact than an entity can be classified as public or private according to the criteria
of a given legal system, the existence of a greater or lesser State participation in

2 James Crawford, The International Law Commission's Articles on State Responsibility. Introduction, Text and
Commentaries, Cambridge University Press, 2002, page 100.

28

its capital or, more generally, in the ownership of its assets, the fact that it is not
subject to executive control- these are not decisive criteria for the purpose of
attribution of the entity’s conduct to the State. Instead, article 5 refers to the true
common feature, namely that these entities are empowered, if only to a limited
extent or in a specific context, to exercise specific elements of governmental
authority".

93. More significantly in this case, EGOTH was an active operator in the
privatisation of the tourism industry on behalf of the Egyptian Government.
Egypt's privatisation program was scheduled since 2001 and always included
EGOTH’s assets. The different announcements proposing to invest in Egypt, on
the Ministry of Investment website, all refers to Egypt, the Holding Company
and EGOTH. In this respect, it must be pointed out that according to Article 5 of
the ILC Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts
"the conduct of a person or entity which is not a organ of the State under Article
4 but which is empowered by the law of that State to exercise elements of the
governmental authority shall be considered an act of the State under
international law, provided the person or entity is acting in that capacity in the
particular instance". Even if EGOTH has not been officially empowered by law
to exercise elements of the governmental authority, its actions within the
privatisation process are attributable to the Egyptian State.

94, Thus, the Respondent’s characterization of EGOTH’s status cannot be
sustained. On the contrary, the Arbitral tribunal findings in this respect confirm,
ex abundanti cautela, that the Claimant has established the existence of a prima
facie dispute involving EGYPT.

95. In consideration of all the above, the Arbitral Tribunal retains jurisdiction.

D. The allocation of costs:

96. Each party requests that the other one be condemned to bear the costs in
connection to these proceedings.

97. The Arbitral Tribunal will examine this question in its Award.

29

ON THE BASIS OF THE ABOVE
THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL DECIDES AS FOLLOWS:
1. The Arbitral Tribunal has jurisdiction over the dispute submitted to it in

this arbitration.

2. The Arbitral Tribunal will, accordingly, make the necessary order for the
continuation of the proceedings on the merits.

3. The Arbitral Tribunal will take a decision regarding the costs in connection
to this part of the proceedings in its Award.

Made on October 17, 2006

Mr. Yves D) of the Arbitral Tribunal

Prof. icstiiere Arbitrator Ln
NE ssc {] Asm

\
Mr. Michael LEE, Arbitrator

sue Nek, Coe

30

