IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION
BEFORE A TRIBUNAL CONSTITUTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE AGREEMENT ON
ENCOURAGEMENT AND RECIPROCAL PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS BETWEEN
THE KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS AND
THE CZECH AND SLOVAK FEDERAL REPUBLIC, SIGNED ON APRIL 29, 1991
ENTERED INTO FORCE ON OCTOBER 1, 1992 (“AGREEMENT”)
-and-

THE UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW
ARBITRATION RULES, 1976 (“UNCITRAL RULES”)
ADMINISTERED BY THE PERMANENT COURT OF ARBITRATION (“PCA”)
PCA CASE NO. 2009-11

-between-

HICEE B.V.

(“Claimant”)

-and-

THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC

(“Respondent”)

 

PARTIAL AWARD

23 May 2011

 

By the Tribunal:

Sir Franklin Berman KCMG QC
Judge Charles N. Brower
Judge Peter Tomka

Page 2 of 58

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION
A. The Parties
B. Background of the Dispute
PROCEDURAL HISTORY
STATEMENT OF FACTS
A. Relevant Provisions of the Agreement
B. _ Relevant Facts Regarding HICEE’s Interests in Dévera and Apollo...
THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS
SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS...
A. The Principles of Interpretation to be Applied by the Tribunal
B. _ The Parties’ Views Regarding the Interpretation of Article 1(a) of the Agreement 15
1. The Ordinary Meaning of the Terms of Article 1(a) of the Agreement ......... 15

(a) The Ordinary Meaning of the Terms “either directly or through an
investor of a third State”...
The Rest ’s Position 15
The Claimant's Position.
(b) The Scope of Article 1(a) Interpreted in Good Faith

The Rest ’s Position

The Claimant's Position.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2. The Terms “either directly or through an investor of a third State” in Their
Context and in Light of the Agreement’s Object and Purpose.....

(a) The Meaning and Relevance of the Dutch Explanatory Notes............. 19
(i) Admissibility under the Vienna Convention.....
The Re ’s Position

 

 

The Claimant's Position
(ii) The Substantive Scope of the Dutch Explanatory Notes.
The Rest ’s Position

   
   
   
   

The Claimant's Position.
(b) The Meaning and Relevance of the Agreed Minutes.
The Rest ’s Position
The Claimant's Position.
(c) The Agreement’s Object and Purpose
The Rest ’s Position
The Claimant's Position.
(d) Contemporaneous and Subsequent Treaty Practice.
The Rest ’s Position
The Claimant's Position.
C. Application of the More Favourable Treatment by Virtue of Article 3(2) and 38) |
of the Agreement.
The Res, ’s Position 29

The Claimant's Position.

 

Page 3 of 58

D. Claims by HICEE as a Shareholder in Dévera Holding.

 

 

The Re ’s Position
The Claimant's Position.
VI. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS 33

 

A, The Terms of the Agr
B. The Meaning of “Direct”
C. The Extraneous Materials
D.
E.

 

 

 

The Most-Favoured-Nation Clause....

.  Conel
Vil. COSTS
VIII. DISPOSITIF

 

 

 

Page 4 of 58

L INTRODUCTION

A. The Parties

The Claimant in this matter is HICEE B.V., Van Nelleweg 1206, 3044 BC Rotterdam, the
Netherlands (hereinafter the “Claimant” or “HICEE”), a corporation constituted under the
laws of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. The Claimant is represented by Mr Pieter de Kok of
HICEE B.V.; | Mr Stanimir A. Alexandrov, Mr Daniel M. Price, Ms Jennifer Haworth
McCandless, and Ms Marinn Carlson of Sidley Austin LLP; and Judge Stephen M. Schwebel.

The Respondent is the Government of the Slovak Republic, Ministry of Finance,
Stefanovitova 5, P.O. BOX 82, 817 82 Bratislava, Slovak Republic (hereinafter the
“Respondent” or the “Slovak Republic”). The Respondent is represented by

of the Ministry of Finance of the Slovak Republic; Mr
David Kavanagh, Mr Rainer Wachter, and Mr David Herlihy of Skadden, Arps, Slate,
Meagher & Flom LLP.

B. Background of the Dispute

The present dispute concerns the Claimant’s interest in DOVERA zdravotna poist’ oviia, a.s.
(hereinafter “D6vera”), and APOLLO zdravotna poist’oviia, a.s. (hereinafter “Apollo”), two
health insurance companies organized under the laws of the Slovak Republic.' Both entities
were subsidiaries of DOVERA Holding, a.s. (hereinafter “Dévera Holding”), also
incorporated in the Slovak Republic, which in turn was — and still is — wholly owned by the
Claimant. In relation to Dévera and Apollo, the Claimant alleges that the Respondent has
breached Articles 3, 4, and 5 of the Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection
of Investments between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Czech and Slovak Federal
Republic of 29 April 1991,? which entered into force on 1 October 1992 (hereinafter the

“Agreement” or the “BIT”).’ Specifically, the Claimant complains about the enactment of

As explained below, the Claimant informed the Tribunal on October 28, 2010 that, as a result of a merger,

Apollo had acquired Dévera; that Apollo was renamed “Dévera”; and that the former Dévera was placed
in liquidation under a new name. These changes in the corporate structure, however, do not affect the
Tribunal’s decision in the present Award.

 

See on and Recip Protection of Between the Kingdom of the
Netherlands and the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic, done at Prague on 29 April 1991, entered into
force on 1 October 1992 (Exhibit C-1). It is not in dispute that, after the dissolution of the Czech and
Slovak Federal Republic on 31 December 1992, the Slovak Republic succeeded to the Agreement (see
also paragraph 47 below).

For greater clarity, the Tribunal reserves the term “treaty” to denote international treaties generally —as in
the context of its discussion of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties below — while referring to
the 29 April 1991 investment agreement as the “Agreement” or the “BIT”.

Page 5 of 58

Act No. 530/2007 Coll. of 25 October 2007, Amending and Supplementing Act No. 581/2004
Coll. on Health Insurance Companies and Healthcare Supervision, and Amending and
Supplementing Certain Acts as Amended,’ by which health insurance companies were
prohibited from distributing profits and made subject to a cap on their permissible

administrative expenses.

IL. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

4. By a Notice of Arbitration dated 17 December 2008, HICEE commenced arbitration against
the Slovak Republic, pursuant to Article 8 of the Agreement and Article 3 of the Arbitration
Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law adopted on 15
December 1976 (hereinafter “UNCITRAL Rules”). The Respondent received the Notice of
Arbitration on 29 December 2008.

Bs On 17 December 2008, the Claimant appointed Judge Charles N. Brower as the first
arbitrator. On 23 February 2009, the Respondent appointed His Excellency Judge Peter
Tomka as the second arbitrator. On 26 May 2009, the co-arbitrators jointly appointed Sir

Franklin Berman as the presiding arbitrator.

6. On 8 October 2009, the Tribunal held a Preliminary Procedural Meeting at the Peace Palace,
The Hague, the Netherlands. Present at the Meeting were the following:

The Tribunal:

Sir Franklin Berman KCMG QC
Judge Charles N. Brower

Judge Peter Tomka

For the Claimant:

Mr Pieter de Kok, HICEE B.V.

Mr Stanimir Alexandrov, Sidley Austin LLP

Ms Marinn Carlson, Sidley Austin LLP

Ms Miroslava Petroviéova, Skubla & Partneri s r.o.
Ms Daniela Svecova, Skubla & Partneri s.r.o.

For the Respondent:
Ministry of Finance of the Slovak Republic
Ministry of Finance of the Slovak Republic
Ministry of Finance of the Slovak Republic
Mr David Kavanagh, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP
Mr Rainer Wachter, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP
Mr David Herlihy, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP
Ms Genevieve Poirier, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP

 

* Act No. 530/2007 Coll. of 25 October 2007, Amending and Supplementing Act No. 581/2004 Coll. on
Health Insurance Companies and Healthcare Supervision, and Amending and Supplementing Certain Acts
as Amended (Exhibit C-19).

Page 6 of 58

For the Permanent Court of Arbitration:
Mr Dirk Pulkowski
Mr Garth Schofield

Court Reporting:
Ms June Martin, T and M Reporting

Other:
Dr Anke Meier, Arbitration Legal Assistant to Judge Brower

On 8 October 2009, in the course of the Preliminary Procedural Meeting, the Parties and the

Tribunal signed the Terms of Appointment.

Taking into account the Parties’ 3 October 2009 agreement on procedural issues and the
further agreement reached during the 8 October 2009 Meeting, the Tribunal issued Procedural
Order No. 1 on 9 November 2009.

On 22 February 2010, in accordance with Procedural Order No. 1, the Claimant filed its
Statement of Claim together with witness statements, an expert report, and accompanying

exhibits.

On 16 March 2010, the Respondent, in accordance with Procedural Order No. 1, notified the
Tribunal of three jurisdictional objections.* The Respondent also proposed to file its
Memorial on Jurisdiction, which would be limited to a discrete point of treaty interpretation,

on 14 May 2010.

On 29 March 2010, the Parties submitted a joint letter to the Tribunal indicating their
agreement that the proceedings should be bifurcated in order to address what the Parties
termed the “Treaty Interpretation Issue” as a preliminary matter. The Respondent agreed to
submit its Memorial on Jurisdiction on 23 April 2010, and the Claimant agreed to file its
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction on 22 June 2010. The Parties proposed to hold a two-day

hearing (the “Hearing”) in mid-July 2010 or soon thereafter.

On 7 April 2010, in response to the Parties’ joint letter of 29 March 2010, the Tribunal held a
telephone conference with the Parties regarding the scheduling for the Hearing on the Treaty
Interpretation Issue. The Parties agreed to the Tribunal’s proposal that the Hearing be held
from the afternoon of 20 July 2010 to 21 July 2010, with the possibility of an extension, if
needed, to the morning of 22 July 2010.

On 23 April 2010, in accordance with the agreed schedule, the Respondent submitted its

Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, together with exhibits.

5 Two of which (relating to the Agreement’s application ratione temporis and to the effect of Slovakia’s

accession to the European Union) need no further consideration here; see below, paragraph 11.

Page 7 of 58

On 29 April 2010, the Tribunal wrote to the Parties in further detail regarding the organization
and conduct of the July 2010 Hearing.

On 22 June 2010, in accordance with the agreed schedule, the Claimant submitted its Counter-
Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, together with witness statements, expert reports,

and accompanying exhibits.

On 9 July 2010, the Tribunal held a pre-Hearing telephone conference with the Parties to
confirm the names of the witnesses that would be called during the Hearing, the schedule for

the oral pleadings, and relevant logistical arrangements.

On 19 July 2010, the Respondent wrote to the Tribunal, requesting leave to introduce three
additional documents (numbered R-3, R-4, and R-5) into the record as exhibits in advance of

the Hearing on the Treaty Interpretation Issue.

On the same day, the Claimant wrote to the Tribunal, requesting that it reject the

Respondent’s application and asserting that the Respondent had failed to establish either the

 

of the indicated d or any i i that would warrant

their admission.

From 20 to 21 July 2010, a Hearing on the Treaty Interpretation Issue was held at the Peace

Palace, The Hague, the Netherlands. Present at the Hearing were the following:

The Tribunal:

Sir Franklin Berman KCMG QC
Judge Charles N. Brower

Judge Peter Tomka

For the Claimant:

Mr Pieter de Kok, HICEE B.V.

Mr Stanimir Alexandrov, Sidley Austin LLP

Mr Daniel Price, Sidley Austin LLP

Ms Jennifer Haworth McCandless, Sidley Austin LLP
Ms Miroslava Petroviéova, Skubla & Partneri s r.o.
Ms Daniela Svecova, Skubla & Partneri s.r.o.

For the Respondent:
Ministry of Finance of the Slovak Republic
Ministry of Finance of the Slovak Republic
Mr David Kavanagh, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP
Mr David Herlihy, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP
Ms Genevieve Poirier, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP
Mr Jose Torres, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP
Mr Martin Subrt, Rowan Legal s.r.o.

 

For the Permanent Court of Arbitration:
Mr Dirk Pulkowski

Mr Garth Schofield

Mr Vladyslav Lanovoy

20.

21.

22.

23.

6

Page 8 of 58

Court Reporting:
Mr Trevor McGowan

Other:

Mr Epaminontas Triantafilou, Arbitration Legal Assistant to Judge Brower
On 20 July 2010, with the Parties’ agreement, the Tribunal determined that the Respondent
could refer in its opening to the three additional d that it had req d

leave to introduce, without prejudice to the Tribunal’s final ruling on their admissibility the

following day.

On 21 July 2010, the Tribunal issued the following ruling regarding the three additional

documents:

[T]he Tribunal has noted what appears to be agreed between the Parties, that the three
documents fall into two rather different classes: the documents numbered R-3 and R-4
into one class, and the document numbered R-5 into a different class, inasmuch as they
are addressed, so it would seem, to rather different questions.

 

Leaving that point aside for the moment, the Tribunal starts from the fact that both Parties
have put directly in issue before it the intentions of the treaty parties in agreeing on the
key provisions of the bilateral agreement, and the Tribunal is clear in its own mind that it
would benefit from whatever assistance is available to it in confronting this question.

   

  

 

All three documents are therefore admitted. But the admission of the documents is
without prejudice to an assessment of their relevance or their materiality, notably the
question of the relevance of document R-5 to the treaty issue, which I have just
described. And the admission of the documents is of course entirely without prejudice to
a determination which remains to be made by the Tribunal, and will be made in due
course, of what weight to attach, if indeed any weight, to the documents in relation to the
points at issue before the Tribunal.

 

  

All of that said, the Tribunal has further decided that in the circumstances it would be
neither fair nor reasonable for any of the documents to be used in cross-examination of
the witnesses who are to be heard later in the day. Counsel may not therefore put the
documents or any of them to a witness.

Counsel will, however, be permitted to put to any witness by alternative means a line of
questioning similar to that which might have been developed in direct reliance on the
documents themselves.°

During the course of the Hearing, the following witnesses were called by the Claimant and
questioned by the Parties:

Mr Rafael Nagapetiants

Mr Jozef Bak’ay

Mr Jiti Brabec
Mr Pavel Novicky

On 26 July 2010, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2, which required the Parties:

Hearing Tr., 21 July 2010, at 1:17-2:25. For better readability and consistency, defined terms are

capitalized throughout the present Award, including when they occur in quotations from the Hearing
Transcripts.

24.

25.

26.

27.

Page 9 of 58

 

[tJo produce jointly to the Tribunal within one month of toda

1. any or all jointly agreed minutes of the negotiating sessions on the text of the
Agreement

2. in the event that no such agreed minutes can be found, any official report by the
Czechoslovakian or Netherlands delegations to the said negotiations

3. any reports by the competent Czechoslovakian or Netherlands Ministries seeking
the formal approval of their Governments of the text of the Agreement and
authorizing its signature

which may throw light on the description of the negotiation of Article 1 of the Agreement
contained in the letter from the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands to the
Chairm{e]n of the First and Second Chambers of the States-General dated 31 March 1992
(Document R-1).

Should difficulties be encountered in securing access to the above documents, or in
securing consent to their production, the Parties are to report back to the Tribunal for
farther directions.

On 26 and 27 August 2010, the Parties wrote to the Tribunal, jointly requesting an extension
until 3 September 2010 of the time period to produce documents in response to the Tribunal’s

Procedural Order No. 2. On 27 August 2010, the Tribunal granted the Parties’ request.

On 3 September 2010, the Parties jointly wrote to the Tribunal enclosing “all documents in
Claimant’s and Respondent’s possession that either party obtained in connection with requests
to the Slovak Republic, the Czech Republic, and the Kingdom of the Netherlands”. The
Parties noted that they were unable to agree on which, if any, of these documents were
responsive to the Tribunal’s request in Procedural Order No. 2, but were in agreement that
further requests to the Governments concerned would be unlikely to yield additional travaux
relevant to the Treaty Interpretation Issue. The Respondent further requested that, in the event
that the Tribunal deemed any of the documents provided to be material to the Tribunal’s

decision, the Parties be given the opportunity to comment on the documents in question.

On 16 September 2010, the Respondent submitted, on behalf of both Parties, a letter to the
Tribunal indicating that the Parties had discussed and agreed to a timetable should the case

proceed beyond the Treaty Interpretation Issue.

On 28 October 2010, the Claimant wrote to the Tribunal to indicate that the merger between
Apollo and Dévera had been approved by the Slovak authorities. More specifically, Apollo
had acquired Dévera; Apollo was renamed “Dévera”; and the former Dévera was placed in
liquidation under a new name. As a result of the corporate restructuring, the Claimant’s
damages had been mitigated to some extent, and the Claimant included a letter from its

damages expert to explain the effect of the merger on the damages calculation.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

Page 10 of 58

On 16 November 2010, a telephone conference was held with the Parties to address the
implications of the timing of the Tribunal’s decision in relation to the Treaty Interpretation
Issue for the schedule of the proceedings. During the telephone conference, it was agreed that
the Tribunal would provide the Parties with an indication of alternative dates in 2011 for a
possible hearing on the merits and any remaining jurisdictional objections, and that the Parties
would consult with each other and inform the Tribunal of any agreement that may be reached
regarding the schedule for the proceedings. The President also addressed the scope of the
Parties’ additional document production in accordance with Procedural Order 2, noting the
absence of responsive documents originating from the Government of the Netherlands. Both
Parties indicated that they believed the documents currently before the Tribunal represented
the entirety of available records and that “no further productive effort” could be made to

secure additional documents from Netherlands or the Slovak Republic.

On 2 December 2010, the PCA wrote to the Parties on behalf of the Tribunal to inquire
whether, as an alternative to hearing dates from 27 June 2011 to 8 July 2011, the Parties
would be available from 28 November 2011 to 9 December 2011. In response, on 22
December 2010, the Tribunal was informed that the Parties had discussed and agreed to two

alternative schedules should the case proceed beyond the Treaty Interpretation Issue.

On 14 January 2011, the Tribunal informed the Parties that it was unlikely to be in a position
to communicate its decision in time to permit recourse to the earlier of the two agreed
schedules. The Tribunal accordingly adopted the Parties’ alternative proposal, pursuant to
which a hearing on the merits and any remaining questions of jurisdiction was to take place

between 28 November and 9 December 2011.

TIL. STATEMENT OF FACTS

The factual background of the formation of the Agreement between the Netherlands and the
Czech and Slovak Federal Republic, the acquisition by the Claimant of Dévera Holding, and

the creation of the Claimant’s interest in Dovera and Apollo are summarized as follows.

A. Relevant Provisions of the Agreement

Following negotiations which were held in 1989 and 1990, the Governments of the
Netherlands and Czechoslovakia signed the Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Czech and Slovak

Federal Republic of 29 April 1991, which entered into force on 1 October 1992.

Page 11 of 58

33. As set out in the Preamble to the Agreement, the Parties wished to “extend and intensify the
economic relations between them particularly with respect to investments by the investors of

one Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party”.
34. Article 1 of the Agreement provides:

For the purposes of the present Agreement:

(a) the term “investments” shall comprise every kind of asset invested either directly or
through an investor of a third State and more particularly, though not exclusively:

i. movable and immovable property and all related property rights;

 

shares, bonds and other kinds of interests in companies and joint ventures.
well as rights derived therefrom;

 

iii.

title to money and other assets and to any performance having an economic
value;

iv. rights in the field of intellectual property, also including technical processes,
goodwill and know-how;

 

v. concessions conferred by law or under contract, including concessions to
prospect, explore, extract and win natural resources.

(b) the term “investors” shall comprise:

i. natural persons having the nationality of one of the Contracting Parties in
accordance with its law;

ii. legal persons constituted under the law of one of the Contracting Parties.

(c) the term “territory” also includes the maritime areas adjacent to the coast of the
State concerned, to the extent to which that State may exercise sovereign rights or
jurisdiction in those areas according to international law.

35. Article 3(2) of the Agreement provides:

More particularly, each Contracting Party shall accord to such investments full security
and protection which in any case shall not be less than that accorded either to investments
of its own investors or to investments of investors of any third State, which is more
favourable to the investor concerned.

36. Article 3(5) of the Agreement provides:

If the provisions of law of either Contracting Party or obligations under international law
existing at present or established hereafter between the Contracting Parties in addition to
the present Agreement contain rules, whether general or specific, entitling investments by
investors of the other Contracting Party to a treatment more favourable than is provided
for by the present Agreement, such rules shall to the extent that they are more favourable
prevail over the present Agreement.

  

37. The Parties have also addressed argument to the Tribunal as to the relevance of other
documents related to the Agreement, notably the Explanatory Notes submitted by the

Netherlands as part of its domestic ratification of the Agreement (hereinafter the “Dutch

38.

39.

40.

Page 12 of 58

Explanatory Notes”)’ and the Agreed Minutes of the Consultations on the interpretation and
application of the Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments
between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Czech Republic conducted pursuant to
Article 9 on 17 June 2002 (hereinafter the “Agreed Minutes”).*

In relevant part, the Dutch Explanatory Notes state:

Explanatory notes by article

Article 1 provides a description of various terms used in the Agreement. The Agreement
covers direct investments and investments made through a company in a third country.
Normally, investment protection agreements also cover investments in the host country
made by a Dutch company’s subsidiary which is already established in the host country
“subsidiary”-“sub-subsidiary” structure). Czechoslovakia wishes to exclude the “sub-
subsidiary” from the scope of this Agreement, because this is in fact a company created
by a Czechoslovakian legal entity, and Czechoslovakia does not want to grant, in
particular, transfer rights to such company. This restriction can be dealt with by
incorporating a new company directly from the Netherlands. As the restriction is
therefore not of great practical importance, the Dutch delegation has consented to it.
Czechoslovakia’s request to use the term “investor” rather than “national” was granted by
the Netherlands.

  

     

In relevant part, the Agreed Minutes state:

Both delegations agree that the purpose of the Agreement is to protect investments of
investors of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party. The
Agreement creates rights and obligations for the Contracting Parties and gives rights to
investors in respect of their investments. They agree that the [Investment Promotion and
Protection Agreement] IPPA is applicable to investments of investors made after 1
January 1950 from the moment an investor of one Contracting Party acquires an
investment in the territory of the other Contracting Party. The IPPA protects investments
of investors who are either natural persons, having the nationality of one of the
Contracting Parties in accordance with its law, or legal persons constituted under the law
of one of the Contracting Parties. The investments covered by the IPPA are invested
either directly or through an investor of a third State. Investors and investments not
falling within these categories are not protected by the IPPA. Investments can be new
investments (greenfield investments) or existing investments acquired by an investor.

B. Relevant Facts Regarding HICEE’s Interests in Dévera and Apollo

While the Parties differ as to whether certain share acquisitions by Dévera Holding were

effective or in conformity with Slovak law, the following facts relating to the creation of the

Letter from the Minister of Foreign Affairs to the Chairmen of the First and Second Chambers of the

States-General, 31 March 1992, and Explanatory Notes to the Agreement on Encouragement and
Reciprocal Protection of Investments between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Czech and Slovak
Federal Republic, Prague, 29 April 1991 (Treaty Series 1991, 94), submitted to the Staten-Generaal as
Parliamentary Paper 22 580 (R 1432), Nr. 1, vergaderjaar 1991-1992, Nr. 278 (Exhibit R-1), referenced
in Tractatenblad van het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden, No. 146 (1992).

Consultations on the interpretation and ication of the Agreement on E and 1

Protection of Investments between the Czech Republic and the Kingdom of the Netherlands, Agreed
Minutes, 17 June 2002, published in Tractatenblad van het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden, No. 27 (2007)
(Exhibit R-2).

41.

42.

43,

44,

Page 13 of 58

Claimant’s interest in the companies at issue in these proceedings are common ground

between the Parties.

HICEE is wholly-owned by Penta Investments Limited (hereinafter “Penta’”), which is based
in Cyprus.’ HICEE was established in the Netherlands on 23 June 2006 and incorporated on 9
August 2006.’ On 15 August 2006, immediately after its formation, HICEE acquired an
existing Slovak company (Zapadoslovenské piesky, a.s.) that it renamed Dévera Holding on |

September 2006.

At the time it incorporated HICEE, Penta directly owned 100 percent of Dévera a.s., a Slovak
company which owned 100 percent of Dévera and had exercised options to purchase 49
percent of Apollo.'' Penta also owned, through various subsidiaries, 94 percent of SIDERIA—
ISTOTA zdruzena zdravotna poist’oviia (‘“Sideria”), another Slovak health insurance

company."

On 13 November 2006, Dévera Holding executed a share transfer agreement to acquire 100

percent of Dévera from Dévera a.s.'?

At the same time, Sideria and Dévera entered into a
merger agreement, which took effect on 1 January 2007. At that point, HICEE, through
Dévera Holding, owned approximately 66 percent of the successor company of the merger,
which also took the name Dévera. Penta, through various other subsidiaries, owned

approximately 33 percent of the post-merger Dévera.'*

HICEE continued to acquire and consolidate Penta’s holdings in the Slovak health insurance
sector. By way of a purchase agreement entered into on 1 June 2007, the Apollo shares were
transferred from Dévera a.s. to Dévera Holding — and thus to HICEE — on 19 June 2007.'° At
the same time, HICEE moved to acquire the shares in Dévera that remained outside its control
following the Dévera-Sideria merger. As of 19 June 2007, HICEE, through Dévera Holding,
owned 99.26 percent of Dévera and 49 percent of Apollo. HICEE subsequently acquired the

Witness Statement of Marin Krajiték, 15 February 2010, at para. | (Exhibit CWS-3).

Witr

 

ss Statement of Pieter de Kok, 15 February 2010, at para. 14 (Exhibit CWS-1).

Claimant’s Statement of Claim, para. 86.

 

Claimant’s Statement of Claim, para. 86-87.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim, para. 86; Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue,
para. 6.
Claimant’s Statement of Claim, para. 87; Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue,
para. 6.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim, para. 88; Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue,
para. 6.

45.

46.

47.

Page 14 of 58

remaining shares in Dévera, which had previously been tied up in bankruptcy proceedings, in

October 2008."°

Iv. THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS
The Respondent requests the following:

that the Tribunal render an award pursuant to Article 31 and 32 of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules declaring that it lacks jurisdiction over the Claimant’s claims under the
BIT, or alternatively that HICEE’s claims as set out in the Notice of Arbitration and
Statement of Claim are inadmissible, and awarding to the Respondent its legal fees,
arbitration costs and other costs incurred in connection with this proceeding.'”

 

   

The Claimant requests as follows:

  

that the Tribunal reject Respondent’s objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction on the basis
of the Treaty Interpretation Issue. Claimant also respectfully requests an award of its
legal fees and other costs incurred in connection with this proceeding."

 

Vv. SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS

A. The Principles of Interpretation to be Applied by the Tribunal

At the time of signing of the Agreement, both the Netherlands and Czechoslovakia were
parties to the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (hereinafter the “Vienna
Convention”).'? The Slovak Republic is also party to the Vienna Convention, having
succeeded to it on 28 May 1993.” The Parties are additionally in agreement that the
applicable rules of international law regarding the interpretation of international treaties are

embodied in Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention.”!

Claimant’s Statement of Claim, para. 89; Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue,

para. 6.
Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 61.
Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 108.

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, done at Vienna on 23 May 1969, entered into force on 27
January 1980, 1155 U.N.T.S. 331. The Netherlands and Czechoslovakia acceded to the Vienna
Convention on 9 April 1985 and 29 July 1987 respectively.

Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 8.

Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, paras. 8-10; Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on
the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 12; Hearing Tr., 21 July 2010, at 33:2 ff.

48.

49.

50.

Page 15 of 58

B. The Parties’ Views Regarding the Interpretation of Article 1(a) of the
Agreement
1. The Ordinary Meaning of the Terms of Article 1(a) of the Agreement

(a) The Ordinary Meaning of the Terms “either directly or through an
investor of a third State”

The Respondent's Position

The Respondent argues that the ordinary meaning of the terms “either directly or through an
investor of a third State” limits the scope of the Agreement’s protection to investments made
“directly” by an investor covered by the Agreement. The Respondent interprets the meaning
of “directly” based on the following dictionary definition: “[s]omething which is made
without intervention of a medium or agent, immediately, by direct process or mode”.”” The
Respondent further defines the term “direct” to mean that which is “[uJninterrupted,
immediate and proceeding in an unbroken line”. When used in reference to investments, the
Respondent concludes, the ordinary meaning of “directly” is an investment made without
intervening subsidiary owners. In support of this interpretation, the Respondent refers to the
reasoning of other tribunals to have considered the phrase “directly or indirectly” in other

Netherlands BITs and found it to refer to the absence of an intermediary entity.”

In the Respondent’s view, the Agreement permits a single exception to this rule when
investments are channelled through an intermediary entity in a third state.* Indirect
investments, however — those made by the subsidiaries of a protected investor — are excluded

by the Agreement’s plain terms.

As a legal matter, the Respondent argues, the plain textual meaning of the parties’ chosen
wording forms the “primary element of interpretation” under Article 31 of the Vienna
Convention and is most likely to reflect the parties’ intentions.”” The ordinary meaning of the
Agreement, the Respondent submits, operates to exclude the assets of Dévera and Apollo
from protection under the Agreement: they are not assets that a Dutch investor has invested

directly, but were rather channelled through Dévera Holding, a Slovak company.”

°° Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 29:10-12.

Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 29:14-15.
Hearing Tr., 21 July 2010, at 176:4-10.
Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 28:12-16.
Respondent's Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 13.

Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 29:20-24.

51.

52.

53.

Page 16 of 58

The Claimant's Position

According to the Claimant, nothing in the text of Article 1(a) states or otherwise indicates that
a specific type of investment structure — such as investment through a subsidiary into so-
called “sub-subsidiaries” — is excluded from the scope of the Agreement’s protection.» The
ordinary meaning of the phrase “either directly or through an investor of a third State” in
Article 1(a) of the Agreement, the Claimant argues, is that a Dutch company’s investments in
the Slovak Republic are covered whether they are made by the Dutch company through
companies in third states (what many treaties refer to as “indirectly”), or by the Dutch
company into Slovak Republic without the involvement of third-state entities (“directly”).”
The Claimant’s interest in Dévera and Apollo is accordingly covered by the Agreement and is

unaffected by the involvement of Dovera Holding.

In establishing the ordinary meaning of the word “directly”, the Claimant relies upon the

Legal Opinion of Professor Christoph Schreuer, in which Professor Schreuer says, inter alia:

Article 1(a) speaks of “every kind of asset invested either directly or through an investor
of a third State”. The use of the word “or” together with the preceding “either” signifies
two mutually exclusive alternatives. The two alternatives are “directly” and “through an
investor of a third State”. Therefore, the meaning of “directly” in this context is “not
through an investor of a third State”.*

“Directly”, the Claimant argues, means not through a third state. The word refers to the

geographic routing of the investment and was not intended to impose a particular structure on

the investment.”

In the Claimant’s view, what the Respondent proposes as the ordinary meaning of the terms of
the Agreement is, in fact, contrary to their ordinary meaning. The Respondent would have

“directly” read to mean “without being held through an intermediary legal entity established
in the host state”.*? This interpretation cannot, however, be read into Article 1(a) due to the
use of “or” to indicate the alternative: the Respondent’s ordinary meaning is, the Claimant

submits, not an alternative to the phrase “through an investor of a third state”.*’

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 11. Legal Opinion of Christoph
Schreuer on the Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue in HICEE B.V. v. The Slovak
Republic, PCA Case No. 2009-11, 21 June 2010, paras. 7-9 (hereinafter “Schreuer Legal Opinion”)
(Exhibit CER-3).

 

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 11.
Schreuer Legal Opinion, para. 9; see also paras. 13-15 (Exhibit CER-3).
Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 14.
Hearing Tr., 21 July 2010, at 11:11-13.

Schreuer Legal Opinion, paras. 9-10.

54.

55.

56.

Page 17 of 58

(b) The Scope of Article 1(a) Interpreted in Good Faith
The Respondent's Position

The Respondent submits that — having established the ordinary meaning of the terms — the
contours of Article 1(a) of the Agreement are to be determined through interpretation in good
faith.’ The Respondent concedes that, interpreted literally, the term “directly” could be
understood to exclude from the scope of the Agreement’s protection any asset, including land
or other property, owned by an investor’s Czechoslovak subsidiary.** In the Respondent’s
view, however, a good faith interpretation does not produce such a result — any more than it
would represent good faith to permit the extension of protection under the Agreement to any
number of sub-subsidiaries, no matter how far removed.** Rather, balancing “the ordinary
meaning of the phrase ‘directly’ with the principle of good faith”’” would lead the Tribunal to
“find a middle ground”** and to draw the line “lower down in the chain”.””

The purpose of good faith interpretation, the Respondent asserts, is to ensure that the
legitimate expectations of the Contracting Parties — arising from the agreed treaty text — are
honoured. The Respondent acknowledges that the principle of good faith “is also capable of a
sufficiently broad meaning to include the principle of effective interpretation”.“” In the
context of the specific treaty exclusion contained in Article 1(a), however, the Respondent
submits that good faith and effet utile are served not by interpreting the Agreement as broadly
as possible, but by abiding strictly by the Parties’ agreement and the principle of pacta sunt

servanda."'

In the Respondent’s view, the “line beyond which the chain of assets can no longer be
considered to be directly invested by a Dutch company” must be drawn when a sub-subsidiary
structure is established, as this “introduces a separate legal owner into the investment chain

oy 42

which is distinct from the holding company which is owned directly by the Dutch investor

Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue at paras. 40-46, citing Gardiner, Treaty
Interpretation (2008), at 151 (Exhibit RLA-34); Villiger, Commentary on the 1969 Vienna Convention
on the Law of Treaties (2009), at 425 (Exhibit RLA-35); Amco Asia Corp. et. al. v. Indonesia, ICSID
Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision on Jurisdiction of 25 September 1983, para. 14 (Exhibit RLA-16).

Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 49:14 to 50:3.
Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 50:4-9.

Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 66:18-20.

Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 50:10.

Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 67:8.

Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 45.
Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 45.

Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 50:10 to 51:5.

57.

58.

59.

Page 18 of 58

Good faith and the Parties’ intention, the Respondent submits, cannot command the total
exclusion of all assets not held directly in the name of HICEE.” At the same time, the

ordinary meaning of “directly” “simply cannot be possibly reconciled’ with the protection of
sub-subsidiaries (or their assets) beyond the initial Czechoslovak subsidiary.” The decision
to draw the line at sub-subsidiaries, the Respondent argues, was “deliberate and carefully
done”.“°

In the Respondent’s view, the best evidence of the Parties’ intention can be found in the Dutch
Explanatory Notes,”” which explain the deviation from the Dutch model BIT and other
Czechoslovak BITs* and require the Tribunal to draw a distinction between HICEF’s indirect
interests in Dévera and Apollo and other assets.” In other words, under Article l(a), “a
Slovak holding company formed by a Dutch company may own movable and immovable
property, all related property rights, title to money and other assets . . . , but will not be

protected to the extent of shares that it buys in a wholly owned subsidiary”.

The Claimant's Position

In the Claimant’s view, not only do the “lines” drawn by the Respondent not represent a good
faith rendering of the Parties’ bargain, but they are “fashioned . . . for the sole purpose of
trying to exclude Claimant’s interests . . . from the Treaty’s reach”! and produce a result that
is “manifestly unreasonable”.

First, the Claimant asserts, the textual interpretation advocated by the Respondent would
require a Dutch investor to hold all of its Slovak assets in its own name.” This is contrary to
the typical manner in which international investments are structured and would significantly
limit the scope of the Agreement.™ Second, the Claimant observes, such an interpretation

would be contrary to Czechoslovak law at the time, which among other things significantly

Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 66:10-24.

Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 50:7-9.
Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 49:14-18.

Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 49:18.

Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 31:20 to 32:4.

Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 39:2-5.

Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 67:12-17.

Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 80:13-21.

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 23.
Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 20.
Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 21.

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 22.

60.

61.

62.

Page 19 of 58

restricted the right of foreign nationals to purchase land* — the very structure required by the
Respondent’s interpretation of the Agreement. Under the applicable legislation, “it was
effectively impossible for a Dutch company to own ‘directly’ (in Respondent’s understanding
of the term) assets such as immovable property”.* Good faith interpretation, in the Claimant’s
view, does not include interpreting treaty provisions in such a way that it would deprive them

of legal effect.*”

The implications of the Respondent’s proposed interpretation can be reconciled, the Claimant
submits, only by inventing a “distinction between ‘shares, bonds, and other kinds of interests
in companies’ on the one hand, and all of the other assets that also qualify as investments
under Article 1(a), on the other hand”. There is, in the Claimant’s view, simply no textual
support for such a distinction.” Finally, even if the distinction advocated by the Respondent
were accepted, it would simply create a further contradiction. Whatever limit may be read
into the term “directly”, the Claimant argues, there is no “wording in which Respondent could
find a similar limitation” to the protection of sub-subsidiaries in the second prong of Article
l(a) under which an investment is made “through an investor of a third State”. The result,
the Claimant submits, is the unreasonable situation — divorced from “any legal, policy,
economic or practical perspective” — in which Slovak sub-subsidiaries would suddenly (and
only) be entitled to protection under the Agreement where an entity from a third State were to

interrupt the ownership chain.*!

2. The Terms “either directly or through an investor of a third State” in Their
Context and in Light of the Agreement’s Object and Purpose

In support of their respective interpretations of the ordinary meaning of the phrase “either

directly or through an investor of a third State”, the Parties turn to the context of the

Agreement’s terms and to its object and purpose.

(a) The Meaning and Relevance of the Dutch Explanatory Notes

According to the Respondent, the “limited scope of the BIT is unequivocally confirmed” by
the “Explanatory Notes to the BIT submitted by the Netherlands as part of its domestic

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 30.
Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 30.
Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 30.
Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 26.
Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 26.
Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 32.

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, paras, 32-33.

63.

64.

65.

66.

62

68

64

65

66

Page 20 of 58

ratification of the Treaty [which] leave no room for doubt that the plain language of Article

1(a) was intended to mean what it says”.

The Respondent relies upon the following portion of the Dutch Explanatory Notes:

Article 1 provides a description of various terms used in the Agreement. The Agreement
covers direct investments and investments made through a company in a third country.
Normally, investment protection agreements also cover investments in the host country
made by a Dutch company’s subsidiary which is already established in the host country
(“subsidiary”-“sub-subsidiary” structure). Czechoslovakia wishes to exclude the “sub-
subsidiary” from the scope of this Agreement, because this is in fact a company created
by a Czechoslovakian legal entity, and Czechoslovakia does not want to grant, in
particular, transfer rights to such company. [...]*°

 

 

 

(i) Admissibility under the Vienna Convention
The Respondent's Position

The Respondent submits that the Dutch Explanatory Notes constitute “an instrument which
was made by one or more parties in connection with the conclusion of the treaty and accepted
by the other parties as an instrument related to the treaty” under Article 31(2)(b) of the Vienna

Convention.

In the alternative, the Respondent submits that the Explanatory Notes are admissible under
Article 32 of the Vienna Convention in order to confirm the Agreement’s meaning.” Should
the Tribunal find the Respondents interpretation of “directly” to be “too literal” in nature, it
would bring the Tribunal “automatically into the territory of ambiguity or obscurity, which
would entitle the Tribunal to open the door to the Dutch Explanatory Note . . . pursuant to

Article 32 of the [Vienna] Convention”.

The Claimant's Position

In the Claimant’s view, the Tribunal may only have recourse to supplemental documents such
as the Dutch Explanatory Notes if they (1) represent the agreement of the Parties, or (2)

confirm or determine the meaning of the treaty text if the text is “ambiguous or leads to an

Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 14.
Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 14.

Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, at para. 14, fh. 7, citing Gardiner, Treaty
Interpretation (2008), at 215 (Exhibit RLA-34).

Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 86:1 to 88:16. As authority for the use of similar notes, the Respondent
relies on Bayview Irrigation District et al. v. United Mexican States, 1CSID Case No. ARB (AF)/05/1
(NAFTA), Award of 19 June 2007, para. 106 (interpreting the NAFTA in light of the report on the treaty
prepared prior to its approval by the Mexican Senate) (Exhibit RLA-26).

Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 91:15-21.

   

67.

68.

69.

70.

Page 21 of 58

absurd or unreasonable result”. The Dutch Explanatory Notes, the Claimant argues, fulfil

neither role, and recourse to them is therefore inappropriate.

First, the Claimant observes, the Notes do not constitute an agreement between the Parties,
and the Respondent has never argued that they do. Nor, the Claimant further notes, are the
Notes an instrument accepted by the Slovak Government — the Respondent has never
established that the Czechoslovak Government knew of the Notes’ existence or ever accepted
their accuracy. To the contrary, the Claimant points to witness testimony from former

Czechoslovak Government officials to the effect that they had no knowledge of the Notes.”

Second, the Claimant asserts that no grounds exist for the Tribunal to have recourse to
supplementary means of interpretation under Article 32 of the Vienna Convention. Rather
than using the Notes to confirm the ordinary meaning of the text of the Agreement, the
Claimant argues, “Respondent is trying to use the Notes . . . to supply a definition that is
entirely different from the unambiguous ordinary meaning of the term”. In the Claimant’s
view, “the only thing that renders this treaty text unclear, or that leads to an absurd result, is
the interpretation Respondent gives it”.”” The Respondent’s argument, in the Claimant’s eyes,
amounts to advancing an absurd interpretation and then inappropriately seeking recourse to

Article 32 to avoid the absurdity.”

(ii) The Substantive Scope of the Dutch Explanatory Notes
The Respondent's Position

According to the Respondent, the Dutch Explanatory Notes record clearly “that Article 1(a)
was drafted specifically to exclude from the BIT situations in which the Czechoslovakian
subsidiary of a Dutch company invests in another Czechoslovakian company”.

In the Respondent’s view, the Notes serve to confirm the ordinary meaning of the term
“directly” in the treaty text and are ultimately in keeping with good faith and the object and

purposes of a bilateral investment treaty.”* The Notes, the Respondent emphasizes, do not

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 40.

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 42; see also Witness Statement of
Jozef BakSay, para. 8 (Exhibit CWS-8), Witness Statement of Pavel Novicky, para. 7 (Exhibit CWS-11).

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 44.
Hearing Tr., 21 July 2010, at 33:17-20.

Hearing Tr., 21 July 2010, at 34:1-10.

Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 14.

Hearing Tr., 21 July 2010, at 183:3-9.

71.

72.

73.

Page 22 of 58
alter or restrict the textual interpretation: indeed, they “actually marginally expand{] it”
insofar as they make clear that the Parties’ concern was only with sub-subsidiary investment
structures (due to questions regarding the appropriate scope of transfer rights), rather than

with other types of assets held by a Dutch investor’s first-level Slovak subsidiary.”*

Finally, the Respondent rejects the Claimant’s argument that the Dutch Explanatory Notes in
fact describe the definition of “investor” under Article 1(b) of the Agreement, rather than
anything relating to the definition of “investment” in Article 1(a).”° In the Respondent’s view,
the limited definition of investor so as to exclude a non-Dutch claimant and the exclusion of
indirectly-held investments — to address a concern regarding sub-subsidiaries — are
complementary and form “a single effort by the Parties to limit the scope of the Treaty”.”
Simply limiting the definition of investor in Article 1(b), the Respondent argues, would not
have accomplished the Parties’ objective: “a substantive limitation on investment and on the

money flowing out of the country” requires a “focus on the definition of ‘investment’ itself’.”

The Claimant's Position

In the event that the Dutch Explanatory Notes are deemed admissible under the Vienna
Convention, the Claimant argues that the Notes do nothing to circumscribe the definition of
“investment”. Rather, the Claimant is of the view that, properly understood, the Notes (which
do not differentiate between the subsections of the Article) address the term “investor” under

Article 1(b) of the Agreement.

According to the Claimant, Czechoslovakia’s main concern in preparing this portion of the
Agreement was to “control the outflow of capital in hard currency from the country”.”” As the
Dutch Explanatory Notes make clear, the Claimant submits, this included the concern that
Czechoslovak-incorporated subsidiaries would be entitled to transfer rights under the
Agreement in respect of their own subsidiary entities (sub-subsidiaries from the point of view

of the Agreement).*” Addressing this concern, however, would be effected by removing

Hearing Tr., 21 July 2010, at 178:7-8.

Hearing Tr., 21 July 2010, at 177:1-11.
Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 40:9 to 45:23.
Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 45:20-23.
Hearing Tr., 21 July 2010, at 180:3-6.

 

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 50. The Claimant points in
particular to the testimony of Mr. Bakay and Mr. Novicky in support of this objective. See Witness
Statement of Jozef BakSay, para. 7 (Exhibit CWS-8); Witness Statement of Pavel Novicky, para. 6
(Exhibit CWS-11).

 

   

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 57.

74.

75.

Page 23 of 58

subsidiaries from the set of “investors” entitled to claim transfer rights under the Agreement.
As the Claimant points out, the scope of the definition of “investors” in the Dutch Model BITs
at the time was broader than that ultimately included in the Agreement, in that subsidiaries

' The fact that the Notes

established in the host country themselves qualified as investors.
also detail the Czechoslovak concern that the term “investor” be used in place of “national”
further indicates, in the Claimant’s view, that “Article 1 of the Notes focuses on who is an

a9 82

‘investor,’ rather than what is considered an ‘investment

(b) The Meaning and Relevance of the Agreed Minutes
The Respondent's Position

The Respondent submits that its proposed interpretation of the Agreement’s text is
corroborated by the Agreed Minutes. These Minutes were the result of official consultations
between the Czech Republic and the Netherlands, conducted in 2002 under Article 9 of the
Agreement in response to the interpretation of the Agreement in the Partial Award’ of the
arbitral tribunal constituted in the CME v. Czech Republic arbitration.“ In the Respondent’s
view, the Agreed Minutes of these consultations should be considered a “subsequent
agreement between the parties regarding the interpretation of the treaty or the application of

its provisions” under Article 31(3)(a) of the Vienna Convention.**

In the Respondent’s view, the relevant portion of the Agreed Minutes consists of the
confirmation of the Czech Republic and the Netherlands understanding of Article 1(a) as

follows:

The investments covered by the [Agreement] are invested either directly or through an
investor of a third State. Investors and investments not falling within these categories are
not protected by the [Agreement].

In the Respondent’s view, the Agreed Minutes clearly “presuppose that some form of
investments are not protected under the treaty”.*° Yet the interpretation advocated by the
Claimant, the Respondent argues, is essentially unlimited and acknowledges no such class of

uncovered investments, to which the Agreed Minutes might refer.

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 57.
Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 59.
CME y. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award of 13 September 2001 (Exhibit CLA-14).

Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 15. See also CME vy. Czech Republic,
UNCITRAL, Final Award of 14 March 2003, paras. 437, 504 (Exhibit RLA-20).

 

Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 15.

Hearing Tr., 21 July 2010, at 177:11-23.

76.

77.

78.

Page 24 of 58

The Claimant's Position

As an initial matter, the Claimant points out that the Agreed Minutes were “made between the
Netherlands and the Czech Republic, not the Netherlands and the Slovak Republic”.*’ As the
Minutes unequivocally pertain to a non-party (the Czech Republic), they cannot represent a

“subsequent agreement between the parties” within the meaning of the Vienna Convention.*

Even if the Agreed Minutes were relevant and admissible, however, the Claimant asserts that
they shed no light on the meaning of Article 1(a). The Minutes simply restate the language of
the Agreement and do not, the Claimant emphasizes, state that “sub-subsidiaries” are excluded
from the scope of the Agreement.” Finally, the Claimant observes that the Agreed Minutes in
fact tend toward the opposite conclusion, insofar as the CME arbitration that prompted
consultations between the States parties to the Agreement extended the Agreement’s
protection to sub-subsidiaries. Neither during the arbitration itself, nor during the
consultations specifically called to address the Czech Government’s dissatisfaction with the
CME tribunal’s partial award, did the Czech Government ever challenge the inclusion of sub-

subsidiaries within the Agreement’s class of protected investments.”

(c) The Agreement’s Object and Purpose
The Respondent's Position

The Respondent submits that a limited definition of “investment” — in the Respondent’s view,
the ordinary meaning of Article 1(a) — is consistent with the Agreement’s object and purpose.
In the Respondent’s view, the Preamble to the Agreement’! evidences a nuanced
understanding of the underlying goals, and commands a balanced application of the
Agreement’s protection, so as to avoid dissuading the host State — by means of exaggerated
protection — from admitting investors in the first place. In this respect, the Respondent relies
in particular on the prior interpretation of the object and purpose of the Agreement by the
tribunal constituted in the Salwka arbitration under this very Agreement.” The Respondent
also points to the inclusion of careful jurisdictional language (the formula “investments of

investors”) in the Preamble as evidence that jurisdictional limits were central to the

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 77.
Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 77.
Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 78.
Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 79.
Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 24.

Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, paras. 25-26; Saluka v. Czech Republic,
UNCITRAL, Partial Award of 17 March 2006, para. 300 (Exhibit RLA-22).

   

79.

80.

81.

Page 25 of 58
Agreement’s object and purpose and a focus on the “flow of capital and technology”.”
Finally, the Respondent argues, pointing to the Tribunal’s reasoning in the Berschader v.
Russia arbitration, that even the objective of promoting investment is logically distinct from

the question of whether indirect investments will be covered under a treaty.”

In light of the nuanced object and purpose of the Agreement, the Respondent contends that it
would be entirely consistent for Article 1(a) to exclude HICEE’s claimed “investment”, given
its domestic nature. First, the Respondent points out that the acquisition of Dévera and
Apollo was made by Dévera Holding, not the Claimant.”> Second, the Respondent argues that
there is no evidence of any net “flow” of capital or technology from the Netherlands to
Slovakia, as the Preamble envisaged and the Agreement sought to encourage, nor of any
contribution of funds from HICEE to Dévera and Apollo. While the Respondent makes it
clear that it does not take the view that an inflow of foreign capital is an inherent requirement
for an investment to exist,” the Respondent does submit that a treaty structure excluding the
investments of domestic subsidiaries would be consistent with the Agreement’s focus on

stimulating the flow for foreign capital.”

The Claimant's Position

The Claimant asserts that the Respondent’s interpretation is unreasonable in light of the object
and purpose of the Agreement, which in the Claimant’s view is for the Agreement to be
“broad and inclusive” in scope.”* In support of this position, the Claimant points to the text of
the Agreement’s Preamble and to the testimony of former Czechoslovak Government officials
who (the Claimant contends) negotiated or oversaw the negotiation of Czechoslovak BITs at
the time and who were unaware of any policy of limiting, in the manner claimed by the

Respondent, the protections accorded to foreign investors.”

Given the manner in which foreign investors typically structure their investments — i.e.,

through holding companies — the Claimant asserts that a treaty interpretation that excluded

Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 27.

 

Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 28; see also Berschader v. Russia, SCC
Case No. 080/2004, Award of 21 April 2006 (Exhibit RLA-23).

Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 35.
Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 54:12-16

Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 39.
Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 16.

Hearing Tr., 21 July 2010, at 12:24 to 13:8; see also Witness Statement of Jozef BakSay, 15 June 2010,
para. 7 (Exhibit CWS-8); Witness Statement of Jifi Brabec, 15 June 2010, para. 7 (Exhibit CWS-9);
Witness Statement of Pavel Novick, 15 June 2010, para. 5 (Exhibit CWS-11).

82.

83.

84.

1

102

103

104

105

Page 26 of 58

this common form would be inconsistent with the Agreement’s object of promoting
investment.'” Similarly, the Claimant argues, there can be no justification in the Agreement’s
object and purpose for a situation in which the sub-subsidiaries of investments made through a
third State are entitled to protection while those made directly are not. Yet this is precisely
the result, in the Claimant’s view, that the Respondent’s interpretation would produce, and no

textual measure exists to reconcile this perceived absurdity.'"'

Finally, the Claimant argues that the allegedly domestic nature of its investments in Dévera
and Apollo is irrelevant, insofar as the origin of capital (rather than foreign control) is not a

. . . 102
requirement for an investment to exist under the Agreement.

Equally, the Claimant
distinguishes the reasoning of the Berschader tribunal, insofar as that arbitration involved the
question of indirect investments made through an intermediary in the Claimant’s home State,

rather than multiple layers of investment within the host State.'°*

(d) Contemporaneous and Subsequent Treaty Practice
The Respondent's Position

The Respondent submits that the Parties deliberately elected to exclude from the treaty text
any language that would have had the effect of extending the Agreement’s protection over
indirect investments held by a Slovak subsidiary. Had the Parties wished to do so, they
clearly understood how to draft language providing for the protection of indirect shareholding,
Czechoslovakia having expressly done so in previously negotiated BITs.'“ The Netherlands
equally had experience in drafting treaties to include or exclude indirect investments. In the
Respondent’s view, “the only logical inference to be drawn from the context of Article 1(a) is
that its wording . . . was carefully and deliberately chosen” in order to exclude the very
investment structure at issue here.'°

The Respondent further discounts the relevance of a Czechoslovak transmittal document that
describes contemporaneously-negotiated BITs with Denmark, Greece, and Norway — which
unequivocally cover indirect investments — as “not materially differ[ing]” from the instant

treaty. First, the Respondent observes that the document is brief and its discussion of four

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 22.
Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, paras, 32-33.

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 106-107; Schreuer Legal Opinion,
paras. 51-55 (Exhibit CER-3).

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 35; Schreuer Legal Opinion, para.
21 (Exhibit CER-3).

Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 20.

Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 23.

85.

86.

87.

106

107

108

109

Page 27 of 58

separately-negotiated treaties is very generic in nature. The Respondent further points to

significant differences among the treaties, including the substantive protections offered and

 

the applicable dispute resoluti i which the tr ital di overlooks.
These observations, in the Respondent’s view, “underscore how little weight one can really
attach to [the] document”.' In a like manner, the transmittal document’s reference to the
draft OECD Convention merely demonstrates the Parties’ familiarity with different
approaches to investment treaties and the informed nature of the decision of the final wording
of the Agreement.'”

Finally, the Respondent addresses the Claimant’s argument that the Netherlands-USSR BIT
contains the identical terms “directly or through an investor of a third State” while the
Netherlands explanatory notes for that treaty indicate that it was intended to cover investors
already “established” in the Soviet Union. First, the Respondent asserts that the Netherlands-
USSR notes do not purport to qualify the meaning of the term “directly” and cannot alter its
ordinary meaning.'* Second, the Respondent observes, the Netherlands-USSR notes provide

no indication of the negotiations relating to the Czechoslovak BIT.'”

In any event, the
Respondent submits, the instant jurisdictional objection could be made under the Netherlands-

USSR BIT with equal effect.'"°

The Claimant's Position

The Claimant points to three issues of contemporary Dutch and Czechoslovak treaty practice
that, in the Claimant’s view, undercut the Respondent’s interpretation of Article 1(a) of the

Agreement.

First, the Claimant argues that, if limiting the grant of transfer rights to Czechoslovak-
incorporated sub-subsidiaries represented a deliberate policy, similar language should be
found in other Czechoslovak BITs negotiated around the same time. In fact, the Claimant
observes, no other Czechoslovak BIT contains the same language and the only similar treaties
(the Czechoslovak treaties with France and Canada) include differences that unequivocally

indicate a broad definition of investment.''!

Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 60:1-21.

Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 61:24 to 62:2.
Hearing Tr., 21 July 2010, at 181:23 to 182:1.
Hearing Tr., 21 July 2010, at 182:2-7.

Hearing Tr., 21 July 2010, at 182:21 to 183:2.

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, paras. 67-69.

88.

89.

116

Page 28 of 58

Second, the Claimant highlights three other Czechoslovak BITs — concluded with Greece,
Norway and Denmark — which do not employ the term “directly” in defining “investment”
and cannot, in the Claimant’s view, be interpreted as excluding investments structured on a

? These treaties were submitted to the Czechoslovak Parliament for

sub-subsidiary basis.'"
ratification along with the instant Agreement and were accompanied by an Explanatory
Report covering all four treaties, which provides that “[t]he investment promotion and
protection treaties being submitted do not materially differ”.''’ Were the Agreement in fact
intended to bear the interpretation the Respondent now submits, the Claimant is of the view
that such a difference in the scope of protected investments would have been noted. As a
further point, the transmittal documents indicate that “the submitted Agreements” are “based
on the OECD model agreement”.'"4 This reference, in the Claimant’s view, indicates the
Czechoslovak Government’s view that the Agreement did not differ materially from the
OECD Draft Convention, which, the Claimant argues, provides for a broad definition of
investment.'°

Third, the Claimant highlights the Netherlands-USSR BIT and the explanatory notes
accompanying its submission to the Netherlands parliament. The Claimant observes that that
treaty contains the same wording — “directly or through an investor of a third State” — as the
instant Agreement. Despite this similarity, the Netherlands-USSR explanatory notes provide
that

[tJhe definition of ‘investments’ (b) does not only include investments made from the
Netherlands in the Soviet Union and investments of a Dutch investor already established
in the Soviet Union, but also investments by a Dutch subsidiary established in [a] third
country.''°

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 64.

Government Bill Submitting the Investment Promotion and Protection Treaty between the CSFR and the
Kingdom of Denmark, done at Prague on 6 March 1991; the Investment Promotion and Protection Treaty
between the CSFR and the Kingdom of the Netherlands, done at Prague on 29 April 1991; the Investment
Promotion and Protection Treaty between the CSFR and the Kingdom of Norway, done at Oslo on 21
May 1991; and the Investment Promotion and Protection Treaty between the Government of the CSFR.
and Government of the Hellenic Republic, done at Prague on 3 June 1991, to the Federal Assembly of the
CSFR for Approval, Explanatory Report for the Federal Assembly (“Explanatory Report for the Federal
Assembly”), § I (Exhibit C-178).

Excerpts of Letter to the Government of the Czech and Slovak Republics from the Minister of Finance,
the Minister of Foreign Trade, and the Deputy Prime Minister/Minister of Foreign Affairs, Reasoned
Statement, 22 July 1991, § I (Exhibit C-179).

see also OECD Draft
it 137 and 139 (1968)

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, paras. 65-66;
Convention on the Protection of Foreign Property, 12 October 1967, 7 LL.M.
(Exhibit C-170).

Netherlands-USSR Explanatory Notes, Art. | (Exhibit C-175).

 

90.

91.

Page 29 of 58

In the Claimant’s view, the Netherlands-USSR explanatory notes provide clear evidence of
how the Netherlands understood and interpreted the specific terms at issue here.''’ The
Claimant further points to witness testimony indicating no intention on the part of the Soviet

Union to exclude investments made through a holding company structure.''*

Cc. Application of the More Favourable Treatment by Virtue of Article 3(2) and
3(5) of the Agreement

The Respondent's Position

The Respondent rejects the possibility that the most-favoured nation (hereinafter “MFN”)
provisions of Article 3 of the Agreement may serve to extend the operable definition of
“investment” to accord with certain — allegedly broader — definitions in other Czechoslovak
BITs. First, pointing to the basic logic of MFN clauses and to the decisions of the tribunals in
the Société Générale v. Dominican Republic and Tecmed v. Mexico arbitrations, the
Respondent asserts that, unless specifically provided for, an MFN clause will alter the
substantive protections of a treaty, but not the gateway issue of the definitions of “investor” or
“investment”.''” Second, the Respondent argues that the MFN provisions of the Agreement
are limited by their own terms. Article 3(2) is explicitly linked — and limited — to the

substantive promise of full protection and security.'””

Article 3(5) applies only to the
domestic legal provisions of the contracting Parties or to subsequent agreements between
them, not to separate treaties concluded with third States.'?! Finally, the Respondent observes
that, were the definition of “investment” extendable by operation of the Agreement’s MFN
provisions, it would have been immediately pathological: other Czechoslovak BITs with, in
the Respondent’s view, a broader definition of “investment” predated the instant

Agreement.'”

The Claimant's Position

Should the Tribunal interpret the definition of investment in Article 1(a) of the Agreement in

such a manner as to exclude claims based on injury to the Claimant’s interests in Dovera and

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, paras. 72-73.

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 71; Witness Statement of Rafael
Nagapetiants, 4 June 2010, paras. 6, 9 (Exhibit CWS-10).

Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 99:13 to 102:19.
Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 102:20 to 103:2.
Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 104:23 to 105:10.
Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 98:22 to 99:10.

92.

93.

94.

1

124

125

126

127

Page 30 of 58

Apollo, the Claimant argues that it is entitled to invoke the broader definitions of investment
123,

in other Slovak BITs through the operation of the MFN provisions of Articles 3(2) and 3(5).
Article 3(2) of the Agreement, the Claimant observes, provides “protection” to investments
“not less than that accorded either to investments of its own investors or investments of any
third State, whichever is more favourable”. The Claimant contests that the MFN provisions of
Article 3(2) of the Agreement may be limited to the substantive provision of full protection
and security. In the Claimant’s view, “far from being actually unusual, the language in the
Czechoslovakia-Netherlands treaty merely reflects the way in which the Netherlands placed
the MEN provision in its treaties. It does not indicate a limitation on the scope of the MFN
provision”.'**

The Claimant further submits that it may draw upon MEN treatment by virtue of Article 3(5)

of the Agreement, which provides as follows:

[i]f the provisions of law of either Contracting Party or obligations under international
law existing at present or established hereafter between the Contracting Parties in
addition to the Present Agreement contain rules, whether general or specific, entitling
investments by investors of the other Contracting Party to a treatment more favourable
than is provided for by the present agreement, such rules shall to the extent that they are
more favourable prevail over the present agreement.

The Claimant disputes that Article 3(5) is textually limited to further agreements between the

same Parties, arguing that the terms “between the Contracting Parties” apply only to the words

“established hereafter”.'2> Other BITs with more favourable definitions of “investment”, the

Claimant submits, were already in force with third States at the time the Agreement was

concluded.'”° In support of this interpretation, the Claimant points to the CME arbitration, in

which a tribunal constituted under the same Agreement employed Article 3(5) to import the

definition of “damages” from the United States-Czechoslovakia BIT.”

D. Claims by HICEE as a Shareholder in Dévera Holding
The Respondent's Position

The Respondent accepted that Article 1(a) of the Agreement covers direct shareholdings and

therefore the Claimant’s interest in Dévera Holding. The Respondent disputes however, that

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 94.
Hearing Tr., 21 July 2010, at 67:8-12.

Hearing Tr., 21 July 2010, at 69:5-12.

Hearing Tr., 21 July 2010, at 69:20 to 70:13.

Hearing Tr., 21 July 2010, at 68:6-14; CME v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Final Award of 14 March
2003, para. 500 (Exhibit CLA-13).

95.

96.

128

129

130

132

133

134

135

Page 31 of 58

this shareholding gives “an admissible right to recover damages for losses suffered by Dévera
and Apollo (for example by seeking to re-plead its damages claim as a loss in the capital value
of Dévera Holding)”.'**

The Respondent reconciles this position by distinguishing between the Claimant’s capacity to
bring a claim by virtue of its interest in Dovera Holding and the actual scope of the protection
offered by the Agreement (and thus the admissibility of the Claimant’s claims).'” In light of
what are, in the Respondent’s view, the express exclusions of Article 1(a) and the balanced
object and purpose of the Agreement, “claims in respect of measures or legislation directed at
Dévera and Apollo are inadmissible”.'*° Once Dévera and Apollo are excluded from the
Agreement’s protection as investments, the “income streams” from those entities to Dévera
Holding are also excluded and “no treaty right to transfer profit or dividends to their Slovak

131

parent company” could be said to exist. Any contrary interpretation would render this

“specifically-negotiated exclusion” effectively meaningless and frustrate the intention of the

Contracting Parties.'*”

An interpretation that would produce such a result would, in the
Respondent’s view, be contrary to the principle of effectiveness and to the Parties’ intention in
negotiating the Agreement insofar as it would render the limitations in Article 1(a)
meaningless.'"* As further evidence of the Parties’ intention, the Respondent observes that the
Dutch Explanatory Notes state that an investor could overcome the restriction “by
incorporating a new company directly from the Netherlands” — a step that would be wholly
unnecessary if the same claims could simply be recast in terms of harm to the value of the

holding company.'™

“By forming a series of limited liability companies to hold varying levels of interest in Dévera
and Apollo”, the Respondent argues, citing the decisions of the International Court of Justice
(hereinafter the “ICJ”) in Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Co. Ltd., and of Chambers of
the ICJ in the Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. and Ahmadou Diallo cases, “HICEE must accept the
corresponding limitations to the extent of its protected property interests”.'*° Although the

Respondent concedes that direct injury to Dévera Holding would present a claim under the

Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 47.

 

Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 49.

 

Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 50.
Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 72:20-25.

Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, paras. 52-53.

 

Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 53.

 

Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 54.

Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 57.

97.

98.

99.

136

137

13

3

140

143

143

Page 32 of 58

Agreement, the Claimant has not articulated such a claim. The Respondent notes that the
Claimant appears to equate the value of Dévera Holding entirely with its interest in Dévera
and Apollo.’ Further, in the Respondent’s view, the subject matter of this arbitration
involves legislation that, by definition, can apply only to a specific class of public health
insurance companies and could not provide a basis for a claim directly against Dévera

Holding.'*”

The Claimant's Position

The Claimant asserts (and the Respondent does not contest) that its interest in Dovera Holding
is direct, and covered by the Agreement. As a matter of international law, the Claimant
submits, “[t]here is no question . . . that a shareholder has standing to bring a case based on
adverse government measures that have affected the value of the company in which the
shareholder owns shares”.'** Actions that “adversely impact the ability of Dévera Holding to
receive . . . profits”, the Claimant argues, “have a direct impact on the rights of Dévera

Holding itself”.'”

In support of this position, the Claimant cites numerous arbitrations under investment treaties,
in which arbitral tribunals have upheld standing for shareholders.'”” In addition, the Claimant
points to the CME arbitration, wherein the tribunal found the present Agreement applicable to

assets held indirectly by CME’s subsidiaries. '*'

In the Claimant’s view, the Respondent’s
argument amounts to nothing more than good faith, in light of which the Respondent would
have the Dutch Explanatory Notes “debar[] an interpretation that permits Dévera Holding to

a 142

recover for injuries to [its] sub-subsidiaries’ Nevertheless, the Claimant argues, “[t]he text

of the Treaty governs, not the counter-textual argument that Respondent constructs out of the
Dutch note”.'?
In respect of the ICJ precedents invoked by the Respondent, the Claimant distinguishes

Barcelona Traction and Diallo on the grounds that both concerned the availability of

Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, paras. 56-57.

 

Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 56.

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 84.

  

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 81.

In particular, the Claimant refers to the awards in Berschader v. Russia, SCC Case No. 080/2004, Award
of 21 April 2006, paras. 127-128 (Exhibit CLA-79) and Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija and Vivendi
Universal v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on Jurisdiction, 14 November 2005, paras.
40-41 (Exhibit CLA-90).

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 88.

Hearing Tr., 21 July 2010, at 74:17-21.

Hearing Tr., 21 July 2010, at 75:16-18.

100.

101.

102.

1

1

146

1

Page 33 of 58

diplomatic protection, rather than shareholder rights under a specific agreement. With respect
to the Elettronica Sicula case, in the context of such an agreement, the Claimant notes that the

ICJ [Chamber] found that it had jurisdiction to hear the claims based on shareholding.

VI. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

The Tribunal begins by recalling that the complaint brought by the Claimant is directed at
measures taken by the Respondent (or for which the Respondent is said to be answerable)
against the private companies which, since 1994, had begun to operate within the health
insurance sector in Slovakia. Specifically, the Claimant complains about the enactment of Act
No. 530/2007 Coll. of 25 October 2007, Amending and Supplementing Act No. 581/2004
Coll. on Health Insurance Companies and Healthcare Supervision, and Amending and
Supplementing Certain Acts as Amended,'** by which health insurance companies were
prohibited from distributing profits and made subject to a cap on their permissible

administrative expenses. As the Claimant summarizes the matter in its Statement of Claim:'°

Individually and collectively, these legislative changes have destroyed the value of
HICEE’s investments in Apollo and Dévera. Fundamentally, HICEE is prohibited from
earning a return on its investments in the two companies. If shareholders cannot receive
any financial benefits from their investments and cannot sell them, the investments have
no value. In addition, HICEE is not able to exit the market by selling its investments, or
its principal assets—the portfolios of insurees—for fair market value. Furthermore, to the
extent that Apollo and Dévera have continued to operate in Slovakia, their ability to earn
profits has been adversely affected by the cumulative effect of the measures.

 

 

Similarly, in its prayer for relief,'*” the Claimant seeks an order from the Tribunal requiring
the Respondent to “reinstate the legal status quo with respect to health insurance companies
that existed before 1 January 2008” (with damages to compensate for harm suffered in the
meanwhile); or in the alternative to make a monetary award equivalent to “restitution of the

full value of [HICEE’s] investments lost as a result of Respondent’s wrongful acts”.

In short, therefore, the central focus of the Claimant’s claims is on measures directed at the
operation of the health insurance sector in Slovakia. It is however an admitted fact, not in
dispute, that HICEE does not itself operate in the health insurance sector in Slovakia, whereas

Dévera and Apollo do. It is equally admitted that HICEE does not own shares in Dévera and

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, paras. 92-93.

Act No. 530/2007 Coll. of 25 October 2007, Amending and Supplementing Act No. 581/2004 Coll. on
Health Insurance Companies and Healthcare Supervision, and Amending and Supplementing Certain Acts
as Amended (Exhibit C-19).

Claimant’s Statement of Claim, para. 177.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim, para. 303.

103.

104.

148

149

150

Page 34 of 58

Apollo; the sole shareholder’ in these Slovak corporate entities is Dévera Holding, itself a
Slovak incorporated company wholly owned by HICEE. The question is thus immediately
raised whether HICEE’s indirect interest in Dévera and Apollo represents an investment that
benefits from the various kinds of protection provided for in the Agreement, including

specifically the right to commence arbitral proceedings before the present Tribunal.

To put the matter another way, HICEE’s investment in the Slovak health insurance market is a
structured one.'” This is not unusual, nor is there anything in the least reprehensible about it;
structured investments are commonplace. The purpose is to secure advantages from
incorporation or operation in a particular jurisdiction; the specific motives behind the
incorporation of HICEE in the Netherlands are explained in the Claimant’s Statement of
Claim.'® The advantages anticipated often include the protection of particular bilateral (or
other) treaties covering foreign investment. If that is the intention in a particular case, the
question will always arise whether the intended purpose has been achieved through the
structuring chosen for the given investment. In these proceedings, the Parties are in dispute,
inter alia, over whether it has. Hence their agreement at an early stage that what was termed
the “Treaty Interpretation Issue” should be argued on its own as a preliminary objection, on an
expedited basis. This proposal was put to the Tribunal in a joint letter of 29 March 2010 and
approved by the Tribunal by letter on 31 March 2010.'' The present constitutes the

Tribunal’s Decision on that preliminary issue.

It must however first be determined exactly what the Treaty Interpretation Issue is. According
to the joint letter of 29 March 2010, “. . . the parties agree to address initially only
Respondent’s jurisdictional objection regarding whether Claimant’s ‘interest in Dovera and
Apollo falls within the scope of Article 1(a)’ of the Netherlands-Slovak BIT because

Claimant’s investment in Dévera and Apollo as described in the Notice of Arbitration and the

The stages by which Dévera Holding acquired complete ownership of Dévera and Apollo is set out in the
pleadings and correspondence, and is not in dispute. For convenience, the Tribunal will continue, despite
the subsequent events recited in paragraph 27 above, with the construction of the present Award as if
Dévera and Apollo both continued to exist as at the time the oral argument was closed; the events in
question appear to the Tribunal to sound only at the level of potential damages, but do not affect the legal
considerations which determine the Treaty Interpretation Issue.

An authentic description of its structure is given in Section ILC of the Claimant’s Statement of Claim,
paras. 83-90.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim, para. 85; Witness Statement of Pieter de Kok, 15 February 2010, at paras.
15-16 (Exhibit CWS-1).

See paragraph 11 above.

105.

106.

107.

152

153

154

1

Page 35 of 58

Statement of Claim ‘was made through its Slovak subsidiary’ Dévera Holding (‘Treaty

o> 152

Interpretation Issue’)”.

Procedurally, the agreement between the Parties foresaw that this issue would be addressed in
one simple exchange of Memorial and Counter-Memorial. In its Memorial, the Respondent

expressed itself in the following terms:

 

Because HICEE’s interests in the Slovak health insurance system are not “investments of
investors” within the meaning of Article 1 of the BIT, the Respondent’s consent to
arbitration in Article 8 of the BIT provides no basis for the claims which HICEE seeks to
advance.!

 

 

and:

In Article 8(2) of the BIT, the Netherlands and the Slovak Republic consented to submit
disputes to international arbitration only if they concern “investments of investors” that
are protected under the BIT. ... The entire substance of the arbitration claims is directed
at measures taken against two domestic health insurers — Dévera and Apollo — which
expressly are not “investments” of a Dutch “investor”. It follows that the Tribunal cannot
adjudicate under Article 8 disputes concerning those excluded investments.'*

  

. For its part, the Claimant expressed itself as follows in the Counter-Memorial:

Respondent’s jurisdictional objection with respect to the Treaty Interpretation Issue is
that the phrase “invested either directly or through an investor of a third State” in Article
1(a) of the Treaty excludes from the definition of “investment,” and thus from the
protection of the Treaty, assets that are held by subsidiaries of the investor that are
located in the host state. In particular, Respondent argues that ownership interests of a
Dutch company’s Slovak subsidiary in other Slovak companies ... are excluded from the
definition of “investment” under the BIT. Thus, according to Respondent, because
Claimant’s shares in Dévera and Apollo are held through a Slovak holding company,
Dévera Holding, they are excluded fom the definition of “investment” under the
Trea

   

The Tribunal detects in these various iterations slight variations in the description of the issue
for decision, which may or may not in the event prove significant. To avoid possible
difficulties on this score, the Tribunal therefore thinks it better to stipulate in precise terms of
its own how it understands the Treaty Interpretation Issue, before proceeding to its Decision
on that issue. It does so on the basis of its understanding that the Parties are in agreement that

the present Decision should serve as the definitive gateway to any further proceedings in the

There follows a footnote reference to an earlier Counsel-to-Counsel letter in which Respondent’s Counsel

  
 
   
 

had put the matter in very slightly different terms: “The question of whether or not HICEE’s indirect
shareholding interest in Dévera and Apollo falls within the scope of Article 1(a) of the BIT is a discrete
point of treaty interpretation. . . . Article I(a) of the BIT expressly excludes from the treaty’s coverage

 

investments made by HICEE’s Slovak subsidiary, Dévera Holding, in any further Slovak sub-subsidiaries
such as Dévera or Apollo (the ‘Treaty Interpretation Issue’)”.

Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 1.
Respondent’s Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 60 (emphasis in original).

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 10.

108.

109.

110.

Page 36 of 58

case, whether proceedings on the merits or on the further preliminary issues signalled by the
Respondent in its filing pursuant to paragraph 3.2 of Procedural Order No. 1. In other words,
in the event that the Tribunal decides the Treaty Interpretation Issue in the Claimant’s favour,
the arbitration will proceed to further consideration of the merits and of such issues of
jurisdiction or admissibility as remain, in accordance with the procedure laid down in Section
3 of Procedural Order No. 1, read in the light of the joint letter of 29 March 2010.
Conversely, should the Tribunal decide the Treaty Interpretation Issue in favour of the

Respondent, that will bring the arbitration to an end.

In the light of the above, the Tribunal determines that the issue to be decided by it at this stage
of the proceedings, under the description “the Treaty Interpretation Issue”, divides into two

sub-issues, namely:-

(a) can Dévera Holding’s shareholdings in the companies Dévera and Apollo be
considered to be “investments” of HICEE, a Dutch investor, within the meaning of
Article 1 of the Agreement, and thus entitled to the protection provided for in the

substantive Articles of the Agreement, including the right to arbitration under Article 8?

(b) even if not, is it open to HICEE to frame its losses sustained via its holdings in Dévera
and Apollo (assuming that such losses can be established) in some other way that would

bring them within the protection of the Agreement?

The Tribunal will approach its Decision on these two sub-issues as follows: A. The terms of
the Agreement; B. The meaning of “direct”; C. The extraneous materials; D. The most

favoured nation clause; E. Conclusion.

A. The Terms of the Agreement

The analysis of the terms of the Agreement begins naturally with Article 1, around which
much of the argument has centred. The Agreement is concluded in the Dutch, Czech and
English languages, all three being equally authentic. In case of “difference of interpretation”
the English text is to prevail. In response to a question raised by the Tribunal at the
Hearing,'* the Parties confirmed that, in their view, all three language texts had the same
meaning in respect of the issues before the Tribunal, which could therefore safely rely on the
English text alone. All subsequent references in this Decision will therefore be to the English

text.

186 Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 96:14-97:9.

11.

112.

187

158

159

160

Page 37 of 58

Article 1 sets out the applicable definitions for the purposes of the Agreement, beginning with
the term “investments”.'*” Investments are defined in Article 1(a) to comprise “every kind of
asset invested either directly or through an investor of a third State”, and there follows an
extended illustrative (though not exhaustive) list of types of investment, including (in sub-
paragraph (ii)) “shares, bonds and other kinds of interests in companies and joint ventures, as
well as rights derived therefrom”. Paragraphs (b) and (c) of the Article complete the picture
with definitions of “investors” and of “territory”. Specifically, the term “investors” is defined
to comprise, on the one hand, “(i) natural persons having the nationality of one of the
Contracting Parties in accordance with its law’, and on the other hand “(ii) legal persons
constituted under the law of one of the Contracting Parties”. Many elements of these
definitions, notably the definition of “investments”, are familiar from bilateral investment
treaties in general. In particular, it may readily be seen from the wording chosen that, so far
as the types of investment are concerned, the intention was to create a wide coverage. The
argument for present purposes, however, and the disagreement between the Parties, revolves
around the way in which such investments may be made, as encapsulated in the phrase
“invested either directly or through an investor of a third State”, subsequently referred to in
this Decision as “the key phrase”. This phrase, by its placing, is plainly designed to govern all
of the wide types of investment that fall in principle within the terms of Article 1, and
therefore of the Agreement. It seems to the Tribunal plain as well that the qualification
introduced by this phrase (whatever its scope may be) applies to the investment and the form

in which it is made, not to the investor.

Before proceeding, however, to an analysis of the meaning of the key phrase, the Tribunal
thinks it well to recall that the substantive protections conferred by subsequent Articles of the
Agreement (specifically Articles 2, 3, and 7) are granted to “investments of investors of the
other Contracting Party”.'** In other Articles the protection is conferred directly on the
investor as such.'” Finally, Article 4 takes as its focus “payments relating to an investment”.
Of these provisions, Articles 3, 4, and 5 are specifically invoked by the Claimant in support of
its claim for relief." These provisions, the general effect of which is to require an organic

link between “investment” and “investor” for treaty protection purposes, undoubtedly form

The full text of Article 1 is reproduced in paragraph 34 above.
In Article 2, owing to the different syntax, the preposition is “by” not “of”.
See e.g. Articles 5 and 6 of the Agreement.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim, Section III.

113.

114.

115.

16

162

Page 38 of 58

part of the “context” for the application to the key phrase of the rules of interpretation laid

down in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of 1969 (“the Vienna Convention”).'"

As pointed out in paragraph 47 above, both Contracting Parties to the Agreement were Parties
to the Vienna Convention at the time of conclusion of the Agreement; it follows that,
pursuant to Article 4 of the Vienna Convention, the Convention applies in terms to the
Agreement, including to its interpretation, a conclusion confirmed by the fact that Slovakia

succeeded in due course to the Agreement as well as to the Vienna Convention.

B. The Meaning of “Direct”

As indicated above (paragraphs 51-53) the Claimant takes its stand on the proposition that the
key phrase “invested either directly or through an investor of a third State” must be
understood as having a directional meaning; that it indicates, in other words, that investments
under the Agreement may be made by an investor of the other Contracting Party either itself
or else via a subsidiary (or equivalent) in a third country. This, but no more than this, the
Claimant says, is the natural meaning of the phrase in its context in Article 1, confirmed in
addition by the consequences it has for the scope and operation of the Agreement. In further
support, the Claimant proffers an Opinion by the respected commentator, Professor Christoph
Schreuer. The Respondent, conversely, asserts (see paragraphs 48-50 above) that the key
phrase is open to an alternative meaning, which in the circumstances is to be preferred,
namely that, to qualify for protection under the Agreement, the investment in the recipient
country must be that of the foreign investor itself, and not through any intermediary — unless

the intermediary is in a third country.’ In support, the Respondent refers in particular to
Explanatory Notes by the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands submitted on 31
March 1992 to the First and Second Chambers of the States-General with the request for
approval for the Agreement to be ratified, as evidence of an express intention between the
Contracting Parties to exclude investments made via a sub-subsidiary. This latter document

has become a central item in the case, and is analyzed more fully at paragraphs 126 ff. below.

The Tribunal begins by recalling in full the terms of Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties, on the basis that, quite aside from their status as a
reflection of customary international law, these provisions are directly binding on the States

Parties to the Agreement in respect of its interpretation and application:

See paragraph 116 below.

 
 

The Tribunal interpolates at this point that, once the alternative interpretation is accurately stated in this
way, much of the argument advanced at the hearing and in Professor Schreuer’s report, about the asserted
illogicality of allowing indirect investments via a third-country intermediary, simply becomes without
object, since the interpretation would exclude Slovak sub-subsidiaries by either route.

Page 39 of 58

Article 31
General rule of interpretation

1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning
to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and
purpos

2. The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall comprise, in
addition to the text, including its preamble and annexes:

 

(a) any agreement relating to the treaty which was made between all the parties
in connection with the conclusion of the treaty;

(b) any instrument which was made by one or more parties in connection with
the conclusion of the treaty and accepted by the other parties as an instrument
related to the treaty.

   

3. There shall be taken into account, together with the context:

(a) any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the interpretation of
the treaty or the application of its provisions;

(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which establishes the
agreement of the parties regarding its interpretation;

 

(c) any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between the
parties.

4. A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the parties so
intended.

Article 32
Supplementary means of interpretation

Recourse may be had to supplementary means of interpretation, including the
preparatory work of the treaty and the circumstances of its conclusion, in order to
confirm the meaning resulting from the application of article 31, or to determine the
meaning when the interpretation according to article 31:

(a) leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure: or

(b) leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.

116. It is by now a truism that these classic provisions of the Vienna Convention require that the

163

process of interpretation begin with the terms of the treaty itself in their ordinary meaning, as

8 The context is

assessed in context, and in the light of the treaty’s “object and purpose’
given its own definition in paragraph 2 of Article 31. The Tribunal is in no doubt that the
phrase “invested either directly or through an investor of a third State”, as it appears in the
Agreement in question, is capable, as a matter of ordinary meaning, of bearing two meanings:
a directional meaning, in which it refers to the investment’s origin, the place from which it
comes; or a relational meaning, in which it refers to the connection between the investor and
the investment, i.e. whether any intermediary intervenes between the one and the other. The

Tribunal is equally of the view that the context as a whole, broadly defined as in Article 31 of

The phrase “object and purpose” is put in quotation marks for the time being, because of the contentious
issue as to how much by way of valuable guidance it offers either in general or in the present case.

164

165

166

167

168

Page 40 of 58

the Vienna Convention, offers virtually nothing by way of authentic guidance as to which of
these two “ordinary meanings” is to be preferred." There is something in the Respondent’s
argument that, inasmuch as the principal mechanism for the conferral of treaty benefits is the

linkage of the investment to the investor,!>

that may suggest reading the key phrase in a
relational sense.’ Likewise, there is something in the Claimant’s argument that the
juxtaposition in the key phrase of “directly” with “‘a third State” may suggest reading the key
phrase in a directional sense. However that may be, neither of these two arguments is
decisive; moreover they cancel one another out. As to the object and purpose of the
Agreement, the Tribunal finds nothing in it sharp enough to cut the Gordian knot either. The
title of the Agreement describes it as an agreement “on encouragement and reciprocal
protection of investments”. Its Preamble, the normal starting place for an attempt to gather an
Agreement’s object and purpose, tells us no more than that there is a mutual desire to extend
and intensify the economic relations between the Contracting Parties, “particularly with
respect to investments by the investors of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other
Contracting Party”, and that they recognize “that agreement upon the treatment to be accorded
to such investments will stimulate the flow of capital and technology and the economic
development of the Contracting Parties”.'"” The Claimant argues that the terms used in the
Preamble show that the Parties intended the scope of the Agreement to be broad and inclusive,

rather than narrow.'*

But in order to make this argument the Claimant quotes a selective
extract from the wording set out in full above. In the Tribunal’s view, the wording chosen for
the Preamble by the Parties is studiously neutral, and refers more to the goal of the stability of
expectations than to any preconception as to the Agreement’s coverage and scope. The
Tribunal observes that, in general, the purpose of bilateral investment treaties can be taken to
be the encouragement of investment, on a mutual and reciprocal basis, while balancing the
interests of the investors and of the receiving State in that regard; in and of itself, however,

that says nothing about where the balance has been drawn in the particular treaty in

Professor Schreuer, in his expert opinion, expre:

 

s the view that the ‘either-or’ grammar of Article I(a)
will support only the Claimant’s interpretation. This view is not, however, convincing, as it begs the
question at issue by adopting as its starting hypothesis that the intention of the Contracting Parties was to
cover the whole universe of possible investments. To say that an investment may be made ‘either’ in way
A ‘or’ in way B does not of itself foreclose its being made in some other manner, only that it will not
enjoy the same status if it is - which is precisely the point at issue here.

Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 23:5-12.

  

    

Though this argument in fact fails to give full weight to the reference to an “investor” of a third State in the

second limb of the ‘either-or’ alternative.

And adds that fair and equitable treatment is “desirable” (“wenselijk” in the Dutch), a somewhat less than
rousing turn of phrase.

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, para. 16.

117.

118.

119.

169

Page 41 of 58

question.'® The Tribunal does not therefore find anything in the object and purpose of the
present Agreement that would help in any material way to determine the question of

interpretation before it.

It may therefore be that the Tribunal is confronted, at the end of the day, with an ambiguity
that falls to be resolved by the application of Article 32 of the Vienna Convention.'” If so,
the Tribunal would then be entitled (Article 32 uses the verb “may”) to bring into play what
are called “supplementary means of interpretation”, and specifically the preparatory work of
the treaty and the circumstances of its conclusion. But once again the terms of Article 32
make it plain that these are merely examples, with the necessary implication that the category

of admissible supplementary means is not a closed one.

The above said, the Tribunal observes also that the door to the employment of supplementary
means of interpretation is not opened exclusively in the case of ambiguity or obscurity. As
Article 32 says, recourse may be had to the same supplementary means in the case where
interpretation in accordance with Article 31 leads to a meaning which is manifestly absurd or
unreasonable. But equally the same supplementary means are admissible, too, to “confirm”
the meaning resulting from the application of Article 31. Each of these alternative
approaches, it may be noted, takes as its starting point the application of Article 31; and that
brings into play certain other elements, which paragraph (2) of the Article says “shall be taken
into account, together with the context”. The elements listed in Article 31(2) were the subject

of extensive debate between the Parties, and are analyzed at paragraphs 133-135 below.

The Claimant would, to be sure, wish to assert that the interpretation for which the
Respondent contends would lead to absurd and unreasonable results, and has put forward an
argument to that effect.'”” Faced with the choice between two alternative interpretations, the
Tribunal is unable, however, to adopt this as its starting point, given the severely prejudicial
effect that this would have, since it would entail in advance the rejection of one of the two
alternatives. The situation which the Vienna Convention envisages in Article 32 is one in
which a textual (and contextual) analysis pursuant to Article 31 does indeed lead to a result,
but one which ought to be rejected because it is found to be absurd or unreasonable. This is
not the same as an outcome that leaves the interpreter with two alternatives but no available

means under Article 31 to decide which of the two is the appropriate one. The Tribunal

Cf. the assessment of this same question by the Tribunal in Saluka v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial
Award of 17 March 2006, para. 300 (Exhibits CLA-56 and RLA-22).

Or, at the least, with a case of obscurity as to what the Parties in fact meant, which, under Article 32(a) of
the Vienna Convention, is to be resolved by the same means.

   

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, paras. 21 ff. and 90.

120.

121.

Page 42 of 58

wishes moreover to emphasize that what the Vienna Convention has expressly in mind in
Article 32 is the avoidance of a result that would be “manifestly” absurd or unreasonable,
which is a rather different matter.'” The temptation will always be there for one disputing
party to claim that its opponent’s case leads to an absurd or unreasonable result, and the
temptation may be particularly strong where the party in question is a claimant investor who
was not, by definition, privy to the negotiation of the BIT under which his claim is brought.
But an investment tribunal is bound by any policy aims on which the Contracting Parties may
have agreed on at the time as the foundation for their treaty, and is not entitled to substitute its
own extraneous opinion, arrived at after the event, as to whether that policy was a sensible one

or not. A tribunal takes a BIT as it is; its task is one of interpretation, not criticism.

It ought in fairness to be added that the Claimant made an argument that it would have been
difficult for a Dutch investor to invest effectively under Czechoslovak law as it existed at the
time without the use of locally incorporated companies. In support, it filed an expert legal
opinion, though that was not the subject of much detailed discussion at the Hearing, nor was
the author called by the Respondent for cross-examination. The Tribunal only feels it
necessary to observe that BITs are, by definition, concluded for the future not just for the
present, and that there was nothing to prevent either side — i.e. the Dutch side quite as much as
the Czechoslovak side — wanting to provide in advance for a more liberal economic regime
that was on its way. This may indeed have been quite probable at a time of transition for the
Czechoslovak State from a centrally planned socialist economy towards a market economy.
But, however that may be, the fatal blow to this line of argument by the Claimant is surely
delivered by the case of Eureko BV v. Slovakia,'” which displays a Dutch investor operating
comfortably in the Slovak health insurance sector without resorting to any form of sub-

subsidiary.

The Tribunal accordingly considers itself to be on safer ground in bringing into the
interpretative process all available material that it finds to be relevant, significant, and at the
same time reliably instructive as to the meaning and intention behind the words used in the

Agreement.’ It recalls once more (paragraph 117 above) that neither the International Law

See paragraph 19 of the International Law Commission’s Commentary to what was then Article 28 in its
Draft Articles on the Law of Treaties, Yearbook of International Law Commission, 1996, vol. II, at p. 223.
See also the analysis of the term “manifestly”, as used in the ICSID Convention and Rules, in the
Decision of 12 May 2008 by the Tribunal in Trans-Global Petroleum y. Jordan, \CSID Case No.
ARB/07/25, paras. 83 ff., which, although not directly in point, is applicable by analogy.

See fn. 189 below.

Cf. Malaysian Historical Salvors v. Malaysia, CSID Case No. ARB/05/10, Decision on the Application
for Annulment of 16 April 2009, at para. 57 (noting that “courts and tribunals interpreting treaties
regularly review the travaux préparatoires whenever they are brought to their attention”).

122.

123.

124.

125.

Page 43 of 58

Commission nor the Vienna Conference sought to lay down an exhaustive or exclusive list of
what might constitute in any given case the admissible “supplementary means of

interpretation”.

c. The Extraneous Materials

Four sets of materials come into consideration here: the negotiating records of the
Agreement; the evidence tendered to the Tribunal on the Claimant’s behalf by a certain
number of witnesses who had occupied official positions within Czechoslovakia at the time
that the Agreement was under negotiation; the Dutch Explanatory Notes; and the Agreed
Minutes of formal consultations under Article 9 held on 4 and 5 April 2002 between

delegations of the Netherlands and the Czech Republic.

As to the negotiating records, no further discussion is required of their status as interpretative
material. The category itself is well recognized in international practice. Whether the records
tell us anything that may be material and reliable on the question for decision is a different
matter, which the Tribunal finds it more convenient to consider as part of its analysis of the

Dutch Explanatory Notes (see paragraphs 128 ff.) below.

As to the witness evidence, on the other hand, the Tribunal finds it to have little bearing on the
question for decision, and does not consider it necessary to analyze this material further. With
no disrespect to the individual witnesses, none of them was directly involved in the
negotiation of the Agreement in question, and none of them purported to have direct
knowledge that could have cast light on the question before the Tribunal. The witness
evidence, taken as a whole, fell into precisely that category against which the International
Law Commission and international tribunals have warned, namely ex post facto expressions
of opinion about what was presumed to have animated the negotiation of a treaty text. The
Tribunal regards evidence of this kind as in principle of doubtful value, and found nothing in
what the witnesses said before it that would bring it within the criteria laid down in paragraph

121 above.

Similarly, although the Agreed Minutes were the subject of some debate between the Parties,
the Tribunal finds them to be of little assistance. To begin with, the Agreed Minutes exhibit
the specific difficulty that (in the context of a bilateral treaty to which there are two successor
States) the consultations in question were with the other successor State, the Czech Republic,
not with the Slovak Republic, the Party to the present arbitration. Although of course the
starting point must be that the terms of a treaty can have only one original meaning, the
circumstance just mentioned nevertheless casts doubt on how far this particular piece of

subsequent conduct can be treated as a decisive guide to that meaning. Even if that question

126.

127.

175

176

Page 44 of 58

as to their status could be readily resolved, however, the consultations had been requested (as
their content recites) on two specific questions,'” neither of which corresponds to the question
presently at issue in this arbitration. It follows that such bearing as the Agreed Minutes may
have on the present question is purely incidental. And even then, the fact remains that the
Agreed Minutes are cast in such broad and general terms, which do no more than pick up the
terminology of the Agreement itself, that the Tribunal does not feel able to attribute to them
any particular significance for the solution of the question before it. At most, the Minutes
tend to indicate that there are some investments that are not within the scope of the

Agreement, but they tell us nothing specific about where the dividing line lies.

The Dutch Explanatory Notes are in a different category entirely, both from the witness

evidence and from the Agreed Minutes, as will appear at once from their content:

Explanatory notes by article

Article 1 provides a description of various terms used in the Agreement. The
Agreement covers direct investments and investments made through a company in a
third country. Normally, investment protection agreements also cover investments in
the host country made by a Dutch company’s subsidiary which is already established
in the host country (“subsidiary”- “sub-subsidiary” structure). Czechoslovakia wi
to exclude the “sub-subsidiary” from the scope of this Agreement, because this is in
fact a company created by a Czechoslovakian legal entity, and Czechoslovakia does
not want to grant, in particular, transfer rights to such company. This restriction can
be dealt with by incorporating a new company directly from the Netherlands. As the
restriction is therefore not of great practical importance, the Dutch delegation has
consented to it. Czechoslovakia’s request to use the term “investor” rather than
“national” was granted by the Netherlands.

 

   

The portion of the Dutch Explanatory Notes that refers to Article 1 thus has the most direct

1.17 Its

and material bearing on the very issue which is now for decision by the Tribunal
standing and effect as an item of interpretative material will be considered below. Certain
features of the Explanatory Notes should however be noted at the outset, not least because
they distinguish its place in the present proceedings from the normal run of past practice in
international judicial settlement. It is by no means uncommon for a party to a dispute
settlement process involving treaty interpretation to support its case by invoking the terms in
which the treaty was submitted internally for approval; it typically involves a statement of

some kind by the executive power to the legislature as to how the terms of the treaty should be

The temporal reach of the Agreement in relation to pre-existing investments, and the application of the
law of the host State.

When the Explanatory Notes say expressly that Czechoslovakia wished to exclude sub-subsidiaries “from
the scope of this Agreement” the Tribunal is unable to endorse the view put forward in Professor
Schreuer’s report that the reference is limited to the definition of investors and “nationals” but not the
definition of “investment”.

 

Page 45 of 58

interpreted and its effect understood.” What that amounts to, normally, is the invocation by
a State of its own contemporaneous interpretation of a treaty text when a dispute over that text
comes before a tribunal later on. By contrast, what marks the present situation out as different
is the following: first, that the negotiating State is not setting down its own interpretation but
the intentions of its negotiating partner; second, that this is not a bare statement but one
backed by reasons; third, that there follows an express confirmation that the other Party’s
intentions were agreed to, and why; fourth, that the Notes conclude with a precise indication
of the recipe for avoiding the exclusionary effect of the restriction that was accepted into the
treaty text. The final difference, which the Tribunal considers to be of some considerable
significance, is that in this case the declaration is being invoked not by the declarant State

itself, but from the opposite side of the treaty nexus.

128. The meaning of the relevant portion of the Explanatory Notes was however put in issue by the

178

Claimant," and the Tribunal must accordingly confront the question. It does so on the

footing that its task is to interpret the Agreement, not to interpret the interpretative

«1179
materials,

although it must be obvious that no tribunal could bring into play any of the
interpretative materials mentioned in Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention without
forming a view as to what the material in question indicates. The Claimant says that the
meaning of the Notes can only be appreciated in the context of what was happening in
Czechoslovakia at the time, notably the concern to balance the inflow and outflow of foreign
capital. It says that the main anxiety of Czechoslovakia was over the definition of “investor”,
and that the terms of the passage in the Explanatory Notes serve to confirm that it focuses on
who is an “investor” rather than what is an “investment”. The Claimant concludes that the
fact that Czechoslovak subsidiaries and sub-subsidiaries were not deemed to be Dutch
investors did not put them outside the protection of the Agreement altogether, as both
subsidiaries and sub-subsidiaries could still be Dutch investments if owned by Dutch
companies. However, this reading of the Explanatory Notes lacks conviction. The Tribunal
cannot accept that a Dutch investor is a more authentic exponent of Czechoslovak views and
intentions in the negotiation than the Government with which Czechoslovakia was
negotiating. When the passage in question says that Czechoslovakia wanted to exclude sub-

subsidiaries “from the scope of this Agreement”, it must be taken to mean what it says. And

7 Examples can be found in the Case Concerning Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States of
America), Preliminary Objection, Judgment, 1.C.J. Reports 1996, p. 803, at p. 814, para. 29 and in the
arbitral decision in Global and Globex v. Ukraine, \CSID Case No. ARB/09/11, Award of 1 December
2010, paras. 48 ff.

"8 See in particular the Claimant’s Counter-Memorial at paragraphs 49-61.

"Cf. the Judgment of Simon J in Czech Republic v. European Media Ventures, cited by the Claimant
(Exhibit CLA- 97).

129.

130.

131.

Page 46 of 58

when the passage begins by talking (repeatedly) about “investments”, that must be taken to be
its subject. To bring in a single (and somewhat obscure) reference to investors in the very last
sentence as a way of subverting the clear intention behind all that precedes it would be a
strained and artificial form of deconstruction that the Tribunal could not endorse. The
Tribunal takes the Explanatory Notes simply, and at their face value, and has no doubt that
what they refer to is the exclusion of sub-subsidiaries from the scope of the Agreement
entirely, both because the sub-subsidiary was not to be regarded as a covered “investment”
and because the local subsidiary which created or acquired it was not itself to be regarded as a

foreign “investor”.

In this unusual set of circumstances, the twin questions immediately arise: should the
Explanatory Notes be taken into consideration at all, and should their contents be accepted as
accurate? It is more convenient to take the latter part first. The Claimant invited the Tribunal
to disregard the Explanatory Notes entirely, largely on the ground that they were arguably
inconsistent with the terms in which other, similar, BITs had been presented to the Dutch
Parliament, and should therefore be regarded as an aberration. This the Tribunal feels unable
to do — in part because of the categorically precise terms in which the passage in the
Explanatory Notes is cast, and in part also because the Explanatory Notes are a formal, public
document that engages the honesty and good faith of the Dutch Minister, and the Tribunal

does not believe that it is its place to call that into question, even implicitly.

That said, the Tribunal did however take the view that what was said in the Explanatory Notes
called for some substantiation or corroboration, if possible. Moreover, given that the
Explanatory Notes say in terms that Czechoslovakia asked in negotiation for something that
the Netherlands agreed to, such substantiation or corroboration ought in principle to be readily
available: the one via the records of the Dutch Foreign Ministry and the other via the records
of the competent Ministries of the former Czechoslovakia. The Tribunal accordingly issued a
Procedural Order under Article 24(3) of the UNCITRAL Rules requiring the Parties to
produce jointly any agreed minutes or reports of either delegation on the negotiating sessions
on the Agreement, and any reports seeking formal approval of it, “which may throw light on
the description of the negotiation of Article 1 of the Agreement contained in the letter from
the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands to the Chairm[e]n of the First and Second
Chambers of the States-General dated 31 March 1992”.

The response received jointly from the Parties on 3 September 2010 was surprising and in
some respects disappointing. This was not so much because the Parties found themselves in
disagreement as to which of the documents they assembled (if any) should be regarded as

responsive to the Tribunal’s request, as because the documents they were able to furnish to the

132.

133.

134.

180

Is

Page 47 of 58

Tribunal threw so little further light on the question raised. To be more specific, the
collection of documents on the Czechoslovak side presented an apparently careful and
comprehensive picture of the discussions between the two Governmental delegations, but
revealed no detail at all about the negotiation of Article 1, other than that its text was settled at
a very early stage.'*” That apart, the only inference the Tribunal is able to draw from the
entirety of the bundle of documentation is that nothing in it has its origin in Dutch official
sources. Whatever the explanation for that might be, its consequence (taken together with the
effect of the Czechoslovak documents just described) is that the Tribunal has nothing before it
to illuminate or otherwise substantiate the basis on which the Dutch Foreign Minister drew up
his submission to Parliament on Article 1. All that the Tribunal is able to deduce (as had
indeed been indicated by Counsel for the Respondent during the oral Hearing) is that the copy
of the Explanatory Notes that was tendered by the Respondent in evidence had been obtained

from Governmental files in Prague, not The Hague. '*!

The Tribunal is bound to observe that the resulting situation is less than satisfactory. Be that
as it may, its consequence is that, in the absence of corroboration of the kind the Tribunal had
been seeking, it must treat the Explanatory Notes as having an essentially unilateral character,

not a joint one — though subject to the point made at the end of paragraph 131 above.

The Tribunal comes now to the question that was most vigorously debated between the
Parties, in the written submissions and orally: can the Explanatory Notes be brought within
the classes of material listed in Article 31, paragraphs (2) or (3) of the Vienna Convention,

and, if so, with what effect?

The terms of paragraphs (2) and (3) of Article 31 are set out in full in paragraph 115 above.
Starting with paragraph (3), its sub-paragraph (c) can be set aside at once, since it refers to
relevant rules of international law, whereas the present problem relates entirely to what took
place between the Parties in the conclusion of the treaty itself. Moving then to sub-paragraphs
(a) and (b), the Tribunal observes that the common feature between them is that both refer to
processes that amount to a form of agreement between the treaty parties. In sub-paragraph (a)
the agreement is ex hypothesi conscious and express, in sub-paragraph (b) it arises by
implication from the parties’ actions. A further common feature is that the agreement in both
cases is “subsequent”, which must in the context mean that it supervenes after the conclusion

of the treaty itself. The relevance of both items to treaty interpretation is obvious (and is

In fact as early as the Second Meeting, held from 31 October to 3 November 1989. See Agreed Minutes

from Second Meeting of Expert Delegations from Czechoslovakia and the Netherlands Concerning
Negotiations of the BIT, 3 November 1989, draft unsigned version (Exhibit R-4).

Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 95:14-19.

Page 48 of 58

explained in full by the International Law Commission in its Commentary to the Draft
Articles), and the fact that it is obligatory to take them into account derives from the fact
that they represent agreements between the treaty parties. The Tribunal has some difficulty
with the argument that the Explanatory Notes can be brought within this category; the most
that could be said is that the document was found to have been within the official archives in
Prague and there was no record of its having been contested by the Czechoslovakian side.
Whatever that may signify, it does not amount to the kind of “agreement” envisaged in Article
31(3). Are the Explanatory Notes nevertheless part of the “context for the purpose of . . .
interpretation” in accordance with the sub-paragraphs to Article 31(2)? Sub-paragraph (a) of
paragraph 2 covers “any agreement relating to the treaty which was made between all the
parties in connection with the conclusion of the treaty”; for the reasons already given in
relation to paragraph 3, the Tribunal is unable to place the Explanatory Notes in the category
of an agreement between the Contracting Parties to the Agreement. Accepting this logic, the
Respondent asserts that the Note nevertheless qualifies under sub-paragraph 2(b), as an
“instrument which was made by one or more parties in connection with the conclusion of the

treaty”;

the Claimant, for its part, denies that the Note was ever accepted, or the accuracy of
its contents confirmed, by the Government of Czechoslovakia. For the Tribunal, the
Claimant’s argument on this point carries greater persuasive effect than that of the
Respondent. The Tribunal has doubts of its own as to whether Article 31(2)(b) was intended
to cover a document of this kind, composed as it was for purely internal purposes of the treaty
approval process in the Netherlands. The Tribunal finds it inherently unlikely that any such
internal document would ever, on its own, qualify for attention under Article 31(2)(b) in the
absence of additional circumstances involving its communication by some reasonably formal
means to the other contracting party (or parties). Only thus would a tribunal be able to make
sense out of the second limb of the sub-paragraph, where it refers to acceptance by the other
parties as an instrument related to the treaty. By definition, the burden of demonstrating that
such acceptance had occurred would lie on the party invoking the document. In these
proceedings, the Respondent, while producing a limited amount of circumstantial evidence
tending to suggest that the document may have been communicated by the Dutch side to their
Czechoslovak counterparts, could produce no concrete evidence of “acceptance” in any
positive form, even sub silentio. That does not, however, as the Tribunal sees matters,
foreclose the possible significance of the Note as an indicator of agreement, for the reasons

the Tribunal will come to below.

"© Draft Articles on the Law of Treaties with Commentaries, Yearbook of International Law Commission,

1966, vol. Il, at p. 227.

13 Tp full, “any instrument which was made by one or more parties in connection with the conclusion of the

treaty and accepted by the other parties as an instrument related to the treaty” (see paragraph 115 above).

135.

136.

184

185

Page 49 of 58

The Tribunal thus arrives at a conclusion which, on the surface, corresponds to the argument
of the Claimant, namely that the Dutch Explanatory Notes do not fit within any of the
categories of extraneous material specified in Article 31 or Article 32'* of the Vienna
Convention. Where the Tribunal parts company with the Claimant’s argument, however, is in
the consequences to be drawn from that. For the Claimant, once the Explanatory Notes find
no express place in Articles 31 and 32, they must be disregarded entirely, not only for the
interpretation of the Agreement, but also for its application. The Tribunal is unable to endorse
so rigid an approach to the matter. In the first place, it recalls once more its conclusion at
paragraph 117 that the category of admissible supplementary means for treaty interpretation is
not a closed one. The Tribunal recalls also the repeated reminders woven into the
International Law Commission’s Commentaries on its Draft Articles that the provisions on
treaty interpretation must not be misread as introducing either a rigid, or still less a
hierarchical, set of rules. As the Commission says, there is in truth only one all-encompassing

rule, whose elements should be combined in a logical and coherent way.'**

Stepping back from a piecemeal analysis, the Tribunal will restate what it considers to be the
essential and quite simple fact: that in the process of giving its consent to be bound by the
Agreement the Government of the Netherlands expressed itself formally, publicly, and in
writing (with reasons) as to what had been intended by the key phrase in Article 1; and that
the Government of Slovakia, now appearing before this Tribunal, espouses the same meaning
for the provision in question. That this represents a concordance of views between the two
Contracting Parties to the treaty obligation in question — albeit in an attenuated form — cannot
be denied. That the concordance of views has on the one side, not the original Contracting
Party but one of its two successor States, and on the other side a State which is not a party to
the present arbitral proceedings, does not seem to the Tribunal to alter, or to be capable of
altering, the existence of that form of “agreement” — for whatever consequences it may have.
The Tribunal has already indicated above why it does not consider that the circumstances give
rise, in any exact sense, to any of the particular forms of agreement specified in Articles 31 or
32 of the Vienna Convention. But that is not by any means the same thing as to say that these
highly pertinent circumstances ought on that account to be left out of the interpretative process
altogether. To do so would fly in the face of logic and good sense. It would not, in the
Tribunal’s considered view, be reconcilable with the requirement that a treaty is to be
interpreted “in good faith”, which the Vienna Convention consciously placed at the very head
For the Tribunal, it is self-evident that the Explanatory Notes do not form part of the preparatory work

(travaux préparatoires), since they post-date the completion of the negotiations, and serve to explain what
had been agreed between the negotiating States.

Draft Articles on the Law of Treaties with Commentaries, Yearbook of International Law Commission,
1966, vol. II, at p. 220.

137.

138.

186

Page 50 of 58

of the provisions dealing with interpretation.'*°

And the Tribunal recalls once more (as set out
above) that the category of supplementary materials that a tribunal is authorized to have
recourse to, in order to confirm the meaning resulting from the application of article 31, or to
determine the meaning when the interpretation according to article 31 leaves the meaning
ambiguous or obscure, is, on the terms of the Convention, not closed. The Tribunal is
therefore in no doubt that the Dutch Explanatory Notes, given their terms and content, taken
together with the viewpoint adopted in these proceedings by Slovakia, constitute valid
supplementary material which the Tribunal may, and in the circumstances must, take into

account in dealing with the question before it.

The matter can be looked at in another way. Let us suppose, as a hypothesis, that the same
question of interpretation of the Agreement was in dispute between the Contracting Parties
themselves, and that that dispute was in litigation. The hypothesis is by no means an unreal
one, since it is precisely what might have happened under Article 10 of the Agreement, which
lays down, as is common in treaties of this type, that disputes between the Contracting Parties
concerning its interpretation or application, if not settled amicably, shall be submitted to
binding arbitration. That the particular issue under consideration by the present Tribunal was
capable, in the alternative, of being submitted to inter-State arbitration in this way is implicit
in the joint decision by the present Parties to ask the Tribunal to determine it as a preliminary
issue precisely because it represents a general issue of the interpretation of the Agreement
which is independent of the facts of particular cases. Had the matter gone to inter-State
arbitration (or indeed to the International Court of Justice) it is surely inconceivable that the
Netherlands would have wished to adopt a position in the litigation materially different from
its formal public position at the time of ratification; or (in the unlikely contrary event) that the
court or tribunal would have permitted it to do so. As the Latin maxim has it: nemo audietur

venire contra factum suum .

It may be objected against the reasoning above that the whole Treaty Interpretation Issue
might never have entered anyone’s mind in the first place had it not been for the Dutch
Explanatory Notes, in other words that it is not admissible to introduce the Notes in order to
give rise to an ambiguity. But the Tribunal is unable to follow so counterfactual a line of
argument. The plain fact is that the Explanatory Notes were put in argument before it, with a
provenance and a relevance that cannot be gainsaid. Whether the ambiguity in the text would
otherwise have occurred to either side in this dispute, or to the Counsel representing it, is a
hypothetical issue on which it would not be proper for a tribunal to speculate. Suffice it to say
The Tribunal recalls also that, pursuant to the fundamental principle pacta sunt servanda, as enunciated in

Article 26 of the Vienna Convention, treaties must also be performed by the parties to them in good faith
(see in addition the third paragraph in the Convention’s Preamble).

 

139.

140.

141.

18

188

189

Page 51 of 58

that the Tribunal, having been confronted with the treaty text and by the highly professional
argument put before it on both sides, has registered the ambiguity in its “ordinary meaning”
and is bound to note that ambiguities exist a fortiori; their existence does not depend on the

skill of counsel in arguing how they should be resolved.

A further question may be raised whether the grounds the Tribunal has set out above for its
preferred interpretation, depending as they do on the actions of the Dutch Government, which
by definition is not itself a party to this arbitration, should properly be regarded as opposable
to the Claimant. As to this, the Tribunal believes the answer to be clear: a treaty can have
only one authentic meaning, which cannot on grounds of basic principle vary according to
who are the parties to a particular dispute. As the Tribunal has already pointed out, the
present question of interpretation could have arisen in inter-State proceedings under Article
10. If it had done so, it would have attracted the consequence that the decision of the tribunal
“shall be final and binding on both Contracting Parties”.'*’. That cannot possibly mean that
the arbitral decision would be binding on the States only, but without effect on an investor

claiming derivatively through the rights procured for it by one of those States.

Would this result, however, be unfair on an investor? The question was not raised in direct
terms by the Parties in argument, but the Tribunal thought right to give it some consideration
— though always subject to the primary proposition stated in paragraph 139 above that a treaty
can have only one authentic meaning — in case the circumstances suggested some need to
mitigate the consequences. In deciding that there is neither need nor justification for not
following the natural consequences of the interpretative result, the Tribunal was influenced
principally by two factors. First among them is the fact that the Dutch Explanatory Notes are
of recent date (1992), and are a formal public document, preserved on the Parliamentary
record,'** and thus accessible by any Dutch investor conducting due diligence into the status
of his proposed investment. The second is the point already made in paragraph 103 above,
that this is a case of a structured investment, structured, that is, to secure certain advantages.
It stands to reason, as the Tribunal sees the matter, that the burden then rests on the investor to

189

make sure that the structure chosen achieves his intended result,“ and to undertake all

necessary precautions to that end.

The Claimant’s argument placed much reliance, understandably, on two separate but (in its

view) parallel items of treaty practice, namely the BIT concluded in 1989 between the

Article 10, paragraph 5 of the Agreement.
See fn. 7 above.

As appears indeed to have been done in the recent case Eureko v. Slovak Republic, PCA Case No. 2008-
13, also concerning the health insurance sector.

142.

143.

144.

Page 52 of 58

Netherlands and the USSR, and the BITs concluded between Czechoslovakia and Greece,
Norway, and Denmark in the period between March and June, 1991, which were submitted
for ratification in Czechoslovakia as a group together with the Agreement under consideration

in the present Arbitration.

The significance of the Netherlands-USSR BIT, the Claimant says, is that it contains the
identical phrase as in the Czechoslovak-Netherlands Agreement, “directly or through an
investor of a third State”, which appears in the same position in the text, and it too was
accompanied by explanatory notes on submission to the Dutch Parliament, but that the
explanation given in those notes, far from being in the same terms, states the contrary, namely

that the BIT was intended to cover investors already established in the Soviet Union.

In considering this argument, the Tribunal begins by observing that it is not its task to
interpret the Netherlands-USSR BIT, nor has it been made aware that the question at issue in
the present case has previously been raised and authoritatively decided under that Treaty. In
the second place — and without pronouncing on whether and to what extent it is proper under
the Vienna Convention to rely on parallel treaty practice of this kind — the Tribunal does not
believe that the terms of the Netherlands-USSR explanatory notes can bear the weight the
Claimant seeks to place on them. When the notes make mention of “investments of a Dutch
investor already established in the Soviet Union”, they say nothing at all about the nature of
those investments, and therefore about the specific subsidiary/sub-subsidiary question
presently at issue. The notes are perfectly capable of being understood as referring to foreign
companies operating, for example, within a joint venture. On the mere wording of the notes,
moreover, it seems equally probable that they may have been referring primarily to the
temporal issue of the application of the BIT, and thus of protection under it, to investments
that already existed at the time of its conclusion. The Tribunal is therefore unable to derive

from the document anything of value for present purposes.

In the case of the Czechoslovak BITs, the Claimant makes a rather different argument, namely
that the global submission of all four BITs for ratification in Czechoslovakia under the
concise formula that they “do not materially differ”, even though three of them do not contain
any limitation on indirect investment, undermines the Respondent’s attempt to attribute
substantive and material effect to the key phrase. As to that, the Tribunal can only say that the
submission document is far too terse and general in its terms to allow the Tribunal to extract
from it any precise meaning on the particular question before it, as opposed to a general
statement as to the overall similarities between all four Treaties, which are indeed undeniable.

The Tribunal therefore finds itself unable to weigh this document in the scales so as to

145.

146.

147.

190

191

Page 53 of 58

countervail against the precise, explicit and directly pertinent remarks in the Dutch

Explanatory Notes.

The Tribunal accordingly finds that the terms of the Agreement are so to be understood and
applied that they do not protect investments made by a Slovak corporate entity (in this case
Dévera Holding) in other Slovak corporate entities (namely Dévera and Apollo), from which
it follows that HICEE’s interests in the businesses of Dévera and Apollo cannot be considered
to be “investments of investors of the other Contracting Party” entitled to the protection

conferred by the Agreement, including the right to bring arbitral proceedings under Article 8.

There was, however, a second limb to the Claimant’s case on the interpretation and
application of the Agreement, as summarized under the second sub-issue set out at paragraph
108 above, namely, is it open to HICEE to frame the losses it claims to have sustained via its
holdings in Dévera and Apollo in some other way that would bring them within the protection

of the Agreement? As the matter was pithily put by Counsel at the oral Hearing:

[Blecause claimant’s investment in Dévera Holding is covered, all of claimant's
claims can proceed and be pursued, whether or not Dévera and Apollo are directly
defined as “investments”. This is because claimant’s claims are predicated on acts by
Slovakia that have injured Dévera Holding, such as the prohibition on its receipt of
profits, such as the restraint on the operations of Dévera and Apollo. Investment
treaty jurisprudence is clear to the effect that a shareholder such as HICEE has
standing to pursue claims for damage to a company in which it holds shares,
including damage inflicted upon the assets of such a company.'”°

   

  

 

 

The Respondent’s answer (also through the mouth of Counsel at the oral Hearing) was that it
was not possible under the Agreement as it stands “simply to claim the same profits down the
chain by bringing the claim in the name of the Dutch company. Rather, you have to alter your
investment structure. You have to incorporate a new company directly from the
Netherlands”.'"' The argument, as the Tribunal understands it, was simply that, if the treaty
negotiators specifically wished to exclude a subsidiary/sub-subsidiary structure (as the Dutch
Explanatory Notes say), then it strains the reasonable bounds of interpretation to conclude that
they nevertheless intended to allow this wolf to come within the scope of the Agreement so

long as it was in sheep’s clothing.

The Tribunal reaches the same conclusion as the Respondent, but by a different route. As the
Tribunal has interpreted the Agreement, it plainly admits a company like Dévera Holding as

an investment in its own right. The consequence is that a claim under the Agreement would

Hearing Tr., 21 July 2010, at 72:19-73:6.

Hearing Tr., 21 July 2010, at 180:25-181:5.

192

193

194

Page 54 of 58

lie (in appropriate circumstances) in respect of losses sustained by Dévera Holding. But it is
equally plain that the losses would have to have been sustained as a result of treatment of
Dévera Holding by the Respondent State or its agencies that is found to be in breach of the
guarantees which the Agreement establishes. Once the subsidiary/sub-subsidiary structure is
found to lie outside the Agreement’s field of protection, it becomes obvious that treatment
meted out to Dévera Holding’s own investments through one of its local subsidiaries does not
meet this requirement, whether or not treatment of that kind might otherwise fall foul of the
substantive standards under the Agreement. The health insurance business of the sub-
subsidiaries, Dévera and Apollo, is covered by national law, and not by the terms of the
Agreement. It is not enough for the Claimant to say that HICEE suffered a loss via the effect
of national law on that business, unless the loss followed in some direct sense from a treaty
breach. When the Claimant says that “investment treaty jurisprudence” gives a shareholder
standing to pursue claims for damage to the assets of a company in which it holds shares, that
is not a proposition that can be upheld by the Tribunal in so sweeping a form, given the
default position in international law that the corporate form is recognized as legally distinct
from the shareholders, and confers on the corporate entity the capacity to assert claims for
damage suffered to it or its property.’ The true position, as the Tribunal understands it, is
that the admissibility of shareholder claims depends upon the provisions of the investment
protection treaty in question, and that investment protection treaties very frequently make
provision to allow for shareholder claims, either explicitly or by necessary implication.'* The

194

position, in other words, is controlled by the treaty, “ and the Tribunal can see no justification

for calling into play a supposed proposition of general law in order to change or override what

the treaty itself provides.

Barcelona Traction Light and Power Company, Limited, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1970, p. 3 (Exhibit
CLA-84). See also Rompetrol v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/3, Decision on Respondent’s
Preliminary Objections on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 18 April 2008 (Exhibits CLA-115 and RLA-
28). Now see further the Judgment of the International Court of Justice of 30 November 2010 (Merits) in
the Case Concerning Ahmadou Sadio Diallo (Republic of Guinea v. Democratic Republic of the Congo),
delivered after the completion of the oral Hearing in the present Arbitration (the Court’s Judgment of 2007
on Preliminary Objections had been the subject of submissions by the Parties in their written pleadings,
Exhibits CLA-83 and RLA-25).

 

As indeed treaties of this kind sometimes make express provision for a local subsidiary to be treated on
the same footing as if it were a foreign investor, on the basis of foreign control (cf. Article 25(2)(b) of the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other States
(“ICSID Convention”), done at Washington on 18 March 1965, entered into force on 14 October 1966,
575 U.N.T.S. 159).

 

 

Professor Schreuer’s report would appear to come toa similar view. See Schreuer Legal Opinion, paras.
23-24 (Exhibit CER-3).

148.

149.

Page 55 of 58

D. The Most-Favoured-Nation Clause

The Tribunal does not, accordingly, find anything in the second of the two sub-issues that
together constitute “the Treaty Interpretation Issue” which would lead it to alter its finding in
paragraph 145 above. That does not, however, finally dispose of the matter, since the
Claimant has put before the Tribunal a further argument relating to the interpretation of the
Agreement and its application, deriving from the most-favoured-nation clause in its Article 3,

which (in relevant part) reads as follows:

Article 3

1. Each Contracting Party shall ensure fair and equitable treatment to the investments
of investors of the other Contracting Party and shall not impair, by unreasonable or
discriminatory measures, the operation, management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or
sposal thereof by those investors.

 
   

2. More particularly, each Contracting Party shall accord to such investments full
security and protection which in any case shall not be less than that accorded either to
investments of its own investors or to investments of investors of any third State,
whichever is more favourable to the investor concerned.

[ed

5. If the provisions of law of either Contracting Party or obligations under
international law existing at present or established hereafter between the Contracting
Parties in addition to the present Agreement contain rules, whether general or
specific, entitling investments by investors of the other Contracting Party to a
treatment more favourable than is provided for by the present Agreement, such rules
shall to the extent that they are more favourable prevail over the present Agreement.

The comparison with the treatment of “its own investors” in Article 3(2) self-evidently not
being applicable here, the Claimant says that the reference to the security and protection
accorded to investors of any third State entitles it to invoke the provisions of bilateral
investment treaties concluded by Slovakia with (or in force between Slovakia and) other
States; likewise for the reference to existing or future obligations under international law
pursuant to article 3(5). Therefore, says the Claimant, for the event that the Tribunal does not
share its view as to the correct interpretation of the present Agreement, it has in reserve an
entitlement to invoke the several BITs which do not include any restriction comparable to the

key phrase, “invested either directly or through an investor of a third State”.

With all respect to the elegance with which this argument was deployed, the Tribunal does not
find much merit in it. The Tribunal endorses the approach adopted by other investment
tribunals that each most-favoured-nation clause is to be interpreted according to its own terms.
It would therefore be a fallacy to suppose that there existed some general concept that could
be called into play to determine the scope of most-favoured-nation treatment in particular

cas

 

s. The clear purpose of Article 3(2), as of Article 3(5), is to broaden the scope of the
substantive protection granted to the eligible investments of eligible investors; it cannot

150.

151.

 

Page 56 of 58

legitimately be used to broaden the definition of the investors or the investments

themselves.'* The argument thus falls of its own weight.

E. Conclusion

The Tribunal accordingly arrives at the overall conclusion that the investments in respect of
which the Claimant seeks to claim in the present Arbitration are not covered by the terms of
the Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments between the
Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic of 29 April 1991,
including the right to request arbitration under Article 8 thereof, and renders the present

Award to that effect.

VII. COSTS

It remains for the Tribunal to decide whether it wishes to make any order for costs, pursuant

to Article 40 of the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules, which reads as follows:

Article 40

1. Except as provided in paragraph 2, the costs of arbitration shall in principle be
borne by the unsuccessful party. However, the arbitral tribunal may apportion each of
such costs between the parties if it determines that apportionment is reasonable,
taking into account the circumstances of the case.

 

2. With respect to the costs of legal representation and assistance referred to in article
38, paragraph (c), the arbitral tribunal, taking into account the circumstances of the
hall be free to determine which party shall bear such costs or may apportion
such costs between the parties if it determines that apportionment is reasonable. [...]

 

The criterion to be applied by the Tribunal is accordingly that of reasonableness, taking into
account the circumstances of the case. Having considered those circumstances with care, the
Tribunal finds that the issues raised in the present phase of this arbitration were difficult, and
in some respects novel; that the Parties were animated by a sense of practicality and economy
in agreeing to hive off the Treaty Interpretation Issue for preliminary decision, and that their
sound judgement in that respect has been vindicated by events; that the Parties are
particularly to be commended for their cooperation with the Tribunal and for the conciseness
and precision of their written and oral arguments. That being so, the Tribunal sees no
justification for the blanket application of a costs rule in favour of the successful Party, as in
the first sentence of Article 40(1). Exercising its discretion under the Rule, it decides instead
le v. The Dominican Republic, LCLA Case No. UN 7927, Award on Preliminary
Objections to Jurisdiction of 19 September 2008, at paras. 40-41 (discussed by the Parties during the
Hearing, Hearing Tr., 20 July 2010, at 99:11-101:4 and Hearing Tr., 21 July 2010, at 62:18-24). See also
Austrian Airlines v. Slovak Republic, UNCITRAL, Final Award of 20 October 2009, para. 135 (Exhibit

RLA-31); Renta 4 and others v. Russia, SCC Case No. 24/2007, Award on Preliminary Objections of 20
March 2009, para. 119 (Exhibit RLA-29).

Page 57 of 58

that the Claimant will meet 6/10 of the costs of the arbitration, which the Tribunal hereby

certifies as amounting to € 461,686.44,’ but that each Party will bear the costs of the

preparation and presentation of its own case.

VIII.

DISPOSITIF

152. Having deliberated, the Tribunal decides that:

a)

b)

c)

d)

e)

The terms of the Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of
Investments between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Czech and Slovak Federal
Republic of 29 April 1991 are so to be understood and applied that they do not protect
investments made by a Slovak corporate entity (Dévera Holding) in other Slovak

corporate entities (Dévera and Apollo);

HICEE’s interests in the businesses of Dévera and Apollo cannot be considered to be
“investments of investors of the other Contracting Party” entitled to the protection
conferred by the Agreement, including the right to bring arbitral proceedings under

Article 8;

Consequently, the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction over the dispute submitted to it in

this arbitration;

The Claimant shall bear 6/10, and the Respondent shall bear 4/10 of the costs of the
arbitration pursuant to Article 38(a), (b), and (c) of the UNCITRAL Rules, which the
Tribunal hereby certifies as amounting to € 461,686.44; consequently, HICEE shall pay
the amount of € 46,168.64 to the Slovak Republic;

Each Party shall bear its own costs of legal representation and assistance.

'°6 The costs of the arbitration comprise the fees of the Arbitral Tribunal (Sir Franklin Berman: € 143,320;
Judge Charles Brower: € 161,550; Judge Peter Tomka: € 84,625), the fees of the Registry (€ 44,465), and
the expenses of the Tribunal and costs of hearings and meetings (€ 27,726.44).

Page 58 of 58

Done at the place of arbitration, London, United Kingdom on 23M. 2011:

a <p& Sou

The Honorable Judge HE. Judge Peter Tomka
Charles N. Brower

(Signed subject to the
attached Dissenting Opinion)

a

Sir Franklin Berman KCMG QC
Presiding Arbitrator

PCA 50370

