INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN

Hochtief AG
(CLAIMANT)

and

The Argentine Republic

(RESPONDENT)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/07/31)

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

Members of the Tribunal
Professor Vaughan Lowe Q.C, President
Judge Charles N. Brower, Arbitrator
Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, Q.C., Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mrs. Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski

Representing the Claimant
Hochtief Aktiengesellschaft
Opernplatz 2, 45128 Essen
Germany

c/o Messrs. Paul F. Doyle and
Philip D. Robben

Kelley Drye & Warren LLP
101 Park Avenue

New York, NY 10178, USA

Date of Decision: October 24, 2011

Representing the Respondent

c/o Dra. Angelina Maria Esther Abbona
Procuradora del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la

Naci6n Argentina

Posadas 1641

C1112ADC, Buenos Aires

Argentina

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

I THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS 4
IL THE FIRST OBJECTION: BIT ARTICLE 10.......cc.cccssssessessessseescsscencssesnessesneeseesncenees 5
Ill THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS 8
IV THE INTERPRETATION OF BIT ARTICLE 10.

V_ THE MEN PROVISION 15
VI DOES THE MFN PROVISION APPLY TO DISPUTE SETTLEMENT?..........000 16
VIL MEN AND JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS.......ccsccsessessessesseessceseenseneeneesessesseeneesnesneene 19
VII. IS ARTICLE 10(3) ‘LESS FAVOURABLP’? .......

IX OTHER ISSUES: THE LOCATION OF THE ‘TREATMENT .......ccscsssssesseeseesseeee 26
X THE SECOND OBJECTION: HOCHTIEF’S STANDING .....ccsssssssssssessesseeseeseeeneene 28
XI JURISDICTION OF THE CENTRE .......ccccsssssssssssssessessesseesecsscecencencencenesneeneeneeneesneeee 30
XII THE CONTRACT CLAIMS AND DOUBLE RECOVERY ......scssssssssessesseeseeneenneene 30
XIII COSTS 31
XIV CONCLUSION 31

 

This claim is brought by Hochtief Aktiengesellschaft, a company incorporated in the
Federal Republic of Germany (“Hochtief’), against the Argentine Republic
(‘Argentina’), under the Treaty between the Federal Republic of Germany and the
Republic of Argentina for the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments,

dated 9 April 1991 (‘the BIT’).

Hochtief and Argentina, the parties to the dispute and to this case, are referred to in
this Decision as the (lower-case) ‘parties’. Argentina and Germany, as the States

Parties to the BIT, are referred to as the (capitalized) ‘Parties’.

The authentic German and Spanish texts of the BIT, together with the English
translation published in the United Nations Treaty Series’, are set out in Appendix I
to this Decision. This Decision will refer to the English-language translation. The
Tribunal has, however, taken full account of the fact that the authentic languages of
the BIT are German and Spanish, and as will be seen it has at various stages reverted

to the authentic texts where the translation is unsatisfactory.

The claim arises from a dispute concerning a 25-year concession awarded to Hochtief
and a consortium of construction companies in 1997 for the construction, maintenance
and operation of a toll road and several bridges in Argentina between the cities of
Rosario and Victoria. Hochtief and other members of the consortium incorporated a
company, Puentes del Litoral SA (‘PdL’), in Argentina in order to implement the
concession. Hochtief owns 26% of the shares in PdL. Hochtief claims that it was
injured by actions taken by Argentina in breach of its obligations under the BIT and

under customary international law.

The claim was initiated by the Request for Arbitration dated 5 November 2007,
addressed by the Claimant to the Secretary-General of ICSID (‘the Centre’). The
Claimant appointed the Hon. Charles Brower, and the Respondent appointed J
Christopher Thomas QC, to the Tribunal. Judge Brower and Mr Thomas agreed to
invite Professor Vaughan Lowe QC to chair the Tribunal. The Tribunal was

constituted on 30 April 2009.

UNTS Vol. 1910, 171 (1996).

By agreement of the parties the First Procedural Meeting of the Tribunal, held by
telephone conference, was begun on 19 June 2009, and resumed on 16 April 2010 at
the seat of ICSID in Washington, D.C. with the President of the Tribunal, prevented

from flying by a volcanic ash cloud, participating by video link.

The Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits was submitted on 29 April 2010, and the
Respondent submitted its Memorial on Objections to the Jurisdiction of the Centre
and the Competence of the Tribunal (including, as agreed, a brief outline of its
defences on the merits) on 30 July 2010. The Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on
Objections to Jurisdiction was submitted on 15 October 2010, and the Respondent’s
Reply and Claimant’s Rejoinder on 22 December 2010 and 10 February 2011

respectively.

The hearing on Jurisdiction was held at the World Bank’s premises in Paris on 4-5
March 2011.The Claimant was represented by Mr Paul F Doyle, Mr Philip D Robben,
Ms Mellisa E Byroade, and Ms Julia A Garza Benitez of Kelley Drye & Warren LLP;
and the Respondent was represented by Dr Angelina Abbona, Dr Gabriel Bottini, Dr
Romina de los Angeles Mercado, Dr Verénica Lavista, Dr Matias Osvaldo Bietti, Dr
Ariel Martins, and Mr Julian Santiago Negro, of the Procuracién del Tesoro de la
Nacioén. Ms Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski acted as the Secretary of the

Tribunal.

The Parties’ Submissions

The submissions of the parties are set out in detail in their written pleadings and were
developed in their oral submissions at the hearing, a verbatim record of which was
kept and made available to the parties and the Tribunal shortly after the end of the
hearing on Jurisdiction. All of these submissions were taken into account, and the
main points are summarized here in so far as is necessary for the purposes of this

Decision.

The Respondent raises two main objections to jurisdiction. The First Objection is that
the Claimant has failed to meet the requirements set forth in Article 10 of the BIT,

and that the Tribunal is consequently without jurisdiction in this case. The Second

Objection is that Hochtief is attempting in this case to bring a claim to enforce the

rights of another person and has no legal standing to do so.

It is well established that the Tribunal has the competence to decide upon challenges
to its jurisdiction. If it finds that it has jurisdiction, the position is unproblematic. If it
finds that it lacks jurisdiction, a pedant might object that it had no right to determine
even that question; but the Law has chosen to side with pragmatism rather than
pedantry and Kompetenz-Kompetenz is a firmly established principle, adopted in

Article 41(1) of the ICSID Convention. The Tribunal proceeds accordingly.

The First Objection: BIT Article 10

In translation, Article 10 of the BIT reads as follows:

“Article 10

(1) Disputes concerning investments within the meaning of this Treaty between one of the
Contracting Parties and a national or company of the other Contracting Party shall as far as
possible be settled amicably between the parties to the dispute.

(2) If a dispute within the meaning of paragraph | cannot be settled within six months from.
the date on which one of the parties concerned gave notice of the dispute, it shall, at the
request of either party, be submitted to the competent courts of the Contracting Party in
whose territory the investment was made.

(3) The dispute may be submitted to an international arbitral tribunal in any of the
following circumstances:
(a) At the request of one of the parties to the dispute where, after a period of 18
months has elapsed from the moment when the judicial process provided for by
paragraph 2 of this article was initiated, no final decision has been given or where a
decision has been made but the Parties are still in dispute;
(b) Where both parties to the dispute have so agreed.

 

rovided for by paragraph 3 above, disputes between the Parties within the
article shall be referred by mutual agreement, when the parties to the
dispute have not agreed otherwise, either to arbitral proceedings under the Convention on
the Settlement of Investment utes between States and Nationals of Other States of 18
March 1965 or to an ad hoc arbitral tribunal established under the Arbitration Rules of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law.

 

 

If there is no agreement after a period of three months has elapsed from the moment when
one of the Parties requested the initiation of the arbitration procedures, the dispute shall be
submitted to arbitration di under the C. ion on the of

Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States of 18 March 1965 provided that
both Contracting Parties are parties to the said Convention. Otherwise, the dispute shall be
submitted to the above-mentioned ad hoc arbitral tribunal.

 

 

 

(5) The arbitral tribunal shall issue its ruling in accordance with the provisions of this
Treaty, with those of other treaties existing between the Parties, with the laws in force in
the Contracting Party in which the investments were made, including its rules of private
international law, and with the general principles of international law.

 

  

5

16.

(6) The arbitration decision shall be binding and both Parties shall implement it in
accordance with their legislation.”

The Respondent says that paragraphs 10(2) and 10(3)(a) of Article 10 impose a
mandatory period of 18 months, for the duration of which the dispute must be
submitted to the Respondent’s courts, before the Claimant is entitled to submit the
dispute to arbitration. It says that Article 10 thus establishes a mandatory condition
upon which the jurisdiction of the Tribunal depends, and that the Claimant has not

fulfilled that condition.

The Respondent makes no jurisdictional challenge based upon the requirement in
Article 10(2) that six months must elapse after notice of the dispute is given, before

the dispute may be submitted to the courts at the instance of either party.

The Claimant, for its part, invokes Article 3 of the BIT, which reads as follows:?

“Article 3

(1) Neither Contracting Party shall subject investments in its territory by or with the
participation of nationals or companies of the other Contracting Party to treatment less
favourable than it accords to investments of its own nationals or companies or to investments
of nationals or companies of any third State.

(2) Neither Contracting Party shall subject nationals or companies of the other Contracting
Party, as regards their activity in connection with investments in its territory, to treatment less
favourable than it accords to its own nationals or companies or to nationals or companies of
any third State.

(3) Such treatment shall not include privileges which may be extended by either Contracting
Party to nationals or companies of third States on account of its membership in a customs or
economic union, common market or free trade area.

 

(4) The treatment under this article shall not extend to privileges accorded by a Contracting
Party to nationals or companies of a third State by virtue of an agreement for the avoidance of
double taxation or other tax agreements.”

Article 3 must be read together with the Protocol to the BIT, which reads in material

part as follows:

“With the signing of the Treaty between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Argentine
Republic on the E and i 1 Protection of igned
plenipotentiaries have agreed on the following provisions, which shall be regarded as an

integral part of the said Treaty:

See paragraphs 63 ff and 104 ff below for certain problems with this translation.

6

(2) Ad article 3:

(a) The following shall more particularly, though not exclusively, be deemed "activity" within
the meaning of article 3, paragraph 2: the management, utilization, use and enjoyment of an
investment. The following shall more particularly, though not exclusively, be deemed
"treatment less favourable" within the meaning of article 3: less favourable measures that
affect the purchase of raw materials and other inputs, energy or fuel, or means of production or
operation of any kind or the marketing of products inside or outside the country. Measures that
are adopted for reasons of internal or external security or public order, public health or
morality shall not be deemed "treatment less favourable" within the meaning of article 3.

 

(b) The provisions of article 3 do not obligate a Contracting Party to extend tax privileges,
exemptions and relief accorded only to natural persons and companies resident in its territory,"
in accordance with its tax laws, to natural persons and companies resident in the territory of
the other Contracting Party.

(c) The Contracting Parties shall within the framework of their national legislation give
favourable consideration to applications for the entry and sojourn of persons of either
Contracting Party who wish to enter the territory of the other Contracting Party in connection
with an investment; the same shall apply to nationals of either Contracting Party who, in
connection with an investment, wish to enter the territory of the other Contracting Party and
sojourn there to take up employment. Applications for work permits shall also be given
favourable consideration.”

 

The Claimant submits that the effect of this MFN provision is to permit it to rely upon
what it says is the more favourable provision in Article 10 of the Argentina-Chile
Bilateral Investment Treaty dated 2 August 1991. That treaty, in its authentic
language and in the English translation submitted in these proceedings, is set out in

Appendix II.
Article 10 of the Argentina-Chile BIT reads as follows:

“ARTICLE 10 Settlement of disputes regarding investments

1. Any dispute related to the investments under this Treaty, between a Party and a national or
company of the other Party shall, as far as possible, be settled by friendly negotiations between
the two parties to the dispute.

2. If the dispute shall not have been settled within the term of six months as from the time it
has been raised by either party, it may be submitted upon request of the national or company:

 

- to the national jurisdictions of the Party involved in the dispute;
- or to international arbitration in the conditions described in paragraph (3).

Once a national or company has submitted the dispute to the jurisdiction of the Party involved
or to international arbitration, the election of either procedure shall be final.

3. In case of election of international arbitration, the dispute may be submitted, at the election
of the national or company, to one of the arbitration entities mentioned below:

7

20.

21.

Ill

22.

To the International Center (sic) for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) created
under the "Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals
of other States", opened to the signature in Washington on March 18, 1965, when each
Member State which is a party to this Agreement has signed the said Convention. While this
condition is not met, each Party may give its consent for the dispute to be submitted to
arbitration pursuant to the Rules of the supplementary Mechanism of ICSID for the
management of conciliation, arbitration or investigation proceedings;

 

To an "ad hoc" arbitration panel organized pursuant to the arbitration rules of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL).

4. The arbitration panel shall render an award on the basis of this Treaty, the right of the Party
that is a party to the dispute, including the rules regarding conflicts of laws and the terms and

ditions of ional private reached in ion with the i and
also the principles of international law in that respect.

 

 

5. Arbitration awards shall be final and binding upon the parties to the dispute.

 

6. The Parties shall refrain from trying, through the diplomatic channels, arguments regarding
arbitration or a judicial proceeding already pending until the relevant proceedings shall have
been completed, unless the parties to the dispute shall have not discharged the arbitration
award or the judgment rendered by the common court, pursuant to the terms for the discharge
laid down in the award or the judgment.”

 

The important point in the Argentina-Chile BIT is that it permits unilateral reference
of a dispute to arbitration six months after the dispute has been raised. There is no
equivalent of the ‘18-month litigation period’ in Article 10(3) of the Argentina-
Germany BIT.

The Respondent submits that the MEN provision in Article 3 of the Argentina-
Germany BIT applies only to substantive protections under the BIT, which do not

include the clauses on dispute resolution in Article 10.

Each party referred to principles of treaty interpretation, decisions of other arbitral

tribunals, and the writings of jurists in support of its position.

The Tribunal’s analysis

The Tribunal’s jurisdiction depends upon the existence of an agreement between the
two parties to the dispute — Hochtief and the Republic of Argentina. That agreement is
not contained in a single document. The agreement of Argentina to accept the
jurisdiction of the arbitral Tribunal in respect of a certain category of disputes is
contained in the Argentina-Germany BIT. Article 10 of the BIT is, in effect, an offer

to submit disputes to arbitration, which investors may accept.

8

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

IV

28.

29.

Hochtief considers that its agreement is contained in the Request for Arbitration
which is intended, in effect, to be an acceptance of Argentina’s offer contained in

Article 10 and Article 3 of the Argentina-Germany BIT.

The question is whether the ‘offer’ and the ‘acceptance’ have resulted in an agreement

which provides the basis for the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

Both parties approached this question on the basis that is necessary to establish a
consensus: i.e., that it is necessary to demonstrate that Hochtief’s Request for
Arbitration was an acceptance of the offer to arbitrate on the terms on which the offer

was made, and not a counter-offer on different terms. The Tribunal shares this view.

The offer to arbitrate being contained in a treaty, it follows that the interpretation and
analysis of its terms must be conducted in accordance with the law of treaties. The
exercise is, accordingly, to be performed according to the principles set out in the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (“VCLT’), to which both Argentina and
Germany are Parties (and to which Article 11 of the BIT refers), and in particular in
Articles 31-33 of the VCLT, which are familiar to all involved in investment

arbitration.

The ‘acceptance’ is contained in the Request for Arbitration. There is no doubt as to
the interpretation of the ‘acceptance’: it purports to accept the offer to arbitrate made

in the BIT.

The interpretation of BIT Article 10

The task of interpreting the BIT must be approached initially by giving the terms of
the treaty their ordinary meaning in their context and in the light of the BIT’s object
and purpose. On this basis it is apparent that Article 10 of the BIT provides for a
number of possible steps and for alternative procedures in the event of a dispute

arising.

Article 10(1) provides that disputes shall as far as possible be settled amicably
between the parties to the dispute. There is no suggestion by the Respondent of any

failure by the Claimant to comply with Article 10(1), which could affect the

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

jurisdiction of the Tribunal; and the Tribunal sees no reason to suppose that the

obligation imposed by Article 10(1) has not been fulfilled.

Paragraph (2) of Article 10 entitles either party — here, either Hochtief or Argentina —

to require the submission of the dispute to the host State’s courts:

“If a dispute within the meaning of paragraph | cannot be settled within six months from the
date on which one of the parties concerned gave notice of the dispute, it shall, at the request of
either party, be submitted to the competent courts of the Contracting Party in whose territory
the investment was made.”

 

Paragraph (2) refers to a ‘request’, but the request triggers an obligation (‘shall ... be

submitted’) to submit the dispute to the courts.

Neither party takes any point concerning the six-month period to which Article 10(2)
refers, and the Tribunal sees no reason to suppose that this obligation imposed by

Article 10(2) has not been fulfilled.

The words “shall ... be submitted” are the only words in Article 10 paragraph 2 that
are capable of imposing a legal obligation. The precise nature of the obligation set out
in paragraph (2) is obscured by the phrasing of the provision. Instead of stipulating
that ‘one or other party shall submit the dispute’ to the courts, it sets out the

stipulation in the passive voice: the dispute shall be submitted to the courts.

The Respondent reads Article 10(2) as saying that in every case one or other party
must submit the dispute to the domestic courts.? The Respondent submits that “the
verbal expression ‘shall be submitted’ [makes] clear that it is an order”, so that one

of the parties must submit the dispute to the domestic courts.*

The Claimant, on the other hand, reads Article 10(2) as giving to each party a right to

have recourse to the courts, but not as imposing upon either party a duty to do so.

It was not suggested that either party had made a request under Article 10(2) for the

reference of the dispute to the courts in Argentina. This is a matter of some

Memorial, paragraph 25.
Memorial, paragraph 24.
Memorial, paragraph 25.

10

36.

37.

38.

39.

significance. The Respondent could have insisted upon the reference of the dispute to

its courts under Article 10(2), but it did not do so.

Article 10(2) says that the dispute “shall, at the request of either party, be submitted”
to the national courts. Article 10(2) thus obliges party B to submit to the jurisdiction
of the courts if party A requests that the dispute be referred to the courts. The
provision does not, however, explicitly impose a duty on either party A or party B to
refer the case to the courts.° Nor, in the view of the Tribunal, does Article 10(2)
implicitly impose such a duty. Article 10(2) makes good sense interpreted without any
such duty to refer implied into it. Recourse to the national courts is an important
option. As far as investors are concerned, access to the host State’s courts is a right
that must surely be regarded as such an elementary part of the concept of legal
protection that the right of access has little need of explicit statement. But under
Article 10(2) it is not only the investor but also the host State that has the right to refer

disputes to court.

The Respondent could, if it had wished, have requested that the dispute be referred to
its courts; and under Article 10(2) the Claimant would have been obliged to pursue
the case in the national courts. The Respondent did not do so. Nor did the Claimant
refer the dispute to the courts. The Respondent argues that in the absence of any
reference of the dispute to the courts there can, under the scheme set out in Article 10,

be no unilateral reference of the dispute to arbitration.

Article 10(3) provides that “The dispute may be submitted to an international arbitral

tribunal in any of the following circumstances”. There are two such circumstances.

One, in Article 10(3)(b), is “Where both parties to the dispute have so agreed.” There
is no suggestion that there is any such agreement in this case apart from the agreement
said to result from the offer in the BIT and the acceptance in the Request for
Arbitration. No more need be said about specific agreements as a route to arbitration
under the BIT, although the terms of the offer in the BIT and of the Request for

Arbitration are, of course, central to the questions in this case.

The parties to the dispute will always be a Contracting Party to the treaty and a national or company of
the other contracting party: Article 10(1).

11

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45,

46.

The other circumstance, in Article 10(3)(a), is where “[a]t the request of one of the
parties to the dispute ..., after a period of 18 months has elapsed from the moment
when the judicial process provided for by paragraph 2 of this Article was initiated, no
final decision has been given or where a decision has been made but the Parties are

still in dispute.”

Four points are to be noted about Article 10(3)(a). First, as in Article 10(2), it creates
a right that may be exercised unilaterally: either the Claimant or the Respondent may

refer the dispute to arbitration.

Second, reference to the courts does not entail a choice under a ‘fork in the road’
provision (and no such fork is created elsewhere in the BIT). Reference to the courts

can be followed by a unilateral reference of the dispute to arbitration.

Third, neither party is obliged to continue to submit to the jurisdiction of the courts
for more than 18 months, whether or not the courts have reached a final — or any —

decision in the case.

Fourth, the provision does not oblige either party to accept a decision of the court as
the resolution of the dispute: either party may take the position that the parties are

“still in dispute” despite any court decision.

Respondent submits that the effect of Article 10(3) is that unless (i) there has been a
reference to the courts under Article 10(2) and (ii) 18 months have elapsed since that
reference, the circumstances envisaged in Article 10(3)(a) cannot arise and there can
be no unilateral reference to arbitration. Claimant submits that the 18-month period is
applicable only if there has in fact been a reference to the courts under Article 10(2),
and that the provision has no application in circumstances where no such reference

was made.

Because neither party is actually obliged to submit the dispute to the courts under
Article 10(2), it cannot be supposed that every dispute not resolved by discussions
will in fact be submitted to the courts. The question is in effect, therefore, whether the
possibility of unilateral recourse to arbitration is altogether excluded in cases where

there is no such reference to the courts.

12

47.

48.

49.

50.

The interpretation of Article 10(3) so as to require reference to the local courts as a
precondition to recourse to arbitration in every case would, as the Respondent pointed
out, have some features in common with a requirement to exhaust local remedies.’
Indeed, under Article 26 of the ICSID Convention the Respondent could have
required the exhaustion of local remedies as a condition of its consent to arbitration

under that Convention; but it did not do so.

In some ways, however, the effect of Article 10(3) as interpreted by the Respondent
would be radically different from that of a duty to exhaust local remedies. There is no
obligation under Article 10(3) to exhaust the remedies, or even to see a first-instance
case through to its conclusion if that takes longer than 18 months. There would be no
question under Article 10(3) of the effectiveness of the available remedies: recourse
would be obligatory even in cases where it was perfectly clear that the courts could
provide no remedy — for example, in cases where legislation has effectively left the

court with no option except to decide the dispute against the Claimant.

If Article 10(3) were indeed interpreted so as to require in each and every case 18
months of litigation before any unilateral reference to arbitration, the effect of the
resultant pattern of obligations would be as follows. A claimant might decide initially
not to refer the dispute to the courts. The respondent might also decide not to ‘request’
(i.e., insist) that the dispute be referred to its courts under Article 10(2); and it might
also decline to agree to a consensual reference to arbitration under Article 10(3)(b). A
claimant could then refer the dispute to arbitration only if it first submitted the dispute
to the courts. If the Claimant did indeed then proceed to submit the case to the courts,
neither the Claimant nor the Respondent would be obliged by the BIT to accept any
decision rendered by the court. (We put to one side the question whether such a
decision could have effect as res judicata in any respect.) Equally, either party could
simply abandon the litigation after 18 months. After 18 months had elapsed, either

party could unilaterally submit the dispute to arbitration.

It is no doubt arguable that there is a duty on both parties to the dispute to act in good
faith during the pursuit of a settlement of the dispute, so that that there is an obligation

to enter into the litigation during the 18-month period in a manner that might lead to a

As the Respondent noted: Memorial, paragraph 17.

13

51.

52.

53.

54.

resolution of the dispute by the courts. It is certainly valuable for each party (and
perhaps particularly for the Respondent) that it has the right to insist upon reference of
the dispute to the host State courts. It is also understandable that a six-month window
for negotiations prior to any reference to the courts should be secured, as Article 10(2)
does on one reading. But it is difficult to see the rationale for imposing, in the terms
used in Article 10(3)(a), a duty to spend a period of 18 months with the dispute listed

on the docket of domestic courts as a precondition for the reference to arbitration.

To oblige the parties to spend 18 months in litigation, where one or other (or both) of
them might have decided in advance to reject any decision that might emerge from the
courts, appears pointless. While the possibility of a requirement for pointless litigation
may not be a decisive indication that this interpretation of the BIT is wrong, it must

surely move some weight in that direction.

The problem does not arise from uncertainty as to the meaning of Article 10(3)(a)
itself. Its meaning is clear. Article 10(3) supplements and follows on from Article
10(2). If either party requests that the dispute be submitted to the courts, it must be
submitted to the courts. The dispute must then stay in the courts until either (i) a final
decision is rendered by the courts or (ii) 18 months have elapsed from the initiation of
the judicial process (Article 10(3)(a)), unless (iii) both parties agree before then to go
to arbitration (Article 10(3)(b)).

The problem arises from the fact that there is no duty under Article 10(2) to refer the
dispute to the courts, and that there is no provision in Article 10 that explicitly permits
unilateral references to arbitration, except in circumstances where the dispute has in
fact been referred to the courts. The only provision in Article 10 that clearly permits a
reference to arbitration without prior litigation is Article 10(3)(b), which requires the
agreement of both parties. Unless an additional implied right to have unilateral
recourse to arbitration can be found, the result would be that litigation is always an
essential precondition to the reference of a dispute to arbitration by one party acting
unilaterally, but is not an essential precondition to a reference to arbitration agreed by

both parties

Viewed in the light of the many provisions in other BITs that permit unilateral
references to arbitration that result might be thought unusual; but it is not impossible,

14

55.

56.

57.

58.

or wholly impracticable, or wholly unreasonable. The Tribunal is, however, not
convinced that it is correct to interpret the BIT to mean that litigation is always an
essential precondition to unilateral reference of a dispute to arbitration, and does not
decide the point or rest its decision upon the rejection of this interpretation and the
existence of an implied right of unilateral reference to arbitration. The Tribunal does
not need to decide the point, because the Claimant has raised another argument, based
on the MEN provision in BIT Article 3. That argument was the main focus of the

parties’ pleadings, and is a sufficient basis for the Tribunal’s decision.

The Tribunal thus proceeds on the assumption, and without deciding the point, that
Article 10 of the Argentina-Germany BIT imposes a mandatory 18-month submission
to the national courts as a precondition of unilateral recourse to arbitration under the

BIT.

The MEN provision

The Claimant considers that the MFN provision in Article 3 of the BIT entitles it to
rely upon the more liberal provisions on dispute settlement in the Argentina-Chile
BIT. The Respondent, in contrast, considers that the Article 3 MFN provision applies
only to ‘substantive’ rights, which in its view do not include the dispute settlement

provisions, under the BIT.

The parties referred extensively to the jurisprudence and to writings of scholars on the
effect of MFN clauses in BITs. The apparent inconsistencies in the case-law of
arbitration tribunals on the question of the applicability of MFN clauses to dispute
settlement provisions afforded each party the possibility of supporting its position by

reference to earlier awards.

The Tribunal has given very careful consideration to this jurisprudence, and is
conscious of the advantages of consistency in the approaches of different tribunals to
similar questions. It is also aware of the significance that other tribunals have attached
to differences between the formulations of MEN provisions in various treaties. That
said, it is the responsibility of this Tribunal to interpret to the best of its ability the

specific provisions of the particular treaties that are applicable in this case, and not to

15

VI

59.

60.

61.

62.

choose between broad doctrines or schools of thought, or to conduct a head-count of

arbitral awards taking various positions and to fall in behind the numerical majority.

Does the MEN provision apply to dispute settlement?
The first question for the Tribunal is whether the MEN provision in BIT Article 3 is in

principle capable of applying to dispute settlement provisions so as to modify BIT

Article 10.

Article 3 contains provisions extending MFN treatment both to investments (Article
3(1)), and to investors (Article 3(2)). The obligation is the same in each case.‘ The
entitlement is to treatment that is not less favourable than the State accords to its own
nationals or companies or to investments of nationals or companies of any third State.
In the present case it is the entitlement of the investor that is relevant, because it is the

treatment of the investor as a disputing party that is in issue.

Article 3(2) does not provide that once one becomes an ‘investor’ under the
Argentina-Germany BIT one has an entitlement to MFN or national treatment in
every aspect of one’s life, whether or not related to the investment. It does not, for
example, give a right to join the ‘nationals only’ queue at immigration desks. Rather,
Article 3(2) stipulates that the entitlement to demand MEN or national treatment from
the State applies to investors “as regards their activity in connection with investments

in its territory.”

Is dispute settlement an ‘activity in connection with the investment’? The Respondent
argues that ad Article 3 in the Protocol to the BIT indicates that it is not. Ad Article 3

provides that

*(a) The following shall more particularly, though not exclusively, be deemed "activity"
within the meaning of article 3, paragraph 2: the management, utilization, use and enjoyment
of an investment. The following shall more particularly, though not exclusively, be deemed
“treatment less favourable" within the meaning of article 3: less favourable measures that
affect the purchase of raw materials and other inputs, energy or fuel, or means of production
or operation of any kind or the marketing of products inside or outside the country. Measures
that are adopted for reasons of internal or external security or public order, public health or
morality shall not be deemed "treatment less favourable" within the meaning of article 3.”

 

 

As is clear in the authentic German and Spanish texts but not in the UN’s English translation.

16

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

In this English translation the opening phrase is unclear. It might be read as meaning
that the listed examples (i) are deemed to be ‘activities’ but (ii) are not exclusively to
be characterised as ‘activities’ and may also have another character. Alternatively, it
might be read as meaning (i) that the following examples are deemed to be ‘activities’

but (ii) that the list is not exhaustive and there may be other examples of ‘activities’.

In the authentic Spanish and German texts of the BIT the opening phrase is “Por
‘activitades’ en el sentido del apartado 2 del articulo 3 se consideraran, en especial
pero no exclusivamente ...” and “Als ‘Betitigung’ im Sinne des Artikels 3 Absatz 2
ist inbesondere, aber nicht ausschlieBlich...” It is therefore clear that ad Article 3 is
setting out a non-exhaustive list of examples of ‘activities’ within the meaning of BIT

Article 3.

It is suggested that the phrase “the management, utilization, use and enjoyment of an
investment” should be read as an indication that the reference is to a range of
activities concerned with the commercial operation of the investment, and that this

does not include the pursuit of dispute settlement under BIT Article 10.

The Tribunal considers that the phrase “the management, utilization, use and
enjoyment of an investment” does include recourse to dispute settlement, as an aspect
of the management of the investment. Indeed, the (‘procedural’) right to enforce
another (‘substantive’) right is one component of the bundles of rights and duties that

make up the legal concept of what property is.

This is clear if one considers the case of a claim to money or to performance having
an economic value, both of which are stipulated by Article 1(c) of the Argentina-
Germany BIT to be within the definition of an ‘investment, or of intellectual property
rights, addressed in Article 1(d). The argument that although a State could not cancel
such claims or intellectual property rights without violating the BIT, it could cancel
the right to pursue the claims or enforce the intellectual property rights through
litigation or arbitration without violating the BIT is nonsensical. It is nonsensical
because the right to enforcement is an essential component of the property rights

themselves, and not a wholly distinct right.

17

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

This is a perfectly reasonable interpretation of the BIT. The BIT is an agreement both
for the promotion and for the reciprocal protection of investments. It is an agreement
between two States, which no doubt is intended to operate to the benefit of both States
but which plainly confers benefits directly upon investors. The Tribunal considers that
the provisions of Article 10, which on any interpretation confer upon investors the
possibility of recourse to arbitration in addition to the right to have recourse to
national courts, are a form of protection that is enjoyed within the scope of “the
management, utilization, use and enjoyment of an investment”. Unlike the inter-State
dispute settlement provisions in Article 9, which safeguard the interests of the States
parties in the event of a dispute regarding the interpretation or application of the BIT,
Article 10 is a benefit conferred on investors and designed to protect their interests
and the interests of a State Party in its capacity as a host State party to a dispute with
an investor: it is a protective right that sits alongside the guarantees against arbitrary

and discriminatory measures, expropriation, and so on.

If the investor submitted a dispute with a third party to the national courts in order to
protect its legal interests — a simple claim for contractual payments from a customer
would be an adequate example — it is difficult to see any reason why that litigation
should not be regarded as a management activity to which the Article 3 MFN
provision is applicable so as to supplement the entitlement to juridical security under

Article 4 of the BIT.

A court fee or bond requirement imposed on litigants who are nationals of State A but
not on nationals of State B, for example, would appear to be caught by the MFN
provision. So, too, would a requirement under national law to submit to conciliation

prior to litigation, imposed upon nationals of A but not nationals of B.

The Tribunal sees no good reason to treat disputes between the investor and the State
any differently from litigation between the investor and another private party, or to
distinguish between the pursuit of remedies in the courts and their pursuit in

arbitration, both of which are contemplated in Article 10 of the BIT.

Accordingly, the Tribunal is satisfied that the MFN provision is in principle

applicable to the pursuit of dispute settlement procedures.

18

73.

74.

7S.

76.

VI

77.

e

Tf there should be any doubt as to whether the pursuit of dispute settlement procedures
falls within the scope of ‘management’, the Tribunal considers that there can be no
doubt that the settlement of disputes is an “activity in connection with investments”,
to use the language of BIT Article 3 itself rather than the non-exhaustive phraseology

of ad Article 3.

The fact that BIT Article 4(4) stipulates expressly that nationals or companies of
either Contracting party are entitled to MFN treatment “in respect of the matters
provided for in this Article”, but that there is no express MFN stipulation in BIT
Article 10 itself, does not change the position.’ There is similarly no express statement
on MEN treatment in BIT Article 2 or BIT Article 5: but to the extent that those
Articles are concerned with the treatment of “investments” or of “nationals or
companies of the other Contracting Party, as regards their activity in connection with
investments in its territory”, Article 3 paragraphs (1) and (2) make clear that the MFN
provision is applicable. Moreover, Article 3 paragraphs (3) and (4) explicitly exclude
certain matters from the scope of the MFN clause, but dispute settlement is not among

them.

The Tribunal is accordingly satisfied that the MFN provision in Article 3 of the
Argentina-Germany BIT applies to dispute settlement under Article 10 of that BIT.

At this stage in the argument two further questions arise: (i) what effect does the
entitlement to ‘most favourable’ treatment have upon the jurisdiction of a tribunal
constituted in pursuance of the provisions of BIT Article 10? and (ii), is the

requirement of 18 months prior litigation ‘less favourable’?

MEN and jurisdictional limits

It is well understood that MFN clauses are subject to implicit limitations. An example
was given by the International Law Commission in its Commentary on its draft
Articles on Most-Favoured-Nation clauses. It said that an MFN clause in a

commercial treaty between State A and State B would not entitle State A to claim the

It is also arguable that the application of the MEN provision to dispute settlement procedures is an
aspect of the enjoyment of full legal protection and security that is guaranteed by Article 4(1). The
Tribunal takes no position on this point.

19

10

78.

79.

80.

81.

extradition of a criminal from State B on the ground that State B has agreed to
extradite such criminals to State C or voluntarily does so. The reason, it said, “is that
the clause can only operate in regard to the subject-matter which the two States had in

mind when they inserted the clause in their treaty.”"°

That proposition cannot seriously be challenged, and the principle is applicable to the
present case. Having decided that the MEN provision is in principle applicable to the
dispute settlement provisions of Article 10 of the BIT, it focuses attention on the need

to ask precisely what rights are covered by the MFN obligation.

In the present case, it might be argued that the MFN clause requires that investors
under the Argentina-Germany BIT be given MEN treatment during the conduct of an
arbitration but that the MFN clause cannot create a right to go to arbitration where
none otherwise exists under the BIT. The argument can be put more generally: the
MEN clause stipulates how investors must be treated when they are exercising the
rights given to them under the BIT but does not purport to give them any further

rights in addition to those given to them under the BIT.

The question is, does the MFN clause in question here create new rights where none
previously existed? and if not, is the right to have unilateral recourse to arbitration
without the 18-month litigation period a distinct, new right or is it rather a matter of

the manner in which those who already have a right to arbitrate are treated?

In the view of the Tribunal, it cannot be assumed that Argentina and German intended
that the MEN clause should create wholly new rights where none otherwise existed
under the Argentina-Germany BIT. The MEN clause stipulates a standard of treatment
and defines it according to the treatment of third parties. The reference is to a standard
of treatment accorded to third parties, not to the extent of the legal rights of third
parties. Non-statutory concessions to third party investors could, in principle, form the
basis of a complaint that the MEN obligation has not been secured. In contrast (to take
an example comparable to the ILC example concerning commercial treaties and
extradition), rights of visa-free entry for the purposes of study, given to nationals of a

third State, could not form the basis of such a complaint under the BIT. The MFN

Sir Arthur Watts, The International Law Commission 1949-1998, (Oxford, 1999), vol. III, p. 1821.

20

82.

83.

84.

85.

clause is not a renvoi to a range of totally distinct sources and systems of rights and
duties: it is a principle applicable to the exercise of rights and duties that are actually

secured by the BIT in which the MEN clause is found.

The Tribunal thus considers that the critical question is whether the absence of the 18-
month litigation period in the dispute settlement provision of the Argentina-Chile BIT
is a distinct right (in which case it would not be brought into the Argentina-Germany
BIT by the operation of the MEN clause) or is a provision that concerns the treatment
of investors in relation to the exercise of an existing right to arbitrate (in which case
the MFN clause in the Argentina-Germany BIT could operate to disapply the 18

month litigation period in Article 10(3)(a)).

There is no established criterion to distinguish for this purpose between a ‘right’ and
‘treatment in relation to the exercise of a right’. But there are several indications that
the 18-month pre-arbitration litigation requirement should be regarded as a matter of
the treatment of investors in exercising their rights in relation to dispute settlement

and not as the subject of a distinct right.

On any interpretation of Article 10 of the Argentina-Germany BIT, an investor can
ultimately exercise its rights so as to submit the dispute unilaterally to arbitration,
without the need for the further specific consent of the State party to the dispute to
proceed to arbitration. At worst, the investor (or indeed the State) could request the
submission of the dispute to the courts under BIT Article 10(2) and then proceed 18
months later to arbitration under Article 10(3)(a). There is, therefore, a right under the
Argentina-Germany BIT to submit an investment dispute to arbitration and to do so

without the consent of the other party to the dispute.

Reliance on the Argentina-Chile BIT via the MFN clause would not give Hochtief a
right to reach a position that it could not reach under the Argentina-Germany BIT: it
would enable it only to reach the same position as it could reach, by its own unilateral
choice and actions, under the Argentina-Germany BIT, but to do so more quickly and
more cheaply, without first pursuing litigation in the courts of Argentina for 18

months.

21

86.

87.

88.

89.

Secondly, the avoidance of the 18-month period in the Argentina-Germany BIT by
reliance on the MFN clause would have no impact upon the scope of the jurisdiction
of the Tribunal. It would not result in any case falling within its jurisdiction that could
not eventually be brought before the Tribunal by the Claimant acting alone under
Article 10 of the Argentina-Germany BIT. Nor would it remove the right of the
Respondent to invoke Article 10(2) of the BIT in any dispute, and to require its

submission to the national courts.

Third, the 18-month litigation period gives no inherent benefit, other than the
interposition of a period in which the parties may refine and reflect upon their
respective positions, to the other party. Neither party is bound to continue the
litigation for more than 18 months, whether or not the litigation has reached a
conclusion. Neither party is bound to accept that the dispute has been resolved by any
final court decision that is rendered within the 18 month period. Either party may,
under BIT Article 10 paragraphs (3) and (4) bring the dispute before ICSID. That is

very clear from Article 10 itself.

While it is true that, as the Respondent noted," the 18-month period gives the courts
the opportunity to resolve the dispute, the arbitrary limit upon the time allowed for
litigation and the express removal of any duty to accept any judgment makes that
opportunity, unlike a true duty to exhaust local remedies, to some extent perfunctory
and insubstantial. There is no certain benefit of which the other party is deprived by
allowing the MEN provision to render the 18-month period inapplicable. While not
logically or legally decisive, the fact that adherence to the 18-month rule would bring
no necessary benefit, and no necessary result other than the delay of the arbitration
proceedings, is a fact from which the Tribunal derives some encouragement to believe

that its decision is correct.

The Tribunal also notes that, to the extent that recourse to national courts is indeed
considered to be a benefit to either party, each party has the right under BIT Article
10(2) to insist, unilaterally, that the dispute be referred to national courts. Indeed,
from one perspective the question under consideration here is whether the

Respondent, having chosen not to require a reference to the national courts under

Transcript, Day 1, p. 4.

22

90.

91.

92.

93.

Article 10(2) may now raise the fact that there was no such reference as a bar to the

arbitration of the dispute of which the Tribunal is seised.

The Tribunal observes that this approach to distinguishing between what is a new,
independent, right to arbitrate and what is simply a manner in which an existing right
to arbitrate must be exercised reflects the distinction between questions of jurisdiction
and questions of admissibility. Jurisdiction is an attribute of a tribunal and not of a
claim, whereas admissibility is an attribute of a claim but not of a tribunal. A
distinction may also be drawn between questions of admissibility and questions of
receivability. A tribunal might decide that a claim of which it is seised and which is
within its jurisdiction is inadmissible (for example, on the ground of lis alibi pendens
or forum non conveniens); or it might refuse even to receive and become seised of a
claim that is within its jurisdiction because of some fundamental defect in the manner

in which the claim is put forward.

In broad terms, the Tribunal considers that the question in this case is not whether the
MEN clause can alter the jurisdiction of tribunals established under the BIT but
whether it can affect the prescribed procedures for accessing that jurisdiction. The
reason can be expressed in terms of the distinction between rights and the manner in

which rights are required to be exercised.

The reason might also be based upon the fact that the Contracting Parties to the BIT
(Argentina, Germany) are not the same as the parties to the dispute (Argentina,
Hochtief). If a tribunal is established by or under a treaty made by States, its
jurisdiction is fixed by that treaty. Its jurisdiction can be altered by the agreement of
the States Parties to treaty; but it cannot be altered by the parties to disputes who
present themselves to the tribunal. So, for example, the ICJ could not hear a claim
from an individual claimant against a State, even if the ‘Respondent’ State agreed to
appear before the Court and defend the claim. If the Court purported to hear the case,

it would not be functioning as ‘the ICJ’ under the ICJ Statute.

Similarly, if this Tribunal were asked by both parties to the present dispute to decide
upon, say, a dispute which arose before the treaty entered into force, and were to
accede to that request, it would not be functioning as an Article 10 tribunal under the
Argentina-Germany BIT. Argentina and Germany agreed, in Protocol ad Article 8,

23

94.

95.

that the Treaty shall in no case apply to disputes which arose before it entered into
force. Argentina and Hochtief cannot by agreement between themselves vary the
terms of that agreement between Argentina and Germany. In such a hypothetical case
it may be that, because the disputing parties had consented to put the matter to this
tribunal, the tribunal would have the legal competence to hear and decide the pre-
existent complaint case: but if it did hear and decide the case it would be functioning

as an ad hoc tribunal, and not as an Argentina-Germany BIT tribunal.

Questions of admissibility, on the other hand, are different from questions of
jurisdiction. The disputing parties are entitled to raise objections based upon questions
of admissibility, but they are not bound to do so; and if they do not raise those
objections, they will have acquiesced in any breach of the requirements of
admissibility and that acquiescence will ‘cure’ the breach. The tribunal, if it has

jurisdiction, will proceed to hear the case.

In the ICJ, for example, rules on admissibility include such matters as the rules on the
nationality of claims and the exhaustion of local remedies. The ICJ may have
jurisdiction to decide whether State A had injured corporation B in violation of
international law; but it may be that the claim actually filed is inadmissible because it
has been brought by the wrong State,” or because local remedies have not yet been
exhausted.'* But if no objection is raised on such grounds, the Court will not raise the
matter proprio motu. '4 Tf, on the other hand, the objection based upon admissibility is
raised and upheld, the very same claim (mutatis mutandis) could be brought by
another State or brought after the exhaustion of local remedies (to pursue the
examples used above), because the Court has jurisdiction in respect of the claim.
Defects in admissibility can be waived or cured by acquiescence: defects in

jurisdiction cannot.

Case concerning the Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Company, Limited (Belgium y. Spain),
Judgment, Feb. 5, 1970, ICJ Reports 1970, p. 3.

Interhandel Case (Switzerland v. United States), Judgment of March 21, 1959, ICJ Reports 1959, p. 6.

See Case concerning the Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI) (United States v. Italy), Judgment, July 20,
1989, ICJ Reports 1989, p. 15.

24

96.

97.

98.

99.

Viewed from this perspective the question in the present case is whether the 18-month
period is a requirement of the kind in respect to which the Respondent could accept or
acquiesce in non-compliance, and whether it has done so. The Tribunal considers that
the Respondent can indeed accept or acquiesce in such non-compliance and that the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal remains unaffected by it. It regards the 18-month period as
a condition relating to the manner in which the right to have recourse to arbitration
must be exercised — as a provision going to the admissibility of the claim rather than

the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

In this case there are two sets of conditions for access to arbitration: those in the
Argentina-Germany BIT and those in the Argentina-Chile BIT. As explained above,
the Tribunal considers that those sets of conditions are provisions relating to the
protection of investors and to the management, utilization, use and enjoyment of an

investment, and accordingly covered by the Article 3 MEN provision.

The MEN provision does not permit the selective picking of components from each
set of conditions, so as to manufacture a synthetic set of conditions to which no
State’s nationals would be entitled. The Claimant in this case cannot rely upon the
lack of an 18-month litigation period in the Argentina-Chile BIT and ignore the fact
that Article 10(2) of the Argentina-Chile BIT imposes a ‘fork in the road’ provision: it
must rely upon the whole scheme as set out in either Article 10 of the Argentina-Chile
BIT or Article 10 of the Argentina-Germany BIT. In this case it has chosen to rely
upon Article 10 of the Argentina-Chile BIT.

The resulting position should be spelled out, as should the scope of the Tribunal’s
decision. The Tribunal notes the limits of its jurisdiction as set by the Argentina-
Germany BIT. It accepts that the procedures relating to the bringing of a dispute to the
Tribunal are covered by Article 3 of the Argentina-Germany BIT. And it accepts that
the Claimant can therefore rely upon the procedures set out in Article 10 of the
Argentina-Chile BIT (including the ‘fork in the road’ provision). The MFN provision

thus operates in this case within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal as set by the

 

Argentina-Germany BIT, and operates so as to modify the procedures applicable to
the seising of the Tribunal. It is not necessary to decide what the position would have

been if the Argentina-Chile BIT had established a wider jurisdiction for tribunals than

25

VI

100.

Ix

101.

102.

103.

is established in the Argentina-Germany BIT, and the Tribunal takes no position on

this question.

Is Article 10(3) ‘less favourable’?

It is sometimes suggested that it is wrong to presuppose that, for example, litigation in
national courts is any less favourable than arbitration, or that a right to arbitrate after
18-months of litigation in national courts is less favourable than a right to arbitrate
immediately. The Tribunal does not share that view. It considers that whatever the
substantive merits of litigation and of arbitration, it is always more favourable to have
the choice as to which to employ than it is not to have that choice.’ This implies no

criticism whatever of the national courts.

Other issues: the location of the ‘treatment’

It was argued by the Respondent, on the basis of the wording of BIT Article 3, that
the MFN provision applied only to treatment that is meted out in the territory of the
State, and that its application in these proceedings was not treatment within the
territory of the State. Further, it was said that because the practice in investment
arbitrations is for the tribunal not to sit in the host State, this was a further indication

that Article 3 is inapplicable to the Article 10 procedures. '®

The consequence of this argument, if correct, is said to be that the duty to accord
MEN treatment was not engaged in this case, so that the Claimant cannot rely upon

the MEN obligation in order to establish the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

Article 3(1) and (2) of the BIT as it is translated in the United Nations Treaty Series
read as follows:
“(1) Neither Contracting Party shall subject investments in its territory by or with the
participation of nationals or companies of the other Contracting Party to treatment less

favourable than it accords to investments of its own nationals or companies or to investments
of nationals or companies of any third State.

There are, no doubt, value judgments concerning the desirability of choice and the existence of free
will presupposed in that proposition. The Tribunal is, however, content to accept it as a premise.

Transcript, day 1, pp. 26 - 33.

26

104.

105.

106.

107.

(2) Neither Contracting Party shall subject nationals or companies of the other Contracting
Party, as regards their activity in connection with investments in its territory, to treatment less
favourable than it accords to its own nationals or companies or to nationals or companies of
any third State.”

The phrase translated as ‘in its territory’ is placed differently in the corresponding and

authentic German and Spanish texts, which read as follows:

“(1) Jede Vertragspartei behandelt Kapitalanlagen von Staatsangehorigen oder Gesellschaften
der anderen Vertragspartei oder Kapitalanlagen, an denen Staatsangehérige oder
Gesellschaften der anderen Vertragspartei beteiligt sind, in ihrem Hoheitsgebiet nicht weniger
giinstig als Kapitalanlagen der eigenen Staatsangehérigen und Gesellschaften oder
Kapitalanlagen von Staatsangehorigen und Gesellschaften dritter Staaten.

 

(2) Jede Vertragsparei behandelt Staatsangehérige oder Gesellschaften der anderen
V tei hinsichtlich ihrer i im mit Kapitalanl in ihrem
Hoheitsgebiet nicht weniger giinstig als ihre eigenen Staatsangehrigen und Gesellschaften
oder Staatsangehorige und Gesellschaften dritter Staaten.”

“(1) Ninguna de las Partes Contratantes someteré en su territorio a las inversiones de
nacionales o sociedades de la otra Parte Contratante o a las inversiones en las que mantengan
participaciones los nacionales o sociedades de la otra Parte Contratante, a un trato menos
favorable que el que se conceda a las inversiones de los propios nacionales y sociedades 0 a
las inversiones de nacionales y sociedades de terceros Estados.

 

 

 

   

(2) Ninguna de las Partes Contratantes someterd en su territorio a los nacionales 0 sociedades
de la otra Parte Contratante, en cuanto se refiere a sus actividades relacionadas con las
inversiones, a un trato menos favorable que a sus propios nacionales y sociedades o a los
nacionales y sociedades de terceros Estados.”

The phrase ‘in its territory’ appears to be linked to the treatment, rather than to the
investment; and the material words would be more precisely translated as “... shall
subject in its territory investments ...” or “... shall in its territory subject investments
...”. The result would be that the subjection of investments or investors to treatment

outside Argentina could not engage liability under Article 3 of the BIT.

Giving this phrase its full weight and assuming, arguendo, that actions of the
Respondent outside Argentina with respect to investments made by a claimant would
not covered by the BIT, the question would be whether the invocation of the 18-
month period under Article 10(3) in this case is treatment ‘outside the territory’ of the

State. The Tribunal does not consider that it is.

The investment was made in Argentina. The Respondent’s decision to invoke the
challenge based upon Article 10(3) of the BIT is an act which was located in the seat

of the Respondent’s Government, and which would be implemented in Argentina by

27

108.

109.

110.

11.

112.

requiring the Claimant to engage in litigation before the courts in Argentina. Thus far,

no extraterritorial element is evident.

The only extraterritorial elements appear to be that the jurisdiction challenge is raised
in a session held outside Argentina by a Tribunal that is characterised by the
Respondent as having an institutionally extraterritorial nature because it is an

international tribunal expected to sit outside the Respondent State.*”

The critical question is, what is the ‘treatment’ to which the MEN obligation applies.
The relevant treatment in this case is not constituted by the act of the reading or
hearing by the Tribunal of the Respondent’s challenge based upon BIT Article 10(3).
The place where that happens is not the location of the treatment: it is the location of
the consequences or the effects of the treatment (and, furthermore, the actual location
of the reading or hearing is purely contingent, and may differ as between members of
the Tribunal). The treatment of which the Claimant complains is the Respondent’s
insistence upon the ‘18-month’ requirement and insistence by way of a jurisdictional

challenge upon the pursuit of litigation in the courts in Argentina.

The ‘international’ nature of this Tribunal does not alter the position. It does not

deprive the conduct of the Respondent of its intra-territorial character.

In the view of the Tribunal, the relevant treatment is the reliance by the Respondent,
not having invoked Article 10(2), upon Article 10(3) and the refusal of the
Respondent to submit to immediate arbitration as the Claimant wishes. That conduct
cannot be said to be conduct outside the territory of the Respondent for the purposes

of Article 3 of the BIT.

The Second Objection: Hochtief’s Standing

The second objection is that Hochtief lacks the standing to present this claim because
the rights belong to a different juridical person. The argument is in essence that
because Hochtief operated through a locally-incorporated subsidiary, PdL, and that
subsidiary is the party that was allegedly injured, Hochtief has no right to bring this

claim.

Transcript, Day 1, p. 33; and Day 1, p. 4.

28

20

113.

114.

115.

116.

The Respondent referred to Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention in this
connection and argued that its effect was that PdL should have brought the claim, and
that for it to be entitled to do so it would have to show that Argentina had agreed to
accord PdL the same rights as a foreign investor and that PdL was in fact under
foreign control.'* It argued that claims by shareholders (‘derivative claims’) are only
allowed where they are specifically provided for in the BIT, and it contrasted the

Argentina-Germany BIT with the Argentina-US BIT in this respect."

The Respondent pointed out that ad Article 4 in the Protocol to the BIT provided for
compensation “also” in the event of the taking of measures “against the company in
which the investment is made” (i.e., the locally-incorporated subsidiary; in this case,
PdL), drawing the inference that in other cases no action lies in respect of injury to the

company in which the investment is made.

Whatever the thinking behind the drafting of ad Article 4 might have been, Article
1(1)(b) of the BIT is unequivocal in stipulating that an investment includes “shares,
stocks in companies, and other forms of participation in companies.” The States
Parties to the BIT could, had they wished, have limited the scope of the term
‘investment’ to cases where the foreign investor holds a controlling shareholding or
even a 100% shareholding in a locally-incorporated subsidiary in the host State. They

did not do so.

Hochtief owns 26% of the shares in PdL, to which it has contributed capital and made
loans totalling over USD 34 million.” Given the scale of what would be regarded in
any commercial context as an investment, and given the likelihood of consortium
funding for large-scale projects, it is not surprising that the States Parties to the BIT
agreed upon a definition of ‘investment’ that includes configurations such as those in
the present case. Moreover, the terms of the tender document under which Hochtief
bid for the right to engage in this project stipulated that the successful bidder would

have to operate through a company incorporated in Argentina.

Transcript, Day 1, pp. 43-44.
Transcript, Day 1, pp. 45-46.

Request for Arbitration, paragraphs 4, 100. The total contribution including interest up to May 2007 is
said to be almost USD 50 million: ibid., paragraph 102.

29

117.

118.

119.

xi

120.

XI

121.

e

The fact that Hochtief agreed, under Article 5 of the Concession contract, to assign all
of its rights and obligations to PdL does not alter the position. Indeed, it confirms that
Hochtief’s investment consisted precisely in its shares in PdL and other forms of

investment recognized in BIT Article 1(1).”

Similarly, the fact that there are jurisdictional clauses relating to disputes under the
concession contract, providing for litigation or arbitration in Argentina,” does not
alter the position. Those provisions govern the manner in which PdL must pursue
dispute settlement; but they do not alter the character of Hochtief’s participation in

PdL as an investment.

The Tribunal has no doubt that Hochtief has made an investment in Argentina, in

PdL, and that it is an investor under the BIT.

Jurisdiction of the Centre

The Respondent sought a declaration that the dispute was not only outside the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal but also outside the jurisdiction of the Centre. The
Tribunal does not accept that this is so. The dispute plainly concerns a dispute
between a State Party to the BIT and an investor of the other State Party, both States
being Contracting Parties to the ICSID Convention. The dispute arises out of an
investment; and the parties to the dispute have, as explained above, consented to
submit it to arbitration. The Tribunal accordingly considers that the requirements of

the ICSID Convention and in particular Article 25 thereof, are met.

The contract claims and double recovery
The Respondent argued that Hochtief’s claim overlapped with contractual claims
being pursued in the courts in Argentina, and that Respondent was being put at risk of

having to pay twice for the same alleged injury.

Transcript, Day 1, pp. 55-56.
See Transcript, Day 1, p. 59.

30

122. The Tribunal is aware of this risk, but does not consider that it is a matter that goes to
the question of jurisdiction. It will, if necessary, be addressed at a later stage in these

proceedings.

XIII Costs

 

123. The Respondent requested an order that costs and fees be taxed against the Claimant.

The Tribunal reserves this question for decision along with the merits of this dispute.

XIV Conclusion

124. The Tribunal has reached this Decision on Jurisdiction by a majority. It has done so
after a great deal of thought and detailed discussion, reflecting the difficulty of the
question. It is right to record the seriousness of those discussions, and the openness
with which differing views have been considered, and the high regard of those in the

majority for the carefully reasoned arguments of their co-arbitrator.
125. Accordingly, for the reasons set out above, the Tribunal decides:

(i) to reject the Respondent’s submission that the Centre has no jurisdiction
and the Tribunal has no competence over this case;

(ii) to assert that the Centre has jurisdiction and the Tribunal has competence
over this case; and

(iii) to decide upon the question of costs and fees at a later stage, along with
the merits of the dispute.

31

[signed] [signed]

Honorable Charles N. Brower Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, Q.C.

Arbitrator Arbitrator

[signed]

Professor Vaughan Lowe
President of the Tribunal

Decision on Jurisdiction
Hochtief Aktiengesellschaft v. Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/07/31)

Appendix I

Treaty Series

 

Treaties and international agreements
registered
or filed and recorded
with the Secretariat of the United Nations

Recueil des Traités

 

Traités et accords internationaux
enregistrés
ou classés et inscrits au répertoire
au Secrétariat de l’Organisation des Nations Unies

Copyright © United Nations 2001
‘All rights reserved
Manufactured in the United States of America

Copyright © Nations Unies 2001
Tous droits réservés
Imprimé aux Etats-Unis d' Amérique

Ces
Wz

Treaty Series

 

Treaties and international agreements
registered
or filed and recorded
with the Secretariat of the United Nations

VOLUME 1910

Recueil des Traités

 

Traités et accords internationaux
enregistrés
ou classés et inscrits au répertoire
au Secrétariat de l’Organisation des Nations Unies

United Nations © Nations Unies
New York, 2001

Treaties and international agreements
registered or filed and recorded
with the Secretariat of the United Nations

 

VOLUME 1910 1996 I. Nos. 32532-32544

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I

Treaties and international agreements
registered on 8 February 1996

No. 32532. Germany and Czech and Slovak Federal Republic:
Arrangement concerning the employment of workers for the purpose of expanding
their vocational and linguistic knowledge (Foreign Labour Agreement).
Signed at Prague on 23 April 1991...

 

No. 32533. Germany and Czech aud Slovak Federal Republic:

Agreement on the international carriage of goods by road. Signed at Bonn on
28 October 1992 ...

 

No. 32534. Germauy and Poland:
Agreement concerning the prevention of incidents at sea beyond the territorial sea
(with annex). Signed at Bonn on 27 November 1990

 

No. 32535. Germany and Poland:

Agreement concerning the German-Polish youth organization. Signed at Bonn on
17 June 1991

No. 32536. Germany and Poland:
Agreement on inland navigation (with protocol). Signed at Warsaw on 8 November
1991

 

No. 32537. Germauy and Poland:
Agreement on the passage of ships through the internal waters in the area of
Usedom island. Signed at Bonn on 17 February 1993 ..

 

Vol. 1910

83

107

151

Traités et accords internationaux
enregistrés ou classés et inscrits au répertoire
au Secrétariat de l’Organisation des Nations Unies

 

VOLUME 1910 1996 I. N° 32532-32544

 

TABLE DES MATIERES

Traités et accords internationaux
enregistrés le 8 février 1996

N° 32532. Allemagne et République fédérale tcbéqne et slovaque :

Convention relative a1’ emploi de travailleurs en vue d’approfondir leurs connais-
relative aux

migrans). Signé a Prague ‘e 23 avril 1991 ...

 

N° 32533. Allemague et République fédérale tchéque et slovaque :

Accord relatif au transport routier international de marchandises. Signé 4 Bonn le
28 octobre 1992...

 

N° 32534. Allemagne et Pologne :
Accord tendant a prévenir les incidents en mer en dehors des eaux territoriales
(avec annexe). Signé 4 Bonn le 27 novembre 1990... a

 

N° 32535. Allemagne et Pologue :

Accord relatif & l'organisme germano-polonais pour la jeunesse. Signé & Bonn le
17 juin 1991 83

N° 32536, Allemague et Pologne :

Accord relatif a la navigation sur les voies d’eau intéri avec Signé
a Varsovie le 8 novembre 1991..... “

 

N° 32537. Allemague et Pologne :

Accord concernant la circulation des navires dans les eaux intérieures dans la
région de I’le d’Usedom. Signé & Bonn le 17 février 1993... “

151

 

Vol. 1910

VI United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

 

No. 32538. Germany and Argentina:

Treaty on the encouragement and reciprocal protection of investments (with Pro-

tocol and exchanges of notes). Signed at Bonn on 9 April 1991 ... 171

 

No. 32539. Germany and Netherlands:

Agreement concerning transfrontier cooperation between territorial communities
and other public agencies (with protocol). Signed at Isselburg-Anholt on
23 May 1991 225

 

No. 32540. Germany and Sweden:
Agreement on the reciprocal observance of secrecy in respect of applications for
patents or registered designs on inventions important for defence (with rules
of procedure). Signed at Stockholm on 26 August 1991 .. a

 

No. 32541. Germany and Norway:
Agreement conceming the avoidance of double taxation and mutual admin-
istrative assistance with respect to taxes on income and on capital (with Pro-

tocol). Signed at Oslo on 4 October 1991 ..

 

No. 32542. Germany and Romania:

Agreement concerning navigation on inland waterways (with protocol). Signed a at
Bonn on 22 October 1991

 

No. 32543. Germany and Romai
Agreement concerning the employment of workers for the purpose of expanding
their vocational and linguistic knowledge (Foreign Labour Agreement).

Signed at on 12 May 1992 439

 

No. 32544. Germany and Turkey:

A on the of Turkish ises in order to
execute work contracts. Sioned at Ankara on 18 November 1991... ses

 

ANNEX A. Ratifications, accessions, subsequent agreements, etc., con-
cerning treaties and international agreements registered with the
Secretariat of the United Nations

No. 5119. Agreement between the Kingdom of Norway and the Federal Re-
public of Germany for the avoidance of douhle taxation and con-
cerning reciprocal administrative and legal assistance with respect
to taxes on income and fortune and to the business tax. Signed at
Oslo, on 18 November 1958:

(Note by the jc 474

 

 

Vol. 1910

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recneil des Traités vir

 

N° 32538. Allemagne et Argentine 3

Traité relatif 4 la p ion eta (
protocole et : échanges de aye eet a Bonn le9 ae 1991...

 

 

N° 32539. Allemagne et Pays-Bas :

Accord relatif & la coopération transfrontaliére entre collectivités ou autorités ter-
ritoriales et autres organismes (avec protocole). Signé a Isselburg-
Anholt le 23 mai 1991 .

 

 

N° 32540. Allemagne et Suéde :

Accord concernant le secret mutuel & observer au sujet des dépéts de brevets ou
des la défense

 

 

(avec régles d’application). Signé 4 Stockholm le 26 aofit 1991..

N° 32541. Allemagne et Norvége :
Convention tendant a éviter la double imposition et réglant l’entraide adminis-
trative en matiére d’impéts sur le revenu et sur la fortune (avec Protocole).

Signé a Oslo le 4 octobre 1991 ...

 

No 32542. Allemague et Roumauie :

Accord relatif a la navigation sur les voies d’eau intérieures (avec protocole). Signe
& Bonn le 22 octobre 1991...

 

N° 32543. Allemagne et Roumanie :

Convention relative a1’ emploi de travailleurs en vue d’approfondir leurs connais-
relative aux

 

 

san
migrants) Signe 2 Bucarest le 12 mai 1992

 

N° 32544. Allemagne et Turqui

Accord relatif & !’emploi de travailleurs d’entreprises turques pour l’exécution de
contrats. Signé Ankara le 18 novembre 1991.... Co

  

ANNEXE A. Rati dhésic accords
des traités et accords internationaux enregistrés ‘au  Secrévariat de
U’Organisation des Nations Unies

 

N°5119. Couvention eutre le Royaume de Norvege et la République fédérale
d’Allemagne tendant a éviter la double imposition et a établir des
régles d’assistance admiuistrative et judiciaire réciproque en ma-
tiére d’impéts sur Ic revenu et sur la fortune et de patente. Signée 4
Oslo, le 18 novembre re 1958 :

bi ion (Note du é 474

Vol. 1910

vul United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

1996

 

No. 10977. Agreement between the Government of the Polish People’s Republic
and the Governmeut of the German Democratic Repuhlic con-
cerning co-operation with regard to navigation in froutier waters.
Signed at Warsaw on 15 May 1969:

(Note by the

 

No. 21984, Cultural Co-operation Agreement betweeu tbe Government of the
Federal Republic of Germany and the Government of the Repnb-
lic of Costa Rica. Signed at San José on 29 Angust 1979:

Protocol amending the above-mentioned Agreement. Signed at San José on 23 July
1986

 

No. 23981. Agreement between the Government of the Federal Republic of
Germauy and the Government of the Kingdom of Morocco con-
cerning financial co-operation (Loans for various projects).
Signed at Rabat ou 24 January 1984:

of notes fituting an to the ab i Agree-
ment. Rabat, 17 January and 29 July 1986 se

 

 

Vol. 1910

475

476

489

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

 

N° 10977. Accord entre le Gouvernement de la Répnblique populaire de Polo-
gne et le Gouvernement de la République démocratiqne allemande
concernant la coopératiou en matiére de uavigation sur les eaux
froutiéres. Signé 4 Varsovie le 15 mai 1969 :

bi ion (Note du

N° 21984. Accord de coopération culturelle entre le Gouvernement de la Répu-
blique fédérale d’Allemague et le Gonvernemeut de la Républiqne
du Costa Rica. Signé 4 San José le 29 aoiit 1979 :

Protocole modifiant I’ Accord susmentionné. Signé a San José le 23 juillet 1986 ....

N° 23981. Accord entre le Gouvernemeut de la Républiqne fédérale d’Alle-
mague et le Gouvernement du Royanme du Maroc de coopératiou
fiuanciére (Préts pour projets divers). Signé 4 Rabat le 24 jauvier
1984:

Echange de notes constituant un amendement a I’ Accord susmentionné. Rabat,
17 janvier et 29 juillet 1986..... 7

Pages

475

 

Vol. 1910

NOTE BY THE SECRETARIAT

Under Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations every treaty and every international agree-
ment entered into by any Member of the United Nations after the coming into force of the Charter shall,
as soon as possible, be registered with the Secretariat and published by it. Furthermore, no party to a
treaty or international agreement subject to registration which has not been registered may invoke that
treaty or agreement before any organ of the United Nations. The General Assembly, by resolution 97 (1),
established regulations to give effect to Article 102 of the Charter (see text of the regulations, vol. 859,
p. VIID.

‘The terms “treaty” and “international agreement” have not been defined either in the Charter or in

ind the i i f the

Member State submitting an instrument for registration that so far as that party is concerned the instru-
ment is a treaty or an international agreement within the meaning of Article 102. Registration of an
instrument submitted by a Member State, therefore, does not imply a judgement by the Secretariat on the
nature of the instrument, the status of a party or any similar question. It is the understanding of the
Secretariat that its action does not confer on the instrument the status of a treaty or an international
agreement if it does not already have that status and does not confer on a party a status which it would
not otherwise have.
*

a #

Unless otherwise indicated, the translations of the original texts of treaties, etc., published in this
Series have been made by the Secretariat of the United Nations.

NOTE DU SECRETARIAT

Aux termes de |’Article 102 de la Charte des Nations Unies, tout traité ou accord international
conclu par un Membre des Nations Unies apres l’entrée en vigueur de la Charte sera, le plus tot possible,
enregistré au Secrétariat et publié par lui. De plus, aucune partie & un traité ou accord international qui
aurait dd étre enregistré mais ne l’a pas été ne pourra invoquer ledit traité ou accord devant un organe des
Nations Unies. Par sa résolution 97 (1), I'Assemblée générale a adopté un réglement destiné 4 mettre en
application |’ Article 102 de la Charte (voir texte du réglement, vol. 859, p. IX).

Le terme « traité » et !"expression « accord international » n'ont été définis ni dans la Charte ni dans
le réglement, et le Secrétariat a pris comme principe de s’en tenir & la position adoptée a cet gard par
l'Etat Membre qui a présenté l'instrument a 'enregistrement, A savoir que pour autant qu'il s’agit de cet
Etat comme partie contractante |’instrument constitue un traité ou un accord international au sens de
l’Article 102. Il s'ensuit que l’enregistrement d'un instrument présenté par un Etat Membre n’implique,
de la part du Secrétariat, aucun jugement sur la nature de l’instrument, le statut d’une partie ou toute
autre question similaire. Le Secrétariat considére donc que les actes qu’ il pourrait étre amené a accomplir
ne conférent pas & un instrument la qualité de « traité» ou d’« accord international » si cet instrument
n’a pas déja cette qualité, et qu’ils ne conférent pas & une partie un statut que, par ailleurs, elle ne
posséderait pas.

*
oo

Sauf indication contraire, les traductions des textes originaux des traités, etc., publiés dans ce Re-
cueil ont été établies par le Secrétariat de I’ Organisation des Nations Unies.

Treaties and international agreements
registered
on 8 February 1996

Nos. 32532 to 32544

Traités et accords internationaux
enregistrés
le 8 février 1996

N° 32532 @ 32544

Vol. 1910



No. 32538

GERMANY
and
ARGENTINA

Treaty on the encouragement and reciprocal protection of
investments (with protocol and exchauges of uotes).
Signed at Bonn on 9 April 1991

Authentic texts: German and Spanish.
Registered by Germany on 8 February 1996.

ALLEMAGNE
et
ARGENTINE

Traité relatif 4 la promotion et 4 la protection réciproque des
investissemeuts (avec protocole et échanges de notes).
Sigué 4 Bonn le 9 avril 1991

Textes authentiques : allemand et espagnol.
Enregistré par l’Allemagne le 8 février 1996.

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

172 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

[GERMAN TEXT — TEXTE ALLEMAND]

VERTRAG ZWISCHEN DER BUNDESREPUBLIK DEUTSCHLAND
UND DER ARGENTINISCHEN REPUBLIK UBER DIE FORDE-
RUNG UND DEN GEGENSEITIGEN SCHUTZ VON KAPITAL-

ANLAGEN

Die Bundesrepublik Deutschland
und
die Argentinische Republik —

in dem Wunsch, die wirtschaftliche Zusammenarbeit zwischen
beiden Staaten zu vertiefen,

in dem Bestreben, giinstige Bedingungen fur Kapitalanlagen
von Staatsangehérigen oder Gesellschaften des einen Staates im
Hoheitsgebiet des anderen Staates zu schaffen,

in der Erkenntnis, daB eine Forderung und ein vertraglicher
Schutz dieser Kapitalaniagen geeignet sind, die private wirtschaft-
liche Initiative zu beleben und den Wohlstand beider Vélker zu
mehren —

haben folgendes vereinbart:

Artikel 1
Fur die Zwecke dieses Vertrags

1. umfaBt der Begriff .Kapitalaniagen” alle Arten von Vermo-
genswerten gema8 der Gesetzgebung der Vertragspartei, in
deren Hoheitsgebiet die Kapitalanlage in Ubereinstimmung
mit diesem Vertrag vorgenommen wird, insbesondere, aber
nicht ausschlieBlich

a) Eigentum an beweglichen und unbeweglichen Sachen
sowie sonstige dingliche Rechte wie Hypotheken und
Pfandrechte:

b) Aktien, Anteilsrechte an Gesellschaften und andere Arten
von Beteiligungen an Geselischaften;
c) Anspriiche auf Geld, das verwendet wurde, um einen

wirtschaftlichen Wert zu schaffen, oder Anspriiche auf
Leistungen, die einen wirtschaftlichen Wert haben;

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

d) Rechte des geistigen Eigentums wie insbesondere Ur-
heberrechte, Patente, Gebrauchsmuster, gewerbliche
Muster und Modelle, Marken, Handelsnamen, Betriebs-
und Geschattsgeheimnisse, technische Verfahren, Know-
how und Goodwill;

e) Offentlich-rechtliche Konzessionen einschlieBlich Aufsu-
chungs- und Gewinnungskonzessionen;

2. bezeichnet der Begriff .Ertrage” diejenigen Betrage. die aut
eine Kapitalanlage enttalien. wie Gewinnanteile, Dividenden.
Zinsen, Lizenz- oder andere Entgelte:

bezeichnet der Begriff .Staatsangehérige”
a) in bezug auf die Bundesrepublik Deutschland:

Deutsche im Sinne des Grundgesetzes fur die Bundes-
republik Deutschiand.

in bezug auf die Argentinische Republik:

Argentinier im Sinne der argentinischen Rechtsvorschrif-
ten:

eo

g

4. bezeichnet der Begriff .Gesellschaften” juristische Personen
sowie Handeisgesellschaften oder sonstige Geselischatten
oder Vereinigungen mit oder ohne Rechtsperséniichkeit, die
ihren Sitz im Hoheitsgebiet einer der Vertragsparteien haben,
gleichviei, ob ihre Tatigkeit auf Gewinn gerichtet ist oder nicht.

Artikel 2

(1) Jede Vertragspartei wird in ihrem Hoheitsgebiet Kapital-
aniagen von Staatsangehérigen oder Geselischaften der anderen
Vertragspantei férdern und diese Kapitalanlagen in Ubereinstim-
mung mit ihren Rechtsvorschriften zulassen. Sie wird Kapital-
aniagen in jedem Fall gerecht und billig behandeln.

(2) Kapitalaniagen von Staatsangehorigen oder Gesellschaften
einer Vertragspartei, die im Hoheitsgebiet der anderen Vertrags-
partei gemaB deren Gesetzgebung vorgenommen worden sind,
genieBen den vollen Schutz dieses Vertrags.

(3) Eine Vertragspantei wird die Verwaltung, die Verwendung,
den Gebrauch oder die Nutzung der Kapitalaniagen von Staats:
oder der anderen Ver
ihrem Hoheitsgebiet in keiner Weise durch willkirliche oder diskr-

minierende Mafnahmen beeintrachtigen.

Artikel 3

(1) Jede Vertagspare! behandelt sanitalaniagen von Staats-
anderen

Vol. 1910, 1:32538

173

Uuited Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

 

oder Kapitalaniagen, an denen Staatsangehorige oder Gesell-
schaften der anderen Vertragspartei beteiligt sind, in ihrem
Hoheitsgebiet nicht waniget gunstig als Kapitalaniagen der eige-
nen 1 oder

von Staatsangehdrigen 7 Gesellschaften dritter Staaten.

(2) Jede Vertragspanei behandelt Staatsangehérige oder
Geselischaften der anderen Vertragspartei hinsichtlich ihrer Beta-
tigung im Zusammenhang mit Kapitalanlagen in ihrem Hoheitsge-
biet nicht weniger giinstig als ihre eigenen Staatsangehdrigen und
Geselischaften oder Staatsangehérige und Gesellschatten dritter
Staaten.

(3) Diese Behandlung bezieht sich nicht auf Vorrechte, die eine
Vertragspartei den Staatsangehérigen oder Geselischaften dritter
Staaten wegen ihrer Mitgliedschaft in einer Zoll- oder Wirtschatts-
union, einem gemeinsamen Markt oder einer Freihandelszone
einraumt.

(4) Die in diesem Anikel gewahrte Behandlung bezieht sich
nicht auf Verginstigungen, die eine Vertragsparei den Staats-
angehorigen oder Geselischaften dritter Staaten aufgrund eines
Doppelbesteuerungsabkommens oder sonstiger Vereinbarungen
ber Steuerfragen gewahrt.

Artikel 4

(1) Kapitalanlagen von Staatsangehdérigen oder Geselischaften
einer Vertragspartei geniefien im Hoheitsgebiet der anderen Ver-
tragspartei vollen rechtlichen Schutz und volle rechtliche Sicher-
heit.

(2) Kapitalanlagen von Staatsangehérigen oder Geselischatten
einer Vertragspartei dirten im Hoheitsgebiet der anderen Ver-
tragspartei nur zum allgemeinen Wohi und gegen Entschadigung
enteignet. verstaatlicht oder anderen MaBnahmen unterworfen
werden, die in ihren Auswirkungen einer Enteignung oder Ver-
Staatlichung gleichkommen. Die Entschadigung mu dem Wert
der enteigneten Kapitalaniage unmittelbar vor dem Zeitpunkt ent-
sprechen, in dem die tatsachliche oder drohende Enteignung,
Verstaatlichung oder vergleichbare MaBnahme 6ffentlich bekannt
wurde. Die Entschadigung mu8 unverziglich geleistet werden
und ist bis zum Zeitpunkt der Zahlung mit dem Ublichen bank-
mafBigen Zinssatz zu verzinsen; sie muB tatsachlich verwertbar
und frei transferierbar sein. Die Rechtma@igkeit der Enteignung,
Verstaatlichung oder vergleichbaren MaBnahme und die Hohe der
Entschadigung missen in einem ordentlichen Rechtsvertahren
nachgeprift werden kénnen.

(3) Staatsangehérige oder Gesellschatten einer Vertragspartei,
die durch Krieg oder sonstige bewaffnete Auseinandersetzungen,

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

United Nations — Treaty Series ¢ Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

Revolution, Staatsnotstand oder Aufruhr im Hoheitsgebiet der

anderen Vertragspartei Verluste an Kapitalanlagen erleiden, wer-

den von dieser Vertragspantei hinsichtlich der Ruckerstattungen,
od

gen, fer
nicht weniger gunstig behandelt als ihre eigenen Staatsangehéri-
gen oder Geselischatten. Solche Zahlungen missen frei transfe-
nierbar sein.

(4) Hinsichtlich der in diesem Artikel geregelten Angelegenhei-
ten genieBen die Staatsangehérigen oder Geselischatten einer
Vertragspartei im Hoheitsgebiet der anderen Vertragspartei
Meistbeginstigung.

Artikei 5
(1) Jede Vertragspartei gewahrleistet den Staatsangehérigen
oder Gesellschaften der anderen Vertragspartei den freien Trans-

fer, der im Zusammenhang mit einer Kapitalanlage stehenden
Zahlungen, insbesondere

a) des Kapitals und zusatzlicher Betrage zur Aufrechterhaltung
oder Ausweitung der Kapitaianlage;

b) der Ertrage:

¢) zur RUckzahlung der in Artikel 1, Absatz 1 Buchstabec
genannten Darlehen:

d) des Erléses im Fall vollstandiger oder teilweiser Liquidation
oder VerauBerung der Kapitalaniage:

e) der Entschadigungen nach Artikel 4.

(2) Der Transfer erfolgt unverziiglich entsprechend den im
Hoheitsgebiet der jeweiligen Vertragsparteien geltenden Vertah-
ren und zu dem jeweils giiltigen Kurs. Dieser Kurs dart nicht
wesentlich von dem Kreuzkurs (cross rate) abweichen, der sich

t 4

 

 

aus ergibt, die der
Wahrungsfonds zum Zeitpunkt der Zahlung Umrechnungen der
in i Te]
legen wurde.
Artikel 6

Leistet eine Vertragspartei ihren Staatsangehérgen oder
Gesellschaften Zahlungen aufgrund einer Gewahrleistung fir eine
Kapitalanlage im Hoheitsgebiet der anderen Vertragspartei, so
erkennt diese andere Vertragspartei, unbeschadet der Rechte der
erstgenannten Vertragspartei aus Artikel 9, die Ubertragung aller
Rechte und Anspriiche dieser Staatsangehérigen oder Gesell-
schaften kraft Gesetzes oder aufgrund Rechtsgeschafts auf

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

175

176

United Nations — Treaty Series ¢ Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

1996

 

die erstgenannte Vertragspartei an. Die andere Vertragspartei
erkennt auch den Eintritt der erstgenannten Vertragspartei in
diese Rechte und Anspriche des Rechtsvorgangers nach Grund
und Héhe an. Fir den Transfer von Zahlungen aufgrund der
Ubertragenen Rechte und Anspriiche gilt Artikel 5 entsprechend.

Artikel 7

(1) Ergibt sich aus den Rechtsvorschriften einer Vertragspartei
oder aus vilkerrechtlichen Verpflichtungen, die neben diesem
Vertrag zwischen den Vertragsparteien bestehen oder in Zukunft
begrundet werden, eine aligemeine oder besondere Regelung,
durch die den Kapitalanlagen der Staatsangehérigen oder Gesell-
schatten der anderen Vertragspartei eine ginstigere Behandlung
als nach diesem Vertrag zu gewahren ist, so geht diese Regelung
dem vorliegenden Vertrag insoweit vor, als sie ginstiger ist

(2) Jede Vertragspartei wird jede andere Verpflichtung einhal-
ten, die sie in bezug auf Kapitalaniagen von Staatsangehérigen
oder Geselischatten der anderen Vertragspartei in ihrem Hoheits-
gebiet Ubernommen hat.

Artikel 8

Dieser Vertrag gilt auch fir Angelegenheiten, die sich nach
Inkrafttreten dieses Vertrags in bezug auf Kapitalanlagen er-
geben, die Staatsangehdrige oder Geselischaften der einen Ver-
tragspartei im Hoheitsgebiet der anderen Vertragspartei gemaB
deren Rechitsvorschriften vor Inkrafttreten dieses Vertrags vorge-
nommen haben.

Artikel 9
(1) Meinungsverschiedenheiten zwischen den Vertragsparteien
ber die Auslegung oder Anwendung dieses Vertrags sollen,
soweit méglich, durch die Regierungen der beiden Vertragspar-
teien beigelegt werden.

(2) Kann eine Meinungsverschiedenheit auf diese Weise nicht
beigelegt werden, so ist sie auf Veriangen einer der beiden
Vertragsparteien einem Schiedsgericht zu unterbreiten.

(3) Das Schiedsgericht wird von Fall zu Fall gebildet, indem
jede Vertragspartei ein Mitglied bestellt und beide Mitglieder sich
auf den Angehorigen eines dritten Staates als Obmann einigen,
der von den Regierungen der beiden Vertragsparteien zu bestel-
len ist. Die Mitglieder sind innerhalb von zwei Monaten, der
Obmann innerhalb von drei Monaten zu bestellen, nachdem die
eine Vertragspartei der anderen mitgeteilt hat, da3 sie die Mei-
nungsverschiedenheiten einem Schiedsgericht unterbreiten will.

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

United Nations — Treaty Series ¢ Nations Unies — Recneil des Traités

(4) Werden die in Absatz 3 genannten Fristen nicht eingehaiten,
so kann in Ermangelung einer anderen Vereinbarung jede Ver-
den des bit-
ten, die erforderlichen Emennungen vorzunehmen. Besitzt der
Prasident die Staatsangehdrigkeit einer der beiden Vertragspar-
teien oder ist er aus einem anderen Grund verhindert, so soll der
Vizeprasident die Ernennungen vornehmen. Besitzt auch der
Vizeprasident die Staatsangehérigkeit einer der beiden Vertrags-
parteien oder ist auch er verhindert, so soll das im Rang nachstfol-
gende Mitglied des Gerichtshots, das nicht die Staatsangehdrig-
keit einer der beiden Vertragsparteien besitzt, die Ernennungen
vornehmen,

(5) Das Schiedsgericht entscheidet mit Stimmenmehrheit.
Seine Entscheidungen sind bindend. Jede Vertragspartei tragt die
Kosten ihres Mitglieds sowie ihrer Vertretung in dern Verfahren
vor dem Schiedsgericht: die Kosten des Obmanns sowie die
sonstigen Kosten werden von den beiden Vertragsparteien zu
gleichen Teilen getragen. tm Ubrigen regelt das Schiedsgericht
sein Verfahren selbst.

_ (6) Sind beide Vertragsparteien auch Vertragsstaaten des
Ubereinkommens vom 18. Marz 1965 zur Beilegung von investi-
tionsstreitigkeiten zwischen Staaten und Angehdrigen anderer
Staaten, so kann mit Ricksicht auf die Regelung in Artikel 27
Absatz 1 dieses Ubereinkommens das vorstehend vorgesehene
icht insoweit nicht werden, als
dem Staatsangehérigen oder der Geselischaft einer Vertragspar-
tei und der anderen Vertragspartei eine Vereinbarung nach MaG-
gabe des Artikels 25 des Ubereinkommens zustande gekornrnen
ist. Die Méglichkeit, das vorstehend vorgesehene Schiedsgericht
im Fall der Nichtbeachtung einer Entscheidung des Schiedsge-
richts des genannten Ubereinkommens (Artikel 27) anzurufen,
bleibt unberuhrt.

Artikel 10

(1) Meinungsverschiedenheiten in bezug auf Investitionen im
Sinne dieses Vertrags zwischen einer der Vertragsparteien und
einem Staatsangehdrigen oder einer Gesellschaft der anderen
Vertragspartei sollen, soweit méglich, zwischen den Streitparteien
gillich beigelegt werden

(2) Kann eine Meinungsverschiedenheit im Sinne von Absatz 1
nicht innerhalb einer Frist von sechs Monaten ab dem Zeitpunkt
ihrer Geltendmachung durch eine der beiden Streitparteien beige-
legt werden, so ist sie auf Veriangen einer der beiden Streitpar-
teien den zustandigen Gerichten der Vertragspartei, in deren
Hoheitsgebiet die Investition getatigt wurde, zu unterbreiten.

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

178

United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

 

(3) Unter jeder der machstehend genannten Voraussetzun-
gen kann die Meinungsverschiedenheit einem internationalen
Schiedsgericht unterbreitet werden:

a) auf Verlangen einer Streitpartei, wenn binnen 18 Monaten seit
Einleitung des gerichtlichen Verfahrens gema8 Absatz 2 eine
Sachentscheidung des angerufenen Gerichts nicht vorliegt
oder wenn eine derartige Entscheidung vorliegt, die Mei-
nungsverschiedenheit zwischen den Streitparteien aber fort-
besteht:

b) wenn beide Streitparteien sich daraut geeinigt haben.

(4) Sofem die Streitparteien nichts anderes vereinbart haben,
werden Meinungsverschiedenheiten zwischen den Streitparteien
in den Fallen von Absatz 3 dieses Artikels entweder einem
Schiedsverfahren im Rahmen des Ubereinkommens vom 18.
Marz 1965 zur Beilegung von Investitionsstreitigkeiten zwischen
den Staaten und Angehdérigen anderer Staaten oder einem
Ad hoc-Schiedsgericht nach den UNCITRAL-Schiedsrege!n ein-
vernehmlich unterworfen.

Kommt binnen drei Monaten, nachdem eine Streitpartei die Einlei-
tung eines Schiedsvertahrens verlangt hat, keine Einigung
zustande, so wird die Meinungsverschiedenheit — sofern beide
Vertragsparteien Vertragsstaaten des Ubereinkommens vom
18. Marz 1965 zur Beilegung von Investitionsstreitigkeiten zwi-
schen Staaten und Angehdngen anderer Staaten sind - einem
Schiedsverfahren im Rahmen des vorgenannten Ubereinkom-
mens unterworten. Anderenfalls wird die Meinungsverschieden-
heit dem vorgenannten Ad hoc-Schiedsgericht unterworfen.

(5) Das Schiedsgericht trifft seine Entscheidungen auf der
Grundlage dieses Vertrags und gegebenenfalls anderer zwischen
den Vertragsparteien geltender Ubereinkintte, des nationalen
Rechts der Vertragspartei, in deren Hoheitsgebiet die Investition
belegen ist — einschlieBlich der Regein des Intemationalen Privat-
rechts ~ und der allgemeinen Rechtsgrundsatze des Vlkerrechts.

(6) Der Schiedsspruch ist bindend und.wird gemaB innerstaat-
lichem Recht volistreckt.

Artikel 11
Die Bestimmungen dieses Vertrags gelten auch in den in Arti-
kel 63 des Wiener Ubereinkommens vom 23. Mai 1969 iber
das Recht der Vertrage genannten Fallen uneingeschrankt fort.

Vol. 1910, 132538,

United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

Artikel 12

(1) Dieser Vertrag bedart der Ratifikation; die Ratifikations-
urkunden werden so bald wie mdglich in Buenos Aires ausge-
tauscht.

(2) Dieser Vertrag tritt einen Monat nach Austausch der Rat
kationsurkunden in Kraft. Er bleibt zehn Jahre lang in Kraft; nach
deren Ablauf verlangert sich die Geltungsdauer auf unbegrenzte
Zeit. sofern nicht eine der beiden Vertragsparteien den Vertrag mit
einer Frist von zwolf Monaten vor Ablauf schriftlich kindigt, Nach
Ablauf von zehn Jahren kann der Vertrag jederzeit mit einer Frist
von zwolf Monaten gekindigt werden.

(3) Fur Kapitalanlagen, die bis zum Zeitpunkt des AuBerkrafttre-
tens dieses Vertrags vorgenommen worden sind, gelten die Arti-
kel 1 bis 11 noch fir weitere funfzehn Jahre vom Tag des
Auferkrafttretens des Vertrags an.

 

Geschehen zu Bonn am 9. April 1991 in zwei Urschriften, jede
in deutscher und spanischer Sprache, wobei jeder Wortlaut glei-
chermafen verbindlich ist.

Fiir die Bundesrepublik
Deutschland:

GENSCHER
Fiir die Argentinische
Republik:
Gurpo pI TELLA

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

180 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

1996

 

PROTOKOLL

Bei der Unterzeichnung des Vertrags zwischen der Bundes-
republik Deutschland und der Argentinischen Republik Uber die
Fe

und den it Schutz von

haben die unterzeichneten Bevollmachtigten auBerdem folgende
Bestimmungen vereinbart. die als Bestancteile des Vertrags
gelten:

a)

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

Zu Artikel

a) Artikel 1 Nummer 1 des Vertrags findet keine Anwendung
auf Kapitalanlagen in der Argentinischen Republik von
natirlichen Personen, die Staatsangehdrige der anderen
Vertragspartei sind. wenn die betreffenden Personen zur
Zeit der Vornahme ihrer urspriinglichen Investition bereits
mehr als zwei Jahre ihren Wohnsitz in der Argentinischen
Republik hatten, es sei denn, daB ihre Kapitalanlage
nachweislich aus dem Ausland eingebracht wurde.

b) Ertrage aus der Kapitalanlage und im Fall ihrer Wieder-
anlage auch deren Ertrage genieBen den gleichen Schutz
wie die Kapitalanlage.

c) Als .andere Arten von Beteiligungen” im Sinne von Arti-
kel 1 Nummer 1 Buchstabe b werden vor allem solche
Kapitalaniagen angesehen, die ihrem fnhaber keine
Stimm- oder Kontrollrechte vermitteln.

d) Die in Nummer 1 Buchstabe c genannten Anspniche auf
Geld umfassen Anspriiche aus Darlehen, die im Zusam-
menhang mit einer Beteiligung stehen und nach Zweck
und Umfang den Charakter einer Beteiligung haben
(beteiligungsahnliche Dariehen). Hierunter fallen nicht
Kredite von dritter Seite, z.B. Bankkredite zu kommer-
Ziellen Bedingungen.

e) Unbeschadet anderer Verfahren zur Feststellung der
Staatsangehdrigkeit gilt insbesondere als Staatsangehé-
riger einer Vertragspartei jede Person, die einen von den
zustandigen Behérden der betreffenden Vertragspartei
ausgesteliten nationalen ReisepaB besitzt. Der Vertrag
tindet keine Anwendung auf Investoren, die Staatsange-
hérige beider Vertragsparteien sind.

Fir die Feststellung, ob der Begriff .Geselischaft* nach
Artikel 1 Nummer 4 anwendbar ist, wird auf ihren Sitz
abgestellt, wobei hierunter der Ort zu verstehen ist, an
dem die Geselischaft ihre Hauptverwaltung hat.

United Nations — Treaty Series » Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

g) Der Vertrag gilt auch in den Gebieten der ausschlie3-
lichen Wirtschaftszone und des Festlandsockels, soweit
das Vdlkerrecht der jeweiligen Vertragspartei die Aus-
bung von souveranen Rechten oder Hoheitsbefugnis-
sen in diesen Gebieten erlaubt.

(2) Zu Artikel 3

a) Als .Betatigung" im Sinne des Artikels 3 Absatz 2 ist
insbesondere, aber nicht ausschlieBlich, die Verwaltung,
die Verwendung, der Gebrauch und die Nutzung einer
Kapitalaniage anzusehen. Als eine ,,weniger ginstige”
Behandlung im Sinne des Artikels 3 sind insbesondere,
aber nicht ausschlieBlich anzusehen: weniger ginstige
Bedingungen beim Bezug von Rohstoffen und anderen
Zulieferungen, Energie und Brennstoffen sowie Produk-
tions- und Betriebsmittein aller Art und beim Absatz von
Erzeugnissen im In- und Ausland. MaBnahmen, die aus
Griinden der inneren und auBeren Sicherheit und dttent-
lichen Ordnung, der Volksgesundheit oder Sittlichkeit zu
treffen sind, gelten nicht als . weniger ginstige” Behand-
lung im Sinne des Artikels 3.

b) Die Bestimmungen des Artikels 3 verpflichten eine Ver-
tragspartei nicht, steverliche Verginstigungen, Befreiun-
gen und Ermafigungen, welche gemaf den Steuergeset-
zen nur den in ihrem Hoheitsgebiet ansassigen natir-
lichen Personen und Geselischaften gewahrt werden, auf
im Hoheitsgebiet der anderen Vertragspartei ansassige
natiirliche Personen und Geselischaften auszudehnen.

2

Die Vertragsparteien werden im Rahmen ihrer innerstaat-
lichen Rechtsvorschriften Antrage auf die Einreise und
den Aufenthait von Personen der einen Vertragspartei,
die im Zusammenhang mit einer Kapitalaniage in das
Hoheitsgebiet der anderen Vertragspartei einreisen und
sich aufhaiten wollen, wohiwollend prifen; das gleiche
gilt tur Arbeitnehmer der einen Vertragspartei, die im
Zusammenhang mit einer Kapitalanlage in das Hoheits-
gebiet der anderen Vertragspartei einreisen und sich dort
aufhalten wollen, um eine Tatigkeit als Arbeitnehmer
auszuiben. Auch Antrage auf Erteilung der Arbeits-
erlaubnis werden wohlwollend geprift.

(3) Zu Artikel 4

Ein Anspruch auf Entschadigung besteht auch dann, wenn
durch in Artikel 4 genannte MaBnahmen in das Unterneh-
men. in dem die Kapitalaniage angelegt ist, eingegniffen und
dadurch die Kapitalaniage erheblich beeintrachtigt wird.

Vol, 1910, 1-32538

182 Ur

inited Nations — Treaty Series ¢ Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

 

(4

(5)

(6)

in

) Zu Artikel S

Als .unverziglich” durchgefihrt im Sinne des Artikels 5
Absatz 2 gilt ein Transfer, der innerhalb einer Frist erfolgt, die
normalerweise zur Beachtung der Transferférmlichkeiten
erforderlich ist. Die Frist beginnt mit der Einreichung eines
formgerechten und volistandigen Antrags und darf unter kei-
nen Umstanden zwei Monate Uberschreiten.

Zu Artikel8

Der Vertrag gilt jedoch in keinem Fall fir Meinungsverschie-
denheiten und Streitfalle, die vor seinem Inkrafttreten ent-
standen sind.

Bei Beférderungen von Giitem und Personen, die im Zusam-
menhang mit einer Kapitalanlage stehen, wird eine Vertrags-
Partei die Transportuntemehmen der anderen Vertragspar-
tei, vorbehaltlich der zwischen beiden Vertragsparteien
bestehenden intemationalen Ubereinkiintte, weder ausschal-
ten noch behindern und, soweit erforderlich, Genehmigun-
gen zur Durchfuhrung der Transporte erteilen.

Geschehen zu Bonn am 9. April 1991 in zwei Urschriften, jede
deutscher und spanischer Sprache, wobei jeder Wortlaut glei-

chermaBen verbindlich ist.

Fiir die Bundesrepublik
Deutschland:

GENSCHER
Fiir die Argentinische
Republik:
Guipo pi TELLA

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

[SPANISH TEXT — TEXTE ESPAGNOL]

183

TRATADO ENTRE LA REPUBLICA FEDERAL DE ALEMANIA Y

EI Gobierno de fa Republica Federal de Alemania

y
el Gobierno de la Republica Argentina,

con el deseo de intensificar la cooperacién econdomica entre
ambos Estados,

con el propdsito de crear condiciones favorables para las
inversiones de los nacionales 0 sociedades de uno de los dos
Estados en el territorio de! otro Estado,

reconociendo que la promocién y la proteccion de esas inver-
siones mediante un tratado pueden servir para estimular la inicia-
tiva economica privada e incrementar el bienestar de ambos
pueblos,

han convenido !o siguiente:

Articulo 1
A los fines del presente Tratado
(1) El concepto de «inversiones» designa todo tipo de activo
definido de acuerdo con las leyes y reglamentaciones de la
Parte Contratante en cuyo territorio !a inversion se realizo de
conformidad con este Tratado: en particular, pero no exclusi-
vamente. esto incluye:

a) la propiedad de bienes muebles e inmuebles y demas
derechos reales, tales como hipotecas y derechos de
prenda;

b) las acciones, derechos de participacion en sociedades y
otros tipos de participaciones en sociedades:

c) los derechos a fondos empleados para crear un valor
economico 0 a prestaciones que tengan un valor econo-
mico:

d) los derechos de propiedad intelectual, tales como los
derechos de autor, patentes, modelos de utilidad, dise-
fios y modelos industriales y comerciales, marcas, nom-

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

LA REPUBLICA ARGENTINA SOBRE PROMOCION Y PROTEC-
CION REC{PROCA DE INVERSIONES

United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

 

bres comerciales, secretos industriales y comerciales,
Procedimientos tecnoldgicos. know how y valor llave;

e) las concesiones otorgadas por entidades de derecho
publico, incluidas las concesiones de prospeccion y ex-
plotacion.

(2) El concepto de «ganancias» designa las sumas obtenidas de

una inversion, tales como las participaciones en los benefi-

cios, los dividendos, los intereses. los derechos de licencia y

otras remuneraciones.

El concepto de «nacionales» designa:

a) con referencia a la Republica Federal de Alemania:
los alemanes en el sentido de la Ley Fundamental de la
Republica Federal de Alemania;

b) con referencia a la Republica Argentina:

(3)

los argentinos en el sentido de las disposiciones legales
vigentes en Argentina.

El concepto de «sociedades» designa todas las personas
juridicas, asi como todas las sociedades comerciales y de-
mas sociedades 0 asociaciones con o sin personeria juridica
que tengan su sede en el territorio de una de las Partes
Contratantes, independientemente de que su actividad tenga
© no fines de lucro.

(4

Articulo 2

(1) Cada una de las Partes Contratantes promovera las inver-
siones dentro de su terntorio de nacionales o sociedades de la
otra Parte Contratante y las admitira de conformidad con sus
leyes y reglamentaciones. En todo caso tratara las inversiones
justa y equitativamente.

(2) Las inversiones realizadas por nacionales o sociedades de
una de las Partes Contratantes en el territorio de !a otra Parte
Contratante de acuerdo con las leyes y reglamentaciones de esta
ultima gozaran de !a plena proteccion de este Tratado.

(3) Ninguna de las Partes Contratantes perjudicara en su
territorio la administracion, la utilizacion, el uso 0 el goce de las
inversiones de nacionales 0 sociedades de la otra Parte Contra-
tante a través de medidas arbitrarias o discriminatorias.

Articulo 3
(1) Ninguna de las Partes Contratantes sometera en su territo-
tio a las inversiones de nacionales 0 sociedades de la otra Parte
Contratante © a las inversiones en las que mantengan participa-

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

Ciones los nacionales 0 sociedades de la otra Parte Contratante. a
un trato menos favorable que el que se conceda a las inversiones
de los propios nacionales y sociedades 0 a las inversiones de
nacionales y sociedades de terceros Estados.

(2) Ninguna de las Partes Contratantes sometera en su territo-
rio a Jos nacionales 0 sociedades de la otra Parte Contratante, en
cuanto Se refiere a sus actividades relacionadas con las inversio-
nes, a un trato menos favorable que a sus propios nacionales y
sociedades 0 a los nacionales y sociedades de terceros Estados.

(3) Dicho trato no se extendera a los privilegios que una de las
Partes Contratantes conceda a los nacionales y sociedades de
terceros Estados por formar parte de una union aduanera o
economica, un mercado comun o una zona de libre comercio.

(4) El trato acordado por el presente articulo no se extendera a
las ventajas que una de las Partes Contratantes conceda a !os
nacionales 0 sociedades de terceros Estados como consecuencia
de un acuerdo para evitar la doble imposicién o de otros acuerdos
en materia impositiva.

Articulo 4

(1) Las inversiones de nacionales o sociedades de una de las
Partes Contratantes gozaran de plena proteccién y seguridad
juridica en el territorio de ta otra Parte Contratante.

(2) Las inversiones de nacionales 0 sociedades de una de las
Partes Contratantes no podran, en el territorio de la otra Parte
Cc . ser ° a
otras medidas que en sus efectos equivaigan a expropiacion o
nacionalizacion, salvo por causas de utilidad publica, y deberan
en tal caso ser indemnizadas. La indemnizacion debera corres-
ponder al valor de la inversion expropiada inmediatamente antes
de la fecha de hacerse publica !a expropiacion efectiva o inmi-
nente, la nacionalizacién o la medida equivalente. La indemniza-
cion debera abonarse sin demora y devengara intereses hasta la
fecha de su pago segun el tipo usual de interés bancario; debera
ser efectivamente realizable y libremente transferible. La legali-
dad de la expropiacion, nacionalizacién 0 medida equiparable, y
el monto de la indemnizacion, deberan ser revisables en procedi-
miento judicial ordinario.

(3) Los nacionates 0 sociedades de una de !as Partes Contra-
tantes que sufran pérdidas en sus inversiones por efecto de
guerra u otro conflicto armado, revolucion, estado de emergencia
Nacional o insurrecion en el territorio de la otra Parte Contratante,
No seran tratados por ésta.menos favorablemente que sus pro-
pios nacionales 0 sociedades en to referente a restituciones.

 

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Uuies — Recueil des Traités

1996

 

compensaciones, indemnizaciones u otros resarcimientos. Estos
Pagos deberan ser libremente transferibles.

(4) En lo concerniente a las materias regidas por el presente
articulo, los nacionales o sociedades de una de las Partes Contra-
tantes gozaran en el territorio de la otra Parte Contratante del
trato de la nacién mas favorecida.

Articulo 5

(1) Cada Parte Contratante garantizara a los nacionales o
sociedades de la otra Parte Contratante la libre transterencia de
los pagos relacionados con una inversion, especialmente:

a) del capita! y de !as sumas adicionales para el mantenimiento o
ampliacion de !a inversion de capital:

b) de las ganancias;

c) de la amortizacion de los préstamos definidos en el inciso c)
del apartado 1 del articulo 1;

d) de! producto de la venta o liquidacion tota! o parcial de la
inversion;

e) de las indemnizaciones previstas en el articulo 4.

(2) La transferencia se efectuara sin demora de acuerdo a los
procedimientos establecidos en el territorio de cada Parte Contra-
tante y al tipo de cambio aplicable en cada caso. Dicho tipo de
cambio no debera diferir sustancialmente del tipo cruzado (cross
rate) resultante de los tipos de cambio que e! Fondo Monetario
Internaciona! aplicaria si en la fecha del pago cambiaran las
monedas de los paises interesados en derechos especiales de
giro

Articulo 6

Si una Parte Contratante realiza pagos a sus nacionales o
sociedades en virtud de una garantia otorgada por una inversion
en el territorio de la otra Parte Contratante, esta ultima, sin
perjuicio de los derechos que en virtud del articulo 9 correspon-
den a la primera Parte Contratante, reconocera el traspaso de
todos los derechos de aquellos nacionales o sociedades a !a
primera Parte Contratante, bien sea por disposicién legal o por
acto juridico. Asimismo, la otra Parte Contratante reconocera la
causa y el alcance de !a subrogacion de la primera Parte Contra-
tante en todos estos derechos del titular anterior. Para la transte-
rencia de los pagos en virtud de los derechos transferidos regira
mutatis mutandis el articulo S.

Vol. 1910, 132538

United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

Articulo 7

(1) Si de las disposiciones legales de una de las Partes Contra-
tantes o de las obligaciones emanadas del derecho internacional
no contempladas en el presente Tratado, actuales o futuras. entre
las Partes Contratantes, resultare una regiamentacion general o
especial en virtud de la cual deba concederse a las inversiones de
los nacionales o sociedades de la otra Parte Contratante un trato
mas favorable que el previsto en el presente Tratado, dicha
reglamentacion prevalecera sobre el presente Tratado, en cuanto
sea mas favorable

(2) Cada Parte Contratante cumplira cualquier otro compromiso
que haya contraido con relaci6n a las inversiones de nacionales o
sociedades de la otra Parte Contratante en su territorio.

Articulo 8

El presente Tratado se aplicara también a los asuntos surgidos
después de su entrada en vigor en relacién a las inversiones
efectuadas por los nacionales 0 sociedades de una Parte Contra-
tante conforme a las leyes y reglamentaciones de {a otra Parte
Contratante en el territorio de esta ultima antes de la entrada en
vigor de! mismo.

Articulo 9

(1) Las controversias que surgieren entre las Partes Contratan-
tes sobre la interpretacién o aplicacion de! presente Tratado
deberan, en lo posible, ser dirimidas por los Gobiernos de ambas
Partes Contratantes.

(2) Si una controversia no pudiere ser dirmida de esa manera.
sera sometida a un tribunal arbitral a peticion de una de las Partes
Contratantes.

(3) El tribunal arbitral sera constituido ad hoc; cada Parte
Contratante nombrara un miembro, y los dos miembros se pon-
dran de acuerdo para elegir como presidente a un nacional de un
tercer Estado que sera nombrado por los Gobiemos de ambas
Partes Contratantes. Los miembros seran nombrados dentro de
un plazo de dos meses, el Presidente dentro de un plazo de tres
meses, después de que una de las Partes Contratantes haya
comunicado a la otra que desea someter la controversia a un
tribunal arbitral.

(4) Si los plazos previstos en el parrafo 3 no fueren observados,
y a falta de otro arreglo, cada Parte Contratante podra invitar al
Presidente de la Corte Internacional de Justicia a proceder a los
nombramientos necesarios. En caso de que el presidente sea
nacional de una de las Partes Contratantes 0 se halle impedido
por otra causa, correspondera al Vicepresidente efectuar los

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

United Nations — Treaty Series ¢ Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

nombramientos. Si el Vicepresidente también fuere nacional de
una de las dos Partes Contratantes o si se hallare también
impedido, correspondera al miembro de ta Corte que siga inme-
diatamente en el orden jerarquico y no sea nacional de una de las
Partes Contratantes, efectuar los nombramientos.

(5) El tribunal arbitral tomara sus decisiones por mayoria de
votos. Sus decisiones seran obligatorias. Cada Parte Contratante
sufragara los gastos ocasionados por la actividad de su arbitro,
asi como los gastos de su representacion en el procedimiento
arbitral: los gastos del presidente, asi como los demas gastos,
eran sufragados por partes iguales por las dos Partes Contratan-
tes. Por lo demas, el tribunal arbitral determinara su propio
Procedimiento.

(6) Si ambas Partes Contratantes fueren tambien Estados
Contratantes de! Convenio sobre arreglo de diferencias relativas
a inversiones entre Estados y nacionales de otros Estados de!
18 de marzo de 1965, no se podra, en atencion a la disposicion
del parrafo 1 del articulo 27 de dicho Convenio, acudir al tribunal
arbitral arriba previsto cuando el nacional o la sociedad de una
Parte Contratante y la otra Parte Contratante hayan llegado a un
acuerdo contorme a! articulo 25 del Convenio. No quedara afec-
tada la posibilidad de acudir al tribunal arbitral arriba previsto en el
caso de que no se respete una decision del Tribunal de Arbitraje
del mencionado Convenio (articulo 27).

Articulo 10

(1) Las controversias que surgieren entre una de las Pares
Contratantes y un nacional o una sociedad de la otra Parte
Contratante en relacién con las inversiones en el! sentido del
Presente Tratado deberan, en lo posible, ser amigablemente
dirimidas entre las partes en la controversia.

(2) Si una controversia en e! sentido de! parrafo 1 no pudiera
ser dirimida dentro del plazo de seis meses, contado desde la
fecha en que una de las partes en la controversia !a haya
Promovido. sera sometida a peticion de una de ellas a los tribuna-
les competentes de la Parte Contratante en cuyo territorio se
realizo la inversion.

(3) La controversia podra ser sometida a un tribunal arbitral
val et de las i

a) a peticién de una de las partes en la controversia, cuando no
exista una decision sobre el fondo después de transcurridos
dieciocho meses contados a partir de la iniciacion del proceso
judicial previsto por el apartado 2 de este articulo, 0 cuando
exista tal decision pero la controversia subsista entre las
partes;

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

b) cuando ambas partes en la controversia asi lo hayan conve-
nido.

(4) En los casos previstos por el parrafo 3 anterior, las contro-
versias entre las partes, en el sentido de este articulo, se somete-
ran de comun acuerdo, cuando las partes en la controversia no
hubiesen acordado otra cosa, sea a un procedimiento arbitral en
el marco del «Convenio sobre Arreglo de Diferencias relativas a
las inversiones entre Estados y nacionales de otros Estados». del
18 de marzo de 1965 0 a un tribunal arbitral ad hoc establecido de
contormidad con las reglas de la Comision de Naciones Unidas
para el Derecho Mercantil internacional (C.N.U.D.M.1.).

Si después de un periodo de tres meses a partir de que una de las
Partes hubiere solicitado el comienzo del procedimiento arbitral
no se hubiese !legado a un acuerdo, la controversia sera some-
tida a un procedimiento arbitral en el marco del «Convenio sobre
Arreglo de Diferencias relativas a las inversiones entre Estados y
nacionales de otros Estados», del 18 de marzo de 1965, siempre
y cuando ambas Partes Contratantes sean partes de dicho Con-
venio. En caso contrario la controversia sera sometida al tribunal
arbitral ad hoc antes citado.

(5) El Tribunal arbitral decidira sobre la base de! presente
Tratado y, en su caso, sobre la base de otros tratados vigentes
entre las Partes, del derecho interno de la Parte Contratante - en
cuyo territorio se realizd la inversion, incluyendo sus normas de
derecho internacional privado, y de los principios generales del
derecho internacional.

(6) La sentencia arbitral sera obligatoria y cada Parte la ejecu-
tara de acuerdo con su legislacion.

Articulo 11

Las disposiciones del presente Tratado continuaran siendo
plenamente aplicables aun en fos casos previstos por el arti-
culo 63 de la Convencion de Viena sobre el derecho de los
Tratados del 23 de mayo de 1969.

Articulo 12

(1) El presente Tratado sera ratificado: los instrumentos de
ratificacion seran canjeados a la mayor brevedad posible en
Buenos Aires.

(2) El presente Tratado entrara en vigor un mes después de ia
fecha en que se haya efectuado el canje de los instrumentos de
ratificacién. Su validez sera de diez afos y se prolongara después.
por tiempo indefinido, a menos que una de las Partes Contratan-
tes comunicara por escrito a la otra su intencién de dario por

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

190 United Nations — Treaty Series ¢ Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

terminado doce meses antes de su expiracion. Transcurridos diez
afos, el Tratado podra denunciarse en cualquier momento, con
un preaviso de doce meses.

(3) Para inversiones realizadas antes de la fecha de termina-
cion del presente Tratado. las disposiciones de los articulos 1
a 11 seguiran rigiendo durante los quince afos subsiguientes a
dicha fecha.

Hecho en Bonn ei dia 9 de Abril de 1991 en dos originales, en
idiomas aleman y espanol. siendo ambos textos igualmente au-
tenticos.

Por la Reptiblica
Federal de Alemania:

GENSCHER

Por la Repiblica
Argentina:

GuIbo Di TELLA

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

PROTOCOLO

En el acto de la firma del Tratado entre la Republica Federal de
Al pu ig sobre y 6
teciproca de inversiones, los plenipotenciarios abajo firmantes
han adoptado Jas siguientes disposiciones, que se consideran
como parte integrante de! Tratado:

(1) Ad articuto1

a) En lo que concieme al articulo 1, apartado 1, este Trata-
do no se aplicara a las inversiones realizadas en la
Republica Argentina por personas fisicas que sean na-
cionales de Ia otra Parte Contratante si tales personas, a
ta fecha de la inversion original, han estado domiciliadas
desde hace mas de dos afios en la Republica Argentina,
Salvo cuando se pruebe que las inversiones provienen
del extranjero.

b) Las ganancias derivadas de inversiones y, en el caso que
sean revertidas, ias ganancias derivadas de estas. goza-
tan de la misma proteccion que /a inversion original.

¢) Por “otros tipos de participaciones”, segun el apartado 1
inciso b) del articulo 1, se entenderan en particular
aquellas inversiones de capital que no otorgan a su
titular derechos de voto o control.

@) Los derechos a fondos mencionados en el apartado 1
inciso c) del articulo 1 comprenden derechos de présta-
mos relacionados con una participacion y que tengan por
su causa y cuantia e| caracter de una participacién
(préstamos cuasi participativos). Sin embargo, no com-
prenden créditos de terceros, como por ejemplo créditos
bancarios con condiciones comerciales.

e) Sin perjuicio de otros procedimientos para determinar la
nacionalidad, se considerara en especial como nacional
de una Parte Contratante a toda persona que posea un
Pasaporte nacional extendido por las autoridades compe-
tentes de la respectiva Parte Contratante. Este Tratado
No se aplicara a los inversores que sean nacionales de
ambas Partes Contratantes.

Para determinar si el concepto de “sociedades” de
acuerdo a lo dispuesto en el apartado 4 del articulo 1 es
aplicable, se atendera a su sede, la cual se entendera
como lugar en el que la sociedad tenga su administracion
principal.

 

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

191

192 United Nations — Treaty Series ¢ Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

1996

 

9)

El Tratado se aplicara también a las areas de la Zona
Econémica Exclusiva y de la Plataforma Continental
sobre las cuales el Derecho Internacional conceda a la
Parte Contratante correspondiente derechos de sobera-
nia 0 jurisdiccion.

(2) Ad articulo3

a)

2

Por «actividades» en e! sentido del apartado 2 del arti-
culo 3 se consideraran en especial pero no exclusiva-
mente, la administracion, la utilizacion, el uso y el aprove-
chamiento de una inversion. Se consideraran en especial
pero no exclusivamente como «trato menos favorable»
en el sentido del articulo 3 a las medidas menos favora-
bles que afecten la adquisicion de materias primas y
otros insumos, energia y combustibles. asi como medios
de produccién y de explotacién de toda clase o la venta
de productos en el interior del pais y en el extranjero. No
se consideraran como «trato menos favorable» en el
sentido del articulo 3 las medidas que se adopten por
fazones de seguridad intema o externa y orden publico,
sanidad publica o moralidad.

Las disposiciones del articulo 3 no obligan a una Parte
Contratante a extender las ventajas, exenciones y reduc-
ciones fiscales que, segun las leyes tributarias solo se
concecen a las personas naturales y sociedades residen-
tes en su territonio, a las personas naturales y sociedades
residentes en el territorio de la otra Parte Contratante.

Las Partes Contratantes, de acuerdo con sus disposicio-
nes legales internas, tramitaran con benevolencia las
solicitudes de inmigracién y residencia de personas de
una de las Partes Contractantes que. en relacion con una
inversion, quieran entrar en el territorio de la otra Parte
Contratante: la misma actitud debera ser observada con
respecto a los asalariados de una Parte Contratante que.
en relacion con una inversion, quieran entrar y residir en
el territorio de la otra Parte Contratante para ejercer su
actividad como asalariados. igualmente se tramitaran
con benevolencia !as solicitudes de permiso de trabajo.

(3) Ad articulo4
El derecho a indemnizaci6n existira asimismo en el caso de

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

que se adopte alguna de las medidas definidas en el arti-

culo 4 respecto de la empresa donde se halla situada la
inversion y se produzca como consecuencia de aquella un
severo perjuicio para la inversion.

United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

(4) Ad articulo5

Una transferencia se considera realizada «sin demora» en el
sentido del apartado 2 del articulo 5 cuando se ha efectuado
dentro de! plazo normalmente necesario para el cumplimien-
to de las formalidades de transterencia. El plazo, que en
ningun caso podra exceder de dos meses, comenzara a
correr en el momento de presentacion de la correspondiente
solicitud formaimente completa.

(5) Ad articulo8

El presente Tratado en ningun caso se aplicara a las recla-
maciones 0 litigios surgidos antes de su vigencia.

(6

Respecto de los transportes de mercancias y personas en
relacién con inversiones, ninguna de las Partes Contratantes
excluira ni pondra trabas a las empresas de transporte de la
otra Parte Contratante y, en caso necesario, concedera
autorizaciones para la realizacién de los transportes condi-
cionados a las normas de los acuerdos internacionales vi-
gentes entre las Partes Contratantes.

Hecho en Bonn el dia 9 de Abril de 1991 en dos ejemplares, en
lengua alemana y espafola, siendo ambos textos igualmente
auténticos.

Por la Republica
Federal de Alemania:
GENSCHER
Por la Republica
Argentina:

Gu1po p1 TELLA

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

EXCHANGES OF NOTES — ECHANGES DE NOTES
[SPANISH TEXT — TEXTE ESPAGNOL]
la

EMBAJADA DE LA REPUBLICA ARGENTINA

Sefior Ministro,

Con motivo de la firma de! Tratado sobre la Promocién y Proteccién Reciproca de
Inversiones del 9 de Abril de 1991. el Gobierno de la Republica Argentina tiene el honor de
comunicarle al Gobierno de la Republica Federal de Alemania lo siguiente:

En base al Tratado de Amistad y Cooperacion de 1988. 0 bien, al Tratado para el
Establecimiento de una Relacion Asociativa Particular de 1987 respectivamente. el Reino
de Espana y la Republica Italiana otorgan a la Republica Argentina lineas de crédito
concesionales con el objeto de financiar inversiones para la ejecucién de inversiones.
especialmente con el fin de crear joint ventures en el sector de la pequefia y mediana
empresa.

Las solicitudes de fir para cada proy
con regulaciones argentinas especiales y posteriormente acordadas con la contraparte
espafiola 0 italiana, segun el caso.

‘Como contrapartida la Republica Argentina se ha comprometido a:

-  otorgar la exencion arancelaria e impositiva para las importaciones de bienes destina-
dos a inversiones que se financian con los créditos concesionales previstos por los
respectivos Tratados.

- no adoptar ninguna medida que impida la repatriacion del capital invertido o Ia libre
transferencia de ganancias a partir de inversiones de riesgo para aquellos proyectos
que hayan sido financiados segun las disposiciones de los citados Tratados.

Estas condiciones especiales se otorgan con el objeto de posibilitar nuevas inversiones
para el desarrollo economico de la Argentina en ambitos cuya promocion es especialmente
necesaria.

Las Partes Contratantes interpretan el articulo 3 del Tratado sobre la Promocion y
Proteccion Reciproca de Inversiones de forma tal que la clausula de la nacion mas
favorecida no se refiere a las condiciones y los privilegios especiales que la Republica
Argentina otorga a inversores extranjeros para los proyectos arriba mencionados.

La Republica Argentina procurara que aquellos inversores alemanes y sus inversiones,
que no estan sujetos a las condiciones especiales arriba mencionadas, no resulten
afectados substancialmente en su capacidad competitiva.

Reciba Ud.. Sr. Ministro, las seguridades de mi mas alta y distinguida consideracion.

Bonn, 9 de Abril de 1991

 

Guino D1 TELLA
Ministro de Relaciones Exteriores y Culto

Sr. Ministro de Asuntos Exteriores

de la Republica Federal de Alemania

Hans D. Genscher
Bonn

Vol. 1910, 1.32538,

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 195

[GERMAN TEXT — TEXTE ALLEMAND]
lla
DER BUNDESMINISTER DES AUSWARTIGEN

Bonn, den 9. April 1991

422-413.35 ARG
Herr Minister,

ich beehre mich, den Emptang der Note der Regierung der Argentinischen Republik vom.
9. April 1991 mut folgendem inhait zu bestatigen:

.Das Kénigreich Spanien und die italienische Republik gewahren autgrund des Freund-
schafts- und Kooperationsabkommens von 1988 bzw. des Abkommens zur Herstellung
einer besonderen Assoziationsbeziehung von 1987 der Argentinischen Republik zur Ourch-
‘nrung gewerbicher Kapitalanlagen insbesondere zwecks Grindung von Gemeinschats-

mit klein- und for
die Finanzierung solcher Investitionen.

 

Die Finanzierungsantrage fir jedes Projekt miissen in Ubereinstimmung mit besonderen
argentinischen Vorschritten genehmigt und anschlieBend mit den zustandigen italienischen
und spanischen Behorden abgestimmt werden.

Im hat sich die i Republik zu

- Sie gewahrt Zoll- und Stevertreiheit fir die Eintuhr von Gitern fiir Kapitalantagen. die mit
den in den jeweiligen Vertragen vorgesehenen konzessionaren Krediten finanziert
werden:

es werden keine Mafnahmen ergritfen, die die Repatriierung des eingesetzten Kapitals
oder den freien Transfer der Ertrage aus Risikoinvestitionen fir jene Projekte behindem.
die gemB den Bestimmungen dieser Vertrage finanziert wurden.

Diese besonderen Bedingungen werden mit dem Ziel gewanrt, neue Kapitalantagen fir die

 

in besonders Bereichen zu
‘erméglichen.

Die Vertragsparteien legen Artikel 3 des Vertrags Uber die Forderung une cen gegenseiti-
gen Schutz von aus. daB die

 

gung sich nicht aut die besonderen Bedingungen und Vorrechte bezieht. die oie Asgentini-
sche Republik ausiéndischen Kapitalanlegem fir die zuvorgenannten Projekte gewahn.

Die Argentinische Republik wird dafiir sorgen, daB deutsche Investoren und ihre Kapital-
anlagen. die den oben genannten besonderen Bedingungen nicht unterliegen. in ihrer
Wettbewerbstahigkeit nicht wesentlich beeintrachtigt werden.”

Genehmigen Sie, Herr Minister. die Versicherung meiner ausgezeichneten Hochachtung.

GENSCHER

 

er Exzellenz

dem Minister fiir Auswartige Beziehungen und Kultus
der Argentinischen Republik

Herrn Guido di Tella

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

196 United Nations — Treaty Series ¢ Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

 

[GERMAN TEXT — TEXTE ALLEMAND]
Ib
DER BUNDESMINISTER DES AUSWARTIGEN

Bonn, den 9. April 1991

422-413.35 ARG
Herr Minister,

ich beehre mich, thnen unter Bezugnahme aut den heute zwischen der Bundesrepublik
Deutschiand und der Argentinischen Republik geschlossenen Vertrag Uber die Férderung
und den gegenseitigen Schutz von Kapitalanlagen folgendes mitzuteilen:
Nach Inkrafttreten des Vertrags ber die Férderung und den gegenseitigen Schutz von
Kapitalaniagen zwischen unseren beiden Staaten und unter Beriicksichtigung des in
Artikel 5 dieses Vertrags niedergelegten Prinzips des freien Transfers von Kapital und
Entragen, haben die deutschen Behérden die Méglichkeit, autgrund eines Antrags potentiel-
ler Investoren {ar deutsche Investitionen in der Argentinischen Republik in vollem Umtange
Kapitalantagegarantien gemaB unseren jeweils geltenden Richtlinien und Allgemeinen
Bedingungen zu gewahren. Vom Inkrafttreten des Vertrags an sind zusatzlich zu den bisher
bereits gewahrten Garantien auch solche Betrage Gegenstand der Garantien, die fur einen
Zeitraum aut fallen, wie z. B. und
Zinsen,

Genehmigen Sie, Herr Minister, die Versicherung meiner ausgezeichneten Hochachtung.

GENSCHER

Seiner Exzellenz
dem Minister fiir Auswartige Beziehungen und Kultus
der Argentinischen Republik

Herrn Guido di Tella

Vol. 1910, 132538,

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series ¢ Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 197

(SPANISH TEXT — TEXTE ESPAGNOL]
lb

MINISTRO DE RELACIONES EXTERIORES Y CULTO
Sefior Ministro,

Tengo el honor de acusar recibo de la nota del Gobiemo de ta Republica Federal de
Alemania, de fecha 9 de abril de 1991, cuyo contenido es el siguiente:

«Con motivo del Tratado sobre Promocién y Proteccién Reciproca de Inversiones
suscripto entre nuestros dos paises con fecha 9 de abril de 1991. tengo el honor de
comunicarie a Usted lo siguiente:

A partir de la entrada en vigor de dicho Tratado y teniendo en cuenta el principio
establecido en su Articulo 5 sobre fa libre transferencia de capital y ganancias, las
autoridades alemanas cuentan con la posibilidad. después de la presentacion por parte de
los inversores interesados de una solicitud para garantizar una inversion en Argentina, de
otorgar la cobertura total de tales inversiones de acuerdo con las directivas y condiciones
generales vigentes. Por lo tanto, a partir de la entrada en vigor de este Tratado dichas
autoridades podran, en adicion a las actualmente disponibles, otorgar garantias respecto
de las sumas obtenidas de una inversion durante un periodo determinado, tales como las
Participaciones en los beneticios, los dividendos y los intereses.

Permitame, Seftor Ministro. hacerle llegar las seguridades de mi mas alta considera-
cion.»

Reitero a Usted, Sefior Ministro, las seguridades de mi mayor consideracién.
Bonn, 9 de abril de 1991

Guipo pt TELLA
Ministro de Relaciones Exteriores y Culto

Sr. Ministro de Asuntos Exteriores

de la Reptiblica Federal de Alemania
Hans D. Genscher
Bonn

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

198 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

 

[TRANSLATION — TRADUCTION]

TREATY! BETWEEN THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY
AND THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC ON THE ENCOURAGE-
MENT AND RECIPROCAL PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS

The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Government of
the Argentine Republic,

Desiring to intensify economic cooperation pen both States,

 

I ding to create di by Is and
companies of either State in the territory of the ‘oe State,
R izing that the and ion of such invest-

 

ment are apt to stimulate private business initiative and to increase the Prosperity of
both nations,

Have agreed as follows:

Article 1

For the purposes of this Treaty,

(1) The term “investments” shall apply to assets of any category defined in
accordance with the laws and regulations of the Contracting Party in whose territory
the investment is made and admitted in accordance with this Treaty and particularly,
but not exclusively, to:

(a) Movable and immovable property as well as any other rights in rem, such as
mortgages, liens and pledges;

(b) Shares, stocks in companies and other forms of participation in companies;

(c) Claims to money which has been used to create an economic value or claims
to any performance having an economic value;

(d) Intellectual property rights, such as copyrights, patents, utility models,
industrial and commercial designs and models, trade marks and trade names, indus-
trial and commercial secrets, technical processes, know-how and goodwill;

(e) Business concessions under public law, including concessions to search for,
extract and exploit natural resources.

(2) The term “returns” shall mean the amounts yielded by an investment such
as profits, dividends, interest, licence fees and other remuneration.

(3) The term “nationals” shall mean:

(a) In respect of the Federal Republic of Germany: Germans within the
meaning of the Basic Law of the Federal Republic of Germany;

(b) In respect of the Argentine Republic: Argentines within the meaning of the
legal provisions in force in Argentina.

' Came into force on 8 November 1993, i.e., one month after the exchange of the instruments of ratification, which
took place at Buenos Aires on 8 October 1993, in accordance with article 12 (2).
Vol. 1910, 1-32538

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 199

(4) The term “companies” shall mean any juridical person as well as any com-
mercial or other company or association with or without legal personality having its
seat in the territory of either Contracting Party whether or not its activities are
directed at profit.

Article 2

(1) Each C ing Party shall by orcom-
panies of the other Contracting Party in its territory and shall admit such invest-
ments in accordance with its laws and regulations. In any case each Party shall
accord fair and equitable treatment to investments.

(2) made by nationals or ies of either Ci Party
in the territory of the other Contracting Party in accordance with the laws and
regulations of the latter Party shall enjoy full protection under this Treaty.

(3) Neither Contracting Party shall subject the management, utilization, use or
enjoyment of investments of nationals or companies of the other Contracting Party
in its territory to arbitrary or discriminatory measures.

Article 3

(1) Neither Contracting Party shall subject investments in its territory by or
with the Participation of nationals or companies of the other Contracting Party to
treatment less favourable than it accords to investments of its own nationals or
companies or to investments of nationals or companies of any third State.

(2) Neither Contracting Party shall subject nationals or companies of the
other Contracting Party, as regards their activity in connection with investments in
its territory, to treatment less favourable than it accords to its own nationals or
companies or to nationals or companies of any third State.

(3) Such treatment shall not include privileges which may be extended by
either Contracting Party to nationals or companies of third States on account of its
membership in a customs or economic union, common market or free trade area.

(4) The treatment under this article shall not extend to privileges accorded by
a Contracting Party to nationals or companies of a third State by virtue of an agree-
ment for the avoidance of double taxation or other tax agreements.

 

Article 4

ad) f by of either Ci Party shall
enjoy full Protection as well as juridical security in the territory of the other Con-
tracting P%

(2) by or ies of either C ing Party shall
not be expropriated, nationalized or subject to any other measure the effects of
which would be tantamount to expropriation or nationalization in the territory of the
other Contracting Party, except for reasons of public interest and against compensa-
tion. Such compensation shall be equivalent to the value of the investment exPrOPri-
ated i diately before the effective or di
equivalent measure became public knowledge. The compensation shall be paid with:
out delay and shall carry the usual bank interest until the date of payment; it shall be
readily convertible and freely transferable. The legality of any such expropriation,
nationalization or comparable measure and the amount of compensation shall be
subject to review by due process of law.

 

 

 

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

200 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

 

(3) Nationals or companies of either Contracting Party whose investments
suffer losses in the territory of the other Contracting Party owing to war or other
armed conflict, revolution, a state of national emergency or insurrection shall be
accorded by the latter Contracting Party treatment which is no less favourable than
that ded to its own nati or as regards
i ion or other valuabl i ion. Such pay shall be freely

 

tion, i
transferable.

(4) Nationals or companies of either Contracting Party shall enjoy most-
favoured-nation treatment in the territory of the other Contracting Party in respect
of the matters provided for in this article.

Article 5
(1) Each Ce ing Party shall to or ies of the

1s y si
other Contracting Party the free ome of payments in connection with an invest-

ment, including:
(a) The capital and additional amounts to maintain or increase the investments;
(b) The returns;
(c) Repayment of loans defined in article 1, paragraph 1 (c);
(d) The proceeds from the sale of the whole or any part of the investment;
(e) The compensation provided for by article 4.

(2) The transfer shall be effected without delay at the rate of exchange appli-
cable in each case and in accordance with the procedures established in the territory
of each Contracting Party. Such exchange rate shall not differ substantially from the
cross rate resulting from the exchange rate that the International Monetary Fund
would apply if the currencies of the countries concerned were converted to special
drawing rights on the date of payment.

Article 6

If either C ing Party makes p: toits nati or ies under
a guarantee it has assumed in respect of an investment in the territory of the other
Contracting Party, the latter Contracting Party shall, without prejudice to the rights
of the former Contracting Party under article 9, recognize the assignment, whether
under a law or pursuant to a legal transaction, of any right or claim from such
national or company to the former Contracting Party. The latter Contracting Party
shall also recognize the reasons for and extent of the subrogation of the former
Contracting Party to any such right or claim which that Contracting Party shall be
entitled to assert to the same extent as its predecessor in title. As regards the transfer
of payments by virtue of such assignment, article 5 shall apply mutatis mutandis.

 

Article 7

(1) If the legislation of either Contracting Party or obligations under interna-
tional law existing at present or established hereinafter between the Contracting
Parties in addition to this Treaty contain a regulation, whether general or specific,
entitling i by nati or ies of the other C g Party toa
treatment more favourable than is provided for by this Treaty, such regulation shall,
to the extent that it is more favourable, take precedence over this Treaty.

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

1996 United Natlons — Treaty Series _¢ Nations Unies — Recueil des Traltés 201

 

(2) Each Contracting Party shall observe any other obligation it may have
entered into with regard to investments in its territory by nationals or companies of
the other Contracting Party.

Article 8

This Treaty shall also apply to matters arising after ii its entry into force i in con-
nection with i of either Party
consistent with the laws nd regulations of the other Contracting Party i in the terri-
tory of the latter prior to the entry into force of the Treaty.

Article 9

(1) Disputes between the Contracting Parties relating to the interpretation or
application of this Treaty shall, as far as possible, be settled by negotiations between
the Governments of both Contracting Parties.

(2) If a dispute cannot be thus settled, it shall, at the request of either Con-
tracting Party, be submitted to an arbitral tribunal.

(3) The arbitral tribunal shall be established on an ad hoc basis. Each Con-
tracting Party shall appoint one member and these two members shall, by agree-
ment, designate a national of a third State as chairman who shall be appointed by
the Governments of the two Contracting Parties. The members shall be appointed
within two months and the chairman within three months after either Contracting
Party informed the other Party of its intention to submit the dispute to an arbitral
tribunal.

(4) If the time-limits provided for under paragraph 3 are not met, and in the
absence of any other agreement, either Contracting Party may request the President
of the International Court of Justice to make the necessary appointments. If the
President is a national of either Contracting Party or is otherwise prevented from
discharging the said function, the appointments shall be made by the Vice-President.
If the Vice-President is also a national of either Contracting Party or is also pre-
vented from discharging the said function, the appointments shall be made by the
member of the Court next in seniority who is not a national of either Contracting
Party.

(5) The arbitral tribunal shall take its decisions by a majority of votes. Its
decisions shall be binding. Each Contracting Party shall defray the costs of the
arbitrator it has appointed and of its representation in the arbitral proceedings. The
costs of the chairman and the remaining costs shall be defrayed in equal parts by the
two Contracting Parties. In all other respects, the tribunal shall determine its own
procedure.

(6) If both Contracting Parties are also parties to the Convention on the set-
tlement of investment disputes between States and nationals of other States of
18 March 1965,' the arbitral tribunal provided for above may, in consideration of the
provisions of article 27, paragraph 1, of the said Convention, not be appealed to
insofar as agreement has been reached between the national or company of one
Contracting Party and the other Contracting Party under article 25 of the Conven-
tion. This shall not affect the possibility of appealing to such arbitral tribunal in the

' United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 575, p. 159.
Vol. 1910, 1-32538

202 United Nations — Treaty Series ¢ Nations Uuies — Recueil des Traités 1996

 

event that a decision of the arbitral tribunal established under the said Convention
(article 27) is not complied with.

Article 10

(1) Disputes concerning investments within the meaning of this Treaty be-
tween one of the Contracting Parties and a national or company of the other Con-
tracting Party shall as far as possible be settled amicably between the parties to the
dispute.

(2) If a dispute within the meaning of paragraph | cannot be settled within
six months from the date on which one of the parties concerned gave notice of the
dispute, it shall, at the request of either party, be submitted to the competent courts
of the Contracting Party in whose territory the investment was made.

(3) The dispute may be submitted to an international arbitral tribunal in any
of the following circumstances:

(a) At the request of one of the parties to the dispute where, after a period of
18 months has elapsed from the moment when the judicial process provided for by
paragraph 2 of this article was initiated, no final decision has been given or where a
decision has been made but the Parties are still in dispute;

(b) Where both parties to the dispute have so agreed.

(4) In the cases provided for by paragraph 3 above, disputes between the
Parties within the meaning of this article shall be referred by mutual agreement,
when the parties to the dispute have not agreed otherwise, either to arbitral pro-
ceedings under the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of Other States of 18 March 1965 or to an ad hoc arbitral
tribunal established under the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law.

If there is no agreement after a period of three months has elapsed from the
moment when one of the Parties requested the initiation of the arbitration proce-
dures, the dispute shall be submitted to arbitration procedures under the Convention
on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other
States of 18 March 1965 provided that both Contracting Parties are parties to the
said Convention. Otherwise, the dispute shall be submitted to the above-mentioned
ad hoc arbitral tribunal.

(5) The arbitral tribunal shall issue its ruling in accordance with the provisions
of this Treaty, with those of other treaties existing between the Parties, with the laws
in force in the Contracting Party in which the investments were made, including its
tules of private international law, and with the general principles of international
law.

(6) The arbitration decision shall be binding and both Parties shall implement
it in accordance with their legislation.

Article 11

The provisions of this Treaty shall remain fully in force even in the cases pro-
vided for by article 63 of the Vienna Convention on the law of treaties of 23 May
1969.

! United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1155. p. 331.
Vol, 1910, 132538

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 203

 

Article 12

(1) This Treaty shall be ratified; the instruments of ratification shall be
exchanged as soon as possible in Buenos Aires.

(2) This Treaty shall enter into force one month after the date of the exchange
of instruments of ratification. It shall remain in force for a period of 10 years and
shall be extended thereafter for an unlimited period unless either Contracting Party
gives written notification to the other of its intention to terminate the Treaty
12 months before its expiration. After 10 years, the Treaty may be denounced at any
time by giving 12 months’ notice.

(3) Investments made prior to the date of termination of this Treaty shall
continue to be protected by the provisions of articles | to 11 for an additional period
of 15 years from such date.

Done at Bonn on 9 April 1991 in two originals in the German and Spanish
languages, both texts being equally authentic.

of German:
GENSCHER

For the Federal Republic
y:

For the Argentine
Republic:

Gurpo pt TELLA

Vol. 1910, 132538

204 United Nations —. Treaty Series ¢ Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

 

PROTOCOL

(With the signing of the ¢ Treaty between the e Federal Republic of Germany and
of Invest-
meats. the undersigned Slempowntares have me on the following provisions,
which shall be regarded as an integral part of the said Treaty:

(1) Ad article 1:

(@) As far as article 4 paragraph lis concerned, this Treaty shall not apply to

in the A by who are of the other

Contracting Party if Bch individuals, on the date of the original investment, have
been domiciled for more than two years in the Argentine Republic, unless it is
proved that such investments originate from abroad.

 

(b) Returns from an investment and, in the event of their re-investment, the
returns therefrom shall enjoy the same protection as the original investment.

(c) The other forms of participation mentioned in article 1, paragraph | (b),
shall refer in particular to those capital investments which do not confer voting or
controlling rights on their holder.

(@ The claims to money referred to in article 1, paragraph 1 (c), include claims
arising from loans relating to an investment that, by virtue of its purpose and
amounts, has the nature of a participation (quasi-participatory loans). However,
they shall not include third-party loans such as bank loans at market rates.

(e) Without prejudice to any other methods of determining nationality, in par-
ticular, any person in possession of a national passport issued by the competent
authorities of the Contracting Party concerned shall be deemed to be a national of
that Party. This Treaty shall not apply to investors who are nationals of both Con-
tracting Parties.

(f) Inorder to determine whether the term “companies” is applicable in accord-
ance with the provisions of article 1, paragraph 4, account shall be taken of the seat
of such companies, which shall mean the place where the company has its main
place of management.

(g) The Treaty shall also apply to areas of the exclusive economic zone and
continental shelf over which international law grants to the Contracting Party con-
cerned rights of sovereignty or jurisdiction.

(2) Ad article 3:

(a) The following shall more particularly, though not exclusively, be deemed
“activity” within the meaning of article 3, paragraph 2: the management, utilization,
use and enjoyment of an investment. The following shall more particularly, though
not exclusively, be deemed “treatment less favourable” within the meaning of arti-
cle 3: less favourable measures that affect the purchase of raw materials and other
inputs, energy or fuel, or means of production or operation of any kind or the mar-
keting of products inside or outside the country. Measures that are adopted for
reasons of internal or external security or public order, public health or morality
shall not be deemed “treatment less favourable” within the meaning of article 3.

(b) The provisions of article 3 do not obligate a Contracting Party to extend tax
privileges, exemptions and relief accorded only to natural persons and companies
Vol. 1910, 1-32538

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 205

 

resident in its territory, in accordance with its tax laws, to natural persons and
companies resident in the territory of the other Contracting Party.

(c) The Contracting Parties shall within the framework of their national legisla-
tion give favourable consideration to applications for the entry and sojourn of per-
sons of either Contracting Party who wish to enter the territory of the other Con-
tracting Party in connection with an investment; the same shall apply to nationals of
either Contracting Party who, in connection with an investment, wish to enter the
territory of the other Contracting Party and sojourn there to take up employment.
Applications for work permits shall also be given favourable consideration.

(3) Ad article 4:

Aclaim to compensation shall also exist when, as a result of the adoption of any
one of the measures referred to in article 4 against the company in which the invest-
ment is made, such investment is severely impaired.

(4) Ad article 5:

A transfer shall be deemed to have been made “without delay” within the
meaning of article 5, paragraph 2, if effected within such period as is normally re-
quired for the completion of transfer formalities. The said period shall commence on
the day on which the relevant request has been formally submitted and may on no
account exceed two months.

(5S) Ad article 8:

This Treaty shall in no case apply to complaints or litigation which arose before
it entered into force.

(6) Whenever goods or persons connected with an investment are to be trans-
ported, neither Contracting Party shall exclude or hinder transport companies of the
other Contracting Party. Permits to carry out such transport in accordance with the
tules of international agreements in force between the two Contracting Parties shall
be issued as required.

Done at Bonn on 9 April 1991, in duplicate in the German and Spanish lan-
guages, both texts being equally authentic.
For the Federal Republic
of Germany:
GENSCHER
For the Argentine
Republic:
Gupo pi TELLA

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

206 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

 

[TRANSLATION — TRADUCTION]
EXCHANGES OF NOTES
la
EMBASSY OF THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC

Bonn, 9 April 1991

Sir,

With the signing of the Treaty on the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection
of Investments of 9 April 1991, the Government of the Argentine Republic has the
honour to inform the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany of the fol-
lowing:

Under the General Treaty of cooperation and friendship of 1988! and the Treaty
for the of a special 1987,2 , the
Kingdom of Spain and the Italian Republic grant to the Rete Republic conces-
sional lines of credit for financing investments, especially for the purpose of creating
joint ventures in the small and medium-size business sector.

Financing applications for each project shall be authorized in accordance with
special Argentine regulations and shall later be decided with the Spanish or Italian
counterpart, as the case may be.

In return, the Argentine Republic has undertaken:

— To grant customs and tax exemptions for imports of goods for investment
financed with concessional lines of credit provided for by the respective
Treaties.

— Not to take any measures to prevent the repatriation of invested capital or the
free transfer of returns from venture capital for any projects financed in accord-
ance with the provisions of the aforementioned Treaties.

These special conditions are granted for the purpose of facilitating new invest-
ments for Argentina’s economic development in areas which it is deemed especially
vital to promote.

The Contracting Parties shall interpret article 3 of the Treaty on the Encourage-
ment and Reciprocal Protection of Investments to mean that the most-favoured-
nation clause shall not refer to the special conditions and privileges that the Argen-
tine Republic grants to foreign investors in respect of the aforementioned projects.

The Argentine Republic shall ensure that the competitiveness of those German
investors and their investments that are not subject to the aforementioned special
conditions is not substantially affected.

' United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1546, p. 3.
2 [bid., vol. 1537, p. 307.

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 207

Accept, Sir, etc.

Gu1bo Di TELLA
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Worship

His Excellency

Mr. Hans D. Genscher
Minister for Foreign Affairs
Federal Republic of Germany
Bonn

Vol. 1910, 1.32538

208 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

 

Ila
Bonn, 9 April 1991
THE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS
422-413.35 ARG
Sir,
Ihave the honour to acknowledge receipt of the note dated 9 April 1991 from
the Argentine Government, which reads as follows:
[See note Ia]
Accept, Sir, etc.
GENSCHER
His Excellency

The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Worship
Mr. Guido di Tella

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 209

 

Ib
THE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Bonn, 9 April 1991
422-413.35 ARG
Sir,

With the signing of the Treaty on the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection
of Investments between our two countries dated 9 April 1991, I have the honour to
inform you of the following:

Following the entry into force of the aforementioned Treaty and taking into
account the principle established in article 5 thereof on the free transfer of capital
and returns, the German authorities have the option, upon the submission by inter-
ested investors of a request for guaranteeing an investment in Argentina, of pro-
viding full ge for such ii in with the pi gnide-
lines and general conditions. Therefore, starting from the entry into force of this
Treaty, such authorities may, in addition to the guarantees already available, grant
guarantees with respect to the sums derived from investments during a given period
such as shares in profits, dividends and interests.

Accept, Sir, etc.

 

GENSCHER

His Excellency
The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Worship
of the Argentine Republic

Mr. Guido di Tella

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

210 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

lb
MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND WORSHIP
Bonn, 9 April 1991
Sir,

Ihave the honour to acknowledge receipt of the note of the Government of the
Federal Republic of Germany dated 9 April 1991, the text of which reads as follows:
[See note Ib]

Accept, Sir, etc.

Gu1po pt TELLA
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Worship

His Excellency

Mr. Hans D. Genscher
Minister for Foreign Affairs

of the Federal Republic of Germany
Bonn

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series _* Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 2It

 

[TRADUCTION — TRANSLATION]

TRAITE! ENTE LA REPUBLIQUE FEDERALE D’ ALLEMAGNE ET
LA REPUBLIQUE ARGENTINE RELATIF A LA PROMOTION
ET ALA PROTECTION RECIPROQUE DES INVESTISSEMENTS

La République fédérale d’A etla
Désireuses d’ intensifier la coopération économique entre les deux Etats,

créer des iti les aux ii i des
et des sociétés de chacun deux sur le territoire de I’autre,

 

que la etla ion de ces i par voie
de traité sont de nature & stimuler |’initiative pissennd privée et 4 accroitre la
prospérité des deux peuples,

Sont convenues de ce qui suit :

Article 1°
Aux fins du présent Traité :

1. Le terme « investissements » désigne tout type d’ activité défini en accord
avec les lois et réglementations de la Partie contractante sur le territoire de laquelle
l'investissement a été réalisé conformément au présent Traité; en particulier sont
compris, non limitativement

a) La propriété des biens meubles et immeubles, ainsi que tous autres droits
réels tels qu’ hypothéques et gages;

5) Les actions, droits de participation a des sociétés et autres formes de partici-
pation a des sociétés;

c) Les créances portant sur des sommes d'argent servant a créer une valeur
économique ou portant sur toute prestation 4 valeur économique;

d) Les droits de la propriété intellectuelle, en particulier les droits d’auteur, les
brevets, les modéles d’utilité, les dessins et modéles industriels et commerciaux, les

ues, les noms commerciaux, les secrets industriels et commerciaux, les pro-
cédés techniques, les savoir-faire et la survaleur incorporelle (« goodwill »);

e) Les concessions accordées par des entités de droit public, y compris les
concessions de prospection et d’exploitation.

2. Le terme « revenus » désigne les sommes rapportées par un investissement,
en particulier participations aux bénéfices, dividendes, intéréts, droits de licence et
autres rémunérations.

3. Le terme « nationaux » désigne :

a) Ence qui concerne la République fédérale d’ Allemagne : les Allemands aux
sens de la Loi fondamentale de la République fédérale d’ Allemagne;
' Bntré en vigueur le 8 novembre 1993, soit un mois aprés I'échange des instruments de ratification, qui a eu liew &
Buenos Aires le 8 octobre 1993, conformément au paragraphe 2 de l'article 2.
Vol. 1910, 132538

212 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

 

b) En ce qui concerne la République argentine : les Argentins au sens des dis-
positions légales en vigueur en Argentine.

4. Leterme « sociétés » désigue toutes les personnes morales ainsi que toutes
les sociétés commerciales et autres sociétés ou associations dotées ou non de la
personnalité juridique dont le siége est situé sur le territoire de l’une des Parties
contractantes, que leur activité soit lucrative ou non.

Article 2

1) Chacune des Parties contractantes encouragera les investissements sur son
territoire par des nationaux ou des sociétés de l'autre Partie contractante et les
admettra conformément & ses lois et réglementations. En tout état de cause, elle
traitera les investissements de maniére juste et équitable.

2) Les investissements effectués par des nationaux ou des sociétés de l’une
des Parties contractantes sur le territoire de l'autre Partie contractante en accord
avec les lois et réglementations de cette derniére bénéficieront de la pleine protec-
tion du présent Traité.

3) Aucune des Parties contractantes ne préjudiciera sur son territoire, par des
mesures arbitraires ou discriminatoires, a ]’administration, a l'utilisation, a l’usage
ou & la jouissance des investissements de nationaux ou sociétés de |’autre Partie
contractante.

Article 3

1) Aucune des Parties contractantes ne soumettra sur son territoire les inves-
tissements des nationaux ou sociétés de |’autre Partie contractante ou les investisse-
ments Is ceux-ci aun moi! que celui con-
senti aux investissements de ses propres nationaux et sociétés ou de ceux d’Etats
tiers.

 

2) Aucune des Parties contractantes ne soumettra sur son territoire les inves-
tissements des nationaux ou sociétés de |’autre Partie contractante, s’agissant de
leurs activités liées aux investissements, 4 un traitement moins favorable que celui
accordé & ses propres nationaux et sociétés ou aux nationaux et sociétés d’Etats
tiers.

3) Ce traitement ne couvrira pas les avantages ou priviléges qu’une Partie
contractante accorde aux nationaux ou aux sociétés d’Etats tiers en raison de leur
appartenance a une union douaniére ou économique, a un marché commun ou a une
zone de libre-échange.

4) Le traitement prévu dans le présent article ne s’appliquera pas aux avan-
tages que l'une des Parties contractantes accorde aux nationaux et sociétés d’Etats
tiers en conséquence d’un accord visant a éviter la double imposition ou autre
accord fiscal.

Article 4

1) Les investissements des nationaux ou sociétés de chacune des Parties con-
tractantes benéficieront d’une pleine protection et d'une pleine sécurité juridique
sur le territoire de l’autre Partie contractante.

2) Les investissements de nationaux ou sociétés d’une Partie contractante ne
pourront pas, sur le territoire de l'autre Partie contractante, étre expropriés ou natio-

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series ¢ Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 213

nalisés, ou faire I’ objet d’autres mesures dont les effets équivaudraient a une expro-
priation ou & une nationalisation, sauf pour cause d’utilité publique, et alors avec
indemnisation. L’indemnisation devra correspondre a la valeur de l’investissement
exproprié immédiatement avant la date de l’annonce publique de |’expropriation
« effective ou imminente », de la nationalisation ou de la mesure équivalente, L’in-
demnité devra étre versée sans retard et portera intéréts jusqu’a la date du paiement
au taux d’intérét bancaire usuel; elle devra étre effectivement réalisable et librement
transférable. La légalité de l’expropriation, de la nationalisation ou autre mesure
équivalente, ainsi que le montant de |’indemnisation, devront pouvoir étre revues
dans le cadre des procédures judiciaires ordinaires.

3) Les nationaux ou sociétés d’une Partie contractante dont les investisse-
ments subissent des pertes 4 cause d’une guerre ou autre conflit armé, d’une révo-
lution, d’un état d’urgence nationale ou d’une insurrection qui se produit sur le
territoire de I’autre Partie contractante ne seront pas traités par celle-ci moins favo-
rablement que ses propres nationaux ou sociétés quant a la restitution, 4 la compen-
sation, a l’indemnisation ou autre forme de dédommagement. Les versements cor-
respondants devront étre librement transférables.

4) S’agissant des questions régies par le présent article, les nationaux ou
sociétés de chacune des Parties contractantes bénéficieront sur le territoire de
l'autre du traitement de la nation la plus favorisée.

Article 5

1) Chaque Partie contractante garantira aux nationaux ou sociétés de l’autre
Partie contractante le libre transfert des paiements liés 4 un investissement, s’agis-
sant en particulier :

a) Ducapital et des fonds additionnels nécessaires au maintien ou a l’augmen-
tation de l’investissement;

b) Des revenus;

c) De l’'amortissement des préts définis a I'alinéa c du paragraphe 1* de I’ar-
ticle 1°;

d) Du produit de la vente ou liquidation totale ou partielle de l'investissement;

e) Des indemnités visées a l’article 4.

2) Le transfert s’effectuera sans retard en accord avec les procédures établies
sur le territoire de chaque Partie contractante et selon les modalités de change appli-
cables dans chaque cas. Ces modalités de change ne devront pas différer substan-
tiellement du taux de change croisé (cross rate) résultant des modalités de change
qu’appliquerait le Fonds monétaire international si, a la date du paiement considéré,
il était amené a convertir en droits de tirage spéciaux des sommes libellées dans la
monnaie des pays intéressés.

Article 6

Si l'une des Parties contractantes fait des paiements au bénéfice de ses natio-
naux ou de ses sociétés en vertu d’une garantie accordée pour un investissement
effectué sur le territoire de |’autre Partie contractante, celle-ci, sans préjudice des
droit conférés 4 la premiére Partie contractante par |’article 9 du présent Traité,
reconnaitra la cession de tous les droits ou créances de ces nationaux ou sociétés 4
la premiére Partie contractante, par voie soit de disposition légale, soit d’acte juri-

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

214 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

 

dique. De méme, |’ autre Partie contractante reconnaitra, en substance et en portée,
la subrogation de la premiére Partie contractante dans tous les droits du précédent
titulaire. S’agissant de transfert des paiements au titre de droits transférés, |’article 5
s’appliquera mutatis mutandis.

Article 7

1) Si les dispositions légales de I’une ou I’autre Partie contractante ou des
obligations résultant du droit international et non envisagées dans le présent Traité,
actuelles ou futures, entre les Parties contractantes, conduisent a une réglementa-
tion générale ou spéciale imposant d’accorder aux investissements des nationaux ou
sociétés de l’autre Partie contractante un traitement plus favorable que celui prévu
dans le présent Traité, cette réglementation prévaudra sur le présent Traité pour
autant qu’elle soit plus favorable.

2) Chacune des Parties contractantes s’acquittera de tout autre engagement
qu’elle aura éventuellement contracté en rapport avec les investissements de natio-
naux ou sociétés de |’autre Partie contractante sur son territoire.

Article 8

Le présent Traité s’appliquera également aux questions qui pourraient se poser
aprés son entrée en vigueur en rapport avec des investissements effectués par les
nationaux ou sociétés d’une des Parties contractantes conformément aux lois et
réglements de l'autre Partie contractante sur le territoire de cette derniére avant
l’entrée en vigueur du Traité.

Article 9

1) Les différends éventuels entre les Parties contractantes concernant |’ inter-
prétation ou I’application du présent Traité devront, dans la mesure du possible, étre
téglés par les gouvernements des deux Parties contractantes.

2) A supposer qu’un différend entre les Parties contractantes ne puisse pas
tre réglé de cette manieére, i] sera soumis a un tribunal arbitral sur demande de l’une
des Parties contractantes.

3) Le tribunal arbitral sera constitué sur une base ad hoc : chaque Partie con-
tractante nommera un membre du tribunal, et les deux membres ainsi nommés
choisiront d’un commun accord comme président un national d’un Etat tiers qui
sera nommé par les gouvernements des deux Parties contractantes. Les membres
seront nommés dans le délai de deux mois et le président dans le délai de trois mois
aprés que l'une des Parties contractantes aura communiqué 4 l’autre son désir de
soumettre le différend a un tribunal arbitral.

4) Si les délais spécifiés au paragraphe 3 n’ont pas été observés et faute
d’autre arrangement, chacune des Parties contractantes pourra inviter le Président
de la Cour internationale de Justice 4 procéder aux nominations nécessaires. Au cas
ou le Président serait un national de l’une des Parties contractantes ou s’il était
empéché pour une autre raison de s’acquitter de cette fonction, il reviendrait au
Vice-Président de la Cour de procéder aux nominations. Si ce dernier lui-méme est
un national de l’une des Parties contractantes ou s’il est empéché, il reviendra au
membre de la Cour venant immédiatement 8 la suite dans I’ ordre hiérarchique et qui
n’est pas un national de |’une des deux Parties contractantes de procéder aux nomi-
nations.

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 215

 

5) Le tribunal arbitral prendra ses décisions a la majorité des voix. Les déci-
sions seront obligatoires. Chaque Partie contractante prendra a sa charge les frais
découlant des activités de son arbitre, ainsi que les frais de sa représentation dans la
procédure arbitrale; les frais du président et les autres frais seront pris en charge A
parts égales par les Parties contractantes. Pour le reste, le tribunal arbitral arrétera
sa propre procédure.

6) Si les deux Parties contractantes ont en outre la qualité d’Etat contractant
par rapport a la Convention du 18 mars 1965! pour le réglement des différends
relatifs aux investissements entre Etats et ressortissants d’autres Etats!, il ne
pourra, eu égard au paragraphe | de l'article 27 de cette Convention, étre recouru au
tribunal arbitral visé plus haut quand le national ou la société d’une Partie contrac-
tante et l'autre Partie contractante seraient arrivés 4 un accord conformément &
l'article 25 de la Convention. II ne sera affecté la possibilité de recourir au tribunal
arbitral visé plus haut au cas od une décision du Tribunal arbitral institué par ladite
Convention (article 27) ne serait pas respectée.

Article 10

1) Les différends qui pourraient surgir entre une Partie contractante et un
national ou une société de |’autre Partie contractante en rapport avec les investisse-
ments au sens du présent Traité devront, autant que possible, étre réglés a l’amiable
par les parties au différend.

2) Siun différend au sens du paragraphe | ne peut étre réglé dans le délai de
six mois 4 compter de la date a laquelle une des parties au différend I’a soulevé, il
sera soumis a la demande de |’ une des parties aux tribunaux compétents de la Partie
contractante sur le territoire de laquelle l’investissement a été effectué.

3) Le différend pourra étre soumis a un tribunal arbitral international dans
l'un quelconque des cas suivants :

a) Ala demande de lune des parties au différend, en l’absence d’une décision
au fond dans le délai de dix-huit mois 4 compter de la mise en route de la procédure
judiciaire visée au paragraphe 2 du présent article, ou bien lorsqu’une décision a été
rendue mais que le différend persiste entre les parties;

b) Lorsque les deux parties au différend en ont ainsi convenu.

4) Dans les cas prévus au paragraphe 3 du présent article, les différends entre
les parties, au sens du présent article, seront soumis d’un commun accord, sauf
convention contraire entre les parties au différend, soit 4 une procédure arbitrale
dans le cadre de la Convention du 18 mars 1965 pour le réglement des différends
relatifs aux investissements entre Etats et ressortissants d’autres Etats, soit 4 un
tribunal ad hoc institué conformément aux régles de la Commission des Nations
Unies pour le droit commercial international (CNUDCI).

Si, dans le délai de trois mois 4 compter du moment od |’une des parties a
demandé la mise en route de la procédure arbitrale, un accord n’est pas intervenu, le
différend sera soumis 4 une procédure arbitrale dans le cadre de ladite Convention
du 18 mars 1965 pour autant que les deux Parties contractantes soient également
parties 4 cette convention. Dans I’hypothése contraire, le différend sera soumis au
tribunal arbitral visé plus haut.

' Nations Unies, Recueil des Traités, vol. 575, p. 159.
Vol. 1910, 1-32538

216 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

 

5) Le tribunal arbitral rendra sa décision sur la base du présent Traité et, le cas
échéant, sur la base des autres traités en vigueur entre les Parties contractantes, du
droit interne de la Partie contractante sur le territoire de laquelle l'investissement a
été effectué, y compris ses normes de droit international privé, et des principes
généraux du droit international.

6) La sentence arbitrale sera obligatoire et chaque Partie l’exécutera confor-
mément a sa législation.

Article 11

Les dispositions du présent Traité resteront pleinement applicables y compris
dans les cas prévus a !’article 63 de la Convention de Vienne sur le droit des traités
en date du 23 mai 1969!.

Article 12

1) Le présent Traité sera ratifié; les instruments de ratification en seront
€changés dés que possible 4 Buenos Aires.

2) Le présent Traité entrera en vigueur un mois aprés la date a laquelle il aura
été procédé a I’échange des instruments de ratification. La durée de sa validité sera
de dix ans et il sera ensuite indéfiniment prorogé, sauf notification écrite adressée
par une Partie contractante a l’autre Partie contractante de son intention d’y mettre
fin, effectuée douze mois avant la date d’expiration. Au bout de dix ans, le Traité
pourra étre dénoncé a tout moment sur préavis de douze mois.

3) Pour ce qui est des investissements effectués avant la date de l’abrogation
du présent Traité, les dispositions des articles 1° 4 1] leur resteront applicables
pendant les quinze années suivant cette date.

Fart a Bonn le 9 avril 1991 en deux originaux, en langues allemande et espa-
gnole, les deux textes faisant également foi.

Pour le Gouvernement
de la République fédérale d’ Allemagne :
GENSCHER
Pour le Gouvernement
de la République argentine :
Guipo pI TELLA

' Nations Unies, Recueil des Traités, vol. 1155, p. 331.
Vol. 1910, :-32538

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unles — Recueil des Traités 217

 

PROTOCOLE

Au moment de signer le Traité entre la République fédérale d’ Allemagne et la
relatif Ala etalap des inves-
tissements, les plénipotentiaires soussignés ont adopté les dispositions ci-aprés,
considérées comme faisant partie intégrante du Traité.
1) Ad article premier :
a) En ce qui concerne le paragraphe | dudit article, le présent Traité ne s’ap-
pliquera pas aux réalisés en par des
physiques ayant la qualité de national de l'autre Partie contractante siles intéressés
ient, a la date de l’investissement originel, domiciliés depuis plus de deux ans en
République argentine, sauf 4 prouver que l’investissement provient de |’ étranger.

b) Les revenus des investissements et, le cas échéant, du réinvestissement de
ces revenus bénéficieront de la méme protection que |’investissement initial.

c) Par « autres formes de participation », au sens de l’alinéa b du paragraphe |
de l'article 1°, seront entendus en particulier les apports de capitaux qui ne con-
férent aux intéressés ni droit de vote, ni contréle.

d) Les créances sur les sommes visées a l’alinéa c du paragraphe | de l’arti-
cle 1 couvrent les créances au titre de préts liés 4 une participation et qui, par leur
cause et leur montant, ont le caractére d’une participation (préts quasi participatifs).
Elles ne s’entendent pas toutefois des crédits accordés par des tiers (par exemple,
des crédits bancaires 4 clauses commerciales).

e) Sans préjudice des autres modes de détermination de la nationalité, sera
notamment considérée national d’une Partie contractante toute personne détentrice
d'un passeport national délivré par les autorités compétentes de ladite Partie con-
tractante. Le présent Traité ne s'appliquera pas aux investisseurs qui ont la natio-
nalité des deux Parties contractantes.

Ff) Pour déterminer si la notion de « société » au sens des dispositions du para-
graphe 4 de l’article 1* est applicable, il sera tenu compte du siége, & savoir le lieu od
se trouve l’administration principale de la société.

8) Le Traité s’appliquera également aux secteurs de la zone économique exclu-
sive et du plateau continental sur lesquelles le droit international confére a la Partie
contractante concernée des droits de souveraineté ou de juridiction.

2) Ad article 3:

a) Par « activités » au sens du paragraphe 2 de l’article 3, sont notamment, mais
non | r usage et | la j
@un it i Sera mais non imitati « traite-
ment moins favorable » au sens de l'article 3 une mesure moins favorable affectant
Vacquisition de matiéres premiéres et d’autres facteurs de production, d’énergie ou
de combustibles, ainsi que les moyens de production ou d’exploitation de toute
catégorie ou la vente de produits dans le pays méme et a I’étranger. Ne seront pas
considérées « traitement moins favorable » au sens de I’article 3 les mesures prises
pour des motifs de sécurité intérieure ou extérieure et d’ ordre public, de santé publi-
que ou de moralité.

b) Les dispositions de l’article 3 ne font pas obligation 4 une Partie contrac-
tante d’accorder aux personnes physiques et aux sociétés résidant sur le territoire
Vol. 1910, 1-32538

 

218 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

 

de l’autre Partie contractante les avantages, exemptions et abattements fiscaux qui,
en vertu du droit fiscal, sont accordés aux seules personnes physiques et sociétés
résidant sur le territoire de la premiére Partie contractante.

c) Les Parties contractantes, en se conformant & leurs dispositions légales, ins-
truiront avec bienveillance les demandes de permis dentrée et de séjour sur leur
temitoire présentées par des ressortissants de |’une des Parties contractantes qui, en

apport avec un investissement, souhaitent entrer sur leur territoire; il sera procédé
de méme pour les salariés ressortissants d’une Partie contractante qui, en rapport
avec un investissement, souhaitent entrer et séjourner sur le territoire de l’autre
Partie contractante pour y exercer leur activité salariée. De méme, les demandes de
permis de travail seront instruites avec bienveillance.

3) Adarticle 4:

Ily aura également droit a indemnisation au cas oii serait prise une quelconque
mesure visée a l'article 4 a l’égard de !’entreprise dans laquelle l’investissement est
situé et sil’i i subit un préjudice grave en q de cette mesure.

4) Adarticle5:

Le transfert est tenu pour réalisé « sans retard » au sens du paragraphe 2 de
l'article 5 quand il a eu lieu dans le temps normalement requis pour accomplir les
formalités de transfert. Le délai, qui ne pourra en aucun cas excéder deux mois,
courra & partir du moment de la présentation de la demande officiellement complete.

5) Adarticle 8 :

Le Traité ne s’appliquera en aucun cas aux réclamations et litiges survenus
avant son entrée en vigueur.

6) S’agissant des transports de marchandises et de personnes liés a des inves-
tissements, les Parties contractantes n’excluront pas et ne géneront pas leurs entre-
prises de transport respectives et, en cas de besoin, elles délivreront les autorisations
requises pour effectuer les transports dans des conditions répondant aux normes
des accords internationaux en vigueur entre elles.

Farr a Bonn le 9 avril 1991 en deux exemplaires en langues allemande et espa-
gnole, les deux textes faisant également foi.

 

Pour le Gouvernement
de la République fédérale d’ Allemagne :

GENSCHER
Pour le Gouvernement
de la République argentine :
Gurpo pi TELLA

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series ¢ Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 219

 

ECHANGES DE NOTES
la
AMBASSADE DE LA REPUBLIQUE ARGENTINE

Bonn, le 9, avril 1991

Monsieur le Ministre,

A’occasion de la signature du Traité du 9 avril 1991 relatif @ la a promotion. eta
la des le Gouve
argentine a l’honneur de communiquer ce qui suit au Gouvernement de la Répu-
blique fédérale d’ Allemagne :

Sur la base, respectivenient, du Traité d’amitié et de coopération de 1988! et du
Traité de 1987 relatif a1" ‘établissement de relations de collaboration particuliéres?, le
Royaume d’Espagne et la italienne
des lignes de crédit concessionnel dont l'objet est de oak les investissenients
tendant a la réalisation d’investissements, plus particuligremient en vue de créer des
coentreprises dans le secteur de la petite et moyenne entreprise.

Les demandes de financement de chaque projet considéré doivent étre auto-
risées conformément aux réglementations argentines spéciales et sont ensuite con-
venues avec la partie espagnole ou, le cas échéant, italienne.

En contrepartie, la République argentine s’est engagée :

— A exempter des droits de douane et de |’impét les importations de biens des-
tinées & des investissements financés au moyen des crédits concessionnels pré-
vus dans les traités correspondants;

— A n/’adopter aucune mesure propre a géner le rapatriement du capital investi ou
le libre transfert des revenus d’investissemuents a risque s’agissant des projets
financés conforménment aux dispositions desdits traités

Ce régime spécial vise a rendre possibles de nouveaux investissements tendant

dans des d dont la p

 

est particuliérement ood

Les Parties contractantes interprétent I’article 3 du Traité relatif 4 la promotion
et a la protection réciproque des investissements dans le sens que la clause de la
nation la plus favorisée ne couvre pas les conditions et priviléges spéciaux que la
République argentine accorde aux investisseurs étrangers aux fins des projets sus-
mentionnés.

La République argentine fera en sorte que les investisseurs et les investisse-
ments allemands qui ne relévent pas des conditions spéciales dont il vient d’étre
question ne soient pas substantiellement affectés sur le plan concurrentiel.

' Nations Unies, Recueil des Traités, vol. 1546, p. 3.
2 Ihid., vol. 1537, p. 307.

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

220 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

Je saisis cette occasion, etc.
Le Ministre des relations extérieures
et du culte,
Gu1po pi TELLA

Son Excellence

Monsieur Hans D. Genscher
Ministre des affaires étrangéres

de la République fédérale d’ Allemagne
Bonn

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 221

Ila
LE MINISTRE DES AFFAIRES ETRANGERES
Bonn, le 9 avril 1991
422-413.35 ARG

Monsieur le Ministre,

J’ai ’honneur d’ accuser réception de la note du Gouvernement de la Répu-
blique argentine en date du 9 avril 1991 qui se lit ainsi :

[Voir note I a]
Je saisis cette occasion, etc.
GENSCHER
Son Excellence
Monsieur Guido di Tella

Ministre des relations extérieures et du culte
de la République argentine

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

222 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

ib
LE MINISTRE DES AFFAIRES ETRANGERES

Bonn, le 9 avril 1991

422-413.35 ARG
Monsieur le Ministre,

A occasion du Traité relatif 4 la promotion et a la protection réciproque des
investissements signé ce jour entre nos deux pays, j’ai l’honneur de vous commu-
niquer ce qui suit :

A partir de l’entrée en vigueur dudit Traité et compte tenu du principe établi par
son article 5 au sujet du libre transfert des capitaux et des revenus, les autorités
allemandes envisagent la possibilité, sur présentation de la part des investisseurs
concernés d’une demande de garantie d’investissement en Argentine, de couvrir en
totalité ces investissements conformément aux directives et conditions générales en
vigueur. Cela étant, a partir de l’entrée en vigueur du Traité, ces autorités pourront,
outre les garanties actuellement possibles, accorder des garanties couvrant les som-
mes résultant d’un investissement pendant une durée déterminée, en particulier les
participations aux bénéfices, les dividendes et les intéréts.

Je saisis cette occasion, etc.

GENSCHER
Son Excellence
Monsieur Guido di Tella .

Ministre des relations extérieures et du culte
de la République argentine

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 223

 

‘lb
MINISTERE DES RELATIONS EXTERIEURES ET DU CULTE

Bonn, le 9 avril 1991

Monsieur le Ministre,

Jai ’honneur d’accuser réception de la note du Gouvernement de la Répu-
blique fédérale d’ Allemagne en date du 9 avril 1991 qui se lit ainsi :

[Voir note Ib]
Je saisis cette occasion, etc.

Le Ministre des relations extérieures
et du culte,

GuIpo pi TELLA

Son Excellence

Monsieur Hans D. Genscher
Ministre des affaires étrangéres

de la République fédérale d’ Allemagne
Bonn

Vol. 1910, 1-32538


Decision on Jurisdiction
Hochtief Aktiengesellschaft v. Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/07/31)

Appendix II

 

TRATADOS

Ley 24.342

Apruébase el tratado sobre Promocién y Proteceién Reciprocas de Inversiones
suscripto con la Republica de Chile y el Acuerdo por Canje de Notas
Modificatorio.

Sancionada: Junio 9 de 1994.

Promulgada: Julio 4 de 1994,

B.O.: 11/07/97 :

El Senado y-Cémara de Diputados de la Nacién Argentina reunidos en Congreso, etc.
sancionan con fuerza de Ley:

ARTICULO 1° -Apruébase el TRATADO ENTRE LA REPUBLICA ARGENTINA Y
LA REPUBLICA DE CHILE SOBRE PROMOCION Y PROTECCION
RECIPROCAS DE INVERSIONES, suscripto en Buenos Aires el 2 de agosto de 1991,
que consta de once (11) articulos y un (1) Protocolo, y el ACUERDO POR CANJE DE
NOTAS MODIFICATORIO DEL TRATADO ENTRE LA REPUBLICA
ARGENTINA Y LA REPUBLICA DE CHILE SOBRE PROMOCION Y
PROTECCION RECIPROCA DE INVERSIONES, suscripto en Buenos Aires el 13 de
julio de 1992, cuyas fotocopias autenticadas forman parte de la presente ley.

ARTICULO 2° -Comuniquese al Poder Ejecutivo Nacional.-ALBERTO R. PIERRI.-
FAUSTINO MAZZUCCO.- Esther H. Pereyra Arandia de Pérez Pardo. - Juan J. Canals

DADA EN LA SALA DE SESIONES DEL CONGRESO ARGENTINO, EN BUENOS
AIRES, A LOS NUEVE DIAS DEL MES DE JUNIO DEL ANO MIL
NOVECIENTOS NOVENTA Y CUATRO.

TRATADO ENTRE

LA REPUBLICA ARGENTINA

Y

LA REPUBLICA DE CHILE .

SOBREPROMOCION Y PROTECCION RECIPROCA DE INVERSIONES

La Repitblica Argentina y la Reptblica de Chile, denominadas en adelante "las Partes
Contratantes".;

Animadas del deseo de i i la colab i émica entre ambos Estados,
Con el propésito de crear condici para las i i de los nacional

0 sociedades de uno de los dos estados en el territorio del otro Estado, que impliquen
transferencias de capitales, :

 

 

i que lap ién y la proteccién de esas inversi diante un
tratado pueden servir para estimular la iniciativa econémica privada e incrementar el
bienestar de ambos pueblos,

 

> RNDRALC taReUe?
APUMLICAS
JA INGLES
TX Fast
8c. 9198

 

 

 

 

 

Han convenido lo siguiente:
ARTICULO 1

Definiciones

Para los fines del presente Tratado:

(1) El concepto "inversiones" designa, de conformidad con el ordenamierito juridico del

- pafs receptor, todo tipo de bienes que el inversor de una Parte Contratante invierte en el

territorio de la otra Parte Contratante de acuerdo con la legislacién de ésta, en particular,
pero no exclusivamente:

a) la propiedad de bienes muebles e inmuebles y demas derechos reales, como hipotecas
y derechos de prenda;

b) acciones, derechos de participacién en sociedades y otros tipos de participaciones en
sociedades, como también la capitalizacién de utilidades con derecho a ser transferidas
al exterior;

c) obligaci 0 créditos di inculados a una it 16 1
contrafdos y documentados segin las disposiciones vigentes en el pafs donde esa
inversién-sea reafizada;

d) derechos de propiedad intelectual como , en especial, derechos de autor, patentes,
disefios y modelos industriales y comerciales, procedimientos tecnolégicos, know how
y valor Ilave;

e) concesiones otorgadas por entidades de derecho. pubblico, incluidas las concesiones de
prospeccién y explotacién.

Ninguna modificacién de la forma juridica segin la cual Jos activos y capitales hayan
sido i i idos afectard su califi de acuerdo con el
presente Tratado.

 

2. El concepto “ganancias o rentas" designa las sumas obtenidas de una inversién en un
perfodo determinado, tales como las participaciones en los beneficios, los dividendos,
los intereses, los derechos de licencia u otras remuneraciones.

3. El concepto "nacionales" designa:

a) con referencia a la Republica de Chile:

los chilenos en el sentido de la Constitucién Polftica de la Reptiblica de Chile;

b) con referencia a la Repiiblica Argentina:

los argentinos en.el sentido de las disposiciones legales vigentes en la Argentina.

4. El concepto “sociedades" designa todas las personas juridicas, constituidas conforme
con la legislacién de una Parte Contratante y que tengan su sede en el territorio de dicha
Parte Contratante, independientemente de que su actividad tenga o no fines de lucro.

5. No obstante lo establecido en el apartado 3 de este articulo, las disposiciones de este
Tratado sol se aplicarin a los nacionales de una Parte C: que no estén

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

domiciliados por mas de dos afios en el territorio de la Parte Contratante donde la
inversién se realizé y que prueben que las inversiones provienen del extranjero.

6. El término "territorio" designa, ademas de las 4reas enmarcadas en los limites
ferrestres ymaritimos, las zonas marinas y submarinas, en las ouales las Partes

 

ejercen derech yb y jurisdi a sus resp
vepleotonee y al derecho internacional.
ARTICULO 2

Promocién y Proteccién de las inversiones -

1. Cada una de las Partes Contratantes promoveré las inversiones dentro de su territorio
de nacionales 0 sociedades de la otra Parte Contratante y las admitiré de conformidad
con sus disposiciones legales vigentes. En todo caso tratar4 las inversiones justa y
equitativamente.

2. Gozarén de la plena proteccién del Tratado las inversiones que, de acuerdo con las
disposiciones legales de una de las Partes Contratantes, hayan sido realizadas en el
Ambito de la ley de esta Parte Contratante por nacionales 0 sociedades de la otra Parte
Contratante.

3. Ninguna de las Partes C judicaré en su territorio la admini: i
utilizacién, el uso o el goce de las i inversiones de nacionales o sociedades de la otra
Parte Contratante a través de medidas arbitrarias o discriminatorias.

ARTICULO 3
Trato nacional y clausula de 1a Nacién m4s favorecida

1, Ningunia de las Partes Contratantes someterd en su territorio a las inversiones de
nacionales o sociedades de la otra Parte Contratante o a las inversiones en las que
mantengan participaciones los nacionales 0 sociedades de la otra Parte Contratante, a-un
trato menos favorable que el que se conceda a las inversiones de los propios nacionales
y sociedades o a las ii de les y sociedades de terceros Estados.

2. Ninguna de las Partes Contratantes someterd en su territorio a los nacionales 0
sociedades de la otra Parte Contratante, en cuanto se refiere a sus actividades
relacionadas con las inversiones, a un trato menos favorable que a sus propios
nacionales y sociedades 0 a los nacionales y sociedades de terceros Estados.

3. Dicho trato no se refiere a los privilegios que una de las Partes Contratantes conceda
alos nacionales y sociedades de terceros Estados por formar parte de una unién
aduanera o‘econémica, un mercado comtin o una zona de libre comercio, o a causa de su
asociacién con tales agrupaciones.

Dicho trato no se refiere tampoco a los privilegios acordados por una Parte Contratante
a los nacionales 0 sociédades de un tercer Estado por una inversién realizada en el
marco de un financiamiento concesional previsto por un tratado bilateral entre dicha
Parte Contratante y el pafs al que pertenecen los citados inversores.

4, El trato acordado por el presente articulo no se refiere a las ventajas que una de las
Partes.Contratantes conceda a los nacionales.o sociedades de terceros Estados como

 

 

 

 

 

 

consecuencia de un acuerdo para evitar la doble imposicién o de otros acuerdos sobre
asuntos tributarios.

ARTICULO 4

Nacionalizacién y si
1, Las inversiones de nacionales 0 sociedades de una de las Partes Contratantes gozarin
de plena proteccién y seguridad juridica en el territorio de la otra Parte Contratante.

2. Las inversionés de nacionales o sociedades de una de las Partes Contratantes no
podran, en el territorio de.la otra Parte Contratante, ser expropiadas, nacionalizadas, o
sometidas a otras medidas que en sus efectos equivalgan a expropiacién o
nacionalizacién, salvo por ley fundada en causas de utilidad publica o de bien comin, y
deberin en tal caso ser previamente indemnizadas. La indemnizacién deber&

al valor de la i antes de la fecha de
hacerse publica la expropiacién efectiva o inminente, la nacionalizacién o la medida
equivalente.

 

 

 

 

La indemnizacién deberd set e lizable y lib ible. La
legalidad de la piacién, nacionalizacién o medida equival y el monto de la
i izacién, deberdn ser revisables en procedimiento judicial ordinari

3. Los nacionales o sociedades de una de las Partes Contratantes que suftan pérdidas cn
sus inversiones por efecto de guerra u otro conflicto armado, revolucién, estado de
emergencia nacional o motin en el territorio de la otra Parte Contratante, no seran
tratados por ésta menos favorablemente que sus Propios nacionales o sociedades enlo

 

 

u otros
Estos pagos deberin ser libremente transferibles.
ARTICULO 5
Transferencias
1, Cada Parte Contratante garantizaré alos nacionales 0 sociedades de la otra Parte
Ci la libre de los pagos dos con una i en
particular:

a) del capital y de las sumas adicionales para el mantenimiento o ampliacién.de la
inversién de capital:

b) de las ganancias o rentas;

c) de la amortizacién de los préstamos definidos en el inciso c) del parrafo 1 del articulo
1; ‘
d) del producto de la venta o liquidacién total-o parcial de la inversién;

¢) de las indemnizaciones previstas en el articulo 4.

2. La transferencia se efectuard sin demora de acuerdo a los procedimientos establecidos
en el territorio de cada parte Contratante, en moneda de libre convertibilidad y a la
cotizacién vigente en cada caso, que deberd ser equivalente al tipo de cambio mas
favorable.

 

 

 

 

ts

DRA | ae

 

tee
“aX BY ane
|e. ares

3.Una transferencia se considera realizada sin demora cuando sé ha efectuado dentro
det plazo para el de las fo lidades de
transferencia. El plazo, que en ningiin caso podré exceder de dos meses, comenzara a
correr en el momento de entrega de la correspondiente solicitud, debidamente
presentada.

ARTICULO 6

Subrogacién

1. En el caso de que una Parte Contratante o una de sus instituciones hubiera concedido
una garantia contra riesgos no comerciales por inversiones efectuadas por uno de sus
nacionales 0 sociedades en el territorio de la otra Parte Contratante y haya efectuado
Ppagos a base de la garantia otorgada, dicha Parte Contratante o la institucién seri
reconocida subrogada de derecho en Ja misma posicién de crédito del inversor cubierto
por la garantfa. Para los pagos a realizarse en beneficio de la Parte Contratante o de su
institucién a base de dicha subrogacién, se aplicardn respectivamente los articulos 4 y 5
del presente Tratado.

2. Los nacionales o sociedades tendr4n derecho a demandar o hacerse parte en las
acciones ya iniciadas, en orden a proteger los restantes derechos que-puedan reclamar y
que no hayan sido subrogados. De esta forma, habiéndose reclamado, se aplicaré el
procedimiento establecido en el Art. 10.

ARTICULO 7
Aplicacién de otras normas mis favorables

1, Si de las disposiciones legales de una de las Partes Contratantes 0 de las obligaciones
emanadas del derecho internacional: no contempladas en el presente Tratado, actuales o
futuras, entre las Partes Contratantes, resultare una reglamentacién general ° especial en
virtud de la cual deba alasi i de los naci la
otra Parte Contratante un trato mas favorable que el previsto en el presente anton
dicha reglamentacién prevalecer4 sobre el presente Tratado, en cuanto sea mas
favorable.

2, Cada Parte C Lir4 cualquier otro con iso que haya {do con
relacién a las inversiones de nacionales o sociedades de la otra Parte Contratante en su
tertitorio.

ARTICULO 8

Ambito de aplicacién

1. El presente Tratado se ° aplicaré a las inversiones que se realicen a partir de su entrada
en vigor por naci dades de una Parte Ci en el territorio de Ia otra.
No obstante, también eneficiard a las inversiones realizadas con anterioridad a su
vigencia y que, segin la legislacién de la respectiva Parte Contratante, estuvieren.
Tregistradas como inversién extranjera.

 

2. No se aplicara, sin emb: alas i 1 i surgidas 0 I
con anterioridad a su entrada en vigor, o relacionadas con hechos acaecidos con
anterioridad a su vigencia o referidas a la mera permanencia de tales situaciones
preexistentes.

 

 

 

 

 

ARTICULO 9
Solucién de controversias entre Estados

1. Las controversias que surgieren entre las Partes Contratantes sobre la interpretacién 0
aplicacién del presente Tratado deberdn, en lo posible, ser dirimidas amigablemente por
los Gobiernos de ambas Partes Contratantes.

2. Si una controversia no pudiere ser dirimida de esa manera, ser4 sometida a in
tribunal arbitral a peticién de una de las Partes Contratantes.

3. El tribunal arbitral ser4 constituido ad-hoc; cada Parte Contratante nombraré. un
miembro, y los dos miembros se pondrin de acuerdo para elegir como presidente a un
nacional de un tercer Estado que ser4 nombrado por los Gobiéernos de ambas Partes
Contratantes, Los miembros seran nombrados dentro de un plazo de dos meses, el
Presidente dentro de un plazo de tres meses, después de que una de las Partes
Contratantes haya comunicado a la otra que desea someter la controversia a una tribunal
arbitral.

4. Si los plazos previstos en el parrafo 3 no fueren observados, y a falta de otro acuerdo,
cada Parte Contratante podré invitar al Presidente de la Corte Internacional de Justicia a
proceder a los nombramientos necesarios. En caso de que el presidente sea nacional de
una de las Partes Contratantes 0 se halle impedido por otra causa, corresponderé al

id efectuar los bramii Siel Vi id también fuere nacional
de una de las dos Partes Contratantes o si se hallara también impedido, corresponderé al
miembro de la Corte que siga inmediatamente en el orden jerarquico-y no sea nacional
de una de las Partes Contratantes, efectuar los nombramientos.

5. Bl tribunal arbitral tomard sus decisiones.por mayoria de votos. Sus decisiones son

ias. Cada Parte C 4 los gastos ionados por la actividad
de su 4rbitro, as{ como los gastos de su representacién en el procedimiento arbitral; los
gastos del presidente, asi como los demis gastos, seran sufragados por partes iguales
por las dos Partes Contratantes.

 

Por lo demas, el tribunal arbitral determinar4 su propio procedimiento.

6. Si ambas Partes Contratantes fueren también Estados Contratantes del Convenio
sobre Arreglo de Di i entre Estados y Nacionales de
otros Estados del 18 de marzo de 1965, no se podr4, en atencién a la disposicién del
parrafo 1 del artfculo 27 de dicho Convenio, acudir al tribunal arbitral arriba previsto
cuando el nacional o la sociedad de una Parte C y la otra Parte €

hayan Ilegado a un acuerdo conforme al artfculo 25 del Convenio. No quedaré afectada
la posibilidad de acudir al tribunal arbitral arriba previsto en el caso de que no se respete
una decisién del Tribunal de Arbitraje del mencionado Convenio (articulo 27), o en el
caso de subrogacién conforme a lo establecido en el articulo 6 del presente Tratado.

ARTICULO 10
Solucién de controversias relativas a inversiones

1, Toda controversia relativa a las inversiones, en el sentido del presente Tratado, entre
una Parte Contratante y un nacional o sociedad de 1a otra Parte Contratante ser, en la

1
|
i
i

 

Dia, YAR

RANPUeLIOA,
la. 1NaI

 

 

 

 

 

 

medida de lo posible, solucionada por consultas amistosas entre las dos partes en la
controversia.

2. Si la controversia no hubiera podido ser solucionada en el término de seis meses‘a
partir del momento en que hubiera sido planteada por una u otra de las partes, ser
sometida, a pedido del nacional o sociedad.

- o biena las jurisdicci ionales de la Parte Ci implicada en la
controversia;

- o bien al arbitraje internacional en las condiciones descriptas en el parrafo 3.

Una vez que un nacional o sociedad haya sometido la controversia a Jas jurisdicciones.
de la Parte Contratante implicada o al arbitraje internacional, la eleccién de uno u otro
de esos procedimientos seré definitiva.

3. En caso de recurso al arbitraje internacional la controversia podra ser Ilevada ante
uno de los érganos de arbitraje designados a continuacién a eleccién del nacional o
sociedad:

- al Centro ional de Arreglo de Diferencias Relativas a i (C.L A.D.
1), creado por el "Convenio sobre Arreglo de Diferencias Relativas a las Inversiones
entre Estados y Nacionales de otros Estados", abierto a la firma en Washington el 18 de
marzo de 1965, cuando cada Estado parte en el presente Convenio haya adherido a
aquél, Mientras esta condicién no se cumpla, cada Parte Contratante da su

i para que la sea ida al arbitraje con el
Reglamento del Mecanismo Complementario del C. I. A. D. L;

 

 

~ aun tribunal de arbitraje ad-hoc establecido de acuerdo con las reglas de arbitraje de la
Comisién de las Naciones Unidas para el Derecho Mercantil Internacional (C. N. U. D.
M.L).

4. El érgano arbitral decidir4 en base a las disposiciones del presente Tratado, al
derecho de 1a Parte Contratante que sea parte en la controversia -incluidas las normas
relativas a conflictos de leyes- y a los términos de eventuales acuerdos particulares
concluidos con relacién a la inversién como asi también a los principios del derecho
internacional en la materia,

5. Las sentencias arbitrales serdn definitivas y obligatorias para las partes en la
controversia,

- 6. Las Partes Contratantes se abstendran de tratar, a través de los canales diplomaticos,
argumentos concemientes al arbitraje © aun proceso judicial ya en marcha hasta que los
. bieren sido

 

 

luidos, salvo que las partes en la
controversia no ‘bubieren cumplido el taudo del tribunal arbitral o la sentencia del
tribunal ordi segun los términos de 0 blecidos en el Jaudo o.en la
sentencia.
ARTICULO 11

Entrada en vigor, Duracién y Vencimiento

1. El presente Tratado ser ratificado; los i de ratificacién serAn canjead
lo antes posible en Santiago, Chile.

 

: A ‘yARELE

wantice
i Ae a

 
 

 

 

2. El presente Tratado entrar4 en vigor un mes después de la fecha en que se haya

* efectuado el canje de los instrumentos de ratificacién. Su vigencia ser4 de diez afios y se

prolongar4 después por tiempo indefinido, a menos que fuera denunciado por escrito
por una de las Partes Contratantes doce meses antes de su expiracién..Transcurridos
diez afios, el Tratado podré denunciarse en cualquier

momento, con un preaviso de doce meses.

3. Las disposiciones del presente Tratado continuarén siendo plenamente aplicables aun
en los casos previstos por el articulo 63 de la Convencién de Viena sobre:el Derecho de
los Tratados del 23 de mayo de 1969.

4. Para las inversiones realizadas antes de la fecha de terminacién de! presente Tratado,
las disposiciones de los artfculos 1 a 10 seguirdn rigiendo durante los quince afios
subsiguientes a la fecha de su terminacién.

Hecho en Buenos Aires, el dos de agosto de mil novecientos noventa y uno en dos
ejemplares originales, siendo ambos igualmente auténticos.

POR EL GOBIERNO DE LA REPUBLICA ARGENTINA
GUIDO DI TELLA

DOMINGO F. CAVALLO

POR EL GOBIERNO DE LA RREPUBLOCA DE CHILE

 

 

 

ENRIQUE SILVA CIMMA
CARLOS OMINAMI
PROTOCOLO
En el acto de la firma del Tratado entre la Repiiblica Atgentina y la Reptiblica de Chile
sobre P y Pr i ip del i los Plenip ios han

do ademas las sigui disposici que se i parte ii del
Tratado: .

1) Ad Artfculo 3, punto 3

En el caso que una de las Partes celebrare en el futuro un Acuerdo de asociacién con

una unién aduanera o econémica, un mercado comtin o una Zona de Libre Comercio, se
la introduccién de una modi: ién ala in del articulo 3, punto 3,

parrafo 1. .

2) Ad Articulo 4

Para los efectos de las causas en que se puede fundar la ley que afecte la propiedad, las
Partes entienden que el concepto de bien comin comprende las causales previstas en sus
Tespectivos ordenamientos juridicos vigentes.

3) Ad Articulo 5

No obstante las disposiciones del articulo 5, la Repiiblica de Chile garantizaré el
derecho de iacién del capital i por inos, después de

 

|
i

 

 

 

 

 

transcurrido el plazo de tres afios, desde su internacién, previsto en el Decreto Ley N°
600 de 1974:

Lo dispuesto en el inciso anterior estar4 vigente mientras lo esté el plazo previsto, en el
referido Decreto Ley.

Buenos Aires, 2 de agosto de 1991.
POR LA REPUBLICA ARGENTINA.
GUIDO DI TELLA

DOMINGO F. CAVALLO

POR LA REPUBLICA DE CHILE
ENRIQUE SILVA CIMMA.
CARLOS OMINIMI

 

 

TRADUCCION PUBLICA / CERTIFIED TRANSLATION...

 

AGI ITS,

Law 24,342

 

An Agreement for the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments, entered into with the
Republic of Chile and a Note Exchange Agreement are hereby approved...

 

Enacted: June 9, 1994.

 

 

Promulgated: July 4, 1994.

Official Gazette: 07/11/97.

 

The Senate and the House of Representatives of the Republic of Argentina, assembled in Congress,
etc., enact as a Law:

 

ARTICLE J — The AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF ARGENTINA AND THE
REPUBLIC OF CHILE FOR THE RECIPROCAL PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF
INVESTMENTS, entered into in Buenos Aires on August 2, 1991, comprising eleven (11) articles
and one (1) Protocol, and the NOTE EXCHANGE AGREEMENT, amending the AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF ARGENTINA AND THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE FOR THE
RECIPROCAL PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS, entered into in Buenos
Aires, on July 13, 1992, are hereby approved, authenticated copies of which are an integral part of
this law.

ARTICLE 2 — Be it communicated to the National Executive Branch - ALBERTO R. PIERRL.-
FAUSTINO MAZZUCCO.- Esther H. Percyra Arandia de Pérez Pardo.- Juan J. Canals... a

 

GIVEN AT THE SESSION ROOM OF THE ARGENTINE CONGRESS, IN BUENOS AIRES,
ON THIS JUNE 9, 1994.

TREATY BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF ARGENTINA AND THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE ON
THE RECIPROCAL PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS...

 

The Republic of Argentina and the Republic of Chile, hereinafter referred to as the “Parties";......

 

Willing to strengthen the economic cooperation between both States; ..

With the purpose of creating favorable conditions for the investments of the nationals or companies
of one the two States in the territory of the other State, that may imply transfers of capitals; ........

A ing that the ion and ion of the said ii under an can
contribute to the encouragement of private economic initiative and increase in the welfare of both
States.

et

Rane

 

 

 

 

 

unt
pe aie

Have agreed as follows:

 

ARTICLE 1D

Under this Treaty:

 

(1) “Investments": means, under the laws of the receiving party, any kind of assets that the investor
of one Party may invest in the territory of the other Party, pursuant to the laws of the latter,
including but not limited to:.

a) the ownership of real and personal property and further real rights, such as mortgages and
pledges;

 

b) shares, corporate participation rights and other kinds of corporate interests, and also the
capitalization of profits qualifying to be transferred abroad...

 

c) obligations or credits directly related to an investments, regularly assumed or taken and
documented pursuant to the provisions in force in the country where the relevant investment is
made;

d) intellectual property rights such as copyright, patents, industrial and commercial designs and
models, know-how and goodwill;

 

) economic concessions conferred by public law entities, including the concessions for the

No amendment to the legal manner under which the assets and copitals have been invested or
reinvested shall affect their eligibility as investments under this Treaty. ...

 

2. “Income or profit”: means all the amounts resulting from an investment within a certain Period,
such as profit sharing, dividends, interest, license fees or other compensation.

 

3. “Nationals”: means:

>a) with refe to the Republic of Chile:

Chileans as the said word is defined under the Political Constitution of the Republic of Chile;
with to the Republic of Ar; :

b) Argentines as defined by the legal provisions in force in the Republic of Argentina.............0i

 

4. “Companies”: means any legal entity, organized under the laws of a Party and having its Place of
business in the territory of the said Party, whether its business is for profit or not....

 

5. The provisions of subparagraph 3 of this article notwithstanding, the provisions of this Treaty
shall only apply to the nationals of one Party who are not domiciled over two years in the territory

 

 

Lo we of the Party where the investment was made and who may prove that the investments originate
‘ane rove’, "ye abroad
. ‘

 

6. "Territory": means, in addition to the areas falling under the land and maritime boundaries, the
maritime and submarine zones, where the Parties may exercise, under their respective laws and the
at ional Law, ign or jurisdictional rights.

ARTICLE 2 P: ion and Pi ion of

1. Each Party shall promote in its territory the investments of the nationals or companies. of the
“other Party, and shall admit the said investments pursuant to its laws and regulations. Each Party
shall at any time treat investments fairly and equitably. ......

 

2. Those investments which, under the legal provisions of one Party, shall have been made under
the law of that Party by nationals or companies of the other Party shall be fully protected under this
Treaty.

 

3. No Party shall impair in its territory the management, use, utilization or enjoyment of the
investments of nationals or companies of the other Party through arbitrary or discriminatory.

 

ARTICLE 3 National treaty and most favored nation provision.....

 

1. Neither Party shall treat in its territory the investments of the nationals or companies of the other

Party or the investments in which the nationals or companies of the other Party may have interests,

less favorably than the investments of its own nationals and companies or the investments of
i and companies of third States

2. Neither Party shall in its territory treat the nationals or companies of the other Party, as regards
their activities related to the investments, less favorably than its own nationals and companies or
the nationals and ics of third States.

3. The said treatment does not refer to the privileges that one of the Parties may grant to the
nationals and companies of third States because they are party to.a customs or economic union, or a
common market or a free trade area, or because of their association with the said groups..........0.0

The said treatment does not refer either to the privileges granted by a Party to the nationals or
companies of a third State because of an investment made in under a concessional financing laid
down in a bilateral treaty between the said Party and the country to which the investors belong to.

 

4. The treatment given under this article does not refer to the advantages that one of the Parties may
grant to the nationals or companies of third States by virtue of an agreement to avoid double
taxation or other t: lated

ARTICLE 4 Expropriation, nationalization and inary si

 

i
\
i
{
j
i
:

 

 

 

 

 

 

1, The investments of nationals or companies of one Party shall enjoy full protection and legal
safety in the territory of the other Party......

 

2. The investments of nationals or companies of one Party may not, in the territory of the other
Party, be exp or itted to other whose effects are equivalent to
expropriation or nationalization, save in case of a law founded on public good or common welfare,
and must in that case be previously compensated, The compensation must match the value of the
expropriated investment immediately before the date the Public expropriation is made effective or
the

or the qui’ measure t

The compensation must be actually practical and freely transferable. The legality of the
expropriation, nationalization or equivalent measure, and the amount of the compensation must
subject to review in an ordinary judicial proceeding.

 

3. The nationals or companies of one Party whose investments may sustain losses as result of war
or other armed conflict, revolution, national emergency or riot in the territory of the other Party,
shall not be treated by the latter less favorably than its own nationals or companies as regards
refunds, compensation, indemnification or any other redress. These payments must be made freely

 

ARTICLE 5 Transfers.

1. Each Party shall guarantee the nationals or companies of the other Party the unrestricted transfer
of the payments related to an investment, including but not limited to:

 

a) the capital and the additional amounts necessary for the maintenance and expansion of the
capital i
b) the income or profits;

c) the repayment of the loans defined in Article 1, subparagraph c);...

 

d) the proceeds derived from the sale or total or partial liquidation of an investment;

 

) the compensation set forth in Article 4,.....

 

 

2. The transfer shall be made forthwith following the procedures set in the territory of each Party,
in freely convertible currency and at the prevailing rate of exchange on a case by case basis, which
must be equivalent to the most ible rate of excl

3. A transfer shall be considered to have been made forthwith when it has been made within the
time frame normally required for the compliance with the transfer formalities. The time frame,
which in no case may exceed two months, shall begin upon delivery of the duly submitted relevant

ARTICLE 6 Subrogati

 

 

 

 

 

 

1, If one Party or one of its entities shall have granted a guaranty against non-business risks for
investments made by one of its nationals or companies in the territory of the other Party and shall
have made payments on the basis of the guaranty granted, the said Party or entity shall be admitted
as a law subrogate ranking for claim purposes in the same position as the investor covered by the
guaranty. For payments to be made for the benefit of the Party or its entity on the basis of the said

subrogation, articles 4 and 5 of this Treaty shall be respectively applied.
'

 

2. The nationals or companies shall be entitled to sue or become a party to the actions already filed,
so as to protect the remaining rights that they may claim and that have not been subrogated. In this.
case, if claims have been filed, the procedure set forth in article 10 shall be followed. .

 

ARTICLE 7 Application of other most tules.

1, If under the provisions of the laws of one Party or the obligations of both Parties arising from

International Law that are not provided by this Treaty, now existing or that may be adopted in
future, there arises a general or special regulation by virtue of which the investments of the
nationals or companies of the other Party must be given a treatment more favorable than the one set
forth in this Treaty, the said regulation shall prevail on this Treaty, to the extent it is more

 

ARTICLE 8 Appli

1, This Treaty shall apply to the investments made as from its effective date by nationals or
companies of one Party in the-territory of the other Party. However, it shall also benefit those
investments made prior to its effective date and which, under the laws of the respective Party, may
be regi: das foreign i .

2. It shall not apply, however, to the disputes or claims arising or settled prior to its effective date,
or related to events occurred prior to its effective date or related to the mere continuation of such

ARTICLE 9 Settlement of disputes between States .....

 

 

1. Any dispute that may arise between the Parties regarding the interpretation or application of this
Treaty shall, as far as practical, be settled in a friendly manner by the Governments of both Parties.

2. If a dispute may not be settled as mentioned above, it shall be submitted, upon the request of one
Party, to an arbitration panel

3. The said arbitration panel shall be organized ad hoc; each Party shall appoint one member, and

the two members shall, upon mutual. agreement, appoint a national of a third State, to be appointed ©

by the governments of both Parties, as chairman. The members shall be appointed within a period
of two months; the chairman, within a period of three months, following notice from one Party to
the other of its decision to submit the dispute to an arbitration panel.

 

4, If the time periods laid down in paragraph 3 above are not met, and in the absence of any other
agreement, each Party may invite the President of the International Court of Justice to proceed with

|
i
|

 

 

 

 

 

se

the necessary appointments. If the President were a national of one of the Parties or when, he is
otherwise prevented from serving as such, the Vice President shall be invited to proceed with the
necessary appointments. If the Vice President were also a national of any of the Parties, or if he
were also prevented from serving as such, the member of the International Court of Justice that

_ tanks immediately junior to him and is not a national of any of the Parties, shall be invited to

proceed with the necessary app

5. The arbitration panel shall adopt its decisions by majority of votes. Its decision shall be binding
upon both Parties. Each Party shall pay the expenses arising from the performance of its arbitrator,
as well as the exp of its ion in the arbi The of the Chairman, and

_ the other expenses shall be paid in principle in equal shares by both Parties, In other respects, the

tt panel shall d ine its own p

6. If both Parties were also Member States under the Agreement on the Settlement of Differences
related to investments between States and Nationals of other States dated March 18, 1965, it shall
not be possible, by virtue of the provisions of paragraph 1, article 27 of the said Agreement, to
resort to the arbitration mentioned above when the national or the company of a Party and the other
Party shall have reached an agreement under article 25 of the Agreement. The possibility to resort
to the arbitration panel provided above shall not be impaired if a decision of the Arbitration Panel
under the aforementioned Agreement (article 27) is not observed, or in the case of subrogation
pursuant to the provisions of article 6 of this Treaty. .......

 

ARTICLE 10 Settl of disputes ding
1. Any dispute related to the investments under this Treaty, between a Party and a national or
company of the other Party shall, as far as possible, be settled by friendly negotiations between the
two parties to the dispute.

 

2. If the dispute shall not have been settled within the term of six months as from the time it has
been raised by either party, it may be submitted upon request of the national or company: ...........

- to the national jurisdictions of the Party involved in the dispute;

 

- or to ii ional arbitration in the conditions described in p h (3).

Once a national or company has submitted the dispute to the jeriatiction 0 of the Party involved or to
international arbitration, the election of either procedure shall be final. ...

 

3. In case of election of international arbitration, the dispute may be submitted, at the election of the
national or to one of the arbi entities ioned below:

To the International Center for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (I.C.S.1.D.). created under the
"Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other
States", opened to the signature in Washington on March 18, 1965, when éach Member State which
is a party to this Agreement has signed the said Convention. While this condition is not met, each
Party may give its consent for the dispute to be submitted to arbitration pursuant to the Rules of the

 

 

 

supplementary Mechanism of I.C.S.LD. for the management of conciliation, arbitration or

To an “ad hoc” arbitration panel organized pursuant to the arbitration rules of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL).

 

4, The arbitration panel shall render an award on the basis of this Treaty, the right of the Party that
is a party to the dispute, including the rules regarding conflicts of laws and the terms and conditions
of. ional private agr reached in ion with the i and also the princi

of international law in that respect.

 

5. Arbitration awards shall be final and binding upon the parties to the dispute. ........ 00

 

6. The Parties shall refrain from trying, through the diplomatic channels, arguments regarding
arbitration or a judicial proceeding already pending until the relevant proceedings shall have been
completed, unless the parties to the dispute shall have not discharged the arbitration award or the
judgment rendered by the common court, pursuant to the terms for the discharge laid down in the
award or the jud;

ARTICLE 11 Effective date, duration and termination

 

1. This Treaty shall be ratified; ‘the ratification documents shall be exchanged as soon as possible in
Santi Chile.

2. This Treaty shall become in full force and effect one month after the date on which the exchange
of the ratification instruments has been completed. It shall be in full force and effect during ten
years and shall be renewed indefinitely, unless it is waived by either Party twelve months before its
expiration. After the lapse of ten years, the Treaty may be waived at any time, upon twelve month
notice. ‘

3. The provisions of this Treaty shall continue to be applicable even in the cases set forth in article
63 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties dated May 23, 196:

 

4. In connection with those investments made prior to the termination date of this Treaty, the
provisions of Articles | to 10 shall continue in full force and effect during a period of 15 years
Mowing its termination date.

Granted in Buenos Aires, on the 2nd day of August, 1991, in two originals counterparts, both of
them authenti

 

ON BEHALF OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARGENTINA.
Guido Di Tella
Domingo F. Cavallo.

 

 

ON BEHALF OF THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE
Enrique Silva Cimma
Carlos Ominami

 

 

 

PROTOCOL

 

Upon the execution of the Treaty t between the Republic of “Argentina and the Republic of Chile on
Pi and Py of I the iaries have further adopted the
following provisions, which are an integral part of this Treaty: eoseveceoneeses

 

1) In Article 3, item 3.

 

If either Party enters into in the future an Association Agreement with a customs or economic
* union, a common market or a Free Trade Zone, the introduction of an amendment to the exception
*: set forth in article 3 item 3, paragraph 1 shall be agreed.

 

"ay In article 4

 

For purposes of the cases to support the law that may affect property, the Parties understand that the
concept of common welfare comprises the grounds set forth in their respective legal systems. .....

3) In article 5

 

The provisions of article 5 notwithstanding, the Republic of Chile shall guarantee the right of
repatriation of the capital invested by Argentine investors, after the lapse-of three years, following
entrance, set forth in Decree Law No. 600 dated 1974.

 

The provisions of the foregoing subparagraph shall be in full force and effect during the period laid
down in the af d Decree-Law.

Buenos Aires, August 2, 1991

 

ON BEHALF OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARGENTINA.

 

Guido Di Tella

 

Domingo F. Cavallo
ON BEHALF OF THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE........000+4s enscersecesverneaeseeses

  

Enrique Silva Cimma
Carlos Ominimi.

THIS IS A TRUE TRANSLATION into English in 8 pages of | iginaT dgcument in Spanish
language which I have had before and attach hereto, in Buesfosp .

  
     

   
     
    

TeaBUcT@RA puBLics
EN IDIOMA | inaces
A. 1? X FY AST

COLEGIO DE TRADUGTORES PUBLICOS
DE LA CIUDAD DE BUENOS AIRES
Corresponde a la Legaliadcién

ne_ Syn -leres lou’

MAXIMILIANG BAMIAN VARGAS

  

an

 

  

\ 00742144

COLEGIO DE .TRADUCTORES. PUBLICOS
DE LA CIUDAD DE BUENOS AIRES

LEY 20.505

 

Bap = LEGALIZACION:

  

pif presente, ol COLEGIO DE TRADUCTORES PUBLICOS DE LA CIUDAD DE BUENOS AIRES,

er Witud dé la’ facultad que Ie confiereel-artioulo 10, inc: d) de la Lay 20.305, certiica Uinicamente ‘quie ia

firma 'y“el -sello que’ aparecen en la traduccién adjunta, -coricuerdan con los correspondientes

al Traductor Publico VARELA, MARCELA ALEJANDRA IRENE
que obrarten tos fegistros de esta Institucién.enelfolio tomo .
“INGLES oo "487 - 40.

Buenos. Aires, - ° Legalizacién Numero: 16124 / 2004/72

 

Fecha: 21/07/2004

  

F; siGaLOrr
Moarguad Btd. de Lega:z- ‘cited
Cbiegid 48 Traductores Pascoe
Wi ta Cilia do Bones aires

 

TA 0 SE_CONSIDERARA VALIDA SIN EL CORRESPONDIENTE

 

Pursuant to Section 10, Paragraph D of Act 20 305, ‘thie oLeaI0 DE TRADUCTORES PUBLICOS
DE LA CIUDAD DE BUENOS AIRES (Swom Translators Association of the City of Buenos Aires)
nereby certifies that the signature and seal affixed hereto appear to match the specimen signature and
seal of the Traductor Publico (Sworn Translator) whose name is subscribed to the attached translation,
as such specimen. signature and seal are kept on file in our office.

THIS CERTIFICATION IS NOT. VALID MITHQUT THE: STAMP ON THE LAST PAGE OF THE™
ATTACHED TRANSLATION.

Vu par e. COLEGIO DE TRADUCTORES PUBLICOS | DE LA CIUDAD DE BUENOS AIRES (Ordre
de'Tréducteuts' Officials de {a ville dé Buends Altes), an'veitu dés attributions ¢ qui [ui ont 6té accord
par I’article 10, alinéa d) de la Loi n? 20.305, pour la seule légalisation matérielle de la‘ signature et
du.sgeau du. Traductar Publico (Traducteur Officiel) apposés sur la: traduction:du document chjoint, _
qui sont conformes a ceux déposés aux archives de cette Institution.

l Genre APPOSE SUR LA DERNIERE. PAGE.DE.LA TRADUCTION | FERA PREUVE DE.LA
VALIDITE: DE LA LEGALISATION.

Con la presente il COLEGIO DE TRADUCTORES PUBLICOS DE LA CIUDAD DE BUENOS AIRES°
(Collegio dei Traduttori Giurati defla Citta’ di Buenos, Aires) al sensi della facolta conferitagli
dall‘articolo 10; comma d), della Legge 20.305, CERTIFICA, ‘esciusivamente, la firma ed ll timbro dél
Traductor Publico (Traduttore Giurato), apposti in calce alla qui unita traduzione, in conformita alla
firma ed al timbro depositati nei propri registri.

LAPRESENTE LEGAIIZZAZIONE SARA PRIVA DI VALIDITA OVE NON VENGA TIMBRATA NELL'ULTIMO
FOGLIO DELLA TRADUZIONE.

Através da presente 0 COLEGIO DE TRADUCTORES PUBLICOS DE LA CIUDAD DE BUENOS
AIRES (Colégio de Tradutores Publicos da Cidade de’ Buenod ‘Aires); eri vittude das attibuiigdes
conferidas pelo art. 10 inc. d) da Lei 20.305, certifica unicamente, que.a assinatura e o carimbo do
Traductor Publico (Tradutor Publico) que subscreve a tradugado adjunta conferem com a assinatura e
o carimbo arquivados nos registros desta instituigao.

A PRESENTE LEGALIZAGAO SO SERA CONSIDERADA VALIDA COM A CORRESPONDENTE
CHANCELA MECANICA APOSTA NA ULTIMA FOLHA DA TRADUGAO.

Kraft der Befugnis, die ihr: durch Art. 10, Abs. d) im Gesetz 20.305 verliehen wird, bestatigt hiermit der
COLEGIO DE TRADUCFORES: PUBLICOS DE LA CIUDAD DE BUENOS AIRES (Kammer der
Vereidigten Ubersetzer der Stadt. yen Aires) lediglich, dass Unterschrift und Siegel, des Traductor
Publico (Vereidigten | Ubersetzere ‘TAikadenen die beigeftigte Ubersetzung versehen ist, mit den
entsprechenden Registereintragungen:dieser Institution ibereinstimmen.

VORLIEGENDE BEGLAUBIUAG. 1ST UNGULTIG OHNE DEN ENTSPRECHENDEN
GEBUHRENSTEMPEL AUF DEM: LETZTEN BLATT DER BEIGESCHLOSSENEN UBERSETZUNG.

 

 

  
  

