INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the arbitration proceeding between
HOCHTIEF AG

(Claimant)

and

ARGENTINE REPUBLIC

(Respondent)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/07/31)

 

AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal
Professor Vaughan Lowe Q.C, President
Judge Charles N. Brower, Arbitrator
Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, Q.C., Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mrs. Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski

Date of dispatch to the Parties: December 21, 2016

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Claimant

Messrs. Paul F. Doyle and
Philip D. Robben

Kelley Drye & Warren LLP
101 Park Avenue

New York, NY 10178,
United States of America

Representing Respondent

Dr. Carlos Francisco Balbin
Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién
Argentina

Posadas 1641

C1112ADC, Buenos Aires
Argentina

VI.

VIL

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

INTRODUCTION 1
BRIEF PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND ..........ceccescessessesseeseeseeeeseeseeseeseesesssssenseneeneeneenees 1
CLAIMANT’S POSITION 7
RESPONDENT’S POSITION 9
THE TRIBUNAL’S FINDINGS 13
(i) The Interest Rate 14
(ii) Whether the Disolution of PdL and the Consequent Termination of the Concession
Contract Requires the Tribunal to Adjust the Approach Taken in its Decision............ 14
(iii) Estimates of damages: Shareholders’ Cash Flow vs. “Simplified Cash Flow” ............ 21
COSTS 34

 

AWARD 35

iii

FREQUENTLY USED ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

Arbitration Rules

BIT or the Treaty

ICSID Convention

ICSID or the Centre

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings

Treaty between the Federal Republic of
Germany and the Argentine Republic on the
Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of
Investments dated 9 April 1991, that came into
force on 8 November 1993.

Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Between States and Nationals of
Other States dated 18 March 1965

International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes

INTRODUCTION

1. This case concerns a dispute submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) on the basis of the Treaty between the
Federal Republic of Germany and the Republic of Argentina for the Promotion and
Reciprocal Protection of Investments dated 9 April 1991 which entered into force on 8
November 1993. The dispute concerns a concession for the construction of a toll highway
and a bridge between the cities of Rosario and Victoria, and Argentina’s alleged breaches

of Claimant’s rights under the BIT.

2. Claimant is Hochtief Aktiengesellschaft and is hereinafter referred to as “Hochtief” or
“Claimant.”

3. Claimant is a company incorporated under the laws of the Federal Republic of Germany.

4. Respondent is the Argentine Republic and is hereinafter referred to as “Argentina” or

“Respondent.”

5. Claimant and Respondent are hereinafter collectively referred to as the “Parties.” The

Parties’ respective representatives and their addresses are listed above on page (ii).

Il. BRIEF PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

6. On 29 December 2014, in its Decision on Liability', the Tribunal decided that the
Respondent had breached its obligation under Article 2 of the Germany-Argentine

Republic Treaty to grant Claimant fair and equitable treatment, by reason of:

(i) its failure to restore and redress the commercial balance that had been
secured by the Concession Contract, after that balance had been

disrupted by the pesification law on 6 January 2002; and

! The 29 December 2014 Decision on Liability [hereafter the “Decision on Liability”], the 24 October 2011
Decision on Jurisdiction and the Separate and Dissenting Opinion of Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, Q.C., also dated 24
October 2011, in this case are integral parts of this Award. They are annexed to this Award for convenience.

10.

 

(ii) its pesification of operation and maintenance expenses in Resolution

14 of 30 June 2003.
The Tribunal decided that reparation was due in respect of those breaches.”

In respect of the quantum of damages, the Tribunal decided unanimously that Claimant
was entitled to 26% of the damages caused to the Puentes del Litoral S.A. (“PdL”) by the
Respondent, corresponding to its share in the equity of PdL.* It also decided, by a majority,
that such damages were to be assessed as at the date of the Decision on Liability.* The
Tribunal also decided unanimously that interest on sums due to Claimant would be payable
at the rates of short-term US Treasury Bills at the relevant times, compounded quarterly.>

It did not, however, specify precisely what term would be employed.

In terms of calculating the reparation due to Claimant (from 23 May 2003 to 29 December
2014), the Tribunal decided, in paragraphs 315 and 316 of the Decision on Liability, as

follows:

“315. In broad terms, the measure of the damage is the amount by which the value of Claimant's
26% shareholding in PdL was reduced by Respondent’s conduct in violation of the BIT. It is
to be assumed that this amount is equivalent to 26% of the reduction in value of PdL caused by
Respondent’s breaches of the BIT.

316. The main element in the reduction in the value of PdL is the difference between the sums
that PdL actually received from tolls and the sums that it should have received if pesification
had not occurred and if the toll rates had been revised annually in line with the US Consumer
Price Index, as the Concession Contract provided.”

Paragraphs 325 — 328 of the Decision on Liability read as follows (footnote omitted):

325. The Tribunal has accordingly decided that for the purpose of calculating the reparation
due to Claimant in this case, the reduction in value is to be Claimant’s 26% share of the
difference in US dollars between the actual value of PdL at the date of this Decision, and the
value that PdL would have had if all other factors had remained as they stand in the ‘actual
scenario’ except that:

a) Peso-dollar parity had been maintained; and

b) The tolls had been revised in accordance with the US Consumer Price Index, as
ision, para. 336.
ision, para. 307.

ision, para. 336(e).
ision, para. 334.

provided in Article 25 of the Concession Contract;

c) The numbers of each kind of toll payments had been the actual numbers reduced to
take into account the impact of the elasticity of demand as estimated in the lower
bounds of Mr Bates’ report, as indicated by Claimant’s experts in paragraph 109 of
their Second Report (2012) ; and

d) The actual operation and maintenance costs and all other financial liabilities
incurred by PdL, including all of its debts, had not been pesified or reduced in the
insolvency proceedings.

Temporal limitations on recovery

326. As far as the temporal limitations on damages are concerned, as noted above, since the
Respondent has not effected a proper readjustment of the Concession Contract, the actual losses
in the present case begin when the income stream began to be affected, on 23 May 2003,
because no earlier loses [sic] have been proven. Respondent's liability arises from its failure
after the end of the economic crisis to restore PdL to the economic position upon which the
Parties had agreed at the beginning of the Project, and to maintain PdL in that position. That is
a continuing failure, and the losses resulting from it continue to accrue. The Tribunal
accordingly decides by a majority that damages are to be assessed as at the date of this Decision.

 

327. The calculation is therefore to be effected by reference to the reduced value of PdL as it
stands at the date of the Decision. The Tribunal would reject the claims for the recovery of
anticipated losses that may arise after the date of the Award, because the Tribunal has no reason
to suppose that Respondent will ignore the implications of this Decision for its continuing
obligations towards PdL and Claimant. The approach adopted here does not violate that
principle. It is the present value of PdL that has been reduced, albeit by taking into account
present expectations as to the future treatment of the Project. It is that loss in the present value
of PdL that is the basis of the compensation in this Decision.

 

328. The Tribunal accordingly decides that damages are to be assessed as at the date of this
Decision. As noted above, the damages begin when the income stream begins to be affected,
on 23 May 2003.

11. Paragraph 335 of the Decision on Liability provided that:

335. The Tribunal has not been able, on the basis of the information submitted by the Parties.
to calculate the actual sum that results from the application of the principles set out above. This
Decision orders the payment of that sum; and if the Parties are unable to agree within three
months on the actual sum in US dollars payable as a result of this Decision, the Tribunal will
invite each Party to submit, simultaneously and within a further two months, a brief setting out
that Party’s calculation of each element of the sum due in accordance with paragraph 325, and
an explanation of the points on which there is disagreement. The Tribunal will then fix the
actual sum payable.

 

 

 

12. The Parties were unable to agree within the time prescribed on the actual sum payable as a
result of the Decision on Liability, and the Tribunal accordingly set about determining that

amount.

13. By 19 June 2015, in response to a request from the Tribunal, each Party filed its Submission
on Damages.° On 10 August 2015, in accordance with the timetable set by the Tribunal,

each party filed a responsive (Supplemental or Second) Submission on Damages.”

14. As is explained below at paragraph 75, the Tribunal identified what it regarded as a gap in
the information available to it, relating to the indebtedness of PdL. On 1 October 2015, the
Tribunal sought from Claimant additional information in the form of spreadsheets. That
information was provided on 15 October 2015, and in response to an invitation from the
Tribunal, Respondent submitted its comments on the additional information on 30

November 2015.

15. On 19 February 2016, the Tribunal wrote to the Parties to say that it considered that it had
sufficient evidence and submissions on all points except one. That one point was the legal
significance and effect upon the calculation of quantum of the termination of the
Concession Contract on 26 August 2014, which had not been brought to the attention of
the Tribunal until 2015, after the Decision on Liability dated 29 December 2014 had been
issued. The Tribunal regarded that late-discovered development as relevant to the
assumption set out in paragraph 327 of the Tribunal’s Decision on Liability, which has
been set out above.® After a telephone conference with the Parties held on 11 March 2016,
the Tribunal clarified its questions and directions to the Parties in a letter dated 21 March

2016.

16. The Parties submitted their responses to this request on 2 May 2016.° On 12 May 2016,
Respondent wrote to the Tribunal concerning the interest rate employed by Claimant in its

calculations, and by invitation of the Tribunal Claimant responded on 19 May 2016.

6 Hochtief AG’s Submission on Damages dated 19 June 2015 [“Claimant’s Submission (19 June 2015)"];
Submission on Damages pursuant to the Decision on Liability dated 18 June 2015 [“Respondent’s Submission (18
June 2015)"].

7 Hochtief AG’s Supplemental Submission on Damages dated 10 August 2015 [“Claimant’s Submission (10
August 2015)”; Second Submission on Damages Pursuant to the Decision on Liability dated 10 August 2015
[“Respondent’s Second Submission (10 August 2015)”]

8 Para. 10, above.

° Hochtief AG’s Second Supplemental Submission on Damages dated 2 May 2016 [“Claimant’s Submission
(2 May 2016)”; Submission of the Argentine Republic in response to the Tribunal’s Questions of 21 March 2016
[“Respondent’s Submission (2 May 2016)”].

   

 

  

   

 

   
 

17. On 10 November 2016, the Tribunal asked each party to submit an updated statement of

the costs incurred in the arbitration.

 

18. On 16 November 2016, each party filed an updated statement of costs.
19. On 21 November 2016, the Tribunal declared the proceeding closed.
The Tribunal’s Decision on Liability

20. In the operative part of its Decision on Liability of 29 December 2014, paragraph 336, the

Tribunal decided as follows:

336. On the basis of the foregoing, the Tribunal DECIDES as follows:

a. Having already determined (by a majority) that it has jurisdiction over the claims in this
case, the Tribunal concludes, by a majority, that claims made by Claimant in its capacity as
a lender to PdL are i le. All the other objections by dent to the issibi
of Claimant's claims, are rejected;

 

b. As I din 209-288, breached its obli under Article 2
of the BIT to grant to Claimant fair and equitable treatment, by (1) the failure to restore and
redress the commercial balance that had been secured by the Concession Contract, after that
balance had been disrupted by the pesification Law, Law 25,561, on 6 January 2002; and
(2) the pesification of operation and maintenance expenses in Resolution 14 of 30 June
2003, and reparation is due in respect of those breaches;

°

The Tribunal finds that it does not need to resolve Claimant’s claims concerning Full
Protection and Security [BIT Articles 2(1) and 4(1)], expropriation [BIT Article 4(2)],
arbitrary and discriminatory measures, and ‘observance of obligations’ or ‘umbrella clause’,
because they are all based on essentially the same arguments as the claims based upon the
FET standard. As noted under paragraph 291, it has not been argued that these other
standards entail a different approach to causation or to determination of quantum, or to
liability, and the Tribunal considers that these additional grounds for the claims are
adequately addressed by its decisions in respect to the FET standard;

a

As is explained in paragraphs 292-301, Respondent’s submission that the breaches in the
present case can be excused or exculpated by reason of the economic crisis and ‘necessity’
under customary international law, is rejected;

°

Claimant is entitled to 26% of the damages caused to PdL by Respondent, corresponding to
its share in the equity of PdL, and the Tribunal decides, by a majority, that such damages
are to be assessed as at the date of this Decision;

 

The political risk insurance payment that Claimant had arranged with the German
Government should not be deducted from the amount due to Claimant, as explained in
paragraph 309;

Since the Tribunal has not been able, on the basis of the information provided by the Parties,
to calculate the actual compensation to be paid, the Parties are to calculate and submit, in
accordance with the principles set out in paragraph 325, the information required under

a

21.

22.

paragraph 335, in the manner and within the time limits indicated therein;

ae

As decided in paragraphs 332-334, interest on all sums due to Claimant from the date on
which the payment should have been made to Claimant, and on any and all sums due under
this Decision from the date of the Decision until the date when the payment of such sums
is made is payable at the rates of short-term US Treasury Bills at the relevant times,
compounded quarterly.

 

 

As to costs, and as ined in paragraphs 329-331, should rei the
Claimant in the sum of US$6,925,318.50.

The Tribunal’s instructions on the calculation of damages were set out in the Decision on
Liability, and have been summarized above. The instructions reflected the Tribunal’s view
that the damages calculated must be directly related to the breaches found in the Decision,
and ensure that no damages are awarded for losses resulting from other causes, not caused
by Treaty breaches attributable to Respondent. This was of particular importance in this
case. It is well established that bilateral investment treaties (“BITs’’) are not insurance
policies against damages flowing from the assumption of business risk. The highway and
bridge construction project was structured in such a way that the Concessionaire was
contractually bound to finance those construction costs that were not covered by the State’s
subsidy. !° The consortium members and the Concessionaire well understood this financial
commitment and there was always a risk that the overall economic climate might affect the
project’s financing. This risk unfortunately materialized. PdL’s investors had the
misfortune to launch the project at the time when the Argentine Republic began to slip into
a recession that developed into a full-blown economic crisis. This, as the Decision on
Liability found, adversely affected PdL’s ability to secure the necessary funding from the
IDB.!! The lack of third party funding meant that the shareholders had to make loans to
finance the company’s operations and ultimately Argentina had to conclude the Financial

Aid Agreement with PdL to enable the project’s completion. '”

It is important therefore to seek to isolate the financial effects of Argentina’s breaches of
its obligations under the Treaty from those resulting from what the Tribunal described as

an “extraordinary financial crisis ... confronting Argentina” in order to differentiate

Decision, paras. 78-80.
Decision, paras. 222-227.
Decision, paras. 102-114.

Ill.

23.

24.

25.

26.

short-term US Treasury Bills’

between damage proximately caused by the breaches and damage resulting from other

causes. 3
CLAIMANT’S POSITION

In summary, Claimant seeks total damages in the sum of US$54 million (employing the 1-

year T-Bill Interest Rate)'4 or its preferred alternatives:
(a) US$103 million (weighted average cost of capital interest rate);° or

(b) US$72.8 million (commercial interest rate, as referred to in Article 4(2) of the

German-Argentine BIT).!°

Claimant has argued that the low interest rate specified in the Decision!’ does not allow

for full reparation of the loss caused to Claimant. '*

Out of the US$54 million, Claimant seeks US$50 million for losses arising out of
Respondent’s failure to restore and redress the commercial balance. It seeks US$4 million
for the pesification of operation and maintenance expenses in Resolution 14, reflecting the
reduction in the value of PdL (from the period of May 2003 to May 2007)'? due to PdL
being compelled to redirect its revenues to make payments to the Financial Assistance

Agreement (FAA) loan that would have been unnecessary were it not for Resolution 14.

Claimant also seeks damages for anticipated losses stemming from the fact that on 26
August 2014, after receiving notice of the shareholders’ intention to dissolve PdL (a
decision taken on 30 June 2014), Respondent adopted a resolution terminating the

Concession Contract.”

Decision, para. 324
Claimant’s Submi
Claimant’s Submi
Claimant’s Submi
Decision on Liability, paragraphs 332-334, 336(h). The Decision refers to interest “payable at the rates of

 

 
  

Claimant’s Submission (19 June 2015), para. 81.
Claimant’s Post Liability Decision Report by Manuel A. Abdala (17 June 2015), para. 44.
Claimant’s Submission (19 June 2015), paras. 20 and 43; Exhibit CX 170.

 

27. The decision to dissolve the Company was taken approximately 6 months before the
Tribunal issued the Decision on Liability, and the Concession’s termination occurred on
26 August 2014, approximately four months before the Tribunal issued the Decision. As
was noted above, neither disputing party brought this to the Tribunal’s attention prior to its
rendering its Decision on 29 December 2014. For its part, Claimant did not inform the
Tribunal of this fact until some two months after the issuance of the Decision, on 25
February 2015.7! It subsequently explained that the termination of the Concession Contract
had little impact upon its claim because
“(t]he only future recovery Hochtief anticipated receiving from its investment was a negligible
amount as a creditor under the terms of PdL’s insolvency plan. Argentina’s termination of the

Concession Contract on August 26, 2014, therefore had little impact on Hochtief’s damages

under Compass Lexecon’s original model.”

28. Claimant’s Submission dated 2 May 2016 summarises the steps leading to the dissolution
of PdL by resolution adopted on 30 June 2014, and Argentina’s termination of the
Concession Contract by resolution adopted on 26 August 2014. In summary, Claimant
maintains that PdL faced the risk of mandatory dissolution from 2006 onwards, after the
expiry of the suspension of a law setting out the obligation to dissolve a company in the
event of a total loss of its corporate capital. After unsuccessfully attempting to renegotiate
the Concession Contract in the course of 2006 and early 2007, PdL initiated insolvency
proceedings on 2 May 2007 in an attempt to restructure its debts. Despite agreement with
its creditors within the framework of the insolvency proceedings, PdL’s financial position
continued to deteriorate, and on 2 July 2012 PdL wrote to Argentina’s President, Cristina
Fernandez de Kirchner, explaining that PdL’s insolvency exposed it to mandatory
dissolution under Argentine law, and urging her to sign and implement the Fourth
Transitory Agreement. On 27 July 2012, PdL’s shareholders attempted to stave off
mandatory dissolution by absorbing its accumulated losses up to AR$ 43,650,000 and
increasing its capital by AR$ 1,000,000 conditionally upon approval of the Fourth
Transitory Agreement within 90 days (which condition was not fulfilled). PdL sought the

necessary approval from the Direccién Nacional de Vialidad (“DNV”) for the amendments

21

 

Claimant’s Submission (19 June 2015), para. 33.
Claimant’s Submission (2 May 2016), para. 39. The original Compass Lexecon model appears in Manuel
Abdala and Pablo T. Spiller, Losses to Hochtief AG’s Investments in Puentes del Littoral S.A., 29 April 2010.

2

 

to its by-laws that the plan required, but that approval was not granted. PdL followed up
its application to DNV in October and November 2012, but approval was still not granted.
On 11 June 2013, by which time it had a negative net worth of AR$ 28,582,450, PdL filed
an administrative claim requesting damages and termination of the Concession Contract.”
PdL’s 2013 financial statements showed its negative net worth as AR$ 121,592,609. On
30 June 2014 PdL’s shareholders voted unanimously for its dissolution, thus triggering the

automatic termination of the Concession Contract in accordance with its Section 30.9.4

29. Claimant maintains that

“the shareholder’s [sic] decision to dissolve PdL was the inevitable consequence of Argentina’s
treatment of PdL: for three consecutive years (2011, 2012, and 2013) PdL had showed a
negative net worth and at that stage it was clear that Argentina had no intention whatsoever of
restoring the economic balance of the Concession Contract.”?>
30. Claimant submits that due to the Concession Contract’s termination, this has left PdL with
no expected cash flow in the actual scenario through 2023, and there can be no
renegotiations. This it considers to be “a follow on effect” of the Respondent’s breach of
the BIT by failure to rebalance the financial terms timeously.”° Claimant argues further
that even if the Concession had not been terminated, the Tribunal’s stated expectation?’
that the Respondent would abide by the Decision and meet its obligations to Claimant and
PdL was not consistent with the Respondent’s past conduct.* Claimant maintains that it is
therefore entitled to compensation for future losses, covering the period up to the expiry of

the Concession Contract as originally stipulated.
IV. RESPONDENT’S POSITION

31. Respondent maintains that

“the economic-financial equilibrium of the Contract had already been disrupted prior to the

3 It appears that Hochtief opposed this decision, and that the shareholders agreed that Hochtief’s vote would
not be counted, so that the decision would be unanimously agreed: Respondent's Submission (2 May 2016), para. 9,
Minutes of Special Shareholders’ Meeting of PdL, 14 March 2013 (Exhibit RA 466).

Claimant’s Submission (2 May 2016), paras. 4-30; Concession Contract, Exhibit CX32.b.
2: Claimant’s Submission (2 May 2016), para. 31.
Claimant’s Submi n (19 June 2015), para. 51.
“ Claimant’s Submission (19 June 2015), para. 48; Decision, para. 327.
Claimant’s Submission (19 June 2015), para. 59.

 

 
  

 

32.

33.

34,

emergency measures, a situation which was clear to the IDB [sc. Inter-American Development
Bank] itself and which influenced the decision to reject the loan request, together with the low
level of income evidenced by the traffic rates presented by PdL. This led to a change in the
financing strategy-whereby PdL’s shareholders took on the role of creditors at an extremely

high cost to PdL —which resulted in the worsening of the financial deterioration of the
3929

  

Concessionaire.

Respondent notes “that PdL had no reserves and that the unappropriated accumulated loss
exceeded the capital stock as from 2011; a situation experienced in 2012 and 2013 as well
In sum, PdL was in a position to be dissolved as early as December 2011.*° It says that
PdL’s “level of indebtedness grew exponentially as from 2001, largely because of the
intercompany loans expressed in United States dollars and the update of the value with

annual 15% rates, after its failure to obtain the IDB [I]Joan.”*!

Respondent initially submitted that as of the date of the Decision on Liability Claimant
sustained total damages of US$3.55 million at most.*? This loss would be due to the failure
to restore and redress the commercial balance that had been secured by the Concession
Contract. However, assuming that the PdL’s operating costs were expressed in US Dollars,
as required by the Decision on Liability, then in its view the damages would be zero.**
There would be no damages arising out of Argentina’s breaches of the Treaty, because
once all the adjustments had been made no dividends would be generated, and PdL’s

shareholders would therefore have lost nothing as a result of Respondent’s breaches.**

In relation to Resolution 14, Respondent’s experts considered that the appropriate valuation
period was between 22 May 2003 and 31 December 2006.** No compensable losses were

suffered and the effect of Resolution 14 was simply delay the repayment of the FAA and

 

Respondent's Submission (2 May 2016), para. 48.
Submission on Damages pursuant to the Decision on Liability dated 18 June 2015 [“Respondent’s

Submission (18 June 2015)”, para. 31.

Respondent’s Submission (18 June 2015), para. 32; Updated Damages Valuation Report following the

guidelines in the Tribunal’s Decision on Liability dated 18 June 2015 [“Respondent’s Updated Experts’ Report (18
June 2015)"1, para. 52.

35

Respondent's Updated Experts’ Report (18 June 2015), paras. 53.
Respondent's Updated Experts’ Report (18 June 2015), para. 43.

35.

36.

37.

8

shareholders’ free cash flow is the cash flow available to be distributed only amon,
on Claimant’s Submission dated 15 October 2015 filed on 30 November 2015 [“M

no dividends would have been paid over that time period even without the effects of

Resolution 14.5°

The Respondent and its experts, Messrs. Sandleris and Schargrodsky, principally focused
on Compass Lexecon’s decision to shift away from the valuation method used consistently
in their two expert reports submitted in the merits phase, to what Compass Lexecon called
a “simplified cash flow analysis” in this damages phase.*” Compass Lexecon’s previous
reports employed a “Free Cash Flow to Equity” approach when estimating the losses

suffered by Claimant. (Messrs. Sandleris and Schargrodsky did likewise.**)

However, this changed after the Decision was issued and in employing its “simplified”
approach, Compass Lexecon calculated the impact of Respondent’s measures on the cash
flows to the firm (i.e. the “Firm or Enterprise Value” or “Free Cash Flow to the firm’)
rather than “to Equity”.*? In essence, the damages calculated were based on the difference
between the actual pesified revenues realized by PdL and the ‘but-for’ dollarized revenues

estimated by Compass Lexecon.*°

This, Respondent contended, had the effect of focusing solely on the difference between
actual and ‘but-for’ revenues without applying the Tribunal’s instructions to assume no
insolvency and PdL’s full repayment of its debts in light of the general priority of creditors’
claims over those of shareholders.*! Respondent thus argued that Claimant’s experts did

not value Claimant’s interest in PdL consistently with the Tribunal’s instructions.”

Respondent's Updated Experts’ Report (18 June 2015), paras. 46.

Claimant's Post Liability Decision Report by Manuel A. Abdala (17 June 2015), para. 10.

See Respondent’s Updated Experts’ Report (18 June 2015), para. 15 & fn 16 — explaining that the
ee also Comments
Sandleris and Schargrodsky’s

 

  

 

30 November 2015 Comment”], para. 9.

Second Submission on Damages Pursuant to the Decision on Liability dated 10 August 2015 [“Respondent’s

Second Submission (10 August 2015)”], paras. 9-10; 12.
40

Respondent's Second Subm
Respondent's Second Subm

sion (10 August 2015), para. 19.
sion (10 August 2015), para. 21.

 

38.

39.

40.

41.

Supplemental Submi

Respondent also referred to Dr. Abdala’s affirmation in footnote 18 of Compass Lexecon’s
report that he:

“...checked that in the but-for scenario as of August 26, 2014, PdL would have already paid

all of its debts (including the Emergency Loan to Argentina, the debt with suppliers such as

Boskalis-Ballast Nedam, and the loans advanced by PdL’s shareholders, considering the debt
amounts as not pesified, and not reduced by the insolvency proceedings).”*

In Respondent’s view, this was unsupported by any evidence.“ In this regard, it pointed
out that “[nJone of the spreadsheets contains the debt evolution cash flow or shows the
repayment of debt as instructed by the Tribunal (CLEX-042).”*> There was also no
reflection of the reduction of ‘but-for’ revenues which would have gone towards payments

of ‘but-for’ debts.*°

Respondent also objected, in its 18 June 2015 Submission, to Claimant’s introduction of
the Concession Contract’s termination as a fact to be considered in the quantification of
damages. It argued that this was not brought to the Tribunal’s attention and was not
therefore analysed during the stage in which the potential liability of the Argentine
Republic was under consideration.*’ It observed further that PdL has already brought an
action in this respect before the Argentine courts, and there is thus the risk of double

recovery.*®

Although it criticised the Tribunal’s ordering of compound interest, the Respondent did not
seek a variation of the order*? and it opposed any attempt by Claimant to re-open the award

of interest previously ordered.*°

Second Submission (10 August 2015), para. 3.
Second Submi n (10 August 2015), para. 3.
Second Submission (10 August 2015), para. 29 & fn 39. The Claimant observes in its

non Damages dated 10 August 2015 [“Claimant’s Supplemental Submission (10 August

  
  

 

2015)”], para. 29, that “Sandleris and Schargrodsky determine that in the but-for scenario that PdL would have paid
off all of its debt by 2013.” See also Respondent’s Updated Experts’ Report (18 June 2015), para. 34.

Messrs. Sandleris and Schargrodsky’s 30 November 2015 Comment, para. 25.
ion (18 June 2015), para. 14, Respondent’s Submission (2 May 2016), paras. 11-18.
ion (2 May 2016), para. 6.

   
 

Respondent’s Submission (18 June 2015), paras. 24-25.
Respondent’s Second Submission (10 August 2015), para. 70.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

Having reviewed Compass Lexecon’s worksheets pertaining to the repayment of debt in
the ‘but-for’ scenario, Respondent’s experts asserted that the damages suffered by
Claimant as of 29 December 2014 would, based on Compass Lexecon’s model corrected
properly to reflect the evolution of debt as well as its proper linking with the cash flow
calculations, be at most US$ 4.7 million (US$1.2 million for 2013 plus US$3.5 million for

2014), and that with certain corrections the damages would be reduced to zero.>!

Finally, Messrs. Sandleris and Schargrodsky separately calculated that the value of
Hochtief’s shareholding as of 29 December 2014 amounted to US$8.94 million (as
determined by ‘but for’ cashflows after the date of termination of the Concession Contract

and until 14 September 2023).°?

THE TRIBUNAL’S FINDINGS

The Tribunal’s task has been assisted by the Parties’ submissions on quantum and by the

experts’ reports.

Essentially, there are three major issues that must be addressed to arrive at the Award. Two
involve questions of principle and proper procedure: (i) whether the Tribunal should revisit
its determination of the appropriate interest rate; and (ii) what is the effect of the dissolution
of PdL and the consequent termination of the Concession Contract on this arbitration.
Having decided those issues, the Tribunal can then determine whether the experts’
approach was faithful to the Tribunal’s instructions, and which is to be preferred and to

what extent. It will then determine the amount of damages payable.

The Tribunal will address each of these questions in turn before turning to the experts’

calculations.

Sandleris and Schargrodsky’s 30 November 2015 Comment, paras. 26-27.
is and Schargrodsky Updated Damages Model, 2 May 2016, para. 32.

 

47.

48.

49.

50.

(i) The Interest Rate

t°> with the assistance

The Tribunal arrived at its decision on the applicable rate of interes
of submissions and the evidence adduced by the Parties. In the Tribunal’s view, Claimant’ s
interest rate adjustment request amounts to a request for re-consideration of that decision.
Leaving aside the issue of whether or not the Tribunal is empowered to reconsider the
interest terms set forth in the Decision on Liability, the Tribunal perceives no reason for
changing its previous decision on the subject. Hence the interest provisions of the Decision

on Liability are carried forward in this Award.

The Tribunal accordingly reiterates that interest is payable at the rates of short-term US
Treasury Bills at the relevant times. Further, it specifies that “short-term US Treasury Bills”

is to be understood to mean one-year US Treasury Bills.

(ii) Whether the Disolution of PdL and the Consequent Termination of the
Concession Contract Requires the Tribunal to Adjust the Approach Taken in its

Decision

It is common ground that on 30 June 2014, the shareholders of PdL resolved to dissolve
the company and therefore it was no longer in a position to perform the Concession
Contract. This led, in accordance with Section 30.9 of the Concession Contract, to the
contract’s termination. Respondent adopted a resolution on termination on 26 August
2014.*4 Court proceedings have been commenced against the Respondent in relation to its

actions relating to the Concession Contract.

When it was notified of the dissolution and related events the Tribunal left open, in its letter
to the Parties dated 11 March 2015, the possibility of the Parties making out a case (either
in their bilateral negotiations, or in their submissions to the Tribunal) for a variation in the

process for determining the quantum of damages as set out in the Decision.® The letter

Decision on Liability, para. 334.
CX-170.
“(1) Having considered the Parties’ letters of 25 February 2015 and 05 March 2015, the Tribunal reaffirms

its Decision on Liability, including its approach to the determination of quantum as set out in paragraphs 311-334 of

the Decision, and its fixing of 23 May 2003 and 29 December 2014 as the beginning and end dates for the as

sment

 

Sl.

53.

of lo:

 

referred to the possibility of an effect upon the calculations, but not to any effect upon the
factual premises of the Decision on Liability, and paragraph | expressly reaffirmed the

approach hitherto taken to the determination of quantum.

Having considered the Parties’ further submissions, the Tribunal’s view is that there is no
basis for the Tribunal to supplement or vary its prior determinations insofar as the
determination of the quantum of damages up to the date of the Decision is concerned.

However, that is not dispositive of the issue that has arisen from PdL’s dissolution.

At paragraph 327 of its Decision, the Tribunal reasoned that it could not be presumed “that
Respondent will ignore the implications of this Decision for its continuing obligations
towards PdL and Claimant.”*° That finding was based on what the Tribunal then
understood the situation to be, namely, that the Concession Contract was in force and that
it could be expected that, following the Tribunal’s determination of certain Treaty breaches
and any order for compensation for Hochtief’s losses suffered up to the date of the
Decision, Respondent would finally conclude a revised contract with PdL that would re-
establish the economic bargain in the changed circumstances and this new arrangement

would then govern the Parties’ relations for the balance of the Concession Contract’s term.

Had it been made aware of the decision to dissolve PdL and the consequent termination of
the Concession Contract, the Tribunal could not and would not have made the statements
in paragraph 327 of the Decision. It would have been squarely presented with the fact of
the non-existence of the Concession Contract, and indeed PdL itself, and would have had
to determine the consequences of those developments. Claimant has asserted that now that
the Tribunal is apprised of these developments it must award damages for the remaining
period of the Concession Contract’s term because PdL and through it, Hochtief, has no
prospect of receiving any revenues from contractual performance. For its part, Respondent
asserted that Claimant had raised a new claim which it did not raise earlier in the

proceedings, and that it was doing so belatedly.

(2) The Tribunal is nonethel aware that recent developments might be said to have affected the

 

calculations envisaged in paragraphs 325-328 and 332-334 of the Decision.”

Decision, para. 327.

34.

55.

56.

The Tribunal’s description of the failure to notify it of the changed circumstances should
not be taken to be a criticism of counsel for either Party. At the time of the Concession
Contract’s termination the Tribunal had yet to issue its Decision and therefore both sides
were unsure what the outcome of this proceeding would be. On Claimant’s case, it had
suffered from multiple breaches with the result that the Concession had been, among other
things, effectively expropriated and therefore substantial damages were in order; for
Respondent, the claims should have been dismissed in their entirety. As events transpired,
the Tribunal accepted that only two of the measures identified by Claimant breached the
fair and equitable treatment standard. The Tribunal also made a series of findings that
narrowed the amount of damages that would be payable to Hochtief.*’

The Tribunal initially had a concern that the development has been brought to its attention
only through correspondence and without the benefit of detailed evidence and submissions.
The present proceeding had not been declared closed after the oral hearing. It was open to
either disputing party to bring any new facts to the Tribunal’s attention before it rendered
its Decision so that they could be considered by the Tribunal after giving both Parties an
appropriate opportunity to address them. As this has not occurred, the Tribunal has not
been given a detailed and tested account of the circumstances surrounding the dissolution
and termination decisions. It is evident from the very existence of the court proceedings as
well as in the Parties’ exchanges in this arbitration that the reasons for the Concession

Contract’s termination are a matter of dispute under the applicable law.

The Tribunal thus finds itself in the position of having to arrive at a just and legally
supported award in light of a development that had not been anticipated when it declined
to award damages for lost future cash flows. After carefully reviewing its Decision on
Liability, the Tribunal finds that in dealing with the claim for damages suffered from the
date of the Decision on Liability to the date of the Contract’s expiry, it is not dealing with
a new claim, as Respondent contended, but rather a further development —unknown to the
Tribunal at the relevant time— in the Concession’s life and ultimate demise. It also finds,

for reasons explained below, that it is unnecessary to hold a full-blown evidentiary hearing.

See para. 61 below.

57.

58.

59.

The Tribunal considers it helpful to recall certain key findings of the Decision on Liability
in order to explain the basis for these findings. In concluding that Respondent breached the
Treaty, the Tribunal took note of the fact that “renegotiation was mandated by the
Emergency Law, Law No. 25,561 in January 2002. Title IV (and in particular Article 9) of
the Emergency Law provided for the renegotiation of public works contracts, and Article
8 of Decree 214/02 provided for adjustments of contracts to be made annually (and in some
circumstances, more frequently) so as to ‘preserve the continuity of the contractual

relationship in a way equitable for the parties.’”>*

Various draft Transitory Agreements were developed and exchanged over the ensuing
years including during the course of the arbitration itself, but none resulted in a final
implemented agreement that would achieve the re-balancing that the Emergency Law had
promised. During this period, PdL sought creditor protection. The Tribunal took note of
the fact that the court conducting the insolvency proceeding considered “that UNIREN’s
refusal to continue the renegotiation of the concession agreement was contrary to the aims
of Argentine law, and that more than six years after the enactment of Emergency Law

25,561 ‘the grave imbalance in the terms of the [Concession] agreement persists’”.*°

The Tribunal found that “that it was practicable for the Parties to conclude a negotiated
settlement by 2006 or 2007 at the latest. PdL was prepared in 2006 to accept — and, indeed,
did accept — a negotiated settlement, and the Claimant was also willing to accept that
settlement as a shareholder in PdL. But the 2006 Letter of Understanding (Carta de
Entendimiento or ‘CdE’) that set out the terms of a settlement was repudiated by the
presentation of the 2007 CdE to PdL by Respondent on 12 February 2007.” Due to this
failure timeously to conclude an agreement, the Tribunal fixed the breach as having
occurred by 26 February 2007°! the date on which the Claimant sent to Respondent its
notice regarding the existence of a dispute under the BIT— but found that for the purposes

of calculating damages, the “breach consists in the failure to redress the commercial

n, para. 284.
n, para. 285. [Emphasis added.]
n, para. 286.
n, para. 287.

   

Decis
Decisi

 

61.

62.

balance that had been disrupted by the pesification Law, Law 25,561 on 6 January 2002;
and the injury for which reparation is due includes losses suffered on and after 6 January

2002.6

The majority of the Tribunal then found that no losses could be proved from the period 6
January 2002 to 23 May 2003: “It was after the opening of the road and bridges to toll-
paying traffic on that date, that the impact of the pesification and the Emergency Loan upon
PdL’s income stream from tolls began to be felt. The Tribunal accordingly decides by a
majority that while the renegotiation and ‘rebalancing’ should have occurred by 2006 or
2007, the duty to restore the balance extended back to cover all ‘unbalancing’ losses
resulting from the 2002 Emergency Law, and thus covered the losses arising after 23 May

2003.63

Three claims advanced by the Claimant were not accepted: (i) the Tribunal, by a majority,
rejected as inadmissible the claims made by Claimant in its capacity as a lender to PdL;
(ii) the claim for losses flowing from PdL’s inability to obtain the IDB loan, and from the
delay in beginning operations (which included the extra costs incurred as a result of the
failure of the IDB loan to materialize, and the allegedly excessive costs of the 2003
Emergency Loan), was rejected on the merits; and (iii) the claim for damage to Hochtief’s
investment as a result of the fall of PdL towards bankruptcy was also rejected on the

merits.

This latter claim was not accepted because the evidence showed that PdL had had the
misfortune to initiate its project shortly before the Argentinean economy began its slide
into the deep recession that triggered the economic crisis. The Tribunal found in this regard
that: “Given the Project’s difficult financial straits in the deteriorating financial conditions
of Argentina in the months leading up to the Emergency Law’s enactment, ... there is
insufficient evidence to warrant the conclusion that the bankruptcy proceedings against

PdL were caused by the pesification process or any other breach of the BIT for which

Id.
Decision, para. 298.

 

63.

64.

65.

Respondent was responsible; and it declines to order the payment of any reparation in

respect of PdL’s fall towards bankruptcy.”

This finding in turn led the Tribunal to hold that the calculation of the quantum of damages
in the ‘but-for’ world of dollarized revenues must at the same time assume that PdL would
have paid all of its creditors: “Indeed, the Tribunal’s assumption must be that if it requires
a revenue stream to be calculated in dollars, in order to avoid any unjust enrichment, it
must equally assume that all of PdL’s liabilities are similarly to be calculated in dollars.
On this basis, and having regard to the normal priority of creditors over shareholders, PdL
must be assumed to have been placed in a position to fully repay all of its debts, including
to Boskalis-Ballast Nedam, to Argentina (for the Emergency Loan), and to those
shareholders such as Hochtief who advanced loans to the company. It follows that the
valuation exercise must assume no insolvency and the full repayment of sums owing to

creditors without any discount.”°”

This set the stage for the Tribunal’s instructions to the Parties in paragraph 336 of the
Decision, quoted above at paragraph 20, on the approach to be taken in the additional

quantum phase.

As is clear from the recitation of the key findings listed above, the Tribunal considered that
the principal breach (the failure to rebalance the concession) adversely affected PdL’s
business. This, to the Tribunal’s mind, was beyond doubt on the evidence before it. It was
the view of the Argentinean insolvency court; and it is also the Tribunal’s view. Similarly,
the Tribunal found, on contemporaneous evidence, including statements of PdL’s own
making, that there were other causes of the project’s poor financial health, including
threatened bankruptcy and the suspension of construction, that predated the financial

crisis.°° What has not been established is the relative ranking of the various causes: but the

 

Decision, para. 324.
Id.
Id., para. 253: “...The Tribunal notes, however, that there is evidence that PdL was in financial difficulties

even before pesification occurred. In particular: (i) PL was informing the Grantor in August 2001, four months before
pesification, that it was going to have to suspend construction of the bridge at the end of the month; (ii) PdL appeared

to be unable to pay its creditors (Boskali:

 

Ballast Nedam); (iii) PdL told the IDB in October 2001 that it could be

petitioned in bankruptcy by its creditors; and (iv) PdL’s smaller shareholders’ were apparently unable or unwilling to
make further capital contributions in September 2001.” (Footnotes omitted.)

19

66.

67.

68.

co)
10

Tribunal does not need to make that determination in order to be in a position to award
damages because its instructions allow financial harm caused by factors not attributable to
the breaches to be addressed by the requirement that all debts be assumed to be paid in full
and in dollars. Thus, in the ‘but-for’ scenario, PdL must pay the debt owed to Boskalis-
Ballet Nedam, to Argentina for the FAA, and the debts owed to Hochtief and the other

shareholders, before PdL is in a position to declare dividends.

In this regard, the Tribunal takes some comfort from the fact that in 2012, when PdL wrote
to the President of Argentina urging Argentina to implement the Fourth Transitory
Agreement, the shareholders conditionally committed to increase the company’s capital if
that occurred.” The investors were experienced contractors and had operated the
Concession for some nine years by the time of that request and it can be surmised that they
believed that they could run the Concession satisfactorily (if not as profitably as originally
hoped) if the rebalancing occurred. Accordingly, it warrants noting that even in the actual

world in 2012, they were willing to commit more capital to PdL if the rebalancing occurred.

Moreover, the key point for the Tribunal is that the experts for both Parties agree that in
the ‘but-for’ world of a rebalanced concession, PdL would have paid off all debt owing to
its creditors including its shareholders and the Argentine Republic by either 2013 or 2014.”
This allows the Tribunal to put to one side the other non-attributable causes of PdL’s
financial difficulties because in the ‘but-for’ dollarized world PdL would have been able
to surmount those difficulties. It is clear that it would take some time for PdL to pay off its
debts, but the seminal point is that both Parties’ experts agree that the Company would

eventually have been in a position to pay dividends to its shareholders.

Once this is established, the answer to Respondent’s objection is clear. In the ‘but-for’
world, PdL’s shareholders would not have voted for dissolution and the Concession
Contract would not be terminated on that ground. Rather, by either 2013 or 2014, the

company would be ‘cash flow positive’. Accordingly, the Tribunal is in a position to award

See para. 28 supra.
Compass Lexecon believes that the debt would be paid by the end of 2013 whereas Sandleris and

Schargrodsky believe that it would be paid off in 2014.

20

69.

70.

71.

damages for lost profits for the balance of the Concession Contract’s term, that is, to 13

September 2023.

Having decided the first two issues of principle and procedure, the Tribunal now turns to

estimate those damages.
(iti) Estimates of damages: Shareholders’ Cash Flow vs. “Simplified Cash Flow”

After the Decision was issued and further analysis performed, it became clear to the
Tribunal that Claimant interpreted the Decision on Liability to mean that it is entitled to
26% of the dollarized cash flows due to PdL directly (evidently without regard to any PdL’s
liabilities and debts). In contrast, Respondent quantified the entitlement as 26% of the
dollarized dividends that Claimant might have received gua shareholder of PdL after all of
PdL’s creditors had been satisfied. This is the key difference between the Parties in respect

of the estimation of damages.

By way of introduction to this discussion, it may be helpful to recall the instructions that
the Tribunal had given in its Decision on Liability with respect to creditors’ rights when it

came to valuing Claimant’s compensable interest in PdL:

(i) At paragraph 304: “As a shareholder in PdL, Claimant has obligations as well as
rights; and one of those obligations is to accept that the assets of PdL would be
properly applied to satisfy the legitimate demands of all PdL’s creditors and all

PdL’s shareholders, according to the priorities laid down by law.”

(ii) At paragraph 324: “Indeed, the Tribunal’s assumption must be that if it requires a
revenue stream to be calculated in dollars, in order to avoid any unjust enrichment,
it must equally assume that all of PdL’s liabilities are similarly to be calculated in
dollars. On this basis, and having regard to the normal priority of creditors over
shareholders, PdL must be assumed to have been placed in a position to fully repay
all of its debts, including to Boskalis-Ballast Nedam, to Argentina (for the
Emergency Loan), and to those shareholders such as Hochtief who advanced loans
to the company. It follows that the valuation exercise must assume no insolvency

and the full repayment of sums owing to creditors without any discount.”

21

72.

73.

74,

(iii) And at paragraph 325, when setting out the precise instructions for calculating
damages, the Tribunal stated that the “the reduction in value is to be Claimant’s
26% share of the difference in US dollars between the actual value of PdL at the

date of this Decision, and the value that PdL would have had if all other factors had

 

remained as they stand in the ‘actual scenario’...”, and the last specific instruction
stated that: “d) The actual operation and maintenance costs and _all other financial
liabilities incurred by PdL, including all of its debts, had not been pesified or
reduced in the insolvency proceedings.” [Emphasis added.]

The necessity to factor in dollarized costs and debt repayments has been settled by the clear
terms of the Tribunal’s directions concerning the calculation of damages, which required
that the valuation exercise must assume no insolvency, and assume the full repayment of
sums owing to creditors without the pesification or reduction of debts in the insolvency

proceedings. ”!

This conclusion is dictated by the logic of the relationship between Claimant’s ability to
claim under the Treaty and its ability to claim under municipal law, and the fact that
Respondent can be liable only for damages that are shown to have flowed from its breach
of its duties under the Treaty. Claimant accepted the terms of the Concession Contract,
which precluded ‘creditor’ claims against Argentina, leaving creditors (including
shareholder-creditors who had the protection of the Treaty in their capacity as investors)
reliant upon municipal law for the pursuit of their claims.’? That left Claimant with its right
to claim for damage to the value of its investment; and the measure of that damage is the

loss in the value of Claimant’s interest as a shareholder in PdL.

Notwithstanding the Tribunal’s clear directions, by focusing virtually exclusively on the
difference between actual and ‘but-for’ cash flows and essentially equating a 26% interest
in those cash flows to Hochtief’s 26% shareholding interest, Compass Lexecon’s Post

Liability Decision Report dated 17 June 2015 appeared to exclude what the Tribunal had

See para. 63, above.
Decision, para. 192.

22

75.

76.

B

directed must be included, namely, the impact of PdL’s financial obligations on its

performance.

Having asserted that Claimant’s 26% share in PdL was worth US$29.8 million as of August
2014, Compass Lexecon’s 17 June 2015 valuation appeared to overstate the value of
Claimant’s shareholding interest after all PdL’s debt had been paid. But the report also
asserted in a footnote (without further explication) that by 2013 all debt would have been
paid off. It was Respondent’s view, and the Tribunal believed that there might well be
substance to it, that the expert’s report overstated PdL’s value as of 2013. It was for this
reason that, on 1 October 2015, the Tribunal instructed its Secretary to write to the Parties,
referring to footnote 18 of Compass Lexecon’s report, and requesting Compass Lexecon
to provide the worksheets that showed the paying down of the various debts incurred by

PdL.”

On 15 October 2015, Claimant’s counsel submitted a letter accompanied by certain
Compass Lexecon spreadsheets in electronic form and describing the analysis contained
therein.’ The letter introduced three additional worksheets to Exhibit CLEX-042 (the
Valuation Model previously submitted with Compass Lexecon’s Post- Liability Decision

Report dated 17 June 2015):

(i) Worksheet VI.1 ‘But-for’ Financing: This worksheet calculated the evolution of
PdL’s loan debt in the ‘but-for’ scenario. Compass Lexecon broke the debt down
into “Senior Debt” for the loan extended by Argentina and “Junior Debt’, which
included inter-company loans made by PdL’s shareholders. The worksheet showed
the breakdown of the principal repayment, the interest due and the interest
repayment at the end of each year (for both categories of debt). The worksheet

showed that in the ‘but-for’ world, by 2013, PdL was debt-free.

(ii) Worksheet VI.2 ‘But-for’ Cash Flows 03-13: This worksheet calculated PdL’s ‘but-

for’ free cash flows available for debt repayment, which was reflected in the

Letter dated 1 October 2015 from the Secretary of the Tribunal to the Parties [“Tribunal Secretary’s Letter

dated 1 October 2015”).

”

Letter dated 15 October 2015, from Kelley Drye & Warren LLP to the Secretary of the Tribunal.

23

calculation of the evolution of the loan debt in Worksheet VI.1. The calculations
further reflected PdL’s and Boskalis-Ballast Nedam’s agreement in 2004 that PdL’s
debt would be US$25 million plus interest. Accordingly, the calculations showed
that that debt was paid off as at the end of 2004. It also showed that PdL took on

new Junior Debt to pay off Boskalis-Ballast Nedam.

(iii)Worksheet IV.3 ‘But-for’ Financial Aid Agreement: This worksheet showed the
evolution of PdL’s debt to Argentina in the ‘but-for’ scenario. By the end of
December 2005 in the ‘but-for’ scenario, PdL would have fully paid Argentina all

principal and interest due under the Financial Aid Agreement.

The letter then concluded that there was no disagreement between the Parties’ experts in

relation to the paying off of debts by the end of 2013 in the ‘but-for’ scenario.”°

77. As contemplated by the Tribunal’s 1 October 2015 letter, Respondent took advantage of

the offer of an opportunity to comment on Claimant’s submission and accompanying

1,76

material. '° Due to prior commitments of Respondent’s counsel, the Tribunal agreed to its

request for additional time and, on 30 November 2015, Respondent filed its own

submissions and supporting material.”

75 Counsel’s letter noted at pp. 3-4: “There is no disagreement between the parties in relation to PdL’s ability

to repay its loan debt and Boskalis by the end of 2013 in the but-for scenario. Indeed, in their 15 June 2015 updated
report, Argentina’s experts, Drs. Sandleris and Schargrodsky, conclude that in their ‘but-for scenario, and according
to the normal priority of creditors over shareholders ... [PdL’s loan] debt is entirely paid off in 2013...’ See Sandleris
and Schargrodsky’s Updated Damages Model, 2 May 2016, at 934.”

76 The Tribunal Secretary’s Letter dated 1 October 2015 stated in this regard: “The Tribunal thanks the Parties
for their submissions on quantum, which are being carefully studied. In case they should be relevant to the Tribunal's
decision, the Tribunal wishes to see the worksheets that lie behind the conclusion noted in footnote 18 of the Compass
Lexecon Report dated 17 June 2015. The conclusion reads ‘I checked that in the but-for scenario as of August 26,
2014, PdL would have already paid all of its debts (including the Emergency Loan to Argentina, the debt with suppliers
such as Boskalis-Ballast Nedam, and the loans advanced by PdL’s shareholders, considering the debt amounts as not
pesified, and not reduced by the insolvency proceedings).’ The worksheets should be sent in electronic form and in
hard copy by Thursday, October 15, 2015. If Respondent wishes to request permission to comment upon those
worksheets, it should do so by Thursday, October 29, 2015.”

7 Letter from Respondent to the Members of Tribunal dated 30 November 2015, NOTE PTN No. 227/AI/15;
Messrs. Sandleris and Schargrodsky’s 30 November 2015 Comment; Excel worksheet containing sheet titled “SS
Damage Valuation” containing the CLEX Model with Drs. Sandleris and Schargrodsky’s calculation [“Messrs
Sandleris and Schargrodsky Damage Valuation”).

 

 

 

    

 

24

78.

79.

Respondent’s comments were accompanied by a report by Respondent’s experts, Messrs.
Sandleris and Schargrodsky, analysing Compass Lexecon’s approach and how the recently

disclosed spreadsheets comported with prior analyses conducted by Compass Lexecon.

Messrs. Sandleris and Schargrodsky asserted that Compass Lexecon’s simplified model
did not comply with the Tribunal’s instructions and was problematic (in sum, resulting in

the overstatement of the amount of damages). Their main arguments were as follows:

(i) Change in valuation method: Claimant’s experts had switched from the “Free Cash
Flow to Equity” method used in their earlier reports to a “Free Cash Flow to Firm”
method. The latter was based on the differential between the actual and the ‘but-
for’ revenues to the company. This was problematic for a number of reasons: (i) it
was at odds with fundamental principles of financial theory; (ii) it contradicted the
Tribunal’s instructions in the Decision in including as damages claims already
found to be inadmissible by the Tribunal; (iii) it drew no difference between debts
paid in the actual scenario and in the ‘but-for’ scenario (thus assuming in the real
scenario all debts were repaid, and operating costs and capital investments were the
same as in the ‘but-for’ scenario); and by considering the revenues obtained by PdL
and the liabilities assumed by the PdL as two independent processes, the valuation
model incorporated damages without any prior deduction of interest or repayment

of debt to shareholders.”*

(ii) Valuation implied PdL’s insolvency in the ‘but-for’ scenario: In the ‘but-for’
scenario, Claimant’s experts assumed that all additional revenues generated in that
scenario were allocated to the payment of dividends to shareholders. This
necessarily implied that PdL’s liabilities remained unpaid in the period for which
damages were estimated, thus implying that PdL remained insolvent in
contradiction to the Tribunal’s directions in the Decision to assume no

insolvency.’?

    

andleris and Schargrodsky’s 30 November 2015 Comment, paras. 3-6, 9-10.
s.Sandleris and Schargrodsky’s 30 November 2015 Comment, para. 12.

25

80.

 

(iii)Valuation sought to restore compensation for Claimant’s creditor’s claims: The

new method included PdL’s debts in full as damages, including PdL’s debt to
Claimant already found to be inadmissible by the Tribunal, and debts to third parties
and the Argentine State, thus implicitly also compensating Claimant for debts owed

by PdL to third parties.*°

Respondent’s experts also commented on certain other issues reflected in the spreadsheets

produced by Compass Lexecon:

(i) Worksheet VI.1 ‘But-for’ Financing: The Respondent’s experts pointed out that

Claimant’s experts had reduced the average interest to 11.44% for the period of
2003 to 2014 and ultimately to 8.57% in 2014. This was, it was argued, without
justification, and below the 15% interest rate at which shareholders had granted
loans to PdL between 2001 and 2005.*! Messrs. Sandleris and Schargrodsky
asserted that if the 15% rate agreed in the inter-company loans had been maintained,
“CLEX’s model would throw [sic. Sc, ‘show’. The Spanish text says “... el propio
modelo de CLEX estimaria un nivel de deuda...”] a remaining debt of USD 12
million for 2014. In other words, there would be no dividends to be distributed to
shareholders in the but-for scenario in any year, not even in 2014, so that there

would be no possibility of claiming damages.”*?

(ii) Worksheet _VI.2 ‘But-for’ Cash Flows 03-13: Claimant’s experts determined an

amount of income tax for the ‘but-for’ free cash flow to PdL which was different
from that estimated for the damage valuation. This amounted to employing
different income tax amounts for the same scenario and Dr. Abdala offered no

explanation to justify such difference.*?

(iii)Worksheet IV.3 ‘But-for’ Financial Aid Agreement: Both interest and principal for

Financial Aid were paid out of the ‘but-for’ revenues obtained by PdL. However,

Sandleris and Schargrodsky’s 30 November 2015 Comment, paras. 7 and 13.
Sandleris and Schargrodsky’s 30 November 2015 Comment, paras. 17-21.
Sandleris and Schargrodsky’s 30 November 2015 Comment, para. 21.

s.Sandleris and Schargrodsky’s 30 November 2015 Comment, paras. 22.

26

81.

82.

the ‘but-for’ revenues set out in sheet “I.1 Toll Rate Pesification” for the purposes
of damage valuation did not decrease as a result of such payment. The Respondent’s
experts asserted that this made it clear that Claimant’s experts did not consider the

debts undertaken by PdL in their damage valuation.*+

The Tribunal agrees generally with the main points made by Respondent’s experts. The
Decision treated the investment as having been made by a consortium, with Claimant’s
rights not being extinguished by PdL’s rights.** It follows that Claimant’s investment and
rights consisted in the revenues that it expected to get out of the consortium, for which PdL
was the vehicle. Further, the Decision referred to Claimant’s share of the value of PdL, not
(as Claimant says — for example, in its Supplemental Submission dated 10 August 2015)

of the value to PdL.*°

In the Tribunal’s view, the problem with Compass Lexecon’s analysis is that although it
calculated the repayment of PdL’s debts over a period of some 10 years, it did not take the
next crucial step of integrating that into the ‘but-for’ cash flows to the shareholders.
Reference to Compass Lexecon’s worksheets shows that the ‘but-for’ value estimation of
“Free cash flows to PdL” as at 2014 was calculated by taking the ‘but-for’ toll revenues
and subtracting operating expenses to arrive at EBITDA, then subtracting depreciation and
amortizations to arrive at EBIT, then subtracting income taxes, CAPEX and changes in
working capital. There is no mention of repayment of debt. Similarly, for the so-called
“Toll Pesification Damages”, Compass Lexecon simply took the ‘but-for’ revenues in
USD, subtracted the actual revenues in USD, applied income tax and a tax loss carry
forward, to arrive at a “Revenue Differential (post-tax)” 26% of which was then attributed
to Hochtief as the “Revenue Differential to Hochtief (Post-Tax) as of Dec-14” of some
US$ 28,771,753. Again, there is no mention of PdL paying its creditors out of any revenues

surplus to operating needs.

 

 

andleris and Schargrodsky’s 30 November 2015 Comment, paras. 23-25.
Decision, paras. 158-169.
Decision, paras. 315, 325; Claimant’s Supplemental Submission (10 August 2015), para. 23.

27

83.

84.

85.

87

The Tribunal has checked the results of this approach against LECG’s Expert Report of 29
April 2010.87 It is useful to compare LECG’s initial estimate of Hochtief’s lost dividends
estimated in the first report to that now estimated as the “Revenue Differential to Hochtief

(Post-Tax) as of Dec-14”.

It warrants noting in this regard that the 2010 estimate was based on the assumption that
the Tribunal would accept Hochtief’s case in its entirety including its claim for losses
suffered in connection with its having lent sums to PdL by means of inter-company loans,
a claim that the Tribunal did not accept. Having rejected that claim, the Tribunal held that
the debt owed by PdL to all lenders must be assumed to have been repaid to the lenders
without any reduction and on the basis that no insolvency proceedings (which reduced the
debts owing in the actual scenario) took place. In simple terms, the debt actually owing to
Hochtief and others had to be assumed to be paid off before any funds could be freed up
for dividends to the shareholders. It is obvious that the repayment of the large inter-
company debt incurred by PdL would mean that the anticipated dividend stream to the
shareholders would be delayed as compared to the ‘but-for’ scenario as originally
conceived by Claimant’s experts. This was to be expected given the overall
macroeconomic conditions in which the project was executed and PdL’s failure to conclude

the IDB loan.

LECG’s report stated at paragraph 77 as follows:

“As a condition to the disbursements of the IDB loan, Hochtief, as well as other shareholders,
would have been required to make additional equity contributions in 2002. For Hochtief, this
contribution would have been US$ 4.0 million, making Hochtief’s total equity contribution add
up to US$ 15.3 million. We also find that starting in 2007, Hochtief would have been earning
dividends and that as of end of 2009 it would have obtained a historical return of US$ 2.3
million on its equity investments as of December 31, 2009 (net of the US$ 4.0 million
additional contribution of 2002 required by the IDB loan). Furthermore, we estimate that from
2010 onwards Hochtief would have expected to receive additional dividends, or other forms of
equity distributions, worth US$ 18.1 million in US$ of December 31, 2009. The implicit
Internal Rate of Return (IRR) on Hochtief’s equity investment would have been 11.7%.”
(footnotes omitted)

LECG LLP later became part of Compass Lexecon and all subsequent reports are authored by Messrs. Spiller

and Abdala or by Dr. Abdala alone as Compass Lexecon reports.

28

86.

87.

Table VII. DCF Approach: Losses to Claimant

 

 

 

In US$ Mv of Dec 31, 2009

Equity Value to Hochtief 20.4 - 20.4
Historical Returns (prior to 2010) 23
Expected Dividends (2010-2023) 18.1 -

Debt Value to Hochtief - (54.2) 54.2
WiC Debt Contributions - (62.9)
Expected iC Debt Recovery - 87

Losses to Hochtief 746

 

 

 

Source: Own Production.

LECG thus estimated that Hochtief would recover US$54.2 million in damages for the loan
claim and that PdL would have begun to declare dividends in 2007, with the result that the
equity value to Hochtief as of 31 December 2009, for the entire period of the Concession

Contract’s life to expiry in 2023, would amount to US$20.4 million.

The Tribunal has already referred to footnote 18 of Compass Lexecon’s Post-Liability
Decision Report, where Dr. Abdala noted that he had checked the but-for scenario as of 26
August 2014, and had found that PdL would have already paid all of its debts, including
all of the loans. The Tribunal does not see how the worksheets in CLEX-042 comport with
the “Free cash flows to PdL” calculated in June 2015. The Tribunal agrees with Messrs.
Sandleris and Schargrodsky’s characterization of the Compass Lexecon 17 June 2015
analysis as being “at odds with the ruling made by the Tribunal in its Decision” with the
effect that “damages are artificially overstated due to the failure to deduct from ‘but-for’
revenues the ‘but-for’ debt payments which should have been included pursuant to the

Decision on Liability”.**

Messrs. Sandleris and Schargrodsky’s 30 November 2015 Comment, para. 2.

29

88.

89.

That said, the key point for present purposes is that Dr. Abdala recognised that (contrary
to the assumed state of affairs in in the initial LECG Report) dividends would not start
flowing to PdL’s shareholders in 2007 in the ‘but-for’ world, but rather that it would take
quite a bit longer —on his worksheets later produced to the Tribunal on 15 October 2015—
some six years more, for the company’s liabilities to third parties, including Hochtief, to
be paid off. The Tribunal recalls that by 2 May 2007, in the actual scenario PdL’s debt to
Hochtief already amounted to US$ 43.3 million.*° (This was not the only inter-company
debt owed; the other major foreign shareholder, Impregilo, made similar loans to PdL.)
Thus, it was inevitable that when the loans were held not to be recoverable in these
proceedings, they would form part of the company’s liabilities that had to be paid off before

dividends could be paid.

The Tribunal further agrees with Messrs. Sandleris and Schargrodsky that had Compass
Lexecon correctly linked the ‘but-for’ debt repayment to the ‘but-for’ revenues, Compass
Lexecon’s own model would show no damages to Hochtief before 2014. It follows that
free cash flows to equity would be generated only from 2013 (at the earliest), which of

course dramatically reduces the claimable damages in this case. This was illustrated in a

table included in Messrs. Sandleris and Schargrodsky’s 30 November 2015 Comment:°°

Damages to Hochtief: USD 4.7 M

 

On this analysis, Messrs. Sandleris and Schargrodsky pointed out that the maximum
recoverable damages as of the date of the Decision on Liability would be US$4.7 million.*!

However, they went further and asserted that in arriving at that figure one would have to

LECG Expert Report of 29 April 2010, para. 39.
ssrs.Sandleris and Schargrodsky’s 30 November 2015 Comment, p.10.
Sandleris and Schargrodsky’s 30 November 2015 Comment, para. 26.

 

30

overlook the fact that Compass Lexecon adjusted certain interest rates for monies owing in
what they had labelled as “Junior Debt”, noting in this regard that if the 15% interest rate
that was set in the Hochtief and Impregilo inter-company loans was employed, the damage
valuation would be zero because PdL would still have been paying off debt as of the date
of the Decision on Liability.°? They also asserted that the income tax rate was adjusted as

well in order to achieve the results.*? This was also presented in the form of another table:**

Damages to Hochtief: USD 0

 

90. The Tribunal has examined LECG’s and Compass Lexecon’s treatment of the interest rate
charged in the inter-company loans made by Hochtief. In the reports prepared prior to the
Decision on Liability, the experts uniformly used the loan rate stipulated in the loan

agreements themselves, i.e., 15%.

91. Yet, as Messrs. Sandleris and Schargrodsky correctly point out, this changes in CLEX-042.

In barely readable grey font Compass Lexecon added:

2 ‘The Tribunal recalls the evidence of Mr Roberto Lamdany, Head of the Transportation Technical Team from
the Unit of Renegotiation and Analysis of Public Utility Contracts (UNIREN): “The company’s Financial Statements
as of 31 December 2001 show paid-up capital in the amount of ARS 43,650,000 and shareholders’ loans for ARS
15,030,466 at an annual rate of 15%. Irrespective of the exorbitant rate accepted for an inter-company loan in US
dollars (Libor rate as of 29 December 2000 ranged from 6,6325% to 5,9646% for a term of 30 and 360 days), it was
clear that the shareholders were not willing to pay up capital for ARS 59,039,000, as announced in the Financial
Statements for the prior year. Consequently the company recorded financial losses, which then resulted in difficulties
for the renegotiation process.” [Lamdany Witness Statement, 7 March 2012, para. 29].

Messrs. Sandleris and Schargrodsky’s 30 November 2015 Comment, para. 28: it is observed that the
calculations performed in the two tables displayed above did not correct an income tax calculation “inconsistency”
found in Sheet “IV. 2. But-For Cash Flows 03-13” and discussed at para. 22 of the same Comment.

Messrs. Sandleris and Schargrodsky’s 30 November 2015 Comment, p. 11.

95 See the LECG Report of 29 April 2010, at paras. 65 and 136 and footnotes 38, 42, 53, and 105, and the
Compass Lexecon Report of 5 June 2012, at paras. 62-66 and 105.

 

 

31

 

92.

93.

94,

95.

Put in larger clearer font, this states: “Note: after 2005, once senior debt (FAA) is fully

paid, PdL’s loan rate on junior debt equals benchmark corporate bonds in local market

2006-2009; CLEX-001, sheet ‘WACC’, 2014: CLEX-042, sheet ‘IL3, WACC’”.

Indeed, the interest rates for inter-company debt drop in Compass Lexecon’s 17 June 2015
Report from 15% starting in the year 2006 (10.72%) and continue a downward trend

culminating in a rate of 8.76% in 2013:
10.72% 10.30% 9.83% 955% 935% 9.16% 8.96% 8.76% 857%
This is at odds with Compass Lexecon’s prior work. In its report filed with the Reply

Compass Lexecon’s Table IV consistently listed the inter-company loan rates through to

2010 (listed under the heading “Subordinated”) at 15% as follows:

Table IV. Cost of Debt: Compass Lexecon v. Sandleris & Schargrodsky, 2002-2010

Cost of Debt

 

 

 

‘Compass Lexecon~ Unsubordinated 11.3% 108% 111% 10.9% = 11.0% 10.6% = 10.1%) 8% = 9.0% | 10.
Compass Lexecon - Subordinated 15.0% 15.0% 15.0% 15.0% 15.0% © 15.0% 15.0%» 15.0% 150% | 15.0%

Sandleris & Schargrodsky - Subordnated 19.4% 17.2% «16.1% += 18.6% «= 18.1% = 18.6% =—22.1% «= 21.5% © 207% 19.1%

 

 

 

Source: Compass Lexecon based on Sandleris & Schargrodsky s Valuation Model.

The Tribunal does not accept the shift in the approach taken respecting the loan rate. The
effect can only be to reduce the amount of debt payments outstanding at the end of each
year such that the worksheets would show that PdL repaid its debt in the ‘but-for’ world in

2013 and would eke out a small dividend distribution to Hochtief of US$1.2 million and

32

96.

97.

98.

96

US$3.5 million in 2013 and 2014, respectively.°°

The Tribunal is inclined to accept Messrs. Sandleris and Schargrodsky’s view that had the
proper interest rates been employed by Compass Lexecon, the resulting analysis would
show that—leaving aside the discounted value of any losses arising after 26 August 2014,
which are considered below—no damages were suffered by Hochtief up to the Concession

Contract’s termination.

LECG’s original estimate of the equity value of Hochtief’s shareholding as of 31 December
2009 provides another check on the expert analysis done after the Decision on Liability. It
will be recalled from paragraph 77 of the LECG Report quoted above at paragraph 85, that
LECG estimated Hochtief’s total loss in the value of its equity, projected to the end of the
Concession, as being US$20.4 million. But that estimate assumed that Hochtief would also
receive compensation for losses associated with the loans. Since that has not occurred and
it has taken some seven years longer to pay off the loans in the ‘but-for’ scenario, with nine
years remaining before expiry, it might be expected that the net present value of the
dividend stream would be somewhat smaller than LECG’s estimated US$18.1 million for
a 13-year period running from 2009 (brought forward with interest). Yet Dr. Abdala has
estimated the but-for value of Hochtief’s interest in PdL to be US$20.2 million for a 9-year

period as of August 2014.9”

However, this is not the end of the matter, for the reasons previously explained above,
because even on Messrs. Sandleris and Schargrodsky’s analysis, by the end of 2014 PdL
would have been cash flow positive and able to pay dividends to its shareholders. This was
made clear in their report of 2 May 2016 which, among other things, computed PdL’s value
from 27 August 2014 to 14 September 2023.

LECG Report of 29 April 2010, footnote 38: “The loans granted by Hochtief to PdL were denominated in

US Dollars and accrued interest at a nominal interest rate of 15% per year. The I/C loans granted by Hochtief in 2001
had a 1-year renewable term. Hochtief’s I/C loans granted since 2002 had an average maturity date of 1.3 years, and
were also renewable. Both principal and interests were due at maturity.”

Compass Lexecon’s Report dated 17 June 2015, Table 1.

33

99.

100.

While Messrs. Sandleris and Schargrodsky still adhered to their position that using a
properly dollarized ‘but-for’ analysis there would be no damages for renegotiation delays
up to 26 August 2014, and that the claimed US$4 million for Resolution 14 damages was
not made out, they agreed that PdL had a positive value for the balance of the Concession
Contract’s life.°* In their view, Claimant’s 26% interest in PdL as of 29 December 2014

amounted to US$8.94 million.

The Tribunal has studied the submissions of the Parties and their experts, and considers
that the most reasonable estimate of Claimant’s loss is higher than that accepted by
Respondent’s experts but some way short of the US$20.2 million estimated by Claimant.
Having regard to the expert evidence, the Tribunal finds that Claimant is entitled to an
award of US$13.41 million for the diminution in the value of its shareholding in PdL caused

by Respondent’s breach of the Treaty.

There is one remaining head of damages claimed, the losses said to be associated with the
Resolution 14 breach. In the Tribunal’s view, just as the financial damages caused by non-
attributable factors are addressed by the Tribunal’s instructions in its Decision, any alleged
damage said to flow from Resolution 14 would be subsumed in the analysis dictated by the
Decision’s general requirement that all revenues, costs and liabilities be dollarized. That
is, in the ‘but-for’ scenario posited by the Tribunal, the operation and maintenance costs
would never have been pesified in the first place and since they are assumed to be in dollars,
the Concession would, in this respect, operate as per the Concession Contract. Therefore,

the claim for US$4 million is rejected.

In these circumstances, the Tribunal decides that Respondent must pay Claimant USD
US$13.41 million, plus interest running from 29 December 2014 at the rate for one-year

US Treasury Bills.

COSTS

 

The Tribunal has considered the question of the allocation of the costs arising from this

phase of the proceedings. The costs in this phase arose initially from the inability of the

Sandleris and Schargrodsky Updated Damages Mode, 2 May 2016, paras. 33-36.

34

VIL.

104.

Parties to agree upon the precise amount of compensation due in accordance with the
instructions of the Tribunal in its Decision on Liability dated 29 December 2014, and from
the investigation of the implications in this context of the termination of the Concession
Contract on 26 August 2014, which neither Party had brought to the attention of the
Tribunal before it delivered its Decision on Liability. Additional work was also required as
a result of the departures by Claimant’s expert, noted above, from the instructions issued
by the Tribunal. The Tribunal decides that in these circumstances it is appropriate that
Claimant should contribute US$200,000 towards Respondent’s costs arising from this
phase of the proceedings. The order for costs arising from earlier phases of these
proceedings, set out in paragraph 336.i of the Decision on Liability dated 29 December

2014, stands and is not affected by this decision.

AWARD

For the foregoing reasons, and the reasons stated in its Decision on Jurisdiction dated 24
October 2011 and the Separate and Dissenting Opinion of Mr. J. Christopher Thomas,
Q.C., also dated 24 October 2011, and in its Decision on Liability dated 29 December 2014,
the Tribunal DECIDES as follows:

(1) The Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction dated 24 October 2011 and the
Separate and Dissenting Opinion of Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, Q.C., also dated 24
October 2011, and the Tribunal’s Decision on Liability dated 29 December 2014 are

deemed to be an integral part of this Award.

(2) The decisions set out in paragraph 125 of the Decision on Jurisdiction dated
24 October 2011 and in paragraph 336 of the Decision on Liability dated 29

December 2014 are reaffirmed.

(3) The Respondent must pay the Claimant US$13.41 million, plus interest
running from 29 December 2014 until effective payment thereof at the rate for one-
year US Treasury Bills, as compensation for the losses caused by the Respondent’s
breach of its obligations under the Treaty between the Federal Republic of Germany
and the Argentine Republic on the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of

Investments dated 9 April 1991.

35

(4) The Claimant must pay Respondent US$200,000 costs arising from this
phase of the proceedings, plus interest on such amount running from the date of
notification of this Award to the Parties and until effective payment thereof at the rate

for one year US Treasury Bills.

Made in Washington, D.C., in English and in Spanish, both versions being equally
authentic.

36

    

CreQes nt. Bama

Honorable Charles N. Brower istopher Thomas, Q.C.
Arbitrat Arbitrator
Date: Jo Noten R520 ys Date: 27 Ahvemh/ Zolt

a potoe

Professor Vaughan Lowe
President of the Tribunal
Date: 21 December 2016

37

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN

Hochtief AG
(CLAIMANT)

and

The Argentine Republic

(RESPONDENT)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/07/31)

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

Members of the Tribunal
Professor Vaughan Lowe Q.C, President
Judge Charles N. Brower, Arbitrator
Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, Q.C., Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mrs. Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski

Representing the Claimant
Hochtief Aktiengesellschaft
Opernplatz 2, 45128 Essen
Germany

c/o Messrs. Paul F. Doyle and
Philip D. Robben

Kelley Drye & Warren LLP
101 Park Avenue

New York, NY 10178, USA

Date of Decision: October 24, 2011

Representing the Respondent

c/o Dra. Angelina Maria Esther Abbona
Procuradora del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la

Naci6n Argentina

Posadas 1641

C1112ADC, Buenos Aires

Argentina

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

I THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS 4
IL THE FIRST OBJECTION: BIT ARTICLE 10.......cc.cccssssessessessseescsscencssesnessesneeseesncenees 5
Ill THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS 8
IV THE INTERPRETATION OF BIT ARTICLE 10.

V_ THE MEN PROVISION 15
VI DOES THE MFN PROVISION APPLY TO DISPUTE SETTLEMENT?..........000 16
VIL MEN AND JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS.......ccsccsessessessesseessceseenseneeneesessesseeneesnesneene 19
VII. IS ARTICLE 10(3) ‘LESS FAVOURABLP’? .......

IX OTHER ISSUES: THE LOCATION OF THE ‘TREATMENT .......ccscsssssesseeseesseeee 26
X THE SECOND OBJECTION: HOCHTIEF’S STANDING .....ccsssssssssssessesseeseeseeeneene 28
XI JURISDICTION OF THE CENTRE .......ccccsssssssssssssessessesseesecsscecencencencenesneeneeneeneesneeee 30
XII THE CONTRACT CLAIMS AND DOUBLE RECOVERY ......scssssssssessesseeseeneenneene 30
XIII COSTS 31
XIV CONCLUSION 31

 

This claim is brought by Hochtief Aktiengesellschaft, a company incorporated in the
Federal Republic of Germany (“Hochtief’), against the Argentine Republic
(‘Argentina’), under the Treaty between the Federal Republic of Germany and the
Republic of Argentina for the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments,

dated 9 April 1991 (‘the BIT’).

Hochtief and Argentina, the parties to the dispute and to this case, are referred to in
this Decision as the (lower-case) ‘parties’. Argentina and Germany, as the States

Parties to the BIT, are referred to as the (capitalized) ‘Parties’.

The authentic German and Spanish texts of the BIT, together with the English
translation published in the United Nations Treaty Series’, are set out in Appendix I
to this Decision. This Decision will refer to the English-language translation. The
Tribunal has, however, taken full account of the fact that the authentic languages of
the BIT are German and Spanish, and as will be seen it has at various stages reverted

to the authentic texts where the translation is unsatisfactory.

The claim arises from a dispute concerning a 25-year concession awarded to Hochtief
and a consortium of construction companies in 1997 for the construction, maintenance
and operation of a toll road and several bridges in Argentina between the cities of
Rosario and Victoria. Hochtief and other members of the consortium incorporated a
company, Puentes del Litoral SA (‘PdL’), in Argentina in order to implement the
concession. Hochtief owns 26% of the shares in PdL. Hochtief claims that it was
injured by actions taken by Argentina in breach of its obligations under the BIT and

under customary international law.

The claim was initiated by the Request for Arbitration dated 5 November 2007,
addressed by the Claimant to the Secretary-General of ICSID (‘the Centre’). The
Claimant appointed the Hon. Charles Brower, and the Respondent appointed J
Christopher Thomas QC, to the Tribunal. Judge Brower and Mr Thomas agreed to
invite Professor Vaughan Lowe QC to chair the Tribunal. The Tribunal was

constituted on 30 April 2009.

UNTS Vol. 1910, 171 (1996).

By agreement of the parties the First Procedural Meeting of the Tribunal, held by
telephone conference, was begun on 19 June 2009, and resumed on 16 April 2010 at
the seat of ICSID in Washington, D.C. with the President of the Tribunal, prevented

from flying by a volcanic ash cloud, participating by video link.

The Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits was submitted on 29 April 2010, and the
Respondent submitted its Memorial on Objections to the Jurisdiction of the Centre
and the Competence of the Tribunal (including, as agreed, a brief outline of its
defences on the merits) on 30 July 2010. The Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on
Objections to Jurisdiction was submitted on 15 October 2010, and the Respondent’s
Reply and Claimant’s Rejoinder on 22 December 2010 and 10 February 2011

respectively.

The hearing on Jurisdiction was held at the World Bank’s premises in Paris on 4-5
March 2011.The Claimant was represented by Mr Paul F Doyle, Mr Philip D Robben,
Ms Mellisa E Byroade, and Ms Julia A Garza Benitez of Kelley Drye & Warren LLP;
and the Respondent was represented by Dr Angelina Abbona, Dr Gabriel Bottini, Dr
Romina de los Angeles Mercado, Dr Verénica Lavista, Dr Matias Osvaldo Bietti, Dr
Ariel Martins, and Mr Julian Santiago Negro, of the Procuracién del Tesoro de la
Nacioén. Ms Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski acted as the Secretary of the

Tribunal.

The Parties’ Submissions

The submissions of the parties are set out in detail in their written pleadings and were
developed in their oral submissions at the hearing, a verbatim record of which was
kept and made available to the parties and the Tribunal shortly after the end of the
hearing on Jurisdiction. All of these submissions were taken into account, and the
main points are summarized here in so far as is necessary for the purposes of this

Decision.

The Respondent raises two main objections to jurisdiction. The First Objection is that
the Claimant has failed to meet the requirements set forth in Article 10 of the BIT,

and that the Tribunal is consequently without jurisdiction in this case. The Second

Objection is that Hochtief is attempting in this case to bring a claim to enforce the

rights of another person and has no legal standing to do so.

It is well established that the Tribunal has the competence to decide upon challenges
to its jurisdiction. If it finds that it has jurisdiction, the position is unproblematic. If it
finds that it lacks jurisdiction, a pedant might object that it had no right to determine
even that question; but the Law has chosen to side with pragmatism rather than
pedantry and Kompetenz-Kompetenz is a firmly established principle, adopted in

Article 41(1) of the ICSID Convention. The Tribunal proceeds accordingly.

The First Objection: BIT Article 10

In translation, Article 10 of the BIT reads as follows:

“Article 10

(1) Disputes concerning investments within the meaning of this Treaty between one of the
Contracting Parties and a national or company of the other Contracting Party shall as far as
possible be settled amicably between the parties to the dispute.

(2) If a dispute within the meaning of paragraph | cannot be settled within six months from.
the date on which one of the parties concerned gave notice of the dispute, it shall, at the
request of either party, be submitted to the competent courts of the Contracting Party in
whose territory the investment was made.

(3) The dispute may be submitted to an international arbitral tribunal in any of the
following circumstances:
(a) At the request of one of the parties to the dispute where, after a period of 18
months has elapsed from the moment when the judicial process provided for by
paragraph 2 of this article was initiated, no final decision has been given or where a
decision has been made but the Parties are still in dispute;
(b) Where both parties to the dispute have so agreed.

 

rovided for by paragraph 3 above, disputes between the Parties within the
article shall be referred by mutual agreement, when the parties to the
dispute have not agreed otherwise, either to arbitral proceedings under the Convention on
the Settlement of Investment utes between States and Nationals of Other States of 18
March 1965 or to an ad hoc arbitral tribunal established under the Arbitration Rules of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law.

 

 

If there is no agreement after a period of three months has elapsed from the moment when
one of the Parties requested the initiation of the arbitration procedures, the dispute shall be
submitted to arbitration di under the C. ion on the of

Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States of 18 March 1965 provided that
both Contracting Parties are parties to the said Convention. Otherwise, the dispute shall be
submitted to the above-mentioned ad hoc arbitral tribunal.

 

 

 

(5) The arbitral tribunal shall issue its ruling in accordance with the provisions of this
Treaty, with those of other treaties existing between the Parties, with the laws in force in
the Contracting Party in which the investments were made, including its rules of private
international law, and with the general principles of international law.

 

  

5

16.

(6) The arbitration decision shall be binding and both Parties shall implement it in
accordance with their legislation.”

The Respondent says that paragraphs 10(2) and 10(3)(a) of Article 10 impose a
mandatory period of 18 months, for the duration of which the dispute must be
submitted to the Respondent’s courts, before the Claimant is entitled to submit the
dispute to arbitration. It says that Article 10 thus establishes a mandatory condition
upon which the jurisdiction of the Tribunal depends, and that the Claimant has not

fulfilled that condition.

The Respondent makes no jurisdictional challenge based upon the requirement in
Article 10(2) that six months must elapse after notice of the dispute is given, before

the dispute may be submitted to the courts at the instance of either party.

The Claimant, for its part, invokes Article 3 of the BIT, which reads as follows:?

“Article 3

(1) Neither Contracting Party shall subject investments in its territory by or with the
participation of nationals or companies of the other Contracting Party to treatment less
favourable than it accords to investments of its own nationals or companies or to investments
of nationals or companies of any third State.

(2) Neither Contracting Party shall subject nationals or companies of the other Contracting
Party, as regards their activity in connection with investments in its territory, to treatment less
favourable than it accords to its own nationals or companies or to nationals or companies of
any third State.

(3) Such treatment shall not include privileges which may be extended by either Contracting
Party to nationals or companies of third States on account of its membership in a customs or
economic union, common market or free trade area.

 

(4) The treatment under this article shall not extend to privileges accorded by a Contracting
Party to nationals or companies of a third State by virtue of an agreement for the avoidance of
double taxation or other tax agreements.”

Article 3 must be read together with the Protocol to the BIT, which reads in material

part as follows:

“With the signing of the Treaty between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Argentine
Republic on the E and i 1 Protection of igned
plenipotentiaries have agreed on the following provisions, which shall be regarded as an

integral part of the said Treaty:

See paragraphs 63 ff and 104 ff below for certain problems with this translation.

6

(2) Ad article 3:

(a) The following shall more particularly, though not exclusively, be deemed "activity" within
the meaning of article 3, paragraph 2: the management, utilization, use and enjoyment of an
investment. The following shall more particularly, though not exclusively, be deemed
"treatment less favourable" within the meaning of article 3: less favourable measures that
affect the purchase of raw materials and other inputs, energy or fuel, or means of production or
operation of any kind or the marketing of products inside or outside the country. Measures that
are adopted for reasons of internal or external security or public order, public health or
morality shall not be deemed "treatment less favourable" within the meaning of article 3.

 

(b) The provisions of article 3 do not obligate a Contracting Party to extend tax privileges,
exemptions and relief accorded only to natural persons and companies resident in its territory,"
in accordance with its tax laws, to natural persons and companies resident in the territory of
the other Contracting Party.

(c) The Contracting Parties shall within the framework of their national legislation give
favourable consideration to applications for the entry and sojourn of persons of either
Contracting Party who wish to enter the territory of the other Contracting Party in connection
with an investment; the same shall apply to nationals of either Contracting Party who, in
connection with an investment, wish to enter the territory of the other Contracting Party and
sojourn there to take up employment. Applications for work permits shall also be given
favourable consideration.”

 

The Claimant submits that the effect of this MFN provision is to permit it to rely upon
what it says is the more favourable provision in Article 10 of the Argentina-Chile
Bilateral Investment Treaty dated 2 August 1991. That treaty, in its authentic
language and in the English translation submitted in these proceedings, is set out in

Appendix II.
Article 10 of the Argentina-Chile BIT reads as follows:

“ARTICLE 10 Settlement of disputes regarding investments

1. Any dispute related to the investments under this Treaty, between a Party and a national or
company of the other Party shall, as far as possible, be settled by friendly negotiations between
the two parties to the dispute.

2. If the dispute shall not have been settled within the term of six months as from the time it
has been raised by either party, it may be submitted upon request of the national or company:

 

- to the national jurisdictions of the Party involved in the dispute;
- or to international arbitration in the conditions described in paragraph (3).

Once a national or company has submitted the dispute to the jurisdiction of the Party involved
or to international arbitration, the election of either procedure shall be final.

3. In case of election of international arbitration, the dispute may be submitted, at the election
of the national or company, to one of the arbitration entities mentioned below:

7

20.

21.

Ill

22.

To the International Center (sic) for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) created
under the "Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals
of other States", opened to the signature in Washington on March 18, 1965, when each
Member State which is a party to this Agreement has signed the said Convention. While this
condition is not met, each Party may give its consent for the dispute to be submitted to
arbitration pursuant to the Rules of the supplementary Mechanism of ICSID for the
management of conciliation, arbitration or investigation proceedings;

 

To an "ad hoc" arbitration panel organized pursuant to the arbitration rules of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL).

4. The arbitration panel shall render an award on the basis of this Treaty, the right of the Party
that is a party to the dispute, including the rules regarding conflicts of laws and the terms and

ditions of ional private reached in ion with the i and
also the principles of international law in that respect.

 

 

5. Arbitration awards shall be final and binding upon the parties to the dispute.

 

6. The Parties shall refrain from trying, through the diplomatic channels, arguments regarding
arbitration or a judicial proceeding already pending until the relevant proceedings shall have
been completed, unless the parties to the dispute shall have not discharged the arbitration
award or the judgment rendered by the common court, pursuant to the terms for the discharge
laid down in the award or the judgment.”

 

The important point in the Argentina-Chile BIT is that it permits unilateral reference
of a dispute to arbitration six months after the dispute has been raised. There is no
equivalent of the ‘18-month litigation period’ in Article 10(3) of the Argentina-
Germany BIT.

The Respondent submits that the MEN provision in Article 3 of the Argentina-
Germany BIT applies only to substantive protections under the BIT, which do not

include the clauses on dispute resolution in Article 10.

Each party referred to principles of treaty interpretation, decisions of other arbitral

tribunals, and the writings of jurists in support of its position.

The Tribunal’s analysis

The Tribunal’s jurisdiction depends upon the existence of an agreement between the
two parties to the dispute — Hochtief and the Republic of Argentina. That agreement is
not contained in a single document. The agreement of Argentina to accept the
jurisdiction of the arbitral Tribunal in respect of a certain category of disputes is
contained in the Argentina-Germany BIT. Article 10 of the BIT is, in effect, an offer

to submit disputes to arbitration, which investors may accept.

8

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

IV

28.

29.

Hochtief considers that its agreement is contained in the Request for Arbitration
which is intended, in effect, to be an acceptance of Argentina’s offer contained in

Article 10 and Article 3 of the Argentina-Germany BIT.

The question is whether the ‘offer’ and the ‘acceptance’ have resulted in an agreement

which provides the basis for the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

Both parties approached this question on the basis that is necessary to establish a
consensus: i.e., that it is necessary to demonstrate that Hochtief’s Request for
Arbitration was an acceptance of the offer to arbitrate on the terms on which the offer

was made, and not a counter-offer on different terms. The Tribunal shares this view.

The offer to arbitrate being contained in a treaty, it follows that the interpretation and
analysis of its terms must be conducted in accordance with the law of treaties. The
exercise is, accordingly, to be performed according to the principles set out in the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (“VCLT’), to which both Argentina and
Germany are Parties (and to which Article 11 of the BIT refers), and in particular in
Articles 31-33 of the VCLT, which are familiar to all involved in investment

arbitration.

The ‘acceptance’ is contained in the Request for Arbitration. There is no doubt as to
the interpretation of the ‘acceptance’: it purports to accept the offer to arbitrate made

in the BIT.

The interpretation of BIT Article 10

The task of interpreting the BIT must be approached initially by giving the terms of
the treaty their ordinary meaning in their context and in the light of the BIT’s object
and purpose. On this basis it is apparent that Article 10 of the BIT provides for a
number of possible steps and for alternative procedures in the event of a dispute

arising.

Article 10(1) provides that disputes shall as far as possible be settled amicably
between the parties to the dispute. There is no suggestion by the Respondent of any

failure by the Claimant to comply with Article 10(1), which could affect the

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

jurisdiction of the Tribunal; and the Tribunal sees no reason to suppose that the

obligation imposed by Article 10(1) has not been fulfilled.

Paragraph (2) of Article 10 entitles either party — here, either Hochtief or Argentina —

to require the submission of the dispute to the host State’s courts:

“If a dispute within the meaning of paragraph | cannot be settled within six months from the
date on which one of the parties concerned gave notice of the dispute, it shall, at the request of
either party, be submitted to the competent courts of the Contracting Party in whose territory
the investment was made.”

 

Paragraph (2) refers to a ‘request’, but the request triggers an obligation (‘shall ... be

submitted’) to submit the dispute to the courts.

Neither party takes any point concerning the six-month period to which Article 10(2)
refers, and the Tribunal sees no reason to suppose that this obligation imposed by

Article 10(2) has not been fulfilled.

The words “shall ... be submitted” are the only words in Article 10 paragraph 2 that
are capable of imposing a legal obligation. The precise nature of the obligation set out
in paragraph (2) is obscured by the phrasing of the provision. Instead of stipulating
that ‘one or other party shall submit the dispute’ to the courts, it sets out the

stipulation in the passive voice: the dispute shall be submitted to the courts.

The Respondent reads Article 10(2) as saying that in every case one or other party
must submit the dispute to the domestic courts.? The Respondent submits that “the
verbal expression ‘shall be submitted’ [makes] clear that it is an order”, so that one

of the parties must submit the dispute to the domestic courts.*

The Claimant, on the other hand, reads Article 10(2) as giving to each party a right to

have recourse to the courts, but not as imposing upon either party a duty to do so.

It was not suggested that either party had made a request under Article 10(2) for the

reference of the dispute to the courts in Argentina. This is a matter of some

Memorial, paragraph 25.
Memorial, paragraph 24.
Memorial, paragraph 25.

10

36.

37.

38.

39.

significance. The Respondent could have insisted upon the reference of the dispute to

its courts under Article 10(2), but it did not do so.

Article 10(2) says that the dispute “shall, at the request of either party, be submitted”
to the national courts. Article 10(2) thus obliges party B to submit to the jurisdiction
of the courts if party A requests that the dispute be referred to the courts. The
provision does not, however, explicitly impose a duty on either party A or party B to
refer the case to the courts.° Nor, in the view of the Tribunal, does Article 10(2)
implicitly impose such a duty. Article 10(2) makes good sense interpreted without any
such duty to refer implied into it. Recourse to the national courts is an important
option. As far as investors are concerned, access to the host State’s courts is a right
that must surely be regarded as such an elementary part of the concept of legal
protection that the right of access has little need of explicit statement. But under
Article 10(2) it is not only the investor but also the host State that has the right to refer

disputes to court.

The Respondent could, if it had wished, have requested that the dispute be referred to
its courts; and under Article 10(2) the Claimant would have been obliged to pursue
the case in the national courts. The Respondent did not do so. Nor did the Claimant
refer the dispute to the courts. The Respondent argues that in the absence of any
reference of the dispute to the courts there can, under the scheme set out in Article 10,

be no unilateral reference of the dispute to arbitration.

Article 10(3) provides that “The dispute may be submitted to an international arbitral

tribunal in any of the following circumstances”. There are two such circumstances.

One, in Article 10(3)(b), is “Where both parties to the dispute have so agreed.” There
is no suggestion that there is any such agreement in this case apart from the agreement
said to result from the offer in the BIT and the acceptance in the Request for
Arbitration. No more need be said about specific agreements as a route to arbitration
under the BIT, although the terms of the offer in the BIT and of the Request for

Arbitration are, of course, central to the questions in this case.

The parties to the dispute will always be a Contracting Party to the treaty and a national or company of
the other contracting party: Article 10(1).

11

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45,

46.

The other circumstance, in Article 10(3)(a), is where “[a]t the request of one of the
parties to the dispute ..., after a period of 18 months has elapsed from the moment
when the judicial process provided for by paragraph 2 of this Article was initiated, no
final decision has been given or where a decision has been made but the Parties are

still in dispute.”

Four points are to be noted about Article 10(3)(a). First, as in Article 10(2), it creates
a right that may be exercised unilaterally: either the Claimant or the Respondent may

refer the dispute to arbitration.

Second, reference to the courts does not entail a choice under a ‘fork in the road’
provision (and no such fork is created elsewhere in the BIT). Reference to the courts

can be followed by a unilateral reference of the dispute to arbitration.

Third, neither party is obliged to continue to submit to the jurisdiction of the courts
for more than 18 months, whether or not the courts have reached a final — or any —

decision in the case.

Fourth, the provision does not oblige either party to accept a decision of the court as
the resolution of the dispute: either party may take the position that the parties are

“still in dispute” despite any court decision.

Respondent submits that the effect of Article 10(3) is that unless (i) there has been a
reference to the courts under Article 10(2) and (ii) 18 months have elapsed since that
reference, the circumstances envisaged in Article 10(3)(a) cannot arise and there can
be no unilateral reference to arbitration. Claimant submits that the 18-month period is
applicable only if there has in fact been a reference to the courts under Article 10(2),
and that the provision has no application in circumstances where no such reference

was made.

Because neither party is actually obliged to submit the dispute to the courts under
Article 10(2), it cannot be supposed that every dispute not resolved by discussions
will in fact be submitted to the courts. The question is in effect, therefore, whether the
possibility of unilateral recourse to arbitration is altogether excluded in cases where

there is no such reference to the courts.

12

47.

48.

49.

50.

The interpretation of Article 10(3) so as to require reference to the local courts as a
precondition to recourse to arbitration in every case would, as the Respondent pointed
out, have some features in common with a requirement to exhaust local remedies.’
Indeed, under Article 26 of the ICSID Convention the Respondent could have
required the exhaustion of local remedies as a condition of its consent to arbitration

under that Convention; but it did not do so.

In some ways, however, the effect of Article 10(3) as interpreted by the Respondent
would be radically different from that of a duty to exhaust local remedies. There is no
obligation under Article 10(3) to exhaust the remedies, or even to see a first-instance
case through to its conclusion if that takes longer than 18 months. There would be no
question under Article 10(3) of the effectiveness of the available remedies: recourse
would be obligatory even in cases where it was perfectly clear that the courts could
provide no remedy — for example, in cases where legislation has effectively left the

court with no option except to decide the dispute against the Claimant.

If Article 10(3) were indeed interpreted so as to require in each and every case 18
months of litigation before any unilateral reference to arbitration, the effect of the
resultant pattern of obligations would be as follows. A claimant might decide initially
not to refer the dispute to the courts. The respondent might also decide not to ‘request’
(i.e., insist) that the dispute be referred to its courts under Article 10(2); and it might
also decline to agree to a consensual reference to arbitration under Article 10(3)(b). A
claimant could then refer the dispute to arbitration only if it first submitted the dispute
to the courts. If the Claimant did indeed then proceed to submit the case to the courts,
neither the Claimant nor the Respondent would be obliged by the BIT to accept any
decision rendered by the court. (We put to one side the question whether such a
decision could have effect as res judicata in any respect.) Equally, either party could
simply abandon the litigation after 18 months. After 18 months had elapsed, either

party could unilaterally submit the dispute to arbitration.

It is no doubt arguable that there is a duty on both parties to the dispute to act in good
faith during the pursuit of a settlement of the dispute, so that that there is an obligation

to enter into the litigation during the 18-month period in a manner that might lead to a

As the Respondent noted: Memorial, paragraph 17.

13

51.

52.

53.

54.

resolution of the dispute by the courts. It is certainly valuable for each party (and
perhaps particularly for the Respondent) that it has the right to insist upon reference of
the dispute to the host State courts. It is also understandable that a six-month window
for negotiations prior to any reference to the courts should be secured, as Article 10(2)
does on one reading. But it is difficult to see the rationale for imposing, in the terms
used in Article 10(3)(a), a duty to spend a period of 18 months with the dispute listed

on the docket of domestic courts as a precondition for the reference to arbitration.

To oblige the parties to spend 18 months in litigation, where one or other (or both) of
them might have decided in advance to reject any decision that might emerge from the
courts, appears pointless. While the possibility of a requirement for pointless litigation
may not be a decisive indication that this interpretation of the BIT is wrong, it must

surely move some weight in that direction.

The problem does not arise from uncertainty as to the meaning of Article 10(3)(a)
itself. Its meaning is clear. Article 10(3) supplements and follows on from Article
10(2). If either party requests that the dispute be submitted to the courts, it must be
submitted to the courts. The dispute must then stay in the courts until either (i) a final
decision is rendered by the courts or (ii) 18 months have elapsed from the initiation of
the judicial process (Article 10(3)(a)), unless (iii) both parties agree before then to go
to arbitration (Article 10(3)(b)).

The problem arises from the fact that there is no duty under Article 10(2) to refer the
dispute to the courts, and that there is no provision in Article 10 that explicitly permits
unilateral references to arbitration, except in circumstances where the dispute has in
fact been referred to the courts. The only provision in Article 10 that clearly permits a
reference to arbitration without prior litigation is Article 10(3)(b), which requires the
agreement of both parties. Unless an additional implied right to have unilateral
recourse to arbitration can be found, the result would be that litigation is always an
essential precondition to the reference of a dispute to arbitration by one party acting
unilaterally, but is not an essential precondition to a reference to arbitration agreed by

both parties

Viewed in the light of the many provisions in other BITs that permit unilateral
references to arbitration that result might be thought unusual; but it is not impossible,

14

55.

56.

57.

58.

or wholly impracticable, or wholly unreasonable. The Tribunal is, however, not
convinced that it is correct to interpret the BIT to mean that litigation is always an
essential precondition to unilateral reference of a dispute to arbitration, and does not
decide the point or rest its decision upon the rejection of this interpretation and the
existence of an implied right of unilateral reference to arbitration. The Tribunal does
not need to decide the point, because the Claimant has raised another argument, based
on the MEN provision in BIT Article 3. That argument was the main focus of the

parties’ pleadings, and is a sufficient basis for the Tribunal’s decision.

The Tribunal thus proceeds on the assumption, and without deciding the point, that
Article 10 of the Argentina-Germany BIT imposes a mandatory 18-month submission
to the national courts as a precondition of unilateral recourse to arbitration under the

BIT.

The MEN provision

The Claimant considers that the MFN provision in Article 3 of the BIT entitles it to
rely upon the more liberal provisions on dispute settlement in the Argentina-Chile
BIT. The Respondent, in contrast, considers that the Article 3 MFN provision applies
only to ‘substantive’ rights, which in its view do not include the dispute settlement

provisions, under the BIT.

The parties referred extensively to the jurisprudence and to writings of scholars on the
effect of MFN clauses in BITs. The apparent inconsistencies in the case-law of
arbitration tribunals on the question of the applicability of MFN clauses to dispute
settlement provisions afforded each party the possibility of supporting its position by

reference to earlier awards.

The Tribunal has given very careful consideration to this jurisprudence, and is
conscious of the advantages of consistency in the approaches of different tribunals to
similar questions. It is also aware of the significance that other tribunals have attached
to differences between the formulations of MEN provisions in various treaties. That
said, it is the responsibility of this Tribunal to interpret to the best of its ability the

specific provisions of the particular treaties that are applicable in this case, and not to

15

VI

59.

60.

61.

62.

choose between broad doctrines or schools of thought, or to conduct a head-count of

arbitral awards taking various positions and to fall in behind the numerical majority.

Does the MEN provision apply to dispute settlement?
The first question for the Tribunal is whether the MEN provision in BIT Article 3 is in

principle capable of applying to dispute settlement provisions so as to modify BIT

Article 10.

Article 3 contains provisions extending MFN treatment both to investments (Article
3(1)), and to investors (Article 3(2)). The obligation is the same in each case.‘ The
entitlement is to treatment that is not less favourable than the State accords to its own
nationals or companies or to investments of nationals or companies of any third State.
In the present case it is the entitlement of the investor that is relevant, because it is the

treatment of the investor as a disputing party that is in issue.

Article 3(2) does not provide that once one becomes an ‘investor’ under the
Argentina-Germany BIT one has an entitlement to MFN or national treatment in
every aspect of one’s life, whether or not related to the investment. It does not, for
example, give a right to join the ‘nationals only’ queue at immigration desks. Rather,
Article 3(2) stipulates that the entitlement to demand MEN or national treatment from
the State applies to investors “as regards their activity in connection with investments

in its territory.”

Is dispute settlement an ‘activity in connection with the investment’? The Respondent
argues that ad Article 3 in the Protocol to the BIT indicates that it is not. Ad Article 3

provides that

*(a) The following shall more particularly, though not exclusively, be deemed "activity"
within the meaning of article 3, paragraph 2: the management, utilization, use and enjoyment
of an investment. The following shall more particularly, though not exclusively, be deemed
“treatment less favourable" within the meaning of article 3: less favourable measures that
affect the purchase of raw materials and other inputs, energy or fuel, or means of production
or operation of any kind or the marketing of products inside or outside the country. Measures
that are adopted for reasons of internal or external security or public order, public health or
morality shall not be deemed "treatment less favourable" within the meaning of article 3.”

 

 

As is clear in the authentic German and Spanish texts but not in the UN’s English translation.

16

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

In this English translation the opening phrase is unclear. It might be read as meaning
that the listed examples (i) are deemed to be ‘activities’ but (ii) are not exclusively to
be characterised as ‘activities’ and may also have another character. Alternatively, it
might be read as meaning (i) that the following examples are deemed to be ‘activities’

but (ii) that the list is not exhaustive and there may be other examples of ‘activities’.

In the authentic Spanish and German texts of the BIT the opening phrase is “Por
‘activitades’ en el sentido del apartado 2 del articulo 3 se consideraran, en especial
pero no exclusivamente ...” and “Als ‘Betitigung’ im Sinne des Artikels 3 Absatz 2
ist inbesondere, aber nicht ausschlieBlich...” It is therefore clear that ad Article 3 is
setting out a non-exhaustive list of examples of ‘activities’ within the meaning of BIT

Article 3.

It is suggested that the phrase “the management, utilization, use and enjoyment of an
investment” should be read as an indication that the reference is to a range of
activities concerned with the commercial operation of the investment, and that this

does not include the pursuit of dispute settlement under BIT Article 10.

The Tribunal considers that the phrase “the management, utilization, use and
enjoyment of an investment” does include recourse to dispute settlement, as an aspect
of the management of the investment. Indeed, the (‘procedural’) right to enforce
another (‘substantive’) right is one component of the bundles of rights and duties that

make up the legal concept of what property is.

This is clear if one considers the case of a claim to money or to performance having
an economic value, both of which are stipulated by Article 1(c) of the Argentina-
Germany BIT to be within the definition of an ‘investment, or of intellectual property
rights, addressed in Article 1(d). The argument that although a State could not cancel
such claims or intellectual property rights without violating the BIT, it could cancel
the right to pursue the claims or enforce the intellectual property rights through
litigation or arbitration without violating the BIT is nonsensical. It is nonsensical
because the right to enforcement is an essential component of the property rights

themselves, and not a wholly distinct right.

17

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

This is a perfectly reasonable interpretation of the BIT. The BIT is an agreement both
for the promotion and for the reciprocal protection of investments. It is an agreement
between two States, which no doubt is intended to operate to the benefit of both States
but which plainly confers benefits directly upon investors. The Tribunal considers that
the provisions of Article 10, which on any interpretation confer upon investors the
possibility of recourse to arbitration in addition to the right to have recourse to
national courts, are a form of protection that is enjoyed within the scope of “the
management, utilization, use and enjoyment of an investment”. Unlike the inter-State
dispute settlement provisions in Article 9, which safeguard the interests of the States
parties in the event of a dispute regarding the interpretation or application of the BIT,
Article 10 is a benefit conferred on investors and designed to protect their interests
and the interests of a State Party in its capacity as a host State party to a dispute with
an investor: it is a protective right that sits alongside the guarantees against arbitrary

and discriminatory measures, expropriation, and so on.

If the investor submitted a dispute with a third party to the national courts in order to
protect its legal interests — a simple claim for contractual payments from a customer
would be an adequate example — it is difficult to see any reason why that litigation
should not be regarded as a management activity to which the Article 3 MFN
provision is applicable so as to supplement the entitlement to juridical security under

Article 4 of the BIT.

A court fee or bond requirement imposed on litigants who are nationals of State A but
not on nationals of State B, for example, would appear to be caught by the MFN
provision. So, too, would a requirement under national law to submit to conciliation

prior to litigation, imposed upon nationals of A but not nationals of B.

The Tribunal sees no good reason to treat disputes between the investor and the State
any differently from litigation between the investor and another private party, or to
distinguish between the pursuit of remedies in the courts and their pursuit in

arbitration, both of which are contemplated in Article 10 of the BIT.

Accordingly, the Tribunal is satisfied that the MFN provision is in principle

applicable to the pursuit of dispute settlement procedures.

18

73.

74.

7S.

76.

VI

77.

e

Tf there should be any doubt as to whether the pursuit of dispute settlement procedures
falls within the scope of ‘management’, the Tribunal considers that there can be no
doubt that the settlement of disputes is an “activity in connection with investments”,
to use the language of BIT Article 3 itself rather than the non-exhaustive phraseology

of ad Article 3.

The fact that BIT Article 4(4) stipulates expressly that nationals or companies of
either Contracting party are entitled to MFN treatment “in respect of the matters
provided for in this Article”, but that there is no express MFN stipulation in BIT
Article 10 itself, does not change the position.’ There is similarly no express statement
on MEN treatment in BIT Article 2 or BIT Article 5: but to the extent that those
Articles are concerned with the treatment of “investments” or of “nationals or
companies of the other Contracting Party, as regards their activity in connection with
investments in its territory”, Article 3 paragraphs (1) and (2) make clear that the MFN
provision is applicable. Moreover, Article 3 paragraphs (3) and (4) explicitly exclude
certain matters from the scope of the MFN clause, but dispute settlement is not among

them.

The Tribunal is accordingly satisfied that the MFN provision in Article 3 of the
Argentina-Germany BIT applies to dispute settlement under Article 10 of that BIT.

At this stage in the argument two further questions arise: (i) what effect does the
entitlement to ‘most favourable’ treatment have upon the jurisdiction of a tribunal
constituted in pursuance of the provisions of BIT Article 10? and (ii), is the

requirement of 18 months prior litigation ‘less favourable’?

MEN and jurisdictional limits

It is well understood that MFN clauses are subject to implicit limitations. An example
was given by the International Law Commission in its Commentary on its draft
Articles on Most-Favoured-Nation clauses. It said that an MFN clause in a

commercial treaty between State A and State B would not entitle State A to claim the

It is also arguable that the application of the MEN provision to dispute settlement procedures is an
aspect of the enjoyment of full legal protection and security that is guaranteed by Article 4(1). The
Tribunal takes no position on this point.

19

10

78.

79.

80.

81.

extradition of a criminal from State B on the ground that State B has agreed to
extradite such criminals to State C or voluntarily does so. The reason, it said, “is that
the clause can only operate in regard to the subject-matter which the two States had in

mind when they inserted the clause in their treaty.”"°

That proposition cannot seriously be challenged, and the principle is applicable to the
present case. Having decided that the MEN provision is in principle applicable to the
dispute settlement provisions of Article 10 of the BIT, it focuses attention on the need

to ask precisely what rights are covered by the MFN obligation.

In the present case, it might be argued that the MFN clause requires that investors
under the Argentina-Germany BIT be given MEN treatment during the conduct of an
arbitration but that the MFN clause cannot create a right to go to arbitration where
none otherwise exists under the BIT. The argument can be put more generally: the
MEN clause stipulates how investors must be treated when they are exercising the
rights given to them under the BIT but does not purport to give them any further

rights in addition to those given to them under the BIT.

The question is, does the MFN clause in question here create new rights where none
previously existed? and if not, is the right to have unilateral recourse to arbitration
without the 18-month litigation period a distinct, new right or is it rather a matter of

the manner in which those who already have a right to arbitrate are treated?

In the view of the Tribunal, it cannot be assumed that Argentina and German intended
that the MEN clause should create wholly new rights where none otherwise existed
under the Argentina-Germany BIT. The MEN clause stipulates a standard of treatment
and defines it according to the treatment of third parties. The reference is to a standard
of treatment accorded to third parties, not to the extent of the legal rights of third
parties. Non-statutory concessions to third party investors could, in principle, form the
basis of a complaint that the MEN obligation has not been secured. In contrast (to take
an example comparable to the ILC example concerning commercial treaties and
extradition), rights of visa-free entry for the purposes of study, given to nationals of a

third State, could not form the basis of such a complaint under the BIT. The MFN

Sir Arthur Watts, The International Law Commission 1949-1998, (Oxford, 1999), vol. III, p. 1821.

20

82.

83.

84.

85.

clause is not a renvoi to a range of totally distinct sources and systems of rights and
duties: it is a principle applicable to the exercise of rights and duties that are actually

secured by the BIT in which the MEN clause is found.

The Tribunal thus considers that the critical question is whether the absence of the 18-
month litigation period in the dispute settlement provision of the Argentina-Chile BIT
is a distinct right (in which case it would not be brought into the Argentina-Germany
BIT by the operation of the MEN clause) or is a provision that concerns the treatment
of investors in relation to the exercise of an existing right to arbitrate (in which case
the MFN clause in the Argentina-Germany BIT could operate to disapply the 18

month litigation period in Article 10(3)(a)).

There is no established criterion to distinguish for this purpose between a ‘right’ and
‘treatment in relation to the exercise of a right’. But there are several indications that
the 18-month pre-arbitration litigation requirement should be regarded as a matter of
the treatment of investors in exercising their rights in relation to dispute settlement

and not as the subject of a distinct right.

On any interpretation of Article 10 of the Argentina-Germany BIT, an investor can
ultimately exercise its rights so as to submit the dispute unilaterally to arbitration,
without the need for the further specific consent of the State party to the dispute to
proceed to arbitration. At worst, the investor (or indeed the State) could request the
submission of the dispute to the courts under BIT Article 10(2) and then proceed 18
months later to arbitration under Article 10(3)(a). There is, therefore, a right under the
Argentina-Germany BIT to submit an investment dispute to arbitration and to do so

without the consent of the other party to the dispute.

Reliance on the Argentina-Chile BIT via the MFN clause would not give Hochtief a
right to reach a position that it could not reach under the Argentina-Germany BIT: it
would enable it only to reach the same position as it could reach, by its own unilateral
choice and actions, under the Argentina-Germany BIT, but to do so more quickly and
more cheaply, without first pursuing litigation in the courts of Argentina for 18

months.

21

86.

87.

88.

89.

Secondly, the avoidance of the 18-month period in the Argentina-Germany BIT by
reliance on the MFN clause would have no impact upon the scope of the jurisdiction
of the Tribunal. It would not result in any case falling within its jurisdiction that could
not eventually be brought before the Tribunal by the Claimant acting alone under
Article 10 of the Argentina-Germany BIT. Nor would it remove the right of the
Respondent to invoke Article 10(2) of the BIT in any dispute, and to require its

submission to the national courts.

Third, the 18-month litigation period gives no inherent benefit, other than the
interposition of a period in which the parties may refine and reflect upon their
respective positions, to the other party. Neither party is bound to continue the
litigation for more than 18 months, whether or not the litigation has reached a
conclusion. Neither party is bound to accept that the dispute has been resolved by any
final court decision that is rendered within the 18 month period. Either party may,
under BIT Article 10 paragraphs (3) and (4) bring the dispute before ICSID. That is

very clear from Article 10 itself.

While it is true that, as the Respondent noted," the 18-month period gives the courts
the opportunity to resolve the dispute, the arbitrary limit upon the time allowed for
litigation and the express removal of any duty to accept any judgment makes that
opportunity, unlike a true duty to exhaust local remedies, to some extent perfunctory
and insubstantial. There is no certain benefit of which the other party is deprived by
allowing the MEN provision to render the 18-month period inapplicable. While not
logically or legally decisive, the fact that adherence to the 18-month rule would bring
no necessary benefit, and no necessary result other than the delay of the arbitration
proceedings, is a fact from which the Tribunal derives some encouragement to believe

that its decision is correct.

The Tribunal also notes that, to the extent that recourse to national courts is indeed
considered to be a benefit to either party, each party has the right under BIT Article
10(2) to insist, unilaterally, that the dispute be referred to national courts. Indeed,
from one perspective the question under consideration here is whether the

Respondent, having chosen not to require a reference to the national courts under

Transcript, Day 1, p. 4.

22

90.

91.

92.

93.

Article 10(2) may now raise the fact that there was no such reference as a bar to the

arbitration of the dispute of which the Tribunal is seised.

The Tribunal observes that this approach to distinguishing between what is a new,
independent, right to arbitrate and what is simply a manner in which an existing right
to arbitrate must be exercised reflects the distinction between questions of jurisdiction
and questions of admissibility. Jurisdiction is an attribute of a tribunal and not of a
claim, whereas admissibility is an attribute of a claim but not of a tribunal. A
distinction may also be drawn between questions of admissibility and questions of
receivability. A tribunal might decide that a claim of which it is seised and which is
within its jurisdiction is inadmissible (for example, on the ground of lis alibi pendens
or forum non conveniens); or it might refuse even to receive and become seised of a
claim that is within its jurisdiction because of some fundamental defect in the manner

in which the claim is put forward.

In broad terms, the Tribunal considers that the question in this case is not whether the
MEN clause can alter the jurisdiction of tribunals established under the BIT but
whether it can affect the prescribed procedures for accessing that jurisdiction. The
reason can be expressed in terms of the distinction between rights and the manner in

which rights are required to be exercised.

The reason might also be based upon the fact that the Contracting Parties to the BIT
(Argentina, Germany) are not the same as the parties to the dispute (Argentina,
Hochtief). If a tribunal is established by or under a treaty made by States, its
jurisdiction is fixed by that treaty. Its jurisdiction can be altered by the agreement of
the States Parties to treaty; but it cannot be altered by the parties to disputes who
present themselves to the tribunal. So, for example, the ICJ could not hear a claim
from an individual claimant against a State, even if the ‘Respondent’ State agreed to
appear before the Court and defend the claim. If the Court purported to hear the case,

it would not be functioning as ‘the ICJ’ under the ICJ Statute.

Similarly, if this Tribunal were asked by both parties to the present dispute to decide
upon, say, a dispute which arose before the treaty entered into force, and were to
accede to that request, it would not be functioning as an Article 10 tribunal under the
Argentina-Germany BIT. Argentina and Germany agreed, in Protocol ad Article 8,

23

94.

95.

that the Treaty shall in no case apply to disputes which arose before it entered into
force. Argentina and Hochtief cannot by agreement between themselves vary the
terms of that agreement between Argentina and Germany. In such a hypothetical case
it may be that, because the disputing parties had consented to put the matter to this
tribunal, the tribunal would have the legal competence to hear and decide the pre-
existent complaint case: but if it did hear and decide the case it would be functioning

as an ad hoc tribunal, and not as an Argentina-Germany BIT tribunal.

Questions of admissibility, on the other hand, are different from questions of
jurisdiction. The disputing parties are entitled to raise objections based upon questions
of admissibility, but they are not bound to do so; and if they do not raise those
objections, they will have acquiesced in any breach of the requirements of
admissibility and that acquiescence will ‘cure’ the breach. The tribunal, if it has

jurisdiction, will proceed to hear the case.

In the ICJ, for example, rules on admissibility include such matters as the rules on the
nationality of claims and the exhaustion of local remedies. The ICJ may have
jurisdiction to decide whether State A had injured corporation B in violation of
international law; but it may be that the claim actually filed is inadmissible because it
has been brought by the wrong State,” or because local remedies have not yet been
exhausted.'* But if no objection is raised on such grounds, the Court will not raise the
matter proprio motu. '4 Tf, on the other hand, the objection based upon admissibility is
raised and upheld, the very same claim (mutatis mutandis) could be brought by
another State or brought after the exhaustion of local remedies (to pursue the
examples used above), because the Court has jurisdiction in respect of the claim.
Defects in admissibility can be waived or cured by acquiescence: defects in

jurisdiction cannot.

Case concerning the Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Company, Limited (Belgium y. Spain),
Judgment, Feb. 5, 1970, ICJ Reports 1970, p. 3.

Interhandel Case (Switzerland v. United States), Judgment of March 21, 1959, ICJ Reports 1959, p. 6.

See Case concerning the Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI) (United States v. Italy), Judgment, July 20,
1989, ICJ Reports 1989, p. 15.

24

96.

97.

98.

99.

Viewed from this perspective the question in the present case is whether the 18-month
period is a requirement of the kind in respect to which the Respondent could accept or
acquiesce in non-compliance, and whether it has done so. The Tribunal considers that
the Respondent can indeed accept or acquiesce in such non-compliance and that the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal remains unaffected by it. It regards the 18-month period as
a condition relating to the manner in which the right to have recourse to arbitration
must be exercised — as a provision going to the admissibility of the claim rather than

the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

In this case there are two sets of conditions for access to arbitration: those in the
Argentina-Germany BIT and those in the Argentina-Chile BIT. As explained above,
the Tribunal considers that those sets of conditions are provisions relating to the
protection of investors and to the management, utilization, use and enjoyment of an

investment, and accordingly covered by the Article 3 MEN provision.

The MEN provision does not permit the selective picking of components from each
set of conditions, so as to manufacture a synthetic set of conditions to which no
State’s nationals would be entitled. The Claimant in this case cannot rely upon the
lack of an 18-month litigation period in the Argentina-Chile BIT and ignore the fact
that Article 10(2) of the Argentina-Chile BIT imposes a ‘fork in the road’ provision: it
must rely upon the whole scheme as set out in either Article 10 of the Argentina-Chile
BIT or Article 10 of the Argentina-Germany BIT. In this case it has chosen to rely
upon Article 10 of the Argentina-Chile BIT.

The resulting position should be spelled out, as should the scope of the Tribunal’s
decision. The Tribunal notes the limits of its jurisdiction as set by the Argentina-
Germany BIT. It accepts that the procedures relating to the bringing of a dispute to the
Tribunal are covered by Article 3 of the Argentina-Germany BIT. And it accepts that
the Claimant can therefore rely upon the procedures set out in Article 10 of the
Argentina-Chile BIT (including the ‘fork in the road’ provision). The MFN provision

thus operates in this case within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal as set by the

 

Argentina-Germany BIT, and operates so as to modify the procedures applicable to
the seising of the Tribunal. It is not necessary to decide what the position would have

been if the Argentina-Chile BIT had established a wider jurisdiction for tribunals than

25

VI

100.

Ix

101.

102.

103.

is established in the Argentina-Germany BIT, and the Tribunal takes no position on

this question.

Is Article 10(3) ‘less favourable’?

It is sometimes suggested that it is wrong to presuppose that, for example, litigation in
national courts is any less favourable than arbitration, or that a right to arbitrate after
18-months of litigation in national courts is less favourable than a right to arbitrate
immediately. The Tribunal does not share that view. It considers that whatever the
substantive merits of litigation and of arbitration, it is always more favourable to have
the choice as to which to employ than it is not to have that choice.’ This implies no

criticism whatever of the national courts.

Other issues: the location of the ‘treatment’

It was argued by the Respondent, on the basis of the wording of BIT Article 3, that
the MFN provision applied only to treatment that is meted out in the territory of the
State, and that its application in these proceedings was not treatment within the
territory of the State. Further, it was said that because the practice in investment
arbitrations is for the tribunal not to sit in the host State, this was a further indication

that Article 3 is inapplicable to the Article 10 procedures. '®

The consequence of this argument, if correct, is said to be that the duty to accord
MEN treatment was not engaged in this case, so that the Claimant cannot rely upon

the MEN obligation in order to establish the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

Article 3(1) and (2) of the BIT as it is translated in the United Nations Treaty Series
read as follows:
“(1) Neither Contracting Party shall subject investments in its territory by or with the
participation of nationals or companies of the other Contracting Party to treatment less

favourable than it accords to investments of its own nationals or companies or to investments
of nationals or companies of any third State.

There are, no doubt, value judgments concerning the desirability of choice and the existence of free
will presupposed in that proposition. The Tribunal is, however, content to accept it as a premise.

Transcript, day 1, pp. 26 - 33.

26

104.

105.

106.

107.

(2) Neither Contracting Party shall subject nationals or companies of the other Contracting
Party, as regards their activity in connection with investments in its territory, to treatment less
favourable than it accords to its own nationals or companies or to nationals or companies of
any third State.”

The phrase translated as ‘in its territory’ is placed differently in the corresponding and

authentic German and Spanish texts, which read as follows:

“(1) Jede Vertragspartei behandelt Kapitalanlagen von Staatsangehorigen oder Gesellschaften
der anderen Vertragspartei oder Kapitalanlagen, an denen Staatsangehérige oder
Gesellschaften der anderen Vertragspartei beteiligt sind, in ihrem Hoheitsgebiet nicht weniger
giinstig als Kapitalanlagen der eigenen Staatsangehérigen und Gesellschaften oder
Kapitalanlagen von Staatsangehorigen und Gesellschaften dritter Staaten.

 

(2) Jede Vertragsparei behandelt Staatsangehérige oder Gesellschaften der anderen
V tei hinsichtlich ihrer i im mit Kapitalanl in ihrem
Hoheitsgebiet nicht weniger giinstig als ihre eigenen Staatsangehrigen und Gesellschaften
oder Staatsangehorige und Gesellschaften dritter Staaten.”

“(1) Ninguna de las Partes Contratantes someteré en su territorio a las inversiones de
nacionales o sociedades de la otra Parte Contratante o a las inversiones en las que mantengan
participaciones los nacionales o sociedades de la otra Parte Contratante, a un trato menos
favorable que el que se conceda a las inversiones de los propios nacionales y sociedades 0 a
las inversiones de nacionales y sociedades de terceros Estados.

 

 

 

   

(2) Ninguna de las Partes Contratantes someterd en su territorio a los nacionales 0 sociedades
de la otra Parte Contratante, en cuanto se refiere a sus actividades relacionadas con las
inversiones, a un trato menos favorable que a sus propios nacionales y sociedades o a los
nacionales y sociedades de terceros Estados.”

The phrase ‘in its territory’ appears to be linked to the treatment, rather than to the
investment; and the material words would be more precisely translated as “... shall
subject in its territory investments ...” or “... shall in its territory subject investments
...”. The result would be that the subjection of investments or investors to treatment

outside Argentina could not engage liability under Article 3 of the BIT.

Giving this phrase its full weight and assuming, arguendo, that actions of the
Respondent outside Argentina with respect to investments made by a claimant would
not covered by the BIT, the question would be whether the invocation of the 18-
month period under Article 10(3) in this case is treatment ‘outside the territory’ of the

State. The Tribunal does not consider that it is.

The investment was made in Argentina. The Respondent’s decision to invoke the
challenge based upon Article 10(3) of the BIT is an act which was located in the seat

of the Respondent’s Government, and which would be implemented in Argentina by

27

108.

109.

110.

11.

112.

requiring the Claimant to engage in litigation before the courts in Argentina. Thus far,

no extraterritorial element is evident.

The only extraterritorial elements appear to be that the jurisdiction challenge is raised
in a session held outside Argentina by a Tribunal that is characterised by the
Respondent as having an institutionally extraterritorial nature because it is an

international tribunal expected to sit outside the Respondent State.*”

The critical question is, what is the ‘treatment’ to which the MEN obligation applies.
The relevant treatment in this case is not constituted by the act of the reading or
hearing by the Tribunal of the Respondent’s challenge based upon BIT Article 10(3).
The place where that happens is not the location of the treatment: it is the location of
the consequences or the effects of the treatment (and, furthermore, the actual location
of the reading or hearing is purely contingent, and may differ as between members of
the Tribunal). The treatment of which the Claimant complains is the Respondent’s
insistence upon the ‘18-month’ requirement and insistence by way of a jurisdictional

challenge upon the pursuit of litigation in the courts in Argentina.

The ‘international’ nature of this Tribunal does not alter the position. It does not

deprive the conduct of the Respondent of its intra-territorial character.

In the view of the Tribunal, the relevant treatment is the reliance by the Respondent,
not having invoked Article 10(2), upon Article 10(3) and the refusal of the
Respondent to submit to immediate arbitration as the Claimant wishes. That conduct
cannot be said to be conduct outside the territory of the Respondent for the purposes

of Article 3 of the BIT.

The Second Objection: Hochtief’s Standing

The second objection is that Hochtief lacks the standing to present this claim because
the rights belong to a different juridical person. The argument is in essence that
because Hochtief operated through a locally-incorporated subsidiary, PdL, and that
subsidiary is the party that was allegedly injured, Hochtief has no right to bring this

claim.

Transcript, Day 1, p. 33; and Day 1, p. 4.

28

20

113.

114.

115.

116.

The Respondent referred to Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention in this
connection and argued that its effect was that PdL should have brought the claim, and
that for it to be entitled to do so it would have to show that Argentina had agreed to
accord PdL the same rights as a foreign investor and that PdL was in fact under
foreign control.'* It argued that claims by shareholders (‘derivative claims’) are only
allowed where they are specifically provided for in the BIT, and it contrasted the

Argentina-Germany BIT with the Argentina-US BIT in this respect."

The Respondent pointed out that ad Article 4 in the Protocol to the BIT provided for
compensation “also” in the event of the taking of measures “against the company in
which the investment is made” (i.e., the locally-incorporated subsidiary; in this case,
PdL), drawing the inference that in other cases no action lies in respect of injury to the

company in which the investment is made.

Whatever the thinking behind the drafting of ad Article 4 might have been, Article
1(1)(b) of the BIT is unequivocal in stipulating that an investment includes “shares,
stocks in companies, and other forms of participation in companies.” The States
Parties to the BIT could, had they wished, have limited the scope of the term
‘investment’ to cases where the foreign investor holds a controlling shareholding or
even a 100% shareholding in a locally-incorporated subsidiary in the host State. They

did not do so.

Hochtief owns 26% of the shares in PdL, to which it has contributed capital and made
loans totalling over USD 34 million.” Given the scale of what would be regarded in
any commercial context as an investment, and given the likelihood of consortium
funding for large-scale projects, it is not surprising that the States Parties to the BIT
agreed upon a definition of ‘investment’ that includes configurations such as those in
the present case. Moreover, the terms of the tender document under which Hochtief
bid for the right to engage in this project stipulated that the successful bidder would

have to operate through a company incorporated in Argentina.

Transcript, Day 1, pp. 43-44.
Transcript, Day 1, pp. 45-46.

Request for Arbitration, paragraphs 4, 100. The total contribution including interest up to May 2007 is
said to be almost USD 50 million: ibid., paragraph 102.

29

117.

118.

119.

xi

120.

XI

121.

e

The fact that Hochtief agreed, under Article 5 of the Concession contract, to assign all
of its rights and obligations to PdL does not alter the position. Indeed, it confirms that
Hochtief’s investment consisted precisely in its shares in PdL and other forms of

investment recognized in BIT Article 1(1).”

Similarly, the fact that there are jurisdictional clauses relating to disputes under the
concession contract, providing for litigation or arbitration in Argentina,” does not
alter the position. Those provisions govern the manner in which PdL must pursue
dispute settlement; but they do not alter the character of Hochtief’s participation in

PdL as an investment.

The Tribunal has no doubt that Hochtief has made an investment in Argentina, in

PdL, and that it is an investor under the BIT.

Jurisdiction of the Centre

The Respondent sought a declaration that the dispute was not only outside the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal but also outside the jurisdiction of the Centre. The
Tribunal does not accept that this is so. The dispute plainly concerns a dispute
between a State Party to the BIT and an investor of the other State Party, both States
being Contracting Parties to the ICSID Convention. The dispute arises out of an
investment; and the parties to the dispute have, as explained above, consented to
submit it to arbitration. The Tribunal accordingly considers that the requirements of

the ICSID Convention and in particular Article 25 thereof, are met.

The contract claims and double recovery
The Respondent argued that Hochtief’s claim overlapped with contractual claims
being pursued in the courts in Argentina, and that Respondent was being put at risk of

having to pay twice for the same alleged injury.

Transcript, Day 1, pp. 55-56.
See Transcript, Day 1, p. 59.

30

122. The Tribunal is aware of this risk, but does not consider that it is a matter that goes to
the question of jurisdiction. It will, if necessary, be addressed at a later stage in these

proceedings.

XIII Costs

 

123. The Respondent requested an order that costs and fees be taxed against the Claimant.

The Tribunal reserves this question for decision along with the merits of this dispute.

XIV Conclusion

124. The Tribunal has reached this Decision on Jurisdiction by a majority. It has done so
after a great deal of thought and detailed discussion, reflecting the difficulty of the
question. It is right to record the seriousness of those discussions, and the openness
with which differing views have been considered, and the high regard of those in the

majority for the carefully reasoned arguments of their co-arbitrator.
125. Accordingly, for the reasons set out above, the Tribunal decides:

(i) to reject the Respondent’s submission that the Centre has no jurisdiction
and the Tribunal has no competence over this case;

(ii) to assert that the Centre has jurisdiction and the Tribunal has competence
over this case; and

(iii) to decide upon the question of costs and fees at a later stage, along with
the merits of the dispute.

31

 

 

 

Honorable Charles N. Brower Mr Christopher Thomas, Q.C.

Arbitrator Arbitrator

ba pmb

Professor Vaughan Lowe
President of the Tribunal

Decision on Jurisdiction
Hochtief Aktiengesellschaft v. Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/07/31)

Appendix I

Treaty Series

 

Treaties and international agreements
registered
or filed and recorded
with the Secretariat of the United Nations

Recueil des Traités

 

Traités et accords internationaux
enregistrés
ou classés et inscrits au répertoire
au Secrétariat de l’Organisation des Nations Unies

Copyright © United Nations 2001
‘All rights reserved
Manufactured in the United States of America

Copyright © Nations Unies 2001
Tous droits réservés
Imprimé aux Etats-Unis d' Amérique

Ces
Wz

Treaty Series

 

Treaties and international agreements
registered
or filed and recorded
with the Secretariat of the United Nations

VOLUME 1910

Recueil des Traités

 

Traités et accords internationaux
enregistrés
ou classés et inscrits au répertoire
au Secrétariat de l’Organisation des Nations Unies

United Nations © Nations Unies
New York, 2001

Treaties and international agreements
registered or filed and recorded
with the Secretariat of the United Nations

 

VOLUME 1910 1996 I. Nos. 32532-32544

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I

Treaties and international agreements
registered on 8 February 1996

No. 32532. Germany and Czech and Slovak Federal Republic:
Arrangement concerning the employment of workers for the purpose of expanding
their vocational and linguistic knowledge (Foreign Labour Agreement).
Signed at Prague on 23 April 1991...

 

No. 32533. Germany and Czech aud Slovak Federal Republic:

Agreement on the international carriage of goods by road. Signed at Bonn on
28 October 1992 ...

 

No. 32534. Germauy and Poland:
Agreement concerning the prevention of incidents at sea beyond the territorial sea
(with annex). Signed at Bonn on 27 November 1990

 

No. 32535. Germany and Poland:

Agreement concerning the German-Polish youth organization. Signed at Bonn on
17 June 1991

No. 32536. Germany and Poland:
Agreement on inland navigation (with protocol). Signed at Warsaw on 8 November
1991

 

No. 32537. Germauy and Poland:
Agreement on the passage of ships through the internal waters in the area of
Usedom island. Signed at Bonn on 17 February 1993 ..

 

Vol. 1910

83

107

151

Traités et accords internationaux
enregistrés ou classés et inscrits au répertoire
au Secrétariat de l’Organisation des Nations Unies

 

VOLUME 1910 1996 I. N° 32532-32544

 

TABLE DES MATIERES

Traités et accords internationaux
enregistrés le 8 février 1996

N° 32532. Allemagne et République fédérale tcbéqne et slovaque :

Convention relative a1’ emploi de travailleurs en vue d’approfondir leurs connais-
relative aux

migrans). Signé a Prague ‘e 23 avril 1991 ...

 

N° 32533. Allemague et République fédérale tchéque et slovaque :

Accord relatif au transport routier international de marchandises. Signé 4 Bonn le
28 octobre 1992...

 

N° 32534. Allemagne et Pologne :
Accord tendant a prévenir les incidents en mer en dehors des eaux territoriales
(avec annexe). Signé 4 Bonn le 27 novembre 1990... a

 

N° 32535. Allemagne et Pologue :

Accord relatif & l'organisme germano-polonais pour la jeunesse. Signé & Bonn le
17 juin 1991 83

N° 32536, Allemague et Pologne :

Accord relatif a la navigation sur les voies d’eau intéri avec Signé
a Varsovie le 8 novembre 1991..... “

 

N° 32537. Allemague et Pologne :

Accord concernant la circulation des navires dans les eaux intérieures dans la
région de I’le d’Usedom. Signé & Bonn le 17 février 1993... “

151

 

Vol. 1910

VI United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

 

No. 32538. Germany and Argentina:

Treaty on the encouragement and reciprocal protection of investments (with Pro-

tocol and exchanges of notes). Signed at Bonn on 9 April 1991 ... 171

 

No. 32539. Germany and Netherlands:

Agreement concerning transfrontier cooperation between territorial communities
and other public agencies (with protocol). Signed at Isselburg-Anholt on
23 May 1991 225

 

No. 32540. Germany and Sweden:
Agreement on the reciprocal observance of secrecy in respect of applications for
patents or registered designs on inventions important for defence (with rules
of procedure). Signed at Stockholm on 26 August 1991 .. a

 

No. 32541. Germany and Norway:
Agreement conceming the avoidance of double taxation and mutual admin-
istrative assistance with respect to taxes on income and on capital (with Pro-

tocol). Signed at Oslo on 4 October 1991 ..

 

No. 32542. Germany and Romania:

Agreement concerning navigation on inland waterways (with protocol). Signed a at
Bonn on 22 October 1991

 

No. 32543. Germany and Romai
Agreement concerning the employment of workers for the purpose of expanding
their vocational and linguistic knowledge (Foreign Labour Agreement).

Signed at on 12 May 1992 439

 

No. 32544. Germany and Turkey:

A on the of Turkish ises in order to
execute work contracts. Sioned at Ankara on 18 November 1991... ses

 

ANNEX A. Ratifications, accessions, subsequent agreements, etc., con-
cerning treaties and international agreements registered with the
Secretariat of the United Nations

No. 5119. Agreement between the Kingdom of Norway and the Federal Re-
public of Germany for the avoidance of douhle taxation and con-
cerning reciprocal administrative and legal assistance with respect
to taxes on income and fortune and to the business tax. Signed at
Oslo, on 18 November 1958:

(Note by the jc 474

 

 

Vol. 1910

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recneil des Traités vir

 

N° 32538. Allemagne et Argentine 3

Traité relatif 4 la p ion eta (
protocole et : échanges de aye eet a Bonn le9 ae 1991...

 

 

N° 32539. Allemagne et Pays-Bas :

Accord relatif & la coopération transfrontaliére entre collectivités ou autorités ter-
ritoriales et autres organismes (avec protocole). Signé a Isselburg-
Anholt le 23 mai 1991 .

 

 

N° 32540. Allemagne et Suéde :

Accord concernant le secret mutuel & observer au sujet des dépéts de brevets ou
des la défense

 

 

(avec régles d’application). Signé 4 Stockholm le 26 aofit 1991..

N° 32541. Allemagne et Norvége :
Convention tendant a éviter la double imposition et réglant l’entraide adminis-
trative en matiére d’impéts sur le revenu et sur la fortune (avec Protocole).

Signé a Oslo le 4 octobre 1991 ...

 

No 32542. Allemague et Roumauie :

Accord relatif a la navigation sur les voies d’eau intérieures (avec protocole). Signe
& Bonn le 22 octobre 1991...

 

N° 32543. Allemagne et Roumanie :

Convention relative a1’ emploi de travailleurs en vue d’approfondir leurs connais-
relative aux

 

 

san
migrants) Signe 2 Bucarest le 12 mai 1992

 

N° 32544. Allemagne et Turqui

Accord relatif & !’emploi de travailleurs d’entreprises turques pour l’exécution de
contrats. Signé Ankara le 18 novembre 1991.... Co

  

ANNEXE A. Rati dhésic accords
des traités et accords internationaux enregistrés ‘au  Secrévariat de
U’Organisation des Nations Unies

 

N°5119. Couvention eutre le Royaume de Norvege et la République fédérale
d’Allemagne tendant a éviter la double imposition et a établir des
régles d’assistance admiuistrative et judiciaire réciproque en ma-
tiére d’impéts sur Ic revenu et sur la fortune et de patente. Signée 4
Oslo, le 18 novembre re 1958 :

bi ion (Note du é 474

Vol. 1910

vul United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

1996

 

No. 10977. Agreement between the Government of the Polish People’s Republic
and the Governmeut of the German Democratic Repuhlic con-
cerning co-operation with regard to navigation in froutier waters.
Signed at Warsaw on 15 May 1969:

(Note by the

 

No. 21984, Cultural Co-operation Agreement betweeu tbe Government of the
Federal Republic of Germany and the Government of the Repnb-
lic of Costa Rica. Signed at San José on 29 Angust 1979:

Protocol amending the above-mentioned Agreement. Signed at San José on 23 July
1986

 

No. 23981. Agreement between the Government of the Federal Republic of
Germauy and the Government of the Kingdom of Morocco con-
cerning financial co-operation (Loans for various projects).
Signed at Rabat ou 24 January 1984:

of notes fituting an to the ab i Agree-
ment. Rabat, 17 January and 29 July 1986 se

 

 

Vol. 1910

475

476

489

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

 

N° 10977. Accord entre le Gouvernement de la Répnblique populaire de Polo-
gne et le Gouvernement de la République démocratiqne allemande
concernant la coopératiou en matiére de uavigation sur les eaux
froutiéres. Signé 4 Varsovie le 15 mai 1969 :

bi ion (Note du

N° 21984. Accord de coopération culturelle entre le Gouvernement de la Répu-
blique fédérale d’Allemague et le Gonvernemeut de la Républiqne
du Costa Rica. Signé 4 San José le 29 aoiit 1979 :

Protocole modifiant I’ Accord susmentionné. Signé a San José le 23 juillet 1986 ....

N° 23981. Accord entre le Gouvernemeut de la Républiqne fédérale d’Alle-
mague et le Gouvernement du Royanme du Maroc de coopératiou
fiuanciére (Préts pour projets divers). Signé 4 Rabat le 24 jauvier
1984:

Echange de notes constituant un amendement a I’ Accord susmentionné. Rabat,
17 janvier et 29 juillet 1986..... 7

Pages

475

 

Vol. 1910

NOTE BY THE SECRETARIAT

Under Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations every treaty and every international agree-
ment entered into by any Member of the United Nations after the coming into force of the Charter shall,
as soon as possible, be registered with the Secretariat and published by it. Furthermore, no party to a
treaty or international agreement subject to registration which has not been registered may invoke that
treaty or agreement before any organ of the United Nations. The General Assembly, by resolution 97 (1),
established regulations to give effect to Article 102 of the Charter (see text of the regulations, vol. 859,
p. VIID.

‘The terms “treaty” and “international agreement” have not been defined either in the Charter or in

ind the i i f the

Member State submitting an instrument for registration that so far as that party is concerned the instru-
ment is a treaty or an international agreement within the meaning of Article 102. Registration of an
instrument submitted by a Member State, therefore, does not imply a judgement by the Secretariat on the
nature of the instrument, the status of a party or any similar question. It is the understanding of the
Secretariat that its action does not confer on the instrument the status of a treaty or an international
agreement if it does not already have that status and does not confer on a party a status which it would
not otherwise have.
*

a #

Unless otherwise indicated, the translations of the original texts of treaties, etc., published in this
Series have been made by the Secretariat of the United Nations.

NOTE DU SECRETARIAT

Aux termes de |’Article 102 de la Charte des Nations Unies, tout traité ou accord international
conclu par un Membre des Nations Unies apres l’entrée en vigueur de la Charte sera, le plus tot possible,
enregistré au Secrétariat et publié par lui. De plus, aucune partie & un traité ou accord international qui
aurait dd étre enregistré mais ne l’a pas été ne pourra invoquer ledit traité ou accord devant un organe des
Nations Unies. Par sa résolution 97 (1), I'Assemblée générale a adopté un réglement destiné 4 mettre en
application |’ Article 102 de la Charte (voir texte du réglement, vol. 859, p. IX).

Le terme « traité » et !"expression « accord international » n'ont été définis ni dans la Charte ni dans
le réglement, et le Secrétariat a pris comme principe de s’en tenir & la position adoptée a cet gard par
l'Etat Membre qui a présenté l'instrument a 'enregistrement, A savoir que pour autant qu'il s’agit de cet
Etat comme partie contractante |’instrument constitue un traité ou un accord international au sens de
l’Article 102. Il s'ensuit que l’enregistrement d'un instrument présenté par un Etat Membre n’implique,
de la part du Secrétariat, aucun jugement sur la nature de l’instrument, le statut d’une partie ou toute
autre question similaire. Le Secrétariat considére donc que les actes qu’ il pourrait étre amené a accomplir
ne conférent pas & un instrument la qualité de « traité» ou d’« accord international » si cet instrument
n’a pas déja cette qualité, et qu’ils ne conférent pas & une partie un statut que, par ailleurs, elle ne
posséderait pas.

*
oo

Sauf indication contraire, les traductions des textes originaux des traités, etc., publiés dans ce Re-
cueil ont été établies par le Secrétariat de I’ Organisation des Nations Unies.

Treaties and international agreements
registered
on 8 February 1996

Nos. 32532 to 32544

Traités et accords internationaux
enregistrés
le 8 février 1996

N° 32532 @ 32544

Vol. 1910



No. 32538

GERMANY
and
ARGENTINA

Treaty on the encouragement and reciprocal protection of
investments (with protocol and exchauges of uotes).
Signed at Bonn on 9 April 1991

Authentic texts: German and Spanish.
Registered by Germany on 8 February 1996.

ALLEMAGNE
et
ARGENTINE

Traité relatif 4 la promotion et 4 la protection réciproque des
investissemeuts (avec protocole et échanges de notes).
Sigué 4 Bonn le 9 avril 1991

Textes authentiques : allemand et espagnol.
Enregistré par l’Allemagne le 8 février 1996.

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

172 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

[GERMAN TEXT — TEXTE ALLEMAND]

VERTRAG ZWISCHEN DER BUNDESREPUBLIK DEUTSCHLAND
UND DER ARGENTINISCHEN REPUBLIK UBER DIE FORDE-
RUNG UND DEN GEGENSEITIGEN SCHUTZ VON KAPITAL-

ANLAGEN

Die Bundesrepublik Deutschland
und
die Argentinische Republik —

in dem Wunsch, die wirtschaftliche Zusammenarbeit zwischen
beiden Staaten zu vertiefen,

in dem Bestreben, giinstige Bedingungen fur Kapitalanlagen
von Staatsangehérigen oder Gesellschaften des einen Staates im
Hoheitsgebiet des anderen Staates zu schaffen,

in der Erkenntnis, daB eine Forderung und ein vertraglicher
Schutz dieser Kapitalaniagen geeignet sind, die private wirtschaft-
liche Initiative zu beleben und den Wohlstand beider Vélker zu
mehren —

haben folgendes vereinbart:

Artikel 1
Fur die Zwecke dieses Vertrags

1. umfaBt der Begriff .Kapitalaniagen” alle Arten von Vermo-
genswerten gema8 der Gesetzgebung der Vertragspartei, in
deren Hoheitsgebiet die Kapitalanlage in Ubereinstimmung
mit diesem Vertrag vorgenommen wird, insbesondere, aber
nicht ausschlieBlich

a) Eigentum an beweglichen und unbeweglichen Sachen
sowie sonstige dingliche Rechte wie Hypotheken und
Pfandrechte:

b) Aktien, Anteilsrechte an Gesellschaften und andere Arten
von Beteiligungen an Geselischaften;
c) Anspriiche auf Geld, das verwendet wurde, um einen

wirtschaftlichen Wert zu schaffen, oder Anspriiche auf
Leistungen, die einen wirtschaftlichen Wert haben;

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

d) Rechte des geistigen Eigentums wie insbesondere Ur-
heberrechte, Patente, Gebrauchsmuster, gewerbliche
Muster und Modelle, Marken, Handelsnamen, Betriebs-
und Geschattsgeheimnisse, technische Verfahren, Know-
how und Goodwill;

e) Offentlich-rechtliche Konzessionen einschlieBlich Aufsu-
chungs- und Gewinnungskonzessionen;

2. bezeichnet der Begriff .Ertrage” diejenigen Betrage. die aut
eine Kapitalanlage enttalien. wie Gewinnanteile, Dividenden.
Zinsen, Lizenz- oder andere Entgelte:

bezeichnet der Begriff .Staatsangehérige”
a) in bezug auf die Bundesrepublik Deutschland:

Deutsche im Sinne des Grundgesetzes fur die Bundes-
republik Deutschiand.

in bezug auf die Argentinische Republik:

Argentinier im Sinne der argentinischen Rechtsvorschrif-
ten:

eo

g

4. bezeichnet der Begriff .Gesellschaften” juristische Personen
sowie Handeisgesellschaften oder sonstige Geselischatten
oder Vereinigungen mit oder ohne Rechtsperséniichkeit, die
ihren Sitz im Hoheitsgebiet einer der Vertragsparteien haben,
gleichviei, ob ihre Tatigkeit auf Gewinn gerichtet ist oder nicht.

Artikel 2

(1) Jede Vertragspartei wird in ihrem Hoheitsgebiet Kapital-
aniagen von Staatsangehérigen oder Geselischaften der anderen
Vertragspantei férdern und diese Kapitalanlagen in Ubereinstim-
mung mit ihren Rechtsvorschriften zulassen. Sie wird Kapital-
aniagen in jedem Fall gerecht und billig behandeln.

(2) Kapitalaniagen von Staatsangehorigen oder Gesellschaften
einer Vertragspartei, die im Hoheitsgebiet der anderen Vertrags-
partei gemaB deren Gesetzgebung vorgenommen worden sind,
genieBen den vollen Schutz dieses Vertrags.

(3) Eine Vertragspantei wird die Verwaltung, die Verwendung,
den Gebrauch oder die Nutzung der Kapitalaniagen von Staats:
oder der anderen Ver
ihrem Hoheitsgebiet in keiner Weise durch willkirliche oder diskr-

minierende Mafnahmen beeintrachtigen.

Artikel 3

(1) Jede Vertagspare! behandelt sanitalaniagen von Staats-
anderen

Vol. 1910, 1:32538

173

Uuited Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

 

oder Kapitalaniagen, an denen Staatsangehorige oder Gesell-
schaften der anderen Vertragspartei beteiligt sind, in ihrem
Hoheitsgebiet nicht waniget gunstig als Kapitalaniagen der eige-
nen 1 oder

von Staatsangehdrigen 7 Gesellschaften dritter Staaten.

(2) Jede Vertragspanei behandelt Staatsangehérige oder
Geselischaften der anderen Vertragspartei hinsichtlich ihrer Beta-
tigung im Zusammenhang mit Kapitalanlagen in ihrem Hoheitsge-
biet nicht weniger giinstig als ihre eigenen Staatsangehdrigen und
Geselischaften oder Staatsangehérige und Gesellschatten dritter
Staaten.

(3) Diese Behandlung bezieht sich nicht auf Vorrechte, die eine
Vertragspartei den Staatsangehérigen oder Geselischaften dritter
Staaten wegen ihrer Mitgliedschaft in einer Zoll- oder Wirtschatts-
union, einem gemeinsamen Markt oder einer Freihandelszone
einraumt.

(4) Die in diesem Anikel gewahrte Behandlung bezieht sich
nicht auf Verginstigungen, die eine Vertragsparei den Staats-
angehorigen oder Geselischaften dritter Staaten aufgrund eines
Doppelbesteuerungsabkommens oder sonstiger Vereinbarungen
ber Steuerfragen gewahrt.

Artikel 4

(1) Kapitalanlagen von Staatsangehdérigen oder Geselischaften
einer Vertragspartei geniefien im Hoheitsgebiet der anderen Ver-
tragspartei vollen rechtlichen Schutz und volle rechtliche Sicher-
heit.

(2) Kapitalanlagen von Staatsangehérigen oder Geselischatten
einer Vertragspartei dirten im Hoheitsgebiet der anderen Ver-
tragspartei nur zum allgemeinen Wohi und gegen Entschadigung
enteignet. verstaatlicht oder anderen MaBnahmen unterworfen
werden, die in ihren Auswirkungen einer Enteignung oder Ver-
Staatlichung gleichkommen. Die Entschadigung mu dem Wert
der enteigneten Kapitalaniage unmittelbar vor dem Zeitpunkt ent-
sprechen, in dem die tatsachliche oder drohende Enteignung,
Verstaatlichung oder vergleichbare MaBnahme 6ffentlich bekannt
wurde. Die Entschadigung mu8 unverziglich geleistet werden
und ist bis zum Zeitpunkt der Zahlung mit dem Ublichen bank-
mafBigen Zinssatz zu verzinsen; sie muB tatsachlich verwertbar
und frei transferierbar sein. Die Rechtma@igkeit der Enteignung,
Verstaatlichung oder vergleichbaren MaBnahme und die Hohe der
Entschadigung missen in einem ordentlichen Rechtsvertahren
nachgeprift werden kénnen.

(3) Staatsangehérige oder Gesellschatten einer Vertragspartei,
die durch Krieg oder sonstige bewaffnete Auseinandersetzungen,

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

United Nations — Treaty Series ¢ Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

Revolution, Staatsnotstand oder Aufruhr im Hoheitsgebiet der

anderen Vertragspartei Verluste an Kapitalanlagen erleiden, wer-

den von dieser Vertragspantei hinsichtlich der Ruckerstattungen,
od

gen, fer
nicht weniger gunstig behandelt als ihre eigenen Staatsangehéri-
gen oder Geselischatten. Solche Zahlungen missen frei transfe-
nierbar sein.

(4) Hinsichtlich der in diesem Artikel geregelten Angelegenhei-
ten genieBen die Staatsangehérigen oder Geselischatten einer
Vertragspartei im Hoheitsgebiet der anderen Vertragspartei
Meistbeginstigung.

Artikei 5
(1) Jede Vertragspartei gewahrleistet den Staatsangehérigen
oder Gesellschaften der anderen Vertragspartei den freien Trans-

fer, der im Zusammenhang mit einer Kapitalanlage stehenden
Zahlungen, insbesondere

a) des Kapitals und zusatzlicher Betrage zur Aufrechterhaltung
oder Ausweitung der Kapitaianlage;

b) der Ertrage:

¢) zur RUckzahlung der in Artikel 1, Absatz 1 Buchstabec
genannten Darlehen:

d) des Erléses im Fall vollstandiger oder teilweiser Liquidation
oder VerauBerung der Kapitalaniage:

e) der Entschadigungen nach Artikel 4.

(2) Der Transfer erfolgt unverziiglich entsprechend den im
Hoheitsgebiet der jeweiligen Vertragsparteien geltenden Vertah-
ren und zu dem jeweils giiltigen Kurs. Dieser Kurs dart nicht
wesentlich von dem Kreuzkurs (cross rate) abweichen, der sich

t 4

 

 

aus ergibt, die der
Wahrungsfonds zum Zeitpunkt der Zahlung Umrechnungen der
in i Te]
legen wurde.
Artikel 6

Leistet eine Vertragspartei ihren Staatsangehérgen oder
Gesellschaften Zahlungen aufgrund einer Gewahrleistung fir eine
Kapitalanlage im Hoheitsgebiet der anderen Vertragspartei, so
erkennt diese andere Vertragspartei, unbeschadet der Rechte der
erstgenannten Vertragspartei aus Artikel 9, die Ubertragung aller
Rechte und Anspriiche dieser Staatsangehérigen oder Gesell-
schaften kraft Gesetzes oder aufgrund Rechtsgeschafts auf

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

175

176

United Nations — Treaty Series ¢ Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

1996

 

die erstgenannte Vertragspartei an. Die andere Vertragspartei
erkennt auch den Eintritt der erstgenannten Vertragspartei in
diese Rechte und Anspriche des Rechtsvorgangers nach Grund
und Héhe an. Fir den Transfer von Zahlungen aufgrund der
Ubertragenen Rechte und Anspriiche gilt Artikel 5 entsprechend.

Artikel 7

(1) Ergibt sich aus den Rechtsvorschriften einer Vertragspartei
oder aus vilkerrechtlichen Verpflichtungen, die neben diesem
Vertrag zwischen den Vertragsparteien bestehen oder in Zukunft
begrundet werden, eine aligemeine oder besondere Regelung,
durch die den Kapitalanlagen der Staatsangehérigen oder Gesell-
schatten der anderen Vertragspartei eine ginstigere Behandlung
als nach diesem Vertrag zu gewahren ist, so geht diese Regelung
dem vorliegenden Vertrag insoweit vor, als sie ginstiger ist

(2) Jede Vertragspartei wird jede andere Verpflichtung einhal-
ten, die sie in bezug auf Kapitalaniagen von Staatsangehérigen
oder Geselischatten der anderen Vertragspartei in ihrem Hoheits-
gebiet Ubernommen hat.

Artikel 8

Dieser Vertrag gilt auch fir Angelegenheiten, die sich nach
Inkrafttreten dieses Vertrags in bezug auf Kapitalanlagen er-
geben, die Staatsangehdrige oder Geselischaften der einen Ver-
tragspartei im Hoheitsgebiet der anderen Vertragspartei gemaB
deren Rechitsvorschriften vor Inkrafttreten dieses Vertrags vorge-
nommen haben.

Artikel 9
(1) Meinungsverschiedenheiten zwischen den Vertragsparteien
ber die Auslegung oder Anwendung dieses Vertrags sollen,
soweit méglich, durch die Regierungen der beiden Vertragspar-
teien beigelegt werden.

(2) Kann eine Meinungsverschiedenheit auf diese Weise nicht
beigelegt werden, so ist sie auf Veriangen einer der beiden
Vertragsparteien einem Schiedsgericht zu unterbreiten.

(3) Das Schiedsgericht wird von Fall zu Fall gebildet, indem
jede Vertragspartei ein Mitglied bestellt und beide Mitglieder sich
auf den Angehorigen eines dritten Staates als Obmann einigen,
der von den Regierungen der beiden Vertragsparteien zu bestel-
len ist. Die Mitglieder sind innerhalb von zwei Monaten, der
Obmann innerhalb von drei Monaten zu bestellen, nachdem die
eine Vertragspartei der anderen mitgeteilt hat, da3 sie die Mei-
nungsverschiedenheiten einem Schiedsgericht unterbreiten will.

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

United Nations — Treaty Series ¢ Nations Unies — Recneil des Traités

(4) Werden die in Absatz 3 genannten Fristen nicht eingehaiten,
so kann in Ermangelung einer anderen Vereinbarung jede Ver-
den des bit-
ten, die erforderlichen Emennungen vorzunehmen. Besitzt der
Prasident die Staatsangehdrigkeit einer der beiden Vertragspar-
teien oder ist er aus einem anderen Grund verhindert, so soll der
Vizeprasident die Ernennungen vornehmen. Besitzt auch der
Vizeprasident die Staatsangehérigkeit einer der beiden Vertrags-
parteien oder ist auch er verhindert, so soll das im Rang nachstfol-
gende Mitglied des Gerichtshots, das nicht die Staatsangehdrig-
keit einer der beiden Vertragsparteien besitzt, die Ernennungen
vornehmen,

(5) Das Schiedsgericht entscheidet mit Stimmenmehrheit.
Seine Entscheidungen sind bindend. Jede Vertragspartei tragt die
Kosten ihres Mitglieds sowie ihrer Vertretung in dern Verfahren
vor dem Schiedsgericht: die Kosten des Obmanns sowie die
sonstigen Kosten werden von den beiden Vertragsparteien zu
gleichen Teilen getragen. tm Ubrigen regelt das Schiedsgericht
sein Verfahren selbst.

_ (6) Sind beide Vertragsparteien auch Vertragsstaaten des
Ubereinkommens vom 18. Marz 1965 zur Beilegung von investi-
tionsstreitigkeiten zwischen Staaten und Angehdrigen anderer
Staaten, so kann mit Ricksicht auf die Regelung in Artikel 27
Absatz 1 dieses Ubereinkommens das vorstehend vorgesehene
icht insoweit nicht werden, als
dem Staatsangehérigen oder der Geselischaft einer Vertragspar-
tei und der anderen Vertragspartei eine Vereinbarung nach MaG-
gabe des Artikels 25 des Ubereinkommens zustande gekornrnen
ist. Die Méglichkeit, das vorstehend vorgesehene Schiedsgericht
im Fall der Nichtbeachtung einer Entscheidung des Schiedsge-
richts des genannten Ubereinkommens (Artikel 27) anzurufen,
bleibt unberuhrt.

Artikel 10

(1) Meinungsverschiedenheiten in bezug auf Investitionen im
Sinne dieses Vertrags zwischen einer der Vertragsparteien und
einem Staatsangehdrigen oder einer Gesellschaft der anderen
Vertragspartei sollen, soweit méglich, zwischen den Streitparteien
gillich beigelegt werden

(2) Kann eine Meinungsverschiedenheit im Sinne von Absatz 1
nicht innerhalb einer Frist von sechs Monaten ab dem Zeitpunkt
ihrer Geltendmachung durch eine der beiden Streitparteien beige-
legt werden, so ist sie auf Veriangen einer der beiden Streitpar-
teien den zustandigen Gerichten der Vertragspartei, in deren
Hoheitsgebiet die Investition getatigt wurde, zu unterbreiten.

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

178

United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

 

(3) Unter jeder der machstehend genannten Voraussetzun-
gen kann die Meinungsverschiedenheit einem internationalen
Schiedsgericht unterbreitet werden:

a) auf Verlangen einer Streitpartei, wenn binnen 18 Monaten seit
Einleitung des gerichtlichen Verfahrens gema8 Absatz 2 eine
Sachentscheidung des angerufenen Gerichts nicht vorliegt
oder wenn eine derartige Entscheidung vorliegt, die Mei-
nungsverschiedenheit zwischen den Streitparteien aber fort-
besteht:

b) wenn beide Streitparteien sich daraut geeinigt haben.

(4) Sofem die Streitparteien nichts anderes vereinbart haben,
werden Meinungsverschiedenheiten zwischen den Streitparteien
in den Fallen von Absatz 3 dieses Artikels entweder einem
Schiedsverfahren im Rahmen des Ubereinkommens vom 18.
Marz 1965 zur Beilegung von Investitionsstreitigkeiten zwischen
den Staaten und Angehdérigen anderer Staaten oder einem
Ad hoc-Schiedsgericht nach den UNCITRAL-Schiedsrege!n ein-
vernehmlich unterworfen.

Kommt binnen drei Monaten, nachdem eine Streitpartei die Einlei-
tung eines Schiedsvertahrens verlangt hat, keine Einigung
zustande, so wird die Meinungsverschiedenheit — sofern beide
Vertragsparteien Vertragsstaaten des Ubereinkommens vom
18. Marz 1965 zur Beilegung von Investitionsstreitigkeiten zwi-
schen Staaten und Angehdngen anderer Staaten sind - einem
Schiedsverfahren im Rahmen des vorgenannten Ubereinkom-
mens unterworten. Anderenfalls wird die Meinungsverschieden-
heit dem vorgenannten Ad hoc-Schiedsgericht unterworfen.

(5) Das Schiedsgericht trifft seine Entscheidungen auf der
Grundlage dieses Vertrags und gegebenenfalls anderer zwischen
den Vertragsparteien geltender Ubereinkintte, des nationalen
Rechts der Vertragspartei, in deren Hoheitsgebiet die Investition
belegen ist — einschlieBlich der Regein des Intemationalen Privat-
rechts ~ und der allgemeinen Rechtsgrundsatze des Vlkerrechts.

(6) Der Schiedsspruch ist bindend und.wird gemaB innerstaat-
lichem Recht volistreckt.

Artikel 11
Die Bestimmungen dieses Vertrags gelten auch in den in Arti-
kel 63 des Wiener Ubereinkommens vom 23. Mai 1969 iber
das Recht der Vertrage genannten Fallen uneingeschrankt fort.

Vol. 1910, 132538,

United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

Artikel 12

(1) Dieser Vertrag bedart der Ratifikation; die Ratifikations-
urkunden werden so bald wie mdglich in Buenos Aires ausge-
tauscht.

(2) Dieser Vertrag tritt einen Monat nach Austausch der Rat
kationsurkunden in Kraft. Er bleibt zehn Jahre lang in Kraft; nach
deren Ablauf verlangert sich die Geltungsdauer auf unbegrenzte
Zeit. sofern nicht eine der beiden Vertragsparteien den Vertrag mit
einer Frist von zwolf Monaten vor Ablauf schriftlich kindigt, Nach
Ablauf von zehn Jahren kann der Vertrag jederzeit mit einer Frist
von zwolf Monaten gekindigt werden.

(3) Fur Kapitalanlagen, die bis zum Zeitpunkt des AuBerkrafttre-
tens dieses Vertrags vorgenommen worden sind, gelten die Arti-
kel 1 bis 11 noch fir weitere funfzehn Jahre vom Tag des
Auferkrafttretens des Vertrags an.

 

Geschehen zu Bonn am 9. April 1991 in zwei Urschriften, jede
in deutscher und spanischer Sprache, wobei jeder Wortlaut glei-
chermafen verbindlich ist.

Fiir die Bundesrepublik
Deutschland:

GENSCHER
Fiir die Argentinische
Republik:
Gurpo pI TELLA

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

180 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

1996

 

PROTOKOLL

Bei der Unterzeichnung des Vertrags zwischen der Bundes-
republik Deutschland und der Argentinischen Republik Uber die
Fe

und den it Schutz von

haben die unterzeichneten Bevollmachtigten auBerdem folgende
Bestimmungen vereinbart. die als Bestancteile des Vertrags
gelten:

a)

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

Zu Artikel

a) Artikel 1 Nummer 1 des Vertrags findet keine Anwendung
auf Kapitalanlagen in der Argentinischen Republik von
natirlichen Personen, die Staatsangehdrige der anderen
Vertragspartei sind. wenn die betreffenden Personen zur
Zeit der Vornahme ihrer urspriinglichen Investition bereits
mehr als zwei Jahre ihren Wohnsitz in der Argentinischen
Republik hatten, es sei denn, daB ihre Kapitalanlage
nachweislich aus dem Ausland eingebracht wurde.

b) Ertrage aus der Kapitalanlage und im Fall ihrer Wieder-
anlage auch deren Ertrage genieBen den gleichen Schutz
wie die Kapitalanlage.

c) Als .andere Arten von Beteiligungen” im Sinne von Arti-
kel 1 Nummer 1 Buchstabe b werden vor allem solche
Kapitalaniagen angesehen, die ihrem fnhaber keine
Stimm- oder Kontrollrechte vermitteln.

d) Die in Nummer 1 Buchstabe c genannten Anspniche auf
Geld umfassen Anspriiche aus Darlehen, die im Zusam-
menhang mit einer Beteiligung stehen und nach Zweck
und Umfang den Charakter einer Beteiligung haben
(beteiligungsahnliche Dariehen). Hierunter fallen nicht
Kredite von dritter Seite, z.B. Bankkredite zu kommer-
Ziellen Bedingungen.

e) Unbeschadet anderer Verfahren zur Feststellung der
Staatsangehdrigkeit gilt insbesondere als Staatsangehé-
riger einer Vertragspartei jede Person, die einen von den
zustandigen Behérden der betreffenden Vertragspartei
ausgesteliten nationalen ReisepaB besitzt. Der Vertrag
tindet keine Anwendung auf Investoren, die Staatsange-
hérige beider Vertragsparteien sind.

Fir die Feststellung, ob der Begriff .Geselischaft* nach
Artikel 1 Nummer 4 anwendbar ist, wird auf ihren Sitz
abgestellt, wobei hierunter der Ort zu verstehen ist, an
dem die Geselischaft ihre Hauptverwaltung hat.

United Nations — Treaty Series » Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

g) Der Vertrag gilt auch in den Gebieten der ausschlie3-
lichen Wirtschaftszone und des Festlandsockels, soweit
das Vdlkerrecht der jeweiligen Vertragspartei die Aus-
bung von souveranen Rechten oder Hoheitsbefugnis-
sen in diesen Gebieten erlaubt.

(2) Zu Artikel 3

a) Als .Betatigung" im Sinne des Artikels 3 Absatz 2 ist
insbesondere, aber nicht ausschlieBlich, die Verwaltung,
die Verwendung, der Gebrauch und die Nutzung einer
Kapitalaniage anzusehen. Als eine ,,weniger ginstige”
Behandlung im Sinne des Artikels 3 sind insbesondere,
aber nicht ausschlieBlich anzusehen: weniger ginstige
Bedingungen beim Bezug von Rohstoffen und anderen
Zulieferungen, Energie und Brennstoffen sowie Produk-
tions- und Betriebsmittein aller Art und beim Absatz von
Erzeugnissen im In- und Ausland. MaBnahmen, die aus
Griinden der inneren und auBeren Sicherheit und dttent-
lichen Ordnung, der Volksgesundheit oder Sittlichkeit zu
treffen sind, gelten nicht als . weniger ginstige” Behand-
lung im Sinne des Artikels 3.

b) Die Bestimmungen des Artikels 3 verpflichten eine Ver-
tragspartei nicht, steverliche Verginstigungen, Befreiun-
gen und Ermafigungen, welche gemaf den Steuergeset-
zen nur den in ihrem Hoheitsgebiet ansassigen natir-
lichen Personen und Geselischaften gewahrt werden, auf
im Hoheitsgebiet der anderen Vertragspartei ansassige
natiirliche Personen und Geselischaften auszudehnen.

2

Die Vertragsparteien werden im Rahmen ihrer innerstaat-
lichen Rechtsvorschriften Antrage auf die Einreise und
den Aufenthait von Personen der einen Vertragspartei,
die im Zusammenhang mit einer Kapitalaniage in das
Hoheitsgebiet der anderen Vertragspartei einreisen und
sich aufhaiten wollen, wohiwollend prifen; das gleiche
gilt tur Arbeitnehmer der einen Vertragspartei, die im
Zusammenhang mit einer Kapitalanlage in das Hoheits-
gebiet der anderen Vertragspartei einreisen und sich dort
aufhalten wollen, um eine Tatigkeit als Arbeitnehmer
auszuiben. Auch Antrage auf Erteilung der Arbeits-
erlaubnis werden wohlwollend geprift.

(3) Zu Artikel 4

Ein Anspruch auf Entschadigung besteht auch dann, wenn
durch in Artikel 4 genannte MaBnahmen in das Unterneh-
men. in dem die Kapitalaniage angelegt ist, eingegniffen und
dadurch die Kapitalaniage erheblich beeintrachtigt wird.

Vol, 1910, 1-32538

182 Ur

inited Nations — Treaty Series ¢ Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

 

(4

(5)

(6)

in

) Zu Artikel S

Als .unverziglich” durchgefihrt im Sinne des Artikels 5
Absatz 2 gilt ein Transfer, der innerhalb einer Frist erfolgt, die
normalerweise zur Beachtung der Transferférmlichkeiten
erforderlich ist. Die Frist beginnt mit der Einreichung eines
formgerechten und volistandigen Antrags und darf unter kei-
nen Umstanden zwei Monate Uberschreiten.

Zu Artikel8

Der Vertrag gilt jedoch in keinem Fall fir Meinungsverschie-
denheiten und Streitfalle, die vor seinem Inkrafttreten ent-
standen sind.

Bei Beférderungen von Giitem und Personen, die im Zusam-
menhang mit einer Kapitalanlage stehen, wird eine Vertrags-
Partei die Transportuntemehmen der anderen Vertragspar-
tei, vorbehaltlich der zwischen beiden Vertragsparteien
bestehenden intemationalen Ubereinkiintte, weder ausschal-
ten noch behindern und, soweit erforderlich, Genehmigun-
gen zur Durchfuhrung der Transporte erteilen.

Geschehen zu Bonn am 9. April 1991 in zwei Urschriften, jede
deutscher und spanischer Sprache, wobei jeder Wortlaut glei-

chermaBen verbindlich ist.

Fiir die Bundesrepublik
Deutschland:

GENSCHER
Fiir die Argentinische
Republik:
Guipo pi TELLA

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

[SPANISH TEXT — TEXTE ESPAGNOL]

183

TRATADO ENTRE LA REPUBLICA FEDERAL DE ALEMANIA Y

EI Gobierno de fa Republica Federal de Alemania

y
el Gobierno de la Republica Argentina,

con el deseo de intensificar la cooperacién econdomica entre
ambos Estados,

con el propdsito de crear condiciones favorables para las
inversiones de los nacionales 0 sociedades de uno de los dos
Estados en el territorio de! otro Estado,

reconociendo que la promocién y la proteccion de esas inver-
siones mediante un tratado pueden servir para estimular la inicia-
tiva economica privada e incrementar el bienestar de ambos
pueblos,

han convenido !o siguiente:

Articulo 1
A los fines del presente Tratado
(1) El concepto de «inversiones» designa todo tipo de activo
definido de acuerdo con las leyes y reglamentaciones de la
Parte Contratante en cuyo territorio !a inversion se realizo de
conformidad con este Tratado: en particular, pero no exclusi-
vamente. esto incluye:

a) la propiedad de bienes muebles e inmuebles y demas
derechos reales, tales como hipotecas y derechos de
prenda;

b) las acciones, derechos de participacion en sociedades y
otros tipos de participaciones en sociedades:

c) los derechos a fondos empleados para crear un valor
economico 0 a prestaciones que tengan un valor econo-
mico:

d) los derechos de propiedad intelectual, tales como los
derechos de autor, patentes, modelos de utilidad, dise-
fios y modelos industriales y comerciales, marcas, nom-

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

LA REPUBLICA ARGENTINA SOBRE PROMOCION Y PROTEC-
CION REC{PROCA DE INVERSIONES

United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

 

bres comerciales, secretos industriales y comerciales,
Procedimientos tecnoldgicos. know how y valor llave;

e) las concesiones otorgadas por entidades de derecho
publico, incluidas las concesiones de prospeccion y ex-
plotacion.

(2) El concepto de «ganancias» designa las sumas obtenidas de

una inversion, tales como las participaciones en los benefi-

cios, los dividendos, los intereses. los derechos de licencia y

otras remuneraciones.

El concepto de «nacionales» designa:

a) con referencia a la Republica Federal de Alemania:
los alemanes en el sentido de la Ley Fundamental de la
Republica Federal de Alemania;

b) con referencia a la Republica Argentina:

(3)

los argentinos en el sentido de las disposiciones legales
vigentes en Argentina.

El concepto de «sociedades» designa todas las personas
juridicas, asi como todas las sociedades comerciales y de-
mas sociedades 0 asociaciones con o sin personeria juridica
que tengan su sede en el territorio de una de las Partes
Contratantes, independientemente de que su actividad tenga
© no fines de lucro.

(4

Articulo 2

(1) Cada una de las Partes Contratantes promovera las inver-
siones dentro de su terntorio de nacionales o sociedades de la
otra Parte Contratante y las admitira de conformidad con sus
leyes y reglamentaciones. En todo caso tratara las inversiones
justa y equitativamente.

(2) Las inversiones realizadas por nacionales o sociedades de
una de las Partes Contratantes en el territorio de !a otra Parte
Contratante de acuerdo con las leyes y reglamentaciones de esta
ultima gozaran de !a plena proteccion de este Tratado.

(3) Ninguna de las Partes Contratantes perjudicara en su
territorio la administracion, la utilizacion, el uso 0 el goce de las
inversiones de nacionales 0 sociedades de la otra Parte Contra-
tante a través de medidas arbitrarias o discriminatorias.

Articulo 3
(1) Ninguna de las Partes Contratantes sometera en su territo-
tio a las inversiones de nacionales 0 sociedades de la otra Parte
Contratante © a las inversiones en las que mantengan participa-

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

Ciones los nacionales 0 sociedades de la otra Parte Contratante. a
un trato menos favorable que el que se conceda a las inversiones
de los propios nacionales y sociedades 0 a las inversiones de
nacionales y sociedades de terceros Estados.

(2) Ninguna de las Partes Contratantes sometera en su territo-
rio a Jos nacionales 0 sociedades de la otra Parte Contratante, en
cuanto Se refiere a sus actividades relacionadas con las inversio-
nes, a un trato menos favorable que a sus propios nacionales y
sociedades 0 a los nacionales y sociedades de terceros Estados.

(3) Dicho trato no se extendera a los privilegios que una de las
Partes Contratantes conceda a los nacionales y sociedades de
terceros Estados por formar parte de una union aduanera o
economica, un mercado comun o una zona de libre comercio.

(4) El trato acordado por el presente articulo no se extendera a
las ventajas que una de las Partes Contratantes conceda a !os
nacionales 0 sociedades de terceros Estados como consecuencia
de un acuerdo para evitar la doble imposicién o de otros acuerdos
en materia impositiva.

Articulo 4

(1) Las inversiones de nacionales o sociedades de una de las
Partes Contratantes gozaran de plena proteccién y seguridad
juridica en el territorio de ta otra Parte Contratante.

(2) Las inversiones de nacionales 0 sociedades de una de las
Partes Contratantes no podran, en el territorio de la otra Parte
Cc . ser ° a
otras medidas que en sus efectos equivaigan a expropiacion o
nacionalizacion, salvo por causas de utilidad publica, y deberan
en tal caso ser indemnizadas. La indemnizacion debera corres-
ponder al valor de la inversion expropiada inmediatamente antes
de la fecha de hacerse publica !a expropiacion efectiva o inmi-
nente, la nacionalizacién o la medida equivalente. La indemniza-
cion debera abonarse sin demora y devengara intereses hasta la
fecha de su pago segun el tipo usual de interés bancario; debera
ser efectivamente realizable y libremente transferible. La legali-
dad de la expropiacion, nacionalizacién 0 medida equiparable, y
el monto de la indemnizacion, deberan ser revisables en procedi-
miento judicial ordinario.

(3) Los nacionates 0 sociedades de una de !as Partes Contra-
tantes que sufran pérdidas en sus inversiones por efecto de
guerra u otro conflicto armado, revolucion, estado de emergencia
Nacional o insurrecion en el territorio de la otra Parte Contratante,
No seran tratados por ésta.menos favorablemente que sus pro-
pios nacionales 0 sociedades en to referente a restituciones.

 

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Uuies — Recueil des Traités

1996

 

compensaciones, indemnizaciones u otros resarcimientos. Estos
Pagos deberan ser libremente transferibles.

(4) En lo concerniente a las materias regidas por el presente
articulo, los nacionales o sociedades de una de las Partes Contra-
tantes gozaran en el territorio de la otra Parte Contratante del
trato de la nacién mas favorecida.

Articulo 5

(1) Cada Parte Contratante garantizara a los nacionales o
sociedades de la otra Parte Contratante la libre transterencia de
los pagos relacionados con una inversion, especialmente:

a) del capita! y de !as sumas adicionales para el mantenimiento o
ampliacion de !a inversion de capital:

b) de las ganancias;

c) de la amortizacion de los préstamos definidos en el inciso c)
del apartado 1 del articulo 1;

d) de! producto de la venta o liquidacion tota! o parcial de la
inversion;

e) de las indemnizaciones previstas en el articulo 4.

(2) La transferencia se efectuara sin demora de acuerdo a los
procedimientos establecidos en el territorio de cada Parte Contra-
tante y al tipo de cambio aplicable en cada caso. Dicho tipo de
cambio no debera diferir sustancialmente del tipo cruzado (cross
rate) resultante de los tipos de cambio que e! Fondo Monetario
Internaciona! aplicaria si en la fecha del pago cambiaran las
monedas de los paises interesados en derechos especiales de
giro

Articulo 6

Si una Parte Contratante realiza pagos a sus nacionales o
sociedades en virtud de una garantia otorgada por una inversion
en el territorio de la otra Parte Contratante, esta ultima, sin
perjuicio de los derechos que en virtud del articulo 9 correspon-
den a la primera Parte Contratante, reconocera el traspaso de
todos los derechos de aquellos nacionales o sociedades a !a
primera Parte Contratante, bien sea por disposicién legal o por
acto juridico. Asimismo, la otra Parte Contratante reconocera la
causa y el alcance de !a subrogacion de la primera Parte Contra-
tante en todos estos derechos del titular anterior. Para la transte-
rencia de los pagos en virtud de los derechos transferidos regira
mutatis mutandis el articulo S.

Vol. 1910, 132538

United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

Articulo 7

(1) Si de las disposiciones legales de una de las Partes Contra-
tantes o de las obligaciones emanadas del derecho internacional
no contempladas en el presente Tratado, actuales o futuras. entre
las Partes Contratantes, resultare una regiamentacion general o
especial en virtud de la cual deba concederse a las inversiones de
los nacionales o sociedades de la otra Parte Contratante un trato
mas favorable que el previsto en el presente Tratado, dicha
reglamentacion prevalecera sobre el presente Tratado, en cuanto
sea mas favorable

(2) Cada Parte Contratante cumplira cualquier otro compromiso
que haya contraido con relaci6n a las inversiones de nacionales o
sociedades de la otra Parte Contratante en su territorio.

Articulo 8

El presente Tratado se aplicara también a los asuntos surgidos
después de su entrada en vigor en relacién a las inversiones
efectuadas por los nacionales 0 sociedades de una Parte Contra-
tante conforme a las leyes y reglamentaciones de {a otra Parte
Contratante en el territorio de esta ultima antes de la entrada en
vigor de! mismo.

Articulo 9

(1) Las controversias que surgieren entre las Partes Contratan-
tes sobre la interpretacién o aplicacion de! presente Tratado
deberan, en lo posible, ser dirimidas por los Gobiernos de ambas
Partes Contratantes.

(2) Si una controversia no pudiere ser dirmida de esa manera.
sera sometida a un tribunal arbitral a peticion de una de las Partes
Contratantes.

(3) El tribunal arbitral sera constituido ad hoc; cada Parte
Contratante nombrara un miembro, y los dos miembros se pon-
dran de acuerdo para elegir como presidente a un nacional de un
tercer Estado que sera nombrado por los Gobiemos de ambas
Partes Contratantes. Los miembros seran nombrados dentro de
un plazo de dos meses, el Presidente dentro de un plazo de tres
meses, después de que una de las Partes Contratantes haya
comunicado a la otra que desea someter la controversia a un
tribunal arbitral.

(4) Si los plazos previstos en el parrafo 3 no fueren observados,
y a falta de otro arreglo, cada Parte Contratante podra invitar al
Presidente de la Corte Internacional de Justicia a proceder a los
nombramientos necesarios. En caso de que el presidente sea
nacional de una de las Partes Contratantes 0 se halle impedido
por otra causa, correspondera al Vicepresidente efectuar los

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

United Nations — Treaty Series ¢ Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

nombramientos. Si el Vicepresidente también fuere nacional de
una de las dos Partes Contratantes o si se hallare también
impedido, correspondera al miembro de ta Corte que siga inme-
diatamente en el orden jerarquico y no sea nacional de una de las
Partes Contratantes, efectuar los nombramientos.

(5) El tribunal arbitral tomara sus decisiones por mayoria de
votos. Sus decisiones seran obligatorias. Cada Parte Contratante
sufragara los gastos ocasionados por la actividad de su arbitro,
asi como los gastos de su representacion en el procedimiento
arbitral: los gastos del presidente, asi como los demas gastos,
eran sufragados por partes iguales por las dos Partes Contratan-
tes. Por lo demas, el tribunal arbitral determinara su propio
Procedimiento.

(6) Si ambas Partes Contratantes fueren tambien Estados
Contratantes de! Convenio sobre arreglo de diferencias relativas
a inversiones entre Estados y nacionales de otros Estados de!
18 de marzo de 1965, no se podra, en atencion a la disposicion
del parrafo 1 del articulo 27 de dicho Convenio, acudir al tribunal
arbitral arriba previsto cuando el nacional o la sociedad de una
Parte Contratante y la otra Parte Contratante hayan llegado a un
acuerdo contorme a! articulo 25 del Convenio. No quedara afec-
tada la posibilidad de acudir al tribunal arbitral arriba previsto en el
caso de que no se respete una decision del Tribunal de Arbitraje
del mencionado Convenio (articulo 27).

Articulo 10

(1) Las controversias que surgieren entre una de las Pares
Contratantes y un nacional o una sociedad de la otra Parte
Contratante en relacién con las inversiones en el! sentido del
Presente Tratado deberan, en lo posible, ser amigablemente
dirimidas entre las partes en la controversia.

(2) Si una controversia en e! sentido de! parrafo 1 no pudiera
ser dirimida dentro del plazo de seis meses, contado desde la
fecha en que una de las partes en la controversia !a haya
Promovido. sera sometida a peticion de una de ellas a los tribuna-
les competentes de la Parte Contratante en cuyo territorio se
realizo la inversion.

(3) La controversia podra ser sometida a un tribunal arbitral
val et de las i

a) a peticién de una de las partes en la controversia, cuando no
exista una decision sobre el fondo después de transcurridos
dieciocho meses contados a partir de la iniciacion del proceso
judicial previsto por el apartado 2 de este articulo, 0 cuando
exista tal decision pero la controversia subsista entre las
partes;

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

b) cuando ambas partes en la controversia asi lo hayan conve-
nido.

(4) En los casos previstos por el parrafo 3 anterior, las contro-
versias entre las partes, en el sentido de este articulo, se somete-
ran de comun acuerdo, cuando las partes en la controversia no
hubiesen acordado otra cosa, sea a un procedimiento arbitral en
el marco del «Convenio sobre Arreglo de Diferencias relativas a
las inversiones entre Estados y nacionales de otros Estados». del
18 de marzo de 1965 0 a un tribunal arbitral ad hoc establecido de
contormidad con las reglas de la Comision de Naciones Unidas
para el Derecho Mercantil internacional (C.N.U.D.M.1.).

Si después de un periodo de tres meses a partir de que una de las
Partes hubiere solicitado el comienzo del procedimiento arbitral
no se hubiese !legado a un acuerdo, la controversia sera some-
tida a un procedimiento arbitral en el marco del «Convenio sobre
Arreglo de Diferencias relativas a las inversiones entre Estados y
nacionales de otros Estados», del 18 de marzo de 1965, siempre
y cuando ambas Partes Contratantes sean partes de dicho Con-
venio. En caso contrario la controversia sera sometida al tribunal
arbitral ad hoc antes citado.

(5) El Tribunal arbitral decidira sobre la base de! presente
Tratado y, en su caso, sobre la base de otros tratados vigentes
entre las Partes, del derecho interno de la Parte Contratante - en
cuyo territorio se realizd la inversion, incluyendo sus normas de
derecho internacional privado, y de los principios generales del
derecho internacional.

(6) La sentencia arbitral sera obligatoria y cada Parte la ejecu-
tara de acuerdo con su legislacion.

Articulo 11

Las disposiciones del presente Tratado continuaran siendo
plenamente aplicables aun en fos casos previstos por el arti-
culo 63 de la Convencion de Viena sobre el derecho de los
Tratados del 23 de mayo de 1969.

Articulo 12

(1) El presente Tratado sera ratificado: los instrumentos de
ratificacion seran canjeados a la mayor brevedad posible en
Buenos Aires.

(2) El presente Tratado entrara en vigor un mes después de ia
fecha en que se haya efectuado el canje de los instrumentos de
ratificacién. Su validez sera de diez afos y se prolongara después.
por tiempo indefinido, a menos que una de las Partes Contratan-
tes comunicara por escrito a la otra su intencién de dario por

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

190 United Nations — Treaty Series ¢ Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

terminado doce meses antes de su expiracion. Transcurridos diez
afos, el Tratado podra denunciarse en cualquier momento, con
un preaviso de doce meses.

(3) Para inversiones realizadas antes de la fecha de termina-
cion del presente Tratado. las disposiciones de los articulos 1
a 11 seguiran rigiendo durante los quince afos subsiguientes a
dicha fecha.

Hecho en Bonn ei dia 9 de Abril de 1991 en dos originales, en
idiomas aleman y espanol. siendo ambos textos igualmente au-
tenticos.

Por la Reptiblica
Federal de Alemania:

GENSCHER

Por la Repiblica
Argentina:

GuIbo Di TELLA

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

PROTOCOLO

En el acto de la firma del Tratado entre la Republica Federal de
Al pu ig sobre y 6
teciproca de inversiones, los plenipotenciarios abajo firmantes
han adoptado Jas siguientes disposiciones, que se consideran
como parte integrante de! Tratado:

(1) Ad articuto1

a) En lo que concieme al articulo 1, apartado 1, este Trata-
do no se aplicara a las inversiones realizadas en la
Republica Argentina por personas fisicas que sean na-
cionales de Ia otra Parte Contratante si tales personas, a
ta fecha de la inversion original, han estado domiciliadas
desde hace mas de dos afios en la Republica Argentina,
Salvo cuando se pruebe que las inversiones provienen
del extranjero.

b) Las ganancias derivadas de inversiones y, en el caso que
sean revertidas, ias ganancias derivadas de estas. goza-
tan de la misma proteccion que /a inversion original.

¢) Por “otros tipos de participaciones”, segun el apartado 1
inciso b) del articulo 1, se entenderan en particular
aquellas inversiones de capital que no otorgan a su
titular derechos de voto o control.

@) Los derechos a fondos mencionados en el apartado 1
inciso c) del articulo 1 comprenden derechos de présta-
mos relacionados con una participacion y que tengan por
su causa y cuantia e| caracter de una participacién
(préstamos cuasi participativos). Sin embargo, no com-
prenden créditos de terceros, como por ejemplo créditos
bancarios con condiciones comerciales.

e) Sin perjuicio de otros procedimientos para determinar la
nacionalidad, se considerara en especial como nacional
de una Parte Contratante a toda persona que posea un
Pasaporte nacional extendido por las autoridades compe-
tentes de la respectiva Parte Contratante. Este Tratado
No se aplicara a los inversores que sean nacionales de
ambas Partes Contratantes.

Para determinar si el concepto de “sociedades” de
acuerdo a lo dispuesto en el apartado 4 del articulo 1 es
aplicable, se atendera a su sede, la cual se entendera
como lugar en el que la sociedad tenga su administracion
principal.

 

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

191

192 United Nations — Treaty Series ¢ Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

1996

 

9)

El Tratado se aplicara también a las areas de la Zona
Econémica Exclusiva y de la Plataforma Continental
sobre las cuales el Derecho Internacional conceda a la
Parte Contratante correspondiente derechos de sobera-
nia 0 jurisdiccion.

(2) Ad articulo3

a)

2

Por «actividades» en e! sentido del apartado 2 del arti-
culo 3 se consideraran en especial pero no exclusiva-
mente, la administracion, la utilizacion, el uso y el aprove-
chamiento de una inversion. Se consideraran en especial
pero no exclusivamente como «trato menos favorable»
en el sentido del articulo 3 a las medidas menos favora-
bles que afecten la adquisicion de materias primas y
otros insumos, energia y combustibles. asi como medios
de produccién y de explotacién de toda clase o la venta
de productos en el interior del pais y en el extranjero. No
se consideraran como «trato menos favorable» en el
sentido del articulo 3 las medidas que se adopten por
fazones de seguridad intema o externa y orden publico,
sanidad publica o moralidad.

Las disposiciones del articulo 3 no obligan a una Parte
Contratante a extender las ventajas, exenciones y reduc-
ciones fiscales que, segun las leyes tributarias solo se
concecen a las personas naturales y sociedades residen-
tes en su territonio, a las personas naturales y sociedades
residentes en el territorio de la otra Parte Contratante.

Las Partes Contratantes, de acuerdo con sus disposicio-
nes legales internas, tramitaran con benevolencia las
solicitudes de inmigracién y residencia de personas de
una de las Partes Contractantes que. en relacion con una
inversion, quieran entrar en el territorio de la otra Parte
Contratante: la misma actitud debera ser observada con
respecto a los asalariados de una Parte Contratante que.
en relacion con una inversion, quieran entrar y residir en
el territorio de la otra Parte Contratante para ejercer su
actividad como asalariados. igualmente se tramitaran
con benevolencia !as solicitudes de permiso de trabajo.

(3) Ad articulo4
El derecho a indemnizaci6n existira asimismo en el caso de

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

que se adopte alguna de las medidas definidas en el arti-

culo 4 respecto de la empresa donde se halla situada la
inversion y se produzca como consecuencia de aquella un
severo perjuicio para la inversion.

United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

(4) Ad articulo5

Una transferencia se considera realizada «sin demora» en el
sentido del apartado 2 del articulo 5 cuando se ha efectuado
dentro de! plazo normalmente necesario para el cumplimien-
to de las formalidades de transterencia. El plazo, que en
ningun caso podra exceder de dos meses, comenzara a
correr en el momento de presentacion de la correspondiente
solicitud formaimente completa.

(5) Ad articulo8

El presente Tratado en ningun caso se aplicara a las recla-
maciones 0 litigios surgidos antes de su vigencia.

(6

Respecto de los transportes de mercancias y personas en
relacién con inversiones, ninguna de las Partes Contratantes
excluira ni pondra trabas a las empresas de transporte de la
otra Parte Contratante y, en caso necesario, concedera
autorizaciones para la realizacién de los transportes condi-
cionados a las normas de los acuerdos internacionales vi-
gentes entre las Partes Contratantes.

Hecho en Bonn el dia 9 de Abril de 1991 en dos ejemplares, en
lengua alemana y espafola, siendo ambos textos igualmente
auténticos.

Por la Republica
Federal de Alemania:
GENSCHER
Por la Republica
Argentina:

Gu1po p1 TELLA

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités

EXCHANGES OF NOTES — ECHANGES DE NOTES
[SPANISH TEXT — TEXTE ESPAGNOL]
la

EMBAJADA DE LA REPUBLICA ARGENTINA

Sefior Ministro,

Con motivo de la firma de! Tratado sobre la Promocién y Proteccién Reciproca de
Inversiones del 9 de Abril de 1991. el Gobierno de la Republica Argentina tiene el honor de
comunicarle al Gobierno de la Republica Federal de Alemania lo siguiente:

En base al Tratado de Amistad y Cooperacion de 1988. 0 bien, al Tratado para el
Establecimiento de una Relacion Asociativa Particular de 1987 respectivamente. el Reino
de Espana y la Republica Italiana otorgan a la Republica Argentina lineas de crédito
concesionales con el objeto de financiar inversiones para la ejecucién de inversiones.
especialmente con el fin de crear joint ventures en el sector de la pequefia y mediana
empresa.

Las solicitudes de fir para cada proy
con regulaciones argentinas especiales y posteriormente acordadas con la contraparte
espafiola 0 italiana, segun el caso.

‘Como contrapartida la Republica Argentina se ha comprometido a:

-  otorgar la exencion arancelaria e impositiva para las importaciones de bienes destina-
dos a inversiones que se financian con los créditos concesionales previstos por los
respectivos Tratados.

- no adoptar ninguna medida que impida la repatriacion del capital invertido o Ia libre
transferencia de ganancias a partir de inversiones de riesgo para aquellos proyectos
que hayan sido financiados segun las disposiciones de los citados Tratados.

Estas condiciones especiales se otorgan con el objeto de posibilitar nuevas inversiones
para el desarrollo economico de la Argentina en ambitos cuya promocion es especialmente
necesaria.

Las Partes Contratantes interpretan el articulo 3 del Tratado sobre la Promocion y
Proteccion Reciproca de Inversiones de forma tal que la clausula de la nacion mas
favorecida no se refiere a las condiciones y los privilegios especiales que la Republica
Argentina otorga a inversores extranjeros para los proyectos arriba mencionados.

La Republica Argentina procurara que aquellos inversores alemanes y sus inversiones,
que no estan sujetos a las condiciones especiales arriba mencionadas, no resulten
afectados substancialmente en su capacidad competitiva.

Reciba Ud.. Sr. Ministro, las seguridades de mi mas alta y distinguida consideracion.

Bonn, 9 de Abril de 1991

 

Guino D1 TELLA
Ministro de Relaciones Exteriores y Culto

Sr. Ministro de Asuntos Exteriores

de la Republica Federal de Alemania

Hans D. Genscher
Bonn

Vol. 1910, 1.32538,

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 195

[GERMAN TEXT — TEXTE ALLEMAND]
lla
DER BUNDESMINISTER DES AUSWARTIGEN

Bonn, den 9. April 1991

422-413.35 ARG
Herr Minister,

ich beehre mich, den Emptang der Note der Regierung der Argentinischen Republik vom.
9. April 1991 mut folgendem inhait zu bestatigen:

.Das Kénigreich Spanien und die italienische Republik gewahren autgrund des Freund-
schafts- und Kooperationsabkommens von 1988 bzw. des Abkommens zur Herstellung
einer besonderen Assoziationsbeziehung von 1987 der Argentinischen Republik zur Ourch-
‘nrung gewerbicher Kapitalanlagen insbesondere zwecks Grindung von Gemeinschats-

mit klein- und for
die Finanzierung solcher Investitionen.

 

Die Finanzierungsantrage fir jedes Projekt miissen in Ubereinstimmung mit besonderen
argentinischen Vorschritten genehmigt und anschlieBend mit den zustandigen italienischen
und spanischen Behorden abgestimmt werden.

Im hat sich die i Republik zu

- Sie gewahrt Zoll- und Stevertreiheit fir die Eintuhr von Gitern fiir Kapitalantagen. die mit
den in den jeweiligen Vertragen vorgesehenen konzessionaren Krediten finanziert
werden:

es werden keine Mafnahmen ergritfen, die die Repatriierung des eingesetzten Kapitals
oder den freien Transfer der Ertrage aus Risikoinvestitionen fir jene Projekte behindem.
die gemB den Bestimmungen dieser Vertrage finanziert wurden.

Diese besonderen Bedingungen werden mit dem Ziel gewanrt, neue Kapitalantagen fir die

 

in besonders Bereichen zu
‘erméglichen.

Die Vertragsparteien legen Artikel 3 des Vertrags Uber die Forderung une cen gegenseiti-
gen Schutz von aus. daB die

 

gung sich nicht aut die besonderen Bedingungen und Vorrechte bezieht. die oie Asgentini-
sche Republik ausiéndischen Kapitalanlegem fir die zuvorgenannten Projekte gewahn.

Die Argentinische Republik wird dafiir sorgen, daB deutsche Investoren und ihre Kapital-
anlagen. die den oben genannten besonderen Bedingungen nicht unterliegen. in ihrer
Wettbewerbstahigkeit nicht wesentlich beeintrachtigt werden.”

Genehmigen Sie, Herr Minister. die Versicherung meiner ausgezeichneten Hochachtung.

GENSCHER

 

er Exzellenz

dem Minister fiir Auswartige Beziehungen und Kultus
der Argentinischen Republik

Herrn Guido di Tella

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

196 United Nations — Treaty Series ¢ Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

 

[GERMAN TEXT — TEXTE ALLEMAND]
Ib
DER BUNDESMINISTER DES AUSWARTIGEN

Bonn, den 9. April 1991

422-413.35 ARG
Herr Minister,

ich beehre mich, thnen unter Bezugnahme aut den heute zwischen der Bundesrepublik
Deutschiand und der Argentinischen Republik geschlossenen Vertrag Uber die Férderung
und den gegenseitigen Schutz von Kapitalanlagen folgendes mitzuteilen:
Nach Inkrafttreten des Vertrags ber die Férderung und den gegenseitigen Schutz von
Kapitalaniagen zwischen unseren beiden Staaten und unter Beriicksichtigung des in
Artikel 5 dieses Vertrags niedergelegten Prinzips des freien Transfers von Kapital und
Entragen, haben die deutschen Behérden die Méglichkeit, autgrund eines Antrags potentiel-
ler Investoren {ar deutsche Investitionen in der Argentinischen Republik in vollem Umtange
Kapitalantagegarantien gemaB unseren jeweils geltenden Richtlinien und Allgemeinen
Bedingungen zu gewahren. Vom Inkrafttreten des Vertrags an sind zusatzlich zu den bisher
bereits gewahrten Garantien auch solche Betrage Gegenstand der Garantien, die fur einen
Zeitraum aut fallen, wie z. B. und
Zinsen,

Genehmigen Sie, Herr Minister, die Versicherung meiner ausgezeichneten Hochachtung.

GENSCHER

Seiner Exzellenz
dem Minister fiir Auswartige Beziehungen und Kultus
der Argentinischen Republik

Herrn Guido di Tella

Vol. 1910, 132538,

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series ¢ Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 197

(SPANISH TEXT — TEXTE ESPAGNOL]
lb

MINISTRO DE RELACIONES EXTERIORES Y CULTO
Sefior Ministro,

Tengo el honor de acusar recibo de la nota del Gobiemo de ta Republica Federal de
Alemania, de fecha 9 de abril de 1991, cuyo contenido es el siguiente:

«Con motivo del Tratado sobre Promocién y Proteccién Reciproca de Inversiones
suscripto entre nuestros dos paises con fecha 9 de abril de 1991. tengo el honor de
comunicarie a Usted lo siguiente:

A partir de la entrada en vigor de dicho Tratado y teniendo en cuenta el principio
establecido en su Articulo 5 sobre fa libre transferencia de capital y ganancias, las
autoridades alemanas cuentan con la posibilidad. después de la presentacion por parte de
los inversores interesados de una solicitud para garantizar una inversion en Argentina, de
otorgar la cobertura total de tales inversiones de acuerdo con las directivas y condiciones
generales vigentes. Por lo tanto, a partir de la entrada en vigor de este Tratado dichas
autoridades podran, en adicion a las actualmente disponibles, otorgar garantias respecto
de las sumas obtenidas de una inversion durante un periodo determinado, tales como las
Participaciones en los beneticios, los dividendos y los intereses.

Permitame, Seftor Ministro. hacerle llegar las seguridades de mi mas alta considera-
cion.»

Reitero a Usted, Sefior Ministro, las seguridades de mi mayor consideracién.
Bonn, 9 de abril de 1991

Guipo pt TELLA
Ministro de Relaciones Exteriores y Culto

Sr. Ministro de Asuntos Exteriores

de la Reptiblica Federal de Alemania
Hans D. Genscher
Bonn

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

198 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

 

[TRANSLATION — TRADUCTION]

TREATY! BETWEEN THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY
AND THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC ON THE ENCOURAGE-
MENT AND RECIPROCAL PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS

The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Government of
the Argentine Republic,

Desiring to intensify economic cooperation pen both States,

 

I ding to create di by Is and
companies of either State in the territory of the ‘oe State,
R izing that the and ion of such invest-

 

ment are apt to stimulate private business initiative and to increase the Prosperity of
both nations,

Have agreed as follows:

Article 1

For the purposes of this Treaty,

(1) The term “investments” shall apply to assets of any category defined in
accordance with the laws and regulations of the Contracting Party in whose territory
the investment is made and admitted in accordance with this Treaty and particularly,
but not exclusively, to:

(a) Movable and immovable property as well as any other rights in rem, such as
mortgages, liens and pledges;

(b) Shares, stocks in companies and other forms of participation in companies;

(c) Claims to money which has been used to create an economic value or claims
to any performance having an economic value;

(d) Intellectual property rights, such as copyrights, patents, utility models,
industrial and commercial designs and models, trade marks and trade names, indus-
trial and commercial secrets, technical processes, know-how and goodwill;

(e) Business concessions under public law, including concessions to search for,
extract and exploit natural resources.

(2) The term “returns” shall mean the amounts yielded by an investment such
as profits, dividends, interest, licence fees and other remuneration.

(3) The term “nationals” shall mean:

(a) In respect of the Federal Republic of Germany: Germans within the
meaning of the Basic Law of the Federal Republic of Germany;

(b) In respect of the Argentine Republic: Argentines within the meaning of the
legal provisions in force in Argentina.

' Came into force on 8 November 1993, i.e., one month after the exchange of the instruments of ratification, which
took place at Buenos Aires on 8 October 1993, in accordance with article 12 (2).
Vol. 1910, 1-32538

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 199

(4) The term “companies” shall mean any juridical person as well as any com-
mercial or other company or association with or without legal personality having its
seat in the territory of either Contracting Party whether or not its activities are
directed at profit.

Article 2

(1) Each C ing Party shall by orcom-
panies of the other Contracting Party in its territory and shall admit such invest-
ments in accordance with its laws and regulations. In any case each Party shall
accord fair and equitable treatment to investments.

(2) made by nationals or ies of either Ci Party
in the territory of the other Contracting Party in accordance with the laws and
regulations of the latter Party shall enjoy full protection under this Treaty.

(3) Neither Contracting Party shall subject the management, utilization, use or
enjoyment of investments of nationals or companies of the other Contracting Party
in its territory to arbitrary or discriminatory measures.

Article 3

(1) Neither Contracting Party shall subject investments in its territory by or
with the Participation of nationals or companies of the other Contracting Party to
treatment less favourable than it accords to investments of its own nationals or
companies or to investments of nationals or companies of any third State.

(2) Neither Contracting Party shall subject nationals or companies of the
other Contracting Party, as regards their activity in connection with investments in
its territory, to treatment less favourable than it accords to its own nationals or
companies or to nationals or companies of any third State.

(3) Such treatment shall not include privileges which may be extended by
either Contracting Party to nationals or companies of third States on account of its
membership in a customs or economic union, common market or free trade area.

(4) The treatment under this article shall not extend to privileges accorded by
a Contracting Party to nationals or companies of a third State by virtue of an agree-
ment for the avoidance of double taxation or other tax agreements.

 

Article 4

ad) f by of either Ci Party shall
enjoy full Protection as well as juridical security in the territory of the other Con-
tracting P%

(2) by or ies of either C ing Party shall
not be expropriated, nationalized or subject to any other measure the effects of
which would be tantamount to expropriation or nationalization in the territory of the
other Contracting Party, except for reasons of public interest and against compensa-
tion. Such compensation shall be equivalent to the value of the investment exPrOPri-
ated i diately before the effective or di
equivalent measure became public knowledge. The compensation shall be paid with:
out delay and shall carry the usual bank interest until the date of payment; it shall be
readily convertible and freely transferable. The legality of any such expropriation,
nationalization or comparable measure and the amount of compensation shall be
subject to review by due process of law.

 

 

 

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

200 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

 

(3) Nationals or companies of either Contracting Party whose investments
suffer losses in the territory of the other Contracting Party owing to war or other
armed conflict, revolution, a state of national emergency or insurrection shall be
accorded by the latter Contracting Party treatment which is no less favourable than
that ded to its own nati or as regards
i ion or other valuabl i ion. Such pay shall be freely

 

tion, i
transferable.

(4) Nationals or companies of either Contracting Party shall enjoy most-
favoured-nation treatment in the territory of the other Contracting Party in respect
of the matters provided for in this article.

Article 5
(1) Each Ce ing Party shall to or ies of the

1s y si
other Contracting Party the free ome of payments in connection with an invest-

ment, including:
(a) The capital and additional amounts to maintain or increase the investments;
(b) The returns;
(c) Repayment of loans defined in article 1, paragraph 1 (c);
(d) The proceeds from the sale of the whole or any part of the investment;
(e) The compensation provided for by article 4.

(2) The transfer shall be effected without delay at the rate of exchange appli-
cable in each case and in accordance with the procedures established in the territory
of each Contracting Party. Such exchange rate shall not differ substantially from the
cross rate resulting from the exchange rate that the International Monetary Fund
would apply if the currencies of the countries concerned were converted to special
drawing rights on the date of payment.

Article 6

If either C ing Party makes p: toits nati or ies under
a guarantee it has assumed in respect of an investment in the territory of the other
Contracting Party, the latter Contracting Party shall, without prejudice to the rights
of the former Contracting Party under article 9, recognize the assignment, whether
under a law or pursuant to a legal transaction, of any right or claim from such
national or company to the former Contracting Party. The latter Contracting Party
shall also recognize the reasons for and extent of the subrogation of the former
Contracting Party to any such right or claim which that Contracting Party shall be
entitled to assert to the same extent as its predecessor in title. As regards the transfer
of payments by virtue of such assignment, article 5 shall apply mutatis mutandis.

 

Article 7

(1) If the legislation of either Contracting Party or obligations under interna-
tional law existing at present or established hereinafter between the Contracting
Parties in addition to this Treaty contain a regulation, whether general or specific,
entitling i by nati or ies of the other C g Party toa
treatment more favourable than is provided for by this Treaty, such regulation shall,
to the extent that it is more favourable, take precedence over this Treaty.

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

1996 United Natlons — Treaty Series _¢ Nations Unies — Recueil des Traltés 201

 

(2) Each Contracting Party shall observe any other obligation it may have
entered into with regard to investments in its territory by nationals or companies of
the other Contracting Party.

Article 8

This Treaty shall also apply to matters arising after ii its entry into force i in con-
nection with i of either Party
consistent with the laws nd regulations of the other Contracting Party i in the terri-
tory of the latter prior to the entry into force of the Treaty.

Article 9

(1) Disputes between the Contracting Parties relating to the interpretation or
application of this Treaty shall, as far as possible, be settled by negotiations between
the Governments of both Contracting Parties.

(2) If a dispute cannot be thus settled, it shall, at the request of either Con-
tracting Party, be submitted to an arbitral tribunal.

(3) The arbitral tribunal shall be established on an ad hoc basis. Each Con-
tracting Party shall appoint one member and these two members shall, by agree-
ment, designate a national of a third State as chairman who shall be appointed by
the Governments of the two Contracting Parties. The members shall be appointed
within two months and the chairman within three months after either Contracting
Party informed the other Party of its intention to submit the dispute to an arbitral
tribunal.

(4) If the time-limits provided for under paragraph 3 are not met, and in the
absence of any other agreement, either Contracting Party may request the President
of the International Court of Justice to make the necessary appointments. If the
President is a national of either Contracting Party or is otherwise prevented from
discharging the said function, the appointments shall be made by the Vice-President.
If the Vice-President is also a national of either Contracting Party or is also pre-
vented from discharging the said function, the appointments shall be made by the
member of the Court next in seniority who is not a national of either Contracting
Party.

(5) The arbitral tribunal shall take its decisions by a majority of votes. Its
decisions shall be binding. Each Contracting Party shall defray the costs of the
arbitrator it has appointed and of its representation in the arbitral proceedings. The
costs of the chairman and the remaining costs shall be defrayed in equal parts by the
two Contracting Parties. In all other respects, the tribunal shall determine its own
procedure.

(6) If both Contracting Parties are also parties to the Convention on the set-
tlement of investment disputes between States and nationals of other States of
18 March 1965,' the arbitral tribunal provided for above may, in consideration of the
provisions of article 27, paragraph 1, of the said Convention, not be appealed to
insofar as agreement has been reached between the national or company of one
Contracting Party and the other Contracting Party under article 25 of the Conven-
tion. This shall not affect the possibility of appealing to such arbitral tribunal in the

' United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 575, p. 159.
Vol. 1910, 1-32538

202 United Nations — Treaty Series ¢ Nations Uuies — Recueil des Traités 1996

 

event that a decision of the arbitral tribunal established under the said Convention
(article 27) is not complied with.

Article 10

(1) Disputes concerning investments within the meaning of this Treaty be-
tween one of the Contracting Parties and a national or company of the other Con-
tracting Party shall as far as possible be settled amicably between the parties to the
dispute.

(2) If a dispute within the meaning of paragraph | cannot be settled within
six months from the date on which one of the parties concerned gave notice of the
dispute, it shall, at the request of either party, be submitted to the competent courts
of the Contracting Party in whose territory the investment was made.

(3) The dispute may be submitted to an international arbitral tribunal in any
of the following circumstances:

(a) At the request of one of the parties to the dispute where, after a period of
18 months has elapsed from the moment when the judicial process provided for by
paragraph 2 of this article was initiated, no final decision has been given or where a
decision has been made but the Parties are still in dispute;

(b) Where both parties to the dispute have so agreed.

(4) In the cases provided for by paragraph 3 above, disputes between the
Parties within the meaning of this article shall be referred by mutual agreement,
when the parties to the dispute have not agreed otherwise, either to arbitral pro-
ceedings under the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of Other States of 18 March 1965 or to an ad hoc arbitral
tribunal established under the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law.

If there is no agreement after a period of three months has elapsed from the
moment when one of the Parties requested the initiation of the arbitration proce-
dures, the dispute shall be submitted to arbitration procedures under the Convention
on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other
States of 18 March 1965 provided that both Contracting Parties are parties to the
said Convention. Otherwise, the dispute shall be submitted to the above-mentioned
ad hoc arbitral tribunal.

(5) The arbitral tribunal shall issue its ruling in accordance with the provisions
of this Treaty, with those of other treaties existing between the Parties, with the laws
in force in the Contracting Party in which the investments were made, including its
tules of private international law, and with the general principles of international
law.

(6) The arbitration decision shall be binding and both Parties shall implement
it in accordance with their legislation.

Article 11

The provisions of this Treaty shall remain fully in force even in the cases pro-
vided for by article 63 of the Vienna Convention on the law of treaties of 23 May
1969.

! United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1155. p. 331.
Vol, 1910, 132538

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 203

 

Article 12

(1) This Treaty shall be ratified; the instruments of ratification shall be
exchanged as soon as possible in Buenos Aires.

(2) This Treaty shall enter into force one month after the date of the exchange
of instruments of ratification. It shall remain in force for a period of 10 years and
shall be extended thereafter for an unlimited period unless either Contracting Party
gives written notification to the other of its intention to terminate the Treaty
12 months before its expiration. After 10 years, the Treaty may be denounced at any
time by giving 12 months’ notice.

(3) Investments made prior to the date of termination of this Treaty shall
continue to be protected by the provisions of articles | to 11 for an additional period
of 15 years from such date.

Done at Bonn on 9 April 1991 in two originals in the German and Spanish
languages, both texts being equally authentic.

of German:
GENSCHER

For the Federal Republic
y:

For the Argentine
Republic:

Gurpo pt TELLA

Vol. 1910, 132538

204 United Nations —. Treaty Series ¢ Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

 

PROTOCOL

(With the signing of the ¢ Treaty between the e Federal Republic of Germany and
of Invest-
meats. the undersigned Slempowntares have me on the following provisions,
which shall be regarded as an integral part of the said Treaty:

(1) Ad article 1:

(@) As far as article 4 paragraph lis concerned, this Treaty shall not apply to

in the A by who are of the other

Contracting Party if Bch individuals, on the date of the original investment, have
been domiciled for more than two years in the Argentine Republic, unless it is
proved that such investments originate from abroad.

 

(b) Returns from an investment and, in the event of their re-investment, the
returns therefrom shall enjoy the same protection as the original investment.

(c) The other forms of participation mentioned in article 1, paragraph | (b),
shall refer in particular to those capital investments which do not confer voting or
controlling rights on their holder.

(@ The claims to money referred to in article 1, paragraph 1 (c), include claims
arising from loans relating to an investment that, by virtue of its purpose and
amounts, has the nature of a participation (quasi-participatory loans). However,
they shall not include third-party loans such as bank loans at market rates.

(e) Without prejudice to any other methods of determining nationality, in par-
ticular, any person in possession of a national passport issued by the competent
authorities of the Contracting Party concerned shall be deemed to be a national of
that Party. This Treaty shall not apply to investors who are nationals of both Con-
tracting Parties.

(f) Inorder to determine whether the term “companies” is applicable in accord-
ance with the provisions of article 1, paragraph 4, account shall be taken of the seat
of such companies, which shall mean the place where the company has its main
place of management.

(g) The Treaty shall also apply to areas of the exclusive economic zone and
continental shelf over which international law grants to the Contracting Party con-
cerned rights of sovereignty or jurisdiction.

(2) Ad article 3:

(a) The following shall more particularly, though not exclusively, be deemed
“activity” within the meaning of article 3, paragraph 2: the management, utilization,
use and enjoyment of an investment. The following shall more particularly, though
not exclusively, be deemed “treatment less favourable” within the meaning of arti-
cle 3: less favourable measures that affect the purchase of raw materials and other
inputs, energy or fuel, or means of production or operation of any kind or the mar-
keting of products inside or outside the country. Measures that are adopted for
reasons of internal or external security or public order, public health or morality
shall not be deemed “treatment less favourable” within the meaning of article 3.

(b) The provisions of article 3 do not obligate a Contracting Party to extend tax
privileges, exemptions and relief accorded only to natural persons and companies
Vol. 1910, 1-32538

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 205

 

resident in its territory, in accordance with its tax laws, to natural persons and
companies resident in the territory of the other Contracting Party.

(c) The Contracting Parties shall within the framework of their national legisla-
tion give favourable consideration to applications for the entry and sojourn of per-
sons of either Contracting Party who wish to enter the territory of the other Con-
tracting Party in connection with an investment; the same shall apply to nationals of
either Contracting Party who, in connection with an investment, wish to enter the
territory of the other Contracting Party and sojourn there to take up employment.
Applications for work permits shall also be given favourable consideration.

(3) Ad article 4:

Aclaim to compensation shall also exist when, as a result of the adoption of any
one of the measures referred to in article 4 against the company in which the invest-
ment is made, such investment is severely impaired.

(4) Ad article 5:

A transfer shall be deemed to have been made “without delay” within the
meaning of article 5, paragraph 2, if effected within such period as is normally re-
quired for the completion of transfer formalities. The said period shall commence on
the day on which the relevant request has been formally submitted and may on no
account exceed two months.

(5S) Ad article 8:

This Treaty shall in no case apply to complaints or litigation which arose before
it entered into force.

(6) Whenever goods or persons connected with an investment are to be trans-
ported, neither Contracting Party shall exclude or hinder transport companies of the
other Contracting Party. Permits to carry out such transport in accordance with the
tules of international agreements in force between the two Contracting Parties shall
be issued as required.

Done at Bonn on 9 April 1991, in duplicate in the German and Spanish lan-
guages, both texts being equally authentic.
For the Federal Republic
of Germany:
GENSCHER
For the Argentine
Republic:
Gupo pi TELLA

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

206 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

 

[TRANSLATION — TRADUCTION]
EXCHANGES OF NOTES
la
EMBASSY OF THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC

Bonn, 9 April 1991

Sir,

With the signing of the Treaty on the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection
of Investments of 9 April 1991, the Government of the Argentine Republic has the
honour to inform the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany of the fol-
lowing:

Under the General Treaty of cooperation and friendship of 1988! and the Treaty
for the of a special 1987,2 , the
Kingdom of Spain and the Italian Republic grant to the Rete Republic conces-
sional lines of credit for financing investments, especially for the purpose of creating
joint ventures in the small and medium-size business sector.

Financing applications for each project shall be authorized in accordance with
special Argentine regulations and shall later be decided with the Spanish or Italian
counterpart, as the case may be.

In return, the Argentine Republic has undertaken:

— To grant customs and tax exemptions for imports of goods for investment
financed with concessional lines of credit provided for by the respective
Treaties.

— Not to take any measures to prevent the repatriation of invested capital or the
free transfer of returns from venture capital for any projects financed in accord-
ance with the provisions of the aforementioned Treaties.

These special conditions are granted for the purpose of facilitating new invest-
ments for Argentina’s economic development in areas which it is deemed especially
vital to promote.

The Contracting Parties shall interpret article 3 of the Treaty on the Encourage-
ment and Reciprocal Protection of Investments to mean that the most-favoured-
nation clause shall not refer to the special conditions and privileges that the Argen-
tine Republic grants to foreign investors in respect of the aforementioned projects.

The Argentine Republic shall ensure that the competitiveness of those German
investors and their investments that are not subject to the aforementioned special
conditions is not substantially affected.

' United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1546, p. 3.
2 [bid., vol. 1537, p. 307.

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 207

Accept, Sir, etc.

Gu1bo Di TELLA
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Worship

His Excellency

Mr. Hans D. Genscher
Minister for Foreign Affairs
Federal Republic of Germany
Bonn

Vol. 1910, 1.32538

208 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

 

Ila
Bonn, 9 April 1991
THE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS
422-413.35 ARG
Sir,
Ihave the honour to acknowledge receipt of the note dated 9 April 1991 from
the Argentine Government, which reads as follows:
[See note Ia]
Accept, Sir, etc.
GENSCHER
His Excellency

The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Worship
Mr. Guido di Tella

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 209

 

Ib
THE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Bonn, 9 April 1991
422-413.35 ARG
Sir,

With the signing of the Treaty on the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection
of Investments between our two countries dated 9 April 1991, I have the honour to
inform you of the following:

Following the entry into force of the aforementioned Treaty and taking into
account the principle established in article 5 thereof on the free transfer of capital
and returns, the German authorities have the option, upon the submission by inter-
ested investors of a request for guaranteeing an investment in Argentina, of pro-
viding full ge for such ii in with the pi gnide-
lines and general conditions. Therefore, starting from the entry into force of this
Treaty, such authorities may, in addition to the guarantees already available, grant
guarantees with respect to the sums derived from investments during a given period
such as shares in profits, dividends and interests.

Accept, Sir, etc.

 

GENSCHER

His Excellency
The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Worship
of the Argentine Republic

Mr. Guido di Tella

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

210 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

lb
MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND WORSHIP
Bonn, 9 April 1991
Sir,

Ihave the honour to acknowledge receipt of the note of the Government of the
Federal Republic of Germany dated 9 April 1991, the text of which reads as follows:
[See note Ib]

Accept, Sir, etc.

Gu1po pt TELLA
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Worship

His Excellency

Mr. Hans D. Genscher
Minister for Foreign Affairs

of the Federal Republic of Germany
Bonn

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series _* Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 2It

 

[TRADUCTION — TRANSLATION]

TRAITE! ENTE LA REPUBLIQUE FEDERALE D’ ALLEMAGNE ET
LA REPUBLIQUE ARGENTINE RELATIF A LA PROMOTION
ET ALA PROTECTION RECIPROQUE DES INVESTISSEMENTS

La République fédérale d’A etla
Désireuses d’ intensifier la coopération économique entre les deux Etats,

créer des iti les aux ii i des
et des sociétés de chacun deux sur le territoire de I’autre,

 

que la etla ion de ces i par voie
de traité sont de nature & stimuler |’initiative pissennd privée et 4 accroitre la
prospérité des deux peuples,

Sont convenues de ce qui suit :

Article 1°
Aux fins du présent Traité :

1. Le terme « investissements » désigne tout type d’ activité défini en accord
avec les lois et réglementations de la Partie contractante sur le territoire de laquelle
l'investissement a été réalisé conformément au présent Traité; en particulier sont
compris, non limitativement

a) La propriété des biens meubles et immeubles, ainsi que tous autres droits
réels tels qu’ hypothéques et gages;

5) Les actions, droits de participation a des sociétés et autres formes de partici-
pation a des sociétés;

c) Les créances portant sur des sommes d'argent servant a créer une valeur
économique ou portant sur toute prestation 4 valeur économique;

d) Les droits de la propriété intellectuelle, en particulier les droits d’auteur, les
brevets, les modéles d’utilité, les dessins et modéles industriels et commerciaux, les

ues, les noms commerciaux, les secrets industriels et commerciaux, les pro-
cédés techniques, les savoir-faire et la survaleur incorporelle (« goodwill »);

e) Les concessions accordées par des entités de droit public, y compris les
concessions de prospection et d’exploitation.

2. Le terme « revenus » désigne les sommes rapportées par un investissement,
en particulier participations aux bénéfices, dividendes, intéréts, droits de licence et
autres rémunérations.

3. Le terme « nationaux » désigne :

a) Ence qui concerne la République fédérale d’ Allemagne : les Allemands aux
sens de la Loi fondamentale de la République fédérale d’ Allemagne;
' Bntré en vigueur le 8 novembre 1993, soit un mois aprés I'échange des instruments de ratification, qui a eu liew &
Buenos Aires le 8 octobre 1993, conformément au paragraphe 2 de l'article 2.
Vol. 1910, 132538

212 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

 

b) En ce qui concerne la République argentine : les Argentins au sens des dis-
positions légales en vigueur en Argentine.

4. Leterme « sociétés » désigue toutes les personnes morales ainsi que toutes
les sociétés commerciales et autres sociétés ou associations dotées ou non de la
personnalité juridique dont le siége est situé sur le territoire de l’une des Parties
contractantes, que leur activité soit lucrative ou non.

Article 2

1) Chacune des Parties contractantes encouragera les investissements sur son
territoire par des nationaux ou des sociétés de l'autre Partie contractante et les
admettra conformément & ses lois et réglementations. En tout état de cause, elle
traitera les investissements de maniére juste et équitable.

2) Les investissements effectués par des nationaux ou des sociétés de l’une
des Parties contractantes sur le territoire de l'autre Partie contractante en accord
avec les lois et réglementations de cette derniére bénéficieront de la pleine protec-
tion du présent Traité.

3) Aucune des Parties contractantes ne préjudiciera sur son territoire, par des
mesures arbitraires ou discriminatoires, a ]’administration, a l'utilisation, a l’usage
ou & la jouissance des investissements de nationaux ou sociétés de |’autre Partie
contractante.

Article 3

1) Aucune des Parties contractantes ne soumettra sur son territoire les inves-
tissements des nationaux ou sociétés de |’autre Partie contractante ou les investisse-
ments Is ceux-ci aun moi! que celui con-
senti aux investissements de ses propres nationaux et sociétés ou de ceux d’Etats
tiers.

 

2) Aucune des Parties contractantes ne soumettra sur son territoire les inves-
tissements des nationaux ou sociétés de |’autre Partie contractante, s’agissant de
leurs activités liées aux investissements, 4 un traitement moins favorable que celui
accordé & ses propres nationaux et sociétés ou aux nationaux et sociétés d’Etats
tiers.

3) Ce traitement ne couvrira pas les avantages ou priviléges qu’une Partie
contractante accorde aux nationaux ou aux sociétés d’Etats tiers en raison de leur
appartenance a une union douaniére ou économique, a un marché commun ou a une
zone de libre-échange.

4) Le traitement prévu dans le présent article ne s’appliquera pas aux avan-
tages que l'une des Parties contractantes accorde aux nationaux et sociétés d’Etats
tiers en conséquence d’un accord visant a éviter la double imposition ou autre
accord fiscal.

Article 4

1) Les investissements des nationaux ou sociétés de chacune des Parties con-
tractantes benéficieront d’une pleine protection et d'une pleine sécurité juridique
sur le territoire de l’autre Partie contractante.

2) Les investissements de nationaux ou sociétés d’une Partie contractante ne
pourront pas, sur le territoire de l'autre Partie contractante, étre expropriés ou natio-

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series ¢ Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 213

nalisés, ou faire I’ objet d’autres mesures dont les effets équivaudraient a une expro-
priation ou & une nationalisation, sauf pour cause d’utilité publique, et alors avec
indemnisation. L’indemnisation devra correspondre a la valeur de l’investissement
exproprié immédiatement avant la date de l’annonce publique de |’expropriation
« effective ou imminente », de la nationalisation ou de la mesure équivalente, L’in-
demnité devra étre versée sans retard et portera intéréts jusqu’a la date du paiement
au taux d’intérét bancaire usuel; elle devra étre effectivement réalisable et librement
transférable. La légalité de l’expropriation, de la nationalisation ou autre mesure
équivalente, ainsi que le montant de |’indemnisation, devront pouvoir étre revues
dans le cadre des procédures judiciaires ordinaires.

3) Les nationaux ou sociétés d’une Partie contractante dont les investisse-
ments subissent des pertes 4 cause d’une guerre ou autre conflit armé, d’une révo-
lution, d’un état d’urgence nationale ou d’une insurrection qui se produit sur le
territoire de I’autre Partie contractante ne seront pas traités par celle-ci moins favo-
rablement que ses propres nationaux ou sociétés quant a la restitution, 4 la compen-
sation, a l’indemnisation ou autre forme de dédommagement. Les versements cor-
respondants devront étre librement transférables.

4) S’agissant des questions régies par le présent article, les nationaux ou
sociétés de chacune des Parties contractantes bénéficieront sur le territoire de
l'autre du traitement de la nation la plus favorisée.

Article 5

1) Chaque Partie contractante garantira aux nationaux ou sociétés de l’autre
Partie contractante le libre transfert des paiements liés 4 un investissement, s’agis-
sant en particulier :

a) Ducapital et des fonds additionnels nécessaires au maintien ou a l’augmen-
tation de l’investissement;

b) Des revenus;

c) De l’'amortissement des préts définis a I'alinéa c du paragraphe 1* de I’ar-
ticle 1°;

d) Du produit de la vente ou liquidation totale ou partielle de l'investissement;

e) Des indemnités visées a l’article 4.

2) Le transfert s’effectuera sans retard en accord avec les procédures établies
sur le territoire de chaque Partie contractante et selon les modalités de change appli-
cables dans chaque cas. Ces modalités de change ne devront pas différer substan-
tiellement du taux de change croisé (cross rate) résultant des modalités de change
qu’appliquerait le Fonds monétaire international si, a la date du paiement considéré,
il était amené a convertir en droits de tirage spéciaux des sommes libellées dans la
monnaie des pays intéressés.

Article 6

Si l'une des Parties contractantes fait des paiements au bénéfice de ses natio-
naux ou de ses sociétés en vertu d’une garantie accordée pour un investissement
effectué sur le territoire de |’autre Partie contractante, celle-ci, sans préjudice des
droit conférés 4 la premiére Partie contractante par |’article 9 du présent Traité,
reconnaitra la cession de tous les droits ou créances de ces nationaux ou sociétés 4
la premiére Partie contractante, par voie soit de disposition légale, soit d’acte juri-

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

214 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

 

dique. De méme, |’ autre Partie contractante reconnaitra, en substance et en portée,
la subrogation de la premiére Partie contractante dans tous les droits du précédent
titulaire. S’agissant de transfert des paiements au titre de droits transférés, |’article 5
s’appliquera mutatis mutandis.

Article 7

1) Si les dispositions légales de I’une ou I’autre Partie contractante ou des
obligations résultant du droit international et non envisagées dans le présent Traité,
actuelles ou futures, entre les Parties contractantes, conduisent a une réglementa-
tion générale ou spéciale imposant d’accorder aux investissements des nationaux ou
sociétés de l’autre Partie contractante un traitement plus favorable que celui prévu
dans le présent Traité, cette réglementation prévaudra sur le présent Traité pour
autant qu’elle soit plus favorable.

2) Chacune des Parties contractantes s’acquittera de tout autre engagement
qu’elle aura éventuellement contracté en rapport avec les investissements de natio-
naux ou sociétés de |’autre Partie contractante sur son territoire.

Article 8

Le présent Traité s’appliquera également aux questions qui pourraient se poser
aprés son entrée en vigueur en rapport avec des investissements effectués par les
nationaux ou sociétés d’une des Parties contractantes conformément aux lois et
réglements de l'autre Partie contractante sur le territoire de cette derniére avant
l’entrée en vigueur du Traité.

Article 9

1) Les différends éventuels entre les Parties contractantes concernant |’ inter-
prétation ou I’application du présent Traité devront, dans la mesure du possible, étre
téglés par les gouvernements des deux Parties contractantes.

2) A supposer qu’un différend entre les Parties contractantes ne puisse pas
tre réglé de cette manieére, i] sera soumis a un tribunal arbitral sur demande de l’une
des Parties contractantes.

3) Le tribunal arbitral sera constitué sur une base ad hoc : chaque Partie con-
tractante nommera un membre du tribunal, et les deux membres ainsi nommés
choisiront d’un commun accord comme président un national d’un Etat tiers qui
sera nommé par les gouvernements des deux Parties contractantes. Les membres
seront nommés dans le délai de deux mois et le président dans le délai de trois mois
aprés que l'une des Parties contractantes aura communiqué 4 l’autre son désir de
soumettre le différend a un tribunal arbitral.

4) Si les délais spécifiés au paragraphe 3 n’ont pas été observés et faute
d’autre arrangement, chacune des Parties contractantes pourra inviter le Président
de la Cour internationale de Justice 4 procéder aux nominations nécessaires. Au cas
ou le Président serait un national de l’une des Parties contractantes ou s’il était
empéché pour une autre raison de s’acquitter de cette fonction, il reviendrait au
Vice-Président de la Cour de procéder aux nominations. Si ce dernier lui-méme est
un national de l’une des Parties contractantes ou s’il est empéché, il reviendra au
membre de la Cour venant immédiatement 8 la suite dans I’ ordre hiérarchique et qui
n’est pas un national de |’une des deux Parties contractantes de procéder aux nomi-
nations.

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 215

 

5) Le tribunal arbitral prendra ses décisions a la majorité des voix. Les déci-
sions seront obligatoires. Chaque Partie contractante prendra a sa charge les frais
découlant des activités de son arbitre, ainsi que les frais de sa représentation dans la
procédure arbitrale; les frais du président et les autres frais seront pris en charge A
parts égales par les Parties contractantes. Pour le reste, le tribunal arbitral arrétera
sa propre procédure.

6) Si les deux Parties contractantes ont en outre la qualité d’Etat contractant
par rapport a la Convention du 18 mars 1965! pour le réglement des différends
relatifs aux investissements entre Etats et ressortissants d’autres Etats!, il ne
pourra, eu égard au paragraphe | de l'article 27 de cette Convention, étre recouru au
tribunal arbitral visé plus haut quand le national ou la société d’une Partie contrac-
tante et l'autre Partie contractante seraient arrivés 4 un accord conformément &
l'article 25 de la Convention. II ne sera affecté la possibilité de recourir au tribunal
arbitral visé plus haut au cas od une décision du Tribunal arbitral institué par ladite
Convention (article 27) ne serait pas respectée.

Article 10

1) Les différends qui pourraient surgir entre une Partie contractante et un
national ou une société de |’autre Partie contractante en rapport avec les investisse-
ments au sens du présent Traité devront, autant que possible, étre réglés a l’amiable
par les parties au différend.

2) Siun différend au sens du paragraphe | ne peut étre réglé dans le délai de
six mois 4 compter de la date a laquelle une des parties au différend I’a soulevé, il
sera soumis a la demande de |’ une des parties aux tribunaux compétents de la Partie
contractante sur le territoire de laquelle l’investissement a été effectué.

3) Le différend pourra étre soumis a un tribunal arbitral international dans
l'un quelconque des cas suivants :

a) Ala demande de lune des parties au différend, en l’absence d’une décision
au fond dans le délai de dix-huit mois 4 compter de la mise en route de la procédure
judiciaire visée au paragraphe 2 du présent article, ou bien lorsqu’une décision a été
rendue mais que le différend persiste entre les parties;

b) Lorsque les deux parties au différend en ont ainsi convenu.

4) Dans les cas prévus au paragraphe 3 du présent article, les différends entre
les parties, au sens du présent article, seront soumis d’un commun accord, sauf
convention contraire entre les parties au différend, soit 4 une procédure arbitrale
dans le cadre de la Convention du 18 mars 1965 pour le réglement des différends
relatifs aux investissements entre Etats et ressortissants d’autres Etats, soit 4 un
tribunal ad hoc institué conformément aux régles de la Commission des Nations
Unies pour le droit commercial international (CNUDCI).

Si, dans le délai de trois mois 4 compter du moment od |’une des parties a
demandé la mise en route de la procédure arbitrale, un accord n’est pas intervenu, le
différend sera soumis 4 une procédure arbitrale dans le cadre de ladite Convention
du 18 mars 1965 pour autant que les deux Parties contractantes soient également
parties 4 cette convention. Dans I’hypothése contraire, le différend sera soumis au
tribunal arbitral visé plus haut.

' Nations Unies, Recueil des Traités, vol. 575, p. 159.
Vol. 1910, 1-32538

216 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

 

5) Le tribunal arbitral rendra sa décision sur la base du présent Traité et, le cas
échéant, sur la base des autres traités en vigueur entre les Parties contractantes, du
droit interne de la Partie contractante sur le territoire de laquelle l'investissement a
été effectué, y compris ses normes de droit international privé, et des principes
généraux du droit international.

6) La sentence arbitrale sera obligatoire et chaque Partie l’exécutera confor-
mément a sa législation.

Article 11

Les dispositions du présent Traité resteront pleinement applicables y compris
dans les cas prévus a !’article 63 de la Convention de Vienne sur le droit des traités
en date du 23 mai 1969!.

Article 12

1) Le présent Traité sera ratifié; les instruments de ratification en seront
€changés dés que possible 4 Buenos Aires.

2) Le présent Traité entrera en vigueur un mois aprés la date a laquelle il aura
été procédé a I’échange des instruments de ratification. La durée de sa validité sera
de dix ans et il sera ensuite indéfiniment prorogé, sauf notification écrite adressée
par une Partie contractante a l’autre Partie contractante de son intention d’y mettre
fin, effectuée douze mois avant la date d’expiration. Au bout de dix ans, le Traité
pourra étre dénoncé a tout moment sur préavis de douze mois.

3) Pour ce qui est des investissements effectués avant la date de l’abrogation
du présent Traité, les dispositions des articles 1° 4 1] leur resteront applicables
pendant les quinze années suivant cette date.

Fart a Bonn le 9 avril 1991 en deux originaux, en langues allemande et espa-
gnole, les deux textes faisant également foi.

Pour le Gouvernement
de la République fédérale d’ Allemagne :
GENSCHER
Pour le Gouvernement
de la République argentine :
Guipo pI TELLA

' Nations Unies, Recueil des Traités, vol. 1155, p. 331.
Vol. 1910, :-32538

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unles — Recueil des Traités 217

 

PROTOCOLE

Au moment de signer le Traité entre la République fédérale d’ Allemagne et la
relatif Ala etalap des inves-
tissements, les plénipotentiaires soussignés ont adopté les dispositions ci-aprés,
considérées comme faisant partie intégrante du Traité.
1) Ad article premier :
a) En ce qui concerne le paragraphe | dudit article, le présent Traité ne s’ap-
pliquera pas aux réalisés en par des
physiques ayant la qualité de national de l'autre Partie contractante siles intéressés
ient, a la date de l’investissement originel, domiciliés depuis plus de deux ans en
République argentine, sauf 4 prouver que l’investissement provient de |’ étranger.

b) Les revenus des investissements et, le cas échéant, du réinvestissement de
ces revenus bénéficieront de la méme protection que |’investissement initial.

c) Par « autres formes de participation », au sens de l’alinéa b du paragraphe |
de l'article 1°, seront entendus en particulier les apports de capitaux qui ne con-
férent aux intéressés ni droit de vote, ni contréle.

d) Les créances sur les sommes visées a l’alinéa c du paragraphe | de l’arti-
cle 1 couvrent les créances au titre de préts liés 4 une participation et qui, par leur
cause et leur montant, ont le caractére d’une participation (préts quasi participatifs).
Elles ne s’entendent pas toutefois des crédits accordés par des tiers (par exemple,
des crédits bancaires 4 clauses commerciales).

e) Sans préjudice des autres modes de détermination de la nationalité, sera
notamment considérée national d’une Partie contractante toute personne détentrice
d'un passeport national délivré par les autorités compétentes de ladite Partie con-
tractante. Le présent Traité ne s'appliquera pas aux investisseurs qui ont la natio-
nalité des deux Parties contractantes.

Ff) Pour déterminer si la notion de « société » au sens des dispositions du para-
graphe 4 de l’article 1* est applicable, il sera tenu compte du siége, & savoir le lieu od
se trouve l’administration principale de la société.

8) Le Traité s’appliquera également aux secteurs de la zone économique exclu-
sive et du plateau continental sur lesquelles le droit international confére a la Partie
contractante concernée des droits de souveraineté ou de juridiction.

2) Ad article 3:

a) Par « activités » au sens du paragraphe 2 de l’article 3, sont notamment, mais
non | r usage et | la j
@un it i Sera mais non imitati « traite-
ment moins favorable » au sens de l'article 3 une mesure moins favorable affectant
Vacquisition de matiéres premiéres et d’autres facteurs de production, d’énergie ou
de combustibles, ainsi que les moyens de production ou d’exploitation de toute
catégorie ou la vente de produits dans le pays méme et a I’étranger. Ne seront pas
considérées « traitement moins favorable » au sens de I’article 3 les mesures prises
pour des motifs de sécurité intérieure ou extérieure et d’ ordre public, de santé publi-
que ou de moralité.

b) Les dispositions de l’article 3 ne font pas obligation 4 une Partie contrac-
tante d’accorder aux personnes physiques et aux sociétés résidant sur le territoire
Vol. 1910, 1-32538

 

218 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

 

de l’autre Partie contractante les avantages, exemptions et abattements fiscaux qui,
en vertu du droit fiscal, sont accordés aux seules personnes physiques et sociétés
résidant sur le territoire de la premiére Partie contractante.

c) Les Parties contractantes, en se conformant & leurs dispositions légales, ins-
truiront avec bienveillance les demandes de permis dentrée et de séjour sur leur
temitoire présentées par des ressortissants de |’une des Parties contractantes qui, en

apport avec un investissement, souhaitent entrer sur leur territoire; il sera procédé
de méme pour les salariés ressortissants d’une Partie contractante qui, en rapport
avec un investissement, souhaitent entrer et séjourner sur le territoire de l’autre
Partie contractante pour y exercer leur activité salariée. De méme, les demandes de
permis de travail seront instruites avec bienveillance.

3) Adarticle 4:

Ily aura également droit a indemnisation au cas oii serait prise une quelconque
mesure visée a l'article 4 a l’égard de !’entreprise dans laquelle l’investissement est
situé et sil’i i subit un préjudice grave en q de cette mesure.

4) Adarticle5:

Le transfert est tenu pour réalisé « sans retard » au sens du paragraphe 2 de
l'article 5 quand il a eu lieu dans le temps normalement requis pour accomplir les
formalités de transfert. Le délai, qui ne pourra en aucun cas excéder deux mois,
courra & partir du moment de la présentation de la demande officiellement complete.

5) Adarticle 8 :

Le Traité ne s’appliquera en aucun cas aux réclamations et litiges survenus
avant son entrée en vigueur.

6) S’agissant des transports de marchandises et de personnes liés a des inves-
tissements, les Parties contractantes n’excluront pas et ne géneront pas leurs entre-
prises de transport respectives et, en cas de besoin, elles délivreront les autorisations
requises pour effectuer les transports dans des conditions répondant aux normes
des accords internationaux en vigueur entre elles.

Farr a Bonn le 9 avril 1991 en deux exemplaires en langues allemande et espa-
gnole, les deux textes faisant également foi.

 

Pour le Gouvernement
de la République fédérale d’ Allemagne :

GENSCHER
Pour le Gouvernement
de la République argentine :
Gurpo pi TELLA

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series ¢ Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 219

 

ECHANGES DE NOTES
la
AMBASSADE DE LA REPUBLIQUE ARGENTINE

Bonn, le 9, avril 1991

Monsieur le Ministre,

A’occasion de la signature du Traité du 9 avril 1991 relatif @ la a promotion. eta
la des le Gouve
argentine a l’honneur de communiquer ce qui suit au Gouvernement de la Répu-
blique fédérale d’ Allemagne :

Sur la base, respectivenient, du Traité d’amitié et de coopération de 1988! et du
Traité de 1987 relatif a1" ‘établissement de relations de collaboration particuliéres?, le
Royaume d’Espagne et la italienne
des lignes de crédit concessionnel dont l'objet est de oak les investissenients
tendant a la réalisation d’investissements, plus particuligremient en vue de créer des
coentreprises dans le secteur de la petite et moyenne entreprise.

Les demandes de financement de chaque projet considéré doivent étre auto-
risées conformément aux réglementations argentines spéciales et sont ensuite con-
venues avec la partie espagnole ou, le cas échéant, italienne.

En contrepartie, la République argentine s’est engagée :

— A exempter des droits de douane et de |’impét les importations de biens des-
tinées & des investissements financés au moyen des crédits concessionnels pré-
vus dans les traités correspondants;

— A n/’adopter aucune mesure propre a géner le rapatriement du capital investi ou
le libre transfert des revenus d’investissemuents a risque s’agissant des projets
financés conforménment aux dispositions desdits traités

Ce régime spécial vise a rendre possibles de nouveaux investissements tendant

dans des d dont la p

 

est particuliérement ood

Les Parties contractantes interprétent I’article 3 du Traité relatif 4 la promotion
et a la protection réciproque des investissements dans le sens que la clause de la
nation la plus favorisée ne couvre pas les conditions et priviléges spéciaux que la
République argentine accorde aux investisseurs étrangers aux fins des projets sus-
mentionnés.

La République argentine fera en sorte que les investisseurs et les investisse-
ments allemands qui ne relévent pas des conditions spéciales dont il vient d’étre
question ne soient pas substantiellement affectés sur le plan concurrentiel.

' Nations Unies, Recueil des Traités, vol. 1546, p. 3.
2 Ihid., vol. 1537, p. 307.

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

220 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

Je saisis cette occasion, etc.
Le Ministre des relations extérieures
et du culte,
Gu1po pi TELLA

Son Excellence

Monsieur Hans D. Genscher
Ministre des affaires étrangéres

de la République fédérale d’ Allemagne
Bonn

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 221

Ila
LE MINISTRE DES AFFAIRES ETRANGERES
Bonn, le 9 avril 1991
422-413.35 ARG

Monsieur le Ministre,

J’ai ’honneur d’ accuser réception de la note du Gouvernement de la Répu-
blique argentine en date du 9 avril 1991 qui se lit ainsi :

[Voir note I a]
Je saisis cette occasion, etc.
GENSCHER
Son Excellence
Monsieur Guido di Tella

Ministre des relations extérieures et du culte
de la République argentine

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

222 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 1996

ib
LE MINISTRE DES AFFAIRES ETRANGERES

Bonn, le 9 avril 1991

422-413.35 ARG
Monsieur le Ministre,

A occasion du Traité relatif 4 la promotion et a la protection réciproque des
investissements signé ce jour entre nos deux pays, j’ai l’honneur de vous commu-
niquer ce qui suit :

A partir de l’entrée en vigueur dudit Traité et compte tenu du principe établi par
son article 5 au sujet du libre transfert des capitaux et des revenus, les autorités
allemandes envisagent la possibilité, sur présentation de la part des investisseurs
concernés d’une demande de garantie d’investissement en Argentine, de couvrir en
totalité ces investissements conformément aux directives et conditions générales en
vigueur. Cela étant, a partir de l’entrée en vigueur du Traité, ces autorités pourront,
outre les garanties actuellement possibles, accorder des garanties couvrant les som-
mes résultant d’un investissement pendant une durée déterminée, en particulier les
participations aux bénéfices, les dividendes et les intéréts.

Je saisis cette occasion, etc.

GENSCHER
Son Excellence
Monsieur Guido di Tella .

Ministre des relations extérieures et du culte
de la République argentine

Vol. 1910, 1-32538

1996 United Nations — Treaty Series * Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 223

 

‘lb
MINISTERE DES RELATIONS EXTERIEURES ET DU CULTE

Bonn, le 9 avril 1991

Monsieur le Ministre,

Jai ’honneur d’accuser réception de la note du Gouvernement de la Répu-
blique fédérale d’ Allemagne en date du 9 avril 1991 qui se lit ainsi :

[Voir note Ib]
Je saisis cette occasion, etc.

Le Ministre des relations extérieures
et du culte,

GuIpo pi TELLA

Son Excellence

Monsieur Hans D. Genscher
Ministre des affaires étrangéres

de la République fédérale d’ Allemagne
Bonn

Vol. 1910, 1-32538


Decision on Jurisdiction
Hochtief Aktiengesellschaft v. Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/07/31)

Appendix II

 

TRATADOS

Ley 24.342

Apruébase el tratado sobre Promocién y Proteceién Reciprocas de Inversiones
suscripto con la Republica de Chile y el Acuerdo por Canje de Notas
Modificatorio.

Sancionada: Junio 9 de 1994.

Promulgada: Julio 4 de 1994,

B.O.: 11/07/97 :

El Senado y-Cémara de Diputados de la Nacién Argentina reunidos en Congreso, etc.
sancionan con fuerza de Ley:

ARTICULO 1° -Apruébase el TRATADO ENTRE LA REPUBLICA ARGENTINA Y
LA REPUBLICA DE CHILE SOBRE PROMOCION Y PROTECCION
RECIPROCAS DE INVERSIONES, suscripto en Buenos Aires el 2 de agosto de 1991,
que consta de once (11) articulos y un (1) Protocolo, y el ACUERDO POR CANJE DE
NOTAS MODIFICATORIO DEL TRATADO ENTRE LA REPUBLICA
ARGENTINA Y LA REPUBLICA DE CHILE SOBRE PROMOCION Y
PROTECCION RECIPROCA DE INVERSIONES, suscripto en Buenos Aires el 13 de
julio de 1992, cuyas fotocopias autenticadas forman parte de la presente ley.

ARTICULO 2° -Comuniquese al Poder Ejecutivo Nacional.-ALBERTO R. PIERRI.-
FAUSTINO MAZZUCCO.- Esther H. Pereyra Arandia de Pérez Pardo. - Juan J. Canals

DADA EN LA SALA DE SESIONES DEL CONGRESO ARGENTINO, EN BUENOS
AIRES, A LOS NUEVE DIAS DEL MES DE JUNIO DEL ANO MIL
NOVECIENTOS NOVENTA Y CUATRO.

TRATADO ENTRE

LA REPUBLICA ARGENTINA

Y

LA REPUBLICA DE CHILE .

SOBREPROMOCION Y PROTECCION RECIPROCA DE INVERSIONES

La Repitblica Argentina y la Reptblica de Chile, denominadas en adelante "las Partes
Contratantes".;

Animadas del deseo de i i la colab i émica entre ambos Estados,
Con el propésito de crear condici para las i i de los nacional

0 sociedades de uno de los dos estados en el territorio del otro Estado, que impliquen
transferencias de capitales, :

 

 

i que lap ién y la proteccién de esas inversi diante un
tratado pueden servir para estimular la iniciativa econémica privada e incrementar el
bienestar de ambos pueblos,

 

> RNDRALC taReUe?
APUMLICAS
JA INGLES
TX Fast
8c. 9198

 

 

 

 

 

Han convenido lo siguiente:
ARTICULO 1

Definiciones

Para los fines del presente Tratado:

(1) El concepto "inversiones" designa, de conformidad con el ordenamierito juridico del

- pafs receptor, todo tipo de bienes que el inversor de una Parte Contratante invierte en el

territorio de la otra Parte Contratante de acuerdo con la legislacién de ésta, en particular,
pero no exclusivamente:

a) la propiedad de bienes muebles e inmuebles y demas derechos reales, como hipotecas
y derechos de prenda;

b) acciones, derechos de participacién en sociedades y otros tipos de participaciones en
sociedades, como también la capitalizacién de utilidades con derecho a ser transferidas
al exterior;

c) obligaci 0 créditos di inculados a una it 16 1
contrafdos y documentados segin las disposiciones vigentes en el pafs donde esa
inversién-sea reafizada;

d) derechos de propiedad intelectual como , en especial, derechos de autor, patentes,
disefios y modelos industriales y comerciales, procedimientos tecnolégicos, know how
y valor Ilave;

e) concesiones otorgadas por entidades de derecho. pubblico, incluidas las concesiones de
prospeccién y explotacién.

Ninguna modificacién de la forma juridica segin la cual Jos activos y capitales hayan
sido i i idos afectard su califi de acuerdo con el
presente Tratado.

 

2. El concepto “ganancias o rentas" designa las sumas obtenidas de una inversién en un
perfodo determinado, tales como las participaciones en los beneficios, los dividendos,
los intereses, los derechos de licencia u otras remuneraciones.

3. El concepto "nacionales" designa:

a) con referencia a la Republica de Chile:

los chilenos en el sentido de la Constitucién Polftica de la Reptiblica de Chile;

b) con referencia a la Repiiblica Argentina:

los argentinos en.el sentido de las disposiciones legales vigentes en la Argentina.

4. El concepto “sociedades" designa todas las personas juridicas, constituidas conforme
con la legislacién de una Parte Contratante y que tengan su sede en el territorio de dicha
Parte Contratante, independientemente de que su actividad tenga o no fines de lucro.

5. No obstante lo establecido en el apartado 3 de este articulo, las disposiciones de este
Tratado sol se aplicarin a los nacionales de una Parte C: que no estén

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

domiciliados por mas de dos afios en el territorio de la Parte Contratante donde la
inversién se realizé y que prueben que las inversiones provienen del extranjero.

6. El término "territorio" designa, ademas de las 4reas enmarcadas en los limites
ferrestres ymaritimos, las zonas marinas y submarinas, en las ouales las Partes

 

ejercen derech yb y jurisdi a sus resp
vepleotonee y al derecho internacional.
ARTICULO 2

Promocién y Proteccién de las inversiones -

1. Cada una de las Partes Contratantes promoveré las inversiones dentro de su territorio
de nacionales 0 sociedades de la otra Parte Contratante y las admitiré de conformidad
con sus disposiciones legales vigentes. En todo caso tratar4 las inversiones justa y
equitativamente.

2. Gozarén de la plena proteccién del Tratado las inversiones que, de acuerdo con las
disposiciones legales de una de las Partes Contratantes, hayan sido realizadas en el
Ambito de la ley de esta Parte Contratante por nacionales 0 sociedades de la otra Parte
Contratante.

3. Ninguna de las Partes C judicaré en su territorio la admini: i
utilizacién, el uso o el goce de las i inversiones de nacionales o sociedades de la otra
Parte Contratante a través de medidas arbitrarias o discriminatorias.

ARTICULO 3
Trato nacional y clausula de 1a Nacién m4s favorecida

1, Ningunia de las Partes Contratantes someterd en su territorio a las inversiones de
nacionales o sociedades de la otra Parte Contratante o a las inversiones en las que
mantengan participaciones los nacionales 0 sociedades de la otra Parte Contratante, a-un
trato menos favorable que el que se conceda a las inversiones de los propios nacionales
y sociedades o a las ii de les y sociedades de terceros Estados.

2. Ninguna de las Partes Contratantes someterd en su territorio a los nacionales 0
sociedades de la otra Parte Contratante, en cuanto se refiere a sus actividades
relacionadas con las inversiones, a un trato menos favorable que a sus propios
nacionales y sociedades 0 a los nacionales y sociedades de terceros Estados.

3. Dicho trato no se refiere a los privilegios que una de las Partes Contratantes conceda
alos nacionales y sociedades de terceros Estados por formar parte de una unién
aduanera o‘econémica, un mercado comtin o una zona de libre comercio, o a causa de su
asociacién con tales agrupaciones.

Dicho trato no se refiere tampoco a los privilegios acordados por una Parte Contratante
a los nacionales 0 sociédades de un tercer Estado por una inversién realizada en el
marco de un financiamiento concesional previsto por un tratado bilateral entre dicha
Parte Contratante y el pafs al que pertenecen los citados inversores.

4, El trato acordado por el presente articulo no se refiere a las ventajas que una de las
Partes.Contratantes conceda a los nacionales.o sociedades de terceros Estados como

 

 

 

 

 

 

consecuencia de un acuerdo para evitar la doble imposicién o de otros acuerdos sobre
asuntos tributarios.

ARTICULO 4

Nacionalizacién y si
1, Las inversiones de nacionales 0 sociedades de una de las Partes Contratantes gozarin
de plena proteccién y seguridad juridica en el territorio de la otra Parte Contratante.

2. Las inversionés de nacionales o sociedades de una de las Partes Contratantes no
podran, en el territorio de.la otra Parte Contratante, ser expropiadas, nacionalizadas, o
sometidas a otras medidas que en sus efectos equivalgan a expropiacién o
nacionalizacién, salvo por ley fundada en causas de utilidad publica o de bien comin, y
deberin en tal caso ser previamente indemnizadas. La indemnizacién deber&

al valor de la i antes de la fecha de
hacerse publica la expropiacién efectiva o inminente, la nacionalizacién o la medida
equivalente.

 

 

 

 

La indemnizacién deberd set e lizable y lib ible. La
legalidad de la piacién, nacionalizacién o medida equival y el monto de la
i izacién, deberdn ser revisables en procedimiento judicial ordinari

3. Los nacionales o sociedades de una de las Partes Contratantes que suftan pérdidas cn
sus inversiones por efecto de guerra u otro conflicto armado, revolucién, estado de
emergencia nacional o motin en el territorio de la otra Parte Contratante, no seran
tratados por ésta menos favorablemente que sus Propios nacionales o sociedades enlo

 

 

u otros
Estos pagos deberin ser libremente transferibles.
ARTICULO 5
Transferencias
1, Cada Parte Contratante garantizaré alos nacionales 0 sociedades de la otra Parte
Ci la libre de los pagos dos con una i en
particular:

a) del capital y de las sumas adicionales para el mantenimiento o ampliacién.de la
inversién de capital:

b) de las ganancias o rentas;

c) de la amortizacién de los préstamos definidos en el inciso c) del parrafo 1 del articulo
1; ‘
d) del producto de la venta o liquidacién total-o parcial de la inversién;

¢) de las indemnizaciones previstas en el articulo 4.

2. La transferencia se efectuard sin demora de acuerdo a los procedimientos establecidos
en el territorio de cada parte Contratante, en moneda de libre convertibilidad y a la
cotizacién vigente en cada caso, que deberd ser equivalente al tipo de cambio mas
favorable.

 

 

 

 

ts

DRA | ae

 

tee
“aX BY ane
|e. ares

3.Una transferencia se considera realizada sin demora cuando sé ha efectuado dentro
det plazo para el de las fo lidades de
transferencia. El plazo, que en ningiin caso podré exceder de dos meses, comenzara a
correr en el momento de entrega de la correspondiente solicitud, debidamente
presentada.

ARTICULO 6

Subrogacién

1. En el caso de que una Parte Contratante o una de sus instituciones hubiera concedido
una garantia contra riesgos no comerciales por inversiones efectuadas por uno de sus
nacionales 0 sociedades en el territorio de la otra Parte Contratante y haya efectuado
Ppagos a base de la garantia otorgada, dicha Parte Contratante o la institucién seri
reconocida subrogada de derecho en Ja misma posicién de crédito del inversor cubierto
por la garantfa. Para los pagos a realizarse en beneficio de la Parte Contratante o de su
institucién a base de dicha subrogacién, se aplicardn respectivamente los articulos 4 y 5
del presente Tratado.

2. Los nacionales o sociedades tendr4n derecho a demandar o hacerse parte en las
acciones ya iniciadas, en orden a proteger los restantes derechos que-puedan reclamar y
que no hayan sido subrogados. De esta forma, habiéndose reclamado, se aplicaré el
procedimiento establecido en el Art. 10.

ARTICULO 7
Aplicacién de otras normas mis favorables

1, Si de las disposiciones legales de una de las Partes Contratantes 0 de las obligaciones
emanadas del derecho internacional: no contempladas en el presente Tratado, actuales o
futuras, entre las Partes Contratantes, resultare una reglamentacién general ° especial en
virtud de la cual deba alasi i de los naci la
otra Parte Contratante un trato mas favorable que el previsto en el presente anton
dicha reglamentacién prevalecer4 sobre el presente Tratado, en cuanto sea mas
favorable.

2, Cada Parte C Lir4 cualquier otro con iso que haya {do con
relacién a las inversiones de nacionales o sociedades de la otra Parte Contratante en su
tertitorio.

ARTICULO 8

Ambito de aplicacién

1. El presente Tratado se ° aplicaré a las inversiones que se realicen a partir de su entrada
en vigor por naci dades de una Parte Ci en el territorio de Ia otra.
No obstante, también eneficiard a las inversiones realizadas con anterioridad a su
vigencia y que, segin la legislacién de la respectiva Parte Contratante, estuvieren.
Tregistradas como inversién extranjera.

 

2. No se aplicara, sin emb: alas i 1 i surgidas 0 I
con anterioridad a su entrada en vigor, o relacionadas con hechos acaecidos con
anterioridad a su vigencia o referidas a la mera permanencia de tales situaciones
preexistentes.

 

 

 

 

 

ARTICULO 9
Solucién de controversias entre Estados

1. Las controversias que surgieren entre las Partes Contratantes sobre la interpretacién 0
aplicacién del presente Tratado deberdn, en lo posible, ser dirimidas amigablemente por
los Gobiernos de ambas Partes Contratantes.

2. Si una controversia no pudiere ser dirimida de esa manera, ser4 sometida a in
tribunal arbitral a peticién de una de las Partes Contratantes.

3. El tribunal arbitral ser4 constituido ad-hoc; cada Parte Contratante nombraré. un
miembro, y los dos miembros se pondrin de acuerdo para elegir como presidente a un
nacional de un tercer Estado que ser4 nombrado por los Gobiéernos de ambas Partes
Contratantes, Los miembros seran nombrados dentro de un plazo de dos meses, el
Presidente dentro de un plazo de tres meses, después de que una de las Partes
Contratantes haya comunicado a la otra que desea someter la controversia a una tribunal
arbitral.

4. Si los plazos previstos en el parrafo 3 no fueren observados, y a falta de otro acuerdo,
cada Parte Contratante podré invitar al Presidente de la Corte Internacional de Justicia a
proceder a los nombramientos necesarios. En caso de que el presidente sea nacional de
una de las Partes Contratantes 0 se halle impedido por otra causa, corresponderé al

id efectuar los bramii Siel Vi id también fuere nacional
de una de las dos Partes Contratantes o si se hallara también impedido, corresponderé al
miembro de la Corte que siga inmediatamente en el orden jerarquico-y no sea nacional
de una de las Partes Contratantes, efectuar los nombramientos.

5. Bl tribunal arbitral tomard sus decisiones.por mayoria de votos. Sus decisiones son

ias. Cada Parte C 4 los gastos ionados por la actividad
de su 4rbitro, as{ como los gastos de su representacién en el procedimiento arbitral; los
gastos del presidente, asi como los demis gastos, seran sufragados por partes iguales
por las dos Partes Contratantes.

 

Por lo demas, el tribunal arbitral determinar4 su propio procedimiento.

6. Si ambas Partes Contratantes fueren también Estados Contratantes del Convenio
sobre Arreglo de Di i entre Estados y Nacionales de
otros Estados del 18 de marzo de 1965, no se podr4, en atencién a la disposicién del
parrafo 1 del artfculo 27 de dicho Convenio, acudir al tribunal arbitral arriba previsto
cuando el nacional o la sociedad de una Parte C y la otra Parte €

hayan Ilegado a un acuerdo conforme al artfculo 25 del Convenio. No quedaré afectada
la posibilidad de acudir al tribunal arbitral arriba previsto en el caso de que no se respete
una decisién del Tribunal de Arbitraje del mencionado Convenio (articulo 27), o en el
caso de subrogacién conforme a lo establecido en el articulo 6 del presente Tratado.

ARTICULO 10
Solucién de controversias relativas a inversiones

1, Toda controversia relativa a las inversiones, en el sentido del presente Tratado, entre
una Parte Contratante y un nacional o sociedad de 1a otra Parte Contratante ser, en la

1
|
i
i

 

Dia, YAR

RANPUeLIOA,
la. 1NaI

 

 

 

 

 

 

medida de lo posible, solucionada por consultas amistosas entre las dos partes en la
controversia.

2. Si la controversia no hubiera podido ser solucionada en el término de seis meses‘a
partir del momento en que hubiera sido planteada por una u otra de las partes, ser
sometida, a pedido del nacional o sociedad.

- o biena las jurisdicci ionales de la Parte Ci implicada en la
controversia;

- o bien al arbitraje internacional en las condiciones descriptas en el parrafo 3.

Una vez que un nacional o sociedad haya sometido la controversia a Jas jurisdicciones.
de la Parte Contratante implicada o al arbitraje internacional, la eleccién de uno u otro
de esos procedimientos seré definitiva.

3. En caso de recurso al arbitraje internacional la controversia podra ser Ilevada ante
uno de los érganos de arbitraje designados a continuacién a eleccién del nacional o
sociedad:

- al Centro ional de Arreglo de Diferencias Relativas a i (C.L A.D.
1), creado por el "Convenio sobre Arreglo de Diferencias Relativas a las Inversiones
entre Estados y Nacionales de otros Estados", abierto a la firma en Washington el 18 de
marzo de 1965, cuando cada Estado parte en el presente Convenio haya adherido a
aquél, Mientras esta condicién no se cumpla, cada Parte Contratante da su

i para que la sea ida al arbitraje con el
Reglamento del Mecanismo Complementario del C. I. A. D. L;

 

 

~ aun tribunal de arbitraje ad-hoc establecido de acuerdo con las reglas de arbitraje de la
Comisién de las Naciones Unidas para el Derecho Mercantil Internacional (C. N. U. D.
M.L).

4. El érgano arbitral decidir4 en base a las disposiciones del presente Tratado, al
derecho de 1a Parte Contratante que sea parte en la controversia -incluidas las normas
relativas a conflictos de leyes- y a los términos de eventuales acuerdos particulares
concluidos con relacién a la inversién como asi también a los principios del derecho
internacional en la materia,

5. Las sentencias arbitrales serdn definitivas y obligatorias para las partes en la
controversia,

- 6. Las Partes Contratantes se abstendran de tratar, a través de los canales diplomaticos,
argumentos concemientes al arbitraje © aun proceso judicial ya en marcha hasta que los
. bieren sido

 

 

luidos, salvo que las partes en la
controversia no ‘bubieren cumplido el taudo del tribunal arbitral o la sentencia del
tribunal ordi segun los términos de 0 blecidos en el Jaudo o.en la
sentencia.
ARTICULO 11

Entrada en vigor, Duracién y Vencimiento

1. El presente Tratado ser ratificado; los i de ratificacién serAn canjead
lo antes posible en Santiago, Chile.

 

: A ‘yARELE

wantice
i Ae a

 
 

 

 

2. El presente Tratado entrar4 en vigor un mes después de la fecha en que se haya

* efectuado el canje de los instrumentos de ratificacién. Su vigencia ser4 de diez afios y se

prolongar4 después por tiempo indefinido, a menos que fuera denunciado por escrito
por una de las Partes Contratantes doce meses antes de su expiracién..Transcurridos
diez afios, el Tratado podré denunciarse en cualquier

momento, con un preaviso de doce meses.

3. Las disposiciones del presente Tratado continuarén siendo plenamente aplicables aun
en los casos previstos por el articulo 63 de la Convencién de Viena sobre:el Derecho de
los Tratados del 23 de mayo de 1969.

4. Para las inversiones realizadas antes de la fecha de terminacién de! presente Tratado,
las disposiciones de los artfculos 1 a 10 seguirdn rigiendo durante los quince afios
subsiguientes a la fecha de su terminacién.

Hecho en Buenos Aires, el dos de agosto de mil novecientos noventa y uno en dos
ejemplares originales, siendo ambos igualmente auténticos.

POR EL GOBIERNO DE LA REPUBLICA ARGENTINA
GUIDO DI TELLA

DOMINGO F. CAVALLO

POR EL GOBIERNO DE LA RREPUBLOCA DE CHILE

 

 

 

ENRIQUE SILVA CIMMA
CARLOS OMINAMI
PROTOCOLO
En el acto de la firma del Tratado entre la Repiiblica Atgentina y la Reptiblica de Chile
sobre P y Pr i ip del i los Plenip ios han

do ademas las sigui disposici que se i parte ii del
Tratado: .

1) Ad Artfculo 3, punto 3

En el caso que una de las Partes celebrare en el futuro un Acuerdo de asociacién con

una unién aduanera o econémica, un mercado comtin o una Zona de Libre Comercio, se
la introduccién de una modi: ién ala in del articulo 3, punto 3,

parrafo 1. .

2) Ad Articulo 4

Para los efectos de las causas en que se puede fundar la ley que afecte la propiedad, las
Partes entienden que el concepto de bien comin comprende las causales previstas en sus
Tespectivos ordenamientos juridicos vigentes.

3) Ad Articulo 5

No obstante las disposiciones del articulo 5, la Repiiblica de Chile garantizaré el
derecho de iacién del capital i por inos, después de

 

|
i

 

 

 

 

 

transcurrido el plazo de tres afios, desde su internacién, previsto en el Decreto Ley N°
600 de 1974:

Lo dispuesto en el inciso anterior estar4 vigente mientras lo esté el plazo previsto, en el
referido Decreto Ley.

Buenos Aires, 2 de agosto de 1991.
POR LA REPUBLICA ARGENTINA.
GUIDO DI TELLA

DOMINGO F. CAVALLO

POR LA REPUBLICA DE CHILE
ENRIQUE SILVA CIMMA.
CARLOS OMINIMI

 

 

TRADUCCION PUBLICA / CERTIFIED TRANSLATION...

 

AGI ITS,

Law 24,342

 

An Agreement for the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments, entered into with the
Republic of Chile and a Note Exchange Agreement are hereby approved...

 

Enacted: June 9, 1994.

 

 

Promulgated: July 4, 1994.

Official Gazette: 07/11/97.

 

The Senate and the House of Representatives of the Republic of Argentina, assembled in Congress,
etc., enact as a Law:

 

ARTICLE J — The AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF ARGENTINA AND THE
REPUBLIC OF CHILE FOR THE RECIPROCAL PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF
INVESTMENTS, entered into in Buenos Aires on August 2, 1991, comprising eleven (11) articles
and one (1) Protocol, and the NOTE EXCHANGE AGREEMENT, amending the AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF ARGENTINA AND THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE FOR THE
RECIPROCAL PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS, entered into in Buenos
Aires, on July 13, 1992, are hereby approved, authenticated copies of which are an integral part of
this law.

ARTICLE 2 — Be it communicated to the National Executive Branch - ALBERTO R. PIERRL.-
FAUSTINO MAZZUCCO.- Esther H. Percyra Arandia de Pérez Pardo.- Juan J. Canals... a

 

GIVEN AT THE SESSION ROOM OF THE ARGENTINE CONGRESS, IN BUENOS AIRES,
ON THIS JUNE 9, 1994.

TREATY BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF ARGENTINA AND THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE ON
THE RECIPROCAL PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS...

 

The Republic of Argentina and the Republic of Chile, hereinafter referred to as the “Parties";......

 

Willing to strengthen the economic cooperation between both States; ..

With the purpose of creating favorable conditions for the investments of the nationals or companies
of one the two States in the territory of the other State, that may imply transfers of capitals; ........

A ing that the ion and ion of the said ii under an can
contribute to the encouragement of private economic initiative and increase in the welfare of both
States.

et

Rane

 

 

 

 

 

unt
pe aie

Have agreed as follows:

 

ARTICLE 1D

Under this Treaty:

 

(1) “Investments": means, under the laws of the receiving party, any kind of assets that the investor
of one Party may invest in the territory of the other Party, pursuant to the laws of the latter,
including but not limited to:.

a) the ownership of real and personal property and further real rights, such as mortgages and
pledges;

 

b) shares, corporate participation rights and other kinds of corporate interests, and also the
capitalization of profits qualifying to be transferred abroad...

 

c) obligations or credits directly related to an investments, regularly assumed or taken and
documented pursuant to the provisions in force in the country where the relevant investment is
made;

d) intellectual property rights such as copyright, patents, industrial and commercial designs and
models, know-how and goodwill;

 

) economic concessions conferred by public law entities, including the concessions for the

No amendment to the legal manner under which the assets and copitals have been invested or
reinvested shall affect their eligibility as investments under this Treaty. ...

 

2. “Income or profit”: means all the amounts resulting from an investment within a certain Period,
such as profit sharing, dividends, interest, license fees or other compensation.

 

3. “Nationals”: means:

>a) with refe to the Republic of Chile:

Chileans as the said word is defined under the Political Constitution of the Republic of Chile;
with to the Republic of Ar; :

b) Argentines as defined by the legal provisions in force in the Republic of Argentina.............0i

 

4. “Companies”: means any legal entity, organized under the laws of a Party and having its Place of
business in the territory of the said Party, whether its business is for profit or not....

 

5. The provisions of subparagraph 3 of this article notwithstanding, the provisions of this Treaty
shall only apply to the nationals of one Party who are not domiciled over two years in the territory

 

 

Lo we of the Party where the investment was made and who may prove that the investments originate
‘ane rove’, "ye abroad
. ‘

 

6. "Territory": means, in addition to the areas falling under the land and maritime boundaries, the
maritime and submarine zones, where the Parties may exercise, under their respective laws and the
at ional Law, ign or jurisdictional rights.

ARTICLE 2 P: ion and Pi ion of

1. Each Party shall promote in its territory the investments of the nationals or companies. of the
“other Party, and shall admit the said investments pursuant to its laws and regulations. Each Party
shall at any time treat investments fairly and equitably. ......

 

2. Those investments which, under the legal provisions of one Party, shall have been made under
the law of that Party by nationals or companies of the other Party shall be fully protected under this
Treaty.

 

3. No Party shall impair in its territory the management, use, utilization or enjoyment of the
investments of nationals or companies of the other Party through arbitrary or discriminatory.

 

ARTICLE 3 National treaty and most favored nation provision.....

 

1. Neither Party shall treat in its territory the investments of the nationals or companies of the other

Party or the investments in which the nationals or companies of the other Party may have interests,

less favorably than the investments of its own nationals and companies or the investments of
i and companies of third States

2. Neither Party shall in its territory treat the nationals or companies of the other Party, as regards
their activities related to the investments, less favorably than its own nationals and companies or
the nationals and ics of third States.

3. The said treatment does not refer to the privileges that one of the Parties may grant to the
nationals and companies of third States because they are party to.a customs or economic union, or a
common market or a free trade area, or because of their association with the said groups..........0.0

The said treatment does not refer either to the privileges granted by a Party to the nationals or
companies of a third State because of an investment made in under a concessional financing laid
down in a bilateral treaty between the said Party and the country to which the investors belong to.

 

4. The treatment given under this article does not refer to the advantages that one of the Parties may
grant to the nationals or companies of third States by virtue of an agreement to avoid double
taxation or other t: lated

ARTICLE 4 Expropriation, nationalization and inary si

 

i
\
i
{
j
i
:

 

 

 

 

 

 

1, The investments of nationals or companies of one Party shall enjoy full protection and legal
safety in the territory of the other Party......

 

2. The investments of nationals or companies of one Party may not, in the territory of the other
Party, be exp or itted to other whose effects are equivalent to
expropriation or nationalization, save in case of a law founded on public good or common welfare,
and must in that case be previously compensated, The compensation must match the value of the
expropriated investment immediately before the date the Public expropriation is made effective or
the

or the qui’ measure t

The compensation must be actually practical and freely transferable. The legality of the
expropriation, nationalization or equivalent measure, and the amount of the compensation must
subject to review in an ordinary judicial proceeding.

 

3. The nationals or companies of one Party whose investments may sustain losses as result of war
or other armed conflict, revolution, national emergency or riot in the territory of the other Party,
shall not be treated by the latter less favorably than its own nationals or companies as regards
refunds, compensation, indemnification or any other redress. These payments must be made freely

 

ARTICLE 5 Transfers.

1. Each Party shall guarantee the nationals or companies of the other Party the unrestricted transfer
of the payments related to an investment, including but not limited to:

 

a) the capital and the additional amounts necessary for the maintenance and expansion of the
capital i
b) the income or profits;

c) the repayment of the loans defined in Article 1, subparagraph c);...

 

d) the proceeds derived from the sale or total or partial liquidation of an investment;

 

) the compensation set forth in Article 4,.....

 

 

2. The transfer shall be made forthwith following the procedures set in the territory of each Party,
in freely convertible currency and at the prevailing rate of exchange on a case by case basis, which
must be equivalent to the most ible rate of excl

3. A transfer shall be considered to have been made forthwith when it has been made within the
time frame normally required for the compliance with the transfer formalities. The time frame,
which in no case may exceed two months, shall begin upon delivery of the duly submitted relevant

ARTICLE 6 Subrogati

 

 

 

 

 

 

1, If one Party or one of its entities shall have granted a guaranty against non-business risks for
investments made by one of its nationals or companies in the territory of the other Party and shall
have made payments on the basis of the guaranty granted, the said Party or entity shall be admitted
as a law subrogate ranking for claim purposes in the same position as the investor covered by the
guaranty. For payments to be made for the benefit of the Party or its entity on the basis of the said

subrogation, articles 4 and 5 of this Treaty shall be respectively applied.
'

 

2. The nationals or companies shall be entitled to sue or become a party to the actions already filed,
so as to protect the remaining rights that they may claim and that have not been subrogated. In this.
case, if claims have been filed, the procedure set forth in article 10 shall be followed. .

 

ARTICLE 7 Application of other most tules.

1, If under the provisions of the laws of one Party or the obligations of both Parties arising from

International Law that are not provided by this Treaty, now existing or that may be adopted in
future, there arises a general or special regulation by virtue of which the investments of the
nationals or companies of the other Party must be given a treatment more favorable than the one set
forth in this Treaty, the said regulation shall prevail on this Treaty, to the extent it is more

 

ARTICLE 8 Appli

1, This Treaty shall apply to the investments made as from its effective date by nationals or
companies of one Party in the-territory of the other Party. However, it shall also benefit those
investments made prior to its effective date and which, under the laws of the respective Party, may
be regi: das foreign i .

2. It shall not apply, however, to the disputes or claims arising or settled prior to its effective date,
or related to events occurred prior to its effective date or related to the mere continuation of such

ARTICLE 9 Settlement of disputes between States .....

 

 

1. Any dispute that may arise between the Parties regarding the interpretation or application of this
Treaty shall, as far as practical, be settled in a friendly manner by the Governments of both Parties.

2. If a dispute may not be settled as mentioned above, it shall be submitted, upon the request of one
Party, to an arbitration panel

3. The said arbitration panel shall be organized ad hoc; each Party shall appoint one member, and

the two members shall, upon mutual. agreement, appoint a national of a third State, to be appointed ©

by the governments of both Parties, as chairman. The members shall be appointed within a period
of two months; the chairman, within a period of three months, following notice from one Party to
the other of its decision to submit the dispute to an arbitration panel.

 

4, If the time periods laid down in paragraph 3 above are not met, and in the absence of any other
agreement, each Party may invite the President of the International Court of Justice to proceed with

|
i
|

 

 

 

 

 

se

the necessary appointments. If the President were a national of one of the Parties or when, he is
otherwise prevented from serving as such, the Vice President shall be invited to proceed with the
necessary appointments. If the Vice President were also a national of any of the Parties, or if he
were also prevented from serving as such, the member of the International Court of Justice that

_ tanks immediately junior to him and is not a national of any of the Parties, shall be invited to

proceed with the necessary app

5. The arbitration panel shall adopt its decisions by majority of votes. Its decision shall be binding
upon both Parties. Each Party shall pay the expenses arising from the performance of its arbitrator,
as well as the exp of its ion in the arbi The of the Chairman, and

_ the other expenses shall be paid in principle in equal shares by both Parties, In other respects, the

tt panel shall d ine its own p

6. If both Parties were also Member States under the Agreement on the Settlement of Differences
related to investments between States and Nationals of other States dated March 18, 1965, it shall
not be possible, by virtue of the provisions of paragraph 1, article 27 of the said Agreement, to
resort to the arbitration mentioned above when the national or the company of a Party and the other
Party shall have reached an agreement under article 25 of the Agreement. The possibility to resort
to the arbitration panel provided above shall not be impaired if a decision of the Arbitration Panel
under the aforementioned Agreement (article 27) is not observed, or in the case of subrogation
pursuant to the provisions of article 6 of this Treaty. .......

 

ARTICLE 10 Settl of disputes ding
1. Any dispute related to the investments under this Treaty, between a Party and a national or
company of the other Party shall, as far as possible, be settled by friendly negotiations between the
two parties to the dispute.

 

2. If the dispute shall not have been settled within the term of six months as from the time it has
been raised by either party, it may be submitted upon request of the national or company: ...........

- to the national jurisdictions of the Party involved in the dispute;

 

- or to ii ional arbitration in the conditions described in p h (3).

Once a national or company has submitted the dispute to the jeriatiction 0 of the Party involved or to
international arbitration, the election of either procedure shall be final. ...

 

3. In case of election of international arbitration, the dispute may be submitted, at the election of the
national or to one of the arbi entities ioned below:

To the International Center for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (I.C.S.1.D.). created under the
"Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other
States", opened to the signature in Washington on March 18, 1965, when éach Member State which
is a party to this Agreement has signed the said Convention. While this condition is not met, each
Party may give its consent for the dispute to be submitted to arbitration pursuant to the Rules of the

 

 

 

supplementary Mechanism of I.C.S.LD. for the management of conciliation, arbitration or

To an “ad hoc” arbitration panel organized pursuant to the arbitration rules of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL).

 

4, The arbitration panel shall render an award on the basis of this Treaty, the right of the Party that
is a party to the dispute, including the rules regarding conflicts of laws and the terms and conditions
of. ional private agr reached in ion with the i and also the princi

of international law in that respect.

 

5. Arbitration awards shall be final and binding upon the parties to the dispute. ........ 00

 

6. The Parties shall refrain from trying, through the diplomatic channels, arguments regarding
arbitration or a judicial proceeding already pending until the relevant proceedings shall have been
completed, unless the parties to the dispute shall have not discharged the arbitration award or the
judgment rendered by the common court, pursuant to the terms for the discharge laid down in the
award or the jud;

ARTICLE 11 Effective date, duration and termination

 

1. This Treaty shall be ratified; ‘the ratification documents shall be exchanged as soon as possible in
Santi Chile.

2. This Treaty shall become in full force and effect one month after the date on which the exchange
of the ratification instruments has been completed. It shall be in full force and effect during ten
years and shall be renewed indefinitely, unless it is waived by either Party twelve months before its
expiration. After the lapse of ten years, the Treaty may be waived at any time, upon twelve month
notice. ‘

3. The provisions of this Treaty shall continue to be applicable even in the cases set forth in article
63 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties dated May 23, 196:

 

4. In connection with those investments made prior to the termination date of this Treaty, the
provisions of Articles | to 10 shall continue in full force and effect during a period of 15 years
Mowing its termination date.

Granted in Buenos Aires, on the 2nd day of August, 1991, in two originals counterparts, both of
them authenti

 

ON BEHALF OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARGENTINA.
Guido Di Tella
Domingo F. Cavallo.

 

 

ON BEHALF OF THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE
Enrique Silva Cimma
Carlos Ominami

 

 

 

PROTOCOL

 

Upon the execution of the Treaty t between the Republic of “Argentina and the Republic of Chile on
Pi and Py of I the iaries have further adopted the
following provisions, which are an integral part of this Treaty: eoseveceoneeses

 

1) In Article 3, item 3.

 

If either Party enters into in the future an Association Agreement with a customs or economic
* union, a common market or a Free Trade Zone, the introduction of an amendment to the exception
*: set forth in article 3 item 3, paragraph 1 shall be agreed.

 

"ay In article 4

 

For purposes of the cases to support the law that may affect property, the Parties understand that the
concept of common welfare comprises the grounds set forth in their respective legal systems. .....

3) In article 5

 

The provisions of article 5 notwithstanding, the Republic of Chile shall guarantee the right of
repatriation of the capital invested by Argentine investors, after the lapse-of three years, following
entrance, set forth in Decree Law No. 600 dated 1974.

 

The provisions of the foregoing subparagraph shall be in full force and effect during the period laid
down in the af d Decree-Law.

Buenos Aires, August 2, 1991

 

ON BEHALF OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARGENTINA.

 

Guido Di Tella

 

Domingo F. Cavallo
ON BEHALF OF THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE........000+4s enscersecesverneaeseeses

  

Enrique Silva Cimma
Carlos Ominimi.

THIS IS A TRUE TRANSLATION into English in 8 pages of | iginaT dgcument in Spanish
language which I have had before and attach hereto, in Buesfosp .

  
     

   
     
    

TeaBUcT@RA puBLics
EN IDIOMA | inaces
A. 1? X FY AST

COLEGIO DE TRADUGTORES PUBLICOS
DE LA CIUDAD DE BUENOS AIRES
Corresponde a la Legaliadcién

ne_ Syn -leres lou’

MAXIMILIANG BAMIAN VARGAS

  

an

 

  

\ 00742144

COLEGIO DE .TRADUCTORES. PUBLICOS
DE LA CIUDAD DE BUENOS AIRES

LEY 20.505

 

Bap = LEGALIZACION:

  

pif presente, ol COLEGIO DE TRADUCTORES PUBLICOS DE LA CIUDAD DE BUENOS AIRES,

er Witud dé la’ facultad que Ie confiereel-artioulo 10, inc: d) de la Lay 20.305, certiica Uinicamente ‘quie ia

firma 'y“el -sello que’ aparecen en la traduccién adjunta, -coricuerdan con los correspondientes

al Traductor Publico VARELA, MARCELA ALEJANDRA IRENE
que obrarten tos fegistros de esta Institucién.enelfolio tomo .
“INGLES oo "487 - 40.

Buenos. Aires, - ° Legalizacién Numero: 16124 / 2004/72

 

Fecha: 21/07/2004

  

F; siGaLOrr
Moarguad Btd. de Lega:z- ‘cited
Cbiegid 48 Traductores Pascoe
Wi ta Cilia do Bones aires

 

TA 0 SE_CONSIDERARA VALIDA SIN EL CORRESPONDIENTE

 

Pursuant to Section 10, Paragraph D of Act 20 305, ‘thie oLeaI0 DE TRADUCTORES PUBLICOS
DE LA CIUDAD DE BUENOS AIRES (Swom Translators Association of the City of Buenos Aires)
nereby certifies that the signature and seal affixed hereto appear to match the specimen signature and
seal of the Traductor Publico (Sworn Translator) whose name is subscribed to the attached translation,
as such specimen. signature and seal are kept on file in our office.

THIS CERTIFICATION IS NOT. VALID MITHQUT THE: STAMP ON THE LAST PAGE OF THE™
ATTACHED TRANSLATION.

Vu par e. COLEGIO DE TRADUCTORES PUBLICOS | DE LA CIUDAD DE BUENOS AIRES (Ordre
de'Tréducteuts' Officials de {a ville dé Buends Altes), an'veitu dés attributions ¢ qui [ui ont 6té accord
par I’article 10, alinéa d) de la Loi n? 20.305, pour la seule légalisation matérielle de la‘ signature et
du.sgeau du. Traductar Publico (Traducteur Officiel) apposés sur la: traduction:du document chjoint, _
qui sont conformes a ceux déposés aux archives de cette Institution.

l Genre APPOSE SUR LA DERNIERE. PAGE.DE.LA TRADUCTION | FERA PREUVE DE.LA
VALIDITE: DE LA LEGALISATION.

Con la presente il COLEGIO DE TRADUCTORES PUBLICOS DE LA CIUDAD DE BUENOS AIRES°
(Collegio dei Traduttori Giurati defla Citta’ di Buenos, Aires) al sensi della facolta conferitagli
dall‘articolo 10; comma d), della Legge 20.305, CERTIFICA, ‘esciusivamente, la firma ed ll timbro dél
Traductor Publico (Traduttore Giurato), apposti in calce alla qui unita traduzione, in conformita alla
firma ed al timbro depositati nei propri registri.

LAPRESENTE LEGAIIZZAZIONE SARA PRIVA DI VALIDITA OVE NON VENGA TIMBRATA NELL'ULTIMO
FOGLIO DELLA TRADUZIONE.

Através da presente 0 COLEGIO DE TRADUCTORES PUBLICOS DE LA CIUDAD DE BUENOS
AIRES (Colégio de Tradutores Publicos da Cidade de’ Buenod ‘Aires); eri vittude das attibuiigdes
conferidas pelo art. 10 inc. d) da Lei 20.305, certifica unicamente, que.a assinatura e o carimbo do
Traductor Publico (Tradutor Publico) que subscreve a tradugado adjunta conferem com a assinatura e
o carimbo arquivados nos registros desta instituigao.

A PRESENTE LEGALIZAGAO SO SERA CONSIDERADA VALIDA COM A CORRESPONDENTE
CHANCELA MECANICA APOSTA NA ULTIMA FOLHA DA TRADUGAO.

Kraft der Befugnis, die ihr: durch Art. 10, Abs. d) im Gesetz 20.305 verliehen wird, bestatigt hiermit der
COLEGIO DE TRADUCFORES: PUBLICOS DE LA CIUDAD DE BUENOS AIRES (Kammer der
Vereidigten Ubersetzer der Stadt. yen Aires) lediglich, dass Unterschrift und Siegel, des Traductor
Publico (Vereidigten | Ubersetzere ‘TAikadenen die beigeftigte Ubersetzung versehen ist, mit den
entsprechenden Registereintragungen:dieser Institution ibereinstimmen.

VORLIEGENDE BEGLAUBIUAG. 1ST UNGULTIG OHNE DEN ENTSPRECHENDEN
GEBUHRENSTEMPEL AUF DEM: LETZTEN BLATT DER BEIGESCHLOSSENEN UBERSETZUNG.

 

 

  
  

In the Proceeding between

Hochtief AG (Claimant)
and
The Argentine Republic (Respondent)

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/31

Separate and Dissenting Opinion of J. Christopher Thomas, Q.C.

Introduction

After exchanging views with my distinguished colleagues in the manner described at paragraph
124 of the Decision on Jurisdiction, I have found that I do not agree with their interpretation of
the Treaty. There are many points made in the Decision with which I agree, and other points with
which I would have agreed had I concurred with their interpretation, but in the end I have a
different view. I do however subscribe to the Decision’s dispositions of the Second Objection,
the rejection of the declaration sought in respect of the Centre’s jurisdiction and the deferral of
the consideration of the “contract claims and double recovery” issue.

Ican readily see how my colleagues have formed a different view on the MEN issue. The reason
why the MEN clause has been invoked of course is that the Respondent has agreed to different
investment protection treaties with different arbitral regimes. Had it maintained a single treaty
model, the MEN issue would not arise in the first place. Thus, when, as here, the basic treaty
requires a claimant to submit the dispute to the respondent’s local courts for a period of time
while another treaty concluded by the respondent does not contain the requirement, it is not
difficult to conclude that many, if not all, putative claimants would prefer the latter. Some
tribunals, including the present one, have agreed, emphasizing the value of such a choice from
the claimant’s perspective.

There is also the pragmatic concern that when an objection such as the instant one is heard, the
tribunal has been constituted, at least some pleadings on the merits have been filed, and often, as
here, there is a substantial dispute between the parties. In the circumstances it could be seen as a
waste of time and money to insist on compliance with the treaty’s conditions on access to
international jurisdiction.’ Accordingly, some tribunals have applied the relevant MFN clause

See Sections X to XII of the Decision on Jurisdiction.
Decision on Jurisdiction, paragraph 100.

This sentiment is expressed in the Decision at the end of paragraph 88 where the majority considers that:
“While not logically or legally decisive, the fact that adherence to the 18-month rule would bring no necessary
benefit, and no necessary result other than the delay of the arbitration proceedings, is a fact from which the Tribunal

  

derives some encouragement to believe that its decision is correct.”

and have concluded that their jurisdiction has been established, even though the claimant has not
met the conditions stipulated in the treaty’s arbitration clause. I fully appreciate this reasoning
and can see the attractiveness of the result, but there are other issues that need to be considered.

It is also the case that when MEN clauses have been invoked by claimants seeking to be relieved
of compliance with the basic treaty’s conditions for gaining access to international jurisdiction,
tribunals have tended to form judgements about the merits of different treaty structures. The
requirements of the basic treaty have sometimes been seen as unduly burdensome to would-be
claimants.

This has been reflected in the majority’s characterizing the ‘prior recourse’ step between
consultations and international arbitration as “pointless”, “to some extent perfunctory and
insubstantial”, the 18-month limit for litigation as “arbitrary”, and the regime’s giving “no
certain benefit”.*

One can wonder why the Contracting Parties decided to require the prior submission of a legal
dispute to the courts of a Party for a period of 18 months before granting the investor/claimant an
unconditional right of direct access to international jurisdiction. At first glance it seems odd that
the requirement can be satisfied by the simple effluxion of time without its requiring a decision
of at least a court of first instance before the dispute can be elevated to the international level. It
is possible that a claim submitted to the local courts might never get to the merits, let alone result
in a judgment, during the 18-month period. This would imply no apparent benefit from the prior
submission of the dispute to the local courts and an attendant loss of time and expense. The
Claimant has argued forcefully that this is the effect of Article 10(3)(a) and the majority accepts
this to be the case.°

The 18-month period is plainly a product of compromise between the States Parties. Bearing in
mind that under Article 26, second sentence, of the ICSID Convention a Contracting State can
require the exhaustion of local remedies as a condition of its consent to arbitration under the
Convention, it is open to two States to agree to a limited recourse to local remedies as a
condition of their consent to arbitration under their bilateral treaty. Their having made such a
choice, the period selected had to be of sufficient time to permit a Contracting Party’s legal
system to at least have an opportunity to address the dispute. A prior recourse provision of say, 6
months would hardly permit any real opportunity for the parties to frame the issues, let alone
permit a court to consider the dispute. On the other hand, from a claimant’s perspective, a limited
period of time is preferable to a requirement of full exhaustion of local remedies (and 18 months
would be seen as preferable to 36 months or more).

Moreover, there are reasons why a “prior recourse” stage in the dispute settlement process can
contribute to a resolution of a dispute, or at least to a narrowing of the issues in dispute. One
cannot rule out the possibility that the local court could uphold the investor’s claim that the
measures complained of violate municipal law or that a contested legal right claimed to exist

Decision on Jurisdiction, paragraphs 51, 87-88.

Decision on Jurisdiction, paragraph 88.

under that law does in fact exist.° Even if such findings did not lead to a settlement, they would
enhance the prospects of success in any subsequent international claim.’ On the other hand, the
local courts might find the measures at issue to be lawful. While this would not bind a
subsequent international tribunal applying an international treaty, it might lead it to find that
there has been no breach of the treaty. It might alternatively lead to a finding that the
respondent’s courts have compounded a treaty breach. There are many such examples in the
cases.

The majority acknowledges the possible res judicata effect of a local court decision on a
subsequent international proceeding but puts that to one side.” This is an important issue that
underlies the interaction between a ‘prior recourse’ proceeding and a subsequent international
claim and helps to explain its rationale. The late Keith Highet’s dissent in Waste Management
Inc. v. Mexico set out how, through the application of res judicata, the decisions of the local
courts can alter the scope of a subsequent international proceeding through the expansion or
reduction of the international claim, depending upon how the local courts treat the investor’s
local law claim.’ In many investment treaty cases, prior proceedings between the disputing
parties have been given res judicata effect by international tribunals.’ Thus, an invocation of
prior remedies as contemplated in Article 10 can have significant constructive juridical effects
for a subsequent international claim or may obviate the need for such a claim.

It is one thing to determine, based on evidence, that the submission of a particular dispute to the
local courts would be futile (an exercise that the Tribunal has not engaged in, although evidence
on this point was led by both parties). It is, in my view, quite another thing to make a rather

Campbell McLachlan QC, Laurence Shore and Mathew Weiniger, International Investment Arbitration:
Substantive Principles, (Oxford University Press 2007), p. 257: “It would be invidious for international tribunals to
be finding ... that host State adjudication of treaty rights was necessarily inferior

to international arbitration.” One can agree with this assertion about the general utility of local court proceedings
even while acknowledging that there will be cases where the local courts cannot adequately adjudicate the dispute.
The point is made by the majority in Renta 4 S.V.S. A. et al v. Russian Federation, SCC Arbitration V (024/2007),
that: “History is replete with examples of investment disputes which have overwhelmed the capacity of national
institutions — in countries of all stages of development — for dispassionate judgment.” (Award on Preliminary
Objections, paragraph 100.)

 

 

7 A claimant that enjoyed some success in the local courts would surely advert to that fact in support of any

claimed breach of the treaty. Likewise, if the respondent demonstrated an obstructionist defensive posture in the
local proceedings, that too would figure in the way in which a subsequent claim was formulated. It might lead to an
additional cause of action.

8 Decision on Jurisdiction, paragraph 49.

° Waste Management Inc. v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/2, Dissenting Opinion of
Keith Highet of June 2, 2000, paragraphs 50-51. This analysis was based on a different regime for the initiation of

an international claim. The analysis remains on point for the purposes of the current discussion.

 

0 See, for example, Helnan International Hotels A/S v. Arab Republic of Egypt, CSID Case No. ARB/05/19,

Award of July 3, 2008, paragraphs 123-125, 143; Malicorp Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, CSID Case No.
ARB/08/18, Award of February 7, 2011, paragraph 103.

sweeping judgement as to a treaty provision’s utility based on a “worst-case” scenario of an
assumed useless and expensive recourse to the local courts. It is not the place of international
tribunals to second-guess the choices of the States Parties even when one can envisage instances
where such choices might lead to inefficiency and additional cost to a would-be claimant. One
cannot avoid the fact that the Federal Republic of Germany and the Argentine Republic were
satisfied with the inclusion of this provision in their Treaty. Hence, I believe that the majority’s
characterization of the prior recourse requirement devalues the States Parties’ policy choice
manifested in the Treaty.

One other point warrants mention at the outset. I agree with the prevailing view that the Treaty’s
dispute settlement provisions are to be interpreted neither broadly nor restrictively. As the Amco
Asia et al. v. Indonesia Decision on Jurisdiction observed, a

... convention to arbitrate is not to be construed restrictively, nor, as a matter of fact, broadly or
liberally. It is to be construed in a way which leads to find out and to respect the common will of
the parties: such a method of interpretation is but the application of the fundamental principle
pacta sunt servanda, a principle common to, indeed, to all systems of internal law and to
international law.

Moreover, - and this is again a general principle of law - any convention, including conventions
to arbitrate, should be construed in good faith, that is to say by taking into account the
consequences of the commitments the parties may be considered as having reasonably and
legitimately envisaged.'' [Emphasis in first paragraph in original; emphasis in second paragraph
added.]

While the first paragraph of the Amco Asia tribunal’s approach is often quoted with approval by
investment tribunals, the second paragraph, which is equally relevant, tends not to be cited as
frequently. The tribunal postulated a general approach to interpretation not confined to the
interpretation of agreements to arbitrate. The Argentina-Germany Treaty’s MEN clause likewise
must be construed neither broadly nor restrictively and its interpretation should also take into
account the commitments that the parties may be considered as having reasonably and
legitimately envisaged.

With these introductory points in mind, I turn to the main issues raised in the First Objection.
The need for an agreement to arbitrate

Before examining the Treaty, I wish to note an important issue on which we are all agreed. At
paragraph 22, the Decision correctly notes that the “Tribunal’s jurisdiction depends upon the
existence of an agreement between the two parties to the dispute — Hochtief and the Republic of
Argentina.” It is only if such agreement exists that the Tribunal is then vested with jurisdiction to
apply the Treaty.

u Amco Asia et al. v. Indonesia, ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision on Jurisdiction of September 25, 1983,
paragraph 14(i).

It is helpful to conceive of the issue in the terms put by the tribunal in RosinvestCo UK Ltd. v.
Russian Federation, namely, “Is there a binding consent to arbitration with the effect that a
prospective party to the arbitration proceedings does not need the agreement of the other
prospective party to start arbitration proceedings?”

As discussed below, two avenues to international arbitration are specified under Article 10(3) of
the Treaty: (i) by agreement between the disputing parties (whereby the respondent’s consent
obviates the need for prior recourse to the local courts and the dispute can proceed directly to
international arbitration); or (ii) by a party’s submitting a claim to an international tribunal after
having submitted the dispute to the local courts for 18 months. Absent the respondent’s
agreement to proceed directly to arbitration, unconditional access to international arbitration is
permitted only after compliance with the 18 month prior recourse condition. To revert to
RosInvestCo, at that point and only at that point, under this Treaty, the initiation of the arbitration
proceedings depends “solely on the unilateral decision by either party and ... the other party does
not have to agree again in order to permit the arbitration to start.””

It is common ground between the parties, agreed by all members of the Tribunal, and well
accepted in investment treaty arbitration that the State’s prior treaty-based offer must be accepted
by the claimant. The Decision correctly observes that, “The question is whether the ‘offer’ and
the ‘acceptance’ have resulted in an agreement which provides the basis for the jurisdiction of
the Tribunal.”!*

With no contemporaneous meeting of the minds, the existence of the agreement to arbitrate is
determined by examining the two consents. Campbell McLachlan, QC observed in this respect:

... Given the absence of a meeting of minds between investor and host State, consent has
to be constructed from the standing consent given by the State by treaty, and the
subsequent consent given by the investor at the time the claim is submitted to
arbitration.'°

Many tribunals have examined the consent given in a claimant’s request for arbitration in light of
the State’s prior treaty-based offer to consent to arbitration and have had little difficulty
concluding that the two consents matched and an agreement to arbitrate was formed. The

e RosinvestCo UK Ltd. v. Russian Federation, SCC Arbitration V_079/2005, Award on Jurisdiction,

paragraph 71(1). At paragraph 84 of the Decision, the majority asserts that on “any interpretation of Article 10 of
the Argentina/Germany BIT, an investor can ultimately exercise its rights so as to submit the dispute unilaterally to
arbitration, without the need for the further specific consent of the State party to the dispute.” This is only partly true
in my view. It is correct that the investor/claimant can do so after having submitted the dispute to the local courts for
a period of 18 months. On a plain reading of Article 10(3), however, it cannot do so before then, absent securing the
agreement of the other party. This bears on my view of the majority’s acquiescence point, discussed below.

 

8 Id., paragraph 72.

i" Decision on Jurisdiction, paragraph 24.

1s McLachlan, Shore and Weiniger, supra note 6, p. 257.

20.

21.

22.

23.

difficult issue arises when, as here, a claimant disavows the conditions attached to the
respondent’s offer expressed in the basic treaty and seeks to change or eliminate them by
invoking the treaty’s MEN clause.'°

In the pre-Maffezini days, it was clear that the offer and the acceptance must match. In the 2001
edition of his treatise, Prof. Schreuer commented that:

Where ICSID’s jurisdiction is based on an offer made by one party, subsequently
accepted by the other, the parties’ consent exists only to the extent that offer and
acceptance coincide... It is evident that the investor’s acceptance may not validly go
beyond the limits of the host State’s offer. Therefore, any limitations contained in the ...
treaty would apply irrespective of the terms of the investor’s acceptance. If the terms of
acceptance do not coincide with the terms of the offer there is no perfected consent.!”

In my view, the need for matching consents, once clear under the ICSID Convention, remains the
case.

The situation in the case before the Tribunal

In the case before us the disputing parties’ consents do not match. The conditions stipulated in
the offer to arbitrate expressed in Article 10 have not been met by the Claimant. Hochtief
consented to arbitration under the Argentina-Germany Treaty yet simultaneously sought to vary
the conditions attached to Argentina’s consent by invoking the Treaty’s MFN clause to bring into
play the Argentina-Chile Treaty’s access to arbitration provisions so as to “displace” the
conditions stipulated in the basic treaty.

The majority has characterized the Claimant’s position as being that “its agreement is contained
in the Request for Arbitration which is intended, in effect, to be an acceptance of Argentina’s
offer contained in Article 10 and Article 3 of the Argentina-Germany BIT.” [Emphasis added.]
That is, they find the State’s offer to arbitrate to lie in two articles (one which establishes the
investor-State arbitration mechanism and the other being the MFN article).

te Although one tends to focus upon a specific respondent’s consent once a dispute arises, it is axiomatic that

in an investment treaty context based upon reciprocity and equality of obligations undertaken by both States Parties,
the conditions on consent stipulated in the treaty apply to either State Party.

" Christoph Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, (Cambridge Universi
356, p. 238. The need for matching consents in order to form the arbitration agreement wa:
in an early article on the ICSID Convention entitled, “The Investment Disputes Convention — Opportunities a1
Pitfalls (How to Submit Disputes to ICSID).” In a section of the article entitled, “Cautions” the author noted: “The
related point to be observed when consent is expressed in diverse instruments, is the extent to which these overlap —
for it is only in the area of coincidence that the consent is both effective and irrevocable.”

  
 

   

8 Hochtief’s Rejoinder on Objections to Jurisdiction, paragraph 68.

8 Decision on Jurisdiction, paragraph 23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

I have some difficulty in describing the MEN article as part of the offer to arbitrate under the
Treaty. The offer to arbitrate set out in Article 10, it seems to me, expresses the entirety of the
Treaty’s investor-State arbitral mechanism.

At paragraph 25 of the Decision, the majority correctly records its agreement with both parties
that “it is necessary to establish a consensus: i.e., that it is necessary to demonstrate that
Hochtief’s Request for Arbitration was an acceptance of the offer to arbitrate on the terms on
which the offer was made, and not a counter-offer on different terms.”

I find it difficult to see that the Claimant’s invocation of a dispute settlement mechanism found
in another treaty in order to vary the terms of the present Treaty is “an acceptance of the offer to
arbitrate on the terms on which the offer was made.” If Hochtief accepted Argentina’s prior offer
in its terms by complying with Article 10(3)(a), the two consents would match, the prior offer
would be accepted, and the agreement to arbitrate would thereby be established. But that is not
what occurred. In my view, regardless of how one puts it, e.g., as the Argentina-Chile Treaty’s
“displacing” Article 10(3) (as the Claimant puts it) or as the Claimant’s having accepted an offer
contained in Articles 10 and 3 (as the majority puts it), there has been no true meeting of the
minds in the sense of matching consents.

It appears to me that when a claimant seeks to change or eliminate the conditions attaching to the
respondent’s consent, the requisite mutuality of an offer and matching acceptance thereof is not
present and, to use Prof. Schreuer’s words, “there is no perfected consent”.”” Rather, the
Claimant has made a “counter-offer on different terms.” The only possible way out of this
conundrum is to find (as the majority has found) that the MFN clause varied the terms of the
offer, which revised terms were then accepted by Hochtief. But for that to occur, the Tribunal
must necessarily apply Article 3, not in the sense of conducting an appraisal of whether the
Claimant has the requisite standing to bring a claim that prima facie appears to fall within the
scope of the Treaty, but rather to establish the very jurisdiction that is at issue.

The principal points of my disagreement with the majority

The principal basis for my separate opinion is that I do not share the view that the MFN
obligation stated in Article 3(2), as further elaborated by Ad Article 3 of the Protocol, interpreted
in accordance with the rules of treaty interpretation, reaches the conditions attached to a State
Party’s consent to arbitration expressed in Article 10. I will go through the Treaty in some detail
in order to develop the point.

* differs from that at issue in RosInvestCo and Renta

In this respect, the legal issue raised in the instant cas
4, where the tribunals grappled with the impact of an MEN clause on an established juris
the tribunal plainly had jurisdiction to determine the level of compensation for an expropriation and used the MFN
clause to enlarge that established jurisdiction. In the latter, the tribunal found that the inclusion of the word “due” in
the relevant treaty text permitted it to consider whether the predicate to an expropriation had been made out. In the
instant case, I believe that the issue differs; lacking jurisdiction conferred by two matching consents, the Tribunal is
using the MFN clause to create the agreement to arbitrate and thereby establish its jurisdiction.

 

 

iction. In the former case,

  

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

As a subsidiary point, I also have reservations about what the Tribunal is actually doing when it
gives effect to the MFN clause in this case. I accept that upon the Treaty’s entry into force,
unless otherwise indicated in its text, all of its provisions enter into force at the same time. The
question in a jurisdictional challenge such as the present one is not whether some or all of the
treaty’s provisions are in force”, but rather whether in the specific case arising under this Treaty
the Tribunal has been seised with jurisdiction. That requires the Tribunal to satisfy itself of the
existence of an arbitration agreement and to do so it must see how such an agreement is formed
under the Treaty’s arbitration clause.

There is no doubt that, as observed in paragraph 11 of the Decision, when considering an
objection to its competence, a tribunal plainly has the power to interpret the treaty as a whole in
order to determine whether it is properly seised with jurisdiction. However, I do not believe that
the Kompetenz-Kompetenz power can be used to create the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. In my
respectful view the approach taken seems to elide the question of competence and the application
of the provisions of the Treaty.

The disagreement manifests itself in another difference in view. The majority does not see
Hochtief’s noncompliance with Article 10 as going to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, but rather to
the claim’s admissibility.” I disagree and prefer the view expressed by other tribunals, namely,
that the prior recourse provision is both mandatory and is jurisdictional in nature.

I will address these reservations in turn, beginning with an examination and discussion of the
relevant provisions of the Treaty.

The terms of the Treaty
Article 10

One simple point can be made at the outset: Article 10 does not contain an MFN obligation
within the article itself that would have made it perfectly clear that if one of the Contracting
Parties agreed to a treaty containing more favourable conditions for access to international
jurisdiction, those conditions would enure to the benefit of an investor bringing a claim under the
Argentina-Germany Treaty. The absence of an explicit MFN undertaking in Article 10 of course
is not dispositive of the interpretative issue, but it warrants noting as a point of departure. There
are four additional inter-related points.

First, Article 10 contemplates a three step process. In respect of the first two steps, the article is
stated in mandatory terms, using the word “shall” rather than “should,” “may” or some other
formulation of words that would suggest that the submission of the dispute to the local courts is

21

I am not to be taken as arguing that the Tribunal has the power to interpret only Article 10 at this stage of
the proceedings.

2 Decision on Jurisdiction, paragraph 96.

35.

36.

37.

anything other than obligatory if a party wishes to be in a position ultimately to proceed to
international jurisdiction.

The most recent discussion of the characterization of this type of provision (albeit worded
slightly differently) is found in Impregilo S.p.A. v. Argentine Republic. * That tribunal reviewed
the analogous dispute settlement provision of the Argentina-Italy Treaty, concluding that the
prior recourse provision was a “general condition that must be complied with by the investor
who wishes to submit the dispute to international arbitration.”

The tribunal described Article 8(3) of that treaty as a “mandatory — but limited in time —
jurisdictional requirement before a right to bring a case to ICSID can be exercised...” [Emphasis
added.] It found support for its conclusion in the decisions of the Maffezini and Wintershall
tribunals.”° At the end of its analysis of the dispute settlement clause, the tribunal concluded that:
“In sum, Article 8(3) contains a jurisdictional requirement that has to be fulfilled before an
ICSID tribunal can assert jurisdiction” (my emphasis), observing further that this conclusion
found support in the Wintershall award which found that “Article 10(2) contains a time-bound
prior-recourse-to local-courts-clause, which mandates (not merely permits) litigation by the
investor (for a definite period) in the domestic forum’?” ( Emphasis added). After reciting that
passage from Wintershall, the Impregilo tribunal added that this mandatory clause applies
“before the right to ICSID can even materialize.””® [Emphasis added.]

The majority in Jmpregilo went on to hold that the MFN clause applied so as to relieve the
claimant of having to comply with this mandatory jurisdictional requirement. For present
purposes, I refer to the award because its characterization of the prior recourse provision as
“mandatory” and “jurisdictional” in nature accords with my understanding of Article 10(3)(a) of

3 While expressing some doubt about the structure of Article 10 and whether it actually requires prior

submission in order to permit a claimant to proceed to international arbitration, the Decision, at paragraph 55,
proceeds on the assumption, and without deciding the point, that Article 10 imposes a mandatory 18-month
submission to the national courts as a precondition of unilateral recourse to arbitration under the BIT.

 

ad Since Impregilo, the Decision on Jurisdiction in Abaclat and others (Case formerly known as Giovanna
Beccara and others) v. The Argentine Republic, I\CSID Case No. ARB/O7/5 has been released. The majority of that
tribunal did not find it necessary to address the characterization of Article 8 of the Argentina-Italy treaty and
whether the Treaty’s MFN clause entitled the claimants to rely on the allegedly more favourable dispute resolution
clause in the Argentina-Chile BIT. (Decision on Jurisdiction of August 4, 2011, paragraph 589.) The dissenting
aid to be forthcoming, has not yet been published, so the views of the dissenting arbitrator

  

  

opinion, which wi
cannot be ascertained.

35 Impregilo S.p.A. v. Argentina Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/17, Award of June 21, 2011, paragraph
90.
26 Id., paragraphs 91-94.

2 Wintershall Aktiengesellschaft v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/14, Award of December 8,
2008, paragraph 118.

8 Impregilo, paragraph 94.

38.

39.

40.

Al.

42.

43.

the present Treaty. I also find its comment that compliance with the clause is required before the
right to ICSID can even materialize to be correct. This is relevant to my analysis because it goes
to the question of what the Tribunal can do when determining its competence.

To revert to Article 10 of the Argentina-Germany Treaty, as noted previously, Article 10(3)(a)’s
application can be avoided only by agreement of the two parties. This is an important point to
bear in mind when considering the majority’s admissibility analysis. At paragraph 94, they note
in respect of questions of admissibility, that “disputing parties are entitled to raise objections
based upon questions of admissibility, but they are not bound to do so; and if they do not raise
those objections, they will have acquiesced in any breach of the requirements of admissibility
and that acquiescence will ‘cure’ the breach.” The critical point is the next one: “The tribunal, if
it has jurisdiction, will proceed to hear the case.” [Emphasis added.]

The majority considers that the Tribunal has such jurisdiction by virtue of the MFN clause’s
disapplication of Article 10; I see the Tribunal as having the jurisdiction to determine its
jurisdiction, but not as empowered to apply the Treaty’s substantive terms (including the MFN
clause) so as to create its jurisdiction. That drives the analysis back to whether the Claimant has
met the mandatory conditions for establishing such jurisdiction, because as Impregilo notes,
compliance with such conditions must occur before the right to ICSID (arbitration) can
materialize.

The Tribunal’s acquiescence analysis would moreover be more persuasive, in my respectful
view, if Article 10(3)(b) was not present in the Treaty. By including the possibility for a
respondent State to agree to waive the prior recourse requirement, the drafters have explicitly
addressed the acquiescence point in the text. Why read in a power to acquiesce into the
conditions stipulated in Article 10(3)(a) when the respondent’s power to agree to proceed
immediately to international arbitration is explicitly recognized in Article 10(3)(b)? I would have
thought that the latter’s presence in the Treaty should lead to the opposite conclusion, namely,
that if the power to waive the requirement is expressed in one sub-paragraph, it ought not to be
read into the other.

If both paragraphs are given effect, the logical conclusion would be that absent the Respondent’s
agreement, under the framework of this Treaty the 18 month prior recourse period is mandatory
and jurisdiction cannot vest in the Tribunal until there is compliance therewith.

On this approach, as held in Jmpregilo, Maffezini and Wintershall, non-compliance with the
mandatory terms of subparagraph 3(a) goes to jurisdiction rather than to admissibility and the
Respondent’s insistence on the Claimant’s compliance with the condition expressed in the
Respondent’s offer is properly characterized as an objection to jurisdiction, not to admissibility.

The third and related interpretative point about Article 10 is that unlike some investment
protection treaties where the States Parties unconditionally submit to investor-State arbitration,
Article 10 is worded conditionally. That is, absent compliance with the 18-month recourse

44.

4S.

46.

47.

requirement, the claimant has no unconditional right to proceed to arbitration.” Absent the
respondent’s waiving prior recourse, it is only when prior recourse has occurred that there is, to
revert to RosInvestCo, a binding consent to arbitration with the effect that a prospective party to
the arbitration proceedings does not need the agreement of the other prospective party to start
arbitration proceedings.

Finally, Article 10 stands in contrast to the Treaty’s other dispute settlement mechanism, Article
9. That is, while Article 10(3)(a) stipulates a condition that must be met before the claim can be
elevated to the international level, Article 9 gives the Contracting Parties direct and immediate
access to international arbitration to settle disputes arising between them (in providing that if a
dispute cannot be settled amicably, “it will be submitted to an arbitral tribunal upon the request
of either Contracting Party”). [Emphasis added.] In such a case, there is no question as to the
Contracting Parties’ unconditional consent to State-to-State arbitration and any tribunal created
under Article 9 is vested with jurisdiction to claims related to the interpretation and application
of the Treaty.

Article 3

Article 3 will be reviewed in detail because it contains a number of phrases which taken
collectively lead me to conclude that it does not apply to Article 10.

Paragraph | deals with “investments of nationals or companies of the other Contracting Party, or
the investments in which the nationals or companies of the other Contracting Party have
interests.” Paragraph 2 addresses “nationals or companies of the other Contracting Party, as
regards its activities related to investments.” The paragraphs thus differentiate between the
investor and its investment.

Paragraphs 3 and 4 then set out two types of treatment that are not considered to be “treatment”
at all within the meaning of Article 3. “Treatment”, as understood in paragraphs 1 and 2, “shall
not include privileges which may be extended by either Contracting Party to nationals or
companies of third States on account of” preferential trade agreements, nor shall it “extend to
privileges accorded by a Contracting Party to nationals or companies of a third State by virtue of
an agreement for the avoidance of double taxation or other tax agreements.” In other words,
paragraphs 3 and 4 deem two types of treatment that could otherwise be seen to be as less
favourable as not even being “treatment” as that term is understood by the Contracting Parties.

*” Obviously, proceeding directly to international arbitration pursuant to Article 10(3)(b) after having

obtained the respondent’s consent cannot be considered an unconditional right to arbitration. It arises from a specific
consent from the respondent which is otherwise entitled to insist on compliance with the Treaty’s mandatory terms.

30 For that reason, | do not share the majority’s view that the “jurisdiction of the Tribunal remains unaffected

by” the Respondent’s acquiescing in the Claimant’s non-compliance with the 18-month period. (Decision on
Jurisdiction, paragraph 96.)

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

Article 3(2) in particular

Paragraphs 1| and 2 of Article 3 do not have the same coverage. Paragraph | applies to any less
favourable treatment accorded to the investment without any specification of the universe of
activities in which the investment might engage. Paragraph 2, in contrast, does not purport to
capture any less favourable treatment accorded to the investor, but rather less favourable
treatment “as regards their activity in connection with investments in [the State’s] territory.” It is
necessary to refer to the Protocol to gain further insight into the meaning of the word “activity”
as used in Article 3(2). I will revert to this below.

What Article 3(2) does not contain

It is useful at this point to consider what Article 3(2) does not contain. Three points come to
mind.

First, Article 3(2) does not refer to Article 10, nor does it expressly include dispute settlement
activities within its scope. (This stands in contrast to the United Kingdom’s Model BIT which
confirms that its MFN clause does apply to dispute settlement.)

It is equally true that dispute settlement under the Treaty has not been expressly “carved out” of
Article 3(2)’s coverage. The majority (in line with some other tribunals) has noted this.*! It is
used to support the inference that dispute settlement is therefore covered (on the basis that the
drafters knew how to exclude something from the Article’s coverage and therefore anything not
excluded must have been intended to be included).

This does not necessarily follow. In addition to examining Article 3 and other articles of the
Treaty, I examine the Treaty’s structure and the grouping of provisions within it because this can
provide interpretative clues as to the meaning of particular provisions. If, as I conclude, the
Contracting Parties conceived of Articles 8-12 as institutional provisions relating to the Treaty’s
application generally, there would have been no need to expressly list any of the matters
addressed in those articles as matters to be carved out from Article 3’s coverage. The Decision
correctly observes at paragraph 77 that it is well understood that MFN clauses are subject to
implicit limitations.

Moreover, it is entirely plausible that the Contracting Parties did not specifically exclude the
conditions for gaining access to dispute settlement under Article 10 from Article 3’s application
because it did not occur to them that the MFN clause could be used to modify Article 10’s
stipulations.” Prior to Maffezini, that was not only a reasonable and legitimate view, it was the

Decision on Jurisdiction, paragraph 74.
» Zachary Douglas observes that “across hundreds of years of activity of international courts and tribunals”
until Maffezini there “has only been judicial pronouncements against such a device...” (i.e., using the MFN clause
to override the State’s conditions of consent). He notes further that prior to Maffezini, “there does not appear to be
any support in the writings of publicists for the extension of the MFN clause to jurisdictional matters.” Zachary
Douglas, The MFN Clause in Investment Arbitration: Treaty Interpretation Off the Rails, Journal of International
Dispute Settlement, Vol. 2, No. 1 (2011), pp. 97-113, at 101. If this was the case, the drafters would see no need to

 

 

54.

55.

56.

57.

orthodox view* (buttressed in the ICSID context by the commonly held view as expressed by
Professor Schreuer that the consents of the two disputing parties under a treaty must coincide).**

Drafters need not exclude matters addressed in another article of a treaty from the MFN
obligation if they do not think that there is a relationship between the two articles. To revert to
the words of Amco Asia quoted earlier, we are to take into account the consequences of the
commitments the parties may be considered as having reasonably and legitimately envisaged.

Second, it warrants noting that when Article 3(2) is compared to the other substantive obligations
of treatment there is nothing in its formulation that suggests that it is any different from any of
the other obligations in terms of its application. That is, Article 3 is like every other provision, to
be applied by a tribunal, but only once it is properly seised with jurisdiction.

Third, this Treaty does not contain the “all matters” language that some tribunals have found to
be highly relevant to their decision that the relevant MFN clause applies to access to
international jurisdiction.>

I readily acknowledge the majority’s point that if one focuses on the word “activity,” one can say
that an investor’s commencing a lawsuit or an arbitration in relation to its investment is an
activity.*° I also accept that the word “treatment” in and of itself is capable of a broad meaning.
But the interpretative exercise does not end with a consideration of the words “activity” and
“treatment” in isolation of the rest of the Treaty and of general international law. Plainly, as the
majority observes at paragraphs 61-70, an investor might engage in the activity of bringing a
lawsuit in relation to its investment, but it does not necessarily follow that an international claim
regulated by the terms of Article 10 is also an “activity” within the meaning of Article 3, as
further interpreted by Ad Article 3 and when considered in light of the overall context of the
Treaty and general international law.

 

exclude something from the MFN clause’s reach because they would not consider it to be related to MFN in the first
place. The clause would not be operating in regard to the subject-matter of Article 10.

3 An indication of the surprise with which Maffezini was received in many quarters is reflected by a
distinguished tribunal’s comment in Salini v. Jordan where, after reviewing Maffezini’s analysis, the tribunal
commented that: “The current Tribunal shares the concerns that have been expressed in numerous quarters with
regard to the solution adopted in the Maffezini case.” Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/13, Decision on Jurisdiction of November 29, 2004, paragraph 115.

 

See paragraph 20 supra.

35

 

In Impregilo, the majority observed at paragraph 104 of the Award that: “The Arbitral Tribunal further
notes that there is a massive volume of case-law which indicates that, at least when there is an MFN clause applying
to “all matters” regulated in the BIT, more favorable dispute settlement clauses in other BITs will be incorporated.
Relevant cases are Maffezini, Gas Natural, Suez, Suez and Camuzzi.” [Footnotes omitted.] The dissenting arbitrator,
Prof. Brigitte Stern, rejected the view that the “all matters” formulation reaches dispute settlement.

 

 

36 Decision on Jurisdiction, paragraphs 66-72.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

Ad Article 3

Article 3 is supplemented by Ad Article 3 in the Protocol which forms an integral part of the
Treaty. I believe that the Protocol’s interpretation of Article 3(2) lends support to my analysis.

The Protocol clarifies the meaning of the word “activity” as used in Article 3(2). It defines
“activity” (labelled as “activities” in the plural) through a non-exhaustive, but illustrative, list.°”

The use of the phrasing “in particular but not exclusively” creates a focus in identifying what is
covered by “activities.” The phrase “[i]t will be considered in particular but not exclusively...”
signals to the interpreter that the drafters were concerned with some genus of activities as
opposed to activities writ large. Otherwise, why include the “will be considered in particular”
phrase in Ad Article 3 at all?** If the meaning of “activities” was intended to capture all possible
activities of the investor in relation to its investment, there would have been no reason to employ
this phrasing. There must be a relationship between the particular types of activities expressly
listed and those not expressly listed.

It also warrants noting that while Article 3 simply used the general word “activity”, the range of
activities specified by the Protocol is narrower than that used in many other treaties. The
Protocol does not, as many investment treaties do, apply the MEN obligation to the full range of
an investor’s activities from pre-establishment to the disposition of an investment. Rather, it
focuses more on the day-to-day management and operation of the investment (its “management,
the exploitation, the use and the enjoyment...”).

Having regard to Article 3(2)’s scope, therefore, the Protocol’s drafting technique tends to
narrow the range of an investor’s activities related to its investment. But this too does not dispose
of the interpretative issue.

The most important clue lies in the next part of the Protocol: Article 3’s purpose is to protect
investors or their investments, as the case may be, from less favourable treatment than that
accorded to investors or investments of third States.” It is of seminal importance that when
taking the opportunity to give interpretative guidance as to what actually constitutes “less
favourable treatment” within the meaning of Article 3(2), the examples used by the States Parties
were far removed from the conditions of access to international jurisdiction stipulated in Article
10 of the Treaty.

There seems to be a slight drafting error here since Article 3 uses the phrasing “their activity” in the
singular while Ad Article 3 uses “activities” in the plural. Nothing appears to turn on this.

8 The majority and I differ on this point. Decision on Jurisdiction, paragraphs 65-66.

* It warrants noting parenthetically that in the last sentence of Ad Article 3 the Parties introduced an entirely
new genus of measures that were not to be considered “treatment less favourable” within the meaning of Article 3.
These sorts of measures (adopted for reasons of internal or external security or public order, public health or
morality”) were not even mentioned in Article 3 itself.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

Once again, the Protocol’s drafters used the “in particular but not exclusively” drafting
technique. The “in particular” examples of less favourable treatment given by the Parties
(“measures affecting the acquisition of raw materials and further supplies, energy and fuels as
well as means of production and of exploitation of any kind or the sale of products inside the
country or abroad”) all fall within a genus of less favourable treatments that are directly related
to the management, the exploitation, the use and enjoyment of the investment in the host State’s
territory.

It warrants emphasizing that all of the listed types of measures are concerned with access to
materials, the production and sales processes, and measures of governments that can adversely
affect the competitiveness of investments, e.g. access to inputs within the host State as well as
access to the internal and export markets. They are closely related types of less favourable
treatment and they must provide a sense of what sort of “activities” the Contracting Parties had
in mind, since logically there must be a connection between the investor’s activities and the types
of treatment that the Contracting Parties agreed would put it at a disadvantage vis-a-vis investors
of the host State and investors of third States.

To be sure, the list is not exhaustive, but even considering the penumbra of less favourable
treatments that are not specified “in particular”, the Treaty’s stipulation of the conditions for
gaining access to international arbitral jurisdiction seems to me to be distant from the listed types
of less favourable treatments.“°

Since the Protocol’s drafters were seeking to give the interpreter a better sense of the Parties’
shared intent in respect of the kind of less favourable treatment covered by Article 3(2), Article
3, as clarified and elaborated by the Protocol (which forms an integral part of the Treaty), does
not reach the Treaty’s conditions applicable to an investor seeking access to international
jurisdiction.

Article 4

I will refer to Article 4 only in passing. It is not insignificant in my view that when it comes to
“full legal protection and security”, protection against expropriation, compensation for losses due
to war or other armed conflict, etc. the drafters inserted an article-specific MFN clause. This too

40 I leave aside the question of whether a respondent’s seeking to have the claimant comply with the Treaty’s

for initiating arbi der even itutes a “measure” that could give rise to less favourable
treatment in the first place. See Pope & Talbot Inc. and Government of Canada, UNCITRAL, Award by Arbitral
Tribunal in relation to Preliminary Motion by Government of Canada to Dismiss Claim Because it Falls Outside the
Scope and Coverage of NAFTA Chapter Eleven "measure relating to investment" Motion, 26 January 2000,
paragraphs 36-37, for a NAFTA tribunal’s differentiation between an international agreement between Canada and
the United States, which did not constitute a “measure” within the tribunal’s jurisdiction and the Canada’s measures
implementing that agreement that were being challenged in that case, which were held to be measures capable of
falling within NAFTA Chapter Eleven.

 

69.

70.

71.

is not dispositive of the overall interpretative result, but the Parties’ insertion of such an MFN
clause for three types of State action lends weight to the idea that the MFN clause in Article 3 is
concerned only with a specific genus of less favourable treatments and in relation to a specific
genus of investor activities."

T now turn to consider the broader context of the Treaty.
The general structure of the Treaty

The foregoing interpretation of Articles 3, 4, 9 and 10 should be grounded not only having regard
to the ordinary meaning of a word or words, but to the words in their context which, under
Article 31(2) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, includes the entire text of the
Treaty. This leads me to consider the Treaty’s general structure.

Like many BITs, the Argentina-Germany Treaty is short, comprising a preamble, followed by
twelve articles and a protocol. It does not employ article titles, nor is it divided into sections.
However, a structure can be discerned from reviewing the Treaty as a whole:*

Preamble
Article 1 [Definitions]

Article 2 [Encouragement and admission of investments in the territories of the
Contracting Parties]

Article 3 [National treatment and MFN treatment]

Article 4 [Full legal protection, prohibition against uncompensated expropriation, and
disciplines for losses suffered through armed conflict, revolution, efc.]

Article 5 [Transfers]
Article 6 [Subrogation]

Article 7 [Extension of more favourable treatment under domestic law or from
obligations under international law not included in the Treaty and fulfillment of
commitments made]

“ Given the inclusion of two MEN clauses in Articles 3 and 4, one can ask why the drafters did not include

an MEN clause in Article 10 itself if they intended to permit the terms of access in other treaties to flow through to
claimants under this Treaty. Given the drafting technique used in this Treaty, that would be the logical place to put
it.
2 For purposes of illustrating its structure given the absence of article titles, I have inserted a description of
each provision.

72.

73.

74.

Article 8 [Application of the Treaty to matters arising under it but relating to pre-existing
investments by nationals or companies of the other Contracting Party]

Article 9 [Disputes between the Contracting Parties]

Article 10 [Disputes between an investor of one Contracting Party and the other
Contracting Party]

Article 11 [Application of the Treaty in cases provided by Article 63 of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties]

Article 12 [Ratification, entry into force, and survival of Articles 1-11 for fifteen years
after termination]

A perusal of the Treaty suggests three subject-matter groupings: (i) Article 1, definitions; (ii)
Articles 2-7, substantive obligations undertaken by the Contracting Parties and enjoyed by
Argentinean and German investors, as the case may be, in the territories of the relevant Party;
and (iii) Articles 8-12, institutional features of the Treaty (i.e., provisions addressing the Treaty’s
application to pre-existing investments, the creation of two dispute settlement mechanisms, the
impact of the severing of diplomatic or consular relations on the Treaty, its entry into force and
the basis for its termination together with the survival of rights for a certain time).

In my opinion, Article 10, when viewed in the context of the Treaty as a whole, is not ejusdem
generis to the Treaty’s substantive obligations of treatment of investors and/or their investments,
including Article 3.

Summary
In sum:

e Article 10 sets out a staged dispute settlement regime. Compliance with Article 10(3)(a)
is as other tribunals have recognized mandatory and is a matter going to the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction.

e Article 10 does not contain an MEN clause stating that more favourable treatment
accorded by either Contracting Party to investors of a third State will flow through and
apply to disputes brought under that article.

e Article 3 does not expressly refer to Article 10, nor does it expressly include the subject
matter of dispute settlement under the Treaty within its scope. Nothing in Article 3
explicitly states that the Contracting Parties intended it to apply to the procedures for the
submission of disputes prescribed by Article 10.

e Article 3(2) does not even specify that the MEN obligations apply to “all matters subject
to this Agreement” as was the case in the treaty considered by, for example, the Maffezini

and Impregilo tribunals. It uses the bare words “activity” in relation to the investor and
“treatment” in relation to the measures of the State.

e Of seminal importance, the Protocol’s elaboration of what sorts of treatment considered
by the Contracting Parties to be “less favourable” addresses State conduct that is entirely
different in nature from the conditions governing access to international jurisdiction
prescribed in the Treaty. While the less favourable measures are not listed exhaustively,
those not covered under the “particularly but not exclusively” phrasing must logically be
related to those which are expressly listed. Access to international jurisdiction regulated
under Article 10 is simply not ejusdem generis to restrictions on availability of natural
resources, the sale of products inside the country or abroad, etc.

e The fact that Article 3 is silent in terms of whether it applies to dispute settlement, yet its
paragraphs 3 and 4 contain matters (benefits accruing from preferential trade agreements
and double taxation treaties“), which are explicitly carved out from being considered to
be “treatment”, does not inexorably support the argument that dispute settlement must
therefore fall within its terms because the Parties knew how to exclude such matters as
from Article 3’s coverage. As noted, if one considers the orthodox view prior to
Maffezini was that the MEN clause did not override the State’s conditions of consent, it
seems difficult to conceive that dislodging Article 10(3)(a) was a consequence of Article
3 which the Contracting Parties may be considered as having reasonably and legitimately
envisaged.

e Finally, nothing in Article 3 or in Ad Article 3 confers any special temporal quality upon
the MEN obligation; there is no indication that the MFN obligation, uniquely amongst the
other standards of treatment contained in the Treaty, is to be given any kind of “pre
agreement to arbitrate” status that would authorize a tribunal to use it to create an
agreement to arbitrate.

International law’s distinction between substantive obligations and jurisdiction-conferring
provisions

Under the general rule of interpretation set forth in Article 31 of the Vienna Convention, the
interpreter is mandated to examine the treaty in light of various elements which are, to use the
International Law Commission’s words, “thrown into the crucible” and from their interaction
“would give the legally relevant interpretation.” The text of the Treaty is to be considered not
simply in its own terms, but also having regard to other elements.** Paragraph 3 of Article 31
adds that there should also be taken into account together with the context “any relevant rules of
international law applicable in the relations between the parties.” As Sir Ian Sinclair noted in his

8 As well as the exclusions from “less favourable treatment” set out in Ad Article 3(b) and (c).

“ A/CONF.39/11/Add.2, 39, paragraph 8.

“5 Case concerning the Arbitral Award of 31 July 1989 (Guinea-Bissau v. Senegal), ICI Reports 1991, 53.

76.

77.

78.

commentary on the Vienna Convention, “Every treaty provision must be read not only in its own
context, but in the wider context of general international law, whether conventional or
customary.”“° The Vienna Convention’s preamble itself specifies that: “disputes concerning
treaties, like other international disputes, should be settled ... in conformity with the principles of
justice and international law.”

At paragraphs 35-37, I expressed agreement with the prior tribunals that have characterized the
“prior recourse” provision as being jurisdictional in nature. This leads me to consider the Treaty
in light of the distinction between substantive obligations and jurisdictional provisions of
treaties. In a number of cases where an objection has been taken against its jurisdiction to hear
claims of alleged breach of treaties, the ICJ has considered that there is a clear distinction
between a treaty’s substantive obligations and its conferral of adjudicative jurisdiction.*”

This has been reaffirmed as recently as April of 2011, when the ICJ found that the preconditions
established in Article 22 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination “establish preconditions before the seisin of the Court.” *

Professor Campbell McLachlan QC, among others, has adverted to this general distinction in his
treatise co-authored by Shore and Weiniger:

... As the ICJ pointed out in East Timor (Portugal) v. Australia, the scope
of application of a substantive obligation is an entirely separate question to

46

139.

Ian Sinclair, The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, (Manchester University Press) (2 ed.) p.

a Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo (New Application: 2002) (Democratic Republic of the

Congo v. Rwanda), Jurisdiction and Admissibility, Judgment of February 3, 2006, ICJ Reports 2006, 6, paras. 64-65,
where the Court noted that it had previously emphasized that the erga omnes character of a norm and the rule of
consent to jurisdiction are two different things. See also the Case Concerning East Timor (Portugal v. Australia),
Judgment of June 30, 1995, ICJ Reports 1995, p. 90, where the Court stated:

 

 
 
 

“26. The Court recalls in this respect that one of the fundamental principles of its Statute is that it cannot decide a
dispute between States without the consent of those States to its jurisdiction. This principle was reaffirmed in the
Judgment given by the Court in the case concerning Monetary Gold Removed from Rome in 1943 and confirmed in
several of its subsequent decisions (see Continental Shelf (Libyan Arab Jarnahiriyu/Malta), Application for
Permission to Intervene, Judgment, 1. C. J. Reports 1984, p. 25, para. 40; Military and Paramilitary Activities in and
against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States of America), Jurisdiction and Admissibility, Judgment, 1. C. J.
Reports 1984, p. 431, para. 88 ; Frontier Dispute (Burkina Faso/Republic of Mali), Judgment, 1. C. J. Reports 1986,
p. 579, para. 49; Land, Island and Maritime Frontier Dispute (El Salvador/Honduras), Application to Intervene,
Judgment, 1. C. J. Reports 1990, pp. 114-1 16, paras. 54-56, and p. 112, para. 73; and Certain Phosphate Lands in
Nauru (Nauru v. Australia), Preliminary Objections, Judgment, I. C. J. Reports 1992, pp. 259-262, paras. 50-55).”

 

 

8 Article 22 of the Convention states: “Any dispute between two or more States Parties with respect to the

interpretation or application of this Convention, which is not settled by negotiation or by the procedures expressly
provided for in this Convention, shall, at the request of any of the parties to the dispute, be referred to the
International Court of Justice for decision, unless the disputants agree to another mode of settlement.” Case
concerning Application of the ional C ion on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
(Georgia v. Russian Federation), Judgment of 1 April 2011. The Court makes the point about in at paragraph
141

 

 

 

79.

80.

81.

the conferral of jurisdiction upon an international tribunal, Jurisdiction in
international law depends solely upon consent.”

Thus, to treat the Treaty’s dispute settlement provisions as being the same as the substantive
obligations that precede it seems to be at variance with how general international law and
practice has distinguished between the two.

The sequential issue

I have already alluded to my concern about the majority’s application of the MFN clause in its
interpretation of the Treaty pursuant to the Kompetenz-Kompetenz power. It seems to me that
consistent with the approach articulated by the ICJ, just noted, there is a sequential issue in the
establishment of a tribunal’s jurisdiction under an investment treaty. During the hearing I asked
both parties to comment on this issue because it seems to me to be bound up in the analysis of
how the specific MFN clause at issue in this case can relate to the investor-State arbitration
mechanism.””

 

The sequential element comes into play as follows: to avoid Article 10’s effects, the Claimant
invokes an obligation contained in the Treaty to “displace” the Treaty’s requirements for
initiating an international claim.” Seeking the application of a particular rule of treatment in the
Treaty in order to create jurisdiction seems to me to be putting the cart before the horse.”

McLachlan, Shore and Weiniger, supra note 6, p. 257. See also Douglas, supra note 32, at p. 103.

50.

Transcript, Day 2, pp. 24-31, pp. 91-94.

Hochtief’s Rejoinder on Objections to Jurisdiction, paragraph 68.

32

 

Rather than using the ‘ ive/jurisdictional” or “substanti dural” distincti found in the
literature, in her recent dissenting and concurring opinion in Impregilo, Professor Brigitte Stern distinguishes
between “rights and ... fundamental conditions for access to the rights”. This accords with my understanding of the
distinction between a treaty’s protections and the means for enforcing such protections but I have used the term
“substantive” to refer to obligations of treatment such as the duty not to expropriate except in accordance with the
treaty’s terms, the fair and equitable treatment standard, etc.

82. If one were to consider any other substantive provision of an investment treaty, such as the
protection against an uncompensated expropriation, were a claimant to file a claim asserting
that an expropriation had been effected in breach of a treaty without the claimant’s having
first consented to the arbitration in the manner specified by the treaty, the tribunal’s response
would be that absent an agreement to arbitrate it was without jurisdiction to entertain the
claim. A tribunal cannot adjudicate someone’s rights if they have not met the threshold
jurisdictional requirements to be able to claim such rights. Yet the Decision on Jurisdiction is
plainly applying this treatment clause in order to dis-apply the 18 month litigation period in
Article 10(3)(a).*°

8

w

. For the foregoing reasons I cannot fully subscribe to the Decision. That said, I accept my
colleagues’ decision and agree that the objection has illustrated the difficulty of the question.
As noted in paragraph 1, I do subscribe to the balance of the Tribunal’s disposition of
Argentina’s objections.

fe Zo Thomas, Q.C.

Date: 22 L2Lff

 

8 Decision on Jurisdiction, paragraph 82. The Treaty between Argentina and Germany has not been amended

by the treaty between Argentina and Chile. Douglas makes the point in similar terms: “The claimant must assert a
right to more favourable treatment by claiming through the MFN clause in the basic treaty. It can only do so by
instituting arbitration proceedings and thus by accepting the terms of the standing offer of arbitration in the basic
treaty. At that point an arbitration agreement between the claimant and the host state comes into existence. And the
existence of that arbitration agreement is critical to the viability of the arbitration regime envisaged by the
investment treaty...” supra, note 32, pp. 106-107. Correctly, in my view, Douglas argues that MFN clause does not
automatically incorporate the terms of a third treaty into the basic treaty and for this reason HOCHTIEF’s
submission that the Argentina-Chile Treaty “displaces” Article 10 of the Argentina-Germany Treaty is misplaced.

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the arbitration proceeding between

HOCHTIEF AG

Claimant

and

ARGENTINE REPUBLIC

Respondent

(ICSID Case No. ARB/07/31)

 

DECISION ON LIABILITY

 

Members of the Tribunal
Professor Vaughan Lowe Q.C, President
Judge Charles N. Brower, Arbitrator
Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, Q.C., Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mrs. Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski

Date: December 29, 2014

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Hochtief

Messrs. Paul F. Doyle and
Philip D. Robben

Kelley Drye & Warren LLP
101 Park Avenue

New York, NY 10178, USA

Representing the Argentine Repulic

Dra. Angelina Maria Esther Abbona
Procuradora del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la

Nacion Argentina

Posadas 1641

C1112ADC, Buenos Aires
Argentina

Ill.

IV.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES 1
PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 1
FACTUAL BACKGROUND 10
(A) Preliminary Observations 10
(B) Argentina’s Privatization Program ..........cccccceceee eee eeeeeeneeeeeestecstseeneeeeeneeeeeneee 10
a) Background 10
b) The Convertibility Regime and overview of the legal framework ..............00 10
(C) The Project, the Bidding Process and the Concession Contract...........c ccc 12
a) The Project and the Bidding Process ..0.......c.ccccceeeeseseeseeeteeseseseeeeteeeeeeeneeeeaeeeee 12
b) The Concession Contract 13
c) Capital Contributions and Project Funding... eects eeeeeeneeeneee 16
(D) The Argentine Crisis 20
(E) The Law 25,561 and its effects 21

 

(F) Suspension of Constructions, Project Delay and Additional Capital Infusions by
Hochtief (“‘inter-company loans") (2002), Argentina Provides Financing (February

 

 

 

 

 

 

2003 Loan) 22

(G) Further Capital infusions by Hochtief (2004-2005) and Total Loans and Capital
Infusions 25
(H) Renegotiations and PdL’s Insolvency Proceedings (Concurso Preventivo) .............000 25
(I) Ballast Nedam 27
(J) The Transitory Agr 30
(K) Insurance provided by the German Government ............:.:cceeeseesee ects eeeeeeeeneeeneee 33
JURISDICTION AND ADMISSIBILITY .........0:-ccccescessessessessesseeeeseeseeseesessssnsessesseneeneesee 33
(A) The ‘PdL Questions’ 34
a) PdL’s Rights and Hochtief’s Rights .......0.0.c ccc ee eeeeseeeeeees cette teeeeeeeneeeneeeee 35
(i) Claimant’s investment as shareholder in PAL ...........cecececeeeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee 39
(ii) PdL and the March 2012 Transitory Agreement.........0.00c cece 40
(iii)‘Double Recovery’; Claimant’s profits as construction contractor............... Al
(B) The temporal limits of the dispute... cece cece ee ee eereeeeeeetetetsteteteneneneeneeeed 42
(C) Claimant’s political risk insurance ........ eee cece ee ee ee cence eeeeeeeteteteteteteeeneeneieaeed 43
(D) Claimant’s claims as creditor 44
(i) Article 22.2 of the Concession Contract .0.......c:ccececesceeeseceeeereeeeeseseeeeeeeeeeeee 44

VI.

(ii) Conformity of the loans with Argentine financial regulations

 

(E) The ‘Ballast Nedam’ argument
(F) CONCLUSIONS ON ADMISSIBILITY.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MERITS 50
(A) FAIR AND EQUITABLE TREATMENT: Article 2(1).......c:cesesessessessesseeseseeseeneesee 51
a) The failure to pay the Subsidy on time... cece tee ee cece ee teeeeeeeneeeeeeeee 51

b) The pesification proce: s7

c) The ‘Emergency Loan’ 64

d) The renegotiation process 69

(i) The unimplemented renegotiations 0.0.0.0... cece eee eeeeeeeee tte teeeeeeeeeees 70

(ii) The excessive delay in the renegotiation... eee etter 72

e) Conclusion on FET 74

(B) FULL PROTECTION AND SECURITY: Articles 2(1) and 4(1) ....c.ecescesseeeeeseeeeeee 74

(C) EXPROPRIATION: Article 4(2)
(D) THE ‘OBSERVANCE OF OBLIGATIONS’ OR ‘UMBRELLA CLAUSE’: Article

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

7(2) 75
(E) ARBITRARY OR DISCRIMINATORY MEASURES: Article 2(3) 75
(F) BREACH OF BINDING UNILATERAL DECLARATIONS. 75
(G) THE DURATION OF THE EMERGENCY AND THE OPERATIVE DATE OF THE

BREACHES 16
(H) CLAIMANT’S SHARE OF THE REPARATION j...ssssssssssssssssssssesssssssecsssssseeesesens 78
(1) THE APPROACH TO THE DETERMINATION OF QUANTUM o..ssssssssscsssssesesee 80
(J) COSTS 86
(K) INTEREST 86
(L) THE SUM TO BE PAID 87
DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL ON LIABILITY .ecsscccosssssssssssssssssssessssssssssnssssecceves 88

iii

FREQUENTLY USED ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

Arbitration Rules

BIT or the Treaty

ICSID Convention

ICSID or the Centre

E [CE] [RE]
LA [CLA] [RLA]
Mem. [Cl. Mem.] [Resp. Mem. Jur.]

C-Mem. [Resp. C-Mem.] [Cl. C-Mem. Jur.]

Rep. [Cl. Rep.] [Resp. Rep. Jur.]

Rej. [Resp. Rej.] [Cl. Rej. Jur.]

Tr. [J.] [Merits] [page:line]

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings

Treaty between the Federal Republic of
Germany and the Argentine Republic on the
Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of
Investments dated 9 April 1991, that came into
force on 8 November 1993.

Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Between States and Nationals of
Other States dated 18 March 1965

International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes

Exhibit [Claimant] [Respondent]
Legal Authority [Claimant] [Respondent]

Memorial [Claimant on the merits]
[Respondent on jurisdiction]

Counter-Memorial [Respondent’s on the
merits] [Claimant’s on jurisdiction]

Reply [Claimant’s on the merits]
[Respondent’s on jurisdiction]

Rejoinder [Respondent’s on the merits]
[Claimant’s on jurisdiction]

Transcript of the hearing on jurisdiction/ on the
merits

I. INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

1. This case concerns a dispute submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) on the basis of the Treaty between the
Federal Republic of Germany and the Republic of Argentina for the Promotion and
Reciprocal Protection of Investments dated 9 April 1991 which entered into force on 8
November 1993. The dispute concerns a concession for the construction of toll highway
and a bridge between cities of Rosario and Victoria and Argentina’s alleged breaches of

Claimant’s rights under the BIT.

2. Claimant is Hochtief Aktiengesellschaft and is hereinafter referred to as “Hochtief” or
“Claimant.”

3. Claimant is a company incorporated under the laws of the Federal Republic of Germany.

4. Respondent is the Argentine Republic and is hereinafter referred to as “Argentina” or

“Respondent.”

5. Claimant and Respondent are hereinafter collectively referred to as the “Parties.” The

Parties’ respective representatives and their addresses are listed above on page (i).

II. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

6. On 7 November 2007, ICSID received a request for arbitration dated 5 November 2007
from Hochtief against Argentina (the “Request” or “RFA”).

7. On 18 December 2007, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request in
accordance with Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention and notified the Parties of the
registration. In the Notice of Registration, the Acting Secretary-General invited the
Parties to proceed to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal as soon as possible in accordance
with Rule 7(d) of the Centre’s Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and

Arbitration Proceedings.

8. By letter dated 19 February 2008, Claimant elected to submit the arbitration to a Tribunal

constituted of three arbitrators, as provided in Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention.

1

On 23 April 2008, Claimant appointed Judge Charles N. Brower, a national of the United
States of America, as arbitrator. On 2 May 2008, Respondent appointed Mr. J.

Christopher Thomas, Q.C., a Canadian national, as arbitrator.

By letter dated 24 April 2009, the Centre informed the Parties that in accordance with the
method agreed by the Parties, Judge Charles N. Brower and Mr. J. Christopher Thomas,
Q.C. had agreed on the appointment of Professor Vaughan Lowe, a national of the United

Kingdom, as the third arbitrator and President of the Tribunal.

On 30 April 2009, the Acting Secretary-General of the Centre, in accordance with Rule
6(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules notified the Parties that all three arbitrators had
accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was therefore deemed to have been
constituted on that date. Mr. Sergio Puig, ICSID Legal Counsel, was designated to serve

as Secretary of the Tribunal.

On 19 June 2009, the Tribunal held a procedural session with the Parties by telephone
conference and, pursuant to the Parties’ agreement, on 16 April 2010, the Tribunal held a
first session with the Parties at the seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C. The Parties
confirmed that the Tribunal had been properly constituted and reached agreements on
several procedural matters, inter alia, that the applicable Arbitration Rules would be those
in force since 10 April 2006, and that the procedural languages would be English and
Spanish.

During the First Session, the Parties further agreed that Claimant would file a memorial
on the merits on 29 April 2010, and that Respondent would file a memorial on
jurisdiction within 120 days from its receipt of Claimant’s memorial on the merits. It was
also agreed that the Tribunal would promptly instruct the Parties on the timetable for the
further submissions. The Minutes were signed by the President of the Tribunal and Mr.

Gonzalo Flores on behalf of the ICSID Secretariat, and circulated to the Parties.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits was submitted on 29 April 2010, and Respondent

submitted its Memorial on Objections to the Jurisdiction of the Centre and the

20.

Competence of the Tribunal on 30 July 2010. Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on

Objections to Jurisdiction was submitted on 15 October 2010.

On 25 June 2010, Respondent submitted a request for production of documents, followed

by Claimant’s observations on Respondent’s request, on 21 July 2010.

On 2 November 2010, after having considered the views of the Parties, the Tribunal
decided, to deal with the objections to jurisdiction as a preliminary question, and decided

on Respondent’s request for production of documents.

On 10 November 2010, the Centre informed the Tribunal and the Parties that
Ms. Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski, ICSID Legal Counsel, would replace Mr.

Sergio Puig as Secretary of the Tribunal.

On 22 December 2010, Respondent filed its Reply on Jurisdiction, and on 10 February

2011, Claimant filed its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction.

A hearing on Jurisdiction took place at the World Bank’s Conference Centre in Paris on
4-5 March 2011. In addition to the Members of the Tribunal and the Secretary of the

Tribunal, present at the hearing were:

For Claimant

Mr. Paul F. Doyle

Mr. Philip D. Robben

Ms. Mellisa E Byroade
Ms. Julia A. Garza Benitez

Kelley Drye & Warren LLP
Kelley Drye & Warren LLP
Kelley Drye & Warren LLP
Kelley Drye & Warren LLP

For Respondent

Ms. Angelina Abbona

Mr. Gabriel Bottini

Ms. Romina de los Angeles Mercado
Ms. Verénica Lavista

Mr Matias Osvaldo Bietti

Mr. Ariel Martins

Mr. Julian Santiago Negro

Procuradora del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién

The following persons were examined during the hearing:

21.

22.

23.

24.

On behalf of Claimant

Mr. Martin Lommatzsch Witness
Mr. Héctor A. Mairal Expert witness

On behalf of Respondent

Mr. Ismael Mata Expert witness (via video conference
from Buenos Aires)

On 24 October 2011, the Tribunal issued its Decision on Jurisdiction. Attached to the
Decision was a dissenting opinion by arbitrator Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, Q.C. The
Tribunal, by majority, rejected Respondent’s submission that the Centre had no
jurisdiction and the Tribunal had no competence over this case; asserted that the Centre
had jurisdiction and the Tribunal had competence over this case; and indicated that it
would decide upon the question of costs and fees at a later stage, along with the merits of

the dispute.

On 30 December 2011, Respondent renewed its request of 25 June 2010 for the Tribunal
to decide on production of documents, and filed a response to Claimant’s observations of
21 July 2010. On 12 January 2012, Claimant submitted a response to Respondent’s
observations of 30 December 2011. On 18 January 2012, the Tribunal decided on

production of documents.

On 31 January 2012, Respondent supplemented its renewed request of 30 December
2011 for the Tribunal to decide on production of documents. This was followed by
Claimant’s observations on 8 February 2011. On 10 February 2011, Respondent further
supplemented its request for production of documents, and on 15 February 2012,
Claimant submitted its observations on Respondent’s request. On 22 February 2012, the

Tribunal decided on production of documents.

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits was filed on 7 March 2012, and Claimant

submitted its Reply on the Merits on 5 June 2012.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

On 20 July 2012, Respondent filed a further request for the Tribunal to decide on
production of documents. This was followed by Claimant’s observations on 27 July 2012,

and the Tribunal’s decision on 31 July 2012.

On 17 August 2012, Respondent submitted a further request for the Tribunal to decide on
production of documents. This was followed by Claimant’s observations on 21 August
2012, and by a further document production request from Respondent of 27 August 2012.
On 30 August 2012, Claimant also submitted a request for the Tribunal to decide on
production of documents. On 3 September 2012, Claimant submitted observations on

Respondent’s further request of 27 August 2012.
On 3 September 2012, Respondent submitted its Rejoinder on the Merits.

On 4 September 2012, the Tribunal decided on Respondent’s requests for production of
documents of 17 and 27 August 2012.

Also on 4 September 2012, Respondent filed observations on Claimant’s document
production request of 30 August 2012, and the Tribunal decided on Claimant’s request on

7 September 2012.

The Tribunal held a two-week hearing on the merits in Paris. The first week was held on
19-23 September 2012 at the International Chamber of Commerce, and the second week

was held on 22-26 October 2012 at the World Bank Paris Conference Center.

In addition to the Members of the Tribunal and the Secretary of the Tribunal, present

during the first week of the hearing were:

For Claimant:

Mr. Paul F. Doyle Kelley Drye & Warren LLP
Mr. Philip D. Robben Kelley Drye & Warren LLP
Ms. Mellisa E. Byroade Kelley Drye & Warren LLP
Ms. Julia A. Garza Benitez Kelley Drye & Warren LLP
Ms. Ana Correa Kelley Drye & Warren LLP
Ms. Tanya Green Kelley Drye & Warren LLP
Ms. Cynthia Inés Graf Caride Leonhardt, Dietl, Graf & Von Der
Fecht

32.

33.

Mr. Hartmut Paulsen Hochtief Aktiengesellschaft
Mr. Georg von Bronk Hochtief Aktiengesellschaft
Mr. Christoph Boeninger Hochtief Aktiengesellschaft

For Respondent:

Ms. Angelina Abbona Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Mr. Gabriel Bottini Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Mr. Javier Pargament Director, Procuracién del Tesoro de la
Nacion
Mr. Carlos Mihanovich Subdirector, Procuracion del Tesoro de la
Nacion
Mr. Horacio Seillant Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Ms. Verénica Lavista Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Mr. Julian Negro Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Mr. Manuel Dominguez Delucchi Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Mr. Leandro Fernandez Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Mr. Luis Rivarola Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Ms. Mariana Lozza Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Ms. Magdalena Gasparini Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Ms. Adriana Cusmano Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién

The following persons were examined during the first week of the hearing:

On behalf of Claimant:

Mr. Martin Lommatzsch Witness
Mr. Hartmut Veigele Witness
Mr. Bjorn Kénig Witness
Mr. Héctor A. Mairal Expert witness

On behalf of Respondent:

Mr. Eduardo Ratti Witness
Mr. Alfredo Villaggi Witness
Mr. Sergio Cipolla Witness
Mr. Roberto Lamdany Witness
Mr. Andrés Aner Witness

In addition to the Members of the Tribunal and the Secretary of the Tribunal, present

during the second week of the hearing that took place on 22-27 October 2012, were:

For Claimant:

Mr. Paul Doyle Kelley Drye & Warren LLP

Mr. Philip Robben Kelley Drye & Warren LLP
Ms. Melissa Byroade Kelley Drye & Warren LLP
Ms. Ana Correa Kelley Drye & Warren LLP
Mr. Levi Downing Kelley Drye & Warren LLP
Ms. Tanya Green Kelley Drye & Warren LLP
Ms. Cynthia Inés Graf Caride Leonhardt, Dietl, Graf & Von Der
Fecht
Mr. Hartmut Paulsen Hochtief Aktiengesellschaft
Mr. Martin Lommatzsch Hochtief Aktiengesellschaft
Mr. Christoph Boeninger Hochtief Aktiengesellschaft

For Respondent:

Procuradora del Tesoro de la Nacién
SubProcurador, Procuracion del Tesoro de la
Nacion

Director, Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Director, Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Subdirector, Procuracion del Tesoro de la
Nacion

Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién

Ms. Angelina Abbona
Mr. Horacio Diez

Mr. Gabriel Bottini
Mr. Javier Pargament
Mr. Carlos Mihanovich

Mr. Horacio Seillant

Ms. Magdalena Gasparini

Mr. Luis Rivarola

Mr. Agustin Tupac Cifré Puig
Ms. Verénica Lavista

Ms. Mariana Lozza

Ms. Alejandra Mackluf

Mr. Nicolas Grosse

Ms. Adriana Cusmano

Mr. Julian Negro

Mr. Manuel Dominguez Delucchi

The following persons were examined during the second week of the hearing:

On behalf of Claimant:

Dr. Manuel A Abdala
Mr. Marcelo Schoeters
Mr. Gustavo de Marco
Mr. Federico Villar

Mr. Philip Bates

Dr. Sergio Berensztein
Dr. Sebastian Edwards
Dr. W. Michael Reisman

Expert Witness
Expert Witness
Expert Witness
Expert Witness
Expert Witness
Expert Witness
Expert Witness
Expert Witness

On behalf of Respondent:

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

Mr. Martin Bes Witness

Mr. Ismael Mata Expert Witness
Mr. Benedict Kingsbury Expert Witness
Mr. Barry Eichengreen Expert Witness
Mr. Alberto Miiller Expert Witness
Mr. Guido Sandleris Expert Witness
Mr. Ernesto Schargrodsky Expert Witness
Mr. Bernardo Kliksberg Expert Witness
Mr. Lucas Bertinatto Expert Witness
Ms. Camila Rodriguez Bedoya Expert Witness

On 12 November 2012, the Tribunal issued a procedural order concerning production of

documents and the procedural calendar.

On 30 November 2012, Respondent filed a request for the Tribunal to decide on
production of documents. This was followed by Claimant’s observations on 14 December
2012. On 7 January 2013, the Tribunal decided on production of documents and issued
directions to the Parties concerning additional expert opinions to be submitted by the

Parties on certain corporate governance issues under Argentine Law.

On 17 January 2013, Claimant submitted a request for the Tribunal to reconsider its
decision of 7 January 2013, and on 29 January 2013, Respondent submitted observations

on Claimant’s request of 17 January 2013.

On 1 February 2013, each Party submitted additional expert opinions in accordance with
the Tribunal’s directions of 7 January 2013. On 12 February 2013, Claimant ratified its
request of 17 January 2013. On 19 February 2013, the Tribunal decided on production of
documents, and ordered Claimant to produce the Puentes del Litoral S.A. (“PdL”)
shareholders’ agreement. The Tribunal also decided on the procedural calendar and posed

questions to the Parties.

On 27 February 2013, Claimant produced the PdL’s Shareholders’ Agreement, which had
previously been provided to the Tribunal on 22 February 2013.

40.

Al.

42.

43.

44.

4S.

46.

47.

48.

On 28 February 2013, the Tribunal invited each Party to submit simultaneous comments
on the PdL Shareholders’ Agreement within 14 days, with replies to be submitted seven

days after the comments.

On 6 March 2013, Claimant submitted a request for the Tribunal to decide on
confidentiality of documents. On 11 March 2013, the Tribunal issued a procedural order
concerning confidentiality of documents, and invited each Party to comment upon and

propose any amendment to the wording of that order by 18 March 2013.

On 14 March 2013, Claimant submitted observations on the relevance of PdL’s
Shareholders’ Agreement, and Respondent filed a request for the Tribunal to order
Claimant to provide certain information, noting that it would submit its comments on

PdL’s Shareholders’ Agreement in its Post-Hearing Brief.

On 18 March 2013, each Party submitted observations as requested by the Tribunal in its
Procedural Order of 11 March 2013.

On 21 March 2013, the Parties replied to each other’s communications of 14 March 2013.

On 28 March 2013, each Party submitted a Post-Hearing Brief.

On 11 April 2013, Respondent filed a request for the exclusion of evidence. This was
followed by Claimant’s observations on 23 April 2013. On 25 April 2013, the Tribunal

decided not to grant Respondent’s request.

On 29 April 2013, the Tribunal informed the Parties that it was ready to issue a
confidentiality order, but thought it preferable that the Parties should agree upon one

between themselves. The Parties were invited to state their views on this matter.

On 6 May 2013, Claimant informed the Tribunal that the Parties had been unable to agree
on a proposed order, and submitted its proposed procedural order. On 7 May 2013, the
Tribunal invited the Parties to submit any final comments on Claimant’s proposed order
by 10 May 2013. Also on 7 May 2013, Respondent submitted its proposed procedural
order. On 10 May 2013, Claimant submitted its final comments on this matter. No further
observations were received from Respondent.

9

49.

50.

51.

Il.

52.

53.

54.

55.

On 23 May 2013, the Tribunal issued a Procedural Order concerning confidentiality of

documents.

The Parties filed their submissions on costs on 30 September 2013.

The Members of the Tribunal have deliberated by various means of communication and
have taken into consideration the Parties’ entire submissions filed during this arbitration

proceeding.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

Preliminary Observations

The facts summarized hereafter are those considered and debated in the Parties’ written

pleadings and oral arguments.

Argentina’s Privatization Program

a) Background

During the 1980s, Argentina experienced widespread economic instability and a number
of economic crises, large foreign debt, and hyperinflation. A number of governmental

regulations were in place that restrained or prohibited foreign investments in Argentina.'

b) — The Convertibility Regime and overview of the legal framework

Beginning in 1991, the Government of Argentina (“the Government”), enacted a variety
of economic reforms to change its policy toward foreign investors, took steps to privatize

many of its services, and created laws to encourage foreign investment.”

Law 23,928, known as the “Convertibility Law”, became effective on 1 April 1991, and
pegged the Argentine peso to the US dollar by providing that the Argentine peso was
convertible by law at a rate of US$ 1:AR $ 1, and that the Argentine Central Bank was

‘Cl. Mem. 65-66, Cl. Rep. { 36, Claimant’ s Post-Hearing Brief (“Cl. PHB”) { 19.
2 Cl. Mem4 67, Cl. PHB 19.

56.

57.

obliged to sell dollars at that rate of exchange. The Convertibility Law also provided that

contracts could be denominated and legally enforced in Argentina in US dollars.*

According to Claimant, Argentina promoted its reforms to potential foreign investors. It
created an Undersecretariat of Investment as part of its Ministry of Economy and Public
Works and Services to facilitate the entry of foreign investment, which prepared and
distributed a publication in English entitled “Argentina, a Growing Country, A
Compendium for Foreign Investors,” dated November 1993. Claimant further asserts that
in this Compendium Argentina made several representations, amongst them, that the
Convertibility Law, which was described in the Compendium as the “cornerstone of a
very strict stabilization plan” had “virtually removed currency risk”,* and that, under
Argentine law, “[c]ontracts can be denominated and legally enforced in foreign
currencies.”* According to Hochtief, it relied upon the representations contained therein

in making its decision to invest.*

On 9 April 1991, Argentina and Germany signed the Treaty. It entered into force on 8
November 1993. The Preamble of the Treaty provides that it is intended “to create
favourable conditions for investments” and that it recognizes “that the encouragement
and contractual protection of such investments are apt to stimulate private business
initiative...”’ Claimant cites the Executive Letter, dated 9 January 1992, through which
Argentina sought legislative approval of the Treaty, which stated that “under the said
agreements, the States undertake to maintain unchanged during the life thereof some
tules on treatment of investments, with which they hope to establish an atmosphere of

stability and trust to attract investments”’.*

3 Cl. Mem4 68, Cl. Rep. 37, Cl. PHB { 21. Convertibility Law, Art. 7 (Exh. CX-9).
+ Argentine Investment Compendium, at 8-9 (Exh. CX-20).

> Ibid., at 8 (emphasis added). See also Argentine Investment Update, at 1 (“Contracts may also be denominated and
enforced in foreign exchange.”)(Exh. CX-22).

© Cl. Mem. 175.
7 Cl, PHB 22. CLA 179, UNTS German — Argentine BIT.

* Cl. Mem 90-93. Cl. PHB 4 22-23. Letter from Guido Di Tella, Leén C. Arslanién and Domingo F. Cavallo to
the Honorable Congress of Argentina, 9 January 1992 (hereinafter the “Executive Letter”), at 2— 4 (Exh. CX-12).

11

58. According to Claimant, highly placed Argentine officials, including Presidents,
represented to Hochtief and other prospective investors that the Convertibility Law was
permanent, and had also highlighted the protections afforded to investors by the German-

Argentine BIT.°

59. On 21 May 1991, Argentina signed the ICSID Convention. The ICSID Convention

entered into force in Argentina on 18 November 1994.'°

60. In 1993, Argentina enacted a “Foreign Investment Act”.'' This law permitted foreign
investors to repatriate capital and remit earnings abroad at any time, and to invest in
Argentina without registration or prior governmental approval, on the same terms as
investors domiciled in Argentina. Investors were free to invest in Argentina through

merger, acquisition or joint venture. '*

(C) The Project, the Bidding Process and the Concession Contract

a) The Project and the Bidding Process

61. Bidding for the Project opened on 15 July 1997. The object of the concession was to
construct, maintain, and operate a 608-meter long, four lane, cable-stayed bridge, 12
smaller bridges and embankments, and a toll road linking the cities of Rosario, in Santa
Fe province, and Victoria, in Entre Rios province, through a crossing over the Parana

river (the “Project”). This entailed the construction of 59.4 kilometers of roads. '°

° Cl. Mem. { 78-86. Cl. PHB 20. Lommatzsch Stmt. {ff 13-20. Satil Carlos Menem, Ultima Oportunidad para la
Grandeza, Actualidad Energética, Edicién Latinoamérica, 27 November 1990 (Exh. CX-7).

© Cl, Mem 103. Cl. PHB 4 24.

"Cl. Mem{ 73, Cl. PHB { 29. Ministry of Economy, Argentine Investment Update, Vol. 1, No. 1, at 8 — 9 (setting
forth the Argentine Foreign Investment Act, as codified on 8 September 1993 by Executive Order 1852) (Exh. CX-
22).

2 Cl. Mem4{ 73, Cl. PHB {{ 29. Argentine Investment Update, 8 (Exh. CX-22).

3 Cl, Mem{ 115, Cl. PHB 35. Lommatzsch Stmt. | 29; National Executive Order No. 650/97 (Exh. CX-28).
Resp. C-Mem. 90.

62. Argentina published the terms of the concession and solicited bids through the Pliego de
Bases y Condiciones del Concurso y sus Circulares [Bidding Terms and Conditions, and

Related Circular Letters] (the “Bidding Terms”).'*

63. This was a subsidized concession, meaning that a substantial portion of the construction
would be funded by State subsidies.'* The Concession would be awarded to the project

requesting the smallest total subsidy.!°

64. Hochtief formed a Consortium together with Impregilo S.p.A., Techint Compaiiia
Técnica Internacional S.A.C. I., Benito Roggio e Hijos S.A., and Iglys S.A. to bid for the

Project (together “the Consortium”)."”

65. There were several bidding processes. Argentina noted that because there was a technical
tie in the second call for bids, the bidders were invited to improve their offers, and that

the best bid would be the one requesting the lowest subsidy. '*

66. The Consortium was the Successful Bidder, as indicated in Resolution MEyOSP No.
1039, dated 13 November 1997.'°

b) — The Concession Contract

67. The Concession Contract was signed on 28 January 1998”, and was ratified by Argentina

by Decree No. 581/1998 of 14 May 1998.7!

4 Cl, Rep. { 27. Bidding Terms (Exh. CX-31).

'5 Cl. Mem 116. Resp. C-Mem. {91

6 Resp. C-Mem. {91

"7 Cl. Mem 119. Resp. C-Mem. {| 102.

'8 Resp. C-Mem. { 106.

© Cl. Mem{ 121. Resp. C-Mem. { 108. Resp. PHB{ 42. Resolution MEOySP No. 1039, 13 November 1997, Art. 2
(Exh. RA 121).

2 Resp. C-Mem. 108.

2 Cl. Mem. 12. Cl. PHB 46. Ministry of Economy Resolution No. 581/98, 14 May 1998 (Exh, CX-35). Resp. C-
Mem. { 110. Decree No. 581/1998 dated 14 May 1998, section | (Exh. RA 124). Concession Contract (Exh. RA
12).

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

723.

As required by Article 5 of the Concession Contract, the Consortium formed Puentes del
Litoral S.A. (“PdL” or “the Concessionaire”), a local corporation with the sole purpose

of performing under the Concession Contract, incorporated on 1 April 1998.”

The current members of the Consortium are the sole current shareholders of PdL.
Hochtief is the largest shareholder of PdL, holding 26% of its shares. Impregilo is the
second largest shareholder, holding 22% of shares in PdL directly and 4% through Iglys
S.A., which it wholly controls. It is followed by Benito Roggio e Hijos S.A. (20%),
Sideco Americana S.A. (19%), Iecsa S.A. (1%) and Techint Cia Técnica Internacional

S.A. (8%). Sideco and Iecsa were not part of the original Consortium.”

On 17 June 1998, the Consortium members assigned all of their rights and obligations
under the Concession Contract to PdL.?4 The legal consequences in the context of this

claim of this assignment is a matter of dispute between the Parties.

On 14 September 1998, the Concessionaire signed the Acta de Toma de Posesién, and

took possession of the Project site.

The term of the Concession would be 25 years as from Taking of Possession.** The
Concessionaire was to build, operate and maintain the road and bridges, and the rights

and responsibilities would be transferred to Argentina at the end of the Concession.”’

Respondent notes that in order to obtain the promised financing from the Republic of

Argentina the Concessionaire had to comply with two duties within 90 days from the

Cl. Rep. { 28, Respondent’s PHB. {[ 43. Deed of Incorporation: Puentes del Litoral $.A., 1 April 1998 (Exh. RA

122).

23 Cl. Mem.{ 133. Lommatzsch Stmt. { 47.

* Cl. Mem{ 131, Cl. Rep. 28, Cl. PHB {fj 42, 51. FLT, § 5.2 (Exh. CX-32). Acta Cesién, 17 June 1998
(translation by counsel) (Exh. CX-36); see also Lommatzsch Stmt., {ff 45, 46. Resp. C-Mem. §{ 111; Resp. PHB J,
43. Rights and Duties Transfer Deed: —Impregilo S.p.A.| and others to —Puentes del Litoral $.A., dated 17 June
1998 (Exh. RA 126). Decision on Jurisdiction { 117.

25 Cl. Mem. ¥ 145, Lommatzsch Stmt., | 56, Resp. C-Mem. {j 113, Resp. PHB {{ 44. Certificate of 14 September
1998 (Exh. RA 131).

26 Resp. C-M { 129. Concession Contract, section 4 (the date of taking of possession was 14 September 1998
(Record dated 14 September 1998, Record of Taking of Possession) (Exh. RA 131).

27 Cl. Mem { 125. Cl. PHB 4 47

74.

75.

execution of the Contract by Argentina: (i) the filing of Firm and Irrevocable Financing
Agreements (“AFFIs” or “FIFAs”) to evidence the availability to the Concessionaire of
the funds required to comply with its duties under the Concession Contract; and (ii) the
filing of a stand-by letter of credit issued by a banking institution to secure that the
amount indicated in sections 8.2 and 22.1.b of the Concession Contract (i.e., the
difference between the projected total construction costs and the subsidy requested from
the State, plus 20%) would be immediately transferred to the Government of Argentina
on the demand so that the Government might, either directly or through third parties,

complete the works.”

On 30 October 1998, the shareholders of PdL posted a standby letter of credit dated 15
October 1998 (the “Letter of Credit’) in favour of Argentina in the amount of US $143.1
million (ARS 143,102,193) to guarantee PdL’s performance and financing for the
Project. Hochtief’s share amounted to 26% or US $37 million (ARS 37,206,570).”

Once construction was completed, the Concessionaire would be entitled to collect toll
revenue, which would be the sole source of revenue for the Concessionaire under the
Concession*. The basic toll rate would be equal to the peso equivalent of US$ 7.40 for a
2-axle vehicle*'. For other vehicles, the toll would be calculated as a multiple of this
rate.” The toll was to be denominated in US dollars and adjusted periodically for
inflation pursuant to the US Consumer Price Index.** In accordance with Law No. 23,696,
which amended Law No. 17,520, the toll amount “was required to comply with two
restrictions: (i) not to exceed the average economic value of the service rendered; and (ii)
profitability was not to exceed a reasonable relation between the investments actually made

9934

by the concessionaire and the net profits obtained through the concession.

28 Resp. C-Mem. 141.

2° Cl. Mem. { 144, Cl. Rep. 1 50. Cl. PHB 455. Resp. C-Mem. { 146.
3 Cl. Mem. { 125, Cl. PHB 39.

351 CL. Rep. 31.

2 Cl. Mem. {ff 126-127, Cl. PHB {ff 47-48.

3 Cl. Mem. { 127, Cl. PHB {{f 47-48.

4 Resp. CM 122.

76.

77.

78.

79.

The estimated volume of traffic was not guaranteed by Argentina. In accordance with
Decree 650/97, “there will be no guaranteed minimum revenues or traffic volume. The
concession will be for all purposes a risk contract, except for the subsidy to be granted to

0935

the Concessionaire.

The toll rate was calculated in US dollars, to be collected from users paying in Argentine
pesos, and would be adjusted monthly based on the average buyer-seller exchange rate
between dollars and pesos of the Banco de la Nacién Argentina. Claimant expected that

the exchange rate would generally be US $1 to AR $1.

c) Capital Contributions and Project Funding

Under the terms of the Concession Contract, the funding of the Project was to come from
three sources: (a) Argentina was to provide a subsidy (the “Subsidy”), which was the
initial source of funding for the construction, to be paid in monthly tranches.*’ According
to Respondent, the amount of the Subsidy accounted for more than 60% of the Project;**
(b) PdL was to provide US$ 30 million of its own capital (shareholders’ equity); and (c)
the balance was to come from funds borrowed by PdL.* According to the Claimant, after
several revisions, the final funding plan provided for approximately US $234 million” of
Subsidy, approximately US $59 million of equity, and a loan from the Inter-American

Development Bank (the “IDB”) in the amount of approximately US $74 million.*!

The Concession Contract also contemplated that the first funds to finance the Project

would be those provided by Argentina through the Subsidy, and that once the Subsidy

35 Cl. PHB  53.Resp. C-M. 125. Decree No. 855/95 issued by the Argentine Executive, section 3, as amended by
Decree No. 650/97 (Exh. RA 97); Villagi Stmt. 16.

36 Cl. Mem. { 127, Cl. PHB 148.

57 Resp. PHB 4 58. Final Technical Document, Sec. 36.2 (Exh. CX-33).
38 Resp. PHB 158.

Cl. Mem. {if 137-138, Cl. PHB {ff 52-54.

“0. Cl. Mem 137.

+! Jbid., 137. CL. Rep. 1 55. Cl. PHB {ff 52, 54.

80.

81.

82.

was depleted, Concessionaire should continue the Project with its own funds (including

third-party loans).**

According to Claimant, Hochtief made capital contributions to PdL, consistent with the
requirements of the Concession Contract, of US $594,930 in May 1998 and US
$1,355,070 in August 1998, for a total of US$ 1,950,000, or 26% of the US $ 7.5 million
capital that PdL was required to have in place upon the start of the Project.*? Hochtief
made further contributions to PdL of US $1,638,000 in March 2000 and US $4,212,000
in July 2000, amounting to a total of US$ 5,850,000, or 26% of the remaining balance of
US $22,500,000 in capital that PdL was required to raise. The other shareholders made
similar equity contributions in proportion to their shareholdings. Also, in addition to the
initial contribution of US $30 million made by the PdL shareholders, in January 2001
PdL’s shareholders made an additional equity investment of US $13.65 million.
Hochtief’s 26% share of this additional equity was US $3.549 million.

On 31 July 2000, PdL entered into a loan agreement with the Inter-American
Development Bank (the “IDB”) in the amount of US $73,751,000 (the “IDB loan”).**
However, disbursements were never made under this agreement. The reasons for that are

disputed between the Parties.

According to Claimant, during the entire construction phase of the Project, Argentina was
in default of its legal and contractual obligation to pay the Subsidy“ in a timely manner,
and those delays impacted the financing of the Project.*’ Claimant asserts that under the
Concession Contract, PdL was to access third-party funding for the Project only after the

Subsidy was paid, and that a condition precedent to the first disbursement of the IDB

2.Cl. Mem. {{ 138. FTD at 36.2 (Exh. CX-33).
3.Cl. Mem. { 135. Lommatzsch Stmt. 450.

Cl. Mem. {if 135-136, Cl. Rep. 1 34, Cl. PHB 4 50.

45. Cl. Mem. {{ 142. CL. Rep. 58. IDB Loan Agreement (Exh. CX-46).
461. Mem. 9 150, Cl. PHB 159.

“7 Cl. PHB 59.

83.

84.

85.

86.

loan, scheduled for 1 March 2001, was that Argentina had paid no less than 90% of the
Subsidy.**

Respondent, on the other hand, asserts that because the Concessionaire had failed to show
the AFFIs, as an assurance that the Project would be carried out“, the Respondent
temporarily suspended® the payment of the Subsidies until the AFFIs were presented.*!
Respondent further asserts that Argentina resumed payment of the Subsidy in September

2000. The Parties dispute whether or not the IDB loan constitutes an AFFI.

According to Claimant, another of the conditions precedent to the disbursement of the
IDB loan in March 2001 was the injection into PdL as equity of 40% of any loan
disbursement until the total paid-in capital amounted to US$ 59,039,000.** Claimant
asserts that because Argentina had failed to pay the Subsidy in a timely manner, PdL’s
shareholders, including Hochtief, were forced to inject equity into PdL in January 2001,

two months before it was scheduled.

With regard to the IDB agreement, Respondent notes that it had been negotiated since
May 1998 for a higher amount, but that it had been reduced twice because, among other
factors, the IDB considered the Project “extremely risky” and a capital increase of PdL,

that was required, never took place. *

On 20 October 2000, PdL and Argentina entered into an agreement, titled Acta Acuerdo,
(the “October 20 Agreement”). This Agreement provided renegotiated deadlines for

payment of the Subsidy, with the last payment due on 28 February 2001. According to

“8 Cl. Mem. ff 152-153. Cl. Rep. 159. Cl. PHB 4 61.
+ Resp. PHB 458. Final Technical Document, Sec. 22.1.b (Exh. CX-33).

50 Resp. PHB {{ 59, fn 77. Letter Secretariat of Public Works (SOP) 1020, 1 September 2000 (Exh. RA 149). Letter
SOP 723/2000, 4 July 2000, p. 2 (Exh. RA 148).

51 Resp. C-M [ 160. Respondent’s PHB 41 59.

52 Resp. C-M [ 162. Letter SOP No. 1020/2000 dated 1 September 2000 (Exh. RA 149).
53. Cl. Mem. { 154.

 Thid., 4 154.

55 Resp. PHB { 62-64. Memorandum from PdL to the Secretariat of Public Works, 13 April 1999, p. 1 (Exh. RA
139). Letter from IDB to PdL, 17 October 2001 (Exh. RA 286). Shareholders’ Agreement, 11 April 2002 (Exh. RA
502). Letter from PdL to the Chief of the Cabinet of Ministers, 25 July 2001, p. 2 (Exh. RA 162).

18

the Claimant, compliance with this agreement would have permitted the first

disbursement of the IDB loan scheduled for 1 March 2001.*

87. By letter of 26 February 2001, PdL asked the IDB for a six-month extension of the

deadline*’. Respondent’s witness asserted that the IDB did not deny the extension.*

88. By letter of 14 May 2001, PdL notified the IDB than over 90% of the Subsidy had

already been paid*®.

89. On 27 August 2001, shortly before the six-month extension was to expire, PdL made a

disbursement request to the IDB.©

90. By letter of 28 February 2002, the IDB informed PdL that there were various issues that

prevented the disbursement.

91. According to Respondent, the disbursements under the IDB loan were never made
because there were many major conditions set forth in the IDB Agreement— which had
nothing to do with the Subsidy- that remained unfulfilled until at least February 2002.
Respondent further asserts that PdL’s impossibility of obtaining financing to complete

the Project was prior to the economic emergency declared in January 2002.%

92. According to Respondent, the Project was essentially financed with funds provided by
Argentina (the Subsidy), noting that the Argentine State also provided financial aid in

order to finish the work.“

56 Cl. Mem. 156. Cl. Rep. ff 52-53. Cl. PHB {{ 62. Acta Acuerdo, 20 October 2000, Agreement between PdL and
Argentina resolving financial disputes (Exh. CX-137).

57 Cl. PHB {[ 63. Letter from PdL to the Inter-American Development Bank, 26 February 2001 (Exh. CX-166);
Transcript Vol. 2, 454:3 — 455:10 (translated on the record).

58 Ty, Hear. Merits, day 11, 2700:21-2701:3(Bes) (Spanish version).

5 Resp. Rej. 95. Letter from PdL to the IDB, 14 May 2001 (Exh. RA 279). Resp. PHB. 4 68.

© Resp. PHB {{ 67.

°! Resp. PHB. 72. Letter from IDB to PdL, 28 February 2002 (Exh. CX-70).

© Resp. PHB {{ 66. Tr. Hear. Merits, day 11, 2734:4-2737:11 (Bes) (Spanish version). Letter from PdL to the IDB,
25 October 2001 (Exh. RA 287).

© Resp. C-M [ 180. Aner Stmt. 4 6.

© Resp. PHB. 1 8. Resp. C-M {132-136 and 179-191 and Resp. Rej. 53-61, 113-118 and 122-145.

 

19

93.

94.

(D)

The Argentine Crisis

The Respondent argues that since mid-1998, Argentina underwent a recession period and
decrease of its domestic product that triggered an economic, financial, institutional,
political and social crisis, which reached its peak in December 2001.% Respondent asserts
that the crisis also had an impact on the provinces of Santa Fe and Entre Rios.“The
impact, duration and legal significance of that recession period is a matter of dispute

between the Parties.

The Tribunal heard evidence from Dr. Bernardo Kliksberg, Professor Barry Eichengreen,
Dr. Sebastian Edwards, as well as from the witnesses Ratti, Cipolla, Lamdany and
Llorens, on various aspects of these issues. Dr. Kliksberg referred to the origins and
social consequences of the crisis, how the crisis evolved, and the possible scenarios that
could have unfolded if the measures subject matter of these proceeding had not been
taken®’. Professor Eichengreen expressed that the crisis was the result of a series of
external factors that were difficult to predict.* Professor Nouriel Roubini, who was not
cross-examined during the hearing, had referred in his report to the external shocks
affecting the Argentine Republic since 1998, which caused exchange parity to become
increasingly difficult to sustain. Dr. Edwards expressed his disagreement with Prof.
Eichengreen and Prof. Roubini with respect to the impact of external shocks, and asserted
that the analysis that both have provided “is incomplete and thus incorrect.” According
to Dr. Edwards, “there [were] a number of ways of dealing with [the crisis], .that did not
require pesification””. Dr. Edwards asserts that “Argentina contributed significantly to

the crisis by these mistakes of omission [...]””'.

© Cl. Mem. ff 16-73. See in general Tr. Merits, Day 10, 2193:15-2235:3 (English version).

© Resp. C-M. 1 74-85.

© Resp. Rej. | 295. Kliksberg Report, 6 March 2012, and Supplementary Report, 3 September 2012.

© Ty. Merits, Day 9, 2067:16-2070:09 (English version). In general, Eichengreen Report, 3 September 2012.
Tr. Merits, Day 6, 1280:4-6 (English version).

% Tr. Merits, Day 6, 1284:7-8 (Lamdany) (English version).

7 Tr. Merits, Day 6, 1279:19-20 (English version).

20

95.

96.

97.

98.

99.

(E)

The Law 25.561 and its effects

 

On 6 January 2002, Argentina passed Law 25,561, the Public Emergency and Foreign

Exchange System Reform Law (“the Emergency Law” or “Law 25,561”).”
The Emergency Law abrogated several provisions of the Convertibility Law.”

Respondent asserts that Argentina had to adopt certain measures in order to attempt to

remedy the worst economic, social and institutional crisis in the history of the country.”

The Emergency Law a) set forth the conversion into Argentine pesos of all obligations
expressed in foreign currency that were connected with the financial system; b) abrogated
adjustment clauses in US dollars or other foreign currencies and indexation clauses based
on price indexes of other countries, as well as any other indexation mechanism provided
for in the contracts entered into by the Government under public law; c) with regard to
contracts between private persons not related to the financial system, it provided that
—all considerations [would] be paid in Argentine pesos at an exchange rate of ONE
ARGENTINE PESO (ARS 1) = ONE US DOLLAR (USD 1), as payment for the amount
to be ultimately agreed upon by the parties, or such amount as might be determined
through court proceedings if the parties failed to reach an agreement. The Emergency
Law additionally provided for the renegotiation of both private and public contracts in

order to adapt them to the new foreign exchange system.”°

Days later, by Decree No. 214/02, Argentina additionally ordered the conversion into
Argentine pesos of —all the obligations to pay a sum of money, whatever their cause or
origin —whether arising from court proceedings or otherwise— expressed in US dollars or
other foreign currencies, existing when the Emergency Law was enacted and which have

not yet been converted into Argentine pesos.”

2 Cl. Mem. if 27, 185. Law 25,561, 6 January 2002 (“Emergency Law”) (Exh. CX-63).
7 Cl. Mem. {ff 28, 189. Cl. Rep. { 43. Resp. C-Mem. 425.

4 Resp. C-Mem. 1.

5 Tbid., | 28. Cl. Mem. { 189, 191. Emergency Law, at 3-4 (Exh. CX-63).

% Resp. C-Mem. § 29. Decree No. 214/02, 3 February 2002 (Exh. RA 194).

21

100.

101.

102.

103.

104.

As a result, PdL’s contractual rights to set the basic toll rate in US dollars for its 25-year
Concession and to have the rate adjusted for inflation pursuant to the U.S. Consumer

Price Index, were eliminated.”

According to the Claimant, because of the impact of the Emergency Law on the toll
revenues under the Concession Contract, the Project was no longer viable and IDB
refused to continue to negotiate the loan. By letter of 28 February 2002, the IDB

informed PdL of its decision to cease discussion concerning the loan.”*

(F) Suspension of Constructions, Project Delay and Additional Capital Infusions by
Hochtief (“inter-company loans") (2002), Argentina Provides Financing (February 2003

Loan)

According to Claimant, at the time the Emergency Law was enacted, the Project was
approximately 93% complete, but the bridge could not be left incomplete and the work
suspended until the structure was complete, because it could collapse. Hochtief and
Impregilo had therefore to inject additional funds, into PdL by means of inter-company
loans. Hochtief’s one-half share of these loans was US$ 5.4 million in 2002. The bridge

span was closed on 5 February 2002.”

On 18 January 2002, PdL requested that in light of the impact of the Emergency Law on
the Project, Argentina provide PdL with an advance on compensation. Since there was no
response from Argentina, in early March 2002, PdL’s Board decided to suspend

construction on the Project.**

On 22 March 2002, PdL again sought assistance from Argentina in financing the Project
because, according to Claimant, the Emergency Law had made the Project unviable and

eliminated PdL’s ability to obtain third-party financing.*'

7 Cl. Mem. ¥ 192, 202.
78 Cl. Mem. { 204. Lommatzsch Stmt. | 88, n. 4; 28 February 2002 letter IDB (Exh. CX-70).
7 Cl. Mem. {ff 205-207.

80 Thy
81 Thy

id., 209-211.
id., | 214. Lommatzsch Stmt. | 100; PdL’s 22 March 2002 letter (Exh. CX-72).

22

105. On 22 October 2002, the Argentine Republic and the Provinces of Santa Fe and Entre
Rios entered into an Agreement as an effort to complete the Project. It was agreed that

the Argentine Ministry of Economy was to provide the funds required to such effect.*

106. By letter No. 962/2002, dated 26 November 2002, the Secretariat of Public Works
pledged to provide PdL with assistance in funding for the completion of the Project, in
the form of an advance against future compensation due to PdL because of the

pesification of the US dollar toll provided for in the Contract.*

107. The text of the Financial Aid Agreement was approved by Decree No. 172 dated 3
February 2003, in the amount of AR $51,648,352, granted by the Road Infrastructure
Fund.* Claimant asserts that this was just enough to complete construction and open the
Project to traffic.** According to Claimant, PdL was advised that if it did not agree to the
terms of the “Financial Aid” Loan, Argentina would declare PdL to be in default, cancel

the Concession resulting in a drawdown of the Letter of Credit in place.*°

108. On 21 February 2003, the Argentine Ministry of Economy and PdL signed the “Financial
Aid” Loan (the “February 21 Agreement” or “Financial Aid Agreement”). Under Section
3 of the February 21 Agreement, PdL agreed to secure repayment of the amount of the
financial aid, by assigning its toll collection rights to the Fondo Fiduciario de
Infraestructura Vial, from the date of commercial operation until the entire amount has
been repaid, including financial expenses, net of the Concession’s operation and
maintenance expenses.*’ Respondent notes that the assignment of the toll collection rights

was contemplated by section 33 of the Concession Contract.** Respondent asserts that the

82 Resp. C-M { 182. Agreement executed by and between the Argentine State and the Provinces of Entre Rios and
Santa Fe, 22 October 2002 (Exh. RA 213).

3 Cl. Mem. { 218. Secretariat of Public Works’ 26 November 2002 letter (Exh. CX-76).

* Resp, CM { 185.

85 Cl. Mem. { 219. Lommatzsch Stmt. | 109; PdL’s 21 February 2003 letter (Exh. CX-78).

8 Cl. Mem. 220. Lommatzsch Stmt. 4] 112-114.

*7 Cl. Mem. { 222. Lommatzsch Stmt. | 115. Resp. C-M. J 186. Financial Aid Agreement, section 3 (Exh. CX-78).
88 Resp. C-M. 186. Concession Contract, section 33 (Exh. RA 12).

23

109.

110.

111.

112.

Argentine Government made a significant effort to finance the completion of the Project,

even if the Concessionaire was exclusively responsible for such financial resources.*®

PdL received the initial tranche of funds under the February 21 Agreement on 28
February 2003, and resumed work to complete the Project.*° The Project was opened to

traffic on 23 May 2003.”

Claimant asserts that Argentina had only paid PdL AR $39.6 million from the agreed AR
$52 million loan, when Argentina abruptly stopped disbursements under the February 21
Agreement. According to Argentina, it stopped payment because a subcontractor, who
had worked on the Project, made a claim against PdL for unpaid work, to which PdL
replied that it had been unable to pay the subcontractor because of the loss of the third

party funding resulting from Argentina’s failure to timely pay the Subsidy.”

Claimant claims that because Argentina failed to make all required payments under the
February 21 Agreement in a timely fashion, Hochtief and Impregilo were forced to make
further inter-company loans to PdL to complete the Project, not called for in the Contract.

Hochtief’s share of the contribution made in 2003 was of US$ 4,172,565.”

In early July 2003, PdL received Public Works Resolution 14 dated 30 June 2003, from
the Secretariat of Public Works (“Resolution 14”), that changed the terms of the February
21 Agreement. It modified the applicable interest rate; interest was to be compounded on
a daily basis; maintenance and operation expenses were pesified and would be deemed
equal to the pesified amount of the projected costs in 1997; collections under the loan
would be made on a daily basis; amounts that PdL could not pay would be added to the

principal amount of the loan on a daily basis. According to Claimant, after one year of

* Resp. CM. { 190.
°0 Cl. Mem. {{ 223. Lommatzsch Stmt. | 116

° Cl. Mem. J
* Cl. Mem. ¥

224

I
I
[ 225. Lommatzsch Stmt. 119
I

°3 Cl. Mem. {{ 226. Lommatzsch Stmt. [120

24

daily payments, and daily compounding and capitalization of interest, the principal

balance of the loan grew to over AR $41 million.

113. On 26 August 2003, PdL formally appealed Resolution 14, and requested that operation
of Resolution 14 be stayed pending resolution of the appeal. According to Claimant, as of
PdL’s insolvency proceeding in April 2007, PdL was forced to comply with Resolution

14 since neither the appeal nor the stay were acted upon by the Public Administration.*

(G) Further Capital infusions by Hochtief (2004-2005) and Total Loans and Capital
Infusions

114. According to Claimant, because of the shortfall resulting from the daily collection of loan
interest, and the reduced allowance for maintenance and operating expenses, PdL had not
had funds to maintain the Project or pay daily expenses. As a result, Hochtief and
Impregilo had to make further inter-company loans throughout 2004 and 2005 to fund

part of those expenses.”

115. Claimant asserts that the total of Hochtief’s equity contributions, inter-company loans

and accrued interest on those loans up to 31 December 2009 was US $117.8 million.”

(H) Renegotiations and PdL’s Insolvency Proceedings (Concurso Preventivo

116. Section 9 of the Emergency Law and its related decree ordered the renegotiation of all
public works contracts in order to mitigate the detrimental effects of the currency
devaluation and mandated that contracts be renegotiated within 120 days of 1 March
2001. The Argentine Congress has subsequently ratified and amended the general

stipulations of Law 25,561°.

°% Cl. Mem. §f 227-230. Lommatzsch Stmt. {ff 122-124. Resolution 14 of 30 June 2003 (Exh. CX-79).
°5 Cl. Mem. {{ 231. Lommatzsch Stmt. {f 125-127.

°6 Cl. Mem. { 232. Cl. Rep. | 71. Lommatzsch Stmt. {| 128.

°” Cl. Mem. 234. LECG Report, 1 6, 37, 62, 83; Tables V and IX.

°8 Law 25.561, at § 9 (Exh. CX-63).

25

117. By Decree No. 311/03 the Unidad de Renegociacion y Andlisis de Contratos de Servicios
Piiblicos (“UNIREN”) was created.*? UNIREN is the agency charged with coordinating
the renegotiation proceedings provided for by Article 9 of the Emergency Law, Law

25,561.

118. On 16 May 2006, UNIREN and PdL subscribed the first Letter of Understanding (Carta
de Entendimiento) (“the May 2006 CdE” or “First Letter of Understanding”).' Claimant
notes that Argentina’s approval under the May 2006 CdE was conditioned on a public
hearing and other procedures!"', which Argentina never attempted to hold.'° Respondent
asserts that the public hearing requirement was in compliance with the regulations
ordering the renegotiation process'. Respondent notes that the May 2006 CdE modified
the conditions for reimbursement of the February 21 Financial Aid Agreement,'™ and
asserts that the validity of the May 2006 CdE was subject to the payment of PdL’s debt to

the subcontractor.'°

119. A second Carta de Entendimiento was sent by UNIREN on 12 February 2007 (“the
February 2007 CdE” or “Second Letter of Understanding”). This revised letter also
required, as a precondition to the renegotiations, for PdL to waive the rights against
Argentina of two-thirds of its shareholders under international investment law, including
the BIT, and for PdL to indemnify Argentina for any such claims brought against
Argentina by PdL shareholders. According to Claimant, although the February 2007 CdE

was less favorable, and PdL had indicated that it could accept Argentina’s proposal,

%® Resp. C-M. | 195. Decree No. 311/03 issued by the Argentine Executive (Exh. RA 222).

0 C], Mem. 242. May 2006 CdE (Exh. CX-94). Resp. C-M. { 200. Lamdany Stmt. ff 45-47. Respondent’s PHB
143. Resp. Rej. 152.

101 Resp. Rej 149.

102 Cl. Mem. {242

103 Resp. Rej. {| 149. Section 9.b of Presidential Decree No. 311/2003 provides: —The execution of [integral or
partial contract renegotiation] agreements must be preceded by a public hearing which helps users become involved
in the decision-making process, in the form of the Unit of Renegotiation and Analysis of Public Service Contracts,
to determine the procedures and mechanisms fit to implement such public hearing. (Exh. RA 222).

104 Resp. C-M. {{ 202. Letter of Understanding of 16 May 2006, Nos. five and six (Exh. CX-94). Lamdany Stmt. {9
48-49,

105 Resp. PHB § 143.

196 Cl, Mem. 4 244. Cl. Rep. {| 85. February 2007 CdE (Exh. CX-100). Resp. C-M. 204.

26

120.

121.

122.

Argentina nevertheless failed to implement the plan.'’ Respondent confirmed that the
February 2007 CdE was executed on 27 February 2007,'* stating that it was more

advantageous to the Concessionaire than the previous one.'°°

On 24 April 2007, PdL received notice that one of its subcontractors, the joint venture of
Boskalis-Ballast Nedam Baggeren, had initiated bankruptcy proceedings against PdL as a

result of an unpaid arbitral award.'°

On 2 May 2007, PdL initiated insolvency proceedings, as previously approved on 26
April 2007 by its board of directors''', to avoid the liquidation of PdL and the loss of the
Concession.'!? The Court granted PdL’s insolvency petition on 22 May 2007, which was
ratified by PdL’s shareholders on 24 May 2007. Claimant notes that the viability of the
insolvency payment scheme would depend on the Government’s renegotiation of the

Concession Contract.!4

By letter of 10 May 2007, UNIREN notified PdL that the February 2007 CdE was no
longer effective, in view of the petition that had been filed by PdL to commence an

insolvency proceeding. ''5

(DD Ballast Nedam

123. Ballast Nedam Baggeren B.V. together with Boskalis International B.V. (“Boskalis”)
formed a joint venture (the “Joint Venture’’) that entered into a dredging subcontract with
107 Cl. Mem. 244.

108 Resp, C-M. 4 204. Resp. PHB {{ 144. Letter of Understanding of 27 February 2007 (Exh. CX-100).
109 Resp. PHB 144.

410 Cl, Mem. 251. Cl. PHB 96.

41 Resp, PHB { 147. Exh. RA 320.

112

Cl. Mem. § 251. Lommatzsch Stmt. {f 159-161. Cl. PHB { 96. Concession Contract, section 30.1 (Exh. RA 12).

13 Cl, Mem. ¥ 251.

“4 Cl, PHB 97.

45 Resp, C-M. {if 205-206. Resp. Rej. {| 163. Resp. PHB 4 147. Letter from UNIREN No. 262/07 of 10 May 2007
(Exh. RA 232).

27

PdL dated 18 December 1998''’. Respondent notes that the Joint Venture was PdL’s main
subcontractor in the Project, and that it played a prominent role at critical moments of the

Concession Contract'”’.

124. Boskalis and Ballast Nedam Baggerem commenced an ICC arbitration on 15 January
2002 on account of PdL’s inability to pay the Joint Venture for dredging services,''* and a

bankruptcy action against PdL in December 2005 due to the ICC award going unpaid.'"”

125. Hochtief confirmed that it “did at one point hold a non-controlling, minority interest in
Ballast Nedam N.V., the parent company of Ballast Nedam Baggeren”. The
consequences thereof, if any, in respect of the issue of causation of PdL’s claimed losses

is a matter of dispute between the Parties.

126. According to Claimant, it was not involved in the ownership or management of Ballast
Nedam Baggeren when the Joint Venture commenced ICC arbitration. Hochtief asserts
that in November of 2001, Ballast Nedam Baggeren merged with a subsidiary of
Hollandsche Beton Groep N.V. (“HBG”), to form a new company, Ballast HAM
Dredging (“BHD”). Claimant further asserts that Ballast Nedam sold its interest in BHD
in late 2002'”, and that Hochtief had no interest in Ballast Nedam after 2004.'*! Claimant
concludes that Hochtief’s one-time ownership in Ballast Nedam has no relevance to any

claim or defense in this proceeding. '

116 Cl, PHB. {{ 303. Contrato de Locacién de Obra, 18 December 1998 (Contract for Works between Puentes del
Litoral and the Joint Venture Boskalis — Ballast Nedam) (Exh. RA 497). Contrato de Uni6n Transitoria de
Empresas, 10 June 1998 (Joint Venture Agreement between Boskalis International by Sucursal Argentina and
Ballast Nedam Baggeren by Sucursal Argentina) (Exh. RA 494).

117 Resp. PHB § 100.

118 Cl. PHB qf 303, 305.

119 Thid., J 306.

120 Tbid., J 305. Ballast Nedam Annual Report, 2002, at 4, 15, 17, 20, 31 — 32 (Exh. RA 495.5); Ballast Nedam
Annual Report, 2003, at 43, 66 (Exh. RA 495.6).

21 Cl. PHB 4 305-306. HT_01156, Hochtief Annual Report (2004), at 59. According to Claimant, this sale, and the
retirement from the Ballast Nedam board of two individuals appointed by Hochtief, is also reported in Ballast
Nedam’s annual report for 2004 (Exh. RA 495.7 at 5, 12).

122 C]. PHB ¥ 307.

 

28

127.

128.

129.

130.

131.

Respondent notes that it only learnt about Hochtief’s participation in Ballast Nedam
during the examination of a witness on the fifth day of the hearing on the merits, and
accuses Claimant of having concealed such relationship, as well as of depriving the
Tribunal and Respondent of the possibility of analysing any evidence in relation to

Hochtief’s participation in the decision-making process of Ballast Nedam.'3

According to Respondent, Claimant failed to meet certain obligations concerning
transparency and conflicting interests during the selection processes conducted by the

Concessionaire.'!*

Respondent notes that PdL contracted the debt with the Joint Venture, at the beginning of
the Concession, while Hochtief was still a shareholder of both companies, and that such
debt was a fundamental cause for the difficulties experienced by PdL’s Concession, that
culminated with the Joint Venture’s claim before the ICC, and the subsequent bankruptcy

petition against PdL. 5

Respondent notes that the IDB was not notified of Hochtief’s shareholding in Ballast
Nedam either,'° even though in various letters from PdL to the IDB, reference had been
made to “some subcontractors hav[ing] announced their intention to file a petition for
bankruptcy against PdL”;!”’ to the need of the financing resources from the IDB to “stop the
filing of lawsuits against it by subcontractors.”'?* Respondent further notes that in its
letter to the IDB of 15 November 2001, PdL had mentioned owing more than $60 million
to its subcontractors and providers, but had still failed to inform that such debt had been

incurred with a related company”.

According to Respondent, the few documents submitted by Hochtief show that its

influence on Ballast Nedam was decisive in the decision-making of that company, from

3 Resp. PHB 9] 99, 115.

24 Tid., 101-103.

25 rid., {| 110-112.

26 Tbid., 4 105.

"27 Tbid., 124. Letter from PdL to the IDB, 4 October 2001, p. 2 (Martin Bes Stmt. Exh. MB 4).
8 Resp. PHB {[ 124. Letter from PdL to the IDB, 15 November 2001, p. | (Exh, RA 283).

29 Resp. PHB {| 125. Letter from PdL to the IDB, 15 November 2001, p. 2 (Exh. RA 283).

29

132.

133.

134.

1993 until at least mid-2004, when it held almost 50% of the shares and had nearly 48%

of the votes of Ballast Nedam.'*®

On 28 January 2003, the Joint Venture sought an order of attachment of PdL’s accounts
in connection with the claim filed against PdL for unpaid sums.'*! According to
Respondent, this precluded the disbursements relating to certificates 5 to 13 provided for

in the Financial Aid Agreement. '*

(J) The Transitory Agreements

As part of the renegotiation process, in December 2009, a First Transitory Agreement
was reached (“the December 2009 Transitory Agreement”), which was signed by PdL on
December 17, 2009'**. Claimant notes that this agreement could be terminated by either
party if it was not implemented within 60 days (i.e. by 15 February 2010), and that, like
the May 2006 and February 2007 CdEs, the December 2009 Transitory Agreement
required PdL to waive the rights against Argentina of two-thirds of its shareholders, but it
did not contain an indemnification requirement. According to Claimant, the December

2009 Transitory Agreement was never implemented.'*

The December 2009 Transitory Agreement contemplated a transitory modification of the
rate, as well as several aspects of the contract binding the parties, taking into account the
PdL’s insolvency proceedings.'** The execution of the December 2009 Transitory
Agreement was approved by PdL’s shareholders’ and Board of Directors. Respondent
asserts that “UNIREN included in the records the letters issued by the company and its

shareholders representing more than two thirds (2/3) of the capital stock, as well as

30 Resp, PHB { 120. Shareholders’ Agreement of Ballast Nedam B.V., p. 6. (Exh. RA 503).
5! Resp, PHB { 137.
32 Tbid., f 137, 152.

133

Cl. Rep. { 88. Resp. Rej. { 167.

84 Cl. Mem. fff 245-246.
85 Resp, CM. 210.

30

135.

136.

137.

138.

139.

140.

certified copies of the registry of shareholders’ and the minutes of the Board of Directors

whereby the said company approved the execution of the Transitory Agreement”. !°°

Upon approval of PdL’s creditors’ agreement (30 December 2009), a Second Transitory
Agreement was agreed upon and executed by PdL on 14 June 2010'” (“the June 2010

Transitory Agreement’).

A public hearing took place in the city of Victoria on 17 June 2011, where a petition to

amend the agreement’s transitional tariff regime was debated.'*

This amendment resulted in a Third Transitory Agreement, (the “October 2011
Transitory Agreement’), signed by PdL on 13 October 2011." Such agreement was
submitted to the Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién for an opinion, as required by the

applicable regulations. '”

Pursuant to Opinion No. 40 of 29 February 2012, certain adjustments were made to the
agreement, and UNIREN presented a Fourth Transitory Agreement to PdL in March
2012, which PdL signed on 6 March 2012. (the “March 2012 Transitory Agreement”) "*!.

The March 2012 Transitory Agreement was signed by the decision of the majority of
PdL’s shareholders”.

In this context, reference has been made to PdL’s Shareholders’ Agreements of 15 May
1999 (“the 1999 Shareholders’Agreement”)', and of 11 April 2002 (“the 2002

Shareholders’ Agreement’”)'*.

136 Tbid., 211.

'57 Resp, Rej. {{ 169. Second Transitory Agreement, 14 June 2010 (Exh. CX-150).

38 Resp. Rej. ff 170.

'89Cl, Rep. | 90. Resp. Rej. J 171. Lommatzsch Supp. Stmt., {{ 15. Third Transitory Agreement, October 2011 (Exh.
CX-156).

40 Resp, Rej. ff 171. Cl. Rep. 1 90.

441.Cl, Rep. 1 91. Lommatzsch Supp. Stmt., | 18. Fourth Transitory Agreement, March 2012 (Exh. CX-160). As the

March 2012 Transitory Agreement is in Spanish, Claimant submitted an English translation that was added to the
record as Exh. CX-160(b).

\2 Resp. PHB if 169-171.

31

141.

142.

143.

144.

The relevance of the March 2012 Transitory Agreement and of PdL’s Shareholders’
Agreements is a matter of dispute between the Parties. The Parties’ respective experts, at
request of the Tribunal'**, addressed the corporate governance issue concerning the extent
to which Hochtief’s rights or interests in PdL could lawfully be removed, compromised,
or otherwise materially and adversely affected by a decision of the majority shareholders
in PdL and of any remedies available under Argentine law for the protection of the

interests of minority shareholders'*°.

Claimant contends that the Shareholders’ Agreements have no bearing, as a legal or
factual matter, on the Tribunal’s determination of Hochtief’s Treaty claims or the
damages that should be awarded to Hochtief.'*’According to Claimant, Hochtief has not
waived any claims, and PdL has not compromised, settled or waived any of Hochtief’s

claims in the March 2012 Transitory Agreement. '*

Respondent claims that by PdL signing the March 2012 Transitory Agreement, PdL
accepted, by the majority of its shareholders, the validity of one of the two measures to

which this case relates, the Emergency Law.”

Claimant asserts that Respondent has failed to implement any of the transitory
agreements PdL entered into, and that there has been no comprehensive renegotiation of
the Concession Contract.'° Claimant further asserts that the basic toll rate remains frozen
at the pesified contract rate (where they stood since the Project opened to traffic on 23

May 2013).'*!

 

43 Shareholders’ Agreement, 25 May 1999 (Exh. RA 501).
\44 Shareholders’ Agreement, 11 April 2002. (Exh. RA 502).
45 Tribunal’s letter of 7 January 2013.

446 Nissen Supp. Report, Mata Second Supp. Report, and Mairal Expert Opinion of 1 February 2013.
47 Claimant’s letter of 14 March 2013 1.

48 Cl, PHB {ff 276-279. Claimant’s letter of 14 March 2013 4 11.

49 Resp, PHB if 169, 171.

150 Tbid., | 276.

5! Cl, Mem. 4 247. Cl. Rep. | 92. Lommatzsch Stmt. 157.

32

(K) Insurance provided by the German Government

145. Hochtief received an indemnification under the German Government’s Federal
Guarantees for Direct Investments in Foreign Countries program (Guarantee Policies No.
GKE 3947 of 20 September 1999 and No. GKE 4151 of 6 September 2001), against
political risks'*, in the amount of EUR 11,359,773.20 relating to Hochtief’s capital

contributions to PdL.'*

146. The grounds for requesting compensation under these guarantees were the same as those
of this arbitration: the adoption of regulatory measures implemented by the Argentine
Republic in the beginning of 2002 in connection with the Emergency Law,'™ the non-

disbursement of the IDB loan,'* and the financial aid for 2003.'*°

147. The relevance of these payments to this proceeding is a matter of dispute between the

Parties.

IV. JURISDICTION AND ADMISSIBILITY

148. In its Decision on Jurisdiction dated 24 October 2011, the Tribunal decided by a

majority:

“(i) to reject the Respondent’s submission that the Centre has no
jurisdiction and the Tribunal has no competence over this case;

(ii) to assert that the Centre has jurisdiction and the Tribunal has
competence over this case; and

(iii) to decide upon the question of costs and fees at a later stage, along
with the merits of the dispute.”

'52 Resp, PHB { 233.

153 Cl. PHB J 299. See Letter from PriceWaterhouse Coopers to Hochtief, 7 December 2007 (agreeing to pay
indemnification in the amount of approximately EUR 11.4 million relating to Hochtief’s capital contributions to
PdL) (Exh. CX-142). Resp. PHB { 233.

154 Resp. PHB { 233. Hochtief*s Request for Compensation of 5 March 2007, pp. 2 and 6 (Exh. RA 358) and
Annexes to the Request for Compensation (Exh. RA 473).

155 Resp. PHB { 233. Hochtief’s Request for Compensation of 5 March 2007, p. 2 (Exh. RA 358)

156 Resp. PHB { 233. Hochtief’s Request for Compensation of 5 March 2007, p. 3 (Exh. RA 358)

33

149. The reasoning of the majority in that Decision distinguished between questions of
jurisdiction and questions of admissibility.'°? The Decision settled the question of
jurisdiction in the present case, but did not address questions of the admissibility of each
element of the claims except in so far as that was necessary in the course of the analysis
of the question of jurisdiction. Accordingly, this Decision on Liability begins with an
analysis of the challenges that were raised by Respondent to the admissibility of
Claimant’s case. Those objections fall under five broad headings: (A) matters arising
from the separate personality of PdL; (B) temporal limitations upon the claims; (C)
Claimant’s recovery under political risk insurance; (D) Claimant’s claims qua creditor;

and (E) the ‘Ballast Nedam’ arguments.

(A) The ‘PdL Questions’

150. Respondent raised three arguments that bear upon the admissibility of the claims, and
which are rooted in the relationship between Claimant and PdL. They flow from
Respondent’s contention that this case is based upon Claimant’s allegations that
Respondent acted unlawfully towards PdL as the holder of the Concession and, in

essence, that PdL stood between Claimant and Respondent.

151. Specifically, Respondent argued: (i) that the Tribunal should not admit a claim made by
Claimant in respect of rights that belong to PdL;'** (ii) that the Tribunal should not admit
a claim made by Claimant in respect of measures that were consented to by PdL;'*? and
(iii) that a ruling in favour of Claimant would, in light of the agreement reached between
Respondent and PdL, lead either to double recovery or to recovery by a shareholder
(Claimant) at the expense of the company (PdL) and its other creditors and

shareholders. ©

157 Decision on Jurisdiction, | 90 ff.
158 Resp. Rej. {if 18-24.

59 Resp. PHB { 1.

160 Thid., 4 2.

34

152.

153.

154.

155.

156.

Before turning to these three specific arguments, the Tribunal will set out its analysis of

the relationship between PdL’s rights and Claimant’s rights.

a) _ PdL’s Rights and Hochtief’s Rights

The Tribunal has already decided in the context of its Decision on Jurisdiction that
Hochtief is an investor. It is a shareholder in PdL, and it can bring a claim for any breach
of the terms of the Treaty that has damaged its shareholding in PdL. That follows from
the definition of an ‘investment’ in Article 1.1 of the Treaty, which includes “shares,
stocks in companies and other forms of participation in companies.” But in the present
case all of the alleged breaches arose from Respondent’s conduct in its dealings with
PdL, and not from Respondent’s conduct in its dealings directly with Claimant or other
shareholders in PdL or with their shareholdings. The question is whether that renders

Claimant’s claim inadmissible.

The harm for which Claimant seeks redress is the “losses to Hochtief AG’s investments
in PdL”, to use the words of the title of the LECG First Report, dated 29 April 2010. In
other words, the harm to Claimant alleged to have resulted from Respondent’s breach of
the Treaty is the diminution in the value of Claimant’s investments in PdL caused by

Respondent’s treatment of PdL: it is what is sometimes called ‘reflective loss’.'°!

PdL has signed what might be characterized as a settlement of its claims against
Respondent: the 2012 Transitory Agreement. Respondent argues that the Treaty
obligations were owed to PdL,that any harm suffered was suffered by PdL and that, as a
shareholder in PdL, Claimant has no right to opt out of the settlement accepted by PdL.
On this view, redress has been offered by Respondent and accepted by the injured party,
PdL; and Claimant as a minority shareholder in that injured party is bound by that

settlement.

Were those the only material facts there would be a strong argument for concluding that
Claimant has no basis to protect its rights and interests as a minority shareholder in PdL

by rejecting the settlement that was reached by a majority of PdL shareholders with

'6! See the LECG Report, 29 April 2010, {44 and Executive Summary, { 1.

35

157.

158.

159.

Respondent and pursuing a separate claim. This is the conclusion that would appear
almost axiomatic from the perspective of company law. Anyone who invests as a
minority shareholder runs the risk that the decisions properly taken by majority
shareholders will be undesirable, or even inimical, to them: that is a consequence of

shareholder democracy, and a price of being a minority shareholder.

In the present case, however, the analysis does not focus on the question of whether the
company — PdL — is a separate legal entity (which it plainly is) and on what rights are
held as a matter of Argentine law by the company and what rights are held by Claimant
as a shareholder. The analysis starts instead with the question of what rights Claimant has
as a matter of treaty law as an investor under the BIT; and that question must be
addressed within the particular context of the BIT, and not by proceeding from principles
of municipal company law, no matter how widely or how firmly those municipal law
principles are established or may otherwise be relevant to issues of corporate governance
that may arise in the course of considering a treaty claim. In this context, the Tribunal

attaches particular importance to two material facts.

First, the initial investment was made by members of a consortium, which bid for the
Project as a consortium. The Concession was awarded by Respondent to that consortium:
not to PdL or to some other single company, but to the members of the Consortium. The
incorporation of PdL was required by the terms of the bid offer in order to implement the

terms of the Concession.

The Concession Contract!

was signed by each one of the Consortium members,
including Claimant, on 28 January 1998. The Ministry, too, signed on that day, and time
then started to run on the obligations under the Concession Contract.'®? The Tribunal
considers that the investment was made no later than that date, and that the Claimant’s
own investment at that time took the form of the obligations under the Concession
Contract accepted by Claimant in return for the right to participate in the Consortium

Project as agreed with the Respondent.

162 Exh, CX-32.
'63 Cf, Villagi’s Testimony, Tr. Day 4, p. 725.

36

160.

161.

162.

163.

164.

Claimant’s rights as an investor were at that time its own rights in relation to the Project
as a member of the Consortium, and not its rights gua shareholder in PdL; and
Respondent’s obligations to Claimant under the BIT date from that time. Among

Claimant’s rights at that time was the right to be treated fairly and equitably.

PdL was incorporated on 1 April 1998; and on 17 June 1998 all the rights and duties set
out in the Concession Contract were transferred by and from the Consortium to PdL (‘the
transfer’). '64 On 17 June 1998, as a result of the transfer, Claimant’s investment changed

its legal form; but Claimant nonetheless continued to hold an investment in Argentina.

This is not a case where the State has dealt with a single company throughout the relevant
time, and a claimant shareholder has subsequently emerged from behind a hitherto-intact
corporate veil and announced that it is seeking redress for alleged injuries to the

company.

Nor is this a case where it can be said that Claimant is trying to obtain the benefits —
chiefly, limited liability — of the corporate form while seeking to avoid its disadvantages.
The Concession Contract itself ensured that the Consortium members would secure the
transfer to PdL of what the Parties to the Concession Contract regarded as adequate
financial resources for the Project, so that the incorporation of PdL cannot be regarded as

an improper attempt to avoid financial liability.

Secondly, the Concession Contract itself (in Article 5.2) stipulated that PdL would
assume all obligations and rights of the Consortium members under the Concession
Contract. Both Respondent and Claimant entered into the Project knowing that for the
purposes of pursuing the Project PdL would be the vehicle and the nominal actor, while
behind PdL the commercial interests would remain in the hands of the individual
members of the Consortium. The legal form of the investments would change; but the

underlying commercial reality would not.

14 Exh, CX-36; Exh. RA 126.

37

165. It is plainly possible in circumstances such as these to transfer to a locally-incorporated
corporation all of the substantive contractual rights (here, the rights under the Concession
Contract) initially held individually by the investors who collectively own that locally-
incorporated corporation. Indeed, that is what was done when PdL was established.
Equally, the Tribunal does not doubt that in the context of BIT rights a State and an
investor can, by agreement between them, extinguish the right of an investor, as a
member of a consortium, to take action in its own name to enforce against the State the
rights that it had previously possessed under the BIT.'® But the question here is different.
It is whether the individual investors can transfer to the local corporation their rights
under an applicable BIT'® to protect their substantive rights under the Concession

Contract; and if so, whether they did so transfer their rights.

166. It is evident that there can be no simple substitution of PdL for the individual Consortium
members. In the present circumstances, for example, the transfer could not confer upon
PdL (an Argentine company most of whose shares were owned by investors of other,
non-German nationalities) the rights that the Germany-Argentina BIT conferred on
German companies, including the Claimant. That effect cannot be brought about within
the provisions of the Germany-Argentina BIT. At most, the procedural rights of the
Consortium members under the BIT could be extinguished, and supplanted by whatever

procedural rights were available to PdL.

167. There is no evidence that Claimant’s rights under the BIT were extinguished here. There
is no indication in the terms of the invitation to bid, or in the Concession Contract, or in
the various unimplemented settlement agreements, that the legal right and capacity of
each investor under an applicable BIT to sue to uphold its substantive BIT rights was
altogether extinguished by the very fact of the creation of PdL. Section 5.2 of the
Concession Contract refers only to the assumption by PdL of “all obligations, liabilities

and rights hereunder as well as all loans and guarantees applied for and obtained by the

'65 The rights in question under the BIT are those of the investor, so that there is no question of an attempt by an
investor to waive the right of its national State to exercise diplomatic protection on its behalf.

166 Of all of the Consortium members, Hochtief alone was German. The balance of the Consortium therefore had no
rights under the Germany-Argentina BIT.

38

168.

169.

170.

171.

167

Successful Bidder in connection herewith” (emphasis added). Rights and obligations
under the Concession Contract were transferred to PdL: but there is no provision that
purports to transfer to PdL Claimant’s rights and obligations under the Germany-

Argentina (or any other) BIT or to extinguish such treaty rights.

The Tribunal accordingly considers that Claimant retains its standing to bring claims in
respect of the treatment of its shareholding in PdL in a situation such as the present,
where (i) the investment was clearly made at a date before the establishment of PdL and
the Claimant acquired rights under the BIT at that date, and (ii) the bidding terms
required the transfer of consortium rights to a company to be established and maintained
for the purpose of holding the concession rights so transferred, and (iii) the actual
commercial obligations (of financing, of commitment of materials, technology, labour
and skills, and of organization of work, etc) remained unchanged by the transfer of rights
to PdL, and (iv) there is no evidence that the Claimant had waived or renounced its rights

of action against Respondent under the BIT.

This is the general reason in principle why the Tribunal does not regard the claims in this
case as inadmissible by reason of Respondent’s arguments based upon the separate legal

personalities of Claimant and of PdL.

Against the background of this explanation of its reasoning, the Tribunal now turns to the

three specific arguments noted in paragraph [151] above.

@ Claimant’s investment as shareholder in PdL,

The Tribunal will first address the argument that the Tribunal should not admit a claim
made by Claimant in respect of rights that belong to PdL. As was noted in the Decision
on Jurisdiction,'® Article 1(1)(b) of the BIT is unequivocal in stipulating that an

investment includes “Shares, stocks in companies and other forms of participation in

Decision on Jurisdiction, J 115.

39

172.

173.

174.

175.

168 This

 

companies.” !*

Further, the Protocol to the BIT specifies that the definition of an
investment includes “specifically those capital investments that do not entitle their

holders to voting or control rights.”!©? Minority shareholdings are thus clearly included.

Claimant owns 26% of the shares in PdL and is plainly entitled to bring a claim in respect

of that shareholding, !”

which constitutes an ‘investment’ in Argentina within the
meaning of the BIT. The question of the extent of those rights — the question of precisely
what rights attach to the shareholding — is distinct; and it is raised also by the second of

the arguments distinguished in paragraph [151], above.

It is said that under Article 5 of the Concession Contract, Claimant assigned to PdL all of
its rights and obligations in respect of the Project, and that Claimant therefore retains no
rights for which it can seek protection under the BIT. The Tribunal does not accept that

argument.

The rights and obligations under the Concession Contract may belong to PdL to the
exclusion of the Claimant; but the claim in this case is not made in order to vindicate any
of those rights but in order to vindicate rights under the BIT that attach to Claimant’s
investment in the shares of PdL. The precise extent of PdL’s own rights and obligations
under the Concession Contract will plainly affect the value of Claimant’s investment in
the shares of PdL; but, whatever the extent of PdL’s rights under the Concession Contract
may be, Claimant as a shareholder in PdL has an interest in the shares of PdL which it is

entitled to protect under the BIT.

(ii) PdL and the March 2012 Transitory Agreement

The second argument is that the Tribunal should not admit a claim made by Claimant in
respect of measures that were consented to by PdL. This argument focuses not on the

initial assignment of rights by Claimant to PdL but on PdL’s subsequent agreement with

is the English translation in the United Nations Treaty Series (‘UNTS’). Vol. 1910, at p. 198. The English

translations submitted by the Parties differ in certain details from that in the UNTS, but the Tribunal has examined
the authentic German and Spanish texts and is satisfied that there are no material differences.
169 Protocol, Ad Section 1(c).

10 Which distinguishes the situation in this case from that in Barcelona Traction: see Resp. PHB, { 54.

40

176.

177.

178.

179.

180.

the Respondent on the settlement of outstanding claims, in the March 2012 Transitory

Agreement (‘Acuerdo Transitorio’).!7!

Respondent’s argument here is that since PdL held all of the rights that were allegedly
violated, PdL was competent, and PdL alone was competent, to agree upon a settlement
of any and all claims concerning the violation of those rights, and that PdL did so in the

March 2012 Transitory Agreement. !7

For its part, Claimant asserts that the March 2012 Transitory Agreement has not been

implemented, and in any event contains no waiver of its Treaty claims.!”

At this point in the analysis we are concerned only with the question whether the
argument is applicable as a bar to the admissibility of the claims in this case. We are not
concerned at this stage with the question of the implications of PdL’s signature of the
March 2012 Transitory Agreement for the substantive question of Respondent's liability:

that is a merits question, not a preliminary question of admissibility.

Whatever those implications might be, PdL’s signature of the March 2012 Transitory
Agreement cannot operate in limine to bar the admissibility of the claim and prevent its
consideration by the Tribunal. Claimant contends that PdL was not entitled to settle
claims concerning the violation of Claimant’s rights, and that it was unfair and
inequitable of Respondent to purport to settle those rights of Claimant by means of its
agreement with PdL. That contention is put forward by Claimant in respect of its
investment in PdL. It is a contention that Claimant is entitled to have considered, and

which can be appraised only in the context of a consideration of the merits of the case.

(iii) | ‘Double Recovery’; Claimant’s profits as construction contractor

Third, Respondent argues that there is a possibility of double recovery.'”* Even assuming

that such a possibility exists, however, that is a matter concerning the remedy rather than

"71 See above, 155.

12 Resp. PHB ff 42-55.
"3 Tbid., | 276 — 279.
174 Resp. PHB 2.

4l

181.

182.

183.

the claim. It is not a bar to the admissibility of a claim — unless, perhaps, it arises as an
aspect of an argument based upon the principle of res judicata, which is not the case here.
To the extent that there may be a possibility of double recovery, that is a matter to be
taken into account in the context of the need to prove and to quantify loss, and in the
drafting of any Order by the Tribunal. The Tribunal accordingly rejects this objection to

the admissibility of the claim.

Similarly, Respondent submits that the fact that Claimant derived benefits from its
involvement in the actual construction of the highway and bridge bears upon the
admissibility of its claim.'> The Tribunal does not consider that submission to have any
legal basis. The fact that an investor has earned profits in the capacity of a contractor
working on the physical construction of the project in question cannot operate to bar the
admissibility of that investor’s claim, although it may bear upon the merits of the claim
and / or upon questions of quantum. The Tribunal accordingly rejects this objection to the

admissibility of the claim.

(B) The temporal limits of the dispute

Over the course of the proceedings, Hochtief supplemented its claims by reference to the
continued unfolding of events in Argentina. Respondent asks the Tribunal to limit its
consideration to the claims as they stood at 18 December 2007, which is the date of the
registration of the Request for Arbitration (the Request for Arbitration itself being dated 5
November 2007).!7°

The Tribunal considers it to be axiomatic that the scope of the claims that Respondent is
called upon to answer is fixed by the terms of the Request for Arbitration and the

Submissions set out in the Memorial. Subject to the possibility of the making of ancillary

"5 Resp, Rej., {if 13, 183-186, 194-196; Sandleris and Schargrodsky Valuation Report, {{ 5, 43, 104; Sandleris and
Schargrodsky Supplementary Valuation Report, {| 24, 138-139, 269, where the experts observed that Hochtief had

faile
phas

d to provide access to information pertaining to the revenues it received as a contractor during the construction
e.

"6 Resp. PHB, 231.

42

184.

185.

'"7 those instruments define

claims arising directly out of the subject-matter of the dispute,
the case that the Respondent has to answer, and the case in respect of which Preliminary
Objections must be made.!’8 No ancillary claims have been made in this case; and the
difference between the date of the Request for Arbitration and the date of its registration
by ICSID is not material. Nor is there any suggestion that the scope of the claims as set

out in the Memorial differs from that set out in the Request for Arbitration.

As long as the claims remain within the limits thus described, the facts that a tribunal
may take into account in order to decide the claims are not confined to those facts that
occurred prior to the date of the signature or registration of the Request for Arbitration
and / or the Memorial. The guantum claimed may clearly need to be updated in the light
of later events; and even matters bearing upon liability may be affected by developments
up to the date of the hearing — for example, if action by the Respondent amounts to timely
reparation for an earlier action that had caused injury to the Claimant.'”? As long as
Respondent has been given a proper opportunity to respond to all factual allegations, the
consideration of events occurring after the filing of the Request for Arbitration and the
Memorial is permissible, and it will be for the Tribunal to determine the relevance of
such references for the claims that are properly before it. Respondent had that opportunity
to respond in the present case. This appears not to be contested.'*? This objection to the

admissibility of the claims is accordingly dismissed.

Claimant’s political risk insurance

Respondent asserts that on 7 December 2007, the German Government agreed to pay
Claimant EUR 11,359 million under a political risk insurance policy that covered the

losses encompassed within the claims made in the present case, and that in consequence,

"77 ICSID Convention Article 46; ICSID Arbitration Rules (2006), Rule 40.

178 ICSID Convention Articles 36, 41; ICSID Rules (2006), Rule 41.

"79 See, for example, Swisslion DOO Skopje v Macedonia (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/16), Award, 6 July 2012, 1
3

133-139.

'89 See Resp. PHB, {fff 231- 232.

43

by virtue of Article 6 of the BIT, Germany is now subrogated to the rights of Hochtief so

that Claimant can no longer pursue its claim. '*!

186. The Tribunal does not agree with that analysis. Article 6 is phrased in terms that do not
require that the insuring State succeed to and extinguish the rights of the insured investor
once payment is made on the insurance policy. Much less does Article 6 itself bring about
that legal result. Article 6 merely obliges the respondent State to recognize or admit
(‘reconocerd, ‘erkennt’) such a transfer of rights if and when the transfer is in fact
effected by provision of law or by a legal act. In the present case no such transfer has
been shown to have occurred. The Tribunal accordingly dismisses this objection to the

admissibility of the claim.

(D) Claimant’s claims as creditor

(i) Article 22.2 of the Concession Contract

187. Respondent raises objections to the elements of the claim that arise from Claimant’s
position as a creditor of PdL. The first objection concerns Article 22.2 of the Concession
Contract.'*? Respondent submits that this provision bars claims against Argentina by
lenders to PdL, despite the arbitration clause in the Treaty.'** In so far as the claims in
this case relate to Claimant’s loans to PdL, it is said that the claims are made by Claimant

as a creditor of PdL.
188. Article 22.2 provides that:

“Loans entered into by the Successful Bidder and Concessionaire, as the
case may be, to finance the construction, maintenance and operation of the
Project shall not be secured by Grantor, nor shall the lenders be entitled to
any claim against Grantor or the Provinces, all of which shall be indicated
in the relevant agreements.”

8! [bid., 4 233.
2 Exh, RA 12.
83 Resp, Rej. 214, 275; Resp. PHB { 19.

44

The evident purpose of Article 22.2 of the Concession Contract is to limit the extent of
Respondent’s liability for loans procured by the Concessionaire. It is a means of ensuring
that the State (the Grantor) makes its agreed financial contribution to the Project and that
thereafter it faces no further financial exposure: it is for the concessionaire, through what
was plainly expected to be a mix of equity and loan financing, to contribute the remaining
finance needed for the Project. It may be that Article 22.2 was drafted with third party
lenders, rather than inter-company loans, in mind. But the provision does not express any
such limitation upon its scope of application, and the majority of the Tribunal sees no

basis for reading such a limitation into Article 22.2.'*+

189. Article 22.2 provides that lenders are not entitled to “any claim against the Grantor or the
Provinces.” The question is whether “any claim” includes both claims under the law
applicable to the loan contract and claims under the BIT. ‘Any claim’ means, on the face
of it, any claim. The precise legal basis of a claim is not material. The question is whether

this is effective to bar BIT claims.

190. It is necessary to decide if an investor can be bound by an agreement with a host State
that it will not invoke the protection of the Treaty in relation to a limited and specified
range of issues. In the present case, the issues in question are loans by Claimant to PdL,
which are legal arrangements to which Respondent is not a party, and whose terms were

not agreed by Respondent.

191. The Tribunal considers that there is no legal reason why effect should not be given to an
agreement between an investor and a host State either to limit the rights of the investor or
to oblige the investor not to pursue any remedies, including its BIT remedies, in certain
circumstances. Such an agreement does not purport to alter the terms of the Treaty. Nor
does it necessarily purport to bar action in respect of extant responsibilities of the
Grantor: it may constitute an agreement by a particular investor to limit the range of

matters for which the Grantor carries the risk and responsibility. It may also be regarded

184 Tt is noted that other sections of the Concession Contract, such as Sections 11.1 and 11.3, do expressly provide
for the position of third parties.

45

192.

193.

194.

185

as an agreement by the investor not to rely upon certain treaty provisions and extant

rights in the specified circumstances.

The majority of the Tribunal considers that Article 22.2 is such a provision, and that it
operates so as to bar “any claim”, including claims under the Treaty, by a signatory to the
Concession Contract, such as Claimant, against the Respondent in so far as the claim is
made by the signatory in its capacity as a lender. Neither the Concession Contract nor the
BIT contains any provision that expressly nullifies Article 22.2 or subordinates it to the
protections afforded by the Treaty. The Concession Contract is governed by Argentine
law,'®> and there is no suggestion that Argentine law imposes any such nullification or

subordination upon Article 22.2.

In the view of the majority, Article 22.2 takes effect so as to limit the range of matters for
which the Grantor carries the risk and responsibility. Under the Concession Contract, the
Grantor was to provide a subsidy to the Project and once that subsidy was paid in full, the
Grantor bore no further financial exposure. In the case of loans, the parties to the
Concession Contract agreed that the Lender and the Successful Bidder and
Concessionaire, and not the Grantor, should carry that business risk and responsibility.
The Successful Bidder and Concessionaire agreed in the Concession Contract that the
Grantor will not carry any liability to any lender for any loans covered by Article 22. In
this way, the Concession Contract underlined the basic principle that, having paid the
totality of its promised subsidy, Respondent had no further financial exposure: the
obligation to arrange finance for the Project lay with the Successful Bidder and
Concessionaire, whether by capital contributions, third-party loans, inter-company loans

or other arrangements made by the Successful Bidder and Concessionaire.

Article 22.2 relates only to claims made by ‘lenders’, which the Tribunal understands to
mean claims made by lenders in their capacity as such, relying upon their rights under the
relevant loan agreement. The Tribunal accordingly decides, by a majority, that claims

made in this arbitration by Claimant in its capacity as a lender to PdL are precluded by

Concession Contract, Article 35.1; and the Bilateral Investment Treaty, Article 10(5).

46

195.

196.

197.

198.

the terms of Article 22.2 of the Concession Contract. When valuing Claimant’s interests
as a shareholder in PdL, however, it will take into account all of the inter-company loans
made by Claimant in the same way that all other financial transactions are counted on the
balance sheet as corporate assets or liabilities of PdL; but they will not be counted as

individual interests of particular lenders.

(ii) Conformity of the loans with Argentine financial regulations

Respondent argues further that Claimant’s loan transactions were not all recorded as
required by Argentine financial regulations,'*° and that the loans were accordingly not
made in accordance with the laws and regulations of Argentina and are excluded from the

scope of the Treaty protection by Article 2(2) of the Treaty. !87

Given the Tribunal’s prior finding, strictly speaking it is not necessary to dispose of this
objection. However, the Tribunal will make a few comments because the questions raised

by the objection are important ones.
Article 2(2) reads as follows:

“Investments made by nationals or companies of either Contracting Party

in the territory of the other Contracting Party in accordance with the laws

and regulations of the latter Party shall enjoy full protection under this

Treaty.”'88
Claimant suggested that the loans were not subject to the reporting requirement because
PdL was not a financial institution. Respondent did not accept that view; but the Parties
did not adduce expert evidence focused on the regulatory requirements, nor did they
make detailed submissions on the legal consequences of any failure to make reports
required by Argentine regulations. It is also notable that Respondent did not suggest that
the loans violated Argentine law in any respect other than a failure to fulfil the reporting

requirement that was said to apply to them.

186 Respondent maintains that Claimant reported only one foreign-currency loan transaction to the Argentine Central
Bank: Resp. PHB {[ 21; Exh. RA 451.

187 See Tr., Day 11, pp. 2694 - 2695.

188 English translation from the version in vol. 1910 of the United Nations Treaty Series.

47

199.

200.

201.

202.

The Tribunal notes that in previous cases, tribunals have focused upon compliance with
“fundamental principles of the host State’s law”.!*° This Tribunal considers that to be the
correct focus when the question is addressed in the context of questions of jurisdiction
and admissibility. Investments that are forbidden, or dependent upon government
approvals that were not in fact obtained, or which were effected by fraud or corruption
can be caught by a provision such as Article 2(2) of the Argentina-Germany BIT. But
not every technical infraction of a State’s regulations associated with an investment will
operate so as to deprive that investment of the protection of a Treaty that contains such a

provision.

Having considered the facts in the present case, and the submissions of the Parties on this
point, the Tribunal does not consider that there is a sufficient basis for rejecting the
claims concerning the loans on the basis of their non-registration under Argentine
regulations. This decision concerning the effect of the alleged breaches of reporting
requirements in Argentina’s financial regulations on the question of the admissibility of
the claims is, however, taken without prejudice to the possibility that such breaches
might, by virtue of Article 2(2) of the Treaty, limit the substantive rights enjoyed by the

Claimant.

The Tribunal’s decision concerning the admissibility of claims in respect of Claimant’s
loans to PdL thus remains based upon the majority decision concerning Article 22.2 of
the Concession Contract, as explained above. The Tribunal accordingly concludes, by a
majority, that claims made by Claimant in its capacity as a lender to PdL are inadmissible

in this arbitration.

The ‘Ballast Nedam’ argument

Ballast Nedam, a Netherlands company, was part of a joint venture (with Boskalis

International BV, another Netherlands company) which was the main subcontractor of

'8 The term used in Desert Line Projects LLC v. Republic of Yemen (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/17), Award, 6
February 2008, { 104, citing Inceysa Vallisoletana S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/26)
and Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Philippines (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25).

48

203.

204.

205.

206.

PdL on the Rosario-Victoria Project. Respondent argues that Claimant attempted to
conceal the true nature and extent of its relationship with Ballast Nedam, as part of a plan
to recover as much as possible of its investment in Argentina by means that would remain

outside the purview of this arbitration and the sight of this Tribunal.

In essence, Respondent suggests that Claimant had a financial interest as a shareholder in
Ballast Nedam, and that Ballast Nedam colluded in threatening to force PdL into
insolvency in order to put pressure on Respondent to provide financial benefits to PdL.
Further, there is some suggestion that the plan was that Ballast Nedam, in its ostensible
capacity as a third-party creditor of PdL, would recover sums from PdL which would

enure to the benefit its shareholders, including Claimant.

Respondent argues that these arrangements and plans amount to an improper attempt by
Claimant to mislead observers, including the Tribunal, as to the real economic interests in
play in this case.!°° It argues that Claimant should, in consequence, be deprived of the

protection of the Treaty by having its claim declared inadmissible.

The facts underlying these allegations and arguments are complex. They also emerged at
a late stage: Respondent asserts that it was only on the fifth day of the merits hearing that
it became aware that Claimant held 48% of the shares in Ballast Nedam.!*! The matter
was, however, addressed during that hearing and in post-hearing submissions, and the
Tribunal is satisfied that it has sufficient information on this matter for the purposes of

reaching a decision in this arbitration.

The Tribunal considers that the principles governing the admissibility of claims are
rooted not only in the notion of a claim that is inherently ripe and properly made, but also
in the proper administration of justice. Admissibility is concerned both with the claim
itself and with the arbitral process. In a case where an allegation of impropriety, made in
the context of a plea of inadmissibility, is based upon facts that are inextricably bound up

with the range of facts upon which the substantive claim is based, it will usually not be

19 Resp. PHB ¥] 99-157.
"1 bid., 99.

49

207.

208.

Vv.

209.

210.

192
45-

practicable to decide upon the question as a preliminary issue. If the tribunal has

jurisdiction to hear the case, it should in such circumstances do so. 192

The Tribunal considers this to be the case in these proceedings, and accordingly rejects
the argument that the claim be dismissed in limine on the ground that it is inadmissible

because of the relationship between Claimant and Ballast Nedam.

(F) CONCLUSIONS ON ADMISSIBILITY

For the reasons given above, the Tribunal, having already determined (by a majority)
that it has jurisdiction over the claims in this case, rejects all except one of the objections
to their admissibility. That one exception concerns claims made in this arbitration by
Claimant in its capacity as a lender to PdL: these are precluded by the terms of Article
22.2 of the Concession Contract. The Tribunal will identify the precise scope of those
‘creditor claims’ at the points in its analysis where the matter arises and can most clearly

be addressed.

MERITS

Claimant invokes several provisions of the Treaty: (A) Fair and Equitable Treatment
(‘FET’) under Article 2(1) of the Treaty); (B) Full Protection and Security, under Articles
2(1) and 4(1)); (C) Expropriation (Article 4(2)); (D) the ‘observance of obligations’ or
‘Umbrella Clause’ (Article 7(2)); (E) Arbitrary or Discriminatory Measures (Article
2(3)). In addition, Claimant asserts (F) that Respondent breached binding unilateral

declarations in violation of international law. These are considered in turn.

It may assist in the reading of the following paragraphs to say at this point that, in broad
terms, the majority of the Tribunal has decided that the initial steps taken by Argentina to
address the financial crisis by the pesification process do not amount in themselves to a
violation of the Treaty but that Argentina’s failure to renegotiate the contract with PdL,

as provided for in Argentine law, in a timely and final fashion does amount to a breach of

Cf., the approach of the International Court of Justice to this general issue: Avena, I.C.J. Reports 2004, p. 12, 19

47.

50

211.

212.

213.

214.

the FET standard, for which reparation is due. Argentina’s actions in respect of the
payment of the Subsidy agreed with PdL do not amount to a breach of the FET standard.
The terms of the ‘Emergency Loan’ made by Argentina to PdL, however, are not
compatible with the FET standard. The Tribunal does not find that any other independent
breaches of the BIT have been established.

(A) FAIR AND EQUITABLE TREATMENT: Article 211)

 

The claim based upon the FET principle has four components, each based upon a
different aspect of conduct for which Respondent is said by Claimant to be responsible.
They are (1) the failure to pay the Subsidy on time; (2) the ‘pesification process’; (3) the
‘Emergency Loan’; and (4) the failed renegotiation attempts. These are considered in

turn.

a) The failure to pay the Subsidy on time

A central element of Claimant’s case is the argument that Respondent failed to make the
Subsidy payments as and when they were due; that this failure violated the fair and
equitable treatment (“FET”) provision in the Treaty; and that this violation caused
Claimant financial loss. The Subsidy was intended to finance the first stages of the
Project up to a capped amount, with the balance to be financed by the Concessionaire.!*°
According to the Concession Contract, the Subsidy was to be paid out in full, in
scheduled monthly instalments, before the duty to finance the continuation and

completion of the Project passed across to the Concessionaire. !+

It is not disputed that there were in fact delays in the payment of the scheduled

instalments of the Subsidy.

Respondent’s position is that the acknowledged delays do not constitute a breach of the

Treaty because (i) Respondent complied with its contractual obligations by paying

3 Resp. Rej., 14.
'°4 Concession Contract, §7.2; Final Technical Document (Exh. CX-33), §36.2.

51

215.

216.

217.

218.

interest in respect of those delays,'*> and (ii) the obligations were a purely contractual

matter and a breach of them could not rise to the level of a breach of the Treaty.!°°

It is evident that, in this part of its claim, what Claimant relies on to establish a breach of
its rights under the Treaty is the alleged breach by Respondent of an obligation based in
contract. Respondent was initially under no obligation other than the obligation under the
Concession Contract to make those Subsidy payments. There is no suggestion that PdL
was without access to the normal legal procedures for the enforcement of contracts.
Moreover, Respondent paid interest on the late instalments in accordance with the

Contract. !°”

Contractual breaches are not ipso facto treaty breaches

The Tribunal does not consider that a contractual breach necessarily amounts to a breach
of the Treaty’s FET standard. In the particular circumstances of the present case, having
regard to the 2000 Acta Acuerdo and to the payment by Respondent of interest in respect
of delays in the payment of instalments of the Subsidy, the Tribunal does not consider
that Respondent’s failures to meet the contractual dates for payments of the Subsidy rise

to the level of a violation of the FET standard.

Claimant argues that the FET standard requires more than the ‘minimum standard’ of
protection prescribed by customary international law, and that it requires ‘stability,
predictability and consistency’ and the protection of an investor’s ‘legitimate

expectations’ .!°8

In Waste Management II the tribunal (there addressing the FET standard in NAFTA
Article 1105) said that even the persistent non-payment of contractual debts by a
municipality was not to be equated with a violation of Article 1105, provided that it did

not amount to “an outright and unjustified repudiation of the transaction and provided

95 Resp. C-M. {if 117, 135; Resp. PHB { 10.
96 Resp. C-M. {ff 388- 389.

57 Resp. PHB 4 10.

8 Cl, Rep. 4 188-206.

52

219.

220.

221.

that some remedy is open to the creditor to address the problem.”!°? The Waste
Management II tribunal observed that otherwise the treaty “would become a mechanism
of equal resort for debt collections and analogous purposes in respect to all public

(including municipal) contracts, which does not seem to be its purpose.”?

This Tribunal agrees with the approach taken in the Waste Management IT award. The
Tribunal is mindful of the controversy concerning the precise definition and content of
the FET standard. The Treaty does not define the FET standard, and the decisions of
other tribunals (to which both Parties referred) are not in themselves binding sources of
international law.?°! But the Tribunal notes that the threshold for a treaty breach set by
Waste Management II is representative of the approach taken by investment tribunals to
this question, and agrees that this is the proper approach to the interpretation of the FET
obligation. The Waste Management II approach is particularly apposite in a case where
the treaty breach is said to be constituted by a breach of contract. The conduct in this case

falls, in the view of the Tribunal, very clearly short of a violation of that threshold.

That is sufficient reason for dismissing the claim that the failure to pay the instalments of
the Subsidy on time violated Claimant’s Treaty right to Fair and Equitable treatment; and

it is not necessary to consider additional arguments leading to the same conclusion.

The wider consequences of late subsidy payments did not cause the collapse of the
Project

It might be argued that although the simple failure to pay Subsidy instalments according
to the contractual timetable is not a breach of the FET standard under the BIT, the late
payment of the Subsidy caused the failure of the first IDB loan disbursement,” and that
this had a domino effect that led to the problems encountered by the Project, and that

these wider consequences constituted a breach of the FET standard.

189 Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3), Award, 30 April 2004, 4
115; and cf., ibid., | 98. (Waste Management Il)

200 Phid., | 116.
201 Resp. C-M. i 335-339. Cl. Rep., {41 196-203. Such decisions are only “subsidiary means for the determination of

rules of law.’

22 See letter from PdL to IDB dated 26 February 2001 (Exh. CX-166).

53

222.

223.

224.

The Tribunal does not understand the evidence in that way. It does not consider that
Claimant has shown that it was the delay in paying the Subsidy that caused the IBD to
withdraw its support. On the contrary, it considers that the evidence on the record
strongly points to the fact that there were “many issues” that prevented the IBD from

disbursing the loan in the manner anticipated by the Consortium.

Particularly significant, in the view of the Tribunal, were the doubts generated by the
results of a traffic study undertaken in 2001 (well prior to the enactment of the

Emergency Law) with a view to confirming the financial projections that had been made

by PdL to support its application for the loan.?° A traffic study was deemed to be

critically important to disbursing the loan proceeds because it would assist the lending
parties in ascertaining the prospects of their being repaid if they were to permit the loan
to be disbursed. The IDB thus explicitly made its offer of finance subject to there being
“no material adverse change in the financial condition, operations or prospects of the

Rosario-Victoria Bridge Project prior to the execution of ... final commitment by the

Bank.”204

The position is well illustrated by the terms of the letter from the IDB to PdL dated 28

February 2002.?°> That letter is sufficiently important to warrant its quotation in full:

“Thank you for your letter dated February 1, 2002, in which you outline
your concerns regarding the disbursement of the loan from the Bank and
its participating banks. We can assure you that the Bank has employed
good faith efforts. We have tried to address in a mutually satisfactory
manner among all parties the various issues that have been identified over
the course of negotiating the remaining documentation and the satisfaction
of the Conditions Precedent for disbursement. Therefore, it is unfortunate
that all of our efforts have been perceived by Puentes del Littoral and its
Sponsors as simply delay tactics.

2°3 Letter from the IDB to the President of PdL, dated 28 February 2002: Lommatzsch Stmt., Exh. R. Article 5 of the
IDB loan agreement with PdL (Exh. CX-46) set out the conditions precedent to disbursement, which included
(Section 5.1.(t) ) the delivery to IDB of a traffic study demonstrating that the Debt Service Coverage Ration
following Technical Completion would be not less than 1.5 at any time.

204 IDB letter to Financial Director, Impregilo S.p.A. and General Manager PdL, dated 4 August 1999 (Exh. RA

143).

205 Exh. CX-70.

54

225.

226.

As_you_are_ aware, the Loan Agreement executed in July of 2000
contemplated that certain financial projections had to be confirmed at the
time of the disbursement by a traffic study. The results of the traffic study
called into question the Company’s economic and financial viability. The
Bank has undertaken considerable effort to restructure the financial plan to
address this issue. Moreover, all of the Bank’s and the Borrower’s hard
work to ensure the Borrower’s compliance with the Disbursement
Conditions have been further complicated by the enactment of the
Emergency Law No. 25561 by the Argentine government on January 6,
2002 (the “Emergency Law”) as well as other related governmental
measures. At a minimum, the Emergency Law has complicated the
Borrower’s ability to meet a number of Disbursement Conditions.

Following the successful re-negotiation of the Concession Agreement, the
Bank and the participating banks will be in a better position to evaluate the
Company’s economic and financial viability. In this regard, we have just
received your proposal of February 27, 2002, are in the process of
analysing it and will revert to you shortly.

As_we_have_indicated_on numerous occasions, we would welcome
reaching a conclusion with the Borrower and the Sponsors regarding the
many _issues_that have _prevented_the Bank from disbursing to
date.””°°[Emphasis added.]

 

 

The Tribunal draws from this letter the conclusions: (i) that not only the non-payment of
the Subsidy but “many issues”, including in particular the results of the traffic study, led
the IDB not to make the disbursements of the loan as planned, (ii) that the position was at
that time recoverable and that the IDB remained willing to make loans to the Project,

albeit on renegotiated terms,2””

and (iii) that the one act of Respondent that was
particularly identified as further complicating disbursement was not the non-fulfilment of
the planned timetable to Subsidy payments but rather the adoption of the Emergency Law

and related governmental measures.

The Tribunal accordingly considers that the failure to pay the Subsidy on time did not

violate the FET standard established by the BIT. The Emergency Law and other measures

206 Letter from the IDB to the President of PdL, dated 28 February 2002: Lommatzsch Stmt., Exh. R. A similar
impression was given in the evidence of Mr Martin Bes, the only witness with direct knowledge of what transpired
within the IDB in relation to PdL: see Tr., Day 11, pp. 2604-2612.

207 Tt may also be noted that even in Section 6 of the ‘Financial Aid’ Loan signed on 21 February 2003, it was still
envisaged that the IDB might make a loan to PdL (Exh. CX-78).

55

227.

228.

229.

adopted during the ‘pesification process’ are considered in the next section of this

Decision.

The Claimant’s inability to demonstrate that the late payments were in themselves a
breach of the FET standard, or that the late payments caused the collapse of the Project, is
sufficient reason for dismissing the claim that the failure to pay the instalments of the
Subsidy on time violated Claimant’s Treaty right to Fair and Equitable treatment. It is not

necessary to consider additional arguments leading to the same conclusion.

Respondent’s argument based on Claimant’s alleged breach of contract

For the sake of completeness, it should be said that Respondent also asserts, by way of a
defence, that PdL acted in bad faith and was itself in breach of its contractual obligations
in the performance of the Concession Contract, notably by failing to obtain the Firm and
Irrevocable Financing Agreements (variously described as ‘FIFAs’ or ‘AFFIs’) required
by Section 22.1.a) of the Concession Contract.?°* Respondent says that Claimant was

consequently not entitled to rely upon its rights under the Concession Contract.

The Tribunal notes that in Clause 1 of the Acta Acuerdo of 20 October 2000, Respondent
agreed to deem “the obligation under Section 22.1.a) of the Concession Agreement to
have been fully met.”?°? The 2000 Acta Acuerdo was a settlement of the dispute between
the Parties as to whether or not PdL had provided the necessary FIFAs; and the effect of
the settlement is that as between Respondent and Claimant, Claimant cannot be regarded
by Respondent as being in breach of Section 22.1.a). In making this finding, the Tribunal
rejects the Respondent’s objections to the Tribunal’s relying upon the Acta Acuerdo. It
was entered into by a senior official of the State and in the circumstances of this case
there is no basis for its now being repudiated. The Acta Acuerdo did not merely provide
that Respondent would take no action in respect of any breach of Section 22.1.a) that
might have occurred: it provided that the Parties agreed as of the date of the Acta

Acuerdo that any such breach had been cured. Respondent cannot, therefore, rely upon

208 Resp, Rej. 1 65.
2 Exh, CX-48, Exh, CX-137.

56

230.

231.

232.

233.

any alleged breach by PdL of Section 22.1.a) as a justification for any of Respondent’s

own acts that took place after 20 October 2000.

That does not necessarily mean that Respondent’s actions prior to 20 October 2000 could
not be justified by reference to any failure by PdL to comply with Section 22.1.a) of the
Concession Contract; but it is not necessary to decide this question because the Tribunal
has determined that in any event the late payment of the Subsidy was not a breach of the

FET obligation under the BIT.

b) The pesification process

The next body of conduct to be considered is the ‘pesification process’: i.e., the departure
of the Argentinian peso from the statutory regime which secured parity with the US
dollar. That process rested on the enactment on 6 January 2002 of Law 25,561, the Public
Emergency and Foreign Exchange System Reform Law (“the Emergency Law”), and the
adoption on 3 February 2002 of Decree No. 214/02. Those measures abrogated the
Convertibility Law and converted into Argentine pesos money obligations that had
previously been expressed in foreign currency, and abrogated indexing mechanisms tied
to foreign currencies or economies. They also provided for the renegotiation of public

works contracts in order to mitigate the detrimental effects of this pesification.?!°

It may be helpful to outline at the outset of this section of the analysis the broad approach
of the Tribunal to the pesification question. The pesification process was part of a major
economic and commercial upheaval. There is much that can be said about its causes and
much that can be said about its consequences, both generally and in the context of this
particular case. But the question to be addressed here is straightforward: as a matter of
legal principle, does the Argentinian pesification process amount to a violation of

Argentina’s BIT obligations?

There are three layers of legal analysis involved in that question. Taking the matter for
the moment in the context only of FET, the first is the question whether pesification is

prima facie incompatible with the FET standard in circumstances where it has been

210 See below, #9 241, 248.

s7

234.

235.

236.

represented to investors by the Government that dollar-peso parity would be maintained
(or to put it in another way, represented that pesification would not take place). If it is, the
second question is whether there is any provision within the Treaty itself that can affect
the question whether pesification is in principle a breach of the Treaty. The third
question, which arises only if pesification is in principle a breach of the Treaty, is
whether the wrongfulness of pesification under the Treaty can be precluded by the plea of

necessity under customary international law.

Was pesification in itself a breach of the BIT?

The first question is whether the pesification was in itself a breach of the FET standard

secured by the BIT.

Claimant pointed to many statements by the authorities in Argentina, and to reports of
such statements, made prior to and after Claimant made its investment, to the effect that
parity between the peso and the dollar would be maintained.?!! There can be no serious
doubt that all of the Parties to the Contract (including the Government of Argentina)

assumed that dollar / peso parity would continue.

On the other hand, neither the Bidding Terms?!” nor the Concession Contract stipulated
that there could be no departure from dollar / peso parity.?!> Rather, the position of the
Concessionaire was protected by provisions that in effect tied the Concessionaire’s
revenues to US dollars and the US economy. Thus, Section 24 of the Contract stipulated
that “In consideration of all its obligations hereunder, Concessionaire shall receive only
the toll rates set forth in the following Section, the Subsidy granted by the National
Government, and the contributions of the Provinces of Santa Fe and Entre Rios.” Those
toll rates were, according to Section 25.2 of the Contract, to be adjusted by “the
percentage change in the United States All Items Consumer Price Index (hereafter CPI)

officially published by the United States Department of Commerce (Business Statistics

21 Cl. Mem. { 75- 88.
22 Exh, CX-31.

213,

Section 3(i) of the Bidding Terms, and Section 2 of the Contract, set out the laws that govern the Agreement, and

do not include the Convertibility Law, Law 23,928, which established parity between the dollar and the peso.

58

237.

238.

239.

Branch).” In this way, the commercial balance of the Contract was secured, with the

value of the tolls being tied, in effect, to the value of the US dollar.
Further, Section 25.3 of the Contract provided that:

“The Toll Rate to be collected by Concessionaire from users shall be
stated in Pesos and be calculated as follows:

a) The toll rate, stated in United States dollars, shall be translated into

pesos on a monthly basis with the assistance of the Oversight Agency,

using the dollar/peso parity based on the average bid/offered exchange rate

quoted by Banco de la Nacién Argentina FIVE (5) days prior to the

application date. If the peso/dollar parity based on the quote of Banco de

la Nacién varies upward or downward by more than ONE PERCENT

(1%) of the parity used to calculate the Basic Toll Rate in effect, the latter

shall be readjusted by the total percentage of such excess commencing on

the first day of the following month.”
In these circumstances, the majority of the Tribunal considers that what Respondent
promised, and what Claimant had the right to expect, was the maintenance of the value,
in dollar terms, of the revenues under the Contract. Precisely how that value was
maintained was, in the view of the majority of the Tribunal, not specified. Claimant did
not have a legal right specifically to have that value maintained by means of constant
adherence to peso-dollar parity. If parity were abandoned but Claimant was compensated
fully and timeously for the fall, in dollar terms, in the value of its revenues, Claimant’s
rights and expectations would have been fulfilled, and Claimant could not complain that

it had been treated unfairly or inequitably in violation of the BIT.

In the view of the majority of the Tribunal, this analysis accords with the facts and the
practical realities of the situation. While there was a clear expectation that the
commercial balance of the Contract would be maintained by the continuation of peso-
dollar parity, no specific promise or undertaking to maintain that parity was explicitly
made by Respondent to Claimant. Neither the Bidding Terms nor the Concession
Contract, nor any other instrument presented to the Tribunal, contains any specific and

absolute undertaking not in any circumstances to pesify the Contract.

59

240. There can be no doubt of Claimant’s intention to secure and to rely upon binding
guarantees that the dollar-value of its revenues would be maintained. But equally, there is
insufficient factual evidence upon which to base a finding that it would be unfair and
inequitable to Claimant to fulfil that obligation to maintain of the dollar value of
Claimant’s revenues by some mechanism that involved a change in the peso-dollar
exchange rate. Indeed, there are indications in Claimant’s pleadings that it would have
accepted some such change, although not a change involving pesification.?!*

241. The majority of the Tribunal has therefore concluded that while the Claimant had the
right to the maintenance of the commercial balance secured by the Contract on the
supposition that peso-dollar parity would continue, it had no absolute right to have that
commercial balance maintained specifically by the continuation of peso-dollar parity in
all circumstances. If parity ceased to exist, Claimant had the right to expect that the
resulting disruption of the commercial balance would be corrected fully and timeously, so
that it would not be materially disadvantaged. Indeed, that expectation was reflected in
the right to apply for renegotiation set out in Section 31.2 of the Contract. But Claimant
did not have the right to expect that there would never, in any circumstances, be any

departure from parity.?!>

242. The majority has thus concluded that pesification of debts alone did not breach the treaty,
and that if appropriate and timely steps had been taken by Respondent to restore Claimant
to the position (in terms of the commercial balance of the Contract) that had been secured
in the Contract, there would have been no breach of the duty to treat Claimant fairly and

equitably.

214 Cl, PHB qf 224- 225.

2!5 Section 25.3 of the Contract in fact provides for (minor) variations in the exchange rate: “The toll rate, stated in
United States dollars, shall be translated into pesos on a monthly basis with the assistance of the Oversight Agency,
using the dollar/peso parity based on the average bid/offered exchange rate quoted by Banco de la Nacién Argentina
FIVE (5) days prior to the application date. If the peso/dollar parity based on the quote of Banco de la Naci6én varies
upward or downward by more than ONE PERCENT (1%) of the parity used to calculate the Basic Toll Rate in
effect, the latter shall be by the total of such excess on the first day of the
following month.”

60

243. The position might have been different if Respondent had made a deliberate choice to
abandon peso-dollar parity in circumstances in which parity could have been maintained

and Respondent had freedom of choice in determining its exchange-rate policy. But in the

216

view of the Tribunal,~'° that was not the case in Argentina during the period in question.

The majority of the Tribunal accepts that although the abandonment of parity was
obviously effected by a deliberate act of the Respondent — the enactment of the
pesification law — and was in that narrow sense Respondent’s ‘choice’, that act was an
acceptance of what foreign exchange markets had already shown to be an economic fact:
the unsustainability of parity.?!’ The IMF had endorsed the economic policies pursued by

Argentina prior to the crisis;?!* and the Emergency Law adopted in January 2002 by the

219

Respondent was regarded by a range of expert commentators~'” as a sound and coherent

approach to the unavoidable facts of the extraordinary financial crisis then confronting

Argentina.”

244. The majority of the Tribunal accordingly does not find that the adoption and pursuit of
the policy of pesification was per se a breach of the FET standard. The policy was not in

itself unfair, and it was not in itself inequitable, to the Claimant.

216 And other tribunals: see, e.g., Total S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/04/1), Decision on
Liability, 27 December 2010, {| 160, 163 (Exh. AL RA180).

2'7 The Tribunal notes the chart at | 26 of Resp. C-Mem, which shows the peso-dollar exchange rate in the foreign
exchange market of the Montevideo, Uruguay, Stock Exchange. That chart shows that the dollar-value of the peso
was falling in Uruguay from the first week of December 2001 onwards, several weeks before the enactment of the
Emergency Law in Argentina. Cf, Roubini Report, 7 March 2012, | 15: “Effectively, the Argentine government did
not ‘choose’ to abandon convertibility and repeal the currency board as there was no effective economic choice or
means or option left to maintain such regime. Rather, the economic facts on the ground led to its effective demise
and abandonment in December 2001 and its formal legal abandonment in January 2002.”

218 International Monetary Fund, News Brief 99/24, 26 May 1999, cited in Andrés Velasco, Ricardo Hausmann,
Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University - Hard Money‘s Soft Underbelly: Understanding the Argentine
Crisis, 2002 (Exh. RA 500); Eichengreen Report, 3 September 2012, {| 10; Roubini Report, 7 March 2012, 23.

219 See Roubini Report, 7 March 2012, especially {f 31- 49, 53-55, and Eichengreen Report, 3 September 2012,
especially {{ 26- 40.

0 To avoid any possible doubt, it should be emphasized that although these factors are similar to those that would
be taken into account in the context of a consideration of the defence of necessity, they are here wholly independent
of the necessity defence. The factors do not bear upon the issue raised in the context of necessity: namely, whether
in the circumstances the Respondent should be excused for what is on the face of it a breach of its international
obligations. Here they bear on the question whether, in order to treat the Claimant with fairness and equity, it was
absolutely essential that Respondent maintain parity at all costs. That is a question as to the precise scope of the
obligation that was owed by Respondent to Claimant. Was it unfair or inequitable to Claimant for Argentina to
depart from parity? In particular, was it unfair to do so in circumstances where Respondent undertook to rebalance
the commercial contract in order to address the losses sustained by Claimant as a consequence of pesification?

  

 

 

61

245.

246.

247.

248.

In view of that decision, it is not necessary to consider whether the position in respect of

221

the abandonment of parity is affected by any other provision in the Treaty,’ or by the

plea of necessity in customary international law.

That is, however, not an end of the matter. As has been indicated above, while the act of
pesification was, in the view of the majority of the Tribunal, not per se a violation of the
FET standard, it was the direct cause of financial losses to the Claimant. That leads to the
question whether the manner in which the pesification process was implemented

amounted to a breach of the FET standard.

Was the manner in which the pesification process was implemented a breach of the
BIT?

It has been noted above that the preservation of the US dollar value of Claimant’s
revenues was undoubtedly a premise upon which the investment was made, and both
Parties entered into the Concession Contract; and it was a principle to which the

222

provisions of the Concession Contract“~ were intended to give effect.

Respondent recognized from the outset the enormously disruptive effect that pesification
would have on public works contracts that had been concluded upon the basis of the
premise of constant dollar-peso parity or payment in dollars. Respondent provided, in the
Emergency Law itself, for the renegotiation of such contracts.??? The Tribunal considers
that provision to be a wholly appropriate, and necessary, response to the inevitable results
of pesification upon dollarized contracts. If those contracts were left unrevised, one party
would suffer a radical deterioration in the commercial position that it had secured by

means of the express terms of the contract.

221 Such as Article XI of the US-Argentina BIT, which provides that the provisions of the BIT do not “preclude the

application by either Party of measures S necessary for the maintenance of public order ... or the protection of i
essential security interes

 

own

 

if >. The effect of any such provision

sar
would have to be considered before the effect of the defence of necessity in customary international law is
considered. There is, however, no such provision in the Germany-Argentina BIT.

2 Notably Sections 6, 13, 24-33 and 31.2 of the Contract.

23 Emergency Law, Section 9 (Exh. RA 187).

62

249.

250.

251.

The Tribunal considers that the terms of the commitment that Respondent had made to
Claimant did not require Respondent to take action during the time of the crisis actually
to restore the commercial balance secured by peso-dollar parity. But it did require
Respondent to make provision for restoring the commercial balance after the crisis had
ended (as, indeed, it did, in the Emergency Law itself); and restoration of the commercial
balance required that Claimant be compensated for losses incurred during the crisis, as

well as thereafter.

224 the

As is explained below, in the section dealing with the renegotiation process,
process provided for in the Emergency Law has not in fact led to the rebalancing of the
commercial relationship between Claimant and Respondent in this case. Due to
Argentina’s failure to timeously adjust the contract in a manner satisfactory to PdL,
Claimant was accordingly deprived of the protection that the dollarization of PdL’s tariffs
was designed to secure, and the value of its interest in PdL was thereby reduced, causing

it financial loss.

The Tribunal thus finds that the manner in which the process for agreeing on the
contractual adjustment to offset the effects of pesification was implemented, and
specifically Respondent’s failure to implement the promised renegotiation process
timeously, constitute a breach of the FET standard under the BIT, for which Respondent
is liable to make reparation. More precisely, the pesification caused the Claimant to
sustain losses; and the breach of the FET in the BIT consists in the failure to implement
within a reasonable period of time a renegotiated agreement to replace the security that
had been provided by the dollarization provisions in the original Concession Contract and
thereby restore the commercial balance of the Concession Contract between Respondent
and the members of the Consortium, including Claimant, and to remedy the losses

already sustained.

224 qi 268-287, below.

63

252.

253.

254.

c) The ‘Emergency Loan’

At the time when the funding for the Project ran out, construction of the bridge span was
not complete. Both parties agreed that it could not be left in its incomplete state because
of the danger of collapse. At this point in time, funds were needed to complete the Project
and without a completed Project, PdL was not yet in a position to collect the toll revenues

on which the payment of its share of the financing as well as any profit could be realized.

Claimant argued that if an adequate renegotiation had been agreed during the first half of
2002, work on the Project could have been completed on time, and that the failure to
secure such a renegotiation obliged it to accept a loan from Respondent to enable it to
complete the Project. The Tribunal notes, however, that there is evidence that PdL was in
financial difficulties even before pesification occurred. In particular: (i) PdL was
informing the Grantor in August 2001, four months before pesification, that it was going
to have to suspend construction of the bridge at the end of the month; (ii) PdL
appeared to be unable to pay its creditors (Boskalis/Ballast Nedam)”**; (iii) PdL told the
IDB in October 2001 that it could be petitioned in bankruptcy by its creditors?*’; and (iv)
PdL’s smaller shareholders’ were apparently unable or unwilling to make further capital

contributions in September 2001.??*

PdL requested financial assistance from Respondent; and in February 2003 Respondent
offered a loan of AR $51,648,352 which was sufficient to complete the Project.?2°
Claimant’s witness, Mr Lommatzsch, testified that PdL was advised that if it did not

accept the loan and finish the Project, Respondent would declare PdL to be in default and

25 Exh. RA 167.
226 LECG Exh. 26 (ICC Award, pp. 88-89).
27 Exh. RA 170.

28 Document HT_01540 produced by the Claimant on 22 February 2013 (Agreement of 11 April 2002 between
Impregilo S.p.A., IGLYS S.A., Hochtief Aktiengesellschaft, SIDECO Americanas S.A. and IECSA S.A., Benito

Roggio y Hijos S.A., Techint Compaiia Técnica Internacional $.A., the “Whereas

* recitals notes that certain

 

shareholders did not make the contributions requested of them).
29 Cl. PHB if 83-84.

64

255.

256.

257.

258.

terminate the Concession Contract, which would necessarily have entailed a drawdown

by Argentina on a US $143 million Letter of Credit posted by PdL’s shareholders.7*”

The Loan Agreement, which secured the loan by the assignment of PdL’s toll collection
rights, was signed on 21 February 2003.7*! The possibility of the assignment of tolls for
the purpose of obtaining finance for the Project was expressly provided for by Section 33

of the Concession Contract.?*

According to Section 2 of the Loan Agreement, the loan was to be repaid “on the terms
prevailing in the local market for similar loans, thus subject to the applicable lending
interest rate and other terms by way of financial expenses, in accordance with the

applicable data to be provided by the Central Bank of Argentina.”

The evidence of the circumstances and reasoning behind PdL’s decision in February 2003
to accept the loan and not to obtain alternative sources of funding, such as additional
capital injections or further inter-company loans, does not enable the Tribunal to reach a
clear conclusion as to the specific reasons for which PdL accepted the Emergency Loan,
rather than to make some other arrangement to obtain additional finance. It appears that

at this time alternative loan funding was scarce in Argentina.

It was the responsibility of the Consortium and then of PdL to arrange financing for the
Project beyond the Subsidy provided by Respondent.” PdL was at liberty to obtain
finance from other sources on better terms, if it could find them. Claimant says that in
fact PdL had no alternative source of funding available from third party banks,”™ and that

it was the drastic reduction in toll revenues, resulting from the Pesification Law, Law

230 Lommatzsch Stmt., {ff 109 - 116.

231 Exh, CX-78.

22 Exh, RA 12.

233 Concession Contract, Sections 8, 22, 30.3.b).
24 Cl. PHB 85.

65

259.

260.

25,561, that undermined PdL’s creditworthiness and was the cause of its inability to

obtain finance elsewhere.”*>

Claimant asserts that in early July 2003, following a change in the Government of
Argentina, it received notice that the terms of that emergency loan had been unilaterally
altered by the Secretariat of Public Works through the adoption of Public Works
Resolution 14 (‘Resolution 14’) on 30 June 2003.?*° Claimant says that Resolution 14
had three material effects: (i) it changed the repayment terms from “those prevailing in

the local market for similar loans”?*7

to a rate (which Claimant says was higher) charged
for 30-day unsecured loans; (ii) it provided for the repayment of the loan through the
daily collection of toll revenues; and (iii) it pesified the operation and maintenance costs

which PdL was entitled to deduct from the toll revenues.”°*

Claimant’s case is that the terms stipulated in June 2003 by Resolution 14 left PdL in an
unsustainable financial position. The daily revenues appropriated to repayment of the
loan were inadequate to cover interest payments and PdL’s operating expenses; and the
interest owing was capitalized, so that the sum owed was constantly increasing.?°?
Claimant says that because of PdL’s repayments under the loan from Respondent, PdL
was unable to maintain the Project or pay daily expenses. In 2004 and 2005 those
expenses were largely funded through inter-company loans made by Claimant and
Impregilo. Claimant made loans totalling US $5,481,833 in 2004, and US $297,000 in
2005.74

235 Thid., | 85. Cl. Rep., | 74: “What HOCHTIEF correctly objects to is the unfair and unnecessary pesification of
the toll rate, and the extremely protracted renegotiation process that is preventing HOCHTIEF from getting the
expected and bargained for return on its investment. Cf., Lommatzsch Stmt., {| 134.

236 Exh. CX-79.

°37 Exh. CX-78, Section 2. That rate was identified in Resolution 14 as “the General Portfolio Lending Rate for
Miscellaneous Transactions, a variable rate published each day by the Banco de la Nacién Argentina.

238 Cl. PHB {ij 86 -90; Exh. CX-79.

239 Cf, the evidence of Mr Andrés Aner, Transcript, Day 5, pp. 1018-1030.

240 Cl, PHB, J 90; LECG First Report, Exh. 034, pp. 28-29.

66

261.

262.

263.

264.

Respondent does not challenge the essential facts concerning the effect of the provisions
of Resolution 14.74! Respondent submitted that Resolution 14 was, however, a measure
implementing, rather than unilaterally altering, the terms of the Loan Agreement of 21

February 2003,7* and that it adopted “a fair market interest rate”.?47

From a comparison of the wording of the Loan Agreement and Resolution 14, it appears
to the Tribunal that Resolution 14 purported to give specificity to the vague terms in the
21 February 2003 Loan Agreement regarding interest rates. Resolution 14 identified the
repayment terms that were to be treated as corresponding to the “the terms prevailing in
the local market for similar loans”, as it was put in Section 2 of the Loan Agreement.
Those terms corresponded to the interest rates paid by top-tier companies on 30-day

unsecured loans.

The Tribunal does not consider that the specification under Resolution 14 of an interest
rate appropriate for 30-day unsecured loans to the radically different case of a loan
secured by the assignment of tolls from a public highway operating under a long-term
concession, can reasonably be regarded as an implementation of a contractual provision
stipulating the application of “the terms prevailing in the local market for similar loans.”
The circumstances of the loans are not ‘similar’. No clear justification was offered for
application of the 30-day unsecured loan rate to the 2003 loan to PdL,”* although it was
said that one constraint was the inability of Respondent to engage in a transaction that
would, by charging too low an interest rate, in effect increase the Subsidy to the Project
provided by the Government beyond that settled when the Consortium’s bid was

accepted.745

The Tribunal is satisfied that the use of rates for unsecured loans as the comparator for
the interest rate charged under the Loan Agreement was inappropriate, and that it is likely

that, at least at some points, the interest rate charged was excessively high. The Tribunal

241 Resp, Rej., $4 132-147.

22 Resp. C-Mem. { 409; Resp. Rej., if 132-133.

243 Resp, Rej., ff 142.

24 See the testimony of Mr. Aner, Transcript, Day 5, pp. 1026-1034.
25 Lommatzsch Stmt. { 110. Cf., Resp. PHB, {[ 10-13, 56-58.

67

265.

266.

267.

notes, however, that the rate of interest charged was not uniformly high. It dropped from
the high of 30% to 18.85% as from 26 September 2003,”*° and stayed around that lower
rate until the commencement of insolvency proceedings in May 2007. (During the period
2001-2005, all the inter-company loans made by Claimant and other PdL shareholders
were set at the significantly lower rate of 15%.) Furthermore, the evidential record
does not provide sufficient data to enable the Tribunal to determine by how much (if at
all) the actual rate of interest charged day-by-day under Resolution 14, compared with an
appropriate Argentine market rate for secured long-term debts, exceeded the maximum

interest rate that would have been fair and equitable.

The Tribunal considers that the use of an inappropriate comparator for the determination
of interest rates under Resolution 14 was not compatible with Claimant’s rights under
Article 2 of the Treaty, but the majority of the Tribunal also considers that Claimant has
not proved a quantifiable loss under this heading. The majority of the Tribunal
accordingly decides not to make an award of damages specifically to compensate
Claimant for losses arising from any excessive interest rates charged under the

Emergency Loan.

Turning to the treatment of PdL’s expenses, the Tribunal does not consider that the
pesification of operation and maintenance costs which PdL was entitled to deduct from
its toll revenues was a step that had been agreed in (or was compatible with) the Loan
Agreement of 21 February 2003. The text of the Loan Agreement does not evidence any
such agreement. This was a further step taken in Resolution 14 on 30 June 2003, which

adversely affected PdL, and hence adversely affected the value of Claimant’s investment.

It is clear that the pesification of operation and maintenance expenses, much of which

required the importation of expensive equipment involving expenditure in US dollars,”

46 Resp. Rej., J 140. Resp. notes that Hochtief itself already talked of an annual 20% rate in a document it submitted
to the German government on 5 March 2007 (Request for Compensation from Hochtief to the German government,
5 March 2007, p. 3 (Exh. RA 358)), and not the 30% rate contended by Claimant in its Reply of 5 June 2012. Cl.
Rep., { 69: Resp. Rej., fn 200.

247 LECG First Report, {| 57; and Exh. 034, p. 85

248 Cl. PHB, fn. 160.

68

268.

269.

270.

reduced the value of the expenses that PdL was entitled to deduct before making its loan
repayments and left it making a loss on the maintenance and operation of the Project. The
Tribunal thus finds that the pesification of operation and maintenance expenses was a

violation of Article 2 of the BIT, for which reparation is due.

The Tribunal accordingly considers that the specific terms imposed by Resolution 14 on
30 June 2003 cannot reasonably be said to have been previously agreed in the February
Loan Agreement or to be consistent with it. When those terms are considered in the
context of PdL’s frozen tariffs, pesified and not adjusted for inflation, they are, in the

view of the Tribunal, unfair and inequitable and a violation of Article 2 of the BIT.

d) The renegotiation process

The Tribunal has decided that the manner in which the pesification process was
implemented, and in particular Respondent’s failure to implement the promised
renegotiation process timeously, constitute a breach of the FET standard under the BIT

for which Respondent is liable to make reparation.“?

It is more accurate to speak of the unacceptable delay in the implementation of the
renegotiation process, because even now it remains possible that the process might be
implemented in the future. Renegotiation of many public contracts inevitably takes time;
and some will be renegotiated before others. The limit of what would be an acceptable
delay in the context of an alleged breach of the FET standard is a matter of appreciation.
Some delay would not have been incompatible with Fair and Equitable Treatment; but at
a certain point, the to-be-expected time that it takes for a complex renegotiation to occur
becomes unacceptably unfair and inequitable. Claimant pointed to the recent award in

EDF International SA & Ors v. Argentine Republic,?° in which liability for breach of a

29 4 251, above.
280 EDF International S.A., SAUR International S.A. and Leén Participaciones Argentinas S.A. v. Argentine
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/23), Award, 11 June 2012; CLA 238.

69

271.

272.

273.

251

BIT was founded upon delays in renegotiation; but each case turns on its facts?’ and

must be appraised separately.

(i) The unimplemented renegotiations

It was in January 2002 that Law No. 25,5617? provided, in Article 9, for the
renegotiation of public works contracts, a category that included the Concession
Contract. Claimant’s witness, Mr Lommatzsch, recalled in his first Witness Statement”,
dated 29 April 2010, that he had been a director of PdL since 1998 and its President from
March 2005 to August 2007.7°* He referred to his personal involvement in numerous
discussions and other meetings between PdL and the Argentine Government between
2003 and 2009. He testified that PdL had continually tried to engage Respondent in
“negotiations aimed at reaching agreement on a renegotiated contract that would
compensate PdL for its losses and re-establish the toll rates so that the concession will
earn PdL and its shareholders the expected return that Argentina’s actions have prevented

them from receiving.”?°°

In May 2006 PdL signed a Carta de Entendimiento (the ‘May 2006 CdE’)?*° which
provided for an increased toll rate and adjusted the economics of the Project. Mr
Lommatzsch said that it was not a perfect solution, and not sufficient fully to compensate
PdL for all of the losses attributable to Law No. 25,561, but that PdL had nonetheless

signed it and awaited the approval of the new terms by the Government.?*”

The necessary Government approvals for the May 2006 CdE were not obtained and it

was not implemented. A second CdE was sent to PdL by Respondent in February 2007

5! In EDF the iation was the ibility of a provincial g within Argentina, rather than of the
federal Government of the Republic.

252 Exh. CX-63.

253 Lommatzsch Stmt., {| 137ff.

254 Tbid., (1.

255 Thid., | 136. See generally Lommatzsch Stmt. §{[ 130-158; Supp. Lommatzsch Stmt., {{] 4-22.

256 Lommatzsch Stmt., Exh. JJ.

257 Thid., 145 — 146.

70

274.

275.

276.

277.

288 bid.,
2° bid.,
20 Tbid.,
261 Thid.,
2 See |

(the ‘February 2007 CdE’).?** According to Mr Lommatzsch, its terms were less
favourable to PdL than the terms of the May 2006 CdE: nevertheless, in his words,
“desperate to finalize a renegotiation, and moderate the financial squeeze it had been put
in due to Argentina’s actions, PdL signed the February 2007 CdE on February 27,
2007.”?°? The February 2007 CdE also remained unimplemented.

PdL signed another agreement on renegotiation, the ‘December 2009 Acuerdo
Transitorio’ 7° on 17 December 2009.”°! Claimant Hochtief abstained from participating
in the vote by PdL shareholders on the decision to sign this agreement, and indicated that
it would not suspend or renounce its ICSID claim (which had been filed at the end of
2007)? against Respondent.”°? That agreement, too, remained without Government

approval and unimplemented.

On 14 June 2010, the ‘June 2010 Acuerdo Transitorio’?™ was sent by UNIREN to PdL.
It was substantially identical to the December 2009 Acuerdo Transitorio. PdL signed it,

though again Hochtief abstained from voting.” It was not implemented.

On 13 October 2010, the ‘October 2011 Acuerdo Transitorio’*®© was sent by UNIREN to
PdL. It was similar but not identical to the June 2010 Acuerdo Transitorio. PdL signed it,

but again Hochtief abstained from voting.?* It was not implemented.

A fourth Acuerdo Transitorio, the ‘March 2012 Acuerdo Transitorio’ 7° was sent to PdL

on 6 March 2012. Yet again, PdL approved the agreement; but Claimant abstained.”

Exh, MM.

q isi.

Exh. 00.

qa 154 — 155.
6 above.

263 Exh, RA 433.
264 Exh, CX-150.
265 Mairal Supp. Opinion, Exh. 2; Cl. PHB {| 100.
266 Exh, CX-156.
261 Mairal Supp. Opinion, Exh. 3; Cl. PHB {{ 101.
268 Exh, CX-160.

71

278.

279.

280.

281.

Each Acuerdo Transitorio was intended to be an interim agreement, to be replaced within
twelve months by a Comprehensive Contract Renegotiation Agreement.?”” No such

Comprehensive Agreement has been made.

According to Mr Lommatzsch, whose evidence in this respect was not disputed,
UNIREN renegotiated 92% of the public works contracts within its jurisdiction by April
2009.77! It is not to be expected that every eligible contract could be renegotiated at once,
or even within a short time of the start of the renegotiation process; and it is obvious that
one contract or another must be the last to be renegotiated. The question is whether there
is anything in the particular treatment of the PdL that breaches the FET standard. The

Tribunal considers that there is.

(ii) The excessive delay in the renegotiation

The most salient of the particular factors that mark out this case are (i) a need for
renegotiation both occasioned by, and recognized and provided for, by Respondent’s own
pesification legislation, (ii) Respondent’s awareness of the precarious position of the
Project and of PdL, evident at least from the time of the conclusion of the Loan
Agreement on 21 February 2003; (iii) Respondent’s awareness of the damages claim in
this case, whose registration by ICSID was notified to the Parties on 17 December 2007;
and, against this background, (iv) Respondent’s repeated failure to implement the
agreements on renegotiation that had been signed by PdL in 2006, 2007, 2009, 2010,
2011, and 2012.

The renegotiation process was a necessary element — the key element — of the fulfilment
of Respondent’s obligation under the Treaty to treat PdL in a fair and equitable manner
following the 2002 pesification and the complete disruption of the premises upon which

the Concession Contract was based.””” The failure to proceed expeditiously to implement

 

269 Mairal Supp. Opinion, Exh. 4; Cl. PHB {| 102.
270 Article 1.3 in each of the texts.
271 Lommatzsch Stmt., { 158.

2? The preamble to Decree 214/02 refers to the “strong interference with the legal relationships, both of public law
and of private law” that resulted from the crisis (Exh. CX-68).

72

282.

283.

284.

285.

the renegotiated terms agreed with PdL, in a situation where the urgency of the
rebalancing of the economic relationship after the Respondent’s legislative intervention
was clear, and in particular when the Claimant’s Memorial in this case focused attention
upon the compatibility or lack thereof of the continuing delays and abandonments of
agreed terms with Respondent’s obligations under the Treaty, all combine to persuade the
Tribunal that Respondent’s failure to secure the implementation of the renegotiated terms

was unfair to PdL.

Respondent’s conduct amounts to more than the disappointment of the hopes and
expectations of the Project Consortium. It crosses the line between what is merely sub-
optimal administration and bureaucratic delay, and it becomes a failure to remedy the
adverse consequences of governmental measures that is so prolonged and so complete as

to infringe the investor’s rights under the Treaty.

It is not easy to identify a precise date by which renegotiation should have been
completed, but there are three indications that the renegotiation was not completed within

what was a reasonable time in the context of the Argentine laws.

First, renegotiation was mandated by the Emergency Law, Law No. 25,5617”

in January
2002. Title IV (and in particular Article 9) of the Emergency Law provided for the
renegotiation of public works contracts, and Article 8 of Decree 214/02 provided for
adjustments of contracts to be made annually (and in some circumstances, more
frequently) so as to “preserve the continuity of the contractual relationship in a way

equitable for the parties.”?”*

Secondly, during the PdL insolvency proceedings, in June 2008, the Argentine Court
took the view that UNIREN’s refusal to continue the renegotiation of the concession

agreement was contrary to the aims of Argentine law, and that more than six years after

273 Exh. CX-63.
274 Exh. CX-68.

73

286.

287.

288.

275 B

the enactment of Emergency Law 25,561 “the grave imbalance in the terms of the

[Concession] agreement persists”.?”>

Third, the Tribunal notes that it was practicable for the Parties to conclude a negotiated
settlement by 2006 or 2007 at the latest. PdL was prepared in 2006 to accept — and,
indeed, did accept — a negotiated settlement, and the Claimant was also willing to accept
that settlement as a shareholder in PdL. But the 2006 CdE was repudiated by the
presentation of the 2007 CdE to PdL by Respondent on 12 February 2007.?”°

The Tribunal considers that Respondent’s failure to conclude an agreement on
renegotiation was a violation of the FET standard in the BIT. While the Tribunal is
satisfied that the violation had occurred by 26 February 2007, when Claimant sent to
Respondent its notice regarding the existence of a dispute under the BIT,?”’ that is not the
date that will be relevant to the calculation of the reparation due in respect of injury
caused by the breach. The breach consists in the failure to redress the commercial balance
that had been disrupted by the pesification Law, Law 25,561 on 6 January 2002; and the

injury for which reparation is due includes losses suffered on and after 6 January 2002.
e) Conclusion on FET
The Tribunal has thus concluded that there were violations of the FET standard in Article

2 of the BIT, in respect of which reparation is due, constituted by:

(1) the failure to restore and redress the commercial balance that had been
secured by the Concession Contract, after that balance had been disrupted
by the pesification Law, Law 25,561, on 6 January 2002; and

(2) the pesification of operation and maintenance expenses in Resolution
14 of 30 June 2003.

(B) FULL PROTECTION AND SECURITY: Articles 2(1) and 40)

 

(C) EXPROPRIATION: Article 4(2

xh. CX-106.

26 Cl, Rep. | 85; CdE (February 2007) (Exh. CX- 100).

277 B

xh. CX-101.

74

(D)

(E)

(F)

289.

290.

291.

THE ‘OBSERVANCE OF OBLIGATIONS’ OR ‘UMBRELLA CLAUSE’: Article
72)

ARBITRARY OR DISCRIMINATORY MEASURES: Article 2(3

BREACH OF BINDING UNILATERAL DECLARATIONS

 

Having considered and decided upon Respondent’s liability for breach of the FET
standard in Article 2 of the BIT, the Tribunal now turns to the other BIT standards upon

which Claimant relied.

Not all BIT standards are the same; nor is the FET standard, despite its undoubted
breadth, capable of subsuming every other BIT standard. As a matter of fact, however, it
may be evident that where the same facts are said to constitute breaches of more than one
BIT standard, and where the alleged losses are the same in each case, equally detailed
analysis of the application of each of the treaty standards to the facts of the case is

redundant.

So it is here; and especially because the terms of the protections accorded under Articles
2, 3 and 4 of the BIT appear to overlap. The claims concerning Full Protection and
Security [BIT Articles 2(1) and 4(1)],7”* the claims concerning expropriation [BIT Article

280

4(2)],?” the claims concerning arbitrary or discriminatory measures,”*° and the claims

concerning the ‘observance of obligations’ or ‘umbrella clause’,”*! are all based on
essentially the same facts and same arguments as the claims based upon the FET
standard. It is not argued that these other standards entail a different approach to
causation or to determination of quantum, or to liability for a different range of losses;?°?
and the Tribunal considers that these additional grounds for the claims are adequately

addressed by its decisions in respect of the FET standard. The same is true of claims

278 See Cl. Mem. | 426-437.

29 See Ibid., Wf 454-508.

280 See Ibid., | 438-447, 448-453

281 See Ibid., 1 509-527.

282 See Ibid., | 536- 549, 550-551. See also the LECG Report, Losses to Hochtief AG’s Investments in Puentes del
Litoral S.A., 29 April 2010, submitted by Claimant.

75

(G)

292.

293.

294.

based upon general international law obligations and the breach of binding unilateral

commitments made by Respondent.?*?

THE DURATION OF THE EMERGENCY AND THE OPERATIVE DATE OF
THE BREACHES

The Tribunal has decided that (1) Respondent’s failure to implement timeously the
renegotiation process (i.e., by 2006 or 2007, but taking account of prior losses: see
paragraph 286 above) and (2) the adoption of Resolution 14 in June 2003, violated the
BIT. The next question is whether either breach might be excused or rendered unlawful
by the defence of necessity. That would be possible only if the emergency persisted at the

relevant time,

Fixing a date for the ‘end’ of an economic crisis is a highly subjective exercise,
overwhelmingly influenced by the precise factors or indicia upon which one focuses and
the degree of change or stability that one regards as qualifying as a return to a normal,

non-crisis situation.

The Tribunal found persuasive the expert evidence suggesting that 2003 saw a

+ and that the worst of the crisis in macro-

resumption of growth in the economy”*
economic terms was over by mid-2003 (although the Tribunal accepts that the social and
other effects on Argentine society identified by Dr Kliksberg persisted well after that
time).?*° Other tribunals have found significant dates in this period, such as the date of the
election of President Kirchner on 26 April 2003.7*° The selection of such a date does not
signify the possibility of making a precise objective determination of a date on which the
economic crisis ended: rather, it signifies the exercise by a tribunal of its power to decide

a case on the evidence before it, and the need to stipulate a particular date in order to give

283 See Cl. Mem. ff 528- 536.
28 Eichengreen Report, | 26.
285 Edwards Report, 208.

28 LG&E Energy Corp., LG&E Capital Corp. and LG&E International Inc. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/1), Decision on Liability, 3 October 2006, 229-230.

76

295.

296.

297.

298.

effect to the tribunal’s reasoned judgment. No more and no less can be expected than a
serious attempt by a tribunal to identify a suitable date on the basis of the evidence

provided by the Parties.

87 in this case

The evidence presented by the respective experts, for both Parties,”
indicates that the crisis was over by the mid-2003, the time during which President
Kirchner was elected. Bearing in mind the practicalities of financial accounting and
calculation, this Tribunal accordingly fixes 1 May 2003 as the date at which the crisis

ended.

The road and the bridges were opened to toll-paying traffic on 23 May 2003.7** The
Tribunal has found no compelling evidence that the delay in the opening of the Project
was caused by conduct that is attributable to Respondent and is in breach of the BIT.
PdL’s income stream accordingly began to flow on 23 May 2003; and it was that income
stream whose dollar value is protected by the FET provision in Article 2 of the BIT. But

that flow begins after the end of the crisis, as determined by the Tribunal.

To be precise, the actions of Respondent, in breach of its obligations under the BIT, that
produced the reduction in value of PdL’s income stream were the failure to correct the
imbalance caused by the pesification introduced by the Emergency Law, Law No. 25,561
in January 2002, and the imposition of the terms of the Emergency Loan by Resolution

14 on 30 June 2003.

The effects of the non-correction of the Emergency Law upon which the Tribunal bases
its calculation of reparation due to PdL are in principle all losses sustained after and as a
result of the enactment of the Emergency Law on 6 January 2002. In practice, the
majority of the Tribunal has found no quantifiable losses of this kind that arose prior to
23 May 2003. It was after the opening of the road and bridges to toll-paying traffic on
that date, that the impact of the pesification and the Emergency Loan upon PdL’s income

stream from tolls began to be felt. The Tribunal accordingly decides by a majority that

287 Edwards Report, {{ 208, and Tr., Day 6, p. 1140. Eichengreen Report, | 26, and Tr. pp. 2122-2123.
288 Cl. Mem. 4.

77

299.

300.

301.

302.

303.

289 g,

while the renegotiation and ‘rebalancing’ should have occurred by 2006 or 2007,7*? the
duty to restore the balance extended back to cover all ‘unbalancing’ losses resulting from

the 2002 Emergency Law, and thus covered the losses arising after 23 May 2003.

While it is theoretically possible that some type of damage arose prior to 23 May 2003 —
for example, the value of the difference between the terms of the Emergency Loan
granted by Argentina to PdL and whatever loan or other financing might have been
available to PdL had it been able to show the lender that the Contract had been
satisfactorily readjusted to offset the effects of pesification — the majority of the Tribunal

finds that no such losses have been proven.

The adoption of Resolution 14 occurred after 23 May 2003. Its impact similarly postdates
both the end of the economic crisis and the opening of the road and bridges to toll-paying

traffic.

The Tribunal accordingly rejects the submission that either breach can be excused or
exculpated by reason of the economic crisis and the doctrine of ‘necessity’ under
customary international law. That rejection inevitably follows from the chronology of the
facts in this case. The economic crisis had ended by the time that the losses for which

reparation is due were sustained.

(A) CLAIMANT’S SHARE OF THE REPARATION

The analysis has proceeded thus far by focusing on the reparation due in respect of the
breach of the FET standard in the BIT, but without addressing the question of Claimant’s

entitlement to a part of that reparation.

The Tribunal has found, in summary, that Claimant is entitled as an investor within the
meaning of the BIT to sue in respect of breaches of the BIT committed by Respondent in
its dealings with PdL, in which Claimant had an investment at the material times. Further,

the Tribunal has determined that the adoption of Resolution 14 on 30 June 2003 and

ee above, Hf 286-287.

78

304.

305.

306.

307.

Respondent’s failure to implement the renegotiated agreements timeously violated the

BIT.

It does not follow that just because Claimant is entitled to sue in its own name, without
bringing PdL into the proceedings, it is also entitled to take away all or part of the
reparation without bringing PdL into the picture. As a shareholder in PdL, Claimant has
obligations as well as rights; and one of those obligations is to accept that the assets of
PdL would be properly applied to satisfy the legitimate demands of all PdL’s creditors

and all PdL’s shareholders, according to the priorities laid down by law.

In the view of the Tribunal, it cannot be assumed that Claimant has an unencumbered
right to a share of the reparation due to PdL that corresponds to the share of the stock in
PdL held by Claimant. Other shareholders and creditors of PdL may have claims on sums
paid by way of reparation. The question is, whether this is a matter for the Tribunal in
this case, or whether any such claims are a matter between Claimant and persons not

party to these proceedings.

The Tribunal has decided that it is beyond both its responsibilities and its powers to make
dispositive orders in this respect. Neither PdL nor any other persons are parties to this
arbitration or subject to its jurisdiction. The Tribunal accordingly proceeds on the basis of
the approach adopted by other tribunals, and makes an award for reparation of which
Claimant will be entitled to a share corresponding to the proportion of its shareholding.
But it does so with the proviso that Claimant must disclose this award to the board of

PdL, drawing the board’s attention specifically to this Section (H).

The Tribunal has accordingly decided that Claimant is entitled to 26% of the damages
caused to PdL by Respondent, as the share corresponding to its share in the equity of

PdL.

79

308.

309.

310.

@

Claimant asks for full reparation for all of its losses caused by Respondent.” It submits
that there should be no deduction made in respect of the payment that it received under

the political risk insurance that it had arranged with the German Government.”?!

The Tribunal decides that the insurance payment, which is understood to amount to EUR
11,359 (US$ 17.7 million?°”) should not be deducted from the amount due to Claimant.
The insurance payment is a benefit which Claimant arranged on its own behalf, and for
which it paid. It does not reduce the losses caused by Respondent’s actions in breach of
the BIT: it is an arrangement that had been made by Claimant with a third party in order
to provide a hedge against potential losses. The Tribunal does not consider that any
principle of international law requires that such an arrangement, to which Respondent
was not a party, should reduce Respondent’s liability.?°? It may be that under such
insurance policies the protected investors are obliged to hand over to the insurer all or
part of any sums recovered as damages: but that is a matter of private contract, into which

the Tribunal has no cause to inquire.

The Tribunal has already determined that amounts received by Claimant in its capacity as
a contractor on the Project do not affect its entitlement to compensation for injury to its

investment in the Project.”

THE APPROACH TO THE DETERMINATION OF QUANTUM

 

The general approach: the reduction in value of Claimant’s shareholder interest in PdL

311.

The Tribunal has considered carefully the arguments in the reports of the Parties’
respective experts, and their respective approaches to the determination of quantum. In
their 2010 report Claimant’s experts Messrs Abdala and Spiller of LECG (later

Compass/Lexecon) estimated damages as of 31 December 2009, at US$ 74.6 million,

2 Cl. Rep., Section XIV, ‘Damages’.
291 Cl. Rep., 435 ff.
282 See the Sandleris and Schargrodsky Valuation Report, | 173.

283 Cf., Joannis Kardassopoulos and Ron Fuchs v. Georgia (ICSID Cases Nos. ARB/05/18 and ARB/07/15), Award,
3 March 2010, | 691 (a decision on third party funding and liability for costs.)

24 Above, { 181.

80

312.

313.

using the Discounted Cash Flow (‘DCF’) approach, and at US$ 109.0 million using the
Net Capital Contribution (‘NCC’) approach. Those figures were revised in their 2012
report to US$ 109.4 million and US$ 157.2 million respectively, as of 31 May 2012.
Respondent’s experts Messrs Sandleris and Schargrodsky estimated damages as of late
December 2010 at sums within a range from negative US$ 3.83 (i.e., damages owed to

the Respondent)?” to a positive US$ 1.07 million.

The wide gap between the experts’ estimates is largely attributable to the different
assumptions concerning key issues on which they based their work. For example,
Claimant’s experts valued damages as at later dates (2010, 2012), and on the basis that
sums recovered under the political risk insurance that Claimant had taken out should be
disregarded, that but for Respondent’s measures tariffs and expenses would have been
dollarized and revised, so that Respondent is responsible for losses resulting from
pesification, and that Respondent was responsible for the non-payment of the IDB loan
and for delays in completing the Project and that Respondent is liable to repay the loans
advanced to PdL by Hochtief. Claimant's experts also assume that but for Respondent’s
actions PdL would have been profitable, and that Claimant would have received
dividends and have seen the value of its equity share in PdL increase, and would have

had its loans to PdL repaid.

On the other hand, Respondent’s experts assumed that the date for valuation should have
been early 2002, when the pesification measures were enacted; that Claimant’s receipts
under the political risk insurance should be deducted; that there was no possibility of
maintaining dollarized tariffs after 2002, even in a ‘but for’ scenario; and that Respondent
was not responsible for the non-payment of the IDB loan (and Claimant was therefore in
breach of its contractual obligation to obtain FIFA) or for delays in completing the
Project. Respondent’s experts assume that PdL would not have been profitable and that

no dividends could have been paid to the shareholders.

285 See the explanation in Resp. PHB {{{ 77-80.

81

314.

315.

316.

317.

318.

There is little common ground between the experts; and the Tribunal finds that the
approach of neither set of experts is entirely satisfactory. Indeed, where there were great
differences between the scenarios contemplated by the experts, comparison of their
reports was an exercise of regrettably limited utility. The Tribunal does, however, have a

clear view on the losses for which compensation is due.

In broad terms, the measure of the damage is the amount by which the value of
Claimant’s 26% shareholding in PdL was reduced by Respondent’s conduct in violation
of the BIT. It is to be assumed that this amount is equivalent to 26% of the reduction in

value of PdL caused by Respondent’s breaches of the BIT.

The main element in the reduction in the value of PdL is the difference between the sums
that PdL actually received from tolls and the sums that it should have received if
pesification had not occurred and if the toll rates had been revised annually in line with

the US Consumer Price Index, as the Concession Contract provided.

Claimant’s experts have taken a relatively conservative approach to the determination of
toll receipts. They have, of course, the actual figures for receipts up until recent months;
and in calculating the toll revenues as they would have been ‘but for’ the pesification and
toll freeze they have assumed that the higher ‘dollarized’ tolls would have reduced
demand, and therefore toll income, because of the elasticity of demand.?°° Respondent’s
experts challenge, inter alia, the elasticity values, and the validity of any assumption that
PdL could (even in the absence of Respondent’s actions) have maintained dollarized

tariff rates after 2002.

The Tribunal finds the approach of Claimant’s experts to the estimation of the estimation
of toll receipts in the ‘but for’ scenario to be persuasive. In their Second (2012) Report,?””
Claimant’s experts revised their estimate of toll receipts in the ‘but-for’ scenario, in the
light of the analysis of elasticities in the study ‘Rosario to Victoria Bridge Traffic and

Revenues’ (1 June 2012), by Mr Philip Bates of Buro Happold. Mr Bates proposed an

296 LECG First Report, i 138-151.
27 Compass Lexecon, Second Report, 5 June 2012, Section III.1.6.

82

319.

320.

321.

322.

323.

‘envelope’ of elasticity values. The initial values used by Messrs Abdala and Spiller lay
comfortably within the envelope; but the Tribunal considers that it is appropriate, given
the burden that lies upon Claimant to prove its case, to prefer the experts’ calculations

based on Mr Bates’ lower bound figures.”

The other element driving the reduction in value of PdL is the pesification of operation

and maintenance expenses imposed by Resolution 14.

The Tribunal has given careful consideration to the question of the claims for
consequential costs. Claimant claimed for losses flowing from its inability to obtain the
IDB loan, and the delay in beginning operations.” These include the extra costs incurred
as a result of the failure of the IDB loan to materialize, and the allegedly excessive costs

of the 2003 Emergency Loan.

The factual evidence is, in the view of the Tribunal, not adequate to support the
conclusion that Respondent is responsible for the non-materialization of the IDB loan.
Nor is the evidence of the market rate for loans to companies in the position of PdL in
Argentina in 2003 sufficiently clear to warrant the making of an order for compensation

specifically related to the alleged increases in PdL’s costs of borrowing.

The pesification of operation and maintenance costs in Resolution 14, in contrast, is a
clear departure from the basic principles on which the Concession Contract was
concluded, and notional reparation for those losses is to be counted in the ‘but for’

scenario, from which Claimant’s entitlement to reparation will be calculated.

Claimant also asserts that it suffered damage to its investment as a result of the fall of
PdL towards bankruptcy. The evidence on this point is not clear. Prior to the onset of the
financial crisis, the Consortium’s members’ own invoices as contractors were paid,*°

evidently enabling them to recoup their own capital contributions; but PdL’s principal

288 Thid., | 109.
2% See e.g., the LECG Report, 2.

30 In a letter dated 4 December 2002 from the Boskalis International BV-Ballast Nedam Baggeren BV joint venture
to the Argentinean Ministry of Economy, it was alleged that PdL gave priority to paying its own
shareholder/contractors before paying its principal subcontractor, the joint venture. (Exh. RA 460)

83

324.

325.

subcontractor, the Boskalis-Ballast Nedam joint venture, was not paid, setting in motion
the events that led to the ICC award against PdL rendered on 28 November 2003 and the
insolvency proceedings initiated against PdL in April 2007, first by Boskalis-Ballast
Nedam on the ground of non-payment of the ICC award and then by PdL’s own board.
But evidence is lacking to prove that PdL did not receive sufficient monies from
Respondent to have been able to pay the invoices received from Boskalis-Ballast Nedam

if PdL had chosen to give priority to the payment of those invoices.

Given the Project’s difficult financial straits in the deteriorating financial conditions of
Argentina in the months leading up to the Emergency Law’s enactment, the Tribunal
finds that there is insufficient evidence to warrant the conclusion that the bankruptcy
proceedings against PdL were caused by the pesification process or any other breach of
the BIT for which Respondent was responsible; and it declines to order the payment of
any reparation in respect of PdL’s fall towards bankruptcy. Indeed, the Tribunal’s
assumption must be that if it requires a revenue stream to be calculated in dollars, in
order to avoid any unjust enrichment, it must equally assume that all of PdL’s liabilities
are similarly to be calculated in dollars. On this basis, and having regard to the normal
priority of creditors over shareholders, PdL must be assumed to have been placed in a
position to fully repay all of its debts, including to Boskalis-Ballast Nedam, to Argentina
(for the Emergency Loan), and to those shareholders such as Hochtief who advanced
loans to the company. It follows that the valuation exercise must assume no insolvency

and the full repayment of sums owing to creditors without any discount.

The Tribunal has accordingly decided that for the purpose of calculating the reparation
due to Claimant in this case, the reduction in value is to be Claimant’s 26% share of the
difference in US dollars between the actual value of PdL at the date of this Decision, and
the value that PdL would have had if all other factors had remained as they stand in the

‘actual scenario’ except that:

a) Peso-dollar parity had been maintained; and

b) The tolls had been revised in accordance with the US Consumer Price Index, as
provided in Article 25 of the Concession Contract;

84

c) The numbers of each kind of toll payments had been the actual numbers reduced to
take into account the impact of the elasticity of demand as estimated in the lower
bounds of Mr Bates’ report, as indicated by Claimant’s experts in paragraph 109 of
their Second Report (2012) ; and

d

The actual operation and maintenance costs and all other financial liabilities incurred
by PdL, including all of its debts, had not been pesified or reduced in the insolvency
proceedings.

Temporal limitations on recovery

326.

327.

As far as the temporal limitations on damages are concerned, as noted above, since the
Respondent has not effected a proper readjustment of the Concession Contract, the actual
losses in the present case begin when the income stream began to be affected, on 23 May
2003, because no earlier loses have been proven. Respondent’s liability arises from its
failure after the end of the economic crisis to restore PdL to the economic position upon
which the Parties had agreed at the beginning of the Project, and to maintain PdL in that
position. That is a continuing failure, and the losses resulting from it continue to accrue.
The Tribunal accordingly decides by a majority that damages are to be assessed as at the

date of this Decision.

The calculation is therefore to be effected by reference to the reduced value of PdL as it
stands at the date of the Decision. The Tribunal would reject the claims for the recovery
of anticipated losses that may arise after the date of the Award, because the Tribunal has
no reason to suppose that Respondent will ignore the implications of this Decision for its
continuing obligations towards PdL and Claimant.**! The approach adopted here does not
violate that principle. It is the present value of PdL that has been reduced, albeit by taking
into account present expectations as to the future treatment of the Project. It is that loss in

the present value of PdL that is the basis of the compensation in this Decision.

81 See in this respect, Mobil Investments Canada and Murphy Oil Corporation v. Canada (ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/07/4), Decision on Liability and on Principles of Quantum, 22 May 2012, {9 473 et seq: cf., Navigational
and Related Rights (Costa Rica v. Nicaragua), Judgment, 13 July 2009, 1.C.J Reports 2009, p. 267, 150.

85

328.

329.

330.

331.

332.

333.

The Tribunal accordingly decides that damages are to be assessed as at the date of this
Decision. As noted above, the damages begin when the income stream begins to be

affected, on 23 May 2003.

() COSTS

The Tribunal has considered the submissions of the Parties on the question of costs, and

the manner in which the litigation has been pursued.

Although the Tribunal has not ordered the payment of reparation under every one of the
heads of claim presented by the Claimant, the core of the claim has been upheld and the
Tribunal has held that Claimant is entitled to reparation for the losses caused by
Respondent’s violation of Claimant’s rights under the BIT. Those losses include

Claimant’s reasonable costs in pursuing this claim, payable as at the date of this Decision.

The Tribunal considers that the costs, including legal costs and the costs of expert
witnesses, are high, but not excessively high given the length and complexity of these
proceedings. It starts from the principle that the successful Party should recover its costs,
but considers that a substantial part of the Claimant’s case was not accepted and that in
the circumstances it would not be fair to impose the entire costs upon the Respondent.
Accordingly, it reduces the costs claimed (US $9,233,758) by 25% and decides that the
Respondent should reimburse the Claimant in the sum of US $6,925,318.50.

(K) | INTEREST

The Tribunal has decided that compound interest is payable on sums due to Claimant
from the date on which the payment should have been made to Claimant (e.g., each day
on which there was a difference between the actual rate toll revenues and the non-

pesified, revised toll revenues).

Compound interest is payable on any and all sums due under this Decision from the date

of the Decision until the date when the payment of such sums is made.

86

334. Interest is payable at the rates of short-term US Treasury Bills at the relevant times,

compounded quarterly.

(L) THE SUM TO BE PAID

335. The Tribunal has not been able, on the basis of the information submitted by the Parties,
to calculate the actual sum that results from the application of the principles set out
above. This Decision orders the payment of that sum; and if the Parties are unable to
agree within three months on the actual sum in US dollars payable as a result of this
Decision, the Tribunal will invite each Party to submit, simultaneously and within a
further two months, a brief setting out that Party’s calculation of each element of the sum
due in accordance with paragraph 325, and an explanation of the points on which there is

disagreement. The Tribunal will then fix the actual sum payable.

87

VI.

DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL ON LIABILITY

336.

On the basis of the foregoing, the Tribunal DECIDES as follows:

Having already determined (by a majority) that it has jurisdiction over the claims in this
case, the Tribunal concludes, by a majority, that claims made by Claimant in its capacity
as a lender to PdL are inadmissible. All the other objections by Respondent to the

admissibility of Claimant’s claims, are rejected;

As explained in paragraphs 209-288, Respondent breached its obligations under Article 2
of the BIT to grant to Claimant fair and equitable treatment, by (1) the failure to restore
and redress the commercial balance that had been secured by the Concession Contract,
after that balance had been disrupted by the pesification Law, Law 25,561, on 6 January
2002; and (2) the pesification of operation and maintenance expenses in Resolution 14 of

30 June 2003, and reparation is due in respect of those breaches;

The Tribunal finds that it does not need to resolve Claimant’s claims concerning Full
Protection and Security [BIT Articles 2(1) and 4(1)], expropriation [BIT Article 4(2)],
arbitrary and discriminatory measures, and ‘observance of obligations’ or ‘umbrella
clause’, because they are all based on essentially the same arguments as the claims based
upon the FET standard. As noted under paragraph 291, it has not been argued that these
other standards entail a different approach to causation or to determination of quantum, or
to liability, and the Tribunal considers that these additional grounds for the claims are

adequately addressed by its decisions in respect to the FET standard;

As is explained in paragraphs 292-301, Respondent’s submission that the breaches in the
present case can be excused or exculpated by reason of the economic crisis and

‘necessity’ under customary international law, is rejected;

Claimant is entitled to 26% of the damages caused to PdL by Respondent, corresponding
to its share in the equity of PdL, and the Tribunal decides, by a majority, that such

damages are to be assessed as at the date of this Decision;

88

The political risk insurance payment that Claimant had arranged with the German
Government should not be deducted from the amount due to Claimant, as explained in

paragraph 309;

Since the Tribunal has not been able, on the basis of the information provided by the
Parties, to calculate the actual compensation to be paid, the Parties are to calculate and
submit, in accordance with the principles set out in paragraph 325, the information

required under paragraph 335, in the manner and within the time limits indicated therein;

As decided in paragraphs 332-334, interest on all sums due to Claimant from the date on
which the payment should have been made to Claimant, and on any and all sums due
under this Decision from the date of the Decision until the date when the payment of such
sums is made is payable at the rates of short-term US Treasury Bills at the relevant times,

compounded quarterly.

As to costs, and as explained in paragraphs 329-331, Respondent should reimburse the

Claimant in the sum of US$6,925,318.50.

Done in English and in Spanish, both versions being equally authentic.

89

Unerleg Wh Brepae—
Honorable Charles N. Brower Mr. istopher Thomas, Q.C.

Arbitrator Arbitrator

bra pontone—

Professor Vaughan Lowe
President of the Tribunal

 

