INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the matter between

HRVATSKA ELEKTROPRIVREDA D.D.
(Claimant)

and

THE REPUBLIC OF SLOVENIA
(Respondent)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/05/24)

 

DECISION ON THE TREATY INTERPRETATION ISSUE

 

Members of the Tribunal

The Hon. Charles N. Brower, Arbitrator
Mr Jan Paulsson, Arbitrator
Mr David A. R. Williams, Q.C., President

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms Aissatou Diop

Representing the Claimant Representing the Respondent
Mr Robert W. Hawkins Mr Stephen Jagusch
Mr Stephen M. Sayers Mr Mark Levy

Hunton & Williams LLP Mr Laurent Gouiffés

Mr Anthony Sinclair
Allen & Overy LLP

Table of Contents

CLAIMANT: HRVATSKA EL! D.D.

THE PARTIES AND THE NATURE OF THEIR DISPUTE.....

 

 

: THE REPUBLIC OF SLOVENIA.

 

OTHER ENTITIES RELEVANT TO THE DISPUTE...

THE NATURE OF THE DISPUTE.

 

The Krko Nuclear Power Plant.
Elektrana Kr3ko vu

Elektro-Slovenija, d.o.o. Ljubljana.

a Re DB RA

PROCEDURAL HISTORY LEADING TO PROCEDURAL ORDER (NO 4) OF 6 OCTOBER 2008

DIRECTING DETERMINATION OF THE TRUE INTERPRETATION OF THE 2001 AGREEMENT (“THE

TREATY INTERPRETATION ISSUE”)...
Mm.

IV. THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS

THE OPERATION OF NEK IN THE 90S AND THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE PARTIES...

6

 

SUMMARY OF THE FACTS.....

 

 

THE 10

 

The 1970 Agr ished the Parity Principle. 1

 

The 1974 Pooling Agreement Continued the Parity Principle...

 

The 1982 Annex to the Pooling Agreement Further Implemented the Parity Principle .....
The 1982 Self-Management Agreement Extended the Parity Principle.

 

The Creation of a D issioning Fund 16

 

The Replacement of the Steam Generators at the Krsko NPP ..

 

The Dispute on the Appointment of NEK’s Deputy General Manager ....

 

The Dispute over HEP’s Financial Obligations towards the Kr3ko NPP.
NEK’s Financial Problem: 21

The Nuclear Safety Concerns at the Krko NPP...

 

The Suspension of Electricity Deliveries to HEP....

 

Slovenia‘s Proposals For an Agreement Over Electricity Supply to HEP.
The 1998 Decree 24

THe 2001 26

 

 

Negotiations Leading to the 2001 Agreement...

 

 

 

The Content of the 2001 Agi 27
The Ratification of the 2001 Agi 31
NEK’s OFFERS FOR SALE OF ELECTRICIT 31

 

CLAIMANT'S SUBMISSIONS ON THE RESPONDENT'S LIABILITY UNDER THE 2001 AGREEMENT...

 

 

THE TREATY Issue
CLAIMANT'S REPLY SUBMISSIONS ON THE RESPONDENT'S LIABILITY UNDER THE 2001 AGREEMENT...

CLAIMANT'S SUBMISSIONS ON IMPLIED TREATY TERMS ...

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ON Case A15 36
V. RELEVANT PRINCIPLES OF TREATY INTERPRETATION...
Vi. DISCUSSION. 39
THE TRIBUNALS JURISDICTION 40
THE TREATY’S TERMS 40
OBJECT AND PURPOSE, 43
THE TREATY’S CONTEXT. 45
ARTICLE 32 OF THE VIENNA Ci 45
GOOD FAITH. 48
THE NON-ISSUE OF RETROACTIVITY 49

 

VII. THE DECISION. 51

I. THE PARTIES AND THE NATURE OF THEIR DISPUTE
CLAIMANT: HRVATSKA ELEKTROPRIVREDA, D.D.

1. The Claimant, Hrvatska elektroprivreda, d.d. (“HEP”), is the national electric
company of Croatia. It was formed in July 1990 pursuant to the 1990 Electricity Act
by the consolidation of 119 formerly independent electricity organisations. In 1994
HEP’s status changed from a state-owned company to a joint-stock company. From
1994 to the present 100% of the stock in HEP has been owned by the Government of
Croatia.

RESPONDENT: THE REPUBLIC OF SLOVENIA

2. The Respondent, the Republic of Slovenia (“Slovenia”), came into existence on 25
June 1991 when the Slovenian parliament declared independence from the former
Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.”

OTHER ENTITIES RELEVANT TO THE DISPUTE

The Krko Nuclear Power Plant

3. The socialist republics of Slovenia and Croatia agreed in the 1970s to jointly construct
and operate a nuclear power plant in Slovenia, the Krsko Nuclear Power Plant
(“Krsko NPP”). The construction of the Krsko NPP commenced in 1974. The Kr’ko
NPP has been in commercial operation since 1983. It is located just outside of the
town of Krsko in south-eastern Slovenia, approximately 15 kilometres west of the
border between Croatia and Slovenia.*

Nuklearna Elektrana Krsko vu

4, Nuklearna elektrana Kriko (“NEK”), a limited liability company, is a “work-
organisation”; it was established as a joint venture by the national electricity
companies of Croatia and Slovenia in 1974 to build and operate the Kr8ko NPP. NEK
applied for and holds the licence to operate the Kr8ko NPP.

Elektro-Slovenija, d.o.o. Ljubljana

5. Elektro-Slovenija, d.o.o, Ljubljana (““ELES-GEN”) is a wholly-owned subsidiary of
Elektro-Slovenija, d.o.o. (“ELES”), the national electric power transmission company
of Slovenia.

THE NATURE OF THE DISPUTE

6. This case arises out of a dispute between HEP and Slovenia concerning the ownership
and operation of the Krsko NPP. The plant is a significant national power resource for
both countries.

' Claimant's Memorial on the Merits (“Claimant’s Memorial”), para 13
2 Claimant's Memorial, para 14

> Claimant's Memorial, paras 15-16

7. The Krsko NPP was designed and constructed in the 1970s with funds contributed
equally by the national power industries of the Socialist Republics of Slovenia and
Croatia when they were both still part of the former Yugoslavia. The costs of design,
development and construction totalled US $1.2 billion. HEP is the successor-in-
interest of the original Croatian investors that contributed US $600 million to design
and construct the Plant. The Krsko NPP constituted the single largest foreign
investment of any Croatian company at the time.

8. The financing, construction, operation, management and use of the Krsko NPP was
regulated by four inter-related agreements entered into by the Socialist Republics of
Slovenia and Croatia, together with representatives of their national power industries,
one each in 1970 and 1974 and two in 1982 (the “Governing Agreements”).

9. The cornerstone of the Governing Agreements was the principle that the co-investors
were to be 50:50 partners in all aspects of the plant construction, management, use
and operations. Each co-owner, thus, had the right to receive 50 percent of the power
output of the plant at prices to be determined in accordance with the Governing
Agreements. This principle became known as the “parity principle.”

10. Slovenia and Croatia both declared their independence in 1991. During the next
several years, the Slovenian Government adopted a series of measures that were ~
viewed by HEP as inconsistent with the parity principle and the basic provisions of
the Governing Agreements. On July 30, 1998, the Slovenians disconnected the
electricity lines from the Krsko NPP to Croatia and terminated all electricity
deliveries to HEP, and issued a Governmental “Decree” which HEP claims affected
its rights as a 50 percent owner and manager of the plant.

11, Following Slovenia’s displacement of HEP from its role as a 50 percent owner of the
Krsko NPP, the governments of the two countries entered into negotiations aimed at
restoring HEP’s rights. Those talks eventually stalled over financial issues. In mid-
2001, however, Dr Goran Granic, the Deputy Prime Minister of Croatia, proposed a
settlement approach that ultimately broke the deadlock. Dr Granic suggested that,
rather than continuing to debate past financial differences, the parties, in essence,
should “wipe the slate clean” as of an agreed date in the future. Under Dr Granic’s
proposal, all of the parties’ claims up to this agreed date would be waived and, on that
agreed date, deliveries of electricity to HEP from the Kr8ko NPP were to be restored.
At a meeting of the Prime Ministers of Croatia and Slovenia held in Rijeka, Croatia
on June 9, 2001, the Prime Ministers formally endorsed Dr Granic’s settlement
approach, and they agreed upon June 30, 2002 as the date for resumption of deliveries
of electricity to HEP, and the date through which all financial claims were to be
waived. These agreements were recorded in the Agreement Between the Government
of the Republic of Croatia and the Government of the Republic of Slovenia on
Regulation of the Status and Other Legal Relations Regarding the Investment, Use,
and Dismantling of Nuclear Power Plant Kr8ko (the “2001 Agreement”)*.

12. HEP contends that Slovenia failed to restore HEP’s rights as a 50 percent owner of

the Kr8ko NPP or to resume electricity deliveries from the plant by June 30, 2002, as
agreed in the 2001 Agreement. Slovenia did not ratify the 2001 Agreement until late

“ Exhibit C-185 (a copy of the 2001 Agreement is attached to this Decision.)

February of 2003, and Slovenia did not resume deliveries of electricity from the
Kr8ko NPP to HEP until April 19, 2003.

In this proceeding, HEP seeks compensation for the financial losses it alleges that it
has suffered as a result of Slovenia’s failure to resume deliveries of electricity from
the Krsko NPP to HEP by the 30 June, 2002 date established in the 2001 Agreement.
HEP advances two independent legal bases for its claim.

First, HEP alleges that Slovenia’s termination of electricity deliveries to HEP on July
30, 1998, together with the issuance that same day of a Decree removing HEP’s rights
as a 50 percent owner of the Krsko NPP, violated HEP’s right as an investor under
Articles 10(1) and 13 of the Energy Charter Treaty (the “ECT Claims”). HEP
contends that those violations continued until deliveries of electricity were restored to
HEP on April 19, 2003. HEP says that in the 2001 Agreement, properly construed, it
agreed to waive its ECT claims accruing up to June 30, 2002. HEP contends it did
not, however, waive its ECT claims that accrued during the period July 1, 2002 to
April 19, 2003.

Separately, and independently, HEP asserts a claim against Slovenia for breach of its
obligation under the 2001 Agreement to restore electricity deliveries to HEP from the
Krsko NPP by June 30, 2002.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY LEADING TO PROCEDURAL ORDER (NO 4) OF
6 OCTOBER 2008 DIRECTING DETERMINATION OF THE TRUE
INTERPRETATION OF THE 2001 AGREEMENT (“THE TREATY
INTERPRETATION ISSUE”)

The Claimant is represented by Messrs Robert W. Hawkins and Stephen M. Sayers of
Hunton and Williams LLP, 1900 K Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20036, United
States. The Respondent is represented by Messrs Stephen Jagusch, Mark Levy,
Laurent Gouiffés and Anthony Sinclair of Allen & Overy LLP, One New Change,
London EC4M9QQ, United Kingdom.

The Request for Arbitration was filed on 4 November 2005 by the Claimant.

On 27 February 2006, the parties entered into an Agreement on Constitution of the
Tribunal’ under Rule 2 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules (“ICSID Rules”). Pursuant to
clauses 3, 4 and 8 of the Agreement, the Tribunal was to consist of three arbitrators,
one arbitrator to be appointed by each party, and the two party-appointed arbitrators to
choose and appoint the President of the Tribunal. Accordingly, the Claimant
appointed the Honorable Charles Brower and the Respondent appointed Mr Jan
Paulsson. Judge Brower and Mr Paulsson together appointed as President of the
Tribunal Mr David A. R. Williams, QC.

After all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments, the Acting Secretary-
General by letter dated 20 April 2006 informed the parties that the Tribunal was
deemed to be constituted and the proceeding to have commenced on that day,

* Agreement on Constitution of the Tribunal in HEP v. Slovenia (ICSID Case No, ARB/05/24), submitted to the

Centre under cover of letter of 28 February 2006.

20.

21.
22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

pursuant to Rule 6(1) of the Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings
(Arbitration Rules) of the Centre (the “ICSID Arbitration Rules”).

The Tribunal held its first session in London on 3 July 2006, in accordance with
ICSID Arbitration Rule 13(1). P dural matters were di: and agreed. All
conclusions reached were reflected in the Minutes of the First Session.

 

The Claimant filed its Memorial on the Merits on 10 November 2006.

By letter dated 8 December 2006, the Respondent notified the Claimant and the
Tribunal that it objected to the jurisdiction of the Centre and to the competence of the
Tribunal to decide the claims set out in the Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits. The
Respondent sought that its objections to jurisdiction be determined as a preliminary
matter, and separately from the merits of the dispute. Furthermore, the Respondent
proposed that the date for filing its Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and
Admissibility be moved to 30 March 2007.

On 14 December 2006 the Tribunal invited both parties, on a provisional basis and
subject to its decision on bifurcation, to consider an appropriate date for a hearing on
jurisdiction should the Tribunal decide to bifurcate the proceeding.

The Claimant, by letter dated 19 December 2006, replied to the Respondent’s
objections to jurisdiction and bifurcation. The Claimant objected to the Respondent’s
suggested new date for filing its Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and
Admissibility on the basis that it was contrary to the timetable already consented to by
the parties at the first session of the Tribunal.

On 22 December 2006 the Tribunal directed the Respondent to file, by 19 January
2007, a reply to the Claimant’s letter of 19 December 2006. The Respondent replied
on 22 December 2006, reiterating its request for bifurcation and for leave to file on 30
March 2007 its Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Admissibility. The
Respondent noted that the timetable set out in the Minutes of the First Session had
been conditional on the Respondent not raising, as a preliminary matter, any
objections to jurisdiction and admissibility.

Responding to the Tribunal’s letter of 14 December 2006, the Claimant stated that it
was unable to propose a procedural timetable for a first round of proceedings whilst
the Tribunal’s decision on the Respondent’s request for bifurcation was still pending.
In a further letter dated 5 February 2007 the Claimant submitted its proposed
procedural timetable. In order that its proposals be implemented, the Claimant
suggested that the Tribunal hold a telephone conference between the parties.

The Secretary of the Tribunal notified the parties by e-mail on 15 February 2007 that
the Tribunal had decided, under ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(4), to reject the
Respondent’s request for bifurcated proceedings dealing with its jurisdictional
objections first and separately from the merits of the dispute.

In relation to discovery, the Respondent submitted to the Claimant a request for the
production of documents on 26 March 2007. The parties then exchanged some
correspondence on the issue. On 6 June 2007 the Tribunal issued an Order on
Respondent’s requests for production of documents. On 21 June 2007 the Tribunal

29.

30.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

issued Procedural Consent Order No.2 setting out a revised timetable for document
production and the submission of pleadings by the parties.

The Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial and Memorial on Objections to
Jurisdiction and Admissibility on 6 July 2007.

The Claimant filed an amended request for the production of documents on 23 August
2007. Subsequently, by letter dated 25 September 2007, the Claimant applied to the
Tribunal for an order directing that the Respondent produce several outstanding
categories of documents that had been requested.

Further to the parties’ respective submissions on the Claimant’s document request, the
Tribunal, by e-mail dated 9 November 2007, requested that the parties provide
additional comments on the progress of their production of certain documents the
requests for which were still in dispute.

The Claimant filed its Reply Memorial on the Merits on 10 December 2007.

On 25 January 2008 the Tribunal issued an Order on Claimant’s Requests for
Production of Documents. Following the Claimant’s revised request for document
production of 4 February 2008 and the ensuing submissions of the parties thereon, the
Tribunal issued an Order on Claimant’s Revised Request for Production of
Documents on | April 2008.

The Respondent filed its Rejoinder on 7 April 2008.

In preparation for the hearing, the parties notified the Tribunal by separate e-mails
dated 11 April 2008 of those witnesses and experts they each wished to cross examine
at the May 2008 oral proceeding in Paris.

The Tribunal issued a Procedural Order on 14 April 2008 communicating the
schedule for the hearing set to commence on 5 May 2008. A telephone conference
was held on 21 April 2008 between the Tribunal and the parties to address procedural
matters relating to the hearing. The agreed list of documents was issued on 1 May
2008. The parties filed their respective Pre-Hearing Submissions on 2 May 2008.

The hearing commenced on 5 May 2008 at the offices of the World Bank in Paris.

Previously, on 25 April 2008, Allen & Overy, counsel for the Respondent, had
submitted the Respondent's list of persons who would be attending the substantive
hearing in Paris, including a Mr David Mildon, QC of Essex Court Chambers,
London, where the President of the Tribunal is a door tenant. The Claimant expressed
concern at the addition to the Respondent’s legal team of counsel affiliated with the
same chambers as the President of the Tribunal at such a late stage in the proceedings,
and requested that, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rules 19 and 39, the Tribunal order
that the Respondent refrain from using the services of Mr Mildon, QC. Following
written submissions from the parties, the Tribunal ruled that Mr Mildon, QC, could
not continue to participate as counsel in the case.

Following the Tribunal’s ruling on the participation of Mr Mildon, QC, the hearing
proceeded in the afternoon of 6 May 2008 on all except certain specified matters
relating to liability and quantum. Those matters were reserved for a future hearing.

40.

41.

42.

43.

45.

On 30 May 2008 the Respondent made an application in respect of the ECT Claims
requesting that:

the arbitral tribunal determine and adjudge that the ECT [C]laims need not be determined or
alternatively that the proceedings in relation to them should be stayed until such time as the
Tribunal can finally rule on whether it is necessary to determine them. This is because the
ECT [C]laims are, on the basis of how HEP has put its case and in any event as a matter of
irrefutable logic, legally and factually irrelevant to the full and final determination of HEP’s
claims in this proceedings.

ly, the Respondent filed an lication for further disc! to be
considered by the Tribunal in the event that the Respondent’s application in relation
to the ECT Claims was denied. On 16 June 2008 the Claimant lodged its opposition
to the Respondent’s application in respect of the ECT Claims. On the same day, the
Tribunal issued Procedural Order (No.3) with directions for the second phase of the
hearing.

On 8 July 2008 the Respondent replied to the Claimant’s opposition to the
Respondent’s application in respect of the ECT Claims. The Claimant filed a
rejoinder on 17 July 2008 concerning the two applications filed by the Respondent on
30 May 2008.

By e-mail dated 28 July 2008, the President of the Tribunal informed the parties that,
having carefully considered the Respondent’s application in respect of the ECT
claims, it had come to the provisional view that it should focus on determining the
fundamental issue of the true interpretation of the 2001 Agreement (the “Treaty
Interpretation Issue”). The President of the Tribunal concluded that the question of
liability turned on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, which should be determined first in
the proceedings. Each party was requested to advise the Tribunal of whether it would
agree to a hearing to determine the Treaty Interpretation Issue and to make
submissions on how the Treaty Interpretation Issue should be framed.

By letter dated 8 August 2008, the Respondent agreed with the Tribunal’s suggestion
that a hearing be held to determine the Treaty Interpretation Issue. The Claimant
responded on 14 August 2008, contending that it was not necessary to hold separate
hearings on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, whether Slovenia had violated the ECT
and on quantum. Instead, it submitted that the ECT claims should be determined
alongside the Treaty Interpretation Issue.

In Procedural Order (No.4) dated 6 October 2008 the Tribunal concluded that,
between the claims under the 2001 Agreement and the ECT Claims, it was preferable
to decide first the question of whether the former claims were tenable under the 2001
Agreement. The Tribunal noted that a ruling on the matter favourable to the Claimant
would potentially obviate the need to consider the ECT Claims. Similarly, a ruling
favourable to the Respondent could preclude the ECT Claims. Nonetheless, the
Tribunal stated that if the Claimant failed on its claims under the 2001 Agreement,
and it was not precluded by the Tribunal’s ruling from pursuing the ECT Claims
further, it would be able to do so in the 2009 hearings. Pursuant to Article 44 of the
ICSID Convention and its inherent powers the Tribunal ordered:

qa) ‘The question as to the true interpretation of the 2001 Treaty (ie, HEP exhibit 185, the
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Croatia and the Government

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

Tl.

of the Republic of Slovenia on Regulation of Status and Other Legal Relations
Regarding the Investment, Use and Dismantling of Nuclear Power Plant Kriko dated
December 19, 2001) be the subject of a hearing at the World Bank Headquarters,
Avenue lena, Paris, France commencing at 10.00 am on Monday 24 November and
concluding at 5.00pm on Tuesday, 25 November 2008.

(2) Following the hearing the Tribunal will determine whether the Claimant is entitled to
succeed on its claim as to liability ie, its assertion that it is entitled to compensation
‘or damages under the 2001 Treaty measured by the difference between the cost to it
of electricity during the period 1 July 2002 until 19 Apri! 2003 and the (allegedly
lower) cost to it had the electricity been supplied to it by the Respondent based on the
substantive provisions of the Treaty.

On 24 October 2008 the Claimant filed its Submissions on the Respondent’s Liability
under the 2001 Agreement. The Respondent filed its Submissions on the Treaty
Interpretation Issue on 14 November 2008. The Claimant filed its Reply Submissions
on the Respondent’s Liability under the 2001 Agreement on 19 November 2008.

Pursuant to Procedural Order (No.4), a hearing on the Treaty Interpretation Issue was
held at the World Bank Headquarters, Paris between 24-25 November 2008.

On 3 December 2008 the Respondent requested the Tribunal’s permission to
introduce a new exhibit, Exhibit No. 326. By e-mail dated 4 December 2008 the
Claimant objected to the Respondent’s attempt to introduce Exhibit No. 326.

In response to an invitation from the Tribunal during the hearing on 25 November
2008, the Claimant filed its Submissions on Implied Treaty Terms on 12 December
2008. One the same day, the Respondent also filed its Submissions on Case A415,
responding to the Tribunal’s request that the parties comment on Islamic Republic of
Iran v. The United States of America, Partial Award No.529-A15-FT, 6 May 1992
(“Case A15.”)®

On 10 February 2009, the Tribunal issued a ruling admitting the Respondent’s
proposed Exhibit No.326. The Claimant made further Submissions on the
Respondent’s “[A]cquiescence [A]rgument” and Exhibit No. 326 on 3 March 2009.
On the same date the Respondent also made further Submissions on Acquiescence
and Exhibit No.326.

SUMMARY OF THE FACTS

The material facts established by the parties’ pleadings, the documents, and the
relevant evidence are set out below. Where there is disagreement between the parties
as to the course of events, or the reasons behind the events, that disagreement is noted.
If one party has asserted a fact and the other has not disputed it, the fact has been
taken as uncontested.

THE GOVERNING AGREEMENTS

$2.

In the late 1960s, Slovenia and Croatia were often affected by power shortages. The
two republics agreed to jointly build two nuclear power plants, one in Slovenia and,

© 28 fran-U.S. C.T.R 112

53.

following its construction, one in Croatia.’ However, due to a changing political
climate following the nuclear accident in Chernobyl, Ukraine, only the nuclear power
plant situated in Slovenia was ever built.

The contractual framework for the construction and operation of the Krsko NPP is
outlined by the four Governing Agreements: the Agreement of the Socialist Republic
of Croatia and the Socialist Republic of Slovenia on Construction and Use of Krsko
Nuclear Power Plant dated October 27, 1970 (the “1970 Agreement”); the
Agreement on Pooling of Resources for Joint Construction and Joint Exploitation of
Kr8ko Nuclear Power Plant dated March 22, 1974 (the “1974 Pooling Agreement”);!°
the Annex of the Agreement on Pooling of Resources for Joint Construction and Joint
Exploitation of Krisko Nuclear Power Plant dated April 16, 1982 (the “1982 Annex to
the Pooling A );! and the Self-Mi Agr on Regulation of
Mutual Rights and Liabilities Between the Incorporators and KrSko Nuclear Power
Plant dated April 16, 1982 (the “1982 Self-Management Agreement”). 2

The 1970 Agreement Established the Parity Principle

54,

55.

56.

Pursuant to the 1970 Agreement, Croatia and Slovenia committed to “support the
action of [the] electric-p ies and other i from
Croatia and Slovenia as regards the construction of [the] joint nuclear power plant”
and to “provide all the necessary assistance and support necessary to achieve the goal
of the said action.” Clause 4 of the 1970 Agreement incorporates the “parity
principle”:

The Republics deem that the joint investors from both Republics should participate
in financing of construction of [the] joint nuclear power plant in equal parts and
that their rights and liabilities should reflect such equal parts.

The same principles should apply in establishing the rights and obligations during
the operation of the joint nuclear power plant.

Clause 7 of the 1970 Agreement provided that the co-founders would be jointly liable
for the procurement and repayment of foreign loans.

Clause 9 provides as follows:

The Republics agree and understand that, in the case the economic measures and instruments
are introduced in any of the two Republics, which adversely affect the construction or use of
the joint nuclear power plant, as compared to the conditions in force at the beginning of its
construction, such measures and instruments shall not have any effect on the rights and
liabilities of the investors from the other Republic.

7 Clause 3, 1970 Agreement, Exhibit C-1

® Slovenia's Counter-Memorial and Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Admissibility (Respondent's

Counter-Memorial”), paras 15-16, 24-27

° Exhibit C-1

° Exhibit C-2
" Exhibit C-3
} Exhibit C-4

57.

The specific details of the business arrangements were left to be determined by the
joint investors, the electric power companies of Croatia and Slovenia, “in such a way
that... the investors practically, directly or indirectly, have the rights to such part of
the capacity of joint nuclear power plant which is directly related to the amount of
their investment.”"*

The 1974 Pooling Agreement Continued the Parity Principle

58.

60.

61.

62.

The 1974 Pooling Agreement was concluded on 22 March 1974 as the construction of
the plant was about to begin between Elektroprivreda Zagreb, on behalf of the electric
power companies of Croatia, and Savske Elektrarne Ljubljana, on behalf of electric
power companies of Slovenia. Clause 2 of the 1974 Pooling Agreement stated that the
parties would: (i) permanently pool the resources for construction and start-up of the
Krsko NPP; and (ii) incorporate a joint venture company, NEK, through which they
would jointly build, operate and use the Krsko NPP.

Each of the Parties would cover 50% of the construction expenses and be liable for
50% of the total liabilities of NEK.'* Concerning the management structure of NEK,
the 1974 Pooling Agreement stipulates that the Management Board would have 22
members, with each appointing 10 members and the parties jointly appointing
two additional members. '* Clause 21.3 stipulates that NEK “shall take care to fill the
managerial and the key work posts in such a manner that the Parties are represented in
equal proportions.”

Regarding the exploitation of the Kr3ko NPP, the 1974 Pooling Agreement stated
that: (i) each of the parties would be entitled to receive 50% of the total available
power and electricity generated by the plant;'* (ii) the parties would jointly establish
the price of power from Krsko NPP, and any profit would be allocated between the
Parties in a 50:50 proportion;'” and (iii) all risks associated with the operation of
Kr8ko NPP would be shared 50:50 by the parties. '®

The first paragraph of Clause 6.1 of the 1974 Pooling Agreement “Liabilities of
Incorporators towards NE Krsko, Company in the Process of Incorporation” reads:

Each of the Parties shall be liable to NE Kr8ko, company in the process of
incorporation, up to the amount of 50% of the total liabilities.

HEP claims that Clause 6.1 of the 1974 Pooling Agreement provided a cross-
guarantee for unpaid liabilities of NEK, i.e. each party was to be liable for 50% of the
total liabilities of NEK.'° Slovenia disagrees. It considers that Clause 6.1 only applied
to liabilities of the parties until the incorporation of NEK.

"3 Clause 11, 1970 Agreement
«Clauses 3.4, 3.5 and 6.1, 1974 Pooling Agreement

'S Clause 9.1.3, 1974 Pooling Agreement

6 Clause 17.1.2, 1974 Pooling Agreement
17 Clause 17.2.6, 1974 Pooling Agreement
*8 Clause 17.3, 1974 Pooling Agreement

'® Claimant's Memorial, para 32

63.

The |

Clause 17.1.2 of the Agreement reads:

In case the Party from SR Slovenia fails to provide to the Party from SR Croatia the
use of power and electricity from NE Kr8ko pursuant to provisions hereof because
it has used the power and electricity itself, it shall compensate to the Party from SR
Croatia the difference in price of power plants or from other territories due to such
failure, including the electricity acquired abroad, taking into account the reasonable
nature of offers for supply as regards the price.

Finally, the 1974 Pooling Agreement provided for arbitration for the s settlement of any
disputes arising between the Parties in connection to an Agreement.”

Annex ‘ooling Agreement Further Implemented the Parity Principl

On 16 April 1982, by which time construction of the Kr3ko NPP was completed and
operations at the Plant about to begin, the electric companies of Croatia and Slovenia
entered into the 1982 Annex to the Pooling Agreement. The main reason for this
annex was to update the 1974 Pooling Agreement and to bring it into conformity with
the Associated Labour Act (the “ALA”), legislation passed by the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to govern “work organisations” such as NEK. The 1982 Annex to the
Pooling Agreement did not change in any material respect the basic structure of the
joint venture relationship established by the 1974 Pooling Agreement.

The 1982 Self- A ded the Parity Principle

65.

66.

Together with the 1982 Annex to the Pooling Agreement, the 1982 Self-Management
Agreement was entered into on 16 April 1982 between: (i) the Associated Electric
Power Industry Companies of Slovenia, Maribor; (ii) the Association of Electric
Power Industry Companies of Croatia, Zagreb; and (iii) Krsko NPP, in the process of
incorporation.”' The bulk of the 1982 Self-Management Agreement is devoted to: (i)
a delineation of the rights and liabilities of the r national electricity companies with
respect to electricity produced at the Krsko NPP;” (ii) NEK’s obligations with respect
to Kriko NPP’s operations; and (iii) the method of calculation of the price of
electricity.”*

According to the 1982 Self-Management Agreement, Krsko NPP was to supply
electricity only to the electricity companies of the two countries in equal
proportions,”* and the price of electricity was to be mutually determined by the two
companies for each business year in advance. 25 The price of electricity was to include
elements such as costs, investment maintenance and. depreciation.” The costs and
income estimate was to encompass “costs of nuclear fuel and other costs relating to

° Clause 22, 1974 Pooling Agreement

2! The Agreement stipulates that it is entered into between the employces of these companies (according to the

system of social ownership).

22 Clause 5, 1982 Self-Management Agreement

> Clauses 7 and 8, 1982 SelfManagement Agreement

Clause 6.3, 1982 Self-Management Agreement
5 Clause 7.1, 1982 Self-Management Agreement
26 Clauses 7.3 and 8.4, 1982 Self-Management Agreement

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

the aforementioned fuel [...] other material costs [...] investment maintenance [...]
depreciation [...] income.”””

The 1982 Self Management Agreement provided for the appointment of the Board of
Directors (“BoD”) and the Management Board. The BoD was to consist of twelve
members, four to be appointed by the electricity companies of each of the two
Republics, and four to be appointed by NEK. The Management Board was to consist
of six members, three appointed by the Slovenian companies and three from the
Croatian ones. The Slovenian national electricity companies were to appoint: (i) the
Chairman of the Management Board; (ii) the Manager of the Economic and Finance
Division; and (iii) the Manager of the General, Legal and Personnel Division. The
Croatian national electricity companies would appoint: (i) the Vice-Chairman of the
Management Board; (ii) the Manager of the Engineering Division; (iii) the Manager
of the Commercial Division.”*

Clause 15.1 provided for the resolution of disputes by arbitration of the Association of
Yugoslav Electric Power Industry. Clause 16.3 provided that “none of the participants
in this Agreement may transfer the rights and obligations resulting from this
Agreement without the consent of other participants”.

Slovenia hasises that the G ing Agi are to be und d and
interpreted within the context of the socialist political and legal regime of Yugoslavia
at the relevant time. The Kr8ko NPP has never been in the ownership of HEP. NEK
was a “work organisation”, a “unique embodiment of the Yugoslav socialist legal
system”. It was “socially-owned” and therefore had no owners. Instead, it was
managed by its workers. The two groups of electricity companies were only the co-
founders of the plant, and had specific rights and liabilities according to the
Governing Agreements (e.g. to use an electricity share from the Krsko NPP and to
participate in the joint decision-making organs).”” They were not, however, co-owners
of Krsko NPP, as HEP argues.

 

The Governing Agreements did not deal with the issue of disposal or storage of
radioactive waste. The only relevant provision is Clause 17.4.1 of the 1982 Annex to
the Pooling Agreement:

The Parties shall take all measures to provide, upon completion of construction of
NE KrSko, the security measures for prevention of possible adverse consequences
for the human environment.

‘The costs of performance of measures from the previous paragraph, together with
the costs arising from disposal of nuclear fuel and radioactive waste shall be borne
by the Parties from each Republic in proportion 50:50.

Slovenia considers that the intention was that each State would be responsible for the
removal and safe storage of waste of the plant on its territory. This was the reason
why no relevant provisions were included in the Governing Agreements. According to
Slovenia, “in the event that the second plant was not built, it was evident that

27 Clause 8.4, 1982 Self-Management Agreement
%* Clauses 10.2 and 12, 1982 Self-Management Agreement
2° Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, paras 19, 21-22

responsibility would be shared between the parties, in line with the parity principle as
envisaged in the 1970 Agreement. a

‘THE OPERATION OF NEK IN THE 90S AND THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE PARTIES

72. Croatia submits that its investment in Krsko NPP amounts to US$600m. Slovenia
contests this amount.*!

73. | Commercial operations at Krsko NPP commenced in January 1983.

74. In July 1990, 119 independent electricity organisations in Croatia were consolidated
to form HEP, a state-owned company. As the legal successor of the Croatian parties to
the 1974 and 1982 Agreements, HEP assumed all of the rights and obligations of the
Croatian investors under the Governing Agreements.»

75. On 25 June 1991 Slovenia and Croatia both declared independence from the former
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Shortly afterwards, differences began to emerge
between the Government of Slovenia on the one hand, and HEP and the Government
of Croatia on the other, with regard to the operation and status of the Krsko NPP and
the application of the Governing Agreements.

76. HEP submits that the Government of Slovenia has taken over the rights of the
Slovenian incorporators of the Krsko NPP. At the end of 1995 the General Manager
of HEP wrote to ELES and Savske Elektrarne Ljubljana po (“Savske Elektrarne”),
two of the Major electricity companies in Slovenia, requesting them to appoint the

of the who would in
In their responses, the two companies stated that the rights of incorporators has been
taken over by the Republic of Slovenia.°?

 

77. In early 1994, the Presidents of Slovenia and Croatia agreed that legal and status
questions regarding the Krsko NPP needed to be regulated with a new inter-State
agreement.» The negotiating process started in March 1994. Slovenia’s position was
that the Governing Agreements did not acquire the status of a treaty when Slovenia
and Croatia became it ign States. , Slovenia
that many of the existing provisions of the Governing ‘Agreements were no longer
appropriate in the new political and legal climate. Croatia thought that the Governing
Agreements should be elevated to the level of a treaty or bilateral contract and should
continue to regulate Krsko NPP matters.** This issue was not resolved until the
signature of the 2001 Agreement on 19 December, 2001.

>° Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, para 23

3! Respondent's Counter-Memorial, fn 3

> Claimant’s Memorial, para 59

33 Exhibits C-43 and C-89; Claimant’s Memorial, paras 77, 78
> Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, para 183

> Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, para 184

The Creation of a Decommissioning Fund

78.

79.

80.

81.

In December 1994 the Slovenian Parliament adopted a “Law on the Fund for
Financing the Decommissioning of the Krsko Nuclear Power Plant and the Disposal
of Radioactive Waste of the Krsko Nuclear Power Plant”.

Croatia states that “at no time did the Government of Slovenia ever consult with HEP,
or any other party from Croatia, regarding any of the financial, legal, administrative or
other requirements imposed by this Law.””” This law offered Slovenia very wide
powers ing the ist of the d issioning p in breach of
the Governing Agreements’ parity principle.””

Slovenia retorts that the “Law on the Fund for Financing the Decommissioning of the
Kr8ko Nuclear Power Plant and the Disposal of Radioactive Waste of the Krsko
Nuclear Power Plant” was a necessary measure in order for it to comply with its
international obligations as a nuclear State:*®

In the eyes of the international community as a result of its status as a nuclear State, it would
ultimately be responsible for the costs of the process of the decommissioning of the Krko
NPP.

Since Slovenia was internationally responsible for the decommissioning costs, it was
compelled to ensure that these responsibilities were met by the creation of the
Decommissioning Fund.“? The Kriko NPP was liable for payments to the
Decommissioning Fund on a monthly basis, collected by NEK by means of a
surcharge factored into the selling price of the electricity produced by Krsko NPP.
The intention was that an equal amount would be charged to both HEP and ELES, in
accordance with the parity principle, and that contributions collected from the buyer
from each State would be credited towards that State’s 50% share of the total cost of
decommissioning. *'

NEK was liable to make payments to the Decommissioning Fund, regardless of
whether it had itself received contributory payments from its buyers. Croatia would
not pay its share of the decommissioning costs.”

The Replacement of the Steam Generators at the Krisko NPP

82.

On 10 February 1995 the Management Board decided on the replacement of the steam
generators.*? In September 1995 the Government of Slovenia issued a “Decision®

* Claimant’s Memorial, para 81

>” Claimant’s Memorial, para 83

>* Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, para 80

» Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, para 79

“° Respondent's Counter-Memorial, para 82

“' Respondent's Counter-Memorial, para 83

 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, para 84

* Claimant's Memorial, para 90; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, para 60

83.

 

86.

supporting a modemisation Programme. In Paragraph 4 of that Decision the
Government of Slovenia announced that:**

In the preparation and realization of the renovation of the NPP Kriko NPP, the
‘Nuclear Power Plant Kr3ko shall act in the capacity of the investor.

According to HEP, Mr Rozman, the General Manager of NEK and a Slovenian
national, based on the Government of Slovenia’s September 1995 Decision ignored
the decision of NEK’s Management Board which mandated a team of two Croatian
and two Slovenian representatives to supervise the steam generator replacement
project. NEK proceeded on its own with respect to the plant modernisation
programme.** Mr RoZman invited HEP to presentations on the progress of the steam
generator replacement programme, but did not form an Operational Team to manage
the modernisation process, as a 1995 KrSko Board directive requested. 46

Slovenia contends that Croatia proposed Mr Vrankié and Mr Udovicic as HEP’s
nominees to the Operational Team, whereas Slovenia did not make any nominations.
Instead, according to the September 1995 Government Decision, it delegated all
competences connected with the modernisation project to NEK. Thus, two employees
of NEK, Messrs RoZman and Novsak, were delegated as Slovenia’s representatives.
When Mr RoZman attended the modernisation project Operational Team meeting on 7
June 1996 on behalf of Slovenia, HEP declined to acknowledge the competence of
Slovenia’s representatives.”

fe on the intment of NEK’s Deputy General Manager

The 1982 Self-Management Agreement provided that the incorporators from Croatia
were to appoint the Deputy General Manager of NEK. In February 1996 the Deputy
General Manager of NEK resigned. By letter dated 4 September 1996, addressed to
Mr RoZman, HEP nominated Mr Vranki¢é as Deputy General Manager. Mr RoZman
rejected this appointment. He noted in his letter of 30 September that the Self-
Management Agreement had become inadequate in the section concerning
personnel, ** that personnel decisions should be based on _ “safety, stability and

i , and that did: for | positions had to be
qualified in the fields of nuclear technology and safe operation of power plants, which
qualifications Mr Vrankié lacked.”

 

In response to continuing differences between the Croatian and Slovenian members of
the NEK Management Board, the Government of Slovenia created by means of a
Decision of 15 May 1997 a “Temporary Management Board”, consisting of four
members nominated by each founder, to oversee NEK.™ Slovenia argues that the

“Exhibit C-41

* Claimant’s Memorial, paras 93 ef seq.

“© Claimant's Memorial, para 101

“” Respondent's Counter-Memorial, para 62
“* Exhibit C-52

“° Claimant’s Memorial, paras 107 et seq.
“° Exhibit C-71; Claimant's Memorial, para 112

87.

89.

90.

Temporary Management Board was created later, in September 1997, by an
agreement of Minister Porges of Croatia and Minister Dragonja of Slovenia in
Portoroz.*!

In a letter dated 9 February 1998, the Slovenian Ministry of Economic Affairs
informed the Chairman of NEK’s Temporary Management Board that it agreed to the
appointment of Mr Vrankié.*? The Temporary Management Board authorised Mr
RoZman to appoint Mr Vranki¢ as Deputy General Manager. Mr Rodman, however,
refused, claiming that Mr Vrankié did not possess the necessary qualifications (for
example, a Senior Reactor Operator Licence (“SRO licence”)).°3

At a meeting of the Temporary Management Board on 24 April 1998, HEP withdrew
its consent to the nomination of Mr Rozman as General Manager of NEK and
declared that it would only resume its participation on the Temporary Management
Board once Mr Vranki¢ was installed as Deputy General Manager. At the same
meeting HEP declared that since Mr Vrankié had not been appointed Deputy General
Manager, after 15 March 1998 HEP would not pay for the electricity it took from the
Kr8ko NPP.**

Slovenia insists on the fact that the only reason why Mr Rozman was not eager to
accept Mr Vranki¢’s appointment was because the latter lacked the necessary
qualifications.** Mr RoZman’s point was not that HEP did not have the right to
nominate NEK personnel, “only that such right was constrained by overarching safety
imperatives.”*° Neither the Temporary Management Board nor Mr Ro%man were
competent to waive mandatory conditions set out in NEK’s Safety Analysis Report
(“SAR”) or NEK’s operating licence.*” Slovenia highlights that the Krsko NPP Safety
Committee (“KSC”) opposed Mr Vrankié’s appointment. **

HEP denies that the reason behind Mr RoZman’s refusal to appoint Mr Vrankié as
Deputy General Manager was the absence of an SRO licence. HEP stresses that: (i
NEK has had three Deputy General Managers who did not have SRO licences; (ii) Mr
Roman based his rejection in his letter of 30 September 1996 primarily on the
grounds that the Governing Agreements were no longer adequate; and (iii) in
February and April 1998 the Government of Slovenia eventually consented to Mr
Vrankié’s appointment, even though he did not have the SRO licence. 9

  

51 Exhibit C-83; Respondent's Counter-Memorial, para 42

2 Claimant’s Memorial, para 114

® Claimant’s Memorial, para 116

* Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, para 55

+ Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, para $0

% Respondent's Counter-Memorial, para 52

5” Respondent's Counter-Memorial, para 53

5 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, para 53
°° Claimant's Reply Memorial on the Merits (“Claimant's Reply”), para 84

The Dispute over HEP’s Financial Obligations towards the Krsko NPP

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

Slovenia emphasises that NEK operates the Krsko NPP on a cost-covering basis.
NEK’s sole source of revenue came from selling the electricity produced by the plant.
Slovenia states that Croatia used to make delayed and incomplete payments for
electricity it received during the nineties, which lead to NEK suffering crippling
debts. NEK’s annual profit and loss account for 1998 showed a total net loss in the
amount of Slovenian tolars (SIT) 5,752 million.©

According to Slovenia, the following table shows the respective debts of HEP and
ELES towards NEK in the period 1996-1998:

 

31 December 1996 | 31 December 1997 | 30 June 1998

 

 

 

 

__|
HEP ELES | HEP ELES |HEP | ELES
1
Total Debt | 9,023 923.8 | 17,703.2 | (credit: | 16,689.5 [ 844.4 |
to NEK in 96.9)
million | | |
sit

 

 

 

 

Slovenia’s calculation also reflects the sums owed by NEK to ELES for pooled
depreciation assets. NEK had paid to HEP its share of these resources (by 1997, NEK
had paid HEP over USD 175.7 million as pooled depreciation funds)°’ but not to
ELES.” Slovenia stresses that HEP did not pay its part of the decommissioning
costs® and of the costs for the modernisation of Krsko NPP.

On 13 September 1997 an agreement was signed in Portoroz between the Croatian
Minister of Economy, Mr Nenad Porges and the Slovenian Minister of Economic
Affairs, Mr Metod Dragonja, according to which agreement the price of electricity
would be calculated “ex plant” for both buyers. Pursuant to that agreement,
decommissioning costs would not be included in the price of electricity, as each State
would regulate independently its share of the costs pending the execution of a new
bilateral agreement that would govern cooperation between the two States including
decommissioning of the Krsko Npp.®

It was agreed that within a month, the Croatian side would provide a guarantee for
coverage of its share of decommissioning costs. According to Slovenia no such

© Respondent's Counter-Memorial, paras 88-89

® Exhibit R-37, p 4

® Respondent's Counter-Memorial, paras 90, 91

® Respondent's Counter-Memorial, paras 96 et seq.
Respondent's Counter-Memorial, paras 100 et seq.
65 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, para 98

96.

97.

98.

99.

guarantee was provided. © HEP disagrees. According to HEP, Croatia did provide
such a guarantee, even though it delayed doing so by approximately five months.”

Following the PortoroZ Agreement, invoices sent to HEP continued to include
decommissioning charges. Slovenia notes that these charges were calculated
separately from the cost elements, and NEK only pressed HEP to pay the electricity
price, and not the decommissioning cost.”

HEP would not pay the amount as established in NEK’s invoices. HEP insisted that it

would pay US2.05 cents per KWh, even though, according to Slovenia, the actual
operating costs in 1997 indicated a price of US3.0841 cents per KWh (not including
decommissioning costs). Slovenia states that despite several meetings between the
ministers of Croatia and Slovenia, HEP continued to make only Partial payments, and
even stopped paying for electricity altogether as of 15 March 1998.”°

HEP argues that Croatia’s refusal to meet its decommissioning obligations prior to
1998 has nothing to do with the disputed i issues in the case. Any such aise should
be solved ding to the dispute provisions of the 2001 A

HEP refers to the witness statement of Damir Begovié and explains how it calculated
the cost of electricity at US2.05 cents per KWh.”* It also denies that it stopped making
any payments as of March 1998. It mentions that during the months, of March to
December 1998 it paid to NEK approximately US$27.2 million.” Moreover,
according to HEP, the calculation of HEP’s debt to NEK by Slovenia is false, for the
following reasons:

. It includes the decommissioning costs, even though it had been agreed in
Portoroz that NEK would not request HEP to pay these charges.

© One of the reasons as to why HEP’s financial obligations towards NEK
appeared to be more extended than the Slovenian investor’s, ELES’s,
obligations, is a result of the Slovenian accounting regulations. HEP claims that
it serviced the loans originally obtained by its predecessor Croatian electric
companies to fund their initia! US$600 million investment in the Krsko NPP
completely independently of NEK. Slovenian loans on the other hand were
transferred to NEK’s books from 1986 onwards, and the debt service was paid
after that by NEK on behalf of ELES.”°

“ Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, para 98

* Claimant's Reply, para 11
® Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, para 99

© Respondent's Counter-Memorial, para 109

™ Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, paras 114 ef seq.

7 Claimant's Reply, para 10

™ Claimant’s Reply, para 109
” Claimant's Reply, para 113
™ Claimant’s Reply, paras 92 et seq.

*5 Claimant's Reply, para 79

100.

. The calculation ought not to include the credit due from NEK to the
incorporators for pooled depreciation assets.”°

Had the above not been taken into account, HEP’s debt to NEK in 1998 would
amount to 3,132 millions SIT, whereas ELES’s debt would be 2,683 million SIT.”
Slovenia disagrees with HEP’s calculation of its debts to NEK.”* It considers for
example that HEP cannot subtract the decommissioning ¢ Sosts from its own debts but
include them in its calculation of ELES’s debts to NEK.” The same is argued for the
depreciation costs. *

NEK’s Financial Problems

101.

102.

103.

Slovenia states that the non-payment by HEP brought NEK to the brink of operational
shutdown.®! NEK was effectively insolvent in mid-1998: it lacked the funds to pay for
nuclear fuel and the employees’ salaries, or to carry out the necessary maintenance.

HEP responds that Slovenia’s description of NEK’s finances in July 1998 is
exaggerated: (i) NEK did not start to have financial problems i in 1998, Rather, NEK
had suffered chronic liquidity problems since 1993;*° (ii) HEP’s debts to NEK are
exaggerated, and the bulk of HEP’s debts was disputed and had no impact on NEK’s
then current business operations (for example, the “decommissioning debts” to NEK
was a charge to finance future expenditures, and therefore had dno current impact on
the operation of the Kr8ko Plant during the years 1996-1998);* (iii) the ELES GEN
debts to NEK contributed significantly to the chronic liquidity problems at the Kr8ko
NPP;** and (iv) the gravity of NEK’s financial condition in 1998 is exaggerated (for
example, the reports to which Slovenia refers do not support Slovenia’s proposition
that “NEK had been effectively insolvent for over three years”).**

Slovenia disagrees with all of the above. It stresses, for example, that, in order to be
able to finance the eventual decommissioning of the Krsko NPP, funds had to be
collected well in advance.”

7° Claimant's Reply, para 94

” Claimant's Reply, paras 95-96

7 Slovenia’s Rejoinder (“Respondent's Rejoinder’), paras 61 ef seq.

7° Respondent's Rejoinder, para 65

© Respondent's Rejoinder, para 66

* Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, para 126

*® Respondent's Counter-Memorial, paras 135 et seq.

© Claimant’s Reply, paras 87 et seq.

* Claimant's Reply, paras 90 et seq.

* Claimant's Reply, para 97

* Claimant's Reply, paras 98 et seq.
*” Respondent's Rejoinder, para 78

The Nuclear Safety Concerns at the Krsko NPP

104.

105.

106.

Slovenia highlights that, as a result of HEP’s non-payment for the deliveries of
electricity, NEK did not have the necessary funds to secure its safe operation and had
to seek alternative buyers for the electricity.** HEP counters that Croatia’s capital,
Zagreb, is located only 40 km downstream from the Krsko NPP, so the proposition
that HEP was disinterested in safety is incorrect.®

Moreover, HEP asserts that the SNSA (the nuclear agency of the Republic of
Slovenia) reports dealing with the Krsko NPP that were produced by Slovenia in
discovery do not support the assertion that the financial condition of NEK had created
any threat to the safe operations of the Krsko NPP.” According to HEP, reports of
different agencies and bodies prior to 1998 (some of which were referred to by
Slovenia) do not support this conclusion either.” Similarly, there is no report
subsequent to 1998 which would support the assertion that the Krsko Plant had any
nuclear safety problems.”

Slovenia denies HEP’s interpretation.” It notes that the reports were written in such a
way so as not to cause undue public alarm,** and that, contrary to HEP’s submissions,
most of the reports stated that the steam generators should be replaced.” It also notes
that the reports reflect concerns about NEK’s financial situation.

The Suspension of Electricity Deliveries to HEP

107.

108.

109.

On 30 July 1998 NEK suspended its electricity deliveries to HEP.

HEP argues that the two 400 kV transmission lines over which electricity had been
delivered from the Kr8ko NPP to HEP were disconnected.” HEP argues that the
decision to disconnect these transmission lines was made by: 1) Mr Metod Dragonja,
the Minister of Economic Affairs for the Republic of Slovenia; 2) Dr Banit, the
General Manager of ELES and the Slovenia-appointed Chairman of the Temporary
Management Board of NEK; and 3) Mr RoZman, the General Manager of NEK. 8

HEP notes that Slovenia cannot use HEP’s alleged failure to pay for electricity as an
excuse for taking this measure. Clause 6.1 of the 1974 Pooling Agreement and the
1982 Annex to the Pooling Agreement provided that the co-owners of the Krsko NPP

"* Respondent's Counter-Memorial, paras 8, 143 ef seq.

® Claimant’s Reply, paras 4, 57

® Claimant’s Reply, paras 118 ef seq.

*" Claimant's Reply, paras 126 ef seq.

* Claimant’s Reply, paras 153 et seq.

° Respondent's Rejoinder, paras 81 et seq.

™ Respondent's Rejoinder, para 84

% Respondent's Rejoinder, para 88

% Respondent's Rejoinder, paras 91 et seq.

*’ Claimant's Memorial, para 126
% Exhibit C-21; Claimant’s Memorial, para 127

cross-guaranteed each other’s financial obligations.°° Further, HEP stresses that the
Governing Agreements provided for the resolution of any disputes by arbitration, and
not by unilateral action. 00

110. HEP refers to a comment made by the Slovenian Minister for Spatial Planning and the
Environment, Mr Janez Kopat, during a 2002 television appearance in which he
concluded that HEP’s exclusion from the Kr3ko NPP amounted to a theft.

111. Slovenia disagrees, and by contrast highlights that the reason why the electricity
deliveries to HEP were suspended was because HEP would not pay for the deliveries
of electricity. As a consequence, NEK did not have the necessary funds to secure its
safe operation and had to seek alternative buyers for the electricity.'°! Irrespective of
the above, Slovenia disagrees with HEP’s interpretation of Clause 6.1 of the 1974
Pooling Agreement and the 1982 Annex to the Pooling Agreement and denies that it
provided for a cross-guarantee of the parties’ financial obligations.

112. Slovenia also emphasises that the termination of electricity supply to HEP was
intended to be a strictly temporary measure. This is evidenced by the fact that the
electricity not delivered to HEP was sold on the short-term “spot” market.'

In its Rejoinder, Slovenia notes that:'°*

[t]here is a distinction to be drawn between physical flows of electricity and how
that electricity is purchased. A person may physically acquire electricity from
persons other than from persons with whom it contracts to purchase it. Contracts
may change, but the physical flows do not. The Tribunal should not be under any
misapprehension that HEP or Croatia were deprived of actual energy flows from
the Krko NPP. In fact, apart from a very brief period 10 years ago ~ just a few
days — there was no physical cut-off at all. Even then, only two of the several
transmission lines from Slovenia to Croatia were affected. Beyond this, throughout
the whole of the relevant period Croatia continued to receive clectricity from the
Krisko NPP in exactly the same way as it had done before July 1998 and indeed
does so today. Zagreb continued to be powered by the electricity of the Kr3ko NPP.
Rather than any physical termination of electricity supply, what occurred is merely
that on the contractual plane (i.e. as a matter of accounting or booking entries) as
opposed to the physical plane, over this period HEP was deemed to have to
purchase that electricity from other sources. All that HEP lost in July 1998 was the
contractual ability to claim electricity from the Kr8ko NPP. Indeed, this is all it
seeks compensation for in damages.

nia’s Proposals For an Agreement Jectricity Supply to HEP

113. In late October 1998 Slovenia proposed conditions for an agreement for the resumed
delivery of electricity from the Kriko NPP to both HEP and ELES.'™ The proposal
included an offer of electricity at the same price to both ELES and HEP.

* Claimant’s Memorial, para 135

'® Claimant’s Memorial, paras 136 et seq.

‘2! Respondent's Counter-Memorial, paras 8, 143 ef seq.
'° Respondent's Counter-Memorial, para 146

'® Respondent's Rejoinder, para 10

1 Exhibit C-157

Decommissioning costs were excluded from the offered price. Croatia rejected this
proposal on 10 November 1998. The Croatian Minister Porges complained in his letter
sent to the Slovenian Minister, Mr Dragonja, that accepting the offer would put HEP in
the position of a buyer. He also complained that the proposed production expenses
were too high and not competitive, '°*

114. In January 2000 Slovenia made another offer to restore the electricity supply to HEP
for a period of two years.'° HEP rejected this offer, considering the price to be too
high.

The 1998 Decree

115. On31 July 1998, the ian Ge iblished a “Decree on Ti ion of
Nuklearna Elektrarna Krsko po into Javno poduzeée Nuclearna Elektrarna Krsko
d.o.0.” (the “1998 Decree”). " * The 1998 Decree stipulated that it would remain
applicable until the entry into force of a bilateral agreement between the Republic of
Slovenia and the Republic of Croatia.

116. HEP claims that several provisions of the 1998 Decree violate the Governing
Agreements: '°°

« Article 1 stipulated that, pending execution of “the appropriate bilateral
agreement between the Republic of Slovenia and the Republic of Croatia”, the
incorporator’s rights in Javno poduze¢e Nuklearna elektrarna Kr3ko, a limited
liability company (transformed by the Decree of the Government of the
Republic of Slovenia of July 30, 1998 from Nuklearna elektrana Krsko p.o.)
(“JP NEK”) were to be exercised by the Government of Slovenia;

« — Article 6 granted HEP the right to participate in the management of JP NEK,
taking into account the Governing Agreements, “unless the same is contrary to
this Decree”;

e By virtue of Articles 20 and 21, JP NEK’s Management Board consisted of
eight members, four appointed by Slovenia and four by Croatia. In the event of a
tie vote in respect of any decision of the Management Board, the Slovenia-
appointed Chairman would have a controlling vote;

. Article 23 granted primary management responsibility to a manager, who was to
be appointed by Slovenia;

. Article 16 authorised JP NEK not to deliver electricity to HEP in the event that
its outstanding obligations exceeded the value of two-months’ delivered
electricity;

'°5 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, para 235,

406 Exhibit C-170

107 Exhibit C-171; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, para 236
‘8 Exhibit C-137

'© Claimant's Memorial, paras 132, 133

17.

118.

119.

120.

. Article 30 stated that if an agreement on the price of electricity was not reached
between JP NEK, ELES and HEP “within 60 days from the date of entry into
force hereof, the price and terms of delivery of electricity should be determined
by the incorporator”, i.e. by the Slovenian Government. This violated HEP’s
tight to participate in all decisions affecting the price of electricity produced at
the Krsko NPP;'?° and

« Article 34 required that NEK’s claims against HEP with respect to “pooled
depreciation resources” were to be set off against HEP’s investment in the
Krsko NPP, thus, according to Croatia, diluting HEP’s overall percentage of
ownership of the plant.

HEP stresses that the reason behind the enactment of the 1998 Decree cannot be
NEK’s crippling financial situation and concerns about nuclear safety, since Slovenia
had been planning the 1998 Decree for at least eighteen months.'!” Slovenia responds
that, after Slovenia’s independence in 1991, NEK remained a work organization
pursuant to the old Yugoslav system of associated labour. NEK was required to
restructure itself in line with the Law on Commercial Companies by 31 December
1994 at the latest. Since this did not happen, from | January 1995 NEK risked being
liquidated by the Slovenian courts. NEK was also obliged to transform its socially-
owned capital to “known” ownership by 1 August 1998. Otherwise, its capital would
have become property of the Development Corporation of Slovenia. ''?

Soon after their independence, Slovenia and Croatia started discussions regarding the
need for a new bilateral agreement governing their relations in connection with the
Krsko NPP. The reorganisation of NEK in line with Slovenia’s new company laws
was postponed in the hope that negotiations would bring about a new bilateral
agreement that would resolve NEK’s status.' In 1998, since NEK’s financial
position was dire, and since no progress had been achieved towards a bilateral
agreement, Slovenia submits that it was forced to enact the 1998 Decree.'"*

NEK, therefore, had to be restructured. From Slovenia’s perspective, there was no
possibility of restructuring NEK by means of an agreement with HEP, since the latter
was obstructing NEK’s management. For example, HEP “refused to cooperate with
management processes,” which resulted in no further meetings of the Board of
Directors being held between 7 June 1996 and May 1997. Even after the Portoroz
Agreement, where the rules of procedure for the new Temporary Management Board
were adopted, HEP continued obstructing decision-making."

As to the content of the 1998 Decree, Slovenia stresses that it preserved HEP’s
interests. First of all, it did not deprive HEP of any ownership rights in the Krsko

"Claimant's Reply, paras 65 ef seq.

"| Claimant's Reply, para 165
"2 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, paras 149-151, 159-160; Slovenia submits no documentary evidence in

support of this last assertion.

"3 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, para 147

"4 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, para 147

"'S Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, para 155

121,

122.

NPP, since HEP did not have any ownership rights until the entry into force of the
2001 Agreement, on 11 March 2003. Ne Furthermore, the 1998 Decree expressly
recognised and preserved the rights and invested assets of the Croatian co-founder.
For example, Article 1 states:

The Republic of Croatia, ie Hrvatska Elektroprivreda dd Zagreb, which is the
holder of rights and liabilities under this Decree, is recognised as the co-investor
under this Decree based on invested assets (pooled resources).

Any adjustments to the value of assets held by either party would only be provisional
and would be subject to settlement by the new bilateral agreement.'

Slovenia also argues that the 1998 Decree did not block HEP’s participation in the
management and operation of the Krsko NPP, or the parity principle. The existing
Temporary Management Board of NEK was retained and renamed the New
Management Board. The arrangement in the Governing Agreements, whereby the
chairman of the Management Board and the manager of NEK were to be appointed by
the Slovenian party was retained. Only in order to guard against “deadtock” would the
vote of the chairman prevail. Slovenia stresses that this arrangement was never
invoked, although it was replicated by Slovenia and Croatia in the 2001
Agreement. ne

On 31 December 1999 HEP commenced proceedings before the Slovenian
Constitutional Court claiming that the 1998 Decree was unconstitutional and contrary
to the Energy Charter Treaty.''? HEP’s application was dismissed on 15 May 2003 on
the basis that the 1998 Decree has been a temporary measure. The Constitutional
Court held that when the 2001 Agreement entered into force on 11 March 2003 “the
initiator lost the legitimate interest for the evaluation of compliance of the Decree
with the Constitution.”"”°

THE 2001 AGREEMENT

Negotiations Leading to the 2001 Agreement

123.

Several meetings between Slovenian and Croatian Ministers on the issue of Krsko
NPP took place after August 1998. A breakthrough in the parties’ negotiations came
at a meeting of the Croatian and Slovenian Prime Ministers at Rijeka held in June of
2001, on the basis of the proposal of Dr Grani¢, the Deputy Prime Minister of Croatia.
The proposal for an agreement was made along the following lines: (i) all sums
claimed by each side would be waived; (ii) HEP would be recognised as co-owner
and co-manager of Krsko NPP; and (iii) the delivery of electricity to HEP from Krsko
NPP would be resumed as of an agreed date. iat

"6 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, para 167

‘7 Article 7, 1998 Decree; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, para 170

48 Respondents Counter-Memorial, para 175

"° Respondent's Counter-Memorial, para 277

"” Respondent's Counter-Memorial, para 279

2! Claimant’s Memorial, paras 148-151

124. An issue that had to be decided during the negotiations was the date(s) as of which the
waiver of the financial claims and the resumption of electricity deliveries would take
place. HEP submits that this agreed date was 30 June 2002. It alleges that in the
meeting in Rijeka the Croatian proposal was to select 1 January 2002 as the key date.
Slovenia suggested 30 June 2002.'“? Croatia states that:

[t]he bargain stuck between the Prime Ministers of the two countries at Rijeka on June 9,
2001, had as its centre a simple quid pro quo: Croatia and HEP waived all financial claims
against Slovenia, ELES and NEK up to, but not beyond June 30, 2002; in return, Slovenia
agreed that the Kriko NPP would resume delivery of 50% of its power output to HEP on that
date. Without such a guid pro quo, Croatia would not have entered into the 2001 Agreement.

125. Slovenia criticizes this quid pro quo as an oversimplified explanation of the
settlement reached between the two States. More specifically, Slovenia claims that the
above view disregards the fact that, in return for Croatia agreeing to waive its
financial claims, Slovenia also waived its past claims for the non-payment by Croatia
of its financial obligations towards NEK. !

126. HEP emphasises that at a meeting on 28-30 June 2001 at Brijuni (Brioni), Croatia, the
draft for an agreement on the resumption of electricity deliveries of both sides,
Croatian and Slovenian, contained the date of 30 June 2002. The Croatian draft read:

The shareholder from the Republic of Slovenia shall receive all generated power and

. electricity and financial effects related to the production thereof for the period from August 1,
1998 until the date on which HEP d.d. starts receiving electricity again, which means until
June 30, 2002.

The Slovenian drafted read:'*

The Slovenian shareholder shall take all the generated power and electricity and any financial
effects associated with the production thereof for the period from August 1, 1998 until the
date of the receiving of electricity by HEP d.d., but not later than by June 30, 2002.

127. Both parties agree that the attendees at the meeting at Rijeka and at Brijuni (Brioni)
expected that the agreement between the two States would be signed by mid-July
2001 and ratified by the end of 2001.'?5 Slovenia argues that the 30 June 2002 date

meant that the parties agreed that their financial relations would be balanced as of six
months from the expected date of entry into force of the Agreement. 126

The Content of the 2001 Agreement

128. The 2001 Agreement was signed on 19 December 2001 by the Croatian Minister of
Economy, Mr Goranko Fizuli¢é, and by the Slovenian Minister of Environment and
Planning, Mr Kopat. The recitals state that the two Governments took into account
the Governing Agreements in agreeing upon the terms of the 2001 Agreement. They

'2 Claimant's Memorial, para 156; this statement is supported by witness evidence, not contemporaneous
documentary evidence.

‘35 Respondent's Counter-Memorial, para 211

2 Claimant’s Memorial, para 163

5 Claimant’s Memorial, para 157; Respondent's Counter-Memorial para 206
26 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, para 206

129,

also state that the 2001 Agreement is based on the Energy Charter Treaty, the
Convention on Nuclear Safety, and the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel
Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management.

The 2001 Agreement:

recognizes HEP and ELES-GEN as the legal successors in interest to the
Slovenian and Croatian companies that invested in the construction of Krsko
NPpP;!

provides that HEP and ELES-GEN shall have equal rights and obligations,
unless otherwise stated in the Agreement, '?

establishes HEP and ELES-GEN as 50:50 shareholders in the limited liability
company NEK d.o.0., a new legal entity to be governed by a Memorandum of
Association (Exhibit 1 to the 2001 Agreement. The Memorandum of
Association states in Article 2 that the transformation of NEK will take place in
accordance with the 2001 Agreement and Slovenian company law. It also
provides in Article 30 that NEK may terminate electricity deliveries to either
shareholder if that shareholder fails to comply with its financial obligations.);!9

states that the governance of NEK d.o.o. will be exercised in accordance with
the parity principle. ELES-GEN nominates the Chairman of the Management
Board and HEP the Vice-Chairman. HEP nominates the Chairman of the
Supervisory Board and ELES-GEN the Vice-Chairman. The Chairman of the
Management Board has a casting vote, which vote is to be controlled by the
Supervisory Board;'

orders that electricity produced at the Krsko NPP shall be delivered to the
shareholders in equal proportions;'? 1

states that the price for electricity deliveries comprises operating costs in the
amounts necessary for long-term investment, and includes, infer alia, the
depreciation costs;

stipulates that decommissioning and radioactive waste disposal are joint
liabilities of Croatia and Slovenia and shall be financed in equal proportions.
The funds for decommissioning shall be collected in a special fund created by
each State;'

Conceming the past financial issues, Article 17 of the 2001 Agreement provides
that:

'27 Article 1(a), 2001 Agreement

"28 Article 1(b), 2001 Agreement

'® article 2, 2001 Agreement

"3 Article 3, 2001 Agreement

™" Article 5, 2001 Agreement

"3 Articles 10 and 11, 2001 Agreement

130.

131.

132.

ial

(1) Mutual financial relations existing up to the signing of this Agreement between
NEK d.0.0., ELES 4.0.0., and HEP dd, shall be regulated in accordance with the
principles set forth in Exhibit 3 of this Agreement.

(2) The Contracting Parties agree that, as of the date of entry into force hereof, all
obligations of NEK 4.0.0. to the Fund for financing the dismantling of NE Kr8ko
and disposal of radioactive waste from NE Kréko, which obligations arose from the
application of the Act on Fund for Financing of Dismantling of NE Kr8ko and
Disposal of Radioactive Waste from NE Kr8ko... shall cease to exist.

Article 19 contains the dispute resolution provision. Article 19(2) reads:

Ifa dispute cannot be settled amicably within six months from the date of written
report to the other Contracting Party, the aggrieved Shareholder may, at its
discretion, refer the dispute for resolution to: ... ¢) the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes — ICSID — in accordance with the Convention
on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other
States and the additional contract on regulation of Conciliation, Arbitration and
Fact-finding.

Article 22 of the 2001 Agreement (“Closing Provisions”) stipulates that:

By entry into force of this Agreement, the provisions of the [1970 Agreement] shall
cease to have effect.

All other issues which are not stipulated herein shall be governed by the Agreement
between the Government of the Republic of Croatia and the Government of the
Republic of Slovenia on stimulation and mutual protection of investments. This
Agreement shall be ratified by the Croatian Parliament, i.e. in the Parliament of the
Republic of Slovenia.

This Agreement shall enter into force on the date of receipt of the last written
diplomatic notice that all conditions as required by the legislations of the
Contracting Parties required for its entry into force have been complied with.

PRINCIPLES OF THE STRUCTURING OF THE FINANCIAL RELATIONS

(1) ELES GEN 4.0.0. shall assume all obligations of NEK 4.0.0 towards the bank
which have occurred as a result of the transfer to NEK d.o.0 of the repayment of
investment loans made by the Slovene founders, according to the balance on
December 31, 2001. Obligations resulting from loans issued to carry out NEK’s
modernization project will be NEK 4.0.0’s only remaining long-term financial
obligations. Until June 30, 2002, the cost of these loans will be bome through the
cost of electricity by the Shareholder from the Republic of Slovenia and from that
day forward by both Shareholders.

(2) By virtue of the entry into force of this Agreement:

-HEP d.d, waives all claims against NEK d.o.0 for damages, i.e. for compensation
for undelivered electricity, i.e. for compensation for use of the capital, and in this
regard will fully waive all claims in court arising therefrom;

Exhibit 3 of the 2001 Agreement, to which reference was made in Article 17 (see the
last bullet point in Paragraph 148, above), regulates the past financial issues between
the Parties:

29

-NEK 4.0.0 waives all claims against HEP d.d. in connection with delivered power
and electricity, and in this regard will fully waive all claims in court arising
therefrom;

-NEK 4.0.0 waives its claims against ELES d.o.0 in the same amount as in the
previous bullet of this Paragraph;

-NEK 4.0.0, waives all claims against HEP d.d. in connection with charged fees for
financing of the dismantling of the Nuclear Power Plant Kr8ko and disposal of
radioactive waste from Nuclear Power Plant Krsko, and in this regard will fully
waive any claims in court arising therefrom;

 

-NEK 4.0.0. waives all claims in connection with pooled resources of depreciation
of both founders and claims in connection with the coverage of losses from
previous years,

(3) Based on the provisions listed above, NEK d.0.0 will rearrange its balance sheet
on December 31, 2001 so that:

-it shows neither any claims torward HEP d.d. and ELES d.o.o nor any obligations
toward the fund for financing of the dismantling of the Nuclear Power Plant Kr3ko
and the disposal of radioactive waste from the Nuclear Power Plant Krsko;

-it does not show any obligations toward the bank which occurred as a result of the
transfer of repayment of Slovene founders’ investment loans to NEK 4.0.0.
described in Paragraph 1 of this Exhibit;

based on the conversion of HEP’s long term investments and the exemption of the
Joan, NEK d.o.0's capital will, after the payment of the possible uncovered losses,
be distributed to the Shareholders in two equal parts, so that. the initial capital of
NEK d.o.0. reaches the amount listed in Article 2 of this Agreement, and so that
any possible remainder is distributed into the reserves;

-any other necessary accounting corrections or changes arising from this Exhibit
are executed.

(4) Any possible profit to NEK d.o.0, arising from accounting corrections or
changes described in Paragraph 3 of this Exhibit will be tax-exempt.

(5) ELES GEN d.o.o assumes the financial results of all power and electricity
produced during the period from July 31, 1998 until the date HEP d.d. begins to
take over the ¢lectricity again, but no later than June 30, 2002. All the while, NEK
d.o.0.’s financial position must not worsen compared to its financial position on
July 30, 1998,

(6) The Contracting Parties will ensure that the Shareholders determine, by no later
than the end of 2002, whether the company needs additional long-term sources of
financing its operating costs, which sources of financing will be secured by a
capital increase in NEK 4.0.0, or any other appropriate manner.

133. HEP submits that the agreed deadline between the parties for the restoration of
electricity deliveries to HEP,'** as well as the deadline for the waiver of its financial
claims against NEK, was 30 June 2002.'3*

134. Slovenia disagrees. It denies that Exhibit 3 contains an express obligation to supply
HEP with electricity on 30 June 2002. It points out that the only provision in the 2001
Agreement for restoration of actual electricity deliveries is its Article 5(2):

'33 Article 5, Exhibit 3 to the 2001 Agreement
' Article 2, Exhibit 3 to the 2001 Agreement

135.

(2) The Contracting Parties agree that the Company shall deliver the produced
power and electricity to the Shareholders in equal proportions, half to each
Shareholder, until the end of the regular useful life of the nuclear power plant in the
year 2023, ie. until the extended useful life of the power plant, if approved
(hereinafter: useful life).

Slovenia stresses that Exhibit 3 did not deal with the electricity supply to HEP, but
with the terms of the financial settlement. It notes that Exhibit 3 is entitled “Principles
of the Restructuring of the Financial Relations”, and that the agreement of the parties
was that a financial equilibrium between the parties should be deemed to have been
reached as of six months after the date of entry into force of the agreement. 135

Slovenia also contends that it was only with the entry into force of the 2001
Agreement that HEP’s rights in relation to Slovenia were activated, and that this is
confirmed by the heading of Exhibit 3’s Paragraph (2): “By virtue of the entry into
force of this Agreement.” !**

The Ratification of the 2001 Agreement

136.

137.

138,

The initial idea of the negotiating parties was that the 2001 Agreement would be
ratified by Slovenia and Croatia by the end of 2001.'5” The Governments of Croatia
and Slovenia issued a Joint Statement on 19 December 2001, when the 2001
Agreement was signed, announcing that they should use their best efforts to achieve
the Tatification of the 2001 Agreement “as soon as possible during the first quarter of
2002”.

In fact, however, Croatia ratified the 2001 Agreement on 3 July 2002 and Slovenia
ratified the 2001 Agreement on 25 February 2003,'”? following unsuccessful litigation
attacking its constitutionality. In Slovenia the signature and ratification of the 2001
Agreement had met with parliamentary and public opposition for a long time.'*° On
10 March 2003 the Slovenian Foreign Ministry advised Croatia of Slovenia’s
ratification. Croatia received the diplomatic notice on 11 March 2003.'*"

The resumption of electricity deliveries of Krsko-generated electricity to HEP took
place on 19 April 2003.

NEK’s OFFERS FOR SALE OF ELECTRICITY

139.

On 24 June 2002 NEK had sent HEP an offer for the supply of electricity during the
six month period 1 July 2002 — 31 December 2002 (the “June 2002 Offer”). Slovenia

'35 Respondent's Counter-Memorial, para 206
6 Respondent's Counter-Memorial, paras 211, 212
'37 Claimant’s Memorial, para 157; Respondent's Counter-Memorial, para 206

‘38 Claimant’s Memorial, paras 281 et seq.

"Claimant's Memorial, paras 178-181

‘ Respondent's Counter-Memorial, paras 22 er seg.

‘| Respondent's Counter-Memorial, para 233

140.

141.

142.

states that the fact that the 2001 Agreement would not come into force by 30 June
2002 caused concerns within Slovenia because: '?

it meant that the deemed financial equilibrium expected to occur on 30 June 2002 would not
happen, and nor would HEP begin to receive electricity again. The ramifications were unclear
to the Slovenian Government. {...] Understandably, (although, as it turns out, mistakenly),
Slovenia assumed that if it offered to supply electricity to HEP, even if this was done outside
the framework of the still-to-be-ratified 2001 Agreement, that this would eliminate any risk
that Croatia or HEP would bring a damages claim against Slovenia or NEK.

The June 2002 Offer included an element for decommissioning. Slovenia states that
the requested price of EUR 29.697 per MWh was, save for the decommissioning
element, exactly the price that HEP would have been charged had the 2001
Agreement been in force. ">

HEP did not accept this offer. HEP submits that it did not accept it because: (i) the
establishment of a temporary buyer-seller relationship between itself and NEK would
have jeopardised the 2001 Agreement; (ii) not having been involved in preparation of
the 2002 Business Plan and establishment of electricity prices for 2002, it had no
assurances that the prices were appropriate and calculated in accordance either with
the Governing Agreements or the 2001 Agreement; and (iii) it was anxious that if the
2001 Agreement was not ratified by both sides and notices of such ratifications
exchanged, it would run the risk of a new suspension of electricity deliveries at any
time.

Slovenia responds that: (i) there was no suggestion that Slovenia saw this arrangement
as an alternative to ratification. The offer itself made it clear that it was intended to be
a “stop gap” pending entry into force of the 2001 Agreement; (ii) the price was in
substance identical to that which would have been payable under the 2001
Agreement. HEP could have proposed to accept the offer but for the part
incorporating the decommissioning costs. Also, HEP had received NEK’s proposed
Business Plan for 2002 and therefore knew the basis on which the price was
calculated; (iii) the electricity delivery to HEP had been suspended because HEP
would not pay. This would not happen under the June 2002 Offer, since HEP would
have been required to provide a bank guarantee for the event of non-payment.'*
Slovenia considers that the reason why HEP did not accept this offer was because it
was able to purchase cheaper electricity elsewhere."

© Respondent's Counter-Memorial, paras 238-239

' Respondent's Counter-Memorial, para 240; Slovenia states in paragraph 241 of the Respondent's Counter-

Memorial: “The June 2002 Offer included an clement for decommissioning whereas under the 2001
‘Agreement HEP would not have had to pay this charge directly to NEK. However, as explained in section
5.2(¢) above, NEK was nevertheless obliged by Slovenian law to include a charge for decommissioning in
the price of electricity leaving the plant. In any event, under the 2001 Agreement Croatia agreed to meet its
proportion of decommissioning costs and make regular payments into a separate fund as prescribed by
Article 11 of the 2001 Agreement”.

‘4 Claimant's Memorial, paras 175-177
"45 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, paras 244-248
6 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, paras 249-251

143.

Iv.

On 13 November 2002 NEK again offered to sell 50% of the electricity production of
Krsko NPP from 1 January 2003 to 31 December 2003.'*” The price requested was
EUR 28.025 per MWh with a clearly delineated decommissioning element of EUR
2.0289 per MWh. '“* HEP rejected this offer for the same reasons.

THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS

CLAIMANT’S SUBMISSIONS ON THE RESPONDENT’S LIABILITY UNDER THE 2001
AGREEMENT

144,

145.

146.

147,

Pursuant to Procedural Consent Order No.4, HEP filed its Submissions on Slovenia’s
Liability under the 2001 Agreement on 24 October 2008, contending that Slovenia
had breached the 2001 Agreement and seeking a partial award to that effect.

HEP contended that the text of Exhibit 3 to the 2001 Agreement was unclear and
ambiguous and that Slovenia’s purely textualist approach to interpretation of the
English translation of the “waiver provision” leads to a result that is “manifestly
absurd....[and] unreasonable.” Accordingly, HEP submitted that recourse was
necessary to the applicable provisions of the VCLT, namely Articles 31 and 32, which
require consideration of a wide range of interpretive sources, including the
“preparatory work” and the “circumstances” in which the 2001 Agreement was
concluded, in order to reach the correct interpretation of the parties’ financial
settlement. HEP emphasized that Exhibit 3 and the elements of the financial
settlement it was intended to embody could not be understood without detailed
background knowledge of the facts relevant to the parties’ long-standing financial
differences over the Krsko NPP.

HEP further submitted that an examination of all such admissible material resulted in
the conclusion that the essence of the parties’ financial settlement was:

that HEP’s rights as a 50% owner of the Kriko NPP, including its right to receive 50% of the
electricity produced at the Kr8ko NPP at a price jointly determined by HEP and its Slovenian
counterpart, were to be restored on June 30, 2002; and (ii) that all parties were to waive all
claims against one another through June 30, 2002.

HEP consequently submitted two alternative interpretations of the 2001 Agreement
which it suggested would give effect to the parties’ financial settlement based on a
restoration of rights and their waiver of claims as of June 30, 2002, and the provision
in Article 22(4) that the 2001 Agreement enters into force upon notice of ratification
by both sides: (i) first, HEP contended that Slovenia choose, “with eyes wide open”,
to ratify the 2001 Agreement in February 2003, which included the financial
settlement consisting of HEP’s waiver of claims through June 30, 2002 and
Slovenia’s obligation to restore HEP’s rights as a 50% owner of the Krsko NPP by
June 30, 2002. Since Slovenia failed to meet this deadline, HEP submitted that the
Slovenia was liable to compensate HEP for its failure to meet the terms of the
financial deal Slovenia agreed to in December 2001 and ratified in February 2003;
and (ii) alternatively, HEP submitted that the only way to give effect to the intention
of the parties (that HEP’s losses from non-delivery of electricity were to be halted on

47 Claimant’s Memorial, para 179; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, para 252

48 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, para 252

June 30, 2002, when Slovenia was obliged to restore HEP’s rights as a 50% owner of
the Krsko NPP) was for the Tribunal to rule that the 2001 Agreement contained an
implied term that required Slovenia to compensate HEP for all losses resulting from
failure to restore HEP’s rights as of June 30, 2002. HEP submitted that a failure to
recognize such an implied term would be “wholly inconsistent with the principles of
good faith and fair dealing.”

RESPONDENT’S SUBMISSIONS ON THE TREATY INTERPRETATION ISSUE

148.

149.

150.

151.

152.

Slovenia replied on 14 November 2008 with its Submissions on the Treaty
Interpretation Issue. In these submissions Slovenia began by reiterating its view that
even if the Tribunal were to find in HEP’s favour on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, it
could not issue a partial award on liability as that would require determination of the
significance of the offers of supply, as to which the Tribunal had not heard all the
relevant evidence.

Slovenia submitted that both theories proposed by HEP in their 24 October
submission required HEP to establish that the 2001 Agreement was intended to create
a retroactive legal obligation, with effect from 1 July 2002.

Slovenia contended, on the contrary, that the 2001 Agreement did not create any
retroactive legal obligation. Instead, pursuant to Article 24 VCLT, the obligation to
resume supplies to HEP and the financial settlement of past claims were to apply in
tandem from the entry into force of the 2001 Agreement. Slovenia submitted that
there was no intention to resume sales to HEP without the new legal framework in
force, or to create an obligation to pay HEP compensation if supply was not restored
by that date.

Slovenia further submitted that the general rule for treaty interpretation is found in
Article 31(1) VCLT which stresses that the text of shall be interpreted in its context
and in the light of its object and purpose. Whilst Slovenia acknowledged that recourse
may be had to ‘supplementary means of interpretation’, pursuant to Article 32 VCLT,
Slovenia contended that only a limited category of material would be admissible

 

under this provision. Furth Slovenia submitted that such ry aids to
interpretation were to be considered secondary to the treaty text itself, which
is the “p inent source for ining the parties’ i ions.”

 

In any event, Slovenia contended that there was no basis for referring to
supplementary means of interpretation. The key terms governing the temporal scope
of application of the 2001 Agreement, and in particular the obligation to supply
electricity and the financial settlement and waiver, were clear, and did not render a
result that was ambiguous or absurd.

CLAIMANT’S REPLY SUBMISSIONS ON THE RESPONDENT’S LIABILITY UNDER THE 2001
AGREEMENT

153.

HEP contended in its Reply Submissions dated 19 November 2008 that Slovenia’s
entire case on the Treaty Interpretation Issue, stated in its 14 November submissions,
rested on Article 28 VCLT and the presumption against retroactivity. HEP submitted
that Slovenia had failed to deal with the evidence of the parties’ intent in concluding
their financial settlement. Further, HEP submitted that Slovenia had resorted to an

argument that the parties merely expected that HEP’s rights would be restored by 30
June 2002, suggesting that this date was only of political significance. By contrast,
HEP submitted that the 30 June 2002 date was an integral element of the 2001
Agreement. Furthermore, HEP contended that. whether the agreement is analyzed in
terms of: (i) the exceptions to the presumption against retroactivity found in Article
28 VCLT; (ii) Slovenia’s ratification of an agreement that expressly called for
restoration of HEP’s rights in the Krsko NPP by June 30, 2002; or (iii) an implied
obligation to compensate HEP for the non-deliveries of electricity from July 1, 2002,
the issue of HEP’s rights to compensation turn on the intention of the parties.
Consequently, evidence supported the conclusion that the parties intended to resolve
their financial differences by the restoration of HEP’s rights on June 30, 2002 and to
exchange mutual waivers through that date.

CLAIMANT’S SUBMISSIONS ON IMPLIED TREATY TERMS

154.

155.

In response to the Tribunal’s invitation of 25 November 2008, the Claimant filed its
comments on the Iran—United States Claims Tribunal case, mentioned by Judge
Brower on 25 November 2008, and to respond to a question raised by Mr Paulsson in
the course of the November hearing in Paris. In this case an “implied” obligation had
been recognized in an international arbitral award.

HEP replied in the affirmative to the Tribunal’s question of whether treaty terms
could be implied. In support of this contention HEP made the following submissions:

« There is authority supporting an award of compensatory damages based on a
State’s breach of an implied term in a treaty.

© In Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States of America, Partial Award No. 382-
BI-FT (31 August 1988), 19 Iran-U.S Cl. Trib. Rep. 273 (1988) and Islamic
Republic of Iran v. United States of America, Partial Award No. 529-A15-FT (6
May 1992), 28 Iran-U.S Cl. Trib. 112 (1992) the Iran-United States Claims
Tribunal found obligations to be “implied” in the Algiers Accords — in one case to
compensate for property acquired, and in the other to compensate “any losses”
that might be proven, in both cases in later proceedings.

e In both these cases, the Tribunal held that the United States had an implied
obligation to compensate Iran because to find otherwise would have been
inconsistent with the object, purpose and intention of the agreement between the
parties, an essential objective of which had been to restore Iran’s financial
position on a specified date.

« The circumstances presented to the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal in both
these cases are the same as those confronting the Tribunal in the present case.
Therefore terms must be implied in the present case, in order not to frustrate the
essential purpose of the 2001 Agreement.

« Aside from those cases in which compensatory damages have been awarded,
international tribunals have routinely issued awards to remedy breaches of implied
treat ligati HEP d this ion with to Islamic
Republic of Iran v. United States of America, Partial Award No. 597-A11-FT (7
April 2000), ___Iran- U.S. Cl. Trib. __ ; Velasquez-Rodriguez Case, Merits

Judgment, Inter-Am. Ct. H.R (ser.C) No. 4 (July 29, 1988), Marckx v Belgium,
App. No 6833/74, 1980 WL 115477 (Eur. Ct. H.R June 13, 1979); Jabari v
Turkey, App. No. 40035/98, 2000 WL 33201699; Tanzania Electric Supply
Company Ltd. V. Independent Power Tanzania Ltd, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/8,
Award (July 12, 2001), 8 ICSID Rep. 226 (2005); United States v Rauscher, 119
U.S. 407 (1886), Regina (Middleton) v. West Somerset Coroner, [2004] 2 A.C
182; Rv. Marhsall, 1999 Can. Sup. Ct. LEXIS 77; Regina v. Sundown [1999] ]1
S.C.R 393; Ry, Sioui [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1025; South West ‘Africa (Ethiopia v. South
Africa; Liberia v. South Africa), Second Phase, 1966 I.C.J 6 (July 18).

In accordance with the principles and reasoning applied by the Iran-United States
Claims Tribunal, the ECHR, the ICJ and the highest courts of various domestic
jurisdictions, the Tribunal should find that Slovenia implicitly agreed to pay HEP
damages in the event that Slovenia breached the agreement to resume electricity
deliveries to HEP by 30 June 2002.

RESPONDENT’S SUBMISSIONS ON CASE AIS

156. On 12 December 2008, Slovenia filed the following submissions regarding the Iran-
United States Claims Tribunal case, Case A15.'°

Case A15 was one of the few examples in public international law where a State
has been held to owe obligations by virtue of an implied term. The case does not,
however, advance the position that Slovenia may have been under an implied
obligation to compensate HEP for electricity not delivered after 30 June 2002.

There was no discussion in Case A/5 of the relevant international law conceming
the “highly controversial” question of whether a tribunal may imply a term into a
treaty. Instead, weight must be given to the many decisions of courts and tribunals
which have held that it would be inappropriate to imply terms. In any event,
decisions such as Case A/5 are not binding and have only persuasive value.

In Case A15 the term implied was that “General Principle A and paragraph 9” of
the agreement between the parties (the “General Declaration”) implied an
obligation to compensate Iran for any “losses” it experienced as a result of the
United States lawfully refusing to permit exportation to Iran from the United
States of Iranian-owned military properties. However, Slovenia contended that in
the present case underlying obligations such as General Principle A do not exist.
Instead, HEP had asked the Tribunal to imply both an underlying obligation (i.e.
to restore HEP’s rights from 30 June 2002 in the absence of the Treaty being in
force), and an obligation to pay compensation to HEP flowing from its breach.
Slovenia did not accept that there ever was such an underlying obligation.
Consequently, there cannot be an implied obligation to compensate.

In Case A15 there was evidence from both Iran and the United States as to their
common intention concerning the interpretation of General Principle A and
paragraph 9 of the General Declaration. In contrast, Slovenia contends that an
implied term was never intended here.

‘® Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States of America, Partial Award No.529-A15-FT, 6 May 1992, 28 Iran-
USC.T.R 112

157.

158.

159.

© Case Al5 was itself highly controversial as three members of the Iran-United
States Claims Tribunal dissented on the relevant point. Further, Case A15 formed
part of a “unique and highly complex factual matrix”, which was very different to
the facts of the present case.

RELEVANT PRINCIPLES OF TREATY INTERPRETATION

Before examining the substantive issues in its decision, the Tribunal sets out the
relevant principles of treaty interpretation which have guided it in its approach to
interpreting the 2001 Agreement.

The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties 1969 (“VCLT”) is recognised in
international law as the primary statement of the principles governing the construction
and interpretation of treaties. Article 31 VCLT provides that:

Article 31: General rule of interpretation

1

A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to
be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and
purpose.

The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall comprise, in
addition the text, including its preamble and annexes:

(a) any agreement relating to the treaty which was made between all the parties in
connection with the conclusion of the treaty;

(b) any instrument which was made by one or more parties in connection with the
conclusion of the treaty and accepted by the other parties as an instrument related to
the treaty.

There shall be taken into account, together with the context:

(a) any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the interpretation of the
treaty or the application of its provisions;

(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which establishes the
agreement of the parties regarding its interpretation;

(©) any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between the
parties.

A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the parties so
intended.

Much has been written about Articles 31 and 32 of the VCLT.'*° As to Article 31 of
the VCLT, a helpful recent discussion of the principles of treaty interpretation set out
in that Article may be found in the judgment of Justice Simon in Czech Republic v
European Media Ventures SA [2008] 1 All E.R. (Comm) 531:

At paragraphs 16-17:

'S® See, e,g,, Shaw International Law (5 Ed 2003) 838-844 and authorities cited therein

160.

It is clear that the proper approach to the interpretation of Treaty wording is to identify what
the words mean in their context (the textual method), rather than attempting to identify what
may have been the underlying purpose in the use of the words (the teleological method). The
disadvantages of this latter approach have been described ...as follows:

One method ....is to ask the question: “What did the parties intend by the clause?”
This approach has, however, been felt to be unsatisfactory, if not actually unsound
and illogical, for a number of reasons....[t ignores the fact that the treaty was, after
all, drafted precisely in order to give expression to the intentions of the parties, and
must be presumed to do so. Accordingly this intention is, prima facie, to be found in
the text itself, and therefore the primary question is not what the parties intended by
the text, but what the text itself means: whatever it clearly means on an ordinary and
natural construction of its terms, such will be deemed to be what the parties
intended....the aim of giving effect to the intentions of the parties means, and can
only mean, their joint or common intentions... This means that, faced with a disputed
interpretation, and different professions of intention, the tribunal cannot in fact give
effect to any intention which both or all the parties will recognise as representing
their common mind... [citation omitted.]

The search for a common intention is likely to be both elusive and unnecessary. Elusive,
because the contracting parties may never have had a common intention: only an agreement as
to a form of words. Unnecessary, because the rules for the interpretation of international
treaties focus on the words and meaning and not the intention of one or other contracting
party, unless that intention can be derived from the object and purpose of the Treaty [article 31
of the Vienna Convention], its context [article 31.1 and 31.2] or a subsequent agreement as to
interpretation [article 31.3(a)] or practice which establishes an agreement as to its
interpretation {article 31.3(b)].

At paragraph 19:

‘The proper approach is to interpret the agreed form of words which, objectively and in their
Proper context, bear an ascertainable meaning. This approach, no doubt reflecting the
experience of centuries of diplomacy, leaves open the possibility that the parties might have
dissimilar intentions and might wish to put different interpretations on what they had agreed.
When considering the object and purpose of a treaty a court should be cautious about taking
into account material which extends beyond what the contracting parties have agreed in the
preamble or other common expressions of intent, see article 31.2(a) and (b).

At paragraphs 36-37:

..the “ordinary meaning” is the meaning attributed to those terms at the time the treaty is
concluded...the terms of the treaty must be interpreted according to the meaning which they
possessed, or which would have been attributed to them, and in light of current linguistic
usage, at the time when the treaty was originally concluded....as a normal principle of
interpretation a court or tribunal should endeavour to give a meaning to cach of the words
being interpreted.

Following the application of Article 31, further recourse may be had to Article 32
VCLT, in the circumstances, or for the purpose, described therein. Article 32
provides:
Article 32: Supplementary means of interpretation
Recourse may be had to supplementary means of interpretation, including the preparatory
work of the treaty and the circumstances of its conclusion, in order to confirm the meaning
resulting from the application of article 31, or to determine the meaning when the
interpretation according to article 31:

(a) leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure;

161.

162.

163.

165.

(b) leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.
Article 24 governs the manner in which a treaty will enter into force:
Article 24: Entry into force

L A treaty enters into force in such manner and upon such date as it may provide or as
the negotiating States may agree.

2. Failing any such provision or agreement, a treaty enters into force as soon as consent
to be bound by the treaty has been established for all the negotiating States.

3. When the consent of a State to be bound by a treaty is established on a date after the
treaty has come into force, the treaty enters into force for that State on that date,
unless the treaty otherwise provides.

4. The provisions of a treaty regulating the authentication of its text, the establishment
of the consent of States to be bound by the treaty, the manner or date of its entry into
force, reservations, the functions of the depositary and other matters arising
necessarily before the entry into force of the treaty apply from the time of the
adoption of its text,

Article 28 is also relevant, establishing the general rule against retroactivity in the
following terms:

Article 28: Non-retroactivity of treaties

 

Unless a different intention appears from the treaty or is otherwise established, its pr jons
do not bind a party in relation to any act or fact which took place or any situation which
ceased to exist before the date of the entry into force of the treaty with respect to that party.

DISCUSSION

The starting point in order to ascertain the true interpretation of the 2001 Agreement
is Article 31 of the VCLT. As noted above, that article requires a treaty to be
interpreted in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of treaty
in their context and in the light of its object and purpose. Moreover, Article 31(3)
stipulates that, together with the “context”, it is necessary to take into account any
subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the interpretation or application
of the treaty, any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty and any relevant
and applicable rules of international law.

The International Law Commission has emphasised in relation to Article 31 that there
is no legal hierarchy between the various aids to interpretation outlined in that Article.
In this regard, the International Law Commission has observed that “[t]he application
of the means of interpretation in this article would be a single combined operation”
and that “[aJll the various elements [terms, context, object and purpose] would be
thrown into the crucible, and their interaction would give the legally relevant
interpretation.”'>!

Article 32 further provides that recourse may be had to extrinsic evidence in order to
“confirm” the meaning resulting from the application of Article 31 or to determine the

 

'S! Yearbook of International Law Commission, 1966, vol. I] at pp 219-220

meaning when the application of Article 31 leaves the meaning “ambiguous or
obscure” or “manifestly absurd or unreasonable.”

THE TRIBUNAL’S JURISDICTION

166.

167.

168,

169.

A threshold issue is whether under the 2001 Agreement, to which only Croatia and
Slovenia are parties, this Tribunal has jurisdiction over the dispute presented to it.
More precisely, can HEP bring this case against the Republic of Slovenia and before
us? Issues of jurisdiction were not seriously contested between the parties to this
arbitration; nevertheless, some questions were asked and in any event the Tribunal is
obliged to be satisfied of its jurisdiction.

The issue is readily settled. Article 19 of the 2001 Agreement, entitled “(Dispute
Resolution),” provides in its Paragraph 2(e) that “[if] a dispute [‘between one
Contracting Party and the members of the Company from the other Contracting
Party’] cannot be settled amicably ..., the aggrieved Shareholder may ... refer the
dispute for resolution to [ICSID].” “Company” is defined in Article 2(1) as “NEK
d.o.o.,” and both HEP and ELES GEN are defined in the same Article 2(1) as
“Shareholders.”

Clearly the dispute before the Tribunal is one to enforce Article 17 and Exhibit 3 of
the 2001 Agreement. The two State Parties to that Agreement have entered into it as
the ultimate shareholders of the immediate “Shareholders” of NEK d.o.o. The
Agreement establishes in detail the points generally included in a shareholders
agreement. In doing so it gives their respective wholly-owned immediate
“Shareholders” of NEK d.o.o. the right to arbitrate directly against the “other State
Party” for any failure on the latter’s part to cause its wholly-owned “Shareholder” to
comply with the Agreement. Moreover, in Article 12(1)2. of the Agreement (entitled
“Protection of Investments”) “[t]he Contracting Parties agree ... that they shall ensure
fair and: impartial treatment of the Shareholders belonging to the other Contracting
Party on their territories, i.e. that they shall treat such Shareholder the same way as its
own Shareholder, with full protection and security of investments for the duration of
the joint investment.”

The Tribunal is in no doubt as to its jurisdiction to hear and decide the dispute here
presented to it.

THE TREATY’S TERMS

170.

The crux of the issue before the Tribunal is the correct interpretation to be adopted of
Article 17 and Exhibit 3 of the 2001 Agreement. It will be recalled that Article 17
provides:

Past Financial Issues

(1) Mutual financial relations existing up to the signing of this Agreement between
NEK d.0.0., ELES d.o.0., and HEP d.d. shall be regulated in accordance with the
principles set forth in Exhibit 3 of this Agreement.

(2) The Contracting Parties agree that, as of the date of entry into force hereof, all
obligations of NEK d.o.0. to the Fund for financing the dismantling of NE Kr8ko
and disposal of radioactive waste from NE KrSko, which obligations arose from the

171.

172.

173.

application of the Act on Fund for Financing of Dismantling of NE Kr8ko and
Disposal of Radioactive Waste from NE Kriko.... shall cease to exist.

The reference in Article 17(1) to “[mJutual financial relations existing up until the
signing of this Agreement [which] shal! be regulated in accordance with the principles
set forth in Exhibit 3 of this Agreement” naturally must be read together with the
Article’s heading, “Past Financial Issues,” and also with the reference in Article 17(2)
to “which obligations arose.” (It is to be noted that the 2001 Agreement, unlike many
agreements, has no express provision depriving headings of interpretative value, and
that the VCLT also has no such provision.) Plainly the text provides for the
“regulat[ion] in accordance with the principles set forth in Exhibit 3 of this
Agreement” of “financial issues” that had arisen between the parties prior to the
signing on 19 December 2001 of the 2001 Agreement. That is to say, it speaks of a
settlement, on the basis set forth in Exhibit 3, of outstanding disputes.

Article 17(1) makes Exhibit 3 an integral part of the entire 2001 Agreement. This is
confirmed by the fact that Articles 2(3), relating to Exhibit 1 to the 2001 Agreement
(“Memorandum of Association”), and 18(2), relating to Exhibit 4 (“Bilateral
Committee Rules of Procedure”), state, respectively, “The executed Memorandum of
Association is not an integral part of this Agreement” and “The Rules of Procedure ...
are not considered an integral part of this Agreement.” The lack of an express
statement to the contrary, therefore, confirms that Exhibit 3 is to be treated as an
integral part of the 2001 Agreement.

Exhibit 3 of the 2001 Agreement, which regulates the past “financial relations”
between the parties, has already been set out, but to assist the analysis it is set out
again here:

PRINCIPLES OF THE STRUCTURING OF THE FINANCIAL RELATIONS

(1) ELES GEN 4... shall assume all obligations of NEK d.o.0 towards the bank
which have occurred as a result of the transfer to NEK 4.0.0 of the repayment of
investment loans made by the Slovene founders, according to the balance on
December 31, 2001. Obligations resulting from loans issued to carry out NEK’s
modernization project will be NEK d.0.0’s only remaining long-term financial
obligations. Until June 30, 2002, the cost of these loans will be borne through the
cost of electricity by the Shareholder from the Republic of Slovenia and from that
day forward by both Sharcholders.

(2) By virtue of the entry into force of this Agreement:
-HEP d.d. waives all claims against NEK d.o.0 for damages, i.e. for compensation
for undelivered electricity, i.c. for compensation for use of the capital, and in this
regard will fully waive all claims in court arising therefrom;

-NEK d.o.0 waives all claims against HEP d.d. in connection with delivered power
and electricity, and in this regard will fully waive all claims in court arising
therefrom;

-NEK d.o.0 waives its claims against ELES d.o.o in the same amount as in the
previous bullet of this Paragraph;

-NEK d.o.0. waives all claims against HEP d.d. in connection with charged fees for
financing of the dismantling of the Nuclear Power Plant Kr3ko and disposal of
radioactive waste from Nuclear Power Plant Krsko, and in this regard will fully
waive any claims in court arising therefrom;

4

174,

-NEK 4.0.0, waives all claims in connection with pooled resources of depreciation
of both founders and claims in connection with the coverage of losses from
previous years.

(3) Based on the provisions listed above, NEK d.o.o will rearrange its balance sheet
on December 31, 2001 so that:

-it shows neither any claims toward HEP dd. and ELES d.o.0 nor any obligations
toward the fund for financing of the dismantling of the Nuclear Power Plant Krsko
and the disposal of radioactive waste from the Nuclear Power Plant Krsko;

~it does not show any obligations toward the bank which occurred as a result of the
transfer of repayment of Slovene founders’ investment loans to NEK 4.0.0.
described in Paragraph 1 of this Exhibit;

-based on the conversion of HEP’s long term investments and the exemption of the
loan, NEK d.o.0's capital will, after the payment of the possible uncovered losses,
be distributed to the Shareholders in two equal parts, so that the initial capital of
NEK d.o.0. reaches the amount listed in Article 2 of this Agreement, and so that
any possible remainder is distributed into the reserves;

-any other necessary accounting corrections or changes arising from this Exhibit
are executed.

(4) Any possible profit to NEK 4.0.0, arising from accounting corrections or
changes described in Paragraph 3 of this Exhibit will be tax-exempt.

(5) ELES GEN 4.0.0 assumes the financial results of all power and electricity
produced during the period from July 31, 1998 until the date HEP d.d. begins to
take over the electricity again, but no later than June 30, 2002. All the while, NEK
4.0.0.’s financial position must not worsen compared to its financial position on
July 30, 1998.

(6) The Contracting Parties will ensure that the Shareholders determine, by no later
than the end of 2002, whether the company needs additional long-term sources of
financing its operating costs, which sources of financing will be secured by a
capital increase in NEK 4.0.0. or any other appropriate manner.

Exhibit 3 is entitled “Principles of the Structuring of Financial Relations”. Its
paragraph (1) provides that ELES GEN d.0.0. shall be responsible for the repayment
of investment loans by the Slovene founders of NEK “according to the balance on
December 31, 2001,” and that NEK’s responsibility for “remaining long-term
financial obligations” arising out of “NEK’s modernization project” “will be borne
through the cost of electricity by the Shareholder from the Republic of Slovenia [until
June 30, 2002] and from that day forward by both Shareholders.” This of course is in
line with the parity principle that has governed the two sides since the 1970
Agreement and which permeates the 2001 Agreement (see Paragraphs 196-197,
below). Accordingly, HEP’s post-30 June 2002 obligation to share NEK’s previously
incurred modernization costs is part of the financial settlement achieved by Article 17
and Exhibit 3 of the 2001 Agreement. That settlement is a two-way street. Paragraph
(5) provides that ELES GEN “assumes the financial results of all power and
electricity produced during the period from July 31, 1998 until the date HEP d.d.
begins to take over the electricity again, but no later than June 30, 2002.” Hence,
starting 1 July 2002, HEP would share the costs outlined in paragraph (1) in
accordance with the new financial terms and, as of 1 July 2002 HEP would also be
entitled to the financial results of its share of the electricity produced by Kr8ko NPP.
While of course NEK could not be compelled actually to deliver electricity to HEP
until such time as the 2001 Agreement would enter into force, the terms of the

a

financial settlement concluded, and which perforce took effect with the entry into
force of the 2001 Agreement, were based on the financial facts that would flow had
HEP been supplied electricity starting 1 July 2002.'*

175. Just as Exhibit 3 determines the date as of which the new financial terms would take
effect, i.e., on the “critical date” of 30 June 2002, so, too, does it determine the extent
of the waivers contained in Paragraph (2) of Exhibit 3. Paragraph (2) expressly refers
to “delivered” and “undelivered” electricity without also giving a date against which
electricity is to be classified as “delivered” or “undelivered”. The same applies to the
subsequent waivers in which NEK waives “all claims against HEP” relating to the
dismantling of the Krsko NPP, disposal of waste, “depreciation” and “coverage of
losses from previous years.”!

176. It is important to note that the above view is reached as a result of construing the
words of the 2001 Agreement as prescribed by Articles 31 and 32 of the VCLT.
Nothing more and nothing less. While the parties have debated vigorously the issue of
whether an obligation can be “implied” in an international agreement, that debate is
rendered pointless by the terms of VCLT Articles 31 and 32, which do not categorize
treaty provisions as being either “express” or “implied”. Hence the VCLT-prescribed
interpretive process is just that. No greater or lesser force resides in a term by virtue
of the relative magnitude of the clarity with which it has been (or has not been)
written. The Tribunal’s construction of Article 17 and Exhibit 3 becomes clearer still
when, as the VCLT requires, one considers their wording “in light of the [the 2001
Agreement’s] object and purpose” and “‘in their context.”

OBJECT AND PURPOSE

177, Turning to the object and purpose of the 2001 Agreement, the Tribunal concludes that
the 2001 Agreement was in general terms a settlement agreement intended to resolve
the longstanding and significant differences between the two countries and to thereby
enable the resumed joint operation and exploitation of NPP Krsko in accordance with
the parity principle. In other words, the purpose of the 2001 Agreement was to draw a
line in time, on 30 June 2002, as of which all past financial disputes were to be settled
and from which new financial terms were to take effect, with a “zero/zero” financial
balance to be achieved, as of 1 July 2002.

178. It is agreed between the parties that, at the time of the signing, both parties envisaged
that the 2001 Agreement would have entered into force prior to the agreed “critical

‘2 While eventual decommissioning costs paid by or changed to HEP prior to | July 2002 were waived per the
penultimate bullet point in Paragraph (2) of Exhibit 3, the parity principle is upheld in this respect, too, by
Articles 10 (Dismantling, Radioactive Waste and Spent Nuclear Fuel”) and 11 (“Financing of Dismantling
and Disposal”) of the 2001 Agreement as regards the totality of such costs. Those Articles both read in the
future, i.c., expressly leaving the various elements of the process to commence within stated numbers of
days “from the entry into force of this Agreement,” or “from the date of entry into force hereof.” Thus the
unexpectedly delayed entry into force of that Agreement had no effect on the parity principle in that regard
or on the financial settlement keyed to the “critical date” of 1 July 2002. Hence in benefiting as claimed,
and found by the Tribunal, as regards the costs of electricity beginning | July 2002 HEP in no way escapes
its obligation to contribute its 50 percent share of ultimate decommissioning costs.

'S) The fact that Paragraph (2) of Exhibit 3 is prefaced by the phrase “By virtue of the entry into force of the
Agreement” is of no interpretive value. It simply confirms the obvious, namely that the Agreement could
enter into force only upon the exchange of the State Parties’ respective notes of ratification.

179.

180.

date” of 30 June 2002 and that the 2001 Agreement’s terms would therefore already
have become enforceable. That the ratification became delayed and the timetable
intended by the parties in 2001 for the practical implementation of the 2001
Agreement never eventuated did not affect the fundamental object and purpose of the
2001 Agreement as embodied in its text. Instead, the object and purpose remained to
provide for the resumed 50-50 operation and exploitation of Krsko NPP by entering
into a liquidated financial settlement of all claims existing as of the 2001 Agreement’s
signature, which settlement was keyed to the presumed time of entry into force of the
2001 Agreement, and which claims would be measured with reference to the date on
which a “zero/zero” financial balance was deemed to occur.

The object and purpose as outlined above is reflected in Paragraph (ii) of the preamble
to the 2001 Agreement, which provides:

(ii) having a desire, as sovereign and internationally recognised states, to continue to jointly
regulate their relations regarding the status, use and dismantling of Nuclear Power Plant Kr8ko
Lal

On a practical level, the terms of the 200] Agreement, with the exception of the
provisions of Exhibit 3, amount to a reincarnation of the terms of the 1970 Agreement
and the parity principle contained therein. On its entry into force the 2001 Agreement
replaced the 1970 Agreement (Article 22, Paragraph (1)). In addition to replacing the
1970 Agreement, the 2001 Agreement:

recognizes HEP and ELES-GEN as the legal successors in interest to the
Slovenian and Croatian companies that invested in the construction of Krsko
NPP (Article 1(a));

* provides that HEP and ELES-GEN will have equal rights and obligations, unless
otherwise stated into the Agreement (Article 1(b));

© establishes HEP and ELES-GEN as 50:50 shareholders in the limited liability
company NEK, a new legal entity to be governed by a Memorandum of
Association (Exhibit 1 to the 2001 Agreement. The Memorandum of
Association states in Article 2 that the transformation of NEK will take place in
accordance with the 2001 Agreement and Slovenian company law. It also
provides in its Article 30 the possibility for NEK to terminate electricity
deliveries to the shareholder who fails to comply with its financial obligations.)
(Article 2);

e states that the governance of NEK will be exercised in accordance with the
parity principle. ELES-GEN nominates the Chairman of the Management
Board and HEP the Vice-Chairman. HEP nominates the Chairman of the
Supervisory Board and ELES-GEN the Vice-Chairman. The Chairman of the
Management Board has a casting vote, controlled however by the Supervisory
Board (Article 3);

© orders that electricity produced at the Krsko NPP shall be delivered to the
shareholders in equal proportions (Article 5);

. states that the price for electricity deliveries comprises operating costs,
including, inter alia, the depreciation costs, in the amounts necessary for long-
term investment; and

* stipulates that decommissioning and radioactive waste disposal are joint
liabilities of Croatia and Slovenia and will be financed in equal proportions. The
funds for decommissioning shall be collected in a special fund created by each
State (Articles 10 and 11).

THE TREATY’S CONTEXT

181.

182.

Considering “context” within the meaning of Article 31(2) of the VCLT, the only
“agreement relating to the treaty which was made between all the parties [i.e.,
Slovenia and Croatia] in connection with the conclusion of the treaty” (emphasis
added), could be the “Joint Statement” signed together with the Treaty on 19
December 2001 by the Croatian Minister of Economy, Mr Fizulic, and the Slovenian
Minister of Environment and Planning, Mr Kopac.

The parties disagree slightly over the precise translation of this “Joint Statement”, but
it is not disputed that it provides:

(1) Regarding the time component built into the [2001 Agreement] and the
necessary extensive preparations for its implementation, the two Parties shall do
their best to ensure [HEP version] / shall endeavour [Slovenia version] that the
ratifications of the [2001 Agrecment] in the Croatian Parliament and the Parliament
of the Republic of Slovenia are implemented as soon as possible during the first
quarter of 2002.

(2) For the entry into force of the Memorandum of Association [Exhibit I]. . . and
for the review of the balance sheets according to Clause 3 of [Exhibit 3], the first
appropriate dates shall be chosen (first date of the month and the last date of the
previous month) after the entry into force of [the 2001 Agreement}, but no later
than the second quarter of 2002.

(3) According to the Joint Minutes on the completion of negotiations of July 5,
2001, the joint committee for the preparation of the basis required for the
constitutional meeting of the company and other actions important for the efficient
start-up operation of the company shall commence its work on January 7, 2002, and
as part of its work include the review of the annual plan for 2002, and other
documents of importance for the operation of [the Plant].

This Joint Statement is entirely consistent with, and indeed further confirms, the
Tribunal’s textual analysis.

ARTICLE 32 OF THE VIENNA CONVENTION

183.

The result arrived at above by applying Article 31 to the 2001 Agreement is
confirmed on further investigation pursuant to Article 32, which permits reference to
the travaux of a treaty in order to confirm the meaning resulting from the application
of Article 31. Alternatively, should application of Article 31 be seen as leaving the
meaning “ambiguous or obscure,” or, indeed, “manifestly absurd or unreasonable,”
resort to Article 32 produces the same result as the Tribunal’s foregoing textual
analysis. Viewed in light of the drafts and documents prepared by the two sides in
conjunction with the various stages of the negotiations, as amplified by the testimony

185.

186.

187.

156

of key actors present during those negotiations, the interpretation outlined above
emerges as the only interpretation which adequately reflects the parties’ mutual
intentions and is therefore confirmed. '

Slovenia itself has argued that the 2001 Agreement constituted an agreement to “deem
their financial relations to be balanced as of six months after the expected date of
entry in force of the 2001 Agreement,” which at the time of the Rijeka meeting was
expected to be | January 2002.'** Clearly it was the intent of both parties to draw a
line in time as of which all past financial disputes were settled and from which new
financial terms were to take effect. That line in time became 30 June 2002.

In May 2001 Dr Goran Granic, Deputy Prime Minister of Croatia from 2000 to 2003,
originated the essential features of what became Exhibit 3, namely, that the solution to
the longstanding and significant differences between the two countries was to “wipe
the slate clean” as of an agreed future “critical date” as of which all claims would be
waived, electricity deliveries would be resumed, and the two shareholders would co-
own and co-manage NEK. 156

At the meeting of the Prime Ministers of Croatia and Slovenia in Rijeka, Croatia on 9
June 2001, the Croatian Prime Minister, Mr Ivica Racan, and his delegation, including
Dr Granic, put this proposal to the Slovenian representatives and they found this
acceptable. The Croatian side then proposed 1 January 2002 as the “critical date,”
and the Slovenians countered with 30 June 2002, which the Croatians quickly
accepted, and the two sides agreed each to draft their understanding of this agreement
for final negotiations at a future session.'*” The final text of what became Exhibit 3
was finalized at a 28-30 June 2001 meeting at Brijuni, Croatia, and the entire text of
what became the 2001 Agreement was completed at a 5 July 2001 meeting in Otocec
na Krki, Slovenia.

Dr Granic states that without the agreement on the Slovenian side in these
negotiations to take responsibility for electricity deliveries to Croatia as of 30 June
2002, Croatia and HEP would not have agreed to waive their claims against NEK and
ELES as from 31 July 1998 until that date, after which point HEP would stop
incurring further damages for non-delivery.'** Memoranda authored by Mr Korze,
who was the head of the Slovenian negotiating team for the 2001 Agreement, in June
and July 2001 each indicate that “all of the electricity will be delivered to the
Slovenian Shareholder until 1 July 2002, and from this date on each of the
Shareholders will receive one half of electricity” and, likewise, that the Slovenian side
would:

may be recalled from Czech Republic v. European Media Ventures SA (paragraph 171 above) that only in

the event of “different professions of intention” by the treaty parties are their professions of intent to be
ignored.

+55 Respondent’s Counter Memorial, para 206; see also Ogoreve Witness Statement (“WS”) at paras 23-24.
+ Granic WS, paras 14-15
‘57 Granic WS, paras 19-20; Tr., Day 6 at 109-112

"8 Ty, Day 6 at 112:20-25

19 Tr, Day 3 at 102-105; Exhibits C-307, C-310, and C-311 at paras 8-9.

188.

189.

190.

cover all costs and [. . .] assume all financial results in connection with assumption of
electricity from 1 August 1998 until the date of resumption of electricity supplies to HEP, but
no later than 30 June 2002.

Both sides’ drafts brought to the Brijuni negotiating round stated that HEP’s right to
receive electricity from the Krsko NPP would be restored “on” (Croatian draft [Ex. C-
181 cl. 8]) or “by” (Slovenian draft [Ex. C-182 cl. 4]) 30 June 2002.'° Also, in its
later filing in the Slovenian Constitutional Court in connection with a challenge to the
constitutionality in Slovenia of the 2001 Agreement, the Slovenian’ Government
affirmed that HEP was to “start receiving, no later than 1 July 2002, one half of the
electricity generated by NEK.”'*!

The delay of the entry into force of the 2001 Agreement until 2003 did not affect the
parties’ mutual intention in signing the 2001 Agreement on 19 December 2001 that
Slovenia’s financial responsibility for electricity deliveries to Croatia be revived, and
the waivers end, as of 30 June 2002. The Tribunal agrees with the Claimant’s
submission that:'

[t]he obvious and natural result of the unforeseen delay [in ratification and entry into force]
was that, if the Rijeka agreement was still to be put into effect, both Governments should be
held to the terms of that initial agreement, regardless of the timing of ratification.

Slovenia’s suggestion at various other points that the 30 June 2002 date was intended to
represent only a “relative,” “fictional,” or “notional” equilibrium is not supported by the
evidence, Slovenia has argued that the intent was that the parties would “deem their
financial relations to be balanced as of six months after the expected date of entry into
force of the 2001 Agreement,” which at the time of the Rijeka meeting was expected to
be 1 January 2002.'* This arrangement, according to Mr. Ogoreve, who was Slovenia’s
negotiator on what became the text of Exhibit 3, was agreed so as “to give both parties
sufficient time to put into place the necessary conditions for the implementation of the
2001 Agreement.”' The 2001 Agreement was not actually signed until 19 December
2001, however, and there is no indication that performance of the 2001 Agreement would
hinge either on it being in force as soon as 1 January 2002 or on there being a six-month
implementation window thereafter. Of course, the 2001 Agreement did specify dates at
which various acts were to be taken, and were taken, before the 2001 Agreement’s entry
into force.'® Slovenia also has conceded that, had the 2001 Agreement been ratified
after 1 January 2002 but before 30 June 2002, the obligation to restore electricity
deliveries would have arisen regardless as of 1 July 2002." It strains credibility for
Slovenia on the one hand to characterize Exhibit 3 as embodying a “financial settlement”
but for it also to argue on the other hand that the basic “price” of this settlement ~ that
ELES would enjoy the “financial results” of electricity generation minus the “cost” of the

'© Claimant's Reply, para 237

'S' Exhibit C-315; Tr. Day 3 at 106-107
‘© Claimant’s Reply, para 270
'® Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, para 206; see also Ogoreve WS, paras 23-24

' Ogoreve WS, para 23
"65 See, ¢.g., Article 2(3) ("The company founders shall enter into the Memorandum of Association immediately

upon the execution of this Agreement”); Exhibit 3 at (3(“NEK dd. will rearrange its balance sheet on
December 31, 2001")

1% Tr, Day 6 at 66:6-19

modernization loans “until June 30, 2002” — was somehow “fictional,” “notional,” or
“relative.”

Goon Farru

191.

192.

193.

It is to be remembered that VCLT Article 31 mandates that treaties be interpreted “in
good faith.” That is the core principle about which all else revolves. The Tribunal is
persuaded that a good faith interpretation of the 2001 Agreement compels the
conclusion at which it has arrived. That result does no violence, either to the
Agreement’s language or in its result. As both parties agree was their desire, a line is
drawn as of 30 June 2002 under their earlier differences, and upon entry into force
HEP receives what was agreed, i.e.: full implementation of the parity principle as
regards NKK Krsko; mutual waivers of all claims existing as of 30 June 2002; and an
equal share in the financial benefits, calculated from 1 July 2002, accruing to a 50-
percent offtaker of NEK’s produced power. Those benefits must take into account,
however, that as of 1 July 2002 HEP must bear 50 percent of the modernization costs
incurred in the past. That obligation is built into the valuation of the electricity that
HEP notionally would have received in the event of the 2001 Agreement entering into
force before 1 July 2002. Furthermore, HEP must, by other means prescribed in the
2001 Agreement, provide 50 percent of all of the decommissioning costs that
ultimately will be incurred. In no way does it get a “free ride” for the nine and a half
months before it once more actually received electricity on 19 April 2003 following
the 2001 Agreement’s entry into force.

Conversely, the Respondent (or ELES GEN or NEK) bears the same liabilities it would
have had if the Agreement had entered into force prior to 1 July 2002. It will be recalled
(see Paragraph 131, above) that, as spelled out by the Respondent in its Rejoinder:'*

[tJhere is a distinction to be drawn between physical flows of electricity and how that
electricity is purchased. A person may physically acquire electricity from persons other than
from persons with whom it contracts to purchase it. Contracts may change, but the physical
flows do not. The Tribunal should not be under any misapprehension that HEP or Croatia
were deprived of actual energy flows from the Kriko NPP. In fact, apart from a very brief
period 10 years ago — just a few days — there was no physical cut-off at all. Even then, only
two of the several transmission lines from Slovenia to Croatia were affected. Beyond this,
throughout the whole of the relevant period Croatia continued to receive electricity from the
Krisko NPP in exactly the same way as it had done before July 1998 and indeed does so today,
Zagreb continued to be powered by the electricity of the Kr3ko NPP. Rather than any physical
termination of electricity supply, what occurred is merely that on the contractual plane (i.e. as
a matter of accounting or booking entries) as opposed to the physical plane, over this period
HEP was deemed to have to purchase that electricity from other sources. All that HEP lost in
July 1998 was the contractual ability to claim electricity from the Kr8ko NPP.

 

To the extent, if any, that ELES GEN received more than 50 percent of the electricity
after 30 June 2002 and prior to 19 April 2003, it benefited insofar as it did not pay the
higher spot market price for such volumes. By now complying with the 2001 Agreement
as the Tribunal has interpreted it the Respondent simply transfers such “windfall” to HEP,
placing it in the position foreseen for it under Article 17 and Exhibit 3. (This is virtually
identical, in fact, to what was provided in Clause 17.1.2 of the 1974 Pooling Agreement
[see Paragraph 82, above].) To the extent that the Respondent, rather than itself using
HEP’s intended share of electricity, sold same on the spot market to on-sellers to HEP,

‘© Respondent’s Rejoinder, para 10

194.

the effect of the Respondent meeting its obligations to HEP under the 2001 Agreement as
interpreted by the Tribunal is, in the first instance, to transfer ELES GEN’s profits on
such spot market sales to HEP, thus reducing HEP’s net cost of spot market purchases
during the period 1 July 2002 — 19 April 2003 to the cost it would have incurred had it in
fact been able to draw electricity from NEK during that period. Concededly, the
Respondent will bear the additional burden of markups by the on-sellers to HEP, which
would not have been incurred had Slovenia ratified the 2001 Agreement in time for it to
enter into force before 1 July 2002. Whether, and, if so, to what extent, such notional
burden in fact exists of course awaits further proceedings in this arbitration.

The point simply is that the interpretation given herein to the 2001 Agreement in no way
constitutes a licence or an incentive to either party to “play games” with the ratification
process. The parties’ overriding concern was to re-establish the parity principle in respect
of all aspects of NKK Kr3ko. The Respondent chose to ratify when it did, rather than to
renegotiate, thus necessarily accepting the consequences of that act.

THE Non-IsSUE OF RETROACTIVITY

195.

196.

197.

As discussed extensively above, what the Claimant seeks, and the 2001 Agreement
supports, is a financial adjustment equivalent to what would have been the case had the
Kr3ko NPP’s electricity in fact been equally delivered to HEP and its Slovene counterpart
as from 1 July 2002, as foreseen in the parties’ financial settlement. For this reason, there
is no issue of retroactivity on the above interpretation.

Nonetheless, even if there were to be an issue of retroactivity, it would clearly be resolved
in HEP’s favor. First it is to be noted that at the time of signature of the 2001 Agreement
the obligation contained in Article 5 thereof to deliver electricity in equal parts to HEP
and ELES GEN” was not something belonging to the past; it was a future, prospective
obligation. The case here is not one of breach of that obligation, which clearly could not
arise prior to the 2001 Agreement entering into force. Rather it is one to enforce,
following entry into force of the 2001 Agreement, the financial settlement that its Article
17 and Exhibit 3 embody. Hence, this in no event would be a true case of retroactive
application. '*

At the time the 2001 Agreement was signed on 19 December 2001, the obligations HEP
asserts under Exhibit 3 would in fact have been prospective; they became “retroactive”
only as the treaty’s entry into force became delayed. As the International Law
Commission’s commentary to what became VCLT Article 28 noted, retroactive
application may be permitted by a “special clause” or “special object” necessitating
retroactivity.'°* Such a provision was found by the Permanent Court of International
Justice in the Mavrommatis Palestine Concessions (Greece v. United Kingdom) case.‘
In that case, Great Britain objected to jurisdiction over Greece’s claims under the 1923
Protocol XII to the Treaty of Lausanne, by which Great Britain had agreed to maintain
and respect the concessions granted in the Palestine trust territory by its former trustee,
Turkey, before 29 October 1914, on the argument that such responsibility would be

' See, eg., Ambatielos case (Greece v United Kingdom), Jurisdiction, Judgment of | July, 1952 I.C.J. Rep. 28,

40 rejecting Greece's argument that it could bring a claim under a 1926 treaty based on acts which had
taken place in 1922 and 1923 since there was no evidence that the 1926 treaty was intended to allow such
retroactive application.

'® Yearbook of International Law Commission, 1966, vol. II, para 212
™ PCJ. (1924) Series A, No. 2, p 34

198.

199.

200.

201.

barred by the principle of non-retroactivity of treaties, The Court rejected this argument
with respect to a pre-World War I concession granted to a Greek national:

Protocol XII was drawn up in order to fix the conditions governing the recognition
and treatment by the contracting Parties of certain concessions granted by the
Ottoman authorities before the conclusion of the Protocol. An essential characteristic
therefore of Protocol XII is that its effects extend to legal situations dating from a
time previous to its own existence. If provision were not made in the clauses of the
Protocol for the protection of the rights recognized therein as against infringements
before the coming into force of that instrument, the Protocol would be ineffective as
regards the very period at which the rights in question are most in need of protection.
The Court therefore considers that the Protocol guarantees the rights recognized in it
against any violation regardless of the date at which it may have taken place.

Similarly, in the present case an “essential characteristic” of Exhibit 3 as interpreted by
HEP is that it was intended to apply directly to a “situation” — the (non)-restoration of
electricity deliveries and “parity” as of 1 July 2002 — that ended up arising before the
2001 Agreement’s entry into force. Not to give effect to the agreement contemplated in
this situation would be to render Exhibit 3, once it did come into force, “ineffective as
regards the very period at which the rights in question are most in need of protection.”
On this understanding the principle of non-retroactivity would not bar HEP’s claim.

If Slovenia’s interpretation of Exhibit 3 were correct, then it still would be no clearer that
VCLT Article 28 would apply. Slovenia argues that Exhibit 3 is merely a “financial

ining no actual ive or material obligati with respect to
electricity deliveries to HEP, even though Slovenia acknowledged at the hearing that such
deliveries were part of the intent of the 2001 Agreement. It is not clear, however, how
such a liquidated financial settlement would “bind a party in relation to any act or fact
which took place or any situation which ceased to exist before the date of the entry into
force of the treaty.” Such a settlement could be more appropriately viewed as binding the
parties to the financial terms of that Agreement as of the date of its entry into force
without, as Slovenia suggests, binding Slovenia in relation to any actual act, fact, or
situation that allegedly was to occur before then.

 

Under any of the interpretations of Exhibit 3 advanced, VCLT Article 28 by its own terms
clearly would not bar HEP’s claim under the 2001 Agreement. The 2001 Agreement
expressly stipulates the temporal applicability of Exhibit 3; under the heading “Past
Financial Issues,” Article 17(1) provides that:

[mJutual financial relations existing up to the signing of this Agreement between NEK 4.0.0.,
ELES d.o.o, ELES GEN d.o.o and HEP dd. shall be regulated in accordance with the
principles set forth in Exhibit 3 of this Agreement. (emphasis added)

In other words, Exhibit 3 was expressly intended to “regulate” the situation existing “up
to” 19 December 2001, which date was self-evidently before either country was expected
to ratify. Article 17(1) thus suggests, as is analyzed in greater detail above, that the 2001
Agreement was intended to settle the past claims on all sides existing as of the date of
signature by, as Exhibit 3 provides, giving ELES six months of financial responsibility
for the modernization project and six months of financial results from the Krsko NPP’s
power generation. This express provision suffices to satisfy the intent requirement of
VCLT Article 28 and thus there is no retroactivity problem here.

Finally as regards Article 28, it should be underscored that it, unlike Article 31, directs
‘one not just to the text of the 2001 Agreement itself, but also permits the parties’ intent of
retroactivity to be “otherwise established.” The very nature of the 2001 Agreement

202.

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(y)

(vi)

(vii)

bespeaks the parties’ intention to go forward on the basis of settling the past. Incidental
support for this is provided by the fact that certain steps were to be taken under the 2001
Agreement on or as of dates that clearly would precede its entry into force (For example:
Article 2(3) providing “The company founders shall enter into the Memorandum of

iation i diately upon the ion of this A ”; Exhibit 3 at (3)
providing “NEK d.d. will rearrange its balance sheet on December 31, 2001”). Ata
minimum, to the extent any issue of retroactivity is presented, the parties’ intent in that
regard clearly is “otherwise established”.

 

THE DECISION

For all the foregoing reasons and rejecting all submissions to the contrary'”! the Tribunal
DECLARES AND DECIDES as follows:

Pursuant to the 2001 Agreement, and in particular its Article 17(1) and its Exhibit 3
(“Principles of the Structuring of the Financial Relations”), both of which constitute integral
parts of the 2001 Agreement:

Declares that the aforementioned Article 17(1) and Exhibit 3 constitute a financial settlement
as of 30 June 2002 between the Republic of Croatia and the Republic of Slovenia in relation
to their respective companies as set forth at (ii) through (vi) hereinbelow.

Declares that the Republic of Slovenia is liable to the Claimant for the financial value to HEP
of 50 percent of the electrical power produced by NEK, or by its predecessor, JP NEK,
throughout the period 1 July 2002 until 19 April 2003, subject, however, to the Tribunal
determining in subsequent proceedings in this arbitration whether or not, and, if so, the extent
to which: (1) HEP has waived such liability by acquiescence as alleged by the Respondent (in
support of which allegation the Respondent was permitted to introduce its Exhibit 326 see
Paragraphs 48 and 50, above); or (2) NEK or JP NEK has satisfied such liability by the offers
of electrical power made to HEP by either of them on 24 June 2002 and on 13 November
2002.

 

Declares that HEP has waived all claims against NEK and JP NEK for damages, i.e., for
compensation for undelivered electricity, i.e., for use of the capital, for any and all periods of
time from the beginning of time through 30 June 2002;

Declares that NEK and JP NEK have waived all claims against HEP in connection with
delivered power and electricity for any and all periods of time from the beginning of time
through 30 June 2002;

Declares that NEK and JP NEK have waived all claims against ELES GEN in connection
with delivered power and electricity for any and all periods of time from the beginning of
time through 30 June 2002;

Declares that NEK and JP NEK have waived all claims against HEP in connection with
charged fees for financing of the dismantling of Krsko NPP for any and all periods of time
from the beginning of time through 30 June 2002; and

Declares that NEK and JP NEK have waived all claims against HEP and ELES GEN in
connection with pooled resources of depreciation and in connection with the coverage of
losses for any and all periods of time from the beginning of time through 30 June 2002.

"\ Having carefully considered the appended Individual Opinion of our esteemed colleague, we are, with
respect, unable to agree with it.

B. Dismisses all claims asserted by HEP against the Republic of Slovenia in this
arbitration as arising under the Energy Charter Treaty.

Cc Reserves costs for decision in the further proceedings.

Date: [June 12, 2009]

[signed] [signed]
Mr Jan Paulsson Hon. Charles N. Brower
Arbitrator Arbitrator
[signed]

Mr David A. R. Williams, Q.C.

President of the Tribunal

_ = = emee eB eB RES

 

AGREEMENT

TWEEN
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA
AND
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SLOVENIA

ON REGULATION OF STATUS AND OTHER LEGAL RELATIONS
REGARDING THE INVESTMENT, USE AND DISMANTLING
OF NUCLEAR POWER PLANT KRSKO

AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA
AND
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SLOVENIA
ON REGULATION OF STATUS AND OTHER LEGAL RELATIONS
REGARDING THE INVESTMENT, USE AND DISMANTLING
OF NUCLEAR POWER PLANT KRSKO

(i) WHEREAS, based on the European Energy Charter, and in particular the principles
established by
* the Energy Charter Treaty,

* the Convention on Nuclear Safety,

.

the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of
Radioactive Waste Management,

(ii) having a desire, as sovereign and internationally recognized states, to continue to jointly
regulate their relations regarding the status, use and dismantling of Nuclear Power Plant Kr3ko
(hereinafter "NE KrSko"), and

(iii) based on the Agreement, executed on October 27, 1970, between the Executive Council of
the Socialist Republic of Croatia and the Executive Council of the Socialist Republic of Slovenia,
ratified in the Parliament of the Socialist Republic of Croatia on December 28, 1970 (“Official
Gazette" of SR Croatia No. 1/71) and in the Assembly of the Socialist Republic of Slovenia on
December 10, 1970 ("Official Gazette" of SR Slovenia No. 44/70),

{iv) taking into account the Agreement on the pooling of resources for joint construction and
exploitation of NE Krsko, executed on March 22, 1974, between Elektroprivreda Zagreb and
Savskih elektrarn Ljubljana, and the respective Annex dated as of April 16, 1982,

(v) taking into account the Self-Management Agreement on regulation of mutual rights and
liabilities between the founders and NE Kr&Sko, executed on April 16, 1982 between ZEOH
Zagreb and EGS Maribor, and

(vi) taking into account the Agreement on preparing the construction of a second joint croatian-
slovenian nuclear power plant, executed on April 21, 1985 between ZEOH Zagreb and EGS
Maribor,

(vii) taking into account that NE KrSko investors were entered into the court register of the
Regional Court Novo Mesto under No. 56/84 of February 29, 1984 as the founders,

the Government of the Republic of Croatia and the Government of the Republic of Slovenia
(hereinafter: the Contracting Parties) agree as follows:

Article 1
(Legal Successors)

(1) The Contracting Parties confirm that NE KrSko was built with the funds of Croatian and
Slovenian electrical power companies, represented on the Croatian side by
Elektroprivreda Zagreb, and on the Slovenian side by Savske elektrarne Ljubljana. The
legal successor of the Croatian electrical power companies’ rights and obligations arising
from the construction and use of NE Kr&ko is Hrvatska elektroprivreda d.d. Zagreb
(hereinafter; HEP d.d), and the legal successor of the Slovenian electrical power
companies is ELES GEN d.o.0. Ljubljana.

(2) The funds required for the construction of the nuclear power plant were invested in equal
parts, based on the proceedings listed in the preamble hereto, by the investors, i.e. by
their legal successors, who, as a result, acquired the basis for acquiring the Shareholder
rights in NE KrSko in accordance with this Agreement.

(3) The Contracting Parties agree that the legal successors of the investors from both
Contracting Parties exercise their rights and obligations regarding the management and
use of jointly owned NE KrSko in equal parts and in equal proportions, unless otherwise
established in this Agreement.

Article 2
(NEK do.0. Company)

(1) The Contracting Parties agree that the existing Javno poduzeée Nuklearna elektrana
KrSko, a limited liability company (JPNEK d.0o.0.), as transformed by the Decree of the
Government of the Republic of Slovenia of July 30, 1998, from Nuklearna elektrana
Kr&ko p.o., is to be transformed into Nuklearna elektrana KrSko, Limited: liability
company (hereinafter: Company or NEK d.o.0.), in accordance with this Agreement and
the respective Memorandum of Association which shall be entered into, based on this
Agreement, between Hrvatska elektroprivreda d.d. Zagreb and ELES GEN d.o.0.
Ljubljana (hereinafter: company founders or Shareholders).

(2) The Company operates based on the principle of covering of all expenses, and therefore
in principle does not produce either losses or profits as a result of its operation.

(3

The agreement being entered into by the company founders (hereinafter Memorandum
of Association) shall be based on the provisions of this Agreement and on the provisions
of the Commercial Companies Act of the Republic of Slovenia. The Contracting Parties
shall ensure that the company founders enter into a Memorandum of Association
substantially in the form enclosed in exhibit 1 of this Agreement. The company founders
shall enter into the Memorandum of Association immediately upon the execution of this
Agreement, provided the Memorandum of Association shall enter into force
simultaneously with entry into force of this Agreement. The Memorandum of Association
is considered the founding document of the company, and does have to be notarized in

2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(6)

(6)

accordance with the Commercial Company Act to be legally valid. The executed
Memorandum of Association is not an integral part of this Agreement.

The base capital of NEK d.o.o. is 84.723,482.000,00 SIT (eighty-four billion seven
hundred twenty-three million four hundred eighty-two thousand Slovenian Tolars).

The base capital of NEK d.o.o. is divided into two equal parts owned by Hrvatska
elektroprivreda d.d. Zagreb and ELES GEN 4.0.0. Ljubljana.

Decisions on withdrawal or dismissal of a Shareholder from the company, and the
decisions on premature liquidation of the company require the consent of the
Contracting Parties.

The Contracting Parties agree not to act in a manner which might revoke or restrict the
rights of Shareholders.

Article 3
(Company Bodies)

The Company bodies are the Shareholders’ Assembly, the Supervisory Board and the
Management Board, all of which are composed on a parity basis, unless agreed to
otherwise in this Agreement.

The Slovenian member is entitled to make a recommendation for the Chairman of the
Management Board, and the Croatian member is entitled to make a recommendation for
the Vice-Chairman of the Management Board. If a consensus cannot be reached within
a parity composed Management Board, the vote of the Chairman of the Management
Board will be the deciding vote (hereinafter: casting vote). The casting vote of the
Chairman of the Management Board is used only in exceptional circumstances, and only
when the failure to reach consensus in the Management Board might jeopardize the
safety of the plant operation, substantially jeopardize achievement of goals determined
by the adopted annual plan or cause significant damages to the company.

In the case of the Chairman of the Management Board using the casting vote, he must
immediately request the Chairman of the Supervisory Board to convene the meeting of
the Supervisory Board during which the justifiableness of the use of the casting vote
shall be reviewed and appropriate decisions adopted.

When the casting vote is used, the members of the Management Board who voted
against the decision are not liable for damages which might arise from such decision of
the Chairman of the Management Board.

The Croatian Shareholder is entitled to make a recommendation for the Chairman of the
Supervisory Board, and the Slovenian Shareholder is entitled to make a
recommendation for the Vice-Chairman of the Supervisory Board.

The representatives of the employees of NEK d.o.0. (wider organization) are entitled to
participate in the meetings and decisions of the Supervisory Board, but only when legal-

3

employment issues related to NEK d.o.0. employees are being directly discussed and
decided upon. In such cases, the Supervisory Board consists of three parts, an equal
number of Slovenian Shareholder representatives, Croatian Shareholder representatives
and of NEK d.o.0. employee representatives, which were appointed in accordance with
regulations governing the employees’ participation in the management. The specific
provisions governing the structure and operation of the Supervisory Board in the wider
organization are provided in the Memorandum of Association.

(7) The Contracting Parties agree that the Slovenian regulations regarding employees’
participation in management pertaining to an employee director shall not be applicable
to NEK d.0o.0,

(8) The Shareholders’ Assembly shall appoint the recommended members of the
Management Board and the Supervisory Board, if they were recommended in
accordance with this Agreement and the Memorandum of Association.

(9) The Contracting Parties agree that the issues which cannot be decided upon by the
company bodies due to the parity composition, shall be resolved by a business
arbitration, whose award shall be final and binding on the Company. The provisions
regarding the structure, competence and operation of such arbitration are provided in
the Memorandum of Association.

Article 4
(Ouration, Flight of First Refusal)
(1) NEK d.o.o. is incorporated for a definite term, i.e. until the end of the process of
dismantling of the nuclear power plant.

(2) During any eventual sale of the real property of NEK d.o.o., the Republic of Slovenia, i.e.
the legal person authorized by it in accordance with Exhibit 2 hereof, has the right of first
refusal. Such right of first refusal has priority over other legal rights of first refusal.

Article 5
(Production and Transimissiory)

(1) The Contracting Parties agree that NE KrSko is a significant electric power resource for
the electric power systems of both countries, and the Contracting Parties are extremely
interested in the safe operation of this power plant.

(2) The Contracting Parties agree that the Company shall deliver the produced power and
electricity to the Shareholders in equal proportions, half to each Shareholder, until the
end of the regular useful life of the nuclear power plant in the year 2023, i.e. until the
extended useful life of the power plant, if approved (hereinafter: useful life).

(3) The Contracting Parties agree that the delivery of the generated electric power shall be
done in compliance with European norms, under equal terms for both Shareholders.

4

 

(4) The operator of the transmission network from the Republic of Slovenia shall provide to
the Shareholder from the Republic of Croatia the transmission of power and electricity
from Paragraph 2 of this Article, by the shortest transmission route. The Shareholder
from the Republic of Croatia must accept the delivered electricity. For the transmission of
the power and electricity from NE Kr&ko the operator of the transmission network shall
charge the Shareholders from the Republic of Croatia the transmission costs in
accordance with the existing and intemational practices.

(5) The legal entities in the Republic of Croatia and in the Republic of Slovenia authorized to
manage the electric power systems and transmission of electric power and NEK d.0.0.
shall regulate their relations by a separate agreement, as needed.

(6) The available power and generated electricity which has been delivered according to
Paragraph 2 of this Article and transmitted according to Paragraph 4 of this Article is free
of customs and other duties.

(7) The Slovenian electricity market regulations shall not apply to the electricity generated in
NE KrSko, which is, according to Paragraph 2 of this Article, accepted by the
Shareholder from the Republic of Croatia.

Article 6
(Price, Expenses)

(1) The Shareholders shall pay the delivered power and electricity at the price covering the
full operating costs, including, /7/er 2/2, the depreciation costs, in the amount necessary
for achieving the long-term investment renewal and investment in technical
improvements regarding the safety and economic efficiency of the nuclear power plant.
The set provisional price for the power and electricity is established based on annual
budget in accordance with the elements set forth in the Memorandum of Association. At
the end of the business year a calculation shall be performed according to electricity
actually generated and actual operating costs.

(2) In case when the nuclear power plant is not operating due to causes which cannot be
attributed to any of the Contracting Parties, i.e. to neither of the Shareholders, and when
the cause of such event is outside the plant and could not be foreseen, and its
consequences could not have been avoided or remedied (Force Majeure), ie. due to a
cause which could not have been foreseen, and the consequences could not have been
avoided or remedied (occurrence), both Shareholders shall jointly cover the expenses
incurred in equal proportions.

(3) The actions of state or local authorities, except for actions which relate to nuclear safety,
are not considered to be events of Force Majeure.

(4) If the circumstances from Paragraph 2 of this Article are continuing longer than 12
months, and the Shareholders do not agree otherwise, the procedure of premature
closing down of NE KrSko shall be performed.

(5) The Shareholders shall regularly perform their financial duties towards NEK d.o.0. and
guarantee their payment obligations.

(6) NEK d.o.o. may terminate the delivery of electric power to the Shareholder who
continually fails to perform its obligations, i.e. who fails to provide the appropriate
guarantee for the payment of its obligations.

Article 7
(Extraordinaty Expenses)

The Contracting Parties shall take the appropriate measures to ensure that the Shareholders
in principle provide the funds for the payment of extraordinary expenses and for new
investments into NE KrSko in equal proportions, unless such funds are provided from the
price set forth in Paragraph 1 of Article 6 hereof.

Article 8
(Employment, Education)

(1) The Contracting Parties agree that the Memorandum of Association will determine the
obligation of NEK d.o.o. to apply the parity principle in employment for the members of
the Management Board and for other employees with special authority as defined in the
Memorandum of Association.

(2) The Company shall define those job positions for which free employment shall be
secured, taking into account the principles of safety, optimal operation of the nuclear
power plant and appropriate representation of experts from both Contracting Parties.

(3) The Republic of Slovenia undertakes, in compliance with Paragraph 1 and Paragraph 2
of this Article, and upon recommendation by the Company, to enable free employment to
those persons who have the status of a legal alien.

(4) In education, scholarship awards and professional training, NEK d.o.o, shall be
governed by the principle of equal rights, regardless of nationality.

(5) The provisions of this Article shall also apply to those persons who are already
employed by NEK d.o.0.

Article 9
(Contractors)

(1) The Contracting Parties agree that, for the needs of the regular operation as well as in
extraordinary situations, NEK d.o.o. shall ensure the participation of companies and
institutions that comply with the requirements for qualified contractors in nuclear power
plants. In addition to complying with the above-mentioned condition as well as the

requirement ‘of competitiveness, NEK d.o.0. shall ensure the participation of the
suppliers and contractors equally from both Contracting Parties.

(2) The Contracting Parties agree to treat the suppliers and contractors of NEK d.o.o. from
the states of both Contracting Parties equally in all respects.

Article 10
(Oismanting, Radioactive Waste and Spent Nuclear Fuel)

(1) The dismantling of NE Krsko, the disposal of radioactive waste and spent nuclear fuel, as
established in the Joint Convention of the preamble of this Agreement, is a joint liability
of both Contracting Parties.

(2) The Contracting Parties agree to ensure an effective joint solution for the dismantling and
the disposal of radioactive waste and spent nuclear fuel, both economically and
environmentally.

(3) The disposal of radioactive waste and spent nuclear fuel from the plant and the
dismantling shall be performed pursuant to the Program of disposal of radioactive waste
and spent nuclear fuel (hereinafter: Program of disposal of RW and SNF). The Program
of disposal of RW and SNF shall be prepared in cooperation with NEK d.o.o, in
compliance with international standards by expert institutions, which the Contracting
Parties shall determine within 60 days from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
The Program of disposal of RW and SNF, /7/er a/a, includes the following: the proposal
of possible division and takeover of radioactive waste and spent nuclear fuel, the criteria
of acceptability for disposal and assessment of the required financing and terms of
performance. The Program of disposal of RW and SNF shall be prepared within 12
months from the date of entry into force of this Agreement, and shall be verified by the
bilateral committee as set forth in Article 18 hereof. The Program of disposal of RW and
SNF shall be reviewed at least every five years.

(4) The dismantling will be implemented in compliance with the Dismantling Program. The
Dismantling Program shall include the disposal of all radioactive and other waste
resulting from the dismantling until the removal from the location of NE Kr&ko,
assessment of required financing and the terms of its implementation.

(5) The Dismantling Program shall be prepared by expert institutions from Paragraph 3 of
this Article, together with NEK d.0.0., and in accordance with the intemational standards,
within 12 months at the latest from the date of entry into force hereof. The Dismantling
Program shall be verified by the bilateral committee form Article 18 hereof, and shall be
approved by the administrative body of the Republic of Slovenia competent for the
nuclear safety. The Dismantling Program shall be reviewed at least every five years.

(6) The site of NE Krsko may be used for a temporary disposal of radioactive waste and
spent nuclear fuel until the end of its useful life.

(7) Should the Contracting Parties fail to reach an agreement on a joint solution of disposal
of radioactive waste and spent nuclear fuel by the end of the regular useful life, the

7

(8)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(6)
(6)

(7)

Contracting Parties undertake that they shall no later than two years from that time
complete the takeover and removal of radioactive waste and spent nuclear fuel from the
NE KrSko site in equal proportions. Further takeover and removal shall be done in
accordance with the Program of disposal of RW and SNF and Dismantling Program, at
least every five years, unless the approved programs provide otherwise.

If the premature closing down of NE KrSko occurs pursuant to action of the goverment
of the Republic of Slovenia, which is not a consequence of Force Majeure or an
occurrence set forth in Article 6 hereof, the Republic of Croatia shall participate in the
dismantling and the disposal of radioactive waste and spent nuclear fuel in a proportion
equal to the ratio of the electricity which was actually taken over by the Shareholder from
the Republic of Croatia as compared to the electricity which NE Krsko would have
generated under normal circumstances from the beginning of its operation until the end
of its useful life.

Article 11
(Financing of Dismantling and Disposal)

The Contracting Parties undertake to secure in equal proportions the financing of the
costs of preparing the Dismantling Program, the costs of its implementation and the
costs of preparing the Program of disposal of RW and SNF.

\f the Contracting Parties agree on a joint solution for the disposal of radioactive waste
and spent nuclear fuel, those expenses shall also be financed in equal proportions. If
such an agreement is not reached, the Contracting Parties shall independently bear the
costs of all activities relating to implementation of the Program of disposal of RW and
SNF which are not of joint character.

The Contracting Parties shall, within 12 months from the date of entry into force hereof,
adopt the appropriate regulations for provision of resources for financing of expenses
from Paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, so that each Contracting Party shall provide
regular payments into its separate fund in the amount required by the approved
programs from Article 10 hereof. The Contracting Parties, i.e. their separate funds will
finance in equal proportions all activities regarding the dismantling and disposal of
radioactive waste and spent nuclear fuel created during the operation and dismantling
of NE Kr&ko that are approved by the bilateral committee in Article 18 hereof.

In the event of occurrence of circumstances from Paragraph 8 of the Article 10 hereof,
the financing of expenses from Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article, which the
Contracting Parties would otherwise bear in equal proportions, shall be appropriately
changed.

Each of the Contracting Parties jointly guarantees the liabilities of its separate fund.

The Contracting Parties will regularly inform each other of the amount of collected funds
in their separate funds.

Pursuant to the Dismantling Program, the dismantling of NE Kr&ko shall be performed
by NEK d.o.o.

Article 12
(Protection of Investments)
(1) The Contracting Parties agree:

1. that the exercise of the rights of the Shareholders arising from this Agreement cannot be
limited, neither temporarily nor permanently;

2. that they shall ensure fair and impartial treatment of the Shareholders belonging to the
other Contracting Party on their territories, i.e. that they shall treat such Shareholder the
same way as its own Shareholder, with full protection and security of investments for the
duration of the joint investment.

(2) The Contracting Parties undertake that they shall not encumber the production and
assumption of electricity from NEK d.o.0. by any public taxes imposed by the state or the
local authorities which were not in force at the time of the execution of this Agreement,
and which refer to NE Kr&ko as a nuclear facility, i.e. that the existing public taxes shall
not be actually increased. For other public taxes, the Republic of Slovenia warrants that
NEK d.o.0. shall be treated the same as other legal persons in the Republic of Slovenia.

(8) If a grant of an appropriate concession is determined for the generation of the electricity,
the Republic of Slovenia undertakes to grant such a concession free of charge to NEK
d.0.0. for the duration of the useful life of the nuclear power plant.

Article 13
(Protection against Expropriation)

(1) The investments of the Shareholder from the Republic of Croatia cannot be
expropriated, nor can any other measures be taken against it which have the same
effect as expropriation (hereinafter: expropriation), unless the measure in question is in
the public interest with respect to internal needs of the Republic of Slovenia, and is
implemented on a non-discriminatory basis and with prompt, appropriate and effective

compensation.

(2) Compensation for expropriation is determined in accordance with Article 13 of the
Energy Charter Treaty while. giving effect to Article 16 of the Intemational Accounting
Standards.

(3) The provisions of the above Paragraphs shail apply equally to revenues from

investments and to partial or full liquidation.

Article 14
(Aepatnation of Investments and Revenues)

The Republic of Slovenia guarantees to the Shareholder from the Republic of Croatia, after
the settlement of tax dues, an unlimited transfer of its investments, revenues and eamings of

9

the Croatian nationals employed at NE KrSko d.o.0. The transfers shall be performed without
delay in convertible currency. The transfers shall be effected according to the exchange rate
applicable on the date of the transfer, subject to valid foreign currency regulations and in
accordance with the same treatment applicable to the repatriation of the investments and
revenues of investors from third countries.

Article 15
(Subrogation)

(1) If a Contracting Party or its appointed legal entity makes a payment pursuant to a claim
for damages, a warranty or an insurance agreement related to the investment, the other
Contracting Party shall recognize the transfer of all rights or claims of the injured
Shareholder to the first Contracting Party or its appointed legal entity. The first
Contracting Party or its appointed legal entity has the authority to exercise such rights
and enforce such claims to the same extent as the Shareholder itself based on
subrogation.

S

The first Contracting Party or its appointed legal entity is always entitled to equal
treatment in connection with the rights or the claims realized as a result of the transfer.

Article 16
(impact on Environment)

The Contracting Parties commit to regularly inform each other about the impact of NE Krsko
on the environment.

Article 17
(Past Financial /ssues)

(1) Mutual financial relations existing up to the signing of this Agreement between NEK
d.o.o., ELES d.o.o., ELES GEN d.o.o. and HEP d.d. shall be regulated in accordance
with the principles set forth in Exhibit 3 of this Agreement.

(2) The Contracting Parties agree that, as of the date of entry into force hereof, all
obligations of NEK d.o.o. to the Fund for financing the dismantling of NE KrSko and
disposal of radioactive waste from NE KrSko, which obligations arose from the
application of the Act on Fund for Financing of Dismantling of NE KrSko and Disposal of
Radioactive Waste from NE Kr&ko (“Official Gazette” of the Republic of Slovenia No.
75/94), shall cease to exist.

Article 18
(Giateral Committee)
(1) The Contracting Parties shall establish a bilateral committee which will monitor the
implementation of this Agreement and perform other tasks in accordance with this

10

Agreement. The committee consists of the delegations of the Contracting Parties. Each
delegation has a chairman and four members.

(2) The committee shall rotate the location of its meetings between the territories of the two
Contracting Party. The first meeting shall be convened by the chairman of the Slovenian
delegation within 90 days from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

(3) The Rules of Procedure of the bilateral committee are provided in Exhibit 4 of this
Agreement and are not considered an integral part of this Agreement.

Article 19
(Dispute Resolution)

(1) All disputes between one Contracting Party and the members of the Company from the
other Contracting Party shall be resolved amicably and in good faith in the first instance.

(2) If a dispute cannot be settled amicably within six months from the date of written report to
the other Contracting Party, the aggrieved Shareholder may, at its discretion, refer the
dispute for resolution to:

a) acourt of competent jurisdiction of the aggrieved Contracting Party;

b) to ad hoc arbitration in accordance with the Arbitration Rules of Procedure of the
United Nations Commission for International Law - UNCITRAL;

an arbitration court in accordance with the rules of the Arbitration Institute of the
Stockholm Chamber of Commerce;

d) the Arbitration Court of the International Arbitration Center of the Federal Chamber
of Commerce in Vienna;

C,

e) the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes - ICSID - in
accordance with the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States and the additional contract on
regulation of Conciliation, Arbitration and Fact-finding.

(8) The decision shall be final and binding. Each of the Contracting Parties shall ensure the
acknowledgement and enforcement of the arbitration award in accordance with its
legislation.

Article 20
(Oispute Resolution)

(1) Any disputes between the Contracting Parties which arise out of or in connection with the
interpretation or application of this Contract, shall be settled in the first instance by
negotiation.

(2) If a dispute under paragraph 1 of this Article cannot be resolved within six months, upon
request of one of the Contracting Parties, the dispute shall be referred to an arbitration
court.

(3) Such arbitration court shall be formed ad hoc as follows: each of the Contracting Parties
shall appoint one arbitrator, and those two arbitrators shall agree on the choice of a

1

national of a third state who will chair the arbitration court. Those arbitrators shall be
appointed within two months of the date one of the Contracting Parties notified the other
of its intention to refer the dispute to an arbitration court. The chairman of the court shall
be appointed within two months.

(4) If the terms stated in paragraph 3 of this Article are not complied with, any of the
Contracting Parties may, in the absence of another relevant agreement, call on the
chairman of the Intemational Court of Arbitration in Hague (hereinafter: International
Court) to make the necessary appointments. If the chairman of the International Court is
a national of one of the Contracting Parties or is otherwise prevented in performing the
said duty, the vice-chairman, or in case of his unavailability, the next in rank member of
the International Court, shall be called upon to perform the necessary appointments
under same conditions.

(5) The arbitration court will establish its own rules of procedure.

(6) The arbitration court shall reach a decision on the basis of this Agreement and in
accordance with the rules of the intemational law. The arbitration court shall reach a
decision by a majority of votes. The decision is final and binding.

(7) Each of the Contracting Parties shall bear its member's costs and the costs of its
representation in the arbitration proceedings before the court. The costs of the arbitration
chairman and other costs shall be borne by both Contracting Parties in equal proportions.
The Arbitration court, however, may, in its decision, determine a different allocation of
costs. -

Article 21
(Registration of the Agreement)

This Agreement, after entry into force, shall be registered with the United Nations in
accordance with the Article 102 of the United Nations Charter. The registration shall be
carried out by the Republic of Slovenia.

Article 22
(Closing Provisions)

(1) By entry into force of this Agreement, the provisions of the Agreement executed on
October 27, 1970, between the Executive Council of Socialist republic of Croatia and the
Executive Council of the Socialist Republic of Slovenia, as ratified in the Parliament of
the Socialist Republic of Croatia on December 28, 1970 and in the Assembly of the
Socialist Republic of Slovenia on December 10, 1970, shall cease to have effect.

(2) All other issues which are not stipulated herein shall be governed by the Agreement
between the Government of the Republic of Croatia and the Government of the Republic
of Slovenia on stimulation and mutual protection of investments.

(3) This Agreement shall be ratified by the Croatian Parliament, i.e. in the Parliament of the
Republic of Slovenia.

 

(4) This Agreement shall enter into force on the date of receipt of the last written diplomatic
Notice that all conditions as required by the legislations of the Contracting Parties
required for its entry into force have been complied with.

This Agreement is executed in Kr8ko, on 19 December 2001, in two originals in Croatian and
Slovene languages, and both language versions are equally valid.

FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SLOVENIA

 

EXHIBIT 1

NEK d.0o.0.

MEMORANDUM OF ASSOCIATION

5 July 2001

Pursuant to the Agreement between the Govemment of the Republic of Croatia and the
Goverment of the Republic of Slovenia on regulation of status and other legal relations
regarding the investment, use and dismantling of Nuclear Power Plant Kr8ko, and
Article 409 of the Companies Act ("Official Gazette" of the Republic of Slovenia Nos.
30/93, 29/94, 82/94, 20/98, 6/99 and 45/01), the legal successors of the Nuclear Power
Plant Krsko founders, being

HRVATSKA ELEKTROPRIVREDA d.d., Ulica grada Vukovara 37, 10000 Zagreb,
Republic of Croatia, represented by the chairman of the board, Mr. Ivo Covié, as the
legal successor of the Nuclear Power Plant KrSko founders from the Republic of
Croatia,

and

ELES GEN d.0.0., Hajdrihova 2, Ljubljana, Republic of Slovenia, represented by its
director, Mr. Vekoslav Korozec, as the legal successor of the Nuclear Power Plant
Kr&ko founders from the Republic of Slovenia

executed on this day of 19.12.2001, in KrSko, the following

MEMORANDUM OF ASSOCIATION

Introduction

Article 1

1.1. It is agreed that an Agreement has been entered into between the Government of
the Republic of Croatia and the Government of the Republic of Slovenia on regulation of
status and other legal relations regarding the investment, use and dismantling of
Nuclear Power Plant KrSko (hereinafter: the Bilateral Agreement), whereby the
signatories to the agreement established their mutual relations regarding the status, use
and dismantling of NE Kr8ko, after the declaration of independence of both countries
and the establishment of new socio-political and economic systems in both Contracting
Parties.

1.2. It is agreed that, as set forth in Article 2 of the Bilateral Agreement, the Contracting
Parties to this Memorandum of Association are the legal successors to the original
investors and founders of the existing NE KrSko from both signatories to the Bilateral
Agreement which successors must continue to exercise their rights and obligations
regarding the management and the use of the joint NE KrSko.

1.3. It is agreed that the existing legal status of NEK d.o.0. is a limited liability company,
registered under No. 1/00120/00 in the court register at the District Court in KrSko.  ~

Article 2

2.1. The Contracting Parties agree that, based on Article 2 of the Bilateral Agreement,
the existing Javno poduzeée NE Kr8ko d.o.0. is transformed into NE KRSKO d.o.o.
(hereinafter: the Company), in accordance with the provisions of the Bilateral
Agreement and the Commercial Companies Act ("Official Gazette" of the Republic of
Slovenia Nos. 30/93, 29/94, 82/94, 20/98, 6/99 and 45/01 — hereinafter: the CCA).

2.2. Based on this Memorandum of Association, the Contracting Parties, as the legal
successors of the original joint NE KrSko investors, as set forth in Article 2 of the
Bilateral Agreement, become the founders and Shareholders of the Company who
agree that the newly established Company is the legal successor of all rights and
obligations of the joint NE Krko in its existing legal status.

Article 3

3.1. This Memorandum of Association is based on the provisions of the Bilateral
Agreement and the provisions of the CCA.

3.2. Whenever the mutual relations are not otherwise regulated by the Bilateral
Agreement and the Memorandum of Association, relevant provisions of the Bilateral
Agreement and the CCA shall apply to the mutual relations between the founders and
Company Shareholders, the relations between the founders and the Company
Shareholders and the legal status of the Company in legal transactions.

Article 4
This Memorandum of Association is the highest act of the Company. Any other acts
adopted by the Company bodies in accordance with this Memorandum of Association
shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this Memorandum of Association.
Name and Registered Office of the Company

Article 5
5.1. The Company has the following name: Nuklearna elektrana Krsko d.0o.0.
The abbreviated name of the Company is: NEK d.o.0.
The registered office of the Company is in KrSko, Vrbina 12, Slovenia.

5.2. The Company name translated into English is: Nuclear Power Plant KrSko d.o.0.

The Company name translated into a foreign language shall be used only in conjunction
with the Company name in the Slovenian language.

5.3. The form and substance of the Company logo, used by the Company in legal
transactions, shall be decided upon by the Company Supervisory Board.

Company objective and term
Article 6

6.1. It is agreed that the objective of the Company is the generation and distribution of
electricity exclusively for the benefit of the Shareholders. Pursuant to the above, the
Company may not produce and distribute electricity to third parties except with the
consent of both Shareholders, and except as provided herein.

6.2. The Company is created for a definite term, i.e. until the end of the procedure of
dismantling of the nuclear power plant.

6.3. Upon expiration of the term of the Company, the Company will be liquidated in
accordance with applicable regulations. As to the sale of the Company’s real property,
the Republic of Slovenia, or a legal person duly authorized on its behalf, has the right of
first refusal in accordance with the provisions of the Bilateral Agreement.

Scope of business
Article 7

The Company performs economic activities within the scope of activities it is registered
for.

In accordance with the Standard Classification of Activities, the Company's activities are
as follows:

¢ /40.102 Generation of electricity in thermal and nuclear power stations

« K/74.204 Miscellaneous planning and technical advice

« K/74.30 Technical testing and analysis

¢ K/73.102 Technological research and experimental development

The Company may perform, without registration, other activities whose purpose is to
perform the registered activities, which are usually performed in conjunction with such
activities in limited scope or from time to time, or which contribute to a more complete
utilization of capacities that are being used to perform said activities.

Representation

Article 8
The Company shall be represented by persons duly authorized for such representation
in accordance with Articles 9 and 34 hereof and a special resolution adopted by the
Shareholders’ Assembly.
Authorized Agents

Article 9
9.1. The Company may appoint one or more authorized agents, who will be authorized
on its behalf to perform all legal actions within the legal capacity of the Company,
except for the alienation and encumbrance of the real property of the Company for
which authorized agents must obtain an authorizing resolution from the Shareholders’

Assembly.

9.2. Any decision on assignment of authority to respective authorized agents shall be
made by the Shareholders’ Assembly.

9.3. The Company and the authorized agents shall enter into a special agreement with
regards to their mutual relations.

Company property, capital and business shares
Article 10

10.1. The Company capital is SIT 84,723,482,000.00 (eighty-four billion seven hundred
twenty-three million four hundred eighty-two thousand Slovenian Tolars).

10.2. Upon the execution of this Memorandum of Association, the capital shall be
deemed to have been fully invested into the Company.

Article 11

11.1. The Shareholders' initial contributions to the capital, as set forth in the preceding
article, are as follows:

1. Hrvatska elektroprivreda d.d. Zagreb has made an initial contribution in
the amount of SIT 42,361,741,000.00 (forty-two billion three hundred sixty-one
million seven hundred forty-one thousand Slovenian Tolars),

2. ELES GEN d.o.o. Ljubljana has made an initial contribution in the amount
of SIT 42,361,741,000.00 (forty-two billion three hundred sixty-one million seven
hundred forty-one thousand Slovenian Tolars).

11.2. The Shareholders acquire their business shares according to the specific initial
capital contributions.

11.3. The rights arising from the business shares are equal, unless otherwise specified
in this Memorandum of Association.

Transfer of business shares
Article 12

12.1. Any free or chargeable use of business shares between the Shareholders and
among the Shareholders and third parties is considered the transfer of business shares
under this Memorandum of Association.

12.2. The transfer of business shares between the Shareholders is not restricted.

12.3. Any transfer of business shares to third parties that have a status of subsidiaries
in which a Shareholder has a majority interest, that is, the majority management rights,
or any transfer to third persons in which the Contracting Parties to the Bilateral
Agreement have a majority interest or the majority management rights, is also
unrestricted.

12.4. Any transfer of business shares which occurs as a result of Shareholders’ legal
status changes shall not be regarded as a transfer of business shares under paragraph
1 of this Article; consequently, a transfer of business shares from Shareholders to legal

successors resulting from such statutory changes shall not be regarded as such a
transfer.

Article 13

A Shareholder shail not transfer its business share to third persons without an explicit
written approval of the other Shareholder.

Article 14
Partition of business shares is not allowed.
Encumbrance of a business share

Article 15

15.1. A Shareholder shall not encumber its business share with a lien or some other
material right without an explicit written approval of the other Shareholder.

15.2. A Shareholder shall immediately notify the other Shareholder in case of a third
party having initiated proceedings against a business share.

Increase of Initial Capital
Article 16
16.1. Based on decisions made by the Shareholders’ Assembly with regard to increase
of the initial capital, Shareholders may register new contributions by making payments,
i.e. in monies and in kind (effective increase of the initial capital).
16.2. Based on decisions made by the Shareholders’ Assembly, the initial capital may
also be increased by transfer of the Company reserves, i.e. the profits (nominal
increase of the initial capital).
16.3. Above listed means of increasing the initial capital may be carried out only if the
business share ratio of 50%:50% is retained during the increase, in accordance with
Article 11 Paragraph 2 of this agreement.
Article 17
Statements regarding the assumption of a new initial contribution must be notarized.
Article 18

18.1. If the initial capital is increased by input in kind, the scope and value of
contribution shall be determined by a decision on the increase of the initial capital. The

value of the contribution shall be determined by a certified estimator appointed by the
Shareholders' Assembly.

18.2. Prior to submission of the application for registering the increase of the initial
capital in the court register, the Shareholder providing the input in kind must enter into a
relevant agreement with the Company on the transfer of the matter, i.e. the rights, to the
Company.

Article 19

19.1. Under the effective increase of the initial capital, the Shareholders shall pay, i.e.
input, and assume, new contributions according to the ratio of their existing initial
contributions in the initial capital of the Company.

19.2. Under the nominal increase of the initial capital, the new contributions shall be
assumed by the previous Shareholders proportionally to their existing initial
contributions in the initial capital of the Company, in such a way that the overall ratio of
initial contributions of the Shareholders in the initial capital remains unchanged.

Reduction of initial capital
Article 20

20.1. The initial capital may be reduced pursuant to a resolution of the Company
Shareholders' Assembly. Any resolution on reduction of the initial capital must include
the scope and purpose of the reduction of the initial capital, as well as the manner and
the conditions of implementing the reduction.

20.2. Any reduction in the value of the initial capital, as set forth herein, such as
reduction caused by the retum of the initial contributions to the Shareholders, reduction
caused by lowering of the nominal amount of the Shareholders’ contributions and the
withdrawal of business shares, shall be considered a reduction of the initial capital.

Article 21
Every reduction of the initial capital shall be made in compliance with the law.

Article 22
A reduction of the initial capital is valid if the following conditions are met:

- if the Management Board has on two separate occasions issued a notice of the
decision to reduce the initial capital, in which notice it invited the Company creditors
to contact the Company and state whether they consent to the reduction of the initial
capital, provided that the Company must directly notify those creditors which are
known to the Company;

- if the Company fulfills the requirements of creditors who do not agree with the
initial capital reduction, that is, if it fumishes them with appropriate insurance
provisions.

Withdrawal of business share

Article 23

Withdrawal and/or exclusion from the Company shail be allowed only with the relevant
consent of the Republic of Croatia and the Republic of Slovenia.

Article 24

24.1. The Shareholder whose business share is being withdrawn pursuant to the
preceding Article shall be entitled only to the disbursement of the monetary value of the
initial capital as of the date of withdrawal. For the purposes of evaluation of the value of
contribution in case of withdrawal of one of the Shareholders, the evaluation shall be
made by authorized auditors appointed by the Company Supervisory Board. The
evaluation shall be made on the day of withdrawal at the expense of the Company. The
Company shall disburse the withdrawing Shareholder the amount of the contribution
within 6 (six) years from the date of the withdrawal, with interest at the rate payable by
banks for demand deposits.

24.2. The act of withdrawal from the Company shall terminate the business share of the
Shareholder, as well as all rights and obligations the Shareholder used to exercise in
relation to the business share.

Relations between Shareholders with regard to exploitation of NE Krsko
Article 25

25.1. These provisions regulate the right to utilize the power and energy produced in NE
KrSko within the scope of activities set forth in Article 7.

25.2. Each Shareholder has the right and obligation to purchase 50% (fifty percent) of
the total available power and electricity generated at NE Kr&ko in accordance with this
Memorandum of Association.

25.3. Should Shareholders fail to use in entirety their respective parts of the total
available power (50%), they will bear the expenses as if they used their respective parts
in their entirety.

Article 26

Generation of electricity within the available power for each consecutive year shall be
agreed upon by the Shareholders and the Company by means of an annual budget,
which shall, #7/er a/a, include an annual generation budget and an annual expense
budget. The annual budget shall be adopted by the Company Supervisory Board
following recommendations made by the Management Board. If the Company
Supervisory Board fails to adopt an annual budget for the next year by December 31 of
the current year, the annual generation budget shall be determined independently by
the Management Board.

Price of power and electricity from NEK
Article 27

27.1. Provisional prices for the available power and electricity for each business year
shall be established by the Company in advance.

27.2. Any such price set shall be established by the Management Board, with the
consent of the Supervisory Board, not later than October 1 for the following year. If
consensus cannot be reached, the latest provisional price is effective, multiplied by the
coefficient of the increase in basic living costs in the Republic of Slovenia since the
provisional price was last established.

27.3. The provisional price of the available power and electricity from the nuclear power
plant shall be established based on the annual budget, which consists of the expense
budget and generation budget, as well as the long-term investment plan, so that such
price covers all operating costs of the Company.

Article 28

28.1. The elements of the expense budget and the price determination are primarily the
following:

- nuclear fuel costs and other costs pertaining to such fuel,

- water dues,

- costs of materials and services,

- depreciation up to the amount required for new investments and the principal
repayment of investment credits for such investments, all established by the
long-term investment plan,

- insurance premiums,

- land use charges and other obligations to the local community,

- operating costs,

- operating asset write-offs,

- interest costs and other financing expenditures, and

- taxes and other operating expenditures.

28.2. The Company shall charge:
- the available generated power of the nuclear power plant in 12 monthly
payments,
- the active power per number of net generated kWh of NEK at the negotiated
price in 12 monthly payments.

Article 29

At the end of the year, prior to the balance sheet preparation, business results shall be
determined and calculations made in a manner that will allow the price for the
distributed power and energy to cover all costs and expenditures incurred by the
Company.

Article 30

30.1. The Shareholders undertake to meet their obligations toward NEK d.o.0. within 15
days from the date of issue of each respective invoice. For any overdue payment NEK
d.o.o. shall charge interest enforceable for sales contracts in the Republic of Slovenia.

30.2. To ensure payment of invoices, the Shareholders shall furnish to the Company,
within 3 months from the date this Agreement is entered into force, a bank guarantee on
first demand or some other appropriate means of securing the payments acceptable to
both Contracting Parties in the amount of at least one average monthly supply from the
preceding year. The instrument guaranteeing the payment shall be continuing and
convertible.

30.3. Should a Shareholder fail to meet its obligation under the preceding Paragraph, at
the expiration of a subsequent 8-day payment period, the Company may terminate any
further supplies and sell the energy on the market. If the income realized by the
Company as a result of the sale of such energy on the market proves insufficient to
cover all expenses, the Shareholder shalt remain liable to the Company for payment of
that difference. The Company shall reestablish the supply to the Shareholder upon
payment of all outstanding obligations.

NE Kr&ko operating risks
Article 31

31.1. If the nuclear power plant is not operating due to causes which cannot be
attributed to any of the Shareholders, and which cause is outside of the actual plant and
could not have been foreseen, and its consequences could not have been avoided or
remedied (Force Majeure), or due to a cause which could not have been foreseen, and
the consequences could not have been avoided or remedied (event), both Shareholders
shall jointly cover the expenses incurred, in equal proportions.

31.2. The actions of state authorities or local self-governing authorities, except the
actions related to nuclear safety, shall not be construed as Force Majeure.

31.3. If the circumstances from Paragraph 1 of this Article should continue for the term
exceeding 12 (twelve) months, and the Shareholders do not agree otherwise, the
procedure of premature shutting down of NE KrSko shall be performed.

Company bodies
Article 32
The Company bodies are:

- THE MANAGEMENT BOARD;
- THE SUPERVISORY BOARD;
- THE SHAREHOLDERS' ASSEMBLY.

The Management Board
Article 33

33.1. The Management Board is comprised of 2 (two) members appointed at the
Shareholders’ Assembly. The chairman of the Management Board is recommended by
ELES GEN d.0.0., while Hrvatska elektroprivreda d.d. Zagreb recommends a member
of the Management Board.

33.2. In addition to the general legal requirements, the appointed persons must have
five years of professional experience; a university degree (Bachelor's degree) in either
technical, economic or legal profession at a minimum; active knowledge of English;
organizational skills and managerial abilities.

33.3. The term of the appointment of the chairman of the Management Board and the
member of the Management Board is five (5) years, with the possibility of
reappointment.

33.4. Should any member of the Management Board, the chairman included, cease its
term for any reason whatsoever, the Shareholder who recommended that member is
entitled to directly appoint a new member of the Management Board, who will have
equal rights and obligations as his predecessor. Promptly upon the appointment, the
Shareholder shall convene a Shareholders' Assembly meeting, where the appointment
must be decided. The term of the appointment of a Management Board member
appointed in such a manner shall continue until the moment the Shareholders’
Assembly makes a decision on the appointment in accordance with this Memorandum
of Association. Should the Shareholders’ Assembly fail to decide on the appointment for
whatever reasons, the term of appointment of the directly appointed Management Board
member shall continue until the arbitral award under Article 58 hereof.

33.5. Immediately after the appointment of the Management Board in accordance with
this Memorandum of Association, such board shall, according to the parity principle,
appoint no less than four (4) and no more than six (6) employees with special
authorizations, who shall assume executive directorships.

33.6. The Management Board shall adopt the rules of procedure concerning the
activities of the Management Board, which will provide a more detailed mode of
operation of the Management Board.

Representation
Article 34

34.1. The Company shall be represented independently by the chairman and the
member of the Management Board, within the limits specified herein.

34.2. The Shareholders’ Assembly may specify to the Management Board and other
persons authorized to represent the Management Board special internal limits to the
right of representation, which limits shall not be entered into the court register. The
Management Board and/or some other person authorized to represent must adhere to
such specified limits.

Business Management
Article 35
35.1. The Management Board shall manage the Company business.

35.2. Decisions by the Management Board within the scope of the management of
Company business shall be made by consensus of all board members, except as set
forth in Paragraph 3 of this Article. If no consensus is reached as to a decision, such
decision shall be submitted for consideration and decision-making to the Company
Supervisory Board, in accordance with the provisions of this Memorandum of
Association and the Rules of Procedure concerning the activities of the Management
Board.

35.3. To prevent possible obstruction in decision-making, when a consensus cannot be
reached within a parity composed Management Board, the vote of the chairman of the
Management Board will be the deciding vote (the casting vote). The casting vote of the
chairman of the Management Board is used only in exceptional circumstances, and only
when failure to reach consensus in the Management Board might:

1. jeopardize the safety of the plant operation,
2. cause substantial risk to the accomplishment of the goals determined by
the adopted annual pian,

3. cause significant damages to the Company.

35.3.1. If the chairman of the board has used the casting vote, he must immediately
request the chairman of the Supervisory Board to convene a meeting of the Supervisory
Board during which the use of casting vote will be reviewed and appropriate measures
decided.

35.3.2. If the casting vote is used, the members of the board who cast their votes
against the decision shall not be held liable for any damage that might arise from such
decision of the chairman of the board.

35.4. Within the scope of the management of Company business, in conformity with the
law. and this Memorandum of Association, the Management Board is particularly
required to do the following:

1. define the Company business policy,

2. independently enter into legal transactions and manage day-to-day
operations,

3. enter into agreements with employees,

maintain business records and prepare and disclose financial reports,
furnish the Supervisory Board with business reports each quarter,
determine the intemal structure of the Company and adopt any other acts,

implement the decisions adopted by the Shareholders’ Assembly and/or the
Supervisory Board,

Noo -

8. prepare decisions to be made by the Supervisory Board, for the purpose of
granting approval,

9. inform other Company bodies, and make appropriate decision within that
scope,

10. adopt general resolutions, unless pursuant to this Memorandum of Association
or law that is explicitly within the scope of another Company body,

11. enter into and sign collective agreements with unions,

12. care for the development of safety culture in the Company and for
implementation of high operational standards,

13. take measures for the purpose of nuclear safety and its implementation, and
observe all elements required for safe and stable operation of the nuclear
power plant,

14. provide measures required for protection of the employees and population
from the source of ionizing radiation in the event of a nuclear accident,

15. govern obligations in conformity with law and regulations that define the
dismantling of the nuclear power plant,

13

16. execute the obligations set forth by the relevant provisions of the Bilateral
Agreement,

17. transact any other business set forth by law and this Memorandum of
Association.

35.5. The rights and obligations of the chairman and the member of the board shall be
defined by an agreement to be entered into with the Management Board by the
chairman of the Supervisory Board on behalf of the Company.

Supervisory Board
Article 36

36.1. The Company Supervisory Board is comprised of six (6) members.

36.2. In principle, the Supervisory Board members are selected from the ranks of
experts in the fields significant for the Company's operations.

36.3. As an exception to the parity principle, representatives of the employees of NEK
d.o.0. (wider organization) are entitled to participate in the meetings and decisions of
the Supervisory Board, but only when legal employment issues conceming the
employees of NEK d.o.0. are being discussed and decided upon. In such cases, the
Supervisory Board consists nine (9) members in three parts, with an equal number of
Slovenian Shareholder representatives, Croatian Shareholder representatives and NEK
d.o.0, employee representatives.

Article 37

37.1. Members of the Supervisory Board shall be appointed by the Shareholders’
Assembly based on recommendations by the Shareholders in such a way that each
respective Shareholder recommends three (3) members of the Supervisory Board. The
representatives of the employees are appointed by the Shareholders’ Assembly in
accordance with the regulations relating to employees' participation in management.

37.2. Any such recommendation shall be accompanied by a written statement with
which the person recommended as a member of the Supervisory Board, and who is
assuming such position for the first time, declares readiness to perform the duties of a
member of the Company Supervisory Board and confirm there are no legal
impediments to the performance of such duty.

37.3. In addition to the general legal requirements, the selected persons must have five
years of professional experience and at least a university education (Bachelor's
degree). This requirement does not apply to employee representatives who take part in
the work of the Supervisory Board.

Article 38

The term of the appointment of the Supervisory Board members shall be four (4) years,
with possible reappointment.

Article 39

39.1. The Supervisory Board appointed at the Shareholders’ Assembly meeting must be
formed within 8 (eight) days from the date of appointment. At the forming session of the
Supervisory Board appointed at the Shareholders’ Assembly meeting, the members of
the Supervisory Board shall elect the chairman of the Supervisory Board and his
deputy.

39.2. The chairman of the Supervisory Board shall be appointed from among the
members recommended by the representative of the Shareholder from Croatia, while
the deputy shall be appointed from among the members recommended by the
representative of the Shareholder from Slovenia.

Article 40

The Supervisory Board performs particularly the following activities:

1. supervises the management of Company business,
2. convenes the Shareholders' Assembly as needed,

3. furnishes the Shareholders’ Assembly with written reports on the
performed supervision,

4. consents to annual budget and long-term investment plans,

5. gives prior consent to decisions made by the Company Management
Board on the investments into the Company, and on the assumption of
liabilities on behalf of the Company in excess of USD 2,000,000.00 (two
million US dollars), except in cases of alienation or the acquisition of real
property, which shall be decided upon by the Shareholders' Assembly,

6. gives opinions on annual reports,

7. represents the Company in relation to the members of the Management
joard, .

8. consents to decisions made by the Management Board if required by a
special act or by this Memorandum of Association,

9. acts as a second-instance body in relation to any matter that requires
second-instance procedures and where the Management Board acts as
the first-instance entity,

10. adopts the rules of procedure concerning its own activities,

11. appoints and relieves members of its commissions for the purpose of
preparing the decisions it makes and the supervision of their
implementation,

12. makes decisions in cases when the Company Management Board cannot
make its decision due to lack of consent,

13. following recommendations by the Management Board, appoints and
relieves members of the independent committee for security analysis
(hereinafter: ISEG),

14. reviews reports made by ISEG,

15. implements obligations set forth by relevant provisions of the Bilateral
Agreement,

16. performs other activities it is expressly charged with pursuant to the
Bilateral Agreement, law, and this Memorandum of Association.

Article 41
41.1. Each member of the Supervisory Board has one (1) vote.

41.2. The Supervisory Board decisions are valid if the majority of member votes is
represented at a given session. A decision is valid if it is adopted by a majority of votes
of all members of the Supervisory Board. These provisions shall be applied accordingly
also when the Supervisory Board is acting as set forth in Article 36 Paragraph 3 of this
Agreement.

41.3. If none of the Supervisory Board members require a holding of a session, the
Supervisory Board may make decisions without holding sessions through consultations
with the members. Such decisions must be verified at the first following Supervisory
Board session.

Article 42
The Supervisory Board shall adopt its Rules of Procedure with detailed regulations of
the Supervisory Board activities. The Supervisory Board must adopt the Rules of
Procedure at the first session following the constitutive session.

Article 43
The Supervisory Board members shall be entitled to compensation for their work on the
Supervisory Board in accordance with a Shareholders' Assembly resolution.

Shareholders' Assembly
Article 44

44.1. The Shareholders’ Assembly meets at least once a year (regular Shareholders
Assembly).

44.2. Decisions of the Shareholders' Assembly shall be made at Shareholders’
Assembly meeting with the consent of both Shareholders unless is otherwise stated in
this Agreement for a particular case. The Shareholders' Assembly meeting is not
necessary if the Shareholders consent in writing to the decisions that have to be made.

Article 45

45.1. Regular Shareholders' Assembly meetings must be held every year within one
month of the preparation of annual report for the previous business year. Shareholders’
Assembly meeting may be convened as necessary, particularly when relevant decisions
of significance for the Company have to be made, in other words when the interests of
the Company thus require.

45.2. Shareholders' Assembly meetings shall be convened by the Management Board
by registered letter dispatched to the Shareholders, designating the venue, time and
agenda. The Shareholders shall receive the invitation at least seven days prior to the
Shareholders' Assembly meeting, with the agenda to be discussed duly attached, as
well as appropriate documents relating to the agenda, if necessary.

45.3. The invitation to a Shareholders’ Assembly meeting under the preceding
Paragraph shall also include an alternate date, venue and time for a Shareholders’
Assembly meeting to be held in case the Shareholders' Assembly meeting fails to take
place because of absence of one of the Shareholders. The decisions made at the
subsequent Shareholders' Assembly meeting shall be valid without regard to whether
both Shareholders are present at the meeting or only one. The subsequent meeting
shall be held at least five (5) days after the originally convened meeting.

Article 46

46.1. Any Shareholder may request that the Management Board convene a
Shareholders' Assembly meeting at any time. If the Management Board fails to do so
within fourteen (14) days from the date of receipt of such request, that Shareholder may
convene a Shareholders’ Assembly meeting directly, in the manner set forth in the
preceding Article of this Agreement.

46.2. The invitation shall be delivered at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the
Shareholders' Assembly meeting, exclusive of the day of the mailing and the
Shareholders' Assembly meeting day. The mailing address for the invitation shall be the
last known headquarters of a Shareholder.

46.3. Shareholders' Assembly meetings shall be held at the Company headquarters if
possible. With the consent of all Shareholders, the formalities of convening and holding
the Shareholders’ Assembly meetings need not be observed, and a decision may be
made without a meeting taking place. For this purpose, the consent of both
Shareholders must be in writing.

Article 47

47.1. Members shall take part at the Shareholders' Assembly meeting through their
legal representatives and/or authorized agents listed in the court register, or through
their proxies. The proxy must be in writing, and a proxy must present the original proxy
prior to the Shareholders' Assembly meeting.

47.2. In addition to the Shareholders, their advisers may also attend the Shareholders'
Assembly meetings.

Article 48
Each Shareholder shall have one vote at the Shareholders' Assembly.
Article 49

49.1. Shareholders' Assembly decides all issues relating to the Company business and
management, and particularly:

1. decides on any modification of the Memorandum of Association,

2. decides on the dissolution of the Company and premature winding-up of the
plant,

3. decides on any legal status changes of the Company and modifications of
the Company structure,

4. adopts general acts of the Company, the adoption of which is the
responsibility of the Shareholders’ Assembly according to the binding
regulations and provisions of this Memorandum of Association,

5. appoints and relieves members of the Company Management Board and
members of the Supervisory Board,

6. appoints and revokes authorized agents,

7. decides upon annual balance sheets, profit sharing, and the manner of
covering Company losses,

8. decides upon modifications to the Company business, name or
headquarters,

9. decides upon consents to respective Shareholders with regard to
encumbrance (attachment) of their business shares in the Company,

10. gives consent to the Company Management Board and the authorized
agents for alienation and encumbrance of the Company real property,

11. within the scope of its activities, meets the obligations set forth by relevant
provisions of the Bilateral Agreement, and

12. performs any other activities that are not within the scope of some other
Company body.

49.2. The Shareholders' Assembly shall appoint the recommended members of the
Management Board and of the Supervisory Board, if they were recommended in
accordance with this Memorandum of Association.

49.3. The Shareholders' Assembly may adopt a resolution regarding the dissolution of
the Company only under the conditions set forth in Article 2 Paragraph 5 of the Bilateral
Agreement.

49.4. Shareholders’ Assembly meetings must be documented in the minutes of the
meetings, which must be signed by the member of the Management Board who was
present at the relevant Shareholders' Assembly meeting and by the Shareholders.

Employment

Article 50

50.1. The Management Board is obligated to apply the parity principle when selecting
employees with special authorizations defined in the Memorandum of Association.

50.2. The Management Board is obligated to determine the job positions for which,
taking into account the principles of safety and optimal operation of the nuclear power
plant, appropriate representation of professionals from the Republic of Slovenia and the
Republic of Croatia will be secured. Any vacancy notices shall be posted by the
Management Board in daily newspapers in the Republic of Slovenia and the Republic of
Croatia.

50.3. In education, scholarships and professional training, the Management Board shall
be governed by the principle of equal rights, regardless of the nationality of the
candidates.

50.4. The provisions of this Article shall also apply to current employees.

Business records and annual report

Article 51

51.1. The Company shall maintain business records and prepare annual reports in
accordance with the applicable regulations in force in the Republic of Slovenia, unless
stated otherwise in the Bilateral Agreement, provided that the Company Management
Board shall be liable for the regularity, accuracy, truthfulness and promptness of such
records and reports. .

51.2. The Company Management Board shall recommend an annual report for
confirmation to the Shareholders' Assembly within the period in which the Company is
obliged to furnish the relevant bodies and/or third party organizations with such annual
reports in accordance with the applicable regulations in force in the Republic of
Slovenia.

Allocation of profits and payment of losses

Article 52

52.1. The Company operates on the principle of covering of all expenses, and in
principle its operation results neither in losses nor in profits.

52.2. Any possible profits of the Company arising as a consequence of the difference
between the actual and the projected income and expenditures, or as a consequence of
subsequent tax or accounting modifications, are allocated into the reserves.

52.3. Any possible loss, incurred as a consequence of the difference between the actual
and the projected income and expenditures, or as a consequence of subsequent tax or
accounting modifications, are paid from the Company reserves.

Company resolutions

Article 53

53.1. The Company, i.e. its bodies, shall pass relevant resolutions of the Company
within their scope of activity, when prescribed by the laws of the Republic of Slovenia or
required for the Company activities.

53.2. The Company resolutions are the regulations that the Company is required to
pass in accordance with the applicable laws of the Republic of Slovenia, as well as the
rules of procedure and statutes regulating the internal structure that is significant for the
operation and business of the Company, accounting and financial performance, labor
relations, disciplinary and material liability of the employees, trade secrets, rights and
regulations of the Shareholders and other important matters that the Shareholders’
Assembly or some other relevant Company body shall decide upon.

53.3. Until the adoption of the relevant resolutions, all other resolutions effective in the
nuclear power plant as of the date of entry into force of this Memorandum of Association
shall apply, provided that they are not in conflict with this Memorandum of Association
and the Bilateral Agreement.

Trade Secrets

Article 54

54.1. Trade secrets are all of the information defined as such by law, other regulations
and the general resolution on protection of trade secrets to be adopted by the
Shareholders' Assembly, which represent a secret related to production, results of
research or construction work, and any other information which, if disclosed to
unauthorized persons, might adversely affect the economic interests of the Company.

54.2. The Shareholders' Assembly undertakes to adopt the general resolution described
in the preceding paragraph of this Article immediately after the Company has been

20

entered into the court register. Promptly after its adoption, the members of the
Company bodies, as well as other persons who are obliged to protect trade secrets
must become familiarized with the contents of the general resolution.

54.3. Notwithstanding the contents of the general resolution, trade secrets also include
such information which, if disclosed to an unauthorized person, would clearly cause
significant damage to the Company. The Shareholders, members of the Company
bodies, employees, and other persons, shall be liable for disclosure of trade secrets if
they were aware or had to be aware of the significance of the information in question.

54.4. No information that is public according to law or information conceming violations
of law or of good business practice shall be declared as a trade secret.

Article 55
55.1. The Shareholders’ Assembly shall establish the manner of protection of trade
secrets and the liability of persons required to protect them by means of a general
resolution mentioned in the preceding paragraph.

55.2. Third persons are also required to protect trade secrets, provided that they were
aware that such information was considered a trade secret.

55.3. Any actions contrary to the law and the will of the Company, through which third
persons would attempt to acquire trade secrets of the Company are prohibited.

Expenses

Article 56
Any expenses incurred as a result of the execution of this Memorandum of Association,
that is, expenses relating to the Memorandum of Association during the process of
restructuring and creating the Company, shall be covered by the Company.

Dispute resolution

Article 57

57.1. Alt disputes arising from or in connection with this Memorandum of Association,
i.e, regarding the breach of its provisions, and regarding the termination and rescinding
of the Memorandum of Association shall be finally resolved under the Rules of
Arbitration and Conciliation (Vienna Rules) at the International Arbitral Center of the
Federal Economic Chamber in Vienna, with 3 (three) arbitrators appointed in
accordance with said Rules.

57.2. The language of the arbitration is English.

21

57.3. The said arbitration is authorized to rule equitably, i.e. ex aequo ef bono.

57.4. The award rendered by the arbitration tribunal as to any specific dispute shall be
valid and enforceable for the Shareholders.

57.5. This arbitration is not authorized to settle disputes arising from an inability to make
decisions and resolutions on the part of the Company management bodies.

Article 58

58.1. If the Shareholders' Assembly, in other words, the Company Supervisory Board
are unable to adopt a resolution due to lack of consent, at the request of one of the
Shareholders, the fina! decision as to the matter in question may be made in a separate
proceeding for each respective case by an ad hoc Business Arbitration, which shall be
appointed by the Shareholders pursuant to this Memorandum of Association.

58.2. The Arbitration tribunal shall have 3 (three) members (arbitrators). Each
Shareholder is obligated to, within 8 days after receipt of request for arbitral
proceedings, appoint 1 (one) arbitrator to the Arbitration tribunal and inform the same
arbitrator and the other Shareholder in writing thereof. The Arbitration tribunal arbitrators
so appointed shall be appointed from a list of arbitrators — twelve (12) neutral experts
that shall be appointed by the Shareholders' Assembly at its first meeting, based on
Shareholders' recommendations. Each Shareholder shall recommend six (6) arbitrators
to the Shareholders' Assembly.

58.3. The appointed arbitrators are obligated to appoint the presiding arbitrator within 5
days from the date of expiration of the period under Article 58 Paragraph 2 hereof. The
presiding arbitrator need not necessarily be an arbitrator named in the list. If the
arbitrators fail to appoint the presiding arbitrator, the Shareholders shall appoint new
arbitrators within 8 days from the expiration of the period set for the presiding arbitrator
appointment. If the newly-appointed arbitrators also fail to nominate the presiding
arbitrator, such presiding arbitrator shall then be appointed, at the request of any
Shareholder, by the chairman of the International Arbitral Centre of the Federal
Economic Chamber in Vienna.

58.4. The arbitrators appointed once by the Shareholders for an individual case may,
without limitation, be appointed for other cases.

58.5. The seat of the so appointed ad hoc Arbitration tribunal shall be in the Company.
All administrative tasks of the arbitration shall be performed by the Company.

58.6. For all other issues, during the proceeding before the Arbitration tribunal the
Rules of the Permanent Arbitration under the Chamber of Commerce of Slovenia shall
apply accordingly.

58.7. The Arbitration tribunal is authorized to rule equitably, i.e. ex zequo et Lono.

22

58.8. The award rendered by the Arbitration tribunal as to any specific dispute shall be
valid and enforceable for the Shareholders and the Company.

58.9. Both Slovenian and Croatian languages will be used as languages for the
arbitration. The arbitral award will be communicated in Slovenian and translated into
Croatian.
Exercise of rights and obligations, and interpretation

Article 59
59.1. The Shareholders particularly undertake to exercise all of their rights and
obligations under this Memorandum of Association in the manner that will ensure the
highest possible degree of safety of the nuclear power plant operation.
59.2. In interpreting this Memorandum of Association and the settlement of disputes, the
equality of rights of the Shareholders shall be observed, unless otherwise specified
herein, together with achievement of safe and stable operation of the nuclear power
plant.
Amendments of Memorandum of Association

Article 60
Amendments of the Memorandum of Association shall be decided upon by agreement
of the Shareholders at the Shareholders’ Assembly, and shall be carried out in
conformity with the provisions of the CCA.

Severability

Article 61
In the event any one or more of the provisions of this Memorandum of Association shall
for any reason be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the remaining provisions of this
Memorandum of Association shall be unaffected. In such an event, the Shareholders
are obligated to remedy the invalidity or the unenforceability of a provision in a valid
manner closest to their economic purpose.

Official language of the Company
Article 62

62.1. The mode and languages of communication among the Company bodies shall be
defined by the relevant rules of procedure of such bodies.

23

62.2. Any business correspondence officially addressed to the Shareholder from the
Republic of Croatia shall be sent to the Croatian Shareholder in Slovenian and in
Croatian.

Copies of Memorandum of Association

Article 63

This Memorandum of Association is made in six (6) copies in Croatian and in Slovenian,
which are equal languages of the Memorandum of Association, of which each
Contracting Party will keep two (2) copies in each language, and the remaining four (4)
copies will be used for Company registration and other official purposes.

Entry into force
Article 64

64.1. This Memorandum of Association enters into force on January 1, 2002, provided
that the Bilateral Agreement is previously entered into force.

64.2. The Management Board and other bodies of NEK d.o.o. shall continue its
functions until new bodies are appointed. The Management Board of NEK d.o.o0.
must convene the Shareholders’ Assembly within 3 days from the date of entry
into force hereof, in accordance with the provisions of this Memorandum of
Association.

64.3. After the Shareholders' Assembly is held pursuant to the preceding Paragraph of
this Article, the newly-appointed Management Board shall submit to the court

register a proposal for registration of all changes that occurred in accordance
with this Memorandum of Association.

sen

The Shareholders

HEP d.d. ELES GEN d.0o.0.

24

—
4

=m meee RBBB RE ERE RB ER EB

 

EXHIBIT 2
PROCEDURE FOR THE EXERCISE OF RIGHT OF FIRST REFUSAL

. Unless during the process of liquidation of the Company the Shareholders agree

otherwise, the Contracting Parties agree that the real property of the Company shall be
sold by international public tender, in the manner stipulated in the following Paragraphs of
this Exhibit. The terms of the tender are determined by the liquidator of the Company, with
the approval of the Shareholders.

. The real property of the Company shall be sold to the highest bidder during the tender

mentioned in Paragraph |. The highest bidder means a domestic or foreign legal or natural
person who offers the highest price.

The Company liquidator shall, within 30 days from the closing date of the international
public tender, deliver to the Shareholders and. to the Government of the Republic of
Slovenia, in writing and by registered mail, detailed information about the highest bid
received for the tender. Such notice shall contain specific information about the real
property being sold, the terms of the sale, the time of sale, and other relevant information.

IV.

The Republic of Slovenia has the right of first refusal, provided it offers at least the same
purchase price and the same terms of payment as the highest bidder.

If within 60 days from the receipt of notice from Paragraph Ill of this Exhibit, the Republic
of Slovenia fails to deliver to the Company liquidator and the Shareholders a written notice,
sent by registered mail, that it is willing to exercise its right of first refusal and to buy the
teal property under the same or more favorable terms than those offered by the highest
bidder, it shall be considered that it did not accept the offer.

\f the Republic of Slovenia accepts the offer to purchase the real property, it shall without
delay, and not later than 30 days from the date of mailing of the notice of its intention to
exercise the right of first refusal, execute the contract for the sale of the real property. If the
Republic of Slovenia fails to act in compliance with the provisions of this Paragraph in
exercising its right of first refusal, its right of first refusal is terminated.

Vv.

Transfer of the Company's real property during liquidation proceedings that is not in
compliance with the provisions of the previous Paragraphs shall be deemed null and void.

 

=

—

(3)

 

EXHIBIT 3
PRINCIPLES OF THE STRUCTURING OF THE FINANCIAL RELATIONS

ELES GEN d.o.0. shall assume all obligations of NEK d.o.0 towards the bank
which have occurred as a result of the transfer to NEK d.o.o of the repayment of
investment loans made by the Slovene founders, according to the balance on
December 31, 2001. Obligations resulting from loans issued to carry out NEK’s
modernization project will be NEK d.o.o.’s only remaining long-term financial
obligations. Until June 30, 2002, the cost of these loans will be bome through
the cost of electricity by the Shareholder from the Republic of Slovenia and from
that day forward by both Shareholders.

By virtue of the entry into force of this Agreement:

HEP d.d. waives all claims against NEK d.o.o and ELES d.o.o for damages, i.e.
for compensation for undelivered electricity, i.e. for compensation for use of the
capital, and in this regard will fully waive all claims in court arising therefrom;
NEK d.o.0 waives all claims against HEP d.d. in connection with delivered power
and electricity, and in this regard will fully waive all claims in court arising
therefrom; .

NEK d.o.o waives its claims against ELES d.o.0 in the same amount as in the
previous bullet of this Paragraph;

NEK d.o.0 waives all claims against HEP d.d. in connection with charged fees for
financing of the dismantling of Nuclear Power Plant Krsko and disposal of
radioactive waste from Nuclear Power Plant KrSko, and in this regard will fully
waive any claims in court arising therefrom;

NEK d.0.0. waives ail claims in connection with pooled resources of depreciation
of both founders and claims in connection with the coverage of losses from
previous years.

Based on the provisions listed above, NEK d.o.o will rearrange its balance sheet
on December 31, 2001 so that:

it shows neither any claims toward HEP d.d. and ELES d.o.o nor any obligations
toward the fund for financing of the dismantling of the Nuclear Power Plant Krsko
and the disposal of radioactive waste from the Nuclear Power Plant KrSko;

it does not show any obligations toward the bank which occurred as a result of
the transfer of repayment of Slovene founders’ investment loans to NEK d.o.o.
described in Paragraph 1 of this Exhibit;

based on the conversion of HEP’s long term investments and the exemption of
the loan, NEK d.o.0’s capital will be increased, which capital will, after the
payment of the possible uncovered losses, be distributed to the Shareholders in
two equal parts, so that the initial capital of NEK d.o.o. reaches the amount listed
in Article 2 of this Agreement, and so that any possible remainder is distributed
into the reserves;

em = [6

(6)

any other necessary accounting corrections or changes arising from this Exhibit
are executed.

Any possible profit to NEK d.o.0. arising from accounting corrections or changes
described in Paragraph 3 of this Exhibit will be tax-exempt.

ELES GEN d.o.o assumes the financial results of all power and electricity
produced during the period from July 31, 1998 until the date HEP d.d. begins to
take over the electricity again, but no later than June 30, 2002. All the while,
NEK d.0.0.’s financial position must not worsen compared to its financial position
on July 30, 1998.

The Contracting Parties will ensure that the Shareholders determine, by no later
than the end of 2002, whether the company needs additional long-term sources
of financing its operating costs, which sources of financing will be secured by a
capital increase in NEK d.o.0. or any other appropriate manner.

 

EXHIBIT 4
BILATERAL COMMITTEE RULES OF PROCEDURE
Article 1
Pursuant to paragraph 1 of Article 18 of the Agreement between the Govemment of the
Republic of Croatia and the Government of the Republic of Slovenia on regulation of
status and other legal relations regarding the investment, use and dismantling of
Nuclear Power Plant KrSko (hereinafter: the Agreement), a Bilateral Committee for
Supervision of the Performance of the Agreement and Other Tasks is created in
accordance with the Agreement (hereinafter: the Bilateral Committee).
The Bilateral Committee shall consist of the delegation of the Republic of Croatia and
the delegation of the Republic of Slovenia. Each delegation has a chairman and four
members. As required, each delegation may also include experts.

The chairman of each delegation has a deputy, who is appointed by the members of the
delegation.

The Contracting Parties shall inform each other by diplomatic means of the structure of
the delegation and any changes thereto.

Article 2
Bilateral Committee shall perform the following tasks:

a,

monitor the implementation of the Agreement;

b

confirm the Program of disposal of RW and SNF and approve other related
activities;

Cc,

confirm the Program of dismantling of NE Kr8ko and approve other related activities;

2

discuss open issues concerning the mutual relations regarding the Agreement.
Article 3

The Bilateral Committee shall meet at least once a year at alternating the location of the

meeting between the territories of both Contracting Parties. As necessary, the

chairmen of both delegations may convene an emergency meeting with one consent.

The meeting agenda with related documentation shall be delivered to the members 14
days prior to the meeting.

Upon proposal of either of the Contracting Parties, the meeting will be convened and
managed by the Contracting Party who is hosting the meeting.

The host of the meeting shall chair the meeting, and also shall provide all necessary
administrative support for the meeting.

Article 4
Any decisions made at the meetings have to be adopted with the consent of both
delegations. If a consent cannot be reached, the views of both parties shall be entered
into the minutes of the meetings, and the Governments of the Contracting Parties will be
notified of such occurrence.

Minutes of the meetings shail be kept and will be signed by both chairmen of the
delegations at the end of the meetings.

Article 5
The official languages of the Bilateral Committee are Croatian and Slovenian.

Article 6
Each Contracting Party shall bear the costs incurred by its delegation. The host of the
meeting shall bear the costs of conducting the meeting, and other costs arising from the

work of the Bilateral Committee shall be bome by both Contracting Parties in equal
proportions, unless agreed to otherwise.

 

