* *
—___ «ss ® ~ _
CONSEIL * COUNCIL

DEL’EUROPE * y * OFEUROPE

COUR EUROPEENNE DES DROITS DE L7 HOMME
EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS
FIRST SECTION

DECISION

AS TO THE ADMISSIBILITY OF

Application no. 14902/04
by OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS
against Russia

The European Court of Human Rights (First Section), sitting on
29 January 2009 as a Chamber composed of:
Christos Rozakis, President,
Nina Vaji¢,
Khanlar Hajiyev,
Dean Spielmann,
Sverre Erik Jebens,
Giorgio Malinverni, judges,
Valeriy Musin, ad hoc judge,
and Sgren Nielsen, Section Registrar,

Having regard to the above application lodged on 23 April 2004,

Having regard to the decision to grant priority to the above application
under Rule 41 of the Rules of Court.

Having regard to the observations submitted by the respondent
Government and the observations in reply submitted by the applicant
company,

Having deliberated, decides as follows:

THE FACTS

1. The applicant, OAO Neftyanaya kompaniya YUKOS, was a publicly-
traded private open joint-stock company incorporated under the laws of
Russia. It was registered in Nefteyugansk, Tyumen Region, and at the
relevant time was managed by its subsidiary, OOO “YUKOS” Moskva,

2 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

registered in Moscow. It was represented before the Court by
Mr J.P. Gardner, a lawyer practising in London.

2. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by
Mr P. Laptev and Mrs V. Milinchuk, former Representatives of the Russian
Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.

A. The circumstances of the case

3. The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised
as follows.

4. The applicant was a holding company established by the Russian
Government in 1993 to own and control a number of stand-alone entities
specialised in oil production. The company remained fully State-owned
until 1995-1996 when, through a series of tenders and auctions, it was
privatised.

J. Proceedings in respect of the applicant company's tax liability for
the year 2000

(a) Tax assessment 2000

(i) Original tax inspection

5. Between 13 November 2002 and 4 March 2003 the Tax Inspectorate of
the town of Nefteyugansk (“the Tax Office”) conducted a tax inspection of
the applicant company.

6. Asa result of the inspection, on 28 April 2003 the Tax Office drew up a
report indicating a number of relatively minor errors in the company's tax
returns and served it on the company.

7. Following the company's objections, on 9 June 2003 the Tax Office
adopted a decision in which it found the company liable for having filed
incomplete returns in respect of certain taxes.

8. The decision of the Tax Office was accepted and complied with by the
company on 7 July 2003.

(ii) Additional tax inspection

9. On 8 December 2003 the Tax Ministry (“the Ministry”), acting as a
reviewing body within the meaning of Section 87 (3) of the Tax Code, carried
out an additional tax inspection of the applicant company.

10. On 29 December 2003 the Ministry issued a report indicating that
the applicant company had a large tax liability for the year 2000. The report
was detailed and came to over 70 pages. It also had 284 supporting
documents in annex. The date of the notification of the report is unclear.

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 3

11. The Ministry established that in 2000 the applicant company had
carried out its activities through a network of 22 trading companies
registered in low-tax areas of Russia (the Republic of Mordoviya, the town
of Sarov in the Nizhniy Novgorod Region, the Republic of Kalmykiya, the
town of Trekhgornyy in the Chelyabinsk Region, the town of Lesnoy in the
Sverdlovsk Region and the Evenk Autonomous District). For all legal
purposes, these entities were set up as entirely independent from the
applicant, though their sole activity consisted of commissioning the applicant
company to buy crude oil on their behalf from the company's own oil-
producing subsidiaries and either putting it up for sale on the domestic market
or abroad, or first handing it over to the company's own oil-processing plants
and then selling it. There were no real cash transactions between the applicant
company, its oil-processing and oil-producing subsidiaries and the trading
entities, and the company's own promissory notes and mutual offsetting were
used instead. All the money thus accumulated from the sales was then
transferred unilaterally to the “Fund for Financial Support of the Production
Development of OAO Neftyanaya kompaniya YUKOS”, a commercial entity
founded, owned and run by the applicant company. Since at all relevant times
the applicant company took part in all the transactions of the trading
companies, but acted as the companies’ agent and never as an owner of the
goods produced and processed by its own subsidiaries and the reward for its
services paid by the trading entities was negligible, the company's real
turnover was never reflected in any tax documents and, consequently, on its
tax returns. In addition, the trading companies were in fact sham entities, as
they were neither present nor operated at the place of their registration. In
addition, they had no assets and no employees of their own.

12. The Ministry found it established, among other things, that:

(a) the actual movement of the traded oil was from the company's
production sites to its own processing or storage facilities;

(b) the applicant company acted as an exporter of goods for the purpose of
customs clearance, even though the goods had formally been owned and sold
by sham companies;

(c) the applicant company through the use of various techniques indirectly
established and, at all relevant times de facto, controlled and owned the sham
entities;

(d) the entirety of the accounting of the companies was carried out by the
same two entities, OOO “YUKOS” FBC and OOO “YUKOS” Invest, both
dependant on or belonging to the applicant company;

(e) the network of sham companies was officially managed by OOO
“YUKOS” RM, all official correspondence, including tax documents, being
sent from the postal address of OOO “YUKOS” Moskva, the applicant
company's managing subsidiary;

4 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

(f) the sham companies and the applicant subsidiaries' companies entered
into transactions with lowered prices for the purpose of reducing the taxable
base of their operations;

(g) all revenues perceived by the sham companies were thereafter
unilaterally transferred to the applicant company;

(h) the statements by the owners and directors of the sham entities, who
confessed that they had signed the documents they had been required to sign
by the officials of the applicant company, had never conducted any
independent activity on behalf of their companies;

(i) and, lastly, that the sham companies received tax benefits unlawfully.

13. Having regard to all this, the Ministry decided that the activities of the
sham companies served the purpose of screening the real business activity of
the applicant company, that the transactions of these companies were sham
and that it had been the applicant company, and not the sham entities, which
conducted the transactions and became the owner of the traded goods. In
view of the above, and also since neither the sham entities nor the applicant
company qualified for the tax exemptions, the report concluded that the
company, having acted in bad faith, failed properly to reflect these
operations in its tax declarations thus avoiding the payment of value-added
tax, motorway tax, corporate property tax, housing and socio-cultural tax, tax
in respect of sales of fuels and lubricants and profit tax.

14. The report referred, inter alia, to Articles 7 (3), 38, 39 (1) and 41 of
the Tax Code, section 3 of Law No. 1992-1 of the Russian Federation (RF)
of 6 December 1991 “On Value Added Tax”, sections 4 and 5 (2) of RF
Law No. 1759-1 of 18 October 1991 “On motorway funds in the Russian
Federation”, section 21 (“Ch”) of RF Law No. 2118-1 of 27 December 1991
“On the basics of the tax system”, Article 209 (1-2) of the Civil Code,
section 2 of RF Law No. 2030-1 of 13 December 1991 “On corporate
property tax”, section 2 (1-2) of RF Law No. 2116-1 of 27 December 1991
“On corporate profit tax”, Decision No. 138-O of the Constitutional Court
of Russia of 25 July 2001 and Article 56 of the Tax Code.

15. On 12 January 2004 the applicant company filed its detailed thirty-
page objections to the report. The company admitted that for a very short
period of time it had partly owned three out of twenty two organisations
mentioned in the report, but denied its involvement in the ownership and
management of the remaining nineteen companies. They maintained the
position about the lack of their involvement in the companies in question
throughout the proceedings.

16. During a meeting between the representatives of the Ministry and the
company on 27 January 2004, the applicant's counsel were given an
opportunity to state orally their arguments against the report.

17. Having considered the company's objections, on 14 April 2004 the
Ministry adopted a decision establishing that the applicant had a large
outstanding tax liability for the year 2000. As the applicant had failed

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 5

properly to declare the above-mentioned operations in its tax declarations and
to pay corresponding taxes, in accordance with Article 122 (3) of the Tax
Code the Ministry found that the company had underreported its tax liability
for 2000 and ordered it to pay 47,989,241,953 Russian roubles (RUB)
(approximately 1,394,748,234 euros, (EUR)) in tax arrears,
RUB 32,190,599,501.40 (approximately EUR 935,580,142) in default interest
and RUB = 19,195,696,780 as a 40 percent penalty (approximately
EUR 557,899,293), totalling RUB  99,375,538,234.40 (approximately
EUR 2,888,227,669). The arguments contained in the decision were identical
to those of the report of 29 December 2003. In addition, the decision
responded in detail to each of the counter-arguments advanced by the
company in its objections of 12 January 2004.

18. The decision was served on the applicant company on 15 April 2004.

19. The company was given until 16 April 2004 to pay voluntarily the
amounts due.

20. The applicant company alleged that it had requested the Ministry to
clarify the report of 29 December 2003 and that the Ministry had failed to
respond to this request.

(iii) Institution of proceedings by the Ministry

21. Under a rule which made it unnecessary to wait until the end of the
grace period if there was evidence that the dispute between the tax authority
and the taxpayer was insolvable, the Ministry did not wait until 16 April
2004.

22. On 14 April 2004 it applied to the Moscow City Commercial Court
(“the City Court”) and requested the court to seize the applicant company's
assets as a security for the claim.

23. By decision of 15 April 2004 the City Court initiated proceedings and
prohibited the applicant company from disposing of its assets pending the
outcome of litigation. The injunction did not concern goods produced by the
company and related cash transactions.

24. By the same decision the court fixed the date of the preliminary
hearing for 7 May 2004 and invited the applicant company to respond to the
Ministry's claims.

25. On 23 April 2004 the applicant company filed a motion in which it
argued that the City Court had no territorial jurisdiction over the company's
legal seat and requested that the case be referred a court in Nefteyugansk,
where it was registered.

26. On 6 May 2004 the Ministry filed a motion inviting the court to call
the applicant company's managing subsidiary OOO “YUKOS” Moskva as a
co-defendant in the case.

6 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

(iv) Hearing of 7 May 2004

27. At the hearing the City Court examined and rejected the applicant
company's motion of 23 April 2004. Having regard to the fact that the
applicant company was operated by its own subsidiary OOO “YUKOS”
Moskva, registered and located in Moscow, the court established that the
applicant company's real headquarters were in Moscow and not in
Nefteyugansk. In view of the above, the court concluded that it was
competent to deal with the case.

28. On 17 May 2004 the applicant company appealed against this
decision. The appeal was examined and rejected by the Appeals Division of
the Moscow City Commercial Court (“the Appeal Court”) on 3 June 2004.

29. The City Court also examined and granted the Ministry's motion of
6 May 2004. The court ordered OOO “YUKOS” Moskva to join the
proceedings as a co-defendant and adjourned the hearing until 14 May 2004.

30. At the hearing of 7 May 2004 the applicant company lodged with the
City Court a separate action against the tax assessment of 14 April 2004,
seeking to have the assessment decision declared unlawful. The applicant
company's brief came to 42 pages and had 22 supporting documents in annex.
This action was examined separately and rejected as unsubstantiated by the
City Court on 27 August 2004. The judgment of 27 August 2004 was upheld
on appeal on 23 November 2004. On 30 December 2005 the Circuit Court
upheld the decisions of the lower courts.

(v) Hearing of 14 May 2004

31. In the meantime the tax assessment case continued. On 14 May 2004
the City Court rejected the applicant company's request to adjourn the
proceedings, having found that the applicant's counterclaim did not require
such adjournment of the proceedings concerning the Ministry's action.

32. OOO “YUKOS” Moskva also requested that the hearing be adjourned
as it was allegedly not ready to participate in the proceedings.

33. This request was rejected by the court as unfounded on the same date.

34. At the hearing the respondent companies also requested the City Court
to vary their procedural status to that of interested parties.

35. The court rejected this request and, on the applicant company's
motion, ordered the Ministry to disclose its evidence.

36. The court then decided that the merits of the case would be heard on
21 May 2004.

37. On 17 May 2004 the Ministry invited the applicant company to
examine the evidence in the case file at its premises. A team of at least five
lawyers representing the applicant company made use of this invitation on
18, 19 and 20 May 2004.

38. According to the applicant company, the supporting material
underlying the case was first provided to the company on 17 May 2004, when
the Ministry filed approximately 24,000 pages of documents. Allegedly, on

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 7

18 May 2004 the Ministry disclosed approximately 45,000 further pages, and
a further 2,000 pages on the eve of the hearing before the City Court, i.e. on
20 May 2004.

(vi) First-instance judgment

39. The hearings on the merits of the case commenced on 21 May and
lasted until 26 May 2004.

40. On 26 May 2004, at the end of the hearings, the City Court gave its
judgment in which, for the most part, it reached the same findings and came
to the same conclusions as in the Ministry's decision of 14 April 2004.
Having confirmed the factual findings of the decision of 14 April 2004 in
respect of the relations and transactions between the sham companies and the
applicant company, the court then reasoned as follows:

“... Under section 3 of RF Law N. 1992-1 of 6 December 1991 ‘On value-added tax’,
part 2 of Section 5 and section 4 of RF Law No. 1759-1 of 18 October 1991 'On
motorway funds in the Russian Federation’, subpart ‘ch’ of section 21 of RF Law No.
2118-1 of 27 December 1991 ‘On the ba of the tax system’, the sale of goods
(works and services) give rise to an obligation to pay value-added tax, motorway
users’ tax, tax on the sale of oil and oil products, tax on maintenance of the housing
fund and objects of socio-cultural sphere.

 

    

  

Under part | of Article 38 of the Tax Code, the objects of taxation may be the sale
of goods (works and services), assets, profit, value of the sold goods (works and
services) or other objects having value, quantity or physical characteristics on the
presence of which the tax legislation bases the obligation to pay tax.

  

Under part 1 of Article 39 of the Tax Code, sales are defined as the transfer of
property rights in respect of goods. Under subpart | and 2 of Article 209 of the Civil
Code (taking into account Article 11 of the Tax Code) the owner of goods in the
person who has the rights of ownership, use and disposal of his property, that is, the
one who has the right to carry out at his own discretion in respect of this property any
actions which are not against the law and other legal acts and do not breach the rights
and protected interests of other persons ...

The court established that the owner of the oil sold under contracts concluded with
organisations registered in low-tax territories had been OAO Yukos. The respondents’
arguments about the unlawfulness of the use of the notion of de facto owner
(@axmuyeckuti co6cmeennux) on the basis that, according to Article 10 (3) and
Article 8 (1) part 3 of the Civil Code ... there existed a presumption of good faith on
the part of parties involved in civil-law transactions and that therefore the persons
indicated as owners in the respective contracts should be regarded as the owners, are
baseless, because the above-mentioned organisations never acquired any property
rights in respect of oil and oil products (nockonKy npae enadenua, nonvzoeanua u
pacnopasienua ued@mvio u uedmenpodykmamu y dannoix opeanuzayuii ne
603HUKAaNO).

 

 

  

 
  

OAO NK Yukos was therefore under an obligation to pay [the taxes], which has not
been complied with in good time.

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

Article 41 of the Tax Code establishes that profit is an economic gain in monetary
form or in kind, which is taken into account if it is possible to evaluate it and in so far
as it can be assessed. Under subparts | and 2 of section 2 of RF Law No. 2116-1 of
27 December 1991 ‘On profit tax of enterprises and organisations’ which was then in
force, the object of taxation is the gross profit of the enterprise, decreased (or
increased) in accordance with the provisions of the present section. The gross profit is
the total of revenues (receipts) from the sale of products (works and services), main
assets (including land parcels), other property of the enterprise and the profit derived
from operations other than sales, decreased by the sum of expenses in respect of these
operations. Since it follows from the case file that the economic profit from the sale of
oil and oil products was perceived by OAO NK Yukos, it was incumbent on [the
applicant company] to comply with the obligation to pay profit tax.

 

 

 

 

Section 2 of RF Law No. 2030-1 of 13 December 1991 'On corporate property tax’
taxes the main assets, non-material assets, reserves and receipts which are indicated
on the taxpayer's balance sheet. It follows that the obligation to pay property tax was
incumbent on the person who was legally responsible for reflecting the main assets
non-material assets, reserves and receipts on its balance sheet. Since it follows from
the materials of the case that OAO NK Yukos was under such an obligation, this
taxpayer was also under an obligation to pay property tax.

 

  

The court does not accept the respondent's arguments that the tax authorities lacked
the power to levy taxes from OAO NK Yukos in respect of the sums ... perceived by
other organisations. The power of the tax authorities to bring proceedings in courts to
ensure the payment of taxes to the budget in cases of bad faith taxpayers is confirmed
by decision No. 138-O of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation, dated
25 July 2001. At the same time the bad faith of taxpayer OAO NK Yukos and the fact
that the proceeds from operations with oil and oil products is confirmed by the
materials of the case file.

 

The court has also established that the use of tax benefits by organisations which
were dependent from OAO NK Yukos and participated in the tax evasion scheme set
up by that company was unlawful.

Pursuant to Article 56 of the Tax Code, tax benefits are recognised as preferences
provided for in the tax legislation for certain groups of taxpayers, in comparison to
other taxpayers, including the possibility of not paying a tax or of paying it at a lower
rate.

 

The court believes that tax payers must use their right to such benefits in good faith.

Meanwhile, it follows from the materials of the case that the taxpayers [concerned]
used their right in bad faith.

The entities registered on the territory of the Republic of Mordoviya (OOO Yu-
Mordoviya ..., ZAO Yukos-M ..., OAO Alta-Treyd .... OOO Ratmir ..., OOO Mars
XXII ...) applied benefits governed by Law of the Republic of Mordoviya No. 9-Z of
9 March 1999 'On conditions for the efficient use of the socio-economic potential of
the Republic of Mordoviya’, which set out a special taxation procedure for entities
with the purpose of creating beneficial conditions for attracting capital to the territory
of the Republic of Mordoviya, developing the securities market and creating
additional jobs. Under section 2 of that law, the special taxation procedure applies in
respect of entities (including foreign entities, operating through permanent

  

 

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 9

representative offices established in the territory of the Republic of Mordoviya),
established after the entry into force of the law (with the exception of entities
conducting leasing business, banks and other credit institutions) and whose business
conforms to one of the following conditions: export operations, with the resulting
quarterly earnings totalling at least at fifteen percent of the whole of the entity's
earnings; wholesale trading of combustibles and lubricants and other kinds of
hydrocarbons with the resulting quarterly earning totalling at least at seventy percent
of the whole of the entity's earnings; and other conditions enumerated in that law.
Pursuant to sections 3 and 4 of the Law, the Government of the Republic of
Mordoviya passed resolutions on the application of the special taxation procedure in
respect of the mentioned entities and, consequently, on the application of the
following tax rates: at the rate of zero percent in respect of profit tax in so far as it is
credited to the republican and local budgets of the Republic of Mordoviya; at the rate
of zero per cent on motorway users’ tax in so far as it is credited to the Territorial
Road Fund of the Republic of Mordoviya; and at the rate of zero percent on corporate
property tax. Moreover, the above-mentioned entities were exempted from payment of
tax on maintenance of the housing fund and socio-cultural facilities by local
government resolutions.

 

However, the special taxation procedure is provided for [by this law] for the
purposes of creating favourable conditions to attract capital to the territory of the
Republic of Mordoviya, develop the securities market and create additional jobs. The
entities which used those benefits did not actually carry out their activities on the
territory of this subject of the Russian Federation, did not attract capital, did not
facilitate the strengthening of the Republic's socio-economic potential, but, on the
contrary, inflicted material damage through non-payment of taxes to the budget of the
Republic, the local budget and the federal budget. Thus, the use of the tax benefits in
respect of these entities was not aimed at improving the economy of the Republic of
Mordoviya but pursued the aim of evading taxes on the production, refining and sales
operations of in respect of oil and oil products by OAO NK Yukos and is, as a
consequence, unlawful.

   

The entity registered on the territory of the Republic of Kalmykiya (OOO Sibirskaya
Transportnaya Kompaniya ...) did not pay profit tax, property tax, motorway users’
tax, tax on the acquisition of vehicles and other taxes in accordance with Law
No. 12-P-3 of the Republic of Kalmykiya of 12 March 1999 'On tax benefits to
enterprises investing in the economy of the Republic of Kalmykiya’, which establishes
advantages in respect of taxes and duties for the categories of taxpayers that invest
into the economy of the Republic of Kalmykiya and are registered as such enterprises
with the Ministry of Investment Policy of the Republic of Kalmykiya. Moreover, the
entity in question was exempt from payment of local taxes and payment of profit tax
to the consolidated budget.

 

 

 

At the same time, it follows from the presumption of good faith of taxpayers
(Decisions No. 138-O of the Constitutional Court of 25 July 2001, No. 4-O of
10 January 2002 and No. 108-O of 14 May 2002, Rulings of the Presidium of the
Supreme Commercial Court no. 9408/00 dated 18 September 2001, no. 7374/01 of
18 June 2002, No. 6294/01 of 5 November 2002 and no. 11259/02 of 17 December
2002 and letter no. C5-5/yn-342 of the Deputy President of the Supreme Commercial
Court of 17 April 2002) that, for the application of tax advantages to become lawful,
the amount of the advantages provided and the sum of investments made by the entity
should be commensurate. Since the amounts of benefits declared for tax purposes by
the above-mentioned entities and the sums of investment made are obviously not

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

 

commensurate, application of the advantages is unlawful. The application of tax
advantages by the given entity is not aimed at improving the economy of the Republic
of Kalmykiya but pursues the aim of tax evasion by OAO NK Yukos in respect of the
operations of production, refining and sales of oil and oil products and, consequently,
is unlawful.

  

The entity registered in the closed administrative territorial formation (ZATO) town
of Sarov in the Nizhniy Novgorod Region (OOO Yuksar ...) concluded a tax
agreement on the provision of tax concessions with the Sarov municipal
administration. The granting of additional tax advantages on the territory of the Sarov
ZATO (Federal Nuclear Centre) in 2000 was regulated by the norms of Articles 21
and 56 of the Tax Code, section 58 of Law no. 227-FZ of 31 December 1999 'On the
federal budget for the year 2000’, section 5 of Law No. 3297-1 ‘On closed
administrative territorial formations’ of 14 July 1992, Item 2 of Paragraph 30 of
Decree No. 222 of the Russian Government of 13 March 2000 'On measures for
implementation of the Federal Law 'On the Federal Budget for 2000' and Regulations
‘On the investment zone of the town of Sarov', approved by a Resolution of the Sarov
Duma on 30 December 1999. According to the tax agreement, the Sarov
administration confers advantages in respect of taxes payable into the Sarov budget to
the entity in question in the form of a reduction in the share of taxes and other
compulsory payments to the budget, to twenty-five percent of the sums due in value-
added tax, property tax, tax on the sale of fuel and lubricants, motorway users' tax, tax
on vehicle owners, tax on the acquisition of vehicles, profit tax, tax on operations with
securities and excise duties; in exchange, Le entity undertakes to participate in

projects ( ) i d in the Sarov i zone or with
its participation, aimed at raising additional budget receipts and solving the problems
of Sarov's socioeconomic development by transferring quarterly at least one percent
of the sum of the tax advantages.

 

 

 

At the same time, according to Paragraph | of section 5 of the Federal Law
No. 3297-1 ‘On closed administrative territorial formations’ of 17 July 1992,
additional benefits on taxes and duties are granted by the appropriate local
government authorities to entities registered as taxpayers with the authorities of the
inistrative territorial formations in compliance with the mentioned law.
ing at least ninety percent of capital and at least seventy percent
of their activities on the territories of the closed administrative territorial formations
(including the requirement that persons who permanently reside on the territory of the
formation in question must constitute at least seventy percent of the average number
of employees on the payroll and at least seventy percent of the labour remuneration
fund must be paid to employees who permanently reside on the territory of the
formation in question) enjoy the right to obtain the benefits in question. Given that
OOO Yuksar did not actually carry out any activity on the territory of Sarov, was not
actually present on the territory of Sarov and that there were no assets and production
facilities necessary for the procurement and storage of oil on the territory of Sarov,
Nizhniy Novgorod Region, the given entity applied the tax advantages unlawfully.

 

 

   

Thus, the use of tax advantages by the given entity is not aimed at improving the
economy of the Sarov ZATO but pursued the aimed of tax evasion by OAO NK
Yukos in respect of its obligation to pay taxes on operations of production, refining
and sales of oil and oil products and is, consequently, unlawful.

Entities registered in the Trekhgornyy ZATO in the Chelyabinsk Region (O00,
sl OOO Nortex ..., OOO Gre

   

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, ll

concluded tax agreements with the administration of the town of Trekhgornyy,
ies were granted advantages in respect of profit tax, tax on
maintenance of the housing fund and socio-cultural facilities, property tax, land tax,
tax on the sale of fuel and lubricants, motorway users' tax, tax on vehicle users, and
tax on the acquisition of vehicles, on condition that the entities would remit the sum of
five percent from the amount of tax advantages conferred for the implementation of
the town's i to the Trekhg« ion's account.
Reasoning from the contents and sense of tax agreements, it follows that their purpose
was the implementation of the particularly important socioeconomic task of
developing the educational, medical service and housing spheres in the Trekhgornyy
ZATO. At the same time, the sums which were transferred to the budget by the
taxpayers in question were many times less than the sums of the declared tax
advantages (the sum of investments around 0.006 percent of the sum of the
advantages for each taxpayer). Thus, the investments made by the taxpayers not
influence the development of Trekhgornyy's economy. On the contrary, since the
above-mentioned organisations did not in fact carry out any activities, were never
located on the territory of Trekhgornyy, had no assets and production facilities
necessary to buy and store oil on the territory of Trekhgornyy, the application of tax
advantages by the above-mentioned organisations is contrary to part | of section 5 of
RF Law No. 3297-1 of 17 July 1992 'On closed administrative territorial formations’.

 

 

 

  

 

The organisations registered in the Lesnoy ZATO in the Sverdlovsk Region (OOO
Mitra ..., OOO Vald-oyl ..., OOO Bizness-oyl ...) concluded tax agreements on the
granting of a targeted tax concession under which organisations were granted the
concession in respect of profit tax, land tax, tax on the sales of fuel and lubricants,
motorway users’ tax, vehicle users’ tax, tax on the acquisition of vehicles, tax on
maintenance of the housing fund and socio-cultural facilities and property tax, whilst
the organisations [in question] were under an obligation to transfer to the account of
the Lesnoy municipal administration sums in the amount of five percent of the sums
of the granted tax concessions, but no less than 6,000 roubles quarterly, for
implementation of the town's socioeconomic programmes. [However], the sums
received from the taxpayers are many times less than the sums of the declared tax
advantages. Accordingly, the investments made by the taxpayers did not influence the
development of the economy of the town of Lesnoy because the above-mentioned
organisations never carried out any activities on the territory of Lesnoy, were never in
fact located on the territory of Lesnoy and had no assets and production facilities
required to sell and store oil on the territory of Lesnoy, the application of the tax
advantages in respect of the above-mentioned organisations is contrary to part | of
section 5 of RF Law No. 3297-1 of 17 July 1992 'On closed administrative territorial
formations’.

 

 

 

 

  
   

   

 

The organisation registered in the Evenk Autonomous District (OOO Petroleum-
Treiding) without in fact carrying out any activity on the territory of the district in
question and without in fact being located on the territory of the Evenk Autonomous
District, abused its right granted by Law No. 108 of the Evenk Autonomous District
of 24 September 1998 'On specific features of the tax s ystem in the Evenk

District’. The d organisation was regi i i
solely for the purpose of acquiring the right to the tax concessi
granted in the Evenk Autonomous District. The use of the tax benefits by the
organisation in question is not aimed at strengthening of economy of the Evenk
Autonomous District, but is rather aimed at tax evasion by OAO NK Yukos in respect
of operations of extraction, processing and sales of oil and oil products and is thus
unlawful.

   

 

 

 

 

 

12 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

Thus, the use of tax concessions by the above-mentioned organisations is not aimed
at strengthening of the economy of the regions in which they were registered but is
aimed at evading the taxes due in respect of the operations of extraction, processing
and sales of oil and oil products by OAO NK Yukos and is thus unlawful. ...”

Al. The first-instance judgment also responded to the applicant company's
submissions. As regards the argument that the Ministry's calculations were
erroneous in that they led to double taxation and the failure to take account of
the right to a refund of value-added tax (VAT) for export operations, the court
noted that, contrary to the company's allegations, both the revenues and
expenses of the sham entities had been taken into account by the Ministry so
as to avoid double taxation. In addition, under Law No. 1992-1 of
6 December 1991 “On value-added tax”, in order to claim a refund of the
value-added tax paid during export operations a tax payer had to justify the
claim in accordance with a special procedure and the applicant company had
failed to apply for a refund either in 2000 or at any later date. As to the
argument that the Ministry's claim was time-barred, the court refuted it with
reference to Article 113 of the Tax Code and Decision No. 138-O of the
Constitutional Court of 21 July 2001. The court held that the rules on
limitation periods were inapplicable in the case at issue as the applicant had
acted in bad faith. In response to the company's argument that the
interdependency within the meaning of Article 20 of the Tax Code was only
relevant for the purposes of price correction under Article 40 of the Code, the
court observed that the interdependency of the sham companies and the
applicant company was one of the circumstances on the basis of which the tax
authorities had proved the tax offence committed by the applicant company in
bad faith.

42. Accordingly, by the judgment of 26 May 2004 the court upheld the
decision of 14 April 2004, albeit slightly reducing the payable amounts by
reference to the Ministry's failure to prove the relations of the applicant
company with one of the entities mentioned in the decision of 14 April 2004.
The court ordered the applicant company to pay RUB 47,989,073,311
(approximately EUR  1,375,080,541) in taxes, RUB  32,190,430,314
(approximately EUR 922,385,687) in default interest and
RUB 19,195,606,923 (approximately EUR 550,031,575) in penalties,
totalling RUB 99,375,110,548 (approximately EUR 2,847,497,802) and
ordered its managing subsidiary OOO “YUKOS” Moskva to comply with
this decision. The judgment could be appealed against by the parties within a
thirty-day time-limit.

43. At the hearings of 21 to 26 May 2004 the applicant company and its
managing subsidiary were represented by eight counsel. The reasoned copy
of the judgment of 26 May 2004 was produced and became available to the
parties on 28 May 2004.

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 13,

(vii) Appeal proceedings

44. On 1 June 2004 OOO “YUKOS” Moskva filed an appeal against the
judgment of 26 May 2004.

45. The Ministry appealed against the judgment on 2 June 2004.

46. On 4 June 2004 the Appeal Court listed the appeals of OOO
“YUKOS” Moskva and the Ministry to be heard on 18 June 2004.

47. On 17 June 2004 the applicant company filed its appeal against the
judgment of 26 May 2004. The brief came to 115 pages and contained
41 documents in annex. The company complained, in particular, that the time
for filing an appeal had been unlawfully abridged, in breach of its rights to
fair and adversarial proceedings, that the first-instance judgment was
ungrounded and unlawful, that the evidence in the case was unlawful, that the
first instance court had erred in interpretation and application of the domestic
law in that it had lacked legal authority to “assign” the tax liabilities of one
company to another and that the court's interpretation of legislation on tax
concessions had been erroneous. The company also argued that the lower
court had wrongly assessed the evidence in the case and had come to wrong
factual conclusions in respect of the relationships between the applicant and
sham companies, that in any event some of the operations of the sham
companies had been unrelated to the alleged tax evasion and that the
respective sums should not be “assigned” to the applicant company, and also
that the case should have been tried in the town of Nefteyugansk, where the
company was registered.

48. The appeal hearing in the case lasted from 18 until 29 June 2004.

49. At the beginning of the hearing of 18 June 2004 the applicant
company requested the Appeal Court to adjourn the proceedings. The
company considered that the hearing had been fixed for too early a date,
before the expiry of the statutory time-limit for lodging appeals.

50. The court refused this request as unfounded.

51. At the hearings of 21 and 28 June 2004 the applicant company filed
four supplements to its appeal. The company and its managing subsidiary
were represented by ten counsel.

52. Under Article 268 of the Code of Commercial Court Procedure the
court fully re-examined the case presented by the Ministry rather than simply
reviewing the first-instance judgment.

53. At the end of the hearing of 29 June 2004 the court delivered its
judgment, in which it reached largely similar findings and came to the same
conclusions as the first-instance judgment. The court rejected the company's
appeals as unfounded and decided to change the first instance judgment in
part. In particular, it declared the Ministry's claims in respect of the VAT
partly unfounded, reduced the amount of the WAT arrears by
RUB 22,939,931 (approximately EUR 649,336) and quashed _ the
corresponding penalty of RUB 10,334,226 (approximately EUR 292,520).

54. The court judgment, in its relevant parts, read as follows:

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

“\.. The parties declared under part 5 of Article 268 of the Code of Commercial
Courts procedure that there was a need to check the lawfulness and grounds of the
first instance judgment and to hold a repeated hearing of the case in full.

  

The Appeal Court has checked the lawfulness and grounds of the first instance
judgment pursuant to ... Article 268 ... of the Code of Commercial Courts procedure.

The Appeal Court does not accept the arguments of the respondents about the
erroneous interpretation and application of the norms of the substantive law by the
first instance court and about the factual incorrectness of the court's conclusions.

[the court went on reviewing and confirming all factual findings made by the
Ministry and the first instance court in respect of the tax evasion scheme set up by the
applicant company]

... Having in mind the stated circumstances, the Appeal Court established that the de
facto owner of the oil was [the applicant]. The acquisition and transfer for processing
of the oil and the sales of the oil in reality was carried out by [the applicant] as the
owner, which is proved by the control of [the applicant company] over all operations,
the actual movement of the oil from the extracting entities to processing entities or oil
facilities controlled by [the applicant company], which is proved by the materials of
the case.

   

The [applicant company's] ownership of the oil is confirmed by the interdependence
of the contracting parties, by the control that [the applicant company] had over them,
by the registration of the contracting parties on the territories with low-tax regime, by
the lack of activities by these entities at their place of registration, by the fact that the
accounting of these was carried by OOO Yukos-Invest or OOO Yukos-FBC,
companies officially dependant on [the applicant company], by the fact that the
accounting of these entities was filed from the addresses of [the applicant company]
and OOO Yukos-Moskva, by the fact that the bank accounts were opened in the same
banks owned by [the applicant company], by the presence and character of
commercial relations between [the applicant company] and the dependent entities, and
by the use of promissory notes and mutual offsetting between them.

 

Under the legislation then in force, such as section 3 of RF Law N. 1992-1 of
6 December 1991 'On value-added tax’, part 2 of Section 5 and section 4 of RF Law
No. 1759-1 of 18 October 1991 'On motorway funds in the Russian Federation’,
subpart 'ch’ of section 21 of RF Law No. 2118-1 of 27 December 1991 'On the basics.
of the tax system’, the sale of goods (works and services) give rise to an obligation to
pay value-added tax, motorway users’ tax, tax on the sale of oil and oil products, tax
on maintenance of the housing fund and objects of socio-cultural sphere.

Under part 1 of Article 39 of the Tax Code, sales are defined as the transfer of
property rights in respect of goods. Under subpart | and 2 of Article 209 of the Civil
Code (taking into account Article 11 of the Tax Code) the owner of goods in the
person who has the rights of ownership, use and disposal of his property, that is, the
one who has the right to carry out at his own discretion in respect of this property any

 

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 15

actions which are not against the law and other legal acts and do not breach the rights
and protected interests of other persons...

 

It follows that the person who in fact had the rights ownership, use and disposal of
his property and who, in view of these rights, actually, at his discretion exercises in
respect of his property any actions, including transfers of property to other persons ...
is the owner of this property.

   

Therefore, OAO NK Yukos, being a de facto owner of the oil, was under an
obligation to pay [the taxes], which has not been complied with in good time.

As it was established, Article 41 of the Tax Code establishes that profit is
economic gain in monetary form or in kind, which is taken into account if it is
possible to evaluate it and in so far as it can be assessed, and determined in
accordance with chapters 'Taxes in respect of the profits of natural persons’, ‘Taxes in
respect of the profits of organisations’, 'Taxes in respect of the capital prot of the
Tax Code of the Russian Federation. Under subparts | and 2 of section 2 of RF Law
No. 2116-1 of 27 December 1991 ‘On profit tax of enterprises and organisations’
which was then in force, the object of taxation is the gross profit of the enterpris
decreased (or increased) in accordance with the provisions of the present section. The
gross profit is the total of revenues (receipts) from the sale of products (works and
services), main assets (including land parcels), other property of the enterprise and the
profit derived from operations other than sales, decreased by the sum of expenses in
respect of these operations. The court established that the economic profit from the
sale of oil and oil products was perceived by OAO NK Yukos, it was incumbent on
[the applicant company] to comply with the obligation to pay profit tax.

    

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

Section 2 of RF Law No. 2030-1 of 13 December 1991 'On corporate property tax’
taxes the main assets, non-material assets, reserves and receipts which are indicated
on the taxpayer's balance sheet. It follows that the obligation to pay property tax was
incumbent on the person who was legally responsible for reflecting the main assets,
non-material assets, reserves and receipts on its balance sheet. Since it follows from
the materials of the on-site tax inspection that OAO NK Yukos was under such an
obligation, this taxpayer was also under an obligation to pay property tax.

   

 

 

The Constitutional Court of the RF in its decision of 25.07.2001 n. 138-0 stated that
it followed from the meaning of the norm contained in part 7 of Article 3 of the Tax
Code of the RF that there is a presumption of good faith of taxpayers. In order to
refute it and establish the bad faith of the taxpayer, the tax authorities have the right —
in order to strike a balance between the public and private interests — to carry out
necessary checks and bring subsequent claims in commercial courts which would
guarantee the payment of taxes to the budget.

In view of the above, the tax authorities ... have the right to carry out checks with a
view to establishing the de facto owner of the sold property and the de facto recipient
of the economic profit and also with a view to establishing his bad faith expressed i
the application of the tax evasion scheme. At the same time, the tax authorities
establish the de facto owner with regard to the actual relations between the parties to
the transaction irrespective of whether the persons had been declared as owners of the
property in the documents submitted during the tax inspections.

    
 

The circumstances indicating that OAO NK Yukos in fact had the rights of
ownership, use and disposal of its oil and oil products and, at its discretion carried out

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

 

in this connection any actions, including the sale, the transfer for proc:
through specially registered organisations dependant on OAO NK Yukos
by the materials of the case.

sing etc.
confirmed

 

  

 

In view of the above, the court does not accept the respondents’ arguments about the
unlawfulness and the lack of factual basis of the decision to levy additional taxes from
OAO NK Yukos as the de facto owner of the oil and oil products.

The respondent's argument that OAO NK Yukos had not perceived any economic
profit from the application of benefits by the entities mentioned in the decision of the
Ministry contradicts the materials of the case. The court had established that OAO NK
Yukos received economic profit in the form of unilateral transfers of cash, OAO NK
Yukos has created the Fund for Financial Support of the Production Development of
OAO NK Yukos [to this effect].

The argument of OAO NK Yukos that the Ministry is levying taxes in respect of
transactions “within the same owner” is unsupported, since the calculations of
additional taxes (except for the property tax in respect of which [this is inapplicable])
take into account also the expenses connected with the acquisition of the oil and oil
products.

 

  

The court does not accept the respondent's arguments that the tax authorities lacked
the power to levy taxes from OAO NK Yukos in respect of the sums ... perceived by
other organisations. The power of the tax authorities to bring proceedings in courts to
ensure the payment of taxes to the budget in cases of bad faith taxpayers is confirmed
by decision No. 138-O of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation, dated
25 July 2001. At the same time the bad faith of taxpayer OAO NK Yukos and the fact
that the proceeds from operations with oil and oil products is confirmed by the
materials of the case file.

 

 

The circumstances of the transactions of acquisition and sales of the oil and oil
products taken in their entirety established by the Appeal Court indicate the presence
of bad faith in the actions of OAO NK Yukos which was expressed in intentional
actions aimed at tax evasion by the application of unlawful schemes. In accordance
with part 2 of Article 110 of the Tax Code of the RF the tax offence is considered
intentional, if the person who has committed it knew about the unlawful character of
the actions (inactions), wished them or conscientiously admitted the possibility of
harmful consequences of such actions (inactions) taking place.

Since OAO NK Yukos intentionally committed action aimed at the tax evasion, and
its officers were aware of the unlawful character of such actions, wished or knowingly
admitted the possibility of harmful consequences due to such actions, OAO NK
Yukos has to be held liable under part 3 of Article 122 of the Tax Code of the RF for
the non-payment or incomplete payment of taxes due to the lowering of the taxable
base or incorrect calculation of the tax or other unlawful actions (inactions) committed
intentionally, in the form of a fine in the amount of 40 percent of the unpaid taxes.

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 17

 

Having repeatedly examined the case and checked the lawfulness and grounds of the
first instance judgment in full, having examined the evidence and having heard the
arguments of the parties, the Appeal Court came to the conclusion that the decision of
the Ministry dated 14.04.2004 ... is in compliance with the Tax Code as well as with
Federal laws and other laws on taxes ...

 

 

The claims for payment of taxes, interest surcharges and fines made in the decision
of the Ministry of 14.04.2004 ... are grounded, lawful and confirmed by the primary
documents of the materials of the inspection submitted to the court to justify them. ...”

 

55. The appeal judgment also responded to the applicant company's other
arguments. As regards the alleged breaches of the procedure and the lack of
time for the preparation of the defence at first instance, the court noted that it
had checked this allegation and that there had been no violation of procedure
at first instance and that in any event the applicant company had had ample
opportunities to study the evidence relied on by the Ministry both at the
Ministry's premises and in court. As regards the argument that the evidence
used by the Ministry was inadmissible, the court noted that the materials of
the case had been collected in full compliance with the requirements of the
domestic legislation. The court also agreed with the first instance court in that
the three years statutory time-limit had been inapplicable in the applicant's
case since the company had been acting in bad faith.

56. The first instance judgment, as upheld on appeal, came into force on
29 June 2004.

57. The applicant company had two months from the date of the delivery
of the appeal judgment to challenge it in third-instance cassation proceedings
(kaccayua).

(viii) Cassation proceedings

58. On 7 July 2004 the applicant company filed a cassation appeal against
the judgments of 26 May and of 29 June 2004 with the Federal Commercial
Court of the Moscow Circuit (“the Circuit Court”). The applicant company's
brief came to 77 pages and had 6 documents in annex. The arguments in the
brief were largely similar to those raised by the applicant company on appeal,
namely that the judgment was unlawful and unfounded, that the entities
mentioned in the report ought to have taken part in the proceedings, that the
trial court had had insufficient evidence to conclude that the applicant
company and other entities were interrelated, that the evidence used by the
trial court was unlawful, that the trial proceedings had not been adversarial
and that the principle of equality of arms had been breached. In addition, the
company alleged that it had had insufficient time to study the evidence and
had been unable to contest the evidence in the case, that the Ministry had
unlawfully applied to a court before the applicant company had an
opportunity to comply with the decision of 14 April 2004 voluntarily, that the
entities mentioned in the report had in fact been eligible for the tax
exemptions, that the rules governing tax exemption had been wrongly

18 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION

interpreted, that the Ministry's claims had been time-barred, that the company
had had insufficient time for the preparation of the appeal, and that the case
ought to have been examined by a court in Nefteyugansk.

59. A copy of the reasoned version of the appeal judgment of 29 June
2004 was attached to the brief.

60. It appears that on an unspecified date the Ministry, too, also
challenged the judgments of 26 May and 29 June 2004.

61. On 17 September 2004 the Circuit Court examined the cassation
appeals and upheld in substance the judgments of 26 May and 29 June 2004.

62. In respect of the applicant company's allegations of unfairness in the
appeal proceedings, the court noted that both defendant companies had had
ample opportunities to avail themselves of their right to bring appeals within
the statutory time-limit, as the appeal decision was not taken until 29 June
2004, which was more than thirty days from the date of the delivery of the
judgment of 26 May 2004. Furthermore, the court observed that the evidence
presented by the Ministry and examined by the lower courts was lawful and
admissible, and that it had been fully available to the defendant companies
before the commencement of the trial hearings. The court also noted that on
14 May 2004 the City Court specifically ordered the Ministry to disclose all
the evidence in the case, that this order has been complied with by the
Ministry and that, despite the fact that the evidence was voluminous, the
applicant company had had sufficient time to examine and challenge it
repeatedly throughout the proceedings between May and July 2004.

63. As regards the applicant company's complaint that the Ministry had
brought proceedings before the expiry of the time-limit for voluntary
compliance with the decision of 14 April 2004, the court noted that the
Ministry and lower courts had acted in compliance with Article 213 of the
Commercial Court Procedure Code, as there were irreconcilable differences
between the parties and, throughout the proceedings, the applicant company
had had insufficient cash to satisfy the Ministry's claims.

64. In respect of the applicant company's argument that the case should
have been tried by a court in Nefteyugansk, the court noted that the City
Court had had jurisdiction over the case under Article 54 of the Civil Code
and decision no. 6/8 of the Plenary Session of the Supreme Court and
Supreme Commercial Court of 1 July 1996.

65. On the merits of the case, the court noted that the lower courts had
reached reasoned conclusions that the applicant company was the effective
owner of all goods traded by the sham companies registered in low-tax areas,
that the transactions of these entities were in fact those of the applicant, that
neither the company nor the sham entities were eligible for the tax
exemptions and that the applicant company had perceived the entirety of the
resulting profits. The court upheld the lower courts’ conclusion that, acting in
bad faith, the applicant company had failed properly to declare its transactions
for the year 2000 and to return corresponding taxes, including value-added

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 19

tax, profit tax, motorway users' tax, property tax, tax on maintenance of the
residential fund and socio-cultural facilities and tax on the sale of fuel and
lubricants.

66. The court noted some arithmetical mistakes in the appeal judgment of
29 June 2004, increasing the penalty by RUB 1,158,254.40 (approximately
EUR 32,613) and reducing the default interest by RUB 22,939,931
(approximately EUR 645,917) accordingly.

(ix) Constitutional review

67. On an unspecified date the applicant company lodged a complaint
against the domestic courts' decisions in its case with the Constitutional
Court.

68. By decision of 18 January 2005 the Constitutional Court declared the
complaint inadmissible for lack of jurisdiction.

(x) Supervisory review

69. Simultaneously to bringing the cassation appeal, on 7 July 2004 the
applicant company also challenged the judgments of 26 May and 29 June
2004 by way of supervisory review before the Supreme Commercial Court of
Russia.

70. On 31 December 2004 the applicant company's case was accepted for
examination by the Supreme Commercial Court.

71. By a decision of 13 January 2005 the Supreme Commercial Court,
sitting with a bench of three judges, decided to relinquish jurisdiction in
favour of the Presidium of the Supreme Commercial Court. Addressing one
of the applicant company's arguments, the court noted that the lower courts
had decided that the three-year statutory time-bar was inapplicable in the case
at issue since the applicant company had been acting in bad faith. It further
noted that such an interpretation of the rules on the time-limits was not in line
with the existing legislation and case-law and that therefore the issue should
be resolved by the Presidium of the Supreme Commercial Court.

72. On 19 April 2005 the Presidium of the Supreme Commercial Court
referred the above-mentioned issue to the Constitutional Court and adjourned
the examination of the applicant company's supervisory review appeal
pending a ruling by the Constitutional Court.

73. By a decision of 14 July 2005 the Constitutional Court upheld
Article 113 of the Tax Code as compatible with the Constitution, having ruled
that the legal provisions on the statutory time-limits ought to be applied in all
cases without exception and irrespective of the applicant's conduct. The court
further mentioned that:

“... the provisions of Article 113 of the Tax Code of the Russian Federation in their
constitutional and legal sense and in the present legal context do not exclude that the
court may have a possibility in cases where the taxpayer impedes the tax supervision

 

20 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

and the carrying out of the tax inspections to excuse the tax authorities’ failure to bring
the proceedings on time ...”

“... In their constitutional and legal sense in the context of the present legal
regulation... [these provisions] mean that the running of the statutory time-bar in
respect of a person prosecuted for tax offences stops on the date of the production of
the tax audit report in which the supported facts of the tax offences revealed during
the inspection are mentioned and in which there are reference to the relevant articles
of the Tax Code or - in cases where there was no need in producing such a report -
from the moment on which the respective decision of the tax authority holding a
taxpayer liable of a tax offence was taken. ...”

74. The case was then returned to the Presidium of the Supreme
Commercial Court.

75. On 4 October 2005 the Presidium of the Supreme Commercial Court
examined and rejected the company's appeal. In respect of the company's
argument that the Ministry's claims were time-barred, the court noted that the
Ministry's tax audit report in the applicant's case had been completed on
29 December 2003 that is within the statutory three-year time-limit and that
thus the case was not time-barred.

(b) Enforcement measures relating to the 2000 Tax Assessment

76. Simultaneously with the determination of the case before the courts in
respect of the applicant company's tax liability for the year 2000, the parties
also took part in various enforcement proceedings.

(i) Attachment of the applicant's property

77. On 15 April 2004 the City Court accepted the Ministry's action in
respect of 2000 for consideration and attached the applicant company's assets,
excluding goods produced by the company and related cash transactions, as a
security for the claims. The court also issued writs of execution in this respect
(see paragraph 22).

78. By a decision of 16 April 2004 the bailiffs instituted enforcement
proceedings in connection with the attachment.

79. On the same day they executed the attachment order by informing the
applicant company and the holder of its corporate register, ZAO 'M-Reestr',
of the decision of 15 April 2004.

80. According to the Government, the applicant company impeded the
execution of the writs issued by the court by hiding its corporate register from
the bailiffs. In particular, they alleged that a few hours prior to the bailiffs’
visit, the applicant company had cancelled its contracts with ZAO 'M-Reestr'.
The register was then dispatched by ordinary post to a location in Russia so
that, over the next weeks, it could not be physically found and the execution
writs could not be enforced.

81. On 22 April 2004 the applicant company filed a court request to have
the attachment of the entirety of its assets replaced by the attachment of the

 

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 21

shares in OAO Sibirskaya neftyanaya kompaniya (“the Sibneft company”, a
major Russian oil company which had attempted unsuccessfully to merge
with the applicant company in 2003), which belonged to the applicant
company and was allegedly worth three times as much as the then liability.
The applicant company also alleged that the attachment order adversely
affected its proper functioning and invited the authorities to opt for less
intrusive measures, insisting on the lack of any risk of asset-stripping.

82. By a decision of 23 April 2004 the City Court examined and rejected
this request as unfounded. The court found no evidence that the interim
measures affected any of the company's production activities.

83. On 17 May 2004 the applicant company appealed against the decision
of 23 April 2004.

84. The outcome of court proceedings in respect of the applicant
company's appeal of 17 May 2004 is unclear.

85. On 23 April 2004 the City Court also examined the applicant
company's request for an injunction order against the attachment and rejected
it. The court noted that the attachment did not interfere with the company's
day-to-day operations and it was a reasonable measure aimed at securing the
Ministry's claims.

86. On 2 July 2004 the Appeal Court rejected the company's appeal and
upheld the judgment.

87. It does not appear that the applicant company brought cassation
proceedings in this respect.

(ii) Enforcement of the Tax Ministry's decision of 14 April 2004

88. In the meantime, on 7 May 2004 the applicant company applied to the
City Court with a separate action against the tax assessment of 14 April 2004,
seeking its invalidation (see paragraph 30 above). The company also
requested interim measures in this connection.

89. Following the applicant's request for interim measures, on 19 May
2004 the City Court stayed the enforcement of the Tax Ministry's decision of
14 April 2004, having noted that the Ministry could have enforced the
decision in the part relating to taxes and default interests even without waiting
for the outcome of the Ministry's claim (Article 46 of the Code of
Commercial Court Procedure). The court decided however that this might be
detrimental for the applicant company and stayed the decision of 14 April
2004 accordingly.

90. On 27 May 2004 the applicant company made a_ public
announcement that:

“.. it [was] under an injunction prohibiting it from selling any of its property,
including the shares owned by the company. Until the injunction is lifted, the
Company is unable to sell its assets in order to obtain liquid funds. Consequently, if
the Tax Ministry's efforts continue, we are very likely to enter a state of bankruptcy
before the end of 2004”.

 

22 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

91. It appears that the City Court's decision of 19 May 2004 to stay the
enforcement was appealed against by the Ministry. Having examined the
Ministry's arguments at the hearing of 23 June 2004, the Appeal Court
quashed the first-instance decision of 19 May 2004 as unlawful and rejected
the applicant company's request for interim measures as unfounded.

92. It does not appear that the applicant company appealed against this
decision before the Circuit Court.

(iii) Enforcement of the judgments concerning the 2000 Tax Assessment

93. As already mentioned earlier (paragraphs 40-57), by a judgment of
26 May 2004 the City Court found in favour of the Tax Ministry upholding
the Tax Assessment of 14 April 2004. The Tax Assessment was upheld by
the Appeal Court with minor reductions and became enforceable on 29 June
2004.

94. On 30 June 2004 the Appeal Court issued the writ of enforcement in
this respect. The applicant company was to pay RUB 47,958,133,380
(approximately EUR 1,358,914,565) in reassessed taxes,
RUB 32,190,430,314 (approximately EUR 912,129,842) in interest
surcharges and RUB 19,185,272,697 (approximately EUR 543,623,045) in
penalties.

95. On 30 June 2004 the bailiffs instituted enforcement proceedings based
on the above judgment, seized the applicant company's assets and gave it five
days to pay. The applicant company was informed that it would be liable to
pay enforcement fees of seven percent, totalling at RUB 6,953,375,547
(approximately EUR 197,026,920), in the event of failure to honour the debt
voluntarily.

96. On 7 July 2004 the applicant company challenged the bailiffs' decision
of 30 June 2004.

97. It argued that the decision to open enforcement proceedings had been
unlawful as it was in breach of the rules of bailiffs' territorial competence as
the enforcement ought to have taken place in Nefteyugansk and not in
Moscow, that the five-day term for voluntary compliance with the court
decisions had been too short and that the seizure had made such compliance
impossible.

98. On 30 July 2004 the City Court examined and rejected these claims as
groundless. The court ruled that the bailiffs had acted lawfully and that the
seizure of the company's assets did not interfere with its ability or inability to
honour its debts.

99. It does not appear that the company brought appeal proceedings
against this judgment.

100. In the meantime, on 1 July 2004 the bailiffs decided to seize
24 subsidiary companies belonging to the applicant company.

101. The applicant appealed against the decision in court.

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 23

102. By a first-instance judgment of 17 September 2004 the appeal was
rejected as unfounded. The judgment was produced on 20 September 2004.

103. The applicant did not appeal against the judgment before the Appeal
Court, though it did bring further appeal proceedings before the Circuit Court.

104. On 2 February 2005 the judgment was upheld by the Circuit Court.

105. In addition to the above attempts to stay the enforcement of the
judgments concerning the 2000 Tax Assessment, the applicant company, by a
letter of 5 July 2004, also suggested to the bailiffs that it repay its debts by
using Sibneft stock allegedly worth 4,050,000,000 United States dollars
(USD), citing its vertically integrated structure as a possible reason for
seeking to find the least intrusive solution as well as the need to honour its
contractual debts.

106. On 14 July 2004 the applicant company filed an action against the
bailiffs on account of their alleged failure to respond to the company's offer of
5 July 2004.

107. On 17 August 2004 the City Court rejected this action, having noted
that the failure to respond was lawful and within the scope of the bailiffs'
discretion. The court established that some of the steps undertaken by the
applicant company during the unsuccessful merger with the Sibneft company
had been contested in different set of proceedings as unlawful. In addition, the
applicant company's ownership of the Sibneft shares had been contested by
third parties in two different sets of proceedings. On the basis of these
findings, the court concluded that the bailiff did not breach the law by
ignoring the company's offer.

108. It does not appear that the applicant company appealed against the
judgment.

109. As set out above (paragraph 58), on 7 July 2004 the applicant
company filed a cassation appeal against the court judgments on the 2000 Tax
Assessment and at the same time it moved to stay the enforcement
proceedings. It argued that the company's assets were highly valuable, but
that it had insufficient cash to honour the debts immediately and that the
seizure of assets made any voluntary settlement impossible. The company
also argued that the enforcement of the court judgments in the case would
irreparably damage its business as a reversal of the enforcement would be
impossible.

110. By decision of 16 July 2004 the Appeal Court accepted the cassation
appeal and, having examined the motion to stay the enforcement, rejected it
as unsubstantiated and unfounded, as the circumstances referred to by the
applicant were irrelevant for the domestic law. The court noted that it would
be possible to reverse the enforcement as the plaintiff was the Treasury.

111. This decision was upheld by the Circuit Court on 4 August 2004.

112. On 8 October 2004 the applicant company announced that it would
comply with the City Court's judgment of 1 March 2004, which had
cancelled the issue of additional shares in the applicant company, used for

24 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

the purpose of acquiring Sibneft. The applicant company, acting in
compliance with the court order, instructed the registrar to return its
57.5 percent stake in Sibneft to its former owners.

(iv) Seven percent enforcement fee

113. By decision of 9 July 2004 the bailiffs levied an enforcement fee of
seven percent in respect of the company's failure to comply with the
execution writs of 30 June 2004 (see paragraph 95 above). The applicant
company was to pay RUB  6,848,291,175.45 (approximately
EUR 190,481,640)

114. On 19 July 2004 the applicant company challenged this decision in
court.

115. By decision of 3 August 2004 the City Court examined the
company's action and quashed the decision of 9 July 2004 as disproportionate
and unjustified. The court decided that the enforcement fee could only be
levied if the respondent had acted in bad faith and found that the bailiffs had
failed to examine this question. The court also noted that seven percent was
the highest possible rate and that the bailiffs' decision failed to explain why
the fee could not be lower. Among other things, the court referred to section 3
of the Ruling of the Constitutional Court No. 13-P of 30 July 2001.

116. Following an appeal by the Ministry, on 27 August 2004 the Appeal
Court quashed the decision of 3 August 2004 as erroneous and held that the
bailiffs' actions were lawful and justified. The court noted that the applicant
company had failed to demonstrate that it had taken any steps to meet the
liabilities. It further noted that the cash in the company's accounts was only
seized in certain specified amounts and that, over those amounts, the
company was free to function as usual. As regards the company's proposal to
proffer the Sibneft shares as payment, the court noted that this could not be
accepted, because the company's property rights in respect of these shares had
been questioned by a third party in a parallel set of proceedings. In addition,
the court noted that the applicant company had failed to use a remedy
provided in Article 324 of the Commercial Procedure Code.

117. The Circuit Court upheld the appeal decision on 6 December 2004.

(v) Overall debt in respect of 2000
118. Overall, in respect of 2000, the applicant company was ordered to
pay RUB 99,333,836,391 (approximately EUR 2,814,667,452)
(vi) Seizure of shares of the applicant company's subsidiary companies

119. On 14 July 2004 the bailiffs seized the shares of OAO
‘Yuganskneftegas, one of the applicant company's principal production
subsidiaries. The decision referred to the applicant company's inability to
meet its liabilities.

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 25

120. The applicant company appealed against this decision in court. With
reference to section 59 of the Enforcement Proceedings Act, it argued that the
bailiffs ought firstly to claim assets which were not involved in the
production process, secondly those goods and other values which were not
related to the production process and, thirdly, immovable objects, raw
material and other main assets relating to the production cycle. In addition,
the applicant company referred to Ruling No. 4 of the Plenary Supreme
Commercial Court “On certain questions arising out of seizure and
enforcement actions in respect of corporate shares”, dated 3 March 1999,
which suggested in respect of those companies which had been privatised by
the State as parts of bigger holding groups through the transfer of controlling
blocks of shares that the production cycle of the respective production unit
should be preserved as much as possible. The company further claimed that
the above ruling was applicable to the case at issue, that OAO
‘Yuganskneftegas was a major production unit and that the bailiffs had
produced no evidence that the assets and goods and other values not involved
in the production process were insufficient. In addition, it reiterated its offer
of the shares in Sibneft.

121. On 6 August 2004 the City Court examined and allowed the
applicant company's challenge of this seizure.

122. At the hearing the Ministry and bailiffs referred to sections 9 (5)
and 51 (1-4) of the Enforcement Proceedings Act and Government Decree
No. 934 “On seizure of securities” of 12 August 1998. They argued that,
under the applicable domestic law, the seizure should be made first in respect
of the cash-flow and then, under secti 46 (5) of the Enforcement
Proceedings, it would be open to the bailiffs to assess and seize the assets
depending on their liquidity. They countered the company's arguments by
saying that their references were invalid as they related to the other stage of
enforcement stage (the collection of debt and not the seizure as such).
Furthermore, they argued that Ruling No. 4 of the Plenary Supreme
Commercial Court was inapplicable since, in the case of Yuganskneftegas,
the State had transferred only 38 percent of the shares and not a controlling
block. With regard to the offer of Sibneft stock, the Ministry and bailiffs
argued that the applicant company's rights in respect of these shares had been
contested in separate sets of court proceedings and it was therefore risky to
accept them as a payment. Lastly, they informed the court that the applicant
company had recently hidden the registry records of its three major
subsidiaries, OAO Yuganskneftegas, OAO Samaraneftegas and OAO
Tomskneft, which, in their view, demonstrated the risk of possible asset-
stripping by the applicant company.

123. Having examined the parties’ submissions, the court upheld the
applicant company's arguments. It noted that the company's references to the
applicable domestic law were correct. With regard to the non-controlling
block argument, the court noted that at the time of transfer of the shares,

 

26 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

25 percent of shares were privileged and non-voting. For the remaining
75 percent of the voting stock, the 38 percent transferred by the State
constituted the controlling block. The court concluded that the decision of
14 July 2004 was unlawful and quashed it.

124. On 9 August 2004 the Ministry challenged the decision of 6 August
2004 on appeal.

125. On 18 August 2004 the Appeal Court quashed the decision, finding
that the first-instance court had erred both in law and fact. In particular, the
court confirmed that it was up to the bailiffs to choose the most liquid assets
and dispose of them with a view to honouring the company's huge debt. It
also noted that Ruling No. 4 of the Plenary Supreme Commercial Court was
inapplicable to the case at issue, as 25 percent of the Yuganskneftgas shares
had become privileged by a decision of 2001, and not through privatisation.

126. Following an appeal by the applicant company, on 25 October 2004
the Circuit Court upheld the decision of 18 August 2004.

127. The applicant company's attempts to bring supervisory review
proceedings against this decision proved unsuccessful.

128. The respective complaint was rejected by decision of the Supreme
Commercial Court dated 17 December 2004.

129. In addition to seizing the shares of OAO Yuganskneftegaz (see
paragraphs 119-128 above), on 14 July 2004 the bailiffs also seized the shares
of OAO Tomskneft-VNK and OAO Samaraneftegas, the applicant company's
two other principal production units.

130. The company's complaint against the seizure of OAO Tomskneft-
NK proved unsuccessful.

131. The City Court rejected an appeal as unfounded on 13 August 2004.

132. The applicant company did not contest the judgment in cassation
before the Appeal Court.

133. On 5 November 2004 the Circuit Court rejected the company's
cassation appeal in respect of the judgment of 13 August 2004. The court
noted that the seizure was intended to protect the creditor's claims and that
there was no indication that the seizure impeded the production cycle or
otherwise disturbed the normal functioning of the company.

134. The company also unsuccessfully complained about the seizure of its
shares in OAO Samaraneftegaz.

135. The City Court, acting as a first instance court, dismissed the appeal
on 2 September 2004.

136. The applicant company failed to appeal the judgment before the
Appeal Court, though did pursue the cassation proceedings.

137. On 18 January 2005 the Circuit Court upheld the judgment.

138. On an unspecified date the applicant company also offered to settle
the debt in fifteen monthly instalments.

139. On 12 August 2004 the City Court examined the applicant's request
to re-pay the 2000 Tax Assessment award in instalments and rejected it as

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 27

unfounded. The court noted, among other things, that the tax debt had
resulted from intentional tax evasion by the applicant company and that the
conduct of the debtor in court and during the enforcement proceedings
demonstrated that they did not intend to pay the debts voluntarily.

140. It does not appear that the company brought any appeal proceedings
in respect of this judgment.

141. On 23 August 2004 the applicant company announced that “to date
the Company has voluntarily paid over USD 700 million of 2000 tax
charge. Approximately another USD 800 million has been taken from the
Company through the collection process”.

2. Proceedings in respect of the applicant company's tax liability for
the year 2001

(a) Tax Assessment 2001

(i) Proceedings before the Ministry

142. By a decision of 2 September 2004 the Ministry issued a tax
assessment for the year 2001 (“the 2001 Tax Assessment”). This time the
applicant company had to pay RUB 50,759,436,900 (approximately
EUR 1,424,746,313) in tax arrears and RUB 28,520,204,254 (approximately
EUR 800,522,195) in default interest and RUB 40,607,549,520 in penalties
(approximately EUR 1,139,797,051). Since the applicant company had
recently been found guilty of a similar offence, the penalty was doubled.

(ii) The applicant company's request for court injunction

143. On 14 September 2004 the applicant company brought a court appeal
against the decision of 2 September 2004 and requested an injunction against
the immediate enforcement of this decision.

144. On 5 October 2004 the City Court turned down the request for an
injunction and on 13 October 2004 it issued execution writs in respect of the
Ministry's decision of 2 September 2004. The court referred to Information
Letter No. 83 of the Supreme Commercial Court of 13 August 2004 which
recommended that requests for interim measures in such situations be granted
only if an applicant could demonstrate some security for a creditor's future
claims. The court noted that, in the present case, the applicant company
clearly had insufficient cash to satisfy the creditor's claims and dismissed the
claims accordingly.

145. It appears that the judgment of 5 October 2004 was upheld by the
Appeal Court on 3 December 2004 and by the Circuit Court on 29 March
2005.

28 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,
(b) Enforcement measures relating to the 2001 Tax Assessment

(i) Enforcement of additional taxes and interest surcharges

146. As the 2001 Tax Assessment was similar to the 2000 Tax
Assessment, the Ministry decided to enforce it directly in the part relating to
additional taxes and interest surcharges, without taking the matter to the
courts. The applicant company was to pay the amounts due by 4 September
2004.

147. On 9 September 2004 the bailiffs instituted enforcement proceedings
in connection with the decision of 2 September 2004. The company was to
pay RUB 50,759,436,900 (approximately EUR 1,424,746,313) in tax arrears
and RUB 28,520,204,254 (approximately EUR 800,522,195) in default
interest.

148. It appears that the 2001 Tax Assessment in part relating to additional
taxes and interest surcharges was upheld by the City Court on 11 October
2004. The judgment of 11 October 2004 was upheld on appeal on
16 February 2005. The Circuit Court upheld the decisions of the lower courts
on 9 December 2005.

149. The applicant's request for an injunction pending these proceedings
was unsuccessful. The City Court rejected it in its judgment of 5 October
2004. The refusal was upheld by the Appeal Court on 3 December 2004 and
by the Circuit Court on 29 March 2005.

(ii) Enforcement of penalties

150. In so far as the 2001 Tax Assessment related to penalties, the
Ministry applied to the City Court to recover them on 3 September 2004.

151. It appears that on 11 October 2004 the action was examined and
granted by the City Court. The judgment in the case was produced on
15 October 2004.

152. According to the applicant company, its appeal against the judgment
of 11 October 2004 was rejected by the Appeal Court on 18 November 2004.
It appears that the Circuit Court upheld these two decisions on 15 November
2005.

153. On 19 November 2004 the bailiffs instituted enforcement
proceedings in respect of the Tax Assessment 2001 in part relating to
penalties. The company was to pay RUB 40,607,549,520 in penalties
(approximately EUR 1,139,797,051).

(iii) Seven percent enforcement fee in respect of additional taxes and interest
surcharges

154. On 20 September 2004 the bailiffs decided to impose a seven percent

enforcement fee in respect of the company's failure to abide by the 2001 Tax

Assessment in the part relating to taxes and interest surcharges. The applicant

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 29

company was to pay RUB _ 5,549,574,880.78 (approximately
EUR 155,693,193)

155. The resolution was served on the applicant company on 1 October
2004.

156. On 29 October 2004 the City Court examined and dismissed the
challenge of the decision of 20 September 2004 as groundless.

157. It does appear that the company pursued appeal proceedings.

158. On 1 December 2004 the company appealed in cassation against the
judgment of 29 October 2004.

159. The appeal was rejected by the Circuit Court on 3 March 2004.

(iv) Seven percent enforcement fee in respect of penalties

160. On 9 December 2004 the bailiff decided to impose a seven percent
enforcement fee in respect the company's failure to abide by the 2001 Tax
Assessment in the part relating to penalties. The company was to pay a seven
percent enforcement fee of RUB  7,102,488,295 or approximately
EUR 190,077,377.

161. On 23 December 2004 the company challenged this decision in
court.

162. On 3 February 2005 the City Court dismissed the action.

163. The applicant company failed to appeal the judgment of 3 February
2005.

164. The Circuit Court upheld the judgment of 3 February 2005 on
16 June 2005.

(iv) Overall debt in respect of 2001

165. Overall, in respect of 2001 the applicant company was ordered to pay
RUB 132,539,253,849.78 (approximately EUR 3,710,836,129).

3. Proceedings in respect of the applicant company's tax liability for
the year 2002

(a) Tax Assessment 2002

166. On 29 October 2004 the Ministry produced an audit report in respect
of the applicant company's activities for the year 2002. The report was
received by the company on 1 November 2004.

167. On 16 November 2004 the Ministry took a decision to levy further
tax liabilities, this time in respect of the year 2002 (“the 2002 Tax
Assessment”). The applicant company was to pay RUB 90,286,552,485
(approximately EUR 2,425,825,387) in taxes, RUB 31,485,110,355.58
(approximately EUR 845,944,140) in default interest and
RUB 72,040,907,796 (approximately EUR 1,935,600,133) in penalties.

30 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

168. The decision established the use of the same scheme of tax evasion
(in respect of profit tax, value-added tax, corporate property tax and
motorway users' tax) as in the decisions concerning the years 2000 and 2001.
It mentioned that the company had carried out its activities through OOO
Ratmir, OOO Alta-Treid, ZAO Yukos-M, OOO Yu-Mordoviya, OOO
Ratibor, OOO Petroleum treyding, OOO Evoyl, OOO Fargoyl, most of which
had also been used by the company in previous years. The entities in
question, acting in breach of Article 575 of the Civil Code, which prohibits
grants and gifts between independently functioning commercial entities,
transferred the entirety of their profits unilaterally to a fund owned and
controlled by the applicant company. The decision mentioned that the
transfers had been wrongly reflected in the applicant company's financial
accounting, that the company had failed to explain the origin of these funds
and failed to take these sums into account for tax purposes. Accordingly, the
applicant company failed to pay taxes in respect of these amounts.

169. The decision mentioned several other mistakes in the company's tax
declarations. In particular, the tax in respect of the company's securities
transactions was wrongly calculated, there were many general mistakes in the
company's financial accounting, there were some mistakes in the company's
request for reimbursement of the VAT on export operations (on one occasion
the company failed to submit the required sales contract; it also mentioned
one contract but received the money on the basis of a different contract; on
some occasions the company failed to submit documents proving customs
clearance, indicated wrongly calculated sums, made multiple mistakes in
VAT export documents). There were further multiple mistakes in tax
deductions in respect of the internal VAT.

170. The decision also established that the company had used sham
entities to lower its group taxes, that the entities and the company's
subsidiaries had entered into transactions with reduced prices, that on some
occasions the company had declared the extracted oil as “hydrocarbon liquid”
in order to lower the applicable price even further, that there were no cash
transactions between the entities and subsidiaries and that the company's own
promissory notes and mutual offsetting had been used instead and that the
whole set-up, which had no economic purpose other than tax evasion, had
resulted in massive tax evasion by the applicant company. The decision also
noted that use of tax concessions in the Republic of Mordoviya and the Evenk
Autonomous District by the sham entities had been unlawful, because they
had failed to qualify for the exemptions and also because they had been sham
companies. The decision was very detailed in respect of the composition and
all activities of the sham entities: the Ministry analysed the entirety of their
activities month by month.

171. The applicant company had until 17 November 2004 to meet the
debts voluntarily.

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 31
(b) Enforcement measures relating to the 2002 Tax Assessment

(i) Enforcement of additional taxes and interest surcharges

172. By decision of 18 November 2004 bailiffs proceeded to enforcement
of the decision of 16 November 2004 in so far as it related to additional taxes
and interest surcharges.

173. It appears that the City Court examined and, in the most part,
rejected the applicant company's appeal on 23 December 2004 for similar
reasons as those mentioned in relation to the tax assessment for 2000. The
court declared the Ministry's conclusions partly unfounded and reduced the
company's tax liability by RUB 325,628,742 (approximately
EUR 8,752,543), its default interest payments by RUB 98,515,758
(approximately EUR 2,647,995) and the penalty by RUB 851,419,688
(approximately EUR 22,885,227).

174. This decision was upheld by the Appeal Court on 5 March 2005 and
the Circuit Court on 30 June 2005.

175. On 28 December 2004 the applicant company also appealed against
the Ministry's decision in respect of the year 2002 in so far as it had ordered
that the tax debts be collected directly.

176. It appears that on 7 February 2005 the City Court examined and
rejected the claim as unfounded. The judgment was upheld on appeal on
4 April 2005. The Circuit Court upheld the decisions of the lower courts on
15 June 2005.

(ii) Enforcement of penalties

177. In so far as the 2002 Tax Assessment related to penalties, the
Ministry applied to the City Court on 22 November 2004.

178. On an unspecified date the City Court granted the Ministry's action.

179. On 28 March 2005 the company appealed against the judgment.

180. The outcome of these proceedings is unclear.

(iii) Seven percent enforcement fee in respect of additional taxes and interest
surcharges

181. On 9 December 2004 the bailiffs decided to impose a seven percent
enforcement fee in respect of the company's failure to comply voluntarily
with the 2002 Tax Assessment in the part relating to additional taxes and
surcharge interests.

182. On 23 December 2004 the company appealed against this decision in
court.

183. On 3 February 2005 the City Court judgment dismissed the appeal.

184. It does not appear that the company submitted an appeal in cassation
against that judgment.

32 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

(iv) Overall debt in respect of 2002

185. Overall in respect of the year 2002 (excluding seven percent
enforcement fee), the applicant company was ordered to pay
RUB 192,537,006,448.58 (approximately EUR 4,344,549,434).

(v) Written information report communicated by ZAO PricewaterhouseCoopers
Audit to the applicant company's management in respect of the year 2002

186. In their observations of 15 April 2005 the Government submitted a
copy of a report communicated to the applicant company's management by its
auditor ZAO PricewaterhouseCoopers Audit. The applicant company did not
comment on the contents of the report.

187. In contrast to “ordinary” audit reports, which were made public, the
internal information report was produced exclusively for the information of
the company's management.

188. The report noted specifically that the company's “Fund for Financial
Support of the Production Development of OAO Neftyanaya kompaniya
YUKOS” was in breach of the domestic law in that the relevant legislation
disallowed unilateral transfers and gifts between commercial entities. It also
noted that the company's accounting policy in respect of the operations
involving promissory notes had been incompatible with the legislation in
force and provided a distorted view of the company's activities.

4. Proceedings in respect of the applicant company's tax liability for
the year 2003

(a) Tax Assessment 2003

189. By a decision of 6 December 2004 the Ministry levied tax liabilities
for the year 2003 (“the 2003 Tax Assessment”), consisting of
RUB 86,228,187,852 (approximately EUR  2,327,114,103) in taxes,
RUB 15,235,930,657.66 (approximately EUR 411,185,136) in default interest
and RUB 68,939,326,976.4 (approximately EUR 1,860,524,778) in penalties.

190. The decision established that the company was guilty of having
evaded taxes (in particular, value-added tax, profit tax and advertising tax) by
using the same arrangement as in previous years. The decision mentioned the
following entities registered either in the Republic of Mordoviya or the Evenk
Autonomous District: OOO Yu-Mordoviya, ZAO Yukos-M, OOO Alta-
Treyd, OOO Ratmir, OOO Energotreyd, OOO Makro-Treyd, OOO Fargoyl,
and OOO Evoyl. It was alleged that the entities were sham and that they had
made unilateral transfers to the applicant company, in breach of Article 575
of the Civil Code, that the company had failed to reflect the transferred
amounts as its profits, to account for them and to pay taxes in this connection
and that the company had used lowered prices to avoid the payment of taxes.

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 33,

The decision made a detailed contract-by-contract analysis of the transactions
of the sham entities.

191. The decision also mentioned that some of the company's expenses
were unjustifiably deducted from the company's taxable income, that the
company failed to account for some of its operations with promissory notes,
that there were some mistakes in calculation of the company's VAT in
operations and that the company had evaded payment of advertising tax in
Moscow.

192. The applicant company had one day to comply with the decision,
until 7 December 2004.

(b) Enforcement measures relating to the 2003 Tax Assessment

(i) Enforcement of additional taxes and interest surcharges

193. On 9 December 2004 the bailiffs proceeded to enforcement of the
decision of 6 December 2004 in so far as it related to taxes and interest
surcharges.

194. It appears that on 28 April 2005 the City Court dismissed the
company's challenge of the 2003 Tax Assessment in the part relating to
additional taxes and surcharge interests. In respect of the company's request
to reimburse the export VAT on operations conducted by the sham entities,
the court noted the request was unsubstantiated and also lodged out of time.
In particular, the company had failed to submit a proper claim with monthly
calculations and evidence that the goods in question had indeed been
exported. The court also addressed the company's argument that
Article 75 (3) of the Tax Code prevented the authorities from levying the
interest surcharges. It noted that the provision in question only applied to
cases in which the sole reason for the taxpayer's inability to pay tax debts was
the seizure of its assets and cash funds. On the facts, the applicant company
was unable to pay because it had insufficient funds and not because its assets
were frozen. The court concluded that the company's argument was
unfounded.

195. The judgment was upheld on appeal on 16 August 2005.

196. The applicant company appealed on cassation.

197. On 5 December 2005 the Circuit Court upheld the decisions of the
lower courts.

(ii) Enforcement of penalties
198. On 17 February 2005 the Ministry applied to the City Court to
collect the fines mentioned in the 2003 Tax Assessment.
199. The outcome of these proceedings is unclear.

34 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

(iii) Overall debt in respect of the year 2003

200. Overall, in respect of 2003 (excluding the seven percent enforcement
fee) the applicant company was ordered to pay RUB 170,403,445,486.06
(approximately EUR 4,598,824,017).

5. Forced auctioning of OAO Yuganskneftegas

201. On 20 July 2004 the Ministry of Justice announced the forthcoming
evaluation and sale of OAO Yuganskneftegas as a part of its ongoing
enforcement procedures.

202. On 22 July 2004 the applicant company announced that “the
company management [was] currently making every effort to raise
additional funds in order to repay, as soon as possible, the tax liability and
to finance current operations. However, should those efforts prove
unsuccessful and Yuganskneftegas [be] sold, in the present circumstances,
the management of the Company would be compelled to announce the
bankruptcy of Russia's largest oil company”.

(a) Valuation report of 17 September 2004

203. On 17 September 2004 the valuation commissioned by the bailiffs
and the Ministry of Justice from Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein, the
investment branch of Dresdner Bank AG (working in Russia as ZAO
Dresdner bank), for the purposes of the enforcement proceedings, estimated
that 100 percent of shares in OAO Yuganskneftegas was worth between
USD 15.7 and 18.3 billion, excluding the pending and probable tax liabilities
of this entity.

204. The report evaluated 100 percent of the price of OAO
‘Yuganskneftegaz as a separate entity and, having deduced its corresponding
obligations, calculated the cost of its shares, on the basis of which it would be
possible to calculate the price of one share in OAO Yuganskeftegaz.

205. It was specifically mentioned in the report that the valuation was not
an opinion concerning the attainable price in the event of the sale of OAO
Yuganskneftegaz or any kind of recommendation concerning the starting bid
of the auction in the event of the sale of Yuganskneftegaz by the Ministry of
Justice or any other State institution, or any recommendation concerning
particular actions to be undertaken by the Ministry of Justice with a view to
levying the judicially determined or estimated amount of the applicant
company's tax debt.

206. Among the basic risks affecting the price of OAO Yuganskneftegaz,
the report mentioned the tax claims, the validity of oil extraction licences,
future oil prices, export quotas etc. The report also mentioned that the price of
OAO Yuganskneftegaz as a part of the applicant company could be
substantially different from the price of OAO Yuganskneftegaz as a separate
entity. The report also mentioned various valuations of OAO

 

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 35

Yuganskneftegaz made by third parties, including investment institutions and
banks, and ranging from USD 9 to 22 billion. It also mentioned that, because
of the size of OAO Yuganskneftegaz, not many buyers would be financially
capable of acquiring it.

207. The valuation (between USD 15.7 and 18.3 billion) did not take
account of already pending and probable tax claims against OAO
Yuganskneftegaz. If and when lodged, these claims would “substantially
influence the assessment” of the equity of OAO Yuganskneftegaz. The claims
already announced (as on that date) were USD 951.3 million.

208. To carry out the valuation, the report used the following three
methods: the method of discounted cash flows, a method based on the
analysis of comparable transactions, and a method based on the analysis of
comparable publicly-held companies.

209. The report also specifically noted that:

“the decision concerning the starting bid of the auction is a tactical one and should
strike a balance between the desire to reach the highest price on the one hand, and the
need to attract the maximum number of potential buyers on the other. Because of this,
the starting bid is most likely to be different from the assessment of the price.”

 

(b) Service of the valuation report on the applicant company on 13 October

210. A copy of the valuation report was served on the applicant company
on 13 October 2004.

211. It does not appear that the applicant company contested the
valuations made in the report before the courts.

212. On 21 October 2004 the bailiffs confirmed to the Ministry that they
had collected 79,584,690,127 RUB (approximately 2,183,447,331 euros).

(c) The company's reply of 4 November 2004

213. On 4 November 2004 the applicant company responded to the
valuation report. They disagreed with the decision to valuate and sell OAO
‘Yuganskneftegaz, and would have preferred to sell its other assets first. The
applicant company informed the bailiffs that it had already honoured a major
part of the debt and that the remaining sum was USD 2.5 billion. According
to the company, it would be more reasonable to lift the seizure and let it
dispose of its minor assets in order to honour the remaining debt.

214. As regards Yuganskneftegas, the company referred to independent
valuations by ZAO Dresdner Bank and JP Morgan PLC, valuing the
subsidiary at “no less than USD 14 billion” and “between USD 16.1 billion
and USD 22.1 billion, including tax liabilities” respectively.

215. The letter mentioned that the Ministry had brought tax claims against
OAO Yuganskneftegaz totalling USD 2.903 billion.

36 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION

(d) The bailiffs' decision of 18 November 2004

216. On 18 November 2004 the bailiffs noted that the company's debt to
the Ministry on that date was RUB 204,902,386,620 (approximately
EUR 5,506,781,584 or USD 7,147,250,717). Having referred to sections 4,
46 (6), 54 (2) and 88 of the Enforcement Proceedings Act, the bailiffs decided
to sell 78.79 percent of the shares in OAO Yuganskneftegas at an auction
which would take place on 19 December 2004. The published minimum
bidding price for 78.79 percent of the shares in OAO Yuganskneftegas was
RUB 246,753,447,303.18 (approximately USD 8.65 billion).

217. The sale was conferred on the Russian Fund of Federal Property
(“the Property Fund”), a specialised State Institution in charge of organising
sales of federal property and the property of those who had debts towards the
State. The Fund was to sell the shares in the quantity necessary to meet the
debt.

(e) Court action against the decision of 18 November 2004

218. The decision of 18 November 2004 was challenged in court on
26 November 2004.

219. It appears that on 3 December 2004 the City Court rejected the
appeal against the decision of 18 November 2004.

220. Apparently, the applicant company appealed in cassation against the
judgment on 11 January 2005.

221. It appears that on 21 January and 3 May 2005 the judgment was
upheld on appeal and in cassation respectively.

222. It appears that the applicant company argued that the valuation report
had failed to give a market valuation of the asset and that the decision of
18 November 2004 failed to mention a_ specific price for OAO
‘Yuganskneftegaz. In response, the courts noted that 43 ordinary and
13 privileged shares in OAO Yuganskneftegaz had been seized by the bailiffs
in satisfaction of the company's liability, that the shares had been valued by
ZAO Dresdner Bank and that the applicant had been informed about all of the
bailiffs' actions in the course of the enforcement proceedings. They also noted
that the seizure of shares in OAO Yuganskneftegaz had previously been
declared lawful, that the valuation by ZAO Dresdner Bank was not contested
by the applicant in accordance with the special procedure provided for by the
legislation in force, and that the bailiffs had properly indicated the amount of
the company's debt and requested the Fund to sell the amount of shares
necessary to satisfy the debt.

(f) Announcement about the sale of OAO Yuganskneftegaz

223. In the meantime, on 19 November 2004, the Russian Gazette, an
official newspaper of the Government, published the announcement about the
sale of 78.79 percent of shares in OAO Yuganskneftegaz at a public auction

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 37

organised by the Property Fund. The only two conditions for participating in
the auction were to file an application between 19 November and
18 December 2004 and to make a deposit payment.

224. It appears that OOO Gazpromneft, ZAO Intercom and OAO First
Venture Company filed applications to bid at the auction.

225. The media reported that OAO Gazprom, a parent company of O0O
Gazpromneft, had begun negotiating a financing arrangement with a
consortium of international banks to finance its bid at the auction.

(g) The applicant company’s application for bankruptcy in the United States
of America and its request for injunctive relief

(i) Filing of bankruptcy petition and request for injunctive relief

226. On 14 December 2004 the applicant company filed a voluntary
petition under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code in the U.S.
Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of Texas, Houston Division
(“the U.S. Bankruptcy Court”).

227. Simultaneously, the applicant company filed a request for
injunctive relief, pursuant to Section 105 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code in
order, among other things, to enforce the automatic stay set out in
Section 362(a) of the Bankruptcy Code by enjoining certain parties from
participating in the Yuganskneftegaz Auction.

(ii) Scope of automatic stay

228. Under U.S. law, an automatic stay went into immediate effect when
the company filed for bankruptcy. The automatic stay protected the
company's assets by preventing the creditors from collecting claims that
arose prior to the bankruptcy filing or from taking “possession” or “control”
of the applicant's property covered under the filing.

(iii) Temporary restraining order of 16 December 2004

229. On 16 December 2004, having examined the company's request,
the U.S. Bankruptcy Court issued a temporary restraining order barring
certain specific entities from taking any actions with respect to the shares in
OAO Yuganskneftegaz, including participation in the auction.

230. The entities mentioned in the order were (a) the three companies
registered to bid at the Auction, including OOO Gazpromneft, ZAO
Intercom and OAO First Venture Company, (b) six western financial
institutions that had announced their intention to fund OOO Gazpromneft's
bid at the auction (ABN Amro, BNP Paribas, Calyon, Deutsche Bank, JP
Morgan and Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein) and (c) those persons in
active concert or participation with them.

38 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

(iv) The outcome of bankruptcy proceedings in the U.S.

231. On 24 February 2005 the U.S. Bankruptcy Court dismissed the
applicant company's petition for bankruptcy with reference to
Section 1112 (b) of U.S. Bankruptcy Code which gave the court discretion
to dismiss a case “in the best interest of the creditors and the estate”.

232. The court noted that most of the applicant company's assets were
oil and gas within Russia, so that the court's ability to carry out a re-
organization without the cooperation of the Russian government was
extremely limited, that the applicant company sought to substitute U.S. law
in place of Russian, European Convention and/or international law, that the
applicant company had commenced proceedings in other fora, including the
European Court of Human Rights, and the court did not feel that it was
uniquely qualified or more able that these other fora to consider the issues
presented. Lastly, the court noted that the vast majority of the business and
financial activities of the applicant company continued to occur in Russia
and that the applicant company was one of the largest producers of
petroleum products in Russia. The court held that “the sheer size of [the
applicant company] and its impact on the entirety of the Russian economy
weighs heavily in favour of allowing resolution in a forum in which
participation of the Russian government is assured”.

(h) Auction of 19 December 2004

233. On 19 December 2004 the Property Fund auctioned 78.79 percent of
the shares in OAO Yuganskneftegaz. It appears that media reporters were
able to attend the auction.

234. There were two participants in the auction, OOO Baykalfinansgrup
and OOO Gazpromneft. OOO Baikalfinansgrup, the only bidder in the
auction, made two bids, first of USD 8.65 billion and then of USD 9.3 billion.
It appears that whilst taking part in the auction OOO Gazpromneft was
prevented from bidding by the injunction of 16 December 2004 (see
paragraphs 229-230 above).

(i) The decisions and reports concerning the outcome of the auction

235. On 21 December 2004 the Ministry of Justice issued a report
accepting that the Property Fund had properly carried out the services due
under the contract of 18 November 2004.

236. On 21 December 2004 the Property Fund publicly reported the sale
of the shares in OAO Yuganskneftegaz.

237. On 31 December 2004 the bailiffs issued a resolution confirming the
results of the auction. The resolution stated that OOO Baykalfinansgrup had
won the auction for 43 shares in OAO Yuganskneftegaz (78.79 percent of its
stock) for RUB 260,753,447,303.18 (approximately EUR 6,896,341,940 or

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 39

USD 9,396,960,842). By the time the decision was taken, the money had
already been transferred to the bailiffs.

(j) Takeover of OOO Baykalfinansgrup by OAO Rosneft

238. According to press reports of 31 December 2004, OAO Rosneft, a
State-owned oil company, acquired OOO Baikalfinansgrup and thus took
control of OAO Yuganskneftegas.

(k) Court proceedings in connection with the auction

239. It appears that on 31 May 2005 the applicant company filed an
action in the City Court to annul the auctioning of 43 shares in OAO
Yuganksneftegas and the deed of sale. It also claimed damages in excess of
RUB 324 billion.

240. The outcome of these proceedings is unclear.

6. Bankruptcy proceedings

241. It does not appear that any enforcement measures took place in
respect of the applicant company after the auctioning of OAO
Yuganskneftegaz and until September 2005.

242. On 8 September 2005 a consortium of foreign banks represented by
the French bank Société Générale (“the banks”) filed an application with the
City Court for recognition and enforcement of an English High Court
judgment ordering the applicant company to re-pay the contractual debt of
USD 482 million.

243. On 22 September 2005, at the banks' request, the bailiffs ordered to
seize the applicant company's property.

244. In October 2005 the applicant company challenged this order.

245. On 30 November 2005 the City Court rejected the appeal as
groundless.

246. The first-instance judgment was upheld by the Appeal Court and the
Circuit Court on 27 February and 12 May 2006 respectively.

247. In the meantime, on 28 September 2005, the City Court allowed
recognition and enforcement of the English High Court judgment.

248. On 5 December 2005 the Circuit Court granted the applicant
company's cassation appeal and quashed the judgment of 28 September 2005.
It remitted the case for a fresh hearing.

249. On 21 December 2005, having re-examined the case, the City Court
allowed the banks' claims.

250. On 25 January 2006 the applicant company appealed against the
judgment of 21 December 2005.

251. On 2 March 2006 the Circuit Court dismissed the appeal.

40 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION

252. It appears that on 13 December 2005 the banks reached an agreement
with the Rosneft company to sell to the latter the applicant company's debt to
the banks.

253. On 9 March 2006 the banks lodged a petition with the City Court to
declare the applicant company bankrupt.

254. On 14 March 2006 the banks notified the City Court about the
decision to sell the debts owed by the applicant company to Rosneft.

255. On 28 March 2006 bankruptcy proceedings were initiated against the
applicant company upon the banks' petition. It appears that the Ministry
decided to join the proceedings as one of the bankruptcy creditors in respect
of remaining tax debts of the 2000-2003 Tax Assessments still owed by the
applicant company.

256. On 29 March 2006 the City Court substituted Rosneft in the place of
the banks as a bankruptcy creditor. By the same decision the court imposed a
supervision order on the applicant company and appointed Mr Eduard
Rebgun as the company's interim receiver. It also prohibited the company's
management from disposing of its property over a value of RUB 30 million.

257. On 6 and 7 April 2006 the company appealed against the decision of
29 March 2006 on all three points.

258. On 27 April 2006 the Appeal Court dismissed the appeals.

259. On 21 June 2006 the applicant company appealed against the lower
courts’ decisions to the Circuit Court. The outcome of these proceedings is
unclear.

260. On 21 April 2006 the Ministry submitted a claim to the City Court,
seeking to be included in the list of the company's creditors for the amount of
353,766,625,235.66 RUB (approximately EUR 10,435,809,153), along with
2,118 pages of documentation. The claim was the company's reassessed tax
liability for the year 2004.

261. In June 2006 the City Court made a number of rulings concerning the
formation of the list of creditors. In particular, on 1 and 7 June 2006 the City
Court held hearings on the claim. On 14 June 2006 the final hearing of the
claim was held. The court allowed the claims in its entirety and dismissed the
application for stay.

262. On 21 June 2006 the City Court delivered a full version of the
judgment of 14 June 2006. It decided to include the Ministry in the list of the
company's creditors for the amount claimed and refused to stay the
proceedings.

263. On 3 and 6 July the applicant company appealed against the
judgment of 14 June 2006 concerning the allowed claims.

264. On 4, 7 and 11 August 2006 the Appeal Court heard the company's
arguments.

265. On the latter date the Appeal Court dismissed the company's appeal.

266. It appears that on 18 August 2006 the Appeal Court delivered a full
version of the appeal decision.

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION 41

267. On 25 July 2006 the Committee of Creditors rejected the
rehabilitation plan offered by the management and recommended the
company's liquidation.

268. On 31 July 2006 the applicant company appealed against this
decision.

269. On 4 August 2006 the City Court examined the company's situation,
declared that the company was bankrupt and dismissed its management. The
court appointed Mr E. Rebgun as the applicant company's trustee. It also
refused the company's request to stay the proceedings.

270. Both parties appealed on 15 August 2006

271. The judgment was upheld on appeal and entered into force on
26 September 2006.

272. It appears that on 22 August 2006 Mr E. Rebgun revoked the
authority of all counsel appointed by the company's previous management.

273. On 12 November 2007 the City Court examined the applicant's
company's situation, heard the report of Mr E. Rebgun and decided to
terminate the liquidation proceedings. The applicant company ceased to exist.

274. On 21 November 2007 a certificate was issued to the effect that the
applicant company had been liquidated on the basis of the court decision.

275. It appears that a company Glendale Group Limited and Yukos
Capital S.A.R.L. contested the decision of 12 November 2007 before the
Appeal Court. The appeal of Glendale Group was declared inadmissible for
the failure to submit it on time, whilst the appeal of Yukos Capital S.A.R.L.
has been accepted for examination. The hearing in this respect was scheduled
by the Appeal Court on 19 November 2007.

276. The outcome of these proceedings remains unclear.

B. Relevant domestic law and practice

1. Tax liability

(a) General provisions

277. According to Article 57 of the Constitution of Russia, everyone is
liable to pay taxes and duties established by law.

278. Article 44 of the Tax Code of 31 July 1998 No. 146-FZ (as in force
at the relevant time) states that an obligation to pay a tax or a duty arises,
alters or ceases in accordance with the present Code and other legislative
acts on taxes and fees.

279. Articles 45 and 80 of the Tax Code provide that, as a general rule,
taxpayers must comply with their obligation to pay a tax on their own
initiative, and define a tax declaration as the written statement of taxpayers
on their revenues and expenses, sources of revenue, tax benefits and the

42 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

calculated sum of the tax, as well as other data related to calculation and
payment of the tax.

280. Under Article 45, in the event of non-payment or incomplete
payment of the tax in due time, the tax authorities may levy the tax liability
directly from the taxpayer's bank account.

281. Article 11 (2) of the Tax Code defines a branch of an organisation
as a geographically separate department, with stable employment posts.

(b) Tax inspections

282. Under Articles 82 and 87 of the Tax Code, the tax authorities may
carry out documentary and on-site tax inspections of taxpayers. Such
inspections may cover only the three calendar years of the taxpayer's
activity directly preceding the year of inspection. In exceptional cases the
authorities are allowed to carry out repeated on-site tax inspections. Such
cases include, among other things, on-site inspections conducted by way of
supervision of activities of the tax authority that conducted the initial audit
(Article 87 (3) of the Code).

283. Under Article 100 (5) of the Tax Code a taxpayer has two months to
file a detailed reply to the report drawn up by the tax authorities on the
outcome of the tax inspection.

2. Applicable taxes

(a) General provisions

284. Article 38 of the Tax Code provides that objects of taxation may be
the operations of retailing of goods, works and services, property, profit,
income, value of retailed goods, works and services or other objects having
cost, quantitative or physical parameters on the existence of which the tax
legislation bases the obligation to pay tax.

285. Article 39 of the Code defines retailing of goods, works and
services as, inter alia, the transfer (including exchange of services, works
and goods) in return for compensation of property rights in respect of goods
and results of works from one person to another, as well as the rendering of
services from one person to another in exchange for compensation.

286. Article 41 of the Code defines profits as economic gains in
monetary form or in kind.

(b) Value-added tax

(i) Before the entry into force of the Second Part of the Tax Code on I January
001

287. Section 3 of RF Law No. 1992-1 of 6 December 1991 “On Value-
Added Tax” (as in force at the relevant time) subjects to value-added

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 43

taxation, among other things, the turnover generated by the retailing of
goods, works and services on the territory of Russia, the rates of which
range between 10 percent and 20 percent. Under section 5 of the Law,
exported goods are exempt from payment of the tax. The exemption becomes
effective only if the taxpayer properly justifies the claim. Until these
documents are filed, the tax remains payable under the non-export rate.

288. Letter No. B3-8-05/848, 04-03-08 of the State Tax Service of Russia
and the Ministry of Finance, dated 21 December 1995, stated that taxpayers
had to file the following documents to justify the tax exemption: a contract
concluded between the legal personality taxpayer registered in Russia with its
foreign partner, proof of payment in respect of the goods, a customs
declaration bearing an appropriate mark of the customs body confirming the
export of goods from the customs territory of Russia.

(ii) After the entry into force of the Second Part of the Tax Code on I January

289. In respect of the value-added tax (“VAT”), the applicable tax rate is
zero percent if the traded goods are placed in an “export” customs regime and
physically removed from the customs territory of the Russian Federation
(Article 164 (1) of the Tax Code). In addition, the taxpayer may claim a
refund of the “incoming” VAT already paid in respect of the exported goods.

290. For the zero rate to become effective and in order to claim the VAT
refund, it is necessary to justify the claim by filing the following documents
with the tax authorities (Article 165 of the Tax Code): the export contract
concluded between the taxpayer and the foreign buyer, a bank statement
confirming receipt of funds from the foreign buyer by a Russian bank duly
registered with the tax authorities, a relevant customs declaration bearing the
stamp of the customs bodies confirming the export of the goods from the
customs territory of Russia, and copies of relevant transport bills and shipping
documents bearing the stamps of the customs bodies confirming the export of
goods from the customs territory of Russia.

291. The relevant documents should be filed with the competent tax
authority within 180 days from the date of the customs clearance of the goods
in question (Article 165 (9) of the Tax Code). Until these documents are filed,
the tax remains payable under the non-export rate.

(c) Motorway fund tax

292. Section 5 (2) of RF Law No. 1759-1 of 18 October 1991 “On
motorway funds in the Russian Federation” provides for a one percent
motorway users’ tax from the turnover of the retail of goods, works and
services, payable by all motorway users. Section 4 also makes subject to a
25 percent tax the amount of retailing (excluding VAT) of the companies
trading fuels and lubricants.

293. This tax was abolished from 1 January 2003.

44 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

(d) Tax for the maintenance of housing fund and objects of socio-cultural
sphere
294. Section 21 (“Ch”) of RF Law No. 2118-1 of 27 December 1991
“On the foundations of the tax system” imposes a tax of up to one-and-a-
half percent for the maintenance of the housing fund and socio-economic
development.
295. This tax was abolished with the entry into force of the Second Part
of the Tax Code on | January 2001.

(e) Corporate property tax

(i) Before the entry into force of the Second Part of the Tax Code on I January
001

296. Section 2 (1-2) of RF Law No. 2030-1 of 13 December 1991 “On
corporate property tax” provided for a tax of up to two percent in respect of
organisations’ property.

(ii) After the entry into force of the Second Part of the Tax Code on I January
2001

297. Chapter 30 of the Tax Code provides for a tax of up to 2.2 percent
in respect of organisations’ property. The exact rate is defined by the
regional authorities.

(f) Profit tax

(i) Before the entry into force of the Second Part of the Tax Code on I January
001
298. Law No. 2116-1 of 27 December 1991 “On profit tax on enterprises
and organisations” (sections 2 and 5) provided for a profit tax, the rate of
which could vary depending on the type of taxable activity and the rate
fixed by the local authorities. The mandatory rate to be transferred to the
Federal budget was eleven percent.

(ii) After the entry into force of the Second Part of the Tax Code on I January
2001

299. Chapter 25 of the Tax Code provides for a profit tax of up to
24 percent (6.5 percent to be transferred to the Federal budget and the rest to
the regional budget).

(g) Advertising tax
300. Section 21 (1) “z” of RF Law No. 2118-1 of 27 December 1991
“On the foundations of the tax system” imposed a tax in respect of the cost
of advertisement services.
301. This tax was abolished from 1 January 2005.

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION 45
3. Tax advantages

(a) General provisions

302. Article 56 of the Tax Code defines a tax benefit as a full or partial
exemption from the payment of taxes, granted by the tax legislation.

(b) Requirements relating to registration of taxpayers

303. Under Article 83 (1) of the Tax Code, taxpayers which are legal
entities are required to register with the tax authorities at their headquarters
(location of their executive bodies), at the location of their branches and at
the location of real estate and vehicles belonging to them.

304. Special rules of registration applied in respect of large taxpayers,
including the applicant company.

305. By Decree No. AII-3-10/399 of the Tax Ministry, dated
15 December 1999, such taxpayers were required to register at their main
location, at the location of their branches and at the location of real estate
and vehicles belonging to them, in certain specific tax offices (inter-district
level or as specifically indicated by the Ministry).

306. Annex 3 to the Decree contains the form “On subsidiary and
dependant companies and subsidiary enterprises”, to be filled in by the
taxpayer. During registration the taxpayer is required to indicate all of its
subsidiary and dependant companies.

307. In respect of domestic off-shore territories, according to
commentators, this requirement means that in practice the taxpayer's
executive body should always be physically located and functioning on the
territory of the off-shore. If the taxpayer fails to comply with the
requirement, the tax authorities could declare its registration void with the
subsequent recovery of the entirety of the perceived tax benefits (see
A.V. Bryzgalin, Practical Tax Encyclopaedia, Moscow, 2003-2006,
Chapter 3 “Methodology of tax optimisation”).

(c) Closed administrative-territorial formations (the town of Sarov in the
Nizhniy Novgorod Region, the town of Trekhgornyy in the Chelyabinsk
Region and the town of Lesnoy in the Sverdlovsk Region)

(i) Legal provisions
308. Under section 5 of Law No. 3297-1 of the Russian Federation “On
closed administrative-territorial formations”, tax concessions are provided
to businesses if, inter alia, they have at least 90 percent of their fixed assets
and conduct at least 70 percent of their activities on the territory of the
respective formation (including a requirement that at least 70 percent of
their average workforce be accounted for by persons permanently residing

46 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

in the ZATO in question, and that at least 70 percent of their wage bill be
paid to employees permanently residing in that territory).

309. Letter No. ATI-6-01/505 of the Tax Ministry dated 24 June 1999
contained Methodological Directions to the tax bodies on issues of
lawfulness of the use of additional tax benefits granted by local authorities
in the closed administrative-territorial formations. It stated that the tax
authorities ought to verify the actual presence of the taxpayer's assets on the
territory in question by checking its accounting records and financial
statements, and by confirming the physical location of the organisation at
the indicated address and the actual functioning of the taxpayer's employees
at the taxpayer's location.

(ii) Case No. A42-6604/00-15-818/01 (The Tax Ministry v. OOO Pribrezhnoe),
referred to by the applicant company

310. The respondent legal entity is OOO Pribrezhnoe, registered in the
closed administrative territorial formation town of Snezhnogorsk, which has
a privileged tax regime. The Ministry tried unsuccessfully to contest the use
of tax concessions by the respondent, by demonstrating that the entity had
not been actually present at the place of its registration. The domestic court
found for the respondent. They established that the entity had some assets
on the territory of Snezhnogorsk, a number of permanent employees
(including a lawyer and the cleaning lady), a cash account in the local bank,
which proved that the entity satisfied the criteria provided for in law.

311. The final decision in the case was taken by the Cassation Court on
5 June 2002.

(a) The Republic of Mordoviya

312. Under Law No. 9-FZ of the Republic of Mordoviya of 9 March
1999 “On the conditions of efficient use of the socio-economic potential of
the Republic of Mordoviya”, tax concessions are granted to taxpayers
established after the entry into force of that law and whose activities meet
certain conditions, including but not limited to the following:

(a) they conduct export operations, the quarterly proceeds from which
account for at least 15 per cent of the business' total earnings;

(b) they engage in wholesale trade in fuel and lubricants and other types
of hydrocarbon raw materials, the quarterly proceeds from which account
for at least 70 percent of the business' total earnings.

313. Section 1 of the Law states that “this Law establishes concessions
with the objective of creating favourable conditions for attracting capital
into the territory of the Republic of Mordoviya, strengthening the socio-
economic potential of the Republic of Mordoviya, developing the securities
market and creating new jobs through special arrangements for the taxation
of organisations”.

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 47

(e) The Republic of Kalmykiya

314. Law No. 12-P-3 of the Republic of Kalmykiya of 12 March 1999
“On tax concessions for companies investing in the Republic of Kalmykiya”
provides tax concessions to those who meet the following criteria:

(a) the taxpayer is not a user of mineral resources in the territory of the
Republic;

(b) the taxpayer is registered with the Ministry of the Investment Policy
of the Republic of Kalmykiya as an enterprise investing in the economy of
the Republic;

(c) the enterprise's investment in the economy of the Republic meets the
criteria established by the Ministry of Investment Policy of the Republic in
accordance with this law.

(f) The Evenk Autonomous District

315. Under section 9 of Law No. 1080f the Evenk Autonomous District
“On specific features of the tax system in the Evenk Autonomous District”
of 24 September 1998, substantially lower tax rates apply to local
businesses whose activities meet certain conditions for applying the special
taxation procedure set out in section 8 of that Law.

4. The use and interpretation of terms of civil legislation in tax
disputes

316. Under Article 11 of the Tax Code, institutions, notions and terms of
the civil legislation of Russia used in the Tax Code keep their respective
meanings, unless specifically stated.

5. General principles governing the status of legal entities

(a) Presumption of independence

317. Under Article 2 of Civil Code of 30 November 1994 No. 51-FZ (as
in force at the relevant time), the legal status of parties involved in civil-law
transactions, the grounds for the creation of and the order of exercising the
right of ownership and other property rights are defined by the civil
legislation, which also regulates the contractual and other obligations.

318. The civil legislation regulates the relations between persons
engaged in business activities or in those performed with their participation,
on the assumption that business activity is an independent activity,
performed at one's own risk, aimed at systematically deriving a profit from
the use of the property, the sale of commodities, the performance of work or
the rendering of services by the persons registered in this capacity in
conformity with the legally-established procedure.

319. It is formally prohibited to make any unilateral property transfers
(gifts, grants or gratuitous loans) between independent commercial legal

48 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

entities (Articles 575 and 690 of the Civil Code). Unilateral property
transfers are permitted by Article 251 (1) 11 of the Tax Code and not
counted for the purposes of profit tax if they are made between associated
entities, one of which holds more than 50 percent of shares in the equity of
the other entity.

(b) Rules applicable to subsidiary and dependant companies

320. Article 105 of the Civil Code provides that a subsidiary company is
one controlled by another company, either through ownership of the
subsidiary company's shares, by virtue of a contract or by any other means.

321. The controlling company is jointly responsible for debts incurred
by the subsidiary company as a result of compliance with the controlling
company's instructions. The controlling company may be held vicariously
responsible for a debt of the subsidiary company in the event of the latter's
insolvency.

322. Article 106 of the Code provides that a company is dependant when
the other company owns over 20 percent of the former company's voting
stock. A company which purchases over 20 percent of the voting shares in
other companies is obliged to make this information public.

323. Similar rules are established in respect of limited liability
companies (o6wecméo c o2zpanuuennolt omeemcméennocmpl) by section 6
of Law No. 14-FZ on limited liability companies of 8 February 1998.

6. Definition of a property owner
324. Article 209 of the Civil Code defines an owner as the person who
has the rights of possession, use and disposal of his property. In respect of
his property, the owner has the right, at his will, to perform any actions not
contradicting the law and the other legal acts, and not violating the rights
and legally protected interests of other persons.

7. Contractual freedom and its limits

(a) Presumption of good faith and prohibition on abuse of rights

325. Articles 9 and 10 of the Civil Code provide that the parties involved
in civil-law transactions are free to act contractually within the limits
defined by law.

326. Article 10 (1 and 2) of the Code states specifically that parties
involved in civil-law transactions are prohibited from abusing their rights.
In such cases, the courts may deny legal protection in respect of the right
which is being abused. Article 10 (3) establishes a refutable presumption of
good faith and reasonableness of actions on the parties in civil-law
transactions.

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 49

(b) Examples of the case-law of the domestic courts concerning the notion of
bad faith

327. In its decision No. 138-O dated 25 July 2001 the Constitutional
Court of Russia confirmed that there existed a refutable presumption that
the taxpayer was acting in good faith and that a finding that a taxpayer had
acted in bad faith could have unfavourable legal consequences for the
taxpayer.

328. In its decision No. 168-O of 8 April 2004 the Constitutional Court
noted that it would be inadmissible for bad faith taxpayers to use
manipulation of the legal civil-law institutions to create and operate
schemes for unlawful enrichment at the expense of the State budget.

(c) Rules governing sham transactions

(i) Statutory law

329. According to Article 153 of the Civil Code, transactions are defined
as activities of natural and legal persons creating, altering and terminating
their civil rights and obligations.

330. Article 166 of the Civil Code states that a transaction may be
declared invalid on the grounds, established by the present Code, either by
force of its being recognized as such by the court (a disputable transaction,
ocnopumaa coeKa), or regardless of such recognition (an insignificant deal,
HUYMOHCHAA COeIKA).

331. According to Article 167 of the Civil Code, insignificant
transactions entail no legal consequences, apart from those relating to their
invalidity, and are invalid from the moment they are effected.

332. Article 170 (2) establishes specific rules in respect of two types of
insignificant transactions: 'colourable' transactions (“maumaa coeaKa’”, deals
effected only for form's sake, without an intention to create corresponding
legal consequences) and 'sham' transactions (“npumeopuaa coenka’, deals
which have been effected for the purpose of screening other transactions).
This provision condemns both colourable and sham transactions as
insignificant.

333. It also provides that in cases of sham transactions, the rules
governing the transaction which was actually intended by the parties may be
applied by a court, regard being had to the substance of this transaction (the
so-called “substance over form” rule).

334. Under Article 45 of the Tax Code the power to re-characterise
transactions by the taxpayer with third parties, the legal status and the
character of the taxpayer's activity in tax disputes lies with the courts (as
opposed to executive bodies). Section 7 of Law No. 943-1 of 21 March 1991
“On Tax Authorities in the Russian Federation” vests the power to contest
such transactions and recover everything received in such transactions in
favour of the State's budget.

50 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

(ii) Academic sources

335. Comments on the Civil Code (O.N. Sadikov, Comments on the Civil
Code, Yuridicheskaya firma Kontrakt Infra-M, Moscow, 1998) state, with
reference to Bulletin No. 11 of the Supreme Court of RSFSR (page 2), that
any evidence admitted by the rules on civil procedure may also serve as proof
of the invalidity of sham transactions.

8. General rules on price formation and price adjustment mechanism

336. Article 40 (1) of the Tax Code requires that the parties trade at
market prices. It also establishes a refutable presumption that the prices
agreed to by the parties correspond to market levels and are used for
taxation purposes.

9. Price adjustment mechanism of the Tax Code

337. Under Article 40 (2) of the Tax Code, the tax authorities are
empowered to overrule the above presumption by verifying and correcting
the prices for taxation purposes. A finding that the prices were lowered
usually leads to the conclusion that the taxpayer understated the taxable
base and thus failed properly to pay his taxes (see Article 122 of the Tax
Code below).

338. This may happen only (1) when the parties are interdependent
within the meaning of Article 20 of the Tax Code; (2) in the event of barter
transactions; (3) or international transactions; (4) when the prices set by a
taxpayer during the same short period for certain identical types of goods,
work or services fluctuate by more than 20 percent.

339. Article 20 (1) of the Tax Code defines interdependent parties as
natural persons and (or) organisations whose mutual relations may influence
the terms or economic results of their respective activities or the activities of
the parties that they represent. In particular, (a) one organisation has a direct
and (or) indirect interest in another organisation, and the aggregate share of
such interest is more than 20 percent. The share accounted for by the
indirect interest held by one organisation in another, through a chain of
separate organisations, is defined as the product of the direct interest shares
that the organisations in this chain hold in one another; (b) one natural
person is subordinate to another natural person ex officio; (c) in the case of
individuals, they are spouses, relatives, adopters or adoptees, guardians or
wards under the family law of the Russian Federation.

340. Article 20 (2) of the Tax Code provides that the court may
recognize persons as interdependent on other grounds, not provided for by
Item 1 of this Article, if the relations between these persons may have
influenced the results of transactions in the sale of goods (work, services).

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 51

10. Applicable tax offences and related penalties

341. Article 122 (1 and 3) of the Tax Code imposes a penalty of
40 percent of the unpaid tax liability on intentional non-payment or
incomplete payment of the tax due, resulting from understating the taxable
base. Articles 112 (2) and 114 (4) of the Tax Code provide for a 100 percent
increase in this penalty in the event of a repeated offence by the same
taxpayer.

342. Article 75 of the Tax Code provides for payment of an interest
surcharge by taxpayers in cases of late payment of the taxes due. The
interest surcharge amounts to one three-hundredth of the statutory rate for
each day of the delay. The persons and entities that were unable to meet
their tax liabilities in due time because their bank account was suspended by
the tax authority or a court are excused from payment of the interest
surcharge for the duration of the respective suspension (Article 75 (3) of the
Tax Code).

11. Statutory time-bar

343. In accordance with Article 113 of the Tax Code, a person cannot be
held liable for a tax offence under Article 122 of the Code if three years
have expired since the first day after the end of the tax period during which
the offence was committed.

12. Applicable rules on court procedure
(a) First-instance proceedings

(i) Territorial jurisdiction

344. Under Article 35 of the Code of Commercial Court Procedure of
24 July 2003 No. 95-FZ (as in force at the relevant time), claims should be
brought to a court having jurisdiction over the defendant's seat.

345. Article 54 of the Civil Code defines a company's seat as the place
of the company's registration, unless, in accordance with the law, the
company's articles of association do not specify otherwise.

346. Decision no. 6/8 of the Plenary Session of the Supreme Court and
Supreme Commercial Court of 1 July 1996 specifies that the company's seat
is the location of its entities.

(ii) Interim measures

347. Under Article 91 of the Code of Commercial Court Procedure, a
party may apply for proportionate security measures, including seizure of
defendant's assets, pending the examination of the case by the courts.

52 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

(iii) Grace period
348. Article 213 of the Code of Commercial Court Procedure provides
that in tax cases a court suit may be filed by the authorities when their
demands have not been complied with voluntarily, or when the term for
voluntary compliance has expired.

(iv) Time-limits for the preparation of the case at first instance

349. Article 134 of the Code of Commercial Court Procedure establishes
a two-month time-limit for the preparation of the case for examination at first
instance.

(v) Right to bring appeal proceedings against the first instance judgment

350. Under Article s 257 and 259 of the Code of Commercial Court
Procedure participants in the proceedings have one month from the delivery
of the first-instance judgment to bring appeal proceedings.

(b) Appeal proceedings

351. Under with Article 268 of the Code of Commercial Courts
Procedure, an appeal court fully re-examines the case using the evidence
contained in the case and any newly-presented additional evidence. In
examining procedural motions of the parties, including requests to call and
hear additional witnesses or adduce and examine additional pieces of
evidence, the appeal court is not bound by previous refusals of the same
motions by the first-instance court.

352. Under Articles 180 and 271 of the Code, the first-instance judgment
becomes enforceable on the date of the entry into force of the appeal decision
confirming it.

(c) Cassation proceedings

353. In accordance with Article 286 of the Code, a cassation instance
court, among other things, reviews the lower courts’ decisions and checks
whether the conclusions of the lower courts in respect of both law and fact
correspond to the circumstances of the case.

354. Article 283 of the Code provides for a possibility of applying for a
stay of enforcement of the lower courts' decisions. The applicant must show
that it would be impossible to reverse the effects of an immediate
enforcement of the lower courts' decisions if the cassation appeal were
successful.

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION 53
13. Domestic courts' case-law
(a) Court disputes involving re-characterisation of sham arrangements

(i) Case No. A40-31714/97-2-312 (the Tax Ministry v. OOO TF Grin Haus)

355. In 1996 the respondent legal entity was involved in a series of
intertwined transactions with two third parties (rent contracts and loan
agreements): as a result, the respondent rented a building in central Moscow
to the third parties but was able to avoid inclusion of the rent payments in
the taxable base of its operations by claiming that they were interest
payment in respect of the loan agreement. The Ministry discovered the tax
evasion scheme, re-characterised the transactions in question as rent and
ordered the taxpayer to pay RUB 2 billion in back taxes.

356. The case was examined in three rounds of court proceedings by the
courts at three levels of jurisdiction. Having regard to the substance of the
transactions entered into by the respondent, the terms of payment and
execution of the contested contracts, and, generally, to the conduct of the
respondent company and third parties, the courts decided that the
contractual arrangement had been sham, re-characterised the arrangement as
rent and upheld the Ministry's decision.

357. In the first round of proceedings the courts adopted their decisions
on the following dates: 1 December 1997, 27 January 1998 and 30 March
1998.

358. In the second round of proceedings the decisions were adopted by
the first-instance and appeal courts on 26 May 1998 and 21 July 1998. The
decision of the cassation court was taken on an unspecified date.

359. The third round of proceedings involved decisions on 17 November
1998, 25 January 1999 and 2 March 1999.

(ii) Case No. KA-A40/2183-98 (the Tax Ministry v. AuRoKom GMBH)

360. The respondent legal entity entered in a loan agreement with a third
person; the tax authorities considered it a sham, re-characterised it as a rent
contract and reassessed the tax due in respect of the gains received. The
lower courts disagreed and quashed the tax authority's decision. By a
decision of 17 September 1998 the cassation court quashed the lower courts’
decisions and ordered that the matter be re-examined, giving due regard to
all relevant circumstances, including the substance of the transaction. The
courts were to reconsider all relevant clauses in the agreement in question,
the conduct of the parties and the fact of physical occupation of the
allegedly rented space.

54 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

(iii) Case No. A40/36819/04-75-387 (the Tax Ministry v. OAO AKB Rossiyskiy
Kapital)

361. The respondent legal entity is a bank which in 2001-2002
conducted business by buying and then reselling precious metals. To avoid
the payment of full VAT on its sales operations in this respect, the bank
entered into commission agreements with the sellers from which it bought
the metals, in order to be considered not as the owner of the traded goods,
but merely as the sellers’ agent.

362. The domestic courts took account of the substance of the bank's
transactions (terms of payment, actual circumstances of delivery and other
relevant factual details) and, having established that in reality the bank had
been buying and reselling the precious metals, re-characterised the bank's
activity as sales. The courts referred to Article 209 of the Civil Code
(containing the legal definition of owner) and concluded that the bank first
bought the precious metals, thus becoming the “owner” within the meaning
of the said provision and thereafter resold the goods. They found the bank
liable for tax evasion under Article 122 of the Tax Code, ordered it to pay
reassessed VAT in the amount of RUB 1,091,123,539.42, default interest of
RUB 408,289.76 and penalties of RUB 436,391,918.65.

363. The first-instance judgment was taken on 3 November 2004 and
upheld on appeal on 11 January 2005.

(b) Tax evasion schemes involving sham rent agreements and letter-box
entities registered in the domestic offshore town of Baykonur

(i) Case No. A4l K1-13539/02 (the Tax Ministry v. OAO Ufimskiy NPZ and
ZAO Bort-M)

364. OAO Ufimskiy NPZ, the main production unit of one of the biggest
Russian oil companies, OAO Bashneft, physically located in the town of
Ufa, used the domestic tax offshore territory situated in the town of
Baykonur, the territory rented by Russia from the Republic of Kazakhstan
for its space-related projects. The town's tax regime was similar to that in
the closed administrative-territorial formations (see above).

365. On 1 February 2001 the respondents OAO Ufimskiy NPZ and ZAO
Bort-M, a letter-box entity registered in Baykonur, entered into a rent
agreement whereby the entirety of OAO Ufimskiy NPZ's production
facilities were rented by ZAO Bort-M in exchange for nominal
compensation. Since ZAO Bort-M was registered in Baykonur, the activity
of OAO Ufimskiy NPZ enjoyed lower rates in respect of excise duties. The
tax authorities discovered “the scheme” and contested it in court as sham
and therefore null and void.

366. On 8 October 2002 the first-instance court had regard to the
substance of the transaction and, having established that, despite the
contractual arrangement, OAO Ufimskiy NPZ had continued to operate the

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 55

facilities in question, that furthermore the letter-box entity was never
properly registered and licensed as the operator of oil processing and oil
storing facilities in accordance with the relevant law, and that the letter-box
entity could not operate the facility because it had rented only one part of
the production cycle (which technologically could not be split in two), that
the sole aim and effect of the arrangement was tax evasion, that OAO
Ufimskiy NPZ and ZAO Bort-M had “malicious intent” to evade taxes,
upheld the tax authorities' claim.

367. The first instance judgment was upheld on appeal and in cassation
on 17 December 2002 and 19 March 2003 respectively.

(ii) Cases nos. A41 K1-13244/02 (the Tax Ministry v. OAO Novo-ufimskiy NPZ
and ZAO Bort-M), A41 K1-11474/02 (the Tax Ministry v. OAO Novo-
ufimskiy NPZ and OOO Korus-Baykonur), A41 K1-137828/02 (the Tax
Ministry v. OAO Ufimskiy NPZ and OOO Korus-Baykonur)

368. These case are essentially follow-ups to the previous case: OAO
Novo-Ufimskiy NPZ is the second main production unit of OAO Bashneft
and was also involved in exactly the same tax evasion scheme, using the
sham offshore entities ZAO Bort-M and OOO Korus-Baykonur.

369. The domestic courts examined all three cases at three instances and
granted the Ministry's claims.

370. The decisions in the first set of proceedings were taken on
9 October, 16 December 2002 and 13 March 2003.

371. The decisions in the second set of proceedings were taken on
19 September 2002, 5 December 2002 and 28 February 2003.

372. The decisions in the third set of proceedings were taken on
18 December 2002, 20 February 2003 and 26 May 2003.

(iii) Case No. A41 K1-9254/03 (the Tax Ministry v. OOO Orbitalnye sistemy
and OAO MNPZ)

373. This case concerns exactly the same tax evasion scheme as in the
previous cases, but involves OAO MNPZ, a major oil-processing facility
located in Moscow and owned by the Government of Moscow, as the
defendant.

374. The decisions in the case were taken on 29 October and
27 December 2004.

(c) Sham rent agreements and letter-box entities registered in the domestic
offshore town of Ozersk (closed administrative-territorial formation)

(i) Case No. AS5-1942/04-24 (the Tax Ministry v. OAO Novokuybyshevskiy NPZ
and OOO SK-STR)

375. The case concerns the same tax evasion scheme as in the previous
cases (involving the sham renting agreement), but the offshore territory at

56 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

issue is the town of Ozersk and the taxpayer is OAO Novokuybyshevskiy
NPZ, one of the applicant company's subsidiary oil-processing units.

376. The scheme operated from January 1999 and was prosecuted in
2004. The first-instance judgment in favour of the Ministry was taken on
13 August 2004. The court applied the same 'substance over form' approach
as in the previous cases and, having assessed the defendants' conduct, the
character of their relations and statements by the officials of the entities,
granted the Ministry's claims and also ordered OAO Novokuybyshevskiy
NPZ to pay RUB 120,688,860 in reassessed taxes.

 

(ii) Case No. A55-5015/2004-33 (the Tax Ministry v. OAO Novokuybyshevskiy
NPZ and OOO SK-STR)

377. This is a follow-up to the previous case: in the first-instance
judgment the court declared the defendants' contractual arrangement to be
sham and unlawful and ordered OAO Novokuybyshevskiy NPZ to pay
RUB 252,963,364 in reassessed taxes.

378. The first-instance judgment in the case, dated 19 October 2004, was
upheld on appeal on 19 October 2004.

(iii) Case No. AS5-1941/2004-40 (the Tax Ministry v. OAO Syzranskiy NPZ and
OOO SK-STR)

379. This is a follow-up to the previous cases, involving OAO
Syzranskiy NPZ, a production unit belonging to the applicant company. The
rent agreement between the letter-box entity and the applicant's production
unit was declared sham and voided. OAO Syzranskiy NPZ was ordered to
pay RUB 30,309,119 in reassessed taxes.

380. The first-instance judgment of 18 August 2004 was upheld on
appeal on 4 November 2004.

(d) Sham arrangements and VAT refund fraud

(i) Case No. AS7-11990/01-5 (the Tax Ministry _ v. FGUP
Nizhnevolzhskgeologiya)

381. The respondent legal entity is a State-owned enterprise specialising
in geological exploration and identification of oil fields. In 2000 it entered
into a series of deliberately unprofitable oil trading transactions with a third
party, OOO Roza-Mira Processing. Since the transactions preceded the
actual export of oil abroad, the two taxpayers, acting in concert, intended to
obtain an artificially increased VAT refund. Having regard to the substance
of the transaction and the relevant circumstances of the case, such as the
terms of actual payment and execution, the courts decided that the
transactions were sham, declared them null and void and refused the
respondent's request for a VAT refund. In addition, the courts recovered the
unpaid VAT with penalties.

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 57

382. The domestic courts took their respective decisions on
22 November 2001, 29 April and 8 July 2002.

(ii) Case No. 7543/02-16 (the Tax Ministry v. OAO Saratovnefiegaz)

383. The respondent legal entity is the main production unit of OAO NK
Russneft, one of the biggest Russian private oil companies, which was
involved in a dispute with the Ministry over VAT refunds in respect of its
export operations. The courts established that in 2001 the respondent
entered into a series of transactions with a number of third parties, aimed at
deceiving the Ministry and claiming an artificially increased VAT refund.
The courts took account of the overall economic effect of the transactions
taken in their entirety, numerous discrepancies and contradictions between
the contractual arrangements, the actual movement of oil, the documents
certifying the customs clearance of the goods in question, etc., and refused
to recognise them as valid for the purposes of reimbursement of VAT. The
courts concluded that the Ministry had been acting lawfully by refusing the
respondent company's request for an export VAT refund.

384. The domestic courts took their respective decisions on 30 June
2003, 31 May and 16 September 2004.

(iii) Case No. A28-7017/02-301/21 (the Tax Ministry v. OAO Kirovskiy Shinnyy
Zavod)

385. This is essential a follow-up to previous cases. The courts reached
similar conclusions in respect of the respondent company and recovered
RUB 5,000,000 in overpaid VAT in favour of the Ministry.

386. The decisions in the case during the first round of proceedings were
taken on 19 December 2002, 19 March 2003 and 27 June 2003.

387. The second round of proceedings resulted in the first-instance
judgment of 19 December 2002, the appeal decision of 19 March 2003 and
the supervisory review decision of 23 December 2003.

(e) Case-law of the domestic courts concerning the invalidity of sham
transactions
388. In a decision of 9 December 1997 in case No. 5246/97, the
Presidium of the Supreme Commercial Court of Russia invalidated a loan
secured by a promissory note and a related pay-off agreement as colourable
and sham respectively. The court had regard to the terms of contracts
concluded between the parties and the manner of their execution, in
particular the fact that the loan had never been used by the borrower; it
concluded that the transactions in question covered the sale of a promissory
note and invalidated them as sham.
389. In a decision of 6 October 1998 in case No. 6202/97 the Presidium
of the Supreme Commercial Court of Russia invalidated two contracts for
the sale of securities and a related loan agreement as sham, having regard to

58 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

the terms of contracts in question, the manner of their execution and the
contractual prices. The court established that the sales contracts in fact
covered the loan agreement secured by the pledge of securities and remitted
the case for re-trial.

14. Enforcement proceedings in respect of a presumably solvent debtor

(a) General principles

390. The Enforcement Proceedings Act (Law No. 119-FZ) of 21 July
1997 (as in force at the relevant time) establishes the procedure by which a
creditor may enforce a court award against a presumably solvent legal entity
debtor.

391. Russian legislation provides for a set of special procedures in
respect of presumably insolvent legal entity debtors (see section 15 below).

(b) Term for voluntary compliance with the execution writ

392. Under section 9 (3) of the Enforcement Proceedings Act, on an
application by the creditor, the bailiff institutes enforcement proceedings,
fixes the time-limit for enforcement of the execution writ, which may not
exceed five days from the date of institution of enforcement proceedings,
and notifies the debtor accordingly.

(c) Various ways to stay or delay enforcement proceedings

393. The Enforcement Proceedings Act provides for a possibility either:
(a) to postpone enforcement actions for a term of up to 15 days (section 19);
(b) to suspend the enforcement proceedings (section 21); or (c) to defer the
execution of enforcement of a debt or arrange for payment in instalments
(section 18).

394. With regard to (a), the bailiff takes the decision in the “appropriate
circumstances” either on an application by the debtor or of its own motion.

395. With regard to (b), the decision may only be taken in seven
enumerated cases: if the bailiff applied to the court with a request to
interpret the judicial act; on a request from a debtor who has been drafted to
serve in the army; if the debtor is on a long-term mission; if the debtor is
hospitalised and being treated; if the actions of the bailiff are being
contested in court; if the debtor himself or his property is being searched
for; if the debtor or creditor are on holiday cannot be contacted.

396. As regards (c), the debtor, creditor or bailiff has the right to request
the court to defer the execution of enforcement of a debt or arrange for
payment in instalments if there are “circumstances impeding the
enforcement actions”.

 

 

 

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 59

(d) Seizure of the debtor's assets

397. If the debtor does not comply within the specified time limit, under
section 9 (5) of the Enforcement Proceedings Act the bailiff, on an
application by the creditor, has the right to make an inventory of the debtor's
property and to put it under arrest.

398. Section 46 (5) of the Enforcement Proceedings Act provides that, if
a debtor lacks sufficient cash funds to satisfy the creditor's claims, the debt
may be levied from the other types of the debtor's property, unless the
federal law states otherwise. The debtor has the right to indicate his
preferred order of priority, but the final order is determined by the bailiff.

399. Section 51 of the Enforcement Proceedings Act establishes a one-
month time-limit for the seizure of the debtor's property from the date of
service of the ruling on the institution of enforcement procedure. The
seizure is intended, inter alia, to secure the safety of the debtor's property
and the creditor's claims, which shall be subject to a subsequent transfer to
the creditor or to a subsequent sale. The seizure of securities is carried out in
conformity with the procedure defined by the Government of the Russian
Federation in Decree No. 934 “On the seizure of securities”, dated
12 August 1998.

400. Section 59 of the Enforcement Proceedings Act establishes the
order of priority in the seizure and forced sale of a debtor's property in three
stages. Firstly, the bailiff sells the property which is not immediately
involved in the debtor's production cycle (securities, cash on the debtor's
deposit and other accounts, currency valuables, cars, office design objects,
etc.); secondly, finished products (goods) and other material values not
immediately involved in production and not intended to play an immediate
part in it; and, thirdly, real-estate objects, as well as raw and other materials,
machine-tools and equipment and other fixed assets, intended for immediate
involvement in production.

401. In Ruling No. 4 “On certain questions arising out of seizure and
enforcement actions in respect of corporate shares”, dated 3 March 1999,
the Plenary Supreme Commercial Court decided that in respect of
companies which had been privatised by the State as parts of bigger holding
groups through the transfer of controlling blocks of shares, the production
cycle of the respective production unit should be preserved as much as
possible.

(e) Enforcement fee

402. Section 81 of the Enforcement Proceedings Act penalises the
debtor's failure voluntarily to comply with the writ of execution with a
seven percent enforcement fee.

403. In ruling No. 13-P of 30 July 2001 the Constitutional Court of
Russia described the enforcement fee as an administrative penal sanction
having a fixed monetary expression, exacted by compulsion, formalised by

60 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

the decision of an authorised official and levied in favour of the State. The
Constitutional court struck the above provision down as unconstitutional, in
so far as it did not allow the debtor to excuse his failure to comply with the
writ by reference to certain extraordinary, objectively inevitable
circumstances and to other unforeseeable and insurmountable obstacles
beyond the debtor's control.

(f) Forced sale of arrested assets

(i) Rules concerning valuation of arrested property

404. Section 53 of the Enforcement Proceedings Act requires the bailiff
to evaluate the arrested property on the basis of market prices on the date of
execution of the enforcement writ. Should valuation be problematic for
technical or any other reasons, the bailiff should appoint a specialist to carry
out the valuation.

405. According to a Decree of the Ministry of Justice dated 27 October
1998, the bailiff is obliged to appoint a specialist to conduct the valuation if
the seized property is shares or other securities (yenno1e 6ymaeu). Under the
same Decree the bailiff should inform the debtor and creditor of the
resulting valuation.

(ii) General rules concerning sales of arrested property

406. Section 54 of the Enforcement Proceedings Act requires the bailiff
to sell the arrested property in satisfaction of the debt within two months of
the date of seizure. The sale is carried out by a specialised institution on the
basis of a commission contract with the bail:

407. According to Government Decree No. 418 “On the Russian Fund of
Federal Property” of 29 November 2001, the Fund is entrusted with the task,
inter alia, of auctioning property seized in satisfaction of the debts owed to
Russia.

 

(g) Distribution of levied sums and order of priority in the event of multiple
claimants

408. Section 77 of the Enforcement Proceedings Act provides that, in
respect of the sums levied from the debtor, including the proceeds from the
forced sale of the debtor's property, the bailiffs first recover enforcement
fees and all related payments and the remainder is used in satisfaction of the
creditors’ claims.

409. If the proceeds from the forced sale(s) are insufficient to satisfy all
creditors, the following order of priority applies (section 78 of the
Enforcement Proceedings Act): tort claims, employment and labour-related
claims, claims made on behalf of the Pension Fund and the Social Security
Fund of Russia, claims made on behalf of the budgets of various territorial
levels and finally all other claims.

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 6l

(bh) Court appeals against bailiffs’ decisions
410. Under section 90 of the Enforcement Proceedings Act, all actions
by the bailiff in the course of enforcement proceedings can be appealed
against within ten days from the date of proper notification of the action in
question.
411. Any damage inflicted on the debtor as a result of the bailiff's
omission is compensated for in accordance with the applicable legislation.

15. Enforcement proceedings in respect of an insolvent debtor legal
entity

412. The enforcement of court awards and more generally debt claims
against insolvent or presumably insolvent debtor legal entities is regulated
by Insolvency (Bankruptcy) Act of 26 October 2002 (Law No. 127-FZ).

(a) Definition of the state of insolvency (bankruptcy)

413. Section 3 of the Insolvency (Bankruptcy) Act defines the state of
bankruptcy of a legal entity as follows:

“A legal entity is regarded as being unable to satisfy the claims of creditors in
respect of pecuniary obligations and (or) to fulfil its obligations in respect of
mandatory payments if the respective obligations and (or) obligation are not complied
with within three months of the date on which compliance should have occurred.”

414. In accordance with section 4 of the Act, the obligations are, as a
general rule, defined/recognised by the court on the date of examination of
the bankruptcy petition.

415. Bankruptcy proceedings in respect of a legal entity may only be
instituted by a court if the overall amount of debt claims exceeds
RUB 100,000 (section 6 of the Act).

(b) Bringing of a bankruptcy petition

416. Under section 7 of the Act the debtor, the debtor's creditors in
respect of pecuniary claims and State bodies competent to take part in
bankruptcy proceedings in which the State is a creditor in respect of
mandatory payments have the right to bring a bankruptcy petition.

417. Whilst the executive body of the debtor has the right to file for
bankruptcy in circumstances where it is obvious that the debtor would be
unable to fulfil its obligation in due time (section 8 of the Act), it has a legal
duty to do so if the forced taking of the debtor's property in satisfaction of a
claim would make the debtor's economic activity considerably difficult or
impossible (section 9 of the Act). In this latter respect, the petition should be
brought within one month from the date on which the respective relevant
circumstances occurred.

62 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

418. Failure to abide by the above rules exposes the offender to civil
liability action by virtue of section 10 of the Act and may also make the
offender vicariously liable for any resulting damage.

(c) Examination of a bankruptcy petition

419. The admissibility of the bankruptcy petition is examined by a
single-judge bench (section 48 of the Act). Having declared the petition
well-founded (admissible), the judge should impose a supervision order in
respect of the debtor (see below).

420. The merits of the bankruptcy petition should be examined by a
court within seven months of the date of its filing (section 51 of the Act).

421. Having examined the merits of the bankruptcy petition, the court
takes one of the followings decisions (section 52 of the Act): (a) it declares
the debtor bankrupt and applies the liquidation procedure in respect of the
debtor; (b) it rejects the request to declare the debtor bankrupt; (c) it
introduces a “financial improvement order” in respect of the debtor; (d) it
applies the procedure of external management; (e) it discontinues the
bankruptcy proceedings; (f) it disallows the bankruptcy petition; (g) it
approves the friendly settlement of the case.

(d) Various solutions available to a court in resolving a bankruptcy case

422. The following five procedures may be applicable in respect of the
debtor in a bankruptcy case (section 27 of the Act): (a) order of supervision;
(b) financial improvement order; (c) external management; (d) liquidation;
(e) friendly settlement.

423. A supervision order is defined as the first procedure applied to the
debtor (see above). It consists of securing the debtor's property, analysing its
financial condition, composing the list of creditors and carrying out the first
assembly of creditors (section 2 of the Act). The decision to impose a
supervision order is taken by a judge in accordance with section 9 of the
Act. It can be appealed against to a higher court. In the decision, the judge
should also appoint an interim receiver.

424. A financial improvement order is a bankruptcy procedure aiming at
re-establishing the debtor's solvency and consisting in repayment of the
debts in accordance with a debt repayment schedule (section 2 of the Act).

425. External management is a bankruptcy procedure aiming at re-
establishing the debtor's solvency (section 2 of the Act).

426. Liquidation is a bankruptcy procedure applied in respect of a debtor
who has been declared bankrupt. It is essentially the sale of the debtor's
property by a court-appointed trustee in proportionate satisfaction of the
creditors' claims (section 2 of the Act).

427. Friendly settlement is a bankruptcy procedure applicable at any
stage of bankruptcy proceedings, whereby the creditors and the debtor reach
an agreement in respect of the debtor's liability (section 2 of the Act).

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 63

(e) Order of supervision and its consequences

428. The automatic consequences of the decision to adopt a supervision
order in respect of the debtor legal entity (section 63 of the Act) are, in
particular, the following: all debts due after the date of the decision are
recoverable only pursuant to a special procedure; enforcement of execution
writs already issued, including any pecuniary claims (with the exception of
those relating to payment of salaries and tort claims) against the debtor, is
halted, the seizure in respect of the debtor's property is lifted.

429. The law also introduces some restrictions in respect of operations
with the debtor's shares and the actions of the debtor itself (section 64 of the
Act). However, the debtor's management team remains in place, subject to
limitations restricting their ability to dispose of the debtor's property above a
certain value (more than five percent of the book costs of the debtor's
property) or to indebt the debtor further by contracting loans, issuing
guaranties or sureties, transferring debts to third parties or transferring the
debtor's property for external management by a third party.

430. An interim receiver is appointed by a court in accordance with
sections 45 and 65 of the Act. At this stage of proceedings, he or she has no
management functions and is essentially responsible for securing the
debtor's property, watching over the activities of the debtor's management,
analysing the debtor's financial condition and identifying the debtor's
creditors. The interim receiver is accountable to a court and is in charge of
organising the first meeting of creditors.

431. For a period of thirty days from the date of publication of the
supervision order notice, the creditors have the right to file their claims
against the debtor (section 71 of the Act). The claims may be included in the
list of creditors on the basis of the court's decision.

432. At least ten days prior to the date of termination of the supervision
order, the interim receiver must organise the first meeting of creditors
(section 72 of the Act). At the meeting, the creditors are competent, among
other things, to decide either: (a) to introduce a financial supervision order
and lodge the relevant request with the court; (b) to introduce an external
management order and lodge the respective request with the court; or (c) to
request the court to declare the debtor bankrupt and impose a liquidation
order (section 73 of the Act).

 

COMPLAINTS

433. Under Article 6 of the Convention the applicant company
complained that its tax liability case for the year 2000 had not been tried by a
tribunal established by law because it should have been tried in
Nefteyugansk.

64 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

434. The applicant company also complained with reference to this
Convention provision that the Ministry had not replied to the applicant
company's request to clarify the 2000 audit report.

435. The applicant company further complained that the proceedings
before the domestic courts had been tainted with a number of procedural
defects which made them unfair and as a whole unlawful, contrary to
Article 6 of the Convention. The applicant company complained in respect of
the 2000 Tax Assessment, in particular, that in the proceedings before the
City Court the action had been brought by the Ministry within the grace
period and that there had been no equality between the parties and no
adversarial process; the applicant company's lawyers could not obtain from
the Ministry answers to all the questions they wished to ask in the hearings
before the court; the applicant company had not had enough time to prepare
for the trial; the court had refused the applicant company's requests to adjourn
the proceedings; the court had abruptly interrupted the pleadings of the
applicant company's lawyer; the court gave its judgment without having
studied all evidence. It also complained that in the proceedings before the
Appeal Court the statutory appeal period was unlawfully abridged; the appeal
court refused to adjourn the proceedings; the appeal court delayed the
delivery of the reasons for its judgment and thereby prevented the applicant
company from lodging a cassation appeal.

436. As regards the 2001-2003 Tax Assessments, the applicant company
also complained, relying on Article 6 of the Convention, that the tax
assessment had not been imposed by a court and that such extrajudicial
enforcement of the tax assessment was incompatible with the right of access
to court and the right to fair proceedings.

437. The applicant company next complained under Article 1 of
Protocol No. | taken alone and in conjunction with Articles 1, 13, 14 and 18
of the Convention that that the Tax Assessments 2000-2003 had been
arbitrary, unlawful and disproportionate.

In particular, the company argued that the decisions had been
disproportionate in so far as they had been likely to ruin the company, and
had been arbitrary, discriminatory and given in bad faith. It further
submitted the whole “enforcement” of the supposed tax liability had been
deliberately set up with a view to preventing the applicant company from
repaying its debts. According to the applicant, the enforcement proceedings,
especially the sale of OAO Yuganskneftegaz, the applicant company's most
valued asset, was unlawful, arbitrary and disproportionate. It also argued
that the attachment of its assets had been arbitrary and that it had prevented
the applicant company from repaying the debt. Lastly, the company also
argued that the prosecution for the year 2000 had been time-barred.

438. Relying on Article 7 of the Convention, the applicant company
complained that the Tax Assessments had not been based on any reasonable
and foreseeable interpretation of the domestic law. The applicant was

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 65

allegedly the first entity to have ever been punished for the hitherto
generally tolerated tax optimisation scheme. The applicant also submitted
that the imposition of double penalties for the years 2001-2003 had
amounted to a retrospective penalty, since it had been unforeseeable at the
date when the liability had been incurred.

THE LAW

A. The Government's request to discontinue the examination of the
case

439. On 26 December 2007 the Government informed the Court that by
decision of the City Court of 12 November 2007 the applicant company had
been liquidated (see paragraphs 273 and 274 above). The Government
submitted that accordingly the Court had lost jurisdiction ratione personae
in respect of the application and relying on Article 35 § 3 of the Convention
requested to discontinue the examination of the case. In addition, they
contested the authority of Mr J. P. Gardner to act continuously on behalf of
the applicant company.

440. The Court notes that it is undisputed between the parties that the
applicant company was not under compulsory administration in April 2004
and that the case was properly introduced with the Court by the company's
counsel Mr Gardner (see, by contrast, Capital bank AD v. Bulgaria (dec.),
no. 49429/99, 9 September 2004, and Credit and Industrial Bank v. the
Czech Republic, no. 29010/95, §§ 43-52, ECHR 2003-XI (extracts)).

441. While under Article 34 of the Convention the existence of a “victim
of a violation” is indispensable for putting the protection mechanism of the
Convention into motion, this criterion cannot be applied in a rigid,
mechanical and inflexible way throughout the whole proceedings. As a rule,
and in particular in cases which, as the one at hand, primarily involve
pecuniary, and, for this reason, transferable claims, the existence of other
persons to whom that claim is transferred is an important criterion, but
cannot be the only one. Human rights cases before the Court generally also
have a moral dimension, which it must take into account when considering
whether to continue with the examination of an application after the
applicant has ceased to exist. All the more so if the issues raised by the case
transcend the person and the interests of the applicant (see Capital Bank AD
v. Bulgaria, no. 49429/99, §§ 74-80, ECHR 2005-XII (extracts), and,
mutatis mutandis, Karner v. Austria, no. 40016/98, § 25, ECHR 2003-IX,
with further references).

66 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION

442. The Court has repeatedly stated that its judgments in fact serve not
only to decide those cases brought before it but, more generally, to
elucidate, safeguard and develop the rules instituted by the Convention,
thereby contributing to the observance by the States of the engagements
undertaken by them as Contracting Parties. Although the primary purpose of
the Convention system is to provide individual relief, its mission is also to
determine issues on public-policy grounds in the common interest, thereby
raising the general standards of protection of human rights and extending
human rights jurisprudence throughout the community of Convention States
(see Karner, § 26).

443. The Court notes that the various alleged breaches of Articles 6, 7,
13, 14 and 18 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. | in the
present case concern the tax assessment and enforcement proceedings in
respect of the applicant company which eventually resulted in its
bankruptcy and ceasing to exist as a legal person. Striking the application
out of the list under such circumstances would undermine the very essence
of the right of individual applications by legal persons, as it would
encourage governments to deprive such entities of the possibility to pursue
an application lodged at a time when they enjoyed legal personality (see
Capital Bank AD, cited above, § 80).

444. This issue in itself transcends the interests of the applicant company
and therefore the Court rejects the Government's request. The Court also
accepts Mr Gardner as the valid representative of the applicant company.

B. Alleged hindrance with the applicant company's right of
individual petition

445. In their submissions on admissibility of the case the applicant
company complained under Article 34 of the Convention that the tax debt
artificially created by the State had been likely to ruin the applicant
company financially and to make it impossible for it to apply for protection
to Strasbourg.

446. The Court recalls that it is of the utmost importance for the
effective operation of the system of individual petition instituted by
Article 34 that applicants or potential applicants should be able to
communicate freely with the Court without being subjected to any form of
pressure from the authorities to withdraw or modify their complaints (see
Akdivar and Others v. Turkey, 16 September 1996, § 105, Reports of
Judgments and Decisions 1996-IV). The applicant company alleged that the
tax debt claimed by the State had been so large that the applicant company
may have gone bankrupt, and, therefore, would no longer be able to apply to
the Court. This allegation, however, is nothing but a restatement of their
complaints under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 and raises no substantive
issues under Article 34 of the Convention.

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 67

447. The Court accordingly dismisses this part of the application
pursuant to Article 35 §§ 3 and 4 of the Convention.

C. Admissibility of the complaints under Article 6 of the Convention

448. The Government contended in respect of the applicant company's
complaints about the 2000 Tax Assessment proceedings that the dispute
concerned the company's tax liability and that Article 6 of the Convention
was therefore inapplicable.

449. The applicant company maintained that the Tax Assessment
proceedings in its case had been criminal within the meaning of Article 6,
given that they had involved its liability for tax offences and resulted in
additional taxes, penalty interest and fines exceeding an overall sum of
RUB 450 billion (approximately EUR 13 billion), surcharged fines of a
further RUB 23.04 billion (approximately EUR 6 billion) and further
enforcement penalties for non-performance of the obligation to pay the
above liabilities, and had also concerned the right to control, charge or
dispose of any of its assets and the forced sale of its principal production
subsidiary. The proceedings were also civil as the tax assessments involved
the re-allocation of ownership of the oil and oil products traded by the
trading companies to the applicant company, whilst the injunction of
15 April 2004 froze the entirety of its assets and the authorities sold its stake
in OAO Yuganskneftegas at auction thus also determining its civil rights
and obligations.

450. The Court notes that the issue, as raised by the Government, is
whether Article 6 of the Convention applied to the 2000 Tax Assessment
proceedings. The Court observes that as a result of these proceedings the
applicant company was required to pay additional taxes of
RUB 47,966,133,380 (approximately EUR  1,357,725,489), a default
interest surcharge of RUB 32,167,990,383 (approximately
EUR 910,544,532) and a 40 percent fine of RUB 19,186,430,950
(approximately EUR 543,089,561). Since the proceedings concerned,
among other things, the imposition of a fine, the Court has to determine
whether Article 6 of the Convention applied in these proceedings in its
criminal limb.

451. The Court recalls that according to its well-established case-law
(see, as the most recent authority confirming the approach, Jussila v.
Finland [GC], no. 73053/01, §§ 37-39, ECHR 2006-...) three criteria are to
be considered in the assessment of the applicability of the criminal aspect of
Article 6 of the Convention: classification of the “offence” as “criminal”
according to the domestic legal system, the very nature of the offence
and the degree of severity of the penalty that the person concerned risks
incurring.

68 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

452. Turning to the first criterion, it is apparent that the tax penalties in
this case were not classified as criminal but as part of the fiscal regime. This
is however not decisive. As regards the second and third criteria, the Court
recalls that they are alternative and not necessarily cumulative. It is enough
that the offence in question is by its nature to be regarded as criminal or that
the offence renders the person liable to a penalty which by its nature and
degree of severity belongs in the general criminal sphere.

453. On the facts, the company was found guilty of tax evasion and
ordered to pay the default interest surcharges and a 40 percent fine. The
latter fine, representing a very substantial sum of over half a billion euros,
was imposed in proportion to the amount of the tax avoided, had no upper
limit and was clearly intended as a punishment to deter re-offending
(compare with 20 to 40 percent surcharge rates in the case of Janosevic v.
Sweden, no. 34619/97, § 69, ECHR 2002-VII and a 20 percent surcharge
rate in the mentioned Jussila case). The Court considers that this establishes
the criminal nature of the offence for the purposes of Article 6 of the
Convention. Hence, Article 6 applies under its criminal head to the 2000
Tax Assessment proceedings.

454. Under Article 6 of the Convention the applicant company
complained that the case concerning its 2000 Tax Assessment had not been
tried by a tribunal established by law as it should have been examined by a
court in Nefteyugansk rather than in Moscow.

455. The Court recalls that a domestic court complies with the
“established by law” criterion of Article 6 § 1 unless it acts in flagrant
disregard of the applicable domestic laws governing its jurisdiction and
procedures (see Coéme and Others v. Belgium, nos. 32492/96, 32547/96,
32548/96, 33209/96 and 33210/96, §§ 98-99, ECHR 2000-VII; Lavents v.
Latvia, no. 58442/00, § 114, 28 November 2002; and Buscarini v. San
Marino (dec.), no. 31657/96, 4 May 2000).

456. The domestic courts in the case at issue carefully examined the
argument about the lack of jurisdiction and rejected it as unfounded (see
paragraphs 24, 27 and 28). Indeed, having examined the applicable domestic
law (see paragraphs 344 and 346), the Court finds nothing unreasonable
about the application of the real seat doctrine in the present case.

457. Accordingly, the Court finds this complaint manifestly ill-founded
within the meaning of Article 35 § 3 of the Convention. It must therefore be
rejected pursuant to Article 35 § 4.

458. With reference to Article 6 of the Convention the company was
also dissatisfied with the Ministry's failure to reply to the company's request
to clarify the audit report in the tax proceedings for the year 2000.

459. The Court notes that there is nothing in the case file to suggest that
the alleged lack of answer by the Ministry in any way affected the fairness
of the subsequent proceedings as such. Furthermore, whilst under the
applicable law the Ministry did not have an obligation to answer the

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 69

company's argument, the Ministry's decision of 14 April 2004 contained
detailed answers to all of the company's objections (see paragraph 17).

460. Accordingly, the Court finds this part of the application manifestly
ill-founded within the meaning of Article 35 § 3 of the Convention and
rejects it pursuant to Article 35 § 4.

461. Under Article 6 of the Convention the applicant company
complained that it had not received a fair trial. In particular, in respect of the
first-instance proceedings in the 2000 Tax Assessment the applicant
company complained that the Ministry had brought the action in these
proceedings within the grace period, that the time to prepare for trial had
been too short, that the courts had erred in refusing the company's requests
to adjourn the proceedings and that there had been no adversarial
proceedings on that account, that its lawyers could not obtain from the
Ministry answers to all the questions they wished to ask in the hearings
before the first-instance court, as the court had abruptly interrupted their
pleadings. According to the applicant company, the first-instance court
pronounced judgment without having studied all the evidence. With
reference to the appeal proceedings in the 2000 Tax Assessment case, the
company complained that the statutory time-limit for appeal had been
unjustifiably abridged and that the appeal court had refused its request for
adjournment of the proceedings. Lastly, the applicant company complained
that the appeal court had delayed the delivery of the reasons for its judgment
in the 2000 Tax Assessment case and thereby had prevented the applicant
company from lodging a cassation appeal.

462. In its relevant parts, Article 6 provides:

“1. In the determination of his civil rights and obligations or of any criminal charge
against him, everyone is entitled to a fair and public hearing within a reasonable time
by an independent and impartial tribunal established by law.

 

3. Everyone charged with a criminal offence has the following minimum rights:

(b) to have adequate time and facilities for the preparation of his defence; ...”

463. The Government submitted that the applicant company had brought
appeal proceedings against the first-instance judgment of 26 May 2004. The
possibility of review on both points of fact and law was expressly provided
for by Russian law (Article 257 of the Code of Commercial Court Procedure)
and the company had used it. It thus could not be said that the court
procedures fell short of the requirements of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.

464. As regards the argument that the company had insufficient time for
the preparation of its defence, the Government referred to the domestic
legislation, which established a two-month time-limit for the examination of
the case at first instance (Article 134 of the Code of Commercial Court
Procedure). The applicant company had had at least 37 days to prepare its

70 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

defence from the date of the filing of the suit, which, in view of the above
time-limit, had not been unreasonable. Furthermore, the applicant company
first became aware of the Ministry's arguments on 29 December 2003, when
the Ministry issued the report indicating the applicant company's large tax
liability, and already on 12 January 2004 the company filed its objections to
the report under Section 100 (5) of the Tax Code. Moreover, the principal
arguments contained in these objections remained unchanged throughout the
proceedings. It could not therefore be said that the applicant company was
unprepared to state its case, as it was well aware of the Ministry's arguments
five months prior to the beginning of the court proceedings. In addition, the
Government pointed out that the applicant company's lawyers were given an
opportunity to study the evidence both in court and at the Ministry's premises
throughout May, June and July 2004. According to the documents submitted
by the Government, counsel for the applicant availed themselves of this
opportunity on at least two occasions, on 18 and 19 May 2004 respectively.
The Government argued that the applicant company's arguments about
insufficient time for the preparation of the case had been carefully examined
and eventually rejected by the domestic courts as unfounded.

465. In the Government's view, the appeal hearings were in compliance
with Article 6. Under Article 267 of the Code of Commercial Courts
Procedure, which requires an appeal court to examine the appeals by the
parties within a month from the date on which they were filed, the Appeal
Court had to examine the case within a month of 1 June 2004, which was
the date on which one party to the case, OOO “YUKOS” Moskva, first
lodged an appeal brief, notwithstanding the fact that the applicant company
lodged its appeal on 17 June 2004. The appeal hearings started on 18 June
and lasted eight days until 29 June 2004, which was in line with the above
tule. In addition, the applicant company deliberately delayed the
examination of the case by dispatching the appeal brief to an erroneous
address.

466. Lastly, the Government underlined that the appeal decision had not
been final and had been appealed against by the applicant company both in
cassation instance and by way of supervisory review. The Government
submitted that the fact that the reasoned copy of the Appeal Court decision
of 29 June 2004 had been produced on 9 July 2004 did not affect the
fairness of the proceedings as, in any event, it was open to the applicant
company to lodge its cassation appeal within the two-month time-limit from
the date of the delivery of the appeal decision on 29 June 2004, even in the
absence of the reasoned copy of the decision. Indeed, the applicant company
lodged its cassation appeal on 6 July 2004 in the absence of the reasoned
copy of the appeal decision. The cassation appeal was accepted for
consideration and on 17 September 2004 its full version was examined and
rejected by the Circuit Court.

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 71

467. The applicant company submitted that the supporting material
underlying the Tax Assessment for 2000 had first been provided to it as a
result of the City Court's decision of 14 May 2004. Allegedly, the disclosure
did not occur until 17 May 2004, when the Ministry had filed 24,000 pages
of documents and had continued on 18 May 2004 with approximately
45,000 further pages and a further 2,000 pages late on 20 May 2004, the eve
of the first-instance hearing. The company conceded that its representatives
had indeed been given access to all these materials, both prior to the
hearings and during the trial, but submitted that the manner and time for
such access had been so unsatisfactory that it was of no practical use. It also
argued that it had been unable effectively to access the court's filed
documents during the first-instance hearings except for during lunch breaks.
Overall, the company insisted that it had had insufficient time to prepare its
defence and familiarise itself with the evidence before the court, as it had
not had an opportunity to have knowledge of and comment on all evidence
adduced or observations filed, or to express its views on every document in
the file, contrary to Article 6.

468. The applicant company further submitted that the domestic courts
had failed to address the question whether the abridgement of time had
affected its substantive right to a fair hearing and that, equally, they did not
rely on Article 267 referred to by the respondent Government. Also, the rule
in Article 267 requiring an appeal to be determined within one month is not
respected in practice by the Russian courts; failure to comply with this
requirement, even for a whole year, has no consequences for the proceedings.
There was, according to the applicant company, no evidence of any particular
urgency in listing or resolving the appeal: neither the Ministry, nor the co-
appellant, OOO “YUKOS” Moscow, sought expedition when their appeals
were lodged and the latter did not oppose the company's applications to
adjourn the appeal hearing.

469. In response to the Government's criticism suggesting that the
company's appeal was misaddressed, the applicant company stated that no
evidence had been provided for any mistake in this respect and that, after all,
the appeal had been received by the court and the tax authorities. In any
event, the court made no criticism of the company in relation to the exercise
of this appeal. Overall, the abridgement of the appeal period was a serious
interference with the company's right to prepare for the appeal hearings,
which failed to cure but rather accentuated the unfairness of the first-instance
proceedings and no substantive reason was offered at all as to why this
acceleration was lawful, necessary or consistent with the requirements of a
fair trial.

470. The applicant company further submitted that the effect of delaying
the reasons for the appeal decision was that the decision had been
immediately enforced against the company, rendering any appeal nugatory.
Only an application for a stay of enforcement pending an appeal in

72 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION

cassation, coupled with a valid appeal in cassation, could operate properly
against the enforcement. In the company's view, any such valid appeal was
strictly dependent on filing of the reasons by the appeal court. However, the
appeal decision became subject to immediate forcible execution, the
company became liable for the additional surcharge fine of seven percent of
the total liability and the opportunity for exercising an effective appeal
against these measures was circumvented. Having regard to all this, the
applicant company maintained that the 2000 tax proceedings did not comply
with the requirements of Article 6 of the Convention.

471. In the light of the parties' submissions, the Court finds that this part
of the application raises serious issues of fact and law under the Convention,
the determination of which requires an examination of the merits. The Court
concludes that the complaint is not manifestly ill-founded within the
meaning of Article 35 § 3 of the Convention. No other grounds for
declaring it inadmissible have been established.

472. Under Article 6 of the Convention the applicant company
complained that the 2001-2003 Tax Assessments had been imposed by the
Ministry, rather than a court.

473. The Court observes that the applicant company had the right to
appeal against the 2001-2003 Tax Assessments, which it eventually did (see
paragraphs 146-149, 172-180, 193-199). In the absence of any credible
allegations of the lack of access to court, the Court finds the complaint
manifestly ill-founded within the meaning of Article 35 § 3 of the
Convention and rejects it pursuant to Article 35 § 4.

D. Admissibility of the complaints under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1,
taken alone and in conjunction with Articles 1, 13, 14 and 18 of
the Convention

474. Under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1, taken alone and in conjunction
with Articles 1, 13, 14 and 18 of the Convention, the applicant company
complained about the allegedly unlawful, arbitrary and disproportionate
imposition and enforcement of the 2000-2003 Tax Assessments. The
company complained furthermore that the sale of OAO Yuganskneftegaz
had been unlawful, arbitrary and disproportionate too.

475. The Convention provisions relied on by the applicant company
state as follows:

Article 1 of the Convention

“The High Contracting Parties shall secure to everyone within their jurisdiction the
rights and freedoms defined in Section I of [the] Convention.”

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 73

Article 13 of the Convention

“Everyone whose rights and freedoms as set forth in [the] Convention are violated
shall have an effective remedy before a national authority notwithstanding that the
violation has been committed by persons acting in an official capacity.”

 

Article 14 of the Convention

“The enjoyment of the rights and freedoms set forth in [the] Convention shall be
secured without discrimination on any ground such as sex, race, colour, language,
religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, association with a
national minority, property, birth or other status.”

Article 18 of the Convention

“The restrictions permitted under [the] Convention to the said rights and freedoms
shall not be applied for any purpose other than those for which they have been
prescribed.”

Article 1 of Protocol No. 1

“Every natural or legal person is entitled to the peaceful enjoyment of his
possessions. No one shall be deprived of his possessions except in the public interest
and subject to the conditions provided for by law and by the general principles of
international law.

   

The preceding provisions shall not, however, in any way impair the right of a State
to enforce such laws as it deems necessary to control the use of property in
accordance with the general interest or to secure the payment of taxes or other
contributions or penalties.”

476. The Government maintained that the tax inspections in respect of
the applicant company had been conducted in accordance with the domestic
law and that the company had been acting in bad faith throughout the
proceedings, in blatant breach of the tax legislation, and had only mimicked
compliance with the law. The Government argued that the applicant
company had committed blatant tax evasion which was confirmed by the
findings of the domestic courts. The evidence to confirm the Ministry's
claims was abundant and it was clear that the whole setup with sham entities
was organised solely for the purpose of tax evasion.

477. As an example of the sham nature of the arrangement, the
Government referred to the fact, established by the domestic courts, that on
one occasion a person managing one of the company's sham entities signed
three contracts simultaneously in three different locations, namely Samara,
Nefteyugansk and the Tomsk region, which are located very far one from
another. In addition, the Government referred to the internal opinion of the
audit company PriceWaterhouseCoopers, which specifically mentioned
various problems with the applicant company's “tax optimisation” scheme,
including the Fund used by the company for receiving the money generated

74 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

by the sham entities. It was in breach of the Russian legislation as money
could only be transferred from one independent commercial entity to another
independent commercial entity in exchange or in payment for services or
goods (Article 575 of the Civil Code, see paragraph 374). In addition, the
company misled the public in its reports and financial statements. The
Government submitted that the company's management had presented a
distorted picture of the company's performance in order to attract investors.

478. According to the Government, the applicant company acted in bad
faith and was also acting in bad faith in other sets of proceedings, including
a failed attempt to file for bankruptcy in the United States. Furthermore, the
management attempted to create artificial liabilities and existing debts to the
applicant company, in order to increase their weight as creditors in the
company's insolvency proceedings.

479. As regards the applicant company's argument about the selective
application of the law in their case, the Government responded that the
allegations that other taxpayers may have used similar schemes could not be
interpreted as justifying the applicant's failure to abide by the law. They
further contended that the occurrence of illegal tax schemes at a certain
stage of Russia's historical development was not due to failures or
drawbacks of the legislation, but was instead due to bad faith actions of
economic actors and weakened governmental control over compliance with
the Russian tax legislation on account of objective reasons, such the 1998
economic crisis, and the difficulties of the transitional period. At present,
the Government were constantly combating tax evasion and had
strengthened supervision in the sphere. The Government referred to
statistical data which demonstrated that, since 2000, there had been a sharp
increase in the number of tax disputes: during the five years between 2000
and 2005 the number of tax cases almost tripled. The Government also cited
domestic case-law demonstrating that the courts’ position in similar tax cases
had been consistent (see paragraphs 401-426). Furthermore, at the relevant
time tax proceedings had also been brought against such large companies as
OAO Ufaneftekhim, IZ TNK, OAO Vympelkom, ZAO Ford Motor Ko.,
ZAO J.T. Marketing and Sales tobacco.

480. As regards the lawfulness of the company's use of domestic off-
shore territories, the Government referred to statements by the former
counsel of the applicant company and its majority shareholder Group
Menatep, Mr D. Sch. In an interview with the Raschyot magazine of
30 January 2001, he suggested that tax planning was like a piece of cake
with multiple layers. According to the Government, the applicant company
used the schemes described by Mr D. Sch. in their crudest form and
undoubtedly knew that the schemes had been illegal.

481. In respect of the lawfulness of the domestic authorities’ actions, the
Government submitted that the company's tax liability had been established
by the domestic courts on the basis of, among other things, Article 122 of the

  

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 75

Tax Code, which penalised the understatement of revenues and
corresponding taxes, RF Law No. 2116-1 of 27 December 1991 “On profit
tax of enterprises and organisations”, RF Law No. 1759-I of 18 October 1991
“On road funds in the Russian Federation”, RF Law No. 2118-I of
27 December 1991 “On the basics of the tax system”, RF Law No. 2030-I of
13 December 1991 “On property tax of enterprises”, RF Law No. 1992-I of
6 December 1991 “On valued-added tax” and RF Law No. 3297-I of 14 July
1992 “On closed administrative-territorial entities” which were all clear and
foreseeable at the relevant time. They also referred to statistical data by
AK&M and some other news agencies in 2002, which had reported that O0AO
LUKOIL and OAO Surgutneftegas, two other large Russian oil producers,
had posted sales proceeds of RUB 434.92 billion and RUB 163.652 billion
and paid RUB 21.190 billion and RUB 13.885 billion in profit tax
respectively, whilst the applicant company had posted sales proceeds of RUB
295.729 billion and paid only RUB 3.193 billion in profit tax.

482. The Government submitted that the authorities had acted in full
compliance with the domestic legislation and with Article 1 of Protocol No. 1
to the Convention, which expressly provided for the “right of a State to
enforce such laws as it deems necessary to control the use of property to
secure the payment of taxes or other contributions or penalties”. In view of
the State's wide margin of appreciation in the fiscal sphere and the applicant
company's abusive conduct the Government maintained that the fair balance
between the private and public interests had been struck. The tax inspections
in respect of the applicant company had been conducted in accordance with
the domestic law, and that the company's bad faith had been exemplified by
an attempt to conceal the register of its subsidiaries. The tax evasion was
committed at the expense of the least developed regions of Russia,
represented a blatant breach of the legislation and had inflicted irreplaceable
damage on the public interest.

483. The Government submitted that the enforcement proceedings in
respect of the applicant company had been lawful and proportionate. The
company, however, had failed properly to exhaust domestic remedies in
respect of this part of the application. In particular, its complaints about the
seizure of property pending the enforcement proceedings, the alleged failure
by the bailiffs to grant the company access to the case in the enforcement
proceedings, the bailiffs' alleged inaction in respect of the shares of Sibneft,
the order to pay a seven percent enforcement fee as well as the
circumstances of valuation and sale of OAO Yuganskneftegaz were
inadmissible on account of the failure to exhaust domestic remedies.

484. The Government also submitted that the sale of OAO
‘Yuganskneftegaz had been a lawful, proportionate and reasonable measure
aimed at forcing the company to meet its debts. In their first set of
observations the Government mentioned that out of a total of RUB 461.3
billion (approximately EUR 13 billion) due by the applicant company, the

76 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

authorities had succeeded in recovering some RUB 380.9 billion
(approximately EUR 11 billion), including RUB 120.5 billion (approximately
EUR 3.4 billion) paid by the company in cash and RUB 260.5 billion
obtained through auctioning of OAO Yuganskneftegas (approximately
EUR 7.5 billion). After deduction of these sums, the company still owed
some RUB 80 billion. The Government pointed out that during the
enforcement proceedings there had been no restrictions on the company's
production cycle or the sale of petroleum and mineral oils, and that the
applicant company had remained fully operational.

485. The Government further submitted that the procedure of
compulsory recovery of arrears of mandatory tax payments had been used
with due respect to the applicant company. Such tax payments were
recovered by way of charging the company's cash flows on bank accounts
and in the event of insufficiency or absence of cash, recovery of tax would
be effectuated at the expense of the taxpayer's assets the procedure for
which was set out in detail in the domestic legislation and followed by the
authorities. During the enforcement procedure, no restrictions were imposed
on the company's production cycle and the company continued functioning.

486. There were no unjustified actions by the bailiffs and the measures
represented control of the use of property and were in full compliance with
the Convention. As regards the seizure of property, the Government referred
to the Gasus Dosier and AGOSI cases and considered that, having regard to
relevant factors, such as the enormous amount of arrears, the bad faith
conduct of the applicant company and the need for an expedient and
efficient recovery of tax to the State budget, the measure in question
complied with the requirements of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1.

487. As regards the sale of OAO Yuganskneftegaz, the measure aimed at
securing the payment of taxes and was effected in full compliance with the
provisions of the Federal Enforcement Proceedings Act. In the course of the
enforcement proceedings the bailiffs seized the entirety of the shares in OAO
‘Yuganskneftegaz belonging to the applicant company. These actions were
contested in court, which on 23 August and 25 October 2004 rejected the
complaints as unfounded. Before the end of 2004 the bailiffs received six
writs to be executed and the total amount to be recovered was then
RUB 461.3 billion. The bailiffs did all they could to find the cash, but the
company's cash funds were clearly insufficient to cover the arrears. Under
section 52 of Enforcement Proceedings Act, an impartial assessment of the
cost of the shareholding of OAO Yuganskneftegza belonging to Yukos was
commissioned and an appropriate report was submitted on 6 October 2004 to
the bailiffs. The parties to the enforcement proceedings, including the
applicant company, were familiarised with the assessment act on 13 October
2004, and the company never challenged the results in court.

488. Under section 54 (2) of the Enforcement Proceedings Act, the sale of
the applicant company's property was made by a specialised organisation

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 77

pursuant to the terms of commission and the relevant legislation. On
18 November 2004 the bailiffs decided to sell 43 shares (76.8 percent) of
OAO Yuganskneftegaz at an auction. The Government noted that OAO
‘Yuganskneftegaz was itself the debtor in mandatory payments to the budget
totalling RUB 102.09 billion, so that the above arrears inevitably affected the
price of the auctioned shares, as defined by the valuation institution and the
results of the auction. The date of the auction and invitation to participate in
the open auction were published in the mass media in due time. The auction
itself was open as to its participants and to the form of submissions of price
bids for shares. Bids were received between 19 November and 18 December
2004. On 19 December 2004 the open auction took place. The winner of the
auction was recognised as OOO Baykalfinancegrup, which offered
RUB 260,753,447,303.18 for the shares in question. The auction itself was
public. The representatives of the mass media provided extensive media
coverage. The results were published in the mass media and broadcasted.
With regard to the proportionality of sale, the sum of 260.5 billion roubles
generated as a result of the sale of the shares did not, however, cover the
arrears of OAO Yukos entirely. In sum, the Government considered that there
had been no breach of the Convention.

489. The applicant company argued that it had been deprived of its
possessions, and that these deprivations had not been in accordance with the
Jaw and had imposed a disproportionate burden on the company. Firstly, the
applicant company disagreed with the factual conclusions reached by the
domestic courts in respect of the trading companies. The applicant argued
that it had been the wrong defendant in the case, that there had been no links
of dependency between the trading companies and itself, and that there were
no grounds for making the applicant company, a holding company having at
the material time only two employees with highly important but small scale
administrative functions, liable for the trading companies’ tax liabilities and
creating a previously virtually unknown concept of “bad faith taxpayer”.

490. The company further argued that the denial of tax benefits to the
trading companies and the failure to repay VAT in respect of the export of oil
and oil products had been unlawful and unsubstantiated. The company further
argued that it had been subjected to double taxation in respect of the profits
received by the trading companies, that the courts' interpretation of the
relevant laws had been unforeseeable, unprecedented, selective and unique,
contradicting the established practice of the courts. The tax authorities and the
Government had submitted no single comparable case, let alone practice to
justify the contrary. The applicant company considered that the case-law
referred to by the Government was not comparable to the facts or the legal
analysis applied in the present case, that it substantially post-dated the
relevant period, was largely unreported and inaccessible and related to the
interpretation and application of Civil Code provisions which were not
invoked or relied on in these proceedings by any party. Furthermore, the

78 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

company relied on Article 251 (1) 11 of the Tax Code to justify the unilateral
transfers of cash from the trading companies to the applicant company's Fund.
They further argued that there had been no such notion as a “sham entity” in
Russian law.

491. With reference to Article 75 (3) of the Tax Code, the applicant
company claimed that it should not have been ordered to pay interest
surcharges at all. The company argued that the authorities ought to have
applied Articles 20 and 40 of the Tax Code in their case. It argued that it had
been deprived of its possessions and that these deprivations had not been in
accordance with the law and had imposed a disproportionate burden on the
company. The tax liability and enforcement proceedings were a de facto
disguised expropriation. The seizure of assets was disproportionate in that
the authorities ordered the applicant company to pay and at the same time
froze the company's assets, worth considerably more than the company's
then liability. The authorities refused to use the company's equity in the
Sibneft company as well as other realistic means of settlement of the debt.
The domestic authorities should have accepted those other realistic means of
settlement because they were required to do so by precedent in the practice
of the commercial courts. The time of merely a couple of days given to the
applicant company for payment was absurdly short. The requirement to pay
seven percent enforcement fees was disproportionate and unlawful. The sale
of OAO Yuganskneftegaz was unlawful, conducted at a_ gross
undervaluation through a plainly controlled auction, with the participation
of a sham bidder, OOO Baykalfinansgrup.

492. With regard to the company's failure to comply with the
requirement to exhaust domestic remedies, the applicant company
considered that exhaustion had been unnecessary in view of the lack of
prospects of success. The domestic courts consistently rejected the
company's attempts to contest the actions of the bailiffs, so the attempts
would have been futile. In any event, the company did not disagree with the
valuation report in respect of OAO Yuganskneftegaz as it was not
materially inaccurate so as to be realistically challenged in litigation.
Furthermore, the company submitted that it did challenge the entire process
in which the voting shares of OAO Yuganskneftegaz were sold to a state-
owned company OAO Rosneft.

493. The Court first notes that the Government raised an argument of
non-exhaustion as regards the applicant company's complaints about various
circumstances of the enforcement proceedings, including the auctioning of
OAO Yuganskneftegaz. The Court considers that in view of the applicant
company's complaints under Article 13 of the Convention, the question of
exhaustion of domestic remedies is so closely linked to the merits of the
case that it is inappropriate to determine it at the present stage of the
proceedings. The Court therefore decides to join this objection to the merits.

OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION, 79

494. In the light of the parties' submissions, the Court finds that this part
of the application raises serious issues of fact and law under the Convention,
the determination of which requires an examination of the merits. The Court
concludes that it is not manifestly ill-founded within the meaning of
Article 35 § 3 of the Convention. No other grounds for declaring them
inadmissible have been established.

E. Admissibility of the complaints under Article 7 of the Convention

495. Under Article 7 of the Convention the applicant company
complained that the Tax Assessments 2000-2003 had been based on an
arbitrary interpretation of the domestic law, that the prosecution had been
selective and arbitrary and that the imposition of double penalties for the
years 2001-2003 had been retrospective. Article 7 of the Convention states
as follows:

“1. No one shall be held guilty of any criminal offence on account of any act or
omission which did not constitute a criminal offence under national or international
law at the time when it was committed. Nor shall a heavier penalty be imposed than
the one that was applicable at the time the criminal offence was committed.

  

 

 

2. This article shall not prejudice the trial and punishment of any person for any act
or omission which, at the time when it was committed, was criminal according to the
general principles of law recognised by civilised nations.”

 

496. The Government argued that the proceedings had not been criminal
within the meaning of the Russian law and that there had not been criminal
proceedings within the meaning of Article 7 of the Convention. According
to them, the dispute was adjudication of a tax debt of an administrative-law
nature, a purely public policy issue falling outside of the Court's
jurisdiction. In any event, Article 7 had not been breached. Overall, the
Government argued that both the domestic law and practice had been clear
and available and had complied with the requirements of lawfulness and legal
certainty within the meaning of Article 7 of the Convention. Their arguments
were similar to those mentioned earlier in respect of Article 1 of Protocol
No. 1.

497. The applicant company argued that the proceedings had been
“criminal” within the meaning of Article 7, that the offences had been
interpreted in a selective, unprecedented and unforeseeable manner, that the
case contained a novel interpretation of the Tax Code insofar as the
applicant company had been made responsible for tax allegedly due on
transactions conducted by the trading companies and these latter companies
had been designated as “sham”, that it could not have known in advance
whether its conduct was criminal and that the Government had failed to
produce a single example or case to justify the contrary.

80 OAO NEFTYANAYA KOMPANIYA YUKOS v. RUSSIA DECISION,

498. As regards the Government's argument that Article 7 of the
Convention was inapplicable, the Court observes that it has earlier
established the criminal nature of the tax offence in the 2000 Tax
Assessment for the purposes of Article 6 of the Convention. Since the 2001-
2003 Tax Assessments concerned essentially the same offence committed
by the applicant company during three subsequent years, the Court finds
that the 2000-2003 Tax Assessment proceedings against the applicant
company concerned criminal offence for the purposes of Article 7.

499. The Court considers that this part of the application raises serious
issues of fact and law under the Convention, the determination of which
requires an examination of the merits. The Court concludes that it is not
manifestly ill-founded within the meaning of Article 35 § 3 of the
Convention. No other grounds for declaring it inadmissible have been
established.

For these reasons, the Court

Dismisses by a majority the Government's request to discontinue the
examination of the case and accepts Mr Gardner as the valid representative
of the applicant company;

Decides by a majority to join to the merits the examination of the issue of
exhaustion in so far as the applicant company's complaints about the
enforcement proceedings, including the auctioning of OAO
Yuganskneftegaz, are concerned;

Declares by a majority admissible, without prejudging the merits:

— the applicant company's complaints under Article 6 of the Convention
concerning various defects in the proceedings concerning its tax liability for
the year 2000;

— the complaints under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1, taken alone and
conjunction with Articles 1, 13, 14 and 18 of the Convention, about the
lawfulness and proportionality of the 2000-2003 Tax Assessments and their
subsequent enforcement, including the sale of OAO Yuganskneftegaz;

— the complaints under Article 7 of the Convention about the lack of
proper legal basis, selective and arbitrary prosecution and the imposition of
double penalties in the Tax Assessment proceedings for the years 2000-
2003;

Declares unanimously inadmissible the remainder of the application.

Sgren Nielsen Christos Rozakis
Registrar President

