International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes

(ICSID)

In the Matter of an Arbitration between

HUSSEIN NUAMAN SOUFRAKI,

Claimant

and

THE UNITED ARAB EMIRATES

Respondent

Case No. ARB/02/7

AWARD

Date of dispatch to the Parties: July 7, 2004

President: L. Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C.

Members of the Tribunal: Judge Stephen M. Schwebel

Dr. Aktham El Kholy

Secretary of the Tribunal: Mrs. Martina Polasek

In Case No. ARB/02/7

BETWEEN: Hussein Nuaman Soufraki (“Claimant”)

Represented by:

Mr. Jan Paulsson, Mr. Peter J. Turner, Mrs. Lucy Reed and

Mr. Georgios Petrochilos

of the law firm Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer, as counsel

And

The United Arab Emirates (“Respondent”)

Represented by:

Mr. Stephen Jagusch, Mr. Simon Roderick and Mr. David
Mackie, C.B.E, Q.C.

of the law firm Allen & Overy, as counsel

THE TRIBUNAL

Composed as above,

After deliberation,

Makes the following Award:

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

1.

On 16 May 2002, Claimant seized the International Centre for Settlement
of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) with a Request for
Arbitration directed against Respondent. The agreement at the heart of
these proceedings is a Concession Agreement between the Dubai
Department of Ports and Customs and Claimant dated 21 October 2000

(the “Concession Agreement”).

The Concession Agreement awarded Claimant a concession for a period of
30 years for the purpose of developing, managing and operating the Port
of Al Hamriya and its surrounding area after which it was to revert to the

Dubai Department of Ports and Customs.

The Concession Agreement was entered into by Mr. Soufraki in his
personal capacity and, in that capacity, he is described in the Concession

Agreement as a Canadian national.

In its Request for Arbitration, Claimant describes himself as an Italian
national and invokes the Bilateral Investment Treaty between Italy and the
United Arab Emirates (“UAE”) dated 22 January 1995 (the “BIT”). This
BIT, which came into force on 29 April 1997, is similar in character and
terms to the multitude of bilateral investment treaties that have been

concluded in the last 35 years.

The Claimant claims that Respondent has breached its obligations under
certain Articles of the BIT and claims damages which he alleges to have

suffered as a result of these breaches.

The arbitration clause in the BIT reads as follows:

qd) All kinds of disputes or differences,
including disputes over the amount of
compensation for expropriation, requisition,
nationalization or similar measures, between
the Contracting State and an investor of the
other Contracting State concerning an
investment of that investor in the territory
and maritime zones of the former
Contracting State shall, if possible, be

settled amicably.

(2) If such disputes or differences cannot be

settled according to the provisions of

7.

(3)

paragraph (1) of this Article within six
months from the date of a written request for
settlement, the investor concerned may

submit the dispute to:

(a) The competent court of the Contracting
State having territorial jurisdiction for

decision; or

(b) the Arbitral Tribunal according to the

provisions provided in the protocol.

(c) the "International Center for the
Settlement of Investment Disputes", for
the application of the arbitration
procedures provided by the Washington
Convention of 18" March 1965 on the
"Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of other

States".

Neither Contracting State shall pursue
through diplomatic channels any matter
referred to arbitration until the proceedings
have been exhausted and a Contracting State
has failed to abide by or to comply with the
award rendered by the Arbitral Tribunal
within the term prescribed by the judgment

pursuant to internal laws.

The ICSID registered the Request for Arbitration on 18 June 2002.

Claimant designated Judge Stephen M. Schwebel as arbitrator and
Respondent designated Dr. Aktham El Kholy as arbitrator. With the
agreement of the Parties, the Secretary-General of the Centre appointed
L. Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C. as President of the Arbitral Tribunal and, in
accordance with Rule 6(1) of the Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings of the Centre (the “ICSID Arbitration Rules”), the Arbitral
Tribunal (the “Tribunal”) was deemed to have been constituted and the
proceedings to have commenced on 23 October 2002. Mrs. Martina
Polasek, Counsel, ICSID, was designated by ICSID as Secretary of the
Tribunal. With the consent of the Parties, Ms. Catherine Dagenais, an
associate of Mr. Fortier, was appointed as Assistant to the Tribunal on 7

May 2003.

A first session of the Tribunal was held on 20 December 2002 in
Washington, D.C., at the seat of the Centre, in the presence of
representatives of the Parties, members of the Tribunal and the Secretary.
Respondent gave notice of its intention to challenge the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal on the grounds that Claimant was not a national of Italy under
Italian law and that he did not possess effective Italian nationality under

international law so as to entitle him to invoke the BIT.

At the first session, the Tribunal announced its decision to bifurcate the
arbitration and to hear Respondent's objection to the jurisdiction of the

Tribunal as a separate, preliminary issue.

In accordance with the timetable directed by the Tribunal, Respondent
filed on 31 January 2003 its Memorial on the Claimant's nationality
contesting the jurisdiction of the Tribunal (“Respondent's Objection to
Jurisdiction”) on the basis that Claimant had not established that he was a
national of Italy in order to meet the nationality requirement of
Article 25(2)(a) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other States (the
“Convention”) and to avail himself of the offer of the consent to ICSID

jurisdiction made by the UAE in the BIT.

On 3March 2003, Claimant submitted its Reply to Respondent's
Objections to Jurisdiction, arguing that Claimant met the nationality
requirement of Article 25(2)(a) of the Convention and could invoke the

BIT to avail himself of the ICSID jurisdiction.

On 7 May 2003, a hearing on jurisdiction of the Tribunal was held in
London. Counsel for both Parties presented oral submissions and
answered questions from members of the Tribunal. Claimant was not

present at this hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Tribunal

directed each Party to file a bundle of their respective exhibits and a Post-

Hearing Brief.

Claimant and Respondent filed their bundles of exhibits and Post-Hearing
Briefs on jurisdiction on 30 June 2003. Among the exhibits filed by
Claimant were five Certificates of Nationality issued by Italian authorities,
copies of Claimant’s Italian passports, and a letter from the Ministry of

Foreign Affairs of Italy reading in part as follows:

I confirm that the right to have recourse to the said
[ICSID/BIT] forum is recognized to you on the basis of your
Italian citizenship, which is attested to by the documents that
you provided to ... the Ministry of Foreign A ffairs..
On 5 August 2003, following an exchange of letters between the Parties
and submissions to the Tribunal, the Tribunal directed Claimant to file an

affidavit addressing all of the issues pending before the Tribunal arising

from Respondent's Objection to Jurisdiction.

On 9 September 2003, pursuant to the Tribunal's directions, Claimant filed

his affidavit with the Tribunal.

On 23 September 2003, Respondent applied to the Tribunal for leave to
cross-examine Mr. Soufraki on his affidavit. Claimant objected to

Respondent’s Application.

20.

After deliberation, on 29 September 2003, the Tribunal granted

Respondent’s Application.

A hearing was held in Washington, D.C., on 12 March 2004. At the
hearing, Claimant was cross-examined by Respondent on his affidavit and

answered questions from members of the Tribunal.

As directed by the Tribunal, Claimant and Respondent filed their

submissions following Mr. Soufraki’s examination on 3 May 2004.

ISSUE TO BE DETERMINED

21.

Under Article 41(1) of the ICSID Convention “the Tribunal shall be the
judge of its own competence”. Pursuant to that provision and Rule 41 of
the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the Tribunal has to decide whether the
dispute falls within the jurisdiction of the Centre. The Tribunal must
determine whether Claimant is a national of Italy according to Article
25(2)(a) of the Convention and whether Claimant belongs to the class of
investors to whom Respondent has offered consent to ICSID arbitration

pursuant to the BIT.

THE LAW

22. With respect to the nationality requirement, Article 25(1) and (2)(a) of the

Convention reads, in its relevant parts, as follows:

qd) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to
any legal dispute arising directly out of an
investment, between a Contracting State (or
a constituent subdivision or agency of the
Contracting State designated to the Centre
by that State) and a national of another
Contracting State, which the parties to the
dispute consent in writing to submit to the
Centre. When the parties have given their
consent, no party may withdraw its consent

unilaterally.

(2) “National of another Contracting State”

means:

(a) any natural person who had _ the
nationality of the Contracting State other
than the State party to the dispute on the
date on which the parties consented to
submit such dispute to conciliation or
arbitration as well as on the date on
which the request was registered
pursuant to paragraph (3) of Article 28
or paragraph (3) of Article 36, but does

not include any person who on either

23.

24.

Article 1(3) of the BIT defines an “investor of the other Contracting State”

as a “natural person holding the nationality of that State [Italy] in

-10-

date also had the nationality of the
Contracting State party to the dispute.

accordance with its law”.

In order to determine whether Claimant is a national of Italy, on the facts

of the present case three provisions of Italian law are relevant:

qd)

(2)

Article 8, paragraph 1 of the Italian Law
No. 555 of 1912 which reads as follows:

Loses the [Italian] citizenship:

qd) whoever spontaneously acquires a
foreign citizenship and establishes his

residence abroad.

Article 17(1) of the Italian Law No. 91 of
1992 which reads as follows:

17.-1 Who has lost the [Italian] citizenship
according to articles 8 and 10, Law 13"
June, 1912, n. 555, or because he/she
has not adhered to the option provided
for by article 5, Law 21" April, 1983,
n. 123, may reacquire the citizenship if

he/she submits a relevant declaration

-ll-

within two years from the entry into

force of this law.!

(3) Article 13(1)(d) of the Italian Law No. 91 of
1992 which provides:

(1) whoever has lost his [Italian] citizenship

reacquires it:

(d) one year after the date at which he
established his residence in the territory
of the Republic [of Italy], save in case of
explicit renunciation within the same

time-limit;

POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES

1) Nationality of Claimant prior to and after 1991

25. Both Parties agree that, prior to 1991, Claimant was or became an Italian

national.

26. Respondent maintains that pursuant to Article 8, paragraph | of the Italian
Law No. 555 of 1912 (which was the law in force in 1991), Mr. Soufraki
lost his Italian nationality automatically when he acquired Canadian
nationality and took up residence in Canada in or about 1991. Claimant in

his testimony before the Tribunal affirmed that he considers himself to be

' This term was further postponed to 31 December 1997 by article 2195, Law 23 December 1996, n. 662.

27.

28.

29.

30.

-12-

an Italian, as of right and choice, and that he never intended to relinquish
his Italian nationality when he acquired Canadian nationality and took up

residence in Canada in or about 1991.

It is also common ground between the Parties and their experts that, under
Article 17(1) or Article 13(1)(d) of the Italian Law No. 91 of 1992,
Mr. Soufraki could have reacquired automatically his Italian nationality
after 1992 by a timely application or by taking up residence in Italy for a

period of no less than one year.

It is acknowledged by Claimant that no application to reacquire Italian

citizenship was ever made by Mr. Soufraki under Article 17(1).

In order to establish that he did reacquire his Italian nationality after 1992,
under Article 13(1)(d), Mr. Soufraki maintained that, in order to oversee
personally the renovation of a hotel in Viareggio acquired by one of his
companies, he moved to Italy in February 1993, rented an office for a
period of two years and resided in Italy “from March 1993 until April

1994”.

In order to demonstrate that he established his residence in Italy during

that period, Claimant filed with the Tribunal the following:

31.

32.

33.

-13-

(i) An affidavit dated 17 April 2003, in which two affiants
affirmed that Claimant was a resident of Viareggio/Massarosa

between January 1993 and April 1994;

(ii) A two-year lease dated 15 February 1993 for office space in

Viareggio/Massarosa; and
(iii) His own affidavit dated 9 September 2003.

Respondent submits that the evidence of Claimant does not constitute the
“substantial evidence” necessary under Italian law to establish that

Claimant reacquired Italian nationality after 1992.

Respondent avers, in particular, that Mr. Soufraki could not show that his
1993-1994 Italian office was attended to by a secretary, incurred telephone
bills and otherwise acted as the center of his considerable and far-flung
interests. Respondent also submits that the fact that Mr. Soufraki did not
possess an Italian tax number before January 2003, his extensive overseas
travel during the relevant period and his acquisition of a UAE residency
visa during the same period all demonstrate conclusively that Claimant

was not resident in Italy for one year within the meaning of Italian law.

Respondent also contends that even if Claimant were able to demonstrate
that he was in fact resident in Italy for the required period, he still would
not be entitled to reacquire Italian nationality because he was not

registered as a resident with the Italian local authorities during that period

34.

35.

36.

-14-

but rather remained on the register of Italians living overseas (the “AIRE”

register).

2) Certificates of Italian nationality

Respondent contends that questions of nationality are not within the
exclusive competence of the Italian State. Respondent maintains that the
Tribunal has the power to determine disputed issues of nationality and that
it must look behind the Certificates of Italian nationality that have been
produced by Claimant, since these Certificates constitute, at best, merely

prima facie evidence of nationality.

The only Certificate, avers Respondent, that could be said to support
Claimant’s case is the Certificate issued by the Italian Consulate General
in Istanbul dated 5 May 2003. However, argues Respondent, this
Certificate cannot be relied upon since it was issued without knowledge by
the Italian authorities of all the relevant facts, particularly that

Mr. Soufraki had lost his Italian nationality in 1991.

For its part, Claimant points out that the BIT between Italy and the United
Arab Emirates, in Article 1(3), defines a “natural person” as follows:
“with respect to either Contracting State a natural person holding the
nationality of that State according to its laws.” It follows that, pursuant to

the Treaty as well as customary international law, the conferral and

37.

38.

-15-

possession of Italian nationality is a matter of Italian law, within the
exclusive competence of Italy. Accordingly, Claimant maintains, the
Tribunal is not entitled to look behind the Certificates issued by Italian
authorities that state that Claimant is an Italian national. It is not entitled
to gainsay the official letter of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Italy not
only affirming Mr. Soufraki’s Italian nationality but his entitlement to
have recourse as an Italian national to proceedings against the UAE

instituted under Italy’s investment treaty with the Respondent.

The Claimant argues that, in the absence of fraud, it is not the province of
the Tribunal to challenge the position of Italian authorities affirming the
Italian nationality of Mr. Soufraki, a position taken by those authorities

with knowledge of the law of Italy which they administer.

More particularly, Claimant argues that the Certificate of Nationality
issued by the Italian Consulate General in Istanbul on 5 May 2003 is the
appropriate and indeed exclusive means of nationality certification under
Italian law and is therefore conclusive evidence of Claimant's Italian
nationality under international law. Claimant also relies upon the above-
quoted letter from the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs of 7 May 2003
which “confirm[s] that the right to have recourse to the said [ICSID/BIT]

forum is recognized to you on the basis of your Italian citizenship, which

39.

40.

Al.

-16-

is attested to by the documents that you provided to ... the Ministry of

Foreign Affairs.”

Respondent however questioned whether the Consulate General in
Istanbul was aware of the loss of Mr. Soufraki’s Italian nationality by
reason of his naturalization as a Canadian, noting that there is no evidence
that the Consulate General was so informed. It contended in its written
pleadings and in its cross-examination of Mr. Soufraki that, while his
letter to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs soliciting the Ministry’s letter
referred to his assumption of Canadian nationality, it did not make full
disclosure by failing to refer to the consequential loss of his Italian

nationality.

Mr. Soufraki resisted this latter contention, countering that he had revealed
all that the Ministry needed to know. The import of his position was that
the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs could be expected to know the law
of Italy and to apply it to the facts of his case as he had adequately

disclosed them.

Respondent also argued that, by describing himself in the Concession
Agreement as a Canadian national, Mr. Soufraki made, in effect, for the
purpose of the document constitutive of the investment, a clear agreement

on nationality. Claimant responded that the Concession Agreement was

42.

43.

44.

-17-

drafted by the UAE, that the reference to his Canadian nationality was
unobjectionable since it was accurate but that it could just as easily have
been a reference to his Italian nationality, of which the UAE was informed

and which it had recognized.

3) The Requirement of Effective Nationality

An alternative argument advanced by the Respondent was that, even if Mr.
Soufraki should be found by the Tribunal to have been a national of Italy
at the relevant dates, his dominant nationality was then not Italian but
Canadian and hence his Italian nationality should not be treated as

effectively Italian for purposes of an action under the Italy-UAE BIT.

The Claimant replied that dominant or effective nationality is not today
accepted as a rule of customary international law and in any event finds no
support in the provisions of the BIT or in the terms and travaux

préparatoires of the ICSID Convention.

The Claimant also argued that, even if considerations of effective
nationality were to be applied in this case, the Claimant’s connections with
Italy greatly outweighed his connections with Canada. Claimant
maintained that the UAE itself had recognized Mr. Soufraki’s Italian
nationality in entry and residence permits, passport entries and like

documents.

-18-

45. On the facts of this case, avers Claimant, Mr. Soufraki could not possibly

be said to have acquired Italian nationality in order to come within the

protection of the BIT between Italy and the UAE; his Italian nationality

was not a nationality of convenience, bestowed, as in the Nottebohm case,

in circumstances of speed and accommodation.

46. For the reason that appears below, it is unnecessary for the Tribunal to

pass upon the question of dominant or effective nationality.

DISCUSSION

47. The Tribunal must decide:

qd)

(2)

(3)

(4)

whether Claimant, prior to 1991, was an Italian national;

if so, whether Claimant lost his Italian nationality when he
acquired Canadian nationality and took up residence in

Canada in 1991;

whether Claimant reacquired automatically his Italian

nationality according to Italian law after 1992;

whether questions of Italian nationality are within the
exclusive and dispositive competence of Italy or whether
the Tribunal is entitled to look behind the passports, identity
cards, certificates and assurances issued by Italian

authorities certifying the Italian nationality of Mr. Soufraki.

48.

49.

50.

Sl.

52.

-19-

As noted above, the Parties are in agreement that, prior to acquiring his
Canadian nationality in 1991, Mr. Soufraki was or became an Italian

national.

Mr. Soufraki maintains that he was — and is — an Italian national by birth,
having been born on the soil of Libya which was then under the
sovereignty of Italy, as the child of Italian nationals. That is to say, Mr.

Soufraki claims Italian nationality by right of jus soli and jus sanguinis.

Mr. Soufraki has recounted the steps that he took in 1988 at the age of 51
to be recognized as an Italian national and to carry an Italian passport, and
he has provided his Italian passports and identity cards valid throughout
the period 1988 to the present time, as well as five Certificates of

Nationality and other indicia of Italian citizenship referred to below.

As was noted earlier, Mr. Soufraki in his testimony before the Tribunal
affirmed that he considers himself to be an Italian, as of right and choice,
and that he never intended to relinquish his Italian nationality. For its part,
the Tribunal accepts and respects the sincerity of Mr. Soufraki’s

conviction that he was and remains a national of Italy.

However, the terms of Article 8, paragraph 1 of the Italian Law No. 555 of

1912 are clear and leave no room for interpretation. As a consequence of

53.

54.

-20-

his acquisition of Canadian nationality and residence in Canada, Mr.
Soufraki, in 1991, lost his Italian nationality by operation of Italian law. It
appears from the evidence that Mr. Soufraki was unaware of the loss of his
Italian nationality at the time and became aware of it only in the course of,

and as a result of expert evidence submitted in, these proceedings.

The first contentious question to be decided is whether, as Claimant
maintains, the Certificates of Nationality issued by Italian authorities
characterizing Mr. Soufraki as an Italian national,’ and his Italian
passports, identity cards and the letter of the Italian Ministry of Foreign
Affairs so stating, constitute conclusive proof that Mr. Soufraki reacquired
his Italian nationality after 1992 and that he was an Italian national on the
date on which the parties to this dispute consented to submit it to
arbitration as well as on the date on which the request to ICSID was

registered by it.

Claimant contends that it is for the Italian authorities to interpret Italian
nationality law, and that this Tribunal should apply their conclusions. He

emphasizes that Article 1(3) of the BIT specifies that the nationality of a

Certificates of Nationality issued by the Municipality of Massarosa dated 12 September 1988, 7
October 2002 and 9 January 2003 (Exhibit R-2);

Certificate of Nationality dated 14 April 2003 (Exhibit C-113(1));

Certificate of Nationality issued by the Italian Consulate General in Istanbul dated 5 May 2003
(Exhibit C-106(1)).

55.

56.

-21-

natural person shall be determined according to the law of the Contracting

State in question.

It is accepted in international law that nationality is within the domestic
jurisdiction of the State, which settles, by its own legislation, the rules
relating to the acquisition (and loss) of its nationality. Article 1(3) of the
BIT reflects this rule. But it is no less accepted that when, in international
arbitral or judicial proceedings, the nationality of a person is challenged,
the international tribunal is competent to pass upon that challenge. It will
accord great weight to the nationality law of the State in question and to
the interpretation and application of that law by its authorities. But it will
in the end decide for itself whether, on the facts and law before it, the
person whose nationality is at issue was or was not a national of the State
in question and when, and what follows from that finding. Where, as in
the instant case, the jurisdiction of an international tribunal turns on an
issue of nationality, the international tribunal is empowered, indeed bound,

to decide that issue.

While the Claimant does not dispute the foregoing authority of this
Tribunal, it submits that it should exercise it so as to override official
Italian affirmations of the Italian nationality of Mr. Soufraki only in

response to allegations and proof of fraud.

57.

58.

3

-22-

While the Respondent did not in terms maintain that evidence in support
of Mr. Soufraki’s acquisition or reacquisition of Italian nationality was
fraudulent, counsel of the Respondent when cross-examining Mr. Soufraki
did characterize the evidence that he submitted in support of his claim that
he was resident in Italy for more than a year 1993-94 as “bogus”
Nevertheless, the Tribunal wishes to make clear that, in its view, issues of

alleged fraud need not be addressed.

The question rather comes to this. Mr. Soufraki asserts as a fact that he
was resident in Italy for business purposes for more than one year in 1993-
94. In accordance with accepted international (and general national)
practice, a party bears the burden of proof in establishing the facts that he
asserts. Claimant accordingly bears the burden of proving to the
satisfaction of the Tribunal that he was resident in Italy for more than one
year in 1993-94 and accordingly that he was an Italian national on the
relevant dates and that, as a result, he belongs to the class of investors in

respect of whom the Respondent has consented to ICSID jurisdiction.

Transcript of cross-examination of Mr. Soufraki dated 12 March 2004 at p. 55.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

4

-23-

The Tribunal agrees with Claimant that, as an international Tribunal, it is

not bound by rules of evidence in Italian civil procedure.

The “substantial” evidence rule, while it may well be required in an

Italian court,’ has no application in the present proceedings.

What weight is given to oral or documentary evidence in an ICSID

arbitration is dictated solely by Rule 34(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules:

The Tribunal shall be the judge of the admissibility of any

evidence adduced and of its probative value.
In the present instance, it is thus for this Tribunal to consider and analyse
the totality of the evidence and determine whether it leads to the

conclusion that Claimant has discharged his burden of proof.

The Tribunal will, of course, accept Claimant’s Certificates of Nationality

as “prima facie” evidence. We agree with Professor Schreuer that:

... A certificate of nationality will be treated as part of the
“documents or other evidence” to be examined by the

tribunal in accordance with Art. 43 [of the Convention].

Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief dated 30 June 2003 at para. 60.
Prof. Sacerdoti's Second Supplemental Legal Opinion dated 2 June 2003, Exhibit R-17.

64.

65.

66.

67.

6

-24-

Such a certificate will be given its appropriate weight but

does not preclude a decision at variance with its contents.°
It is common ground between the Parties that, if Claimant reacquired his
Italian citizenship after 1992, it is as a result of having established his

residence in Italy for one year after that date.

Consequently, it is evident that Mr. Soufraki’s Certificate of Nationality

issued in 1988 cannot inform the Tribunal’s decision.

As to the four Certificates of Nationality issued after 1992, there is no
evidence in the record that any Italian official who issued to Mr. Soufraki
any of these Certificates undertook any inquiry in order to determine
whether he had lost his Italian citizenship prior to 1992 and whether he
had established his residence in Italy for one year after enactment of the

Law of 1992 and thus reacquired his Italian citizenship.

Furthermore, the Tribunal notes that, when he was cross-examined,
Mr. Soufraki admitted that he had not informed any Italian official of his

loss of Italian citizenship since he did not believe that he had lost it.”

Christopher SCHREUER, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, p. 268, para. 433.
Transcript of cross-examination of Mr. Soufraki dated 12 March 2004 at pp. 225-226.

68.

69.

70.

71.

8

-25-

The Tribunal accordingly holds that the Claimant cannot rely on any of the
pleaded Certificates of Nationality to establish conclusively that he was a
national of Italy on the dates of the Request for Arbitration and its
registration. Nor can it treat the letter from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
as conclusively establishing Mr. Soufraki’s Italian nationality and his
entitlement to invoke Italy’s BIT with the UAE, essentially for the same
reason, namely, that it is not shown that the Ministry knew when it wrote
its letter that Mr. Soufraki had lost his Italian nationality and that hence

the question was whether he had reacquired it.

The Tribunal must now examine the other evidence in the record which,
Claimant maintains, demonstrates that Mr. Soufraki resided in Italy for

one year after the enactment of Italian Law No. 91.

The concept of “residence” as used in Article 13(1)(d) of Italian Law

No. 91 is factual. It is different from the concept of “legal residence”.

Consequently, actual residence for one year is a sufficient requisite for the

reacquisition of Italian citizenship.

Legal opinion of Avv Castellani and Curto dated 23 June 2003, Exhibit C-114, paras. 16-25.

72.

73.

74.

75.

- 26 -

Residence does not imply continuous presence and does not disallow
travel. However, the Tribunal agrees with Respondent that proof of some

continuity of residence during that year is required.

The Tribunal will consider whether the evidence discloses that
Mr. Soufraki, during the relevant period, had his “habitual abode” in Italy
and that he manifested his “intention to fix in Italy the center of [his] own

business and affairs.”

The Tribunal’s inquiry begins with Mr. Soufraki’s Affidavit. In paragraphs
29 to 33 of his Affidavit, as we noted earlier, Mr. Soufraki deposed that, in
order to oversee personally the renovation of a hotel in Viareggio acquired
by one of his companies, he moved to Italy in February 1993, rented an
office for a period of two years and resided in Italy “from March 1993

until April 1994.”

Mr. Soufraki has produced two documents to prove his claimed period of
residence in Italy in 1993 and 1994. These are the affidavit sworn by
Messrs Casini and Nicotra dated 17 April 2003 and the lease for office

space of a flat in Viareggio dated 15 February 1993.

Legal opinion of Avv Castellani and Curto dated 23 June 2003, Exhibit C-114, para. 22(a).

76.

10

-27-

The Tribunal finds the following evidence provided by Mr. Soufraki in his
Affidavit and in the course of his cross-examination particularly relevant

to its inquiry:

@ After leaving Libya in 1978, Mr. Soufraki established his

“main family home” in London.'°

(ii) From 1988 until 1997 or 1998, Mr. Soufraki had the free
use of a house in Italy belonging to his friend and lawyer,
Avvocato Picchi.'' At the same time, in his Reply
Memorial of 3 March 2003, Claimant stated in respect to

his periods of residence in Italy that:

the Claimant has not taken
permanent residence in Italy for longer

than two years at a time. However:

= In 1983-1984 the Claimant had the
day to day management of the
Fratelli Benetti shipyard in
Viareggio;

= In 1988 the Claimant resided
permanently in Massarosa and is
recorded as so doing in official

records; and

= during his subsequent frequent stays

in Italy, the Claimant stays at his

Transcript of cross-examination of Mr. Soufraki dated 12 March 2004 at pp. 20, 164.
Transcript of cross-examination of Mr. Soufraki dated 12 March 2004 at p. 64.

- 28 -

own hotel in Viareggio, the
American Hotel, which is not

2
documented. '*

(iii) After obtaining his Italian passport in 1988, Mr. Soufraki

returned to his residence in Monaco “for tax purposes”.'?

(iv) In 1988, Mr. Soufraki placed himself on the Register of
Italians living overseas (the “AIRE Register”). He has
remained on the AIRE Register to this date and did not, in
1993, inform the Italian authorities of a change in his

residence.'*

(v) In January 1993, when he says that he took up his residence
in Italy, Mr. Soufraki states that he “had no intention of

a 1S

being a resident again”.

(vi) During the 1993-94 period in which Mr. Soufraki maintains
that he was resident in Italy while directing his
international business interests, Mr. Soufraki did not

personally obtain an Italian tax number.'°
77. The Tribunal observes that in the quotation reproduced above in paragraph

76(ii) of this Award, Claimant’s Reply made no mention of Mr. Soufraki’s

residing in Italy in the 1993-94 period.

2 Claimant’s Reply Memorial dated 3 March 2003 at p. 53, para. 156.

Transcript of cross-examination of Mr. Souftaki dated 12 March 2004 at pp. 41, 45, 56, 57, 73.
anscript of cross-examination of Mr. Soufraki dated 12 March 2004 at pp. 66-69, 74.

examination of Mr. Soufraki dated 12 March 2004 at p. 85.

ss-examination of Mr. Soufraki dated 12 March 2004 at p. 236.

 

78.

79.

80.

81.

- 29 -

The Tribunal does not find that the affidavit of Messrs. Casini and Nicotra
constitutes disinterested and convincing evidence. It should be noted that
Mr. Casini is an auditor whom Mr. Soufraki has engaged over the years,

and that Mr. Nicotra is a receptionist at Mr. Soufraki’s hotel in Viareggio.

As to the lease, the Tribunal notes that it was to be used by Mr. Soufraki
“as his own personal office” and that it was never registered although its
terms required that, “in case of use” (in caso d’uso), it needed to be

registered.

In the opinion of the Tribunal, neither the affidavit of Messrs. Casini and
Nicotra, nor the unregistered lease of the Viareggio flat, sufficiently
sustain the central submission of the Claimant that he resided in Italy for

more than one year as from March 1993.

Having considered and weighed the totality of the evidence adduced by
Mr. Soufraki, the Tribunal, unanimously, comes to the conclusion that
Claimant has failed to discharge his burden of proof. He has not
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Tribunal that he established and
maintained his residence in Italy during the period from March 1993 until

April 1994.

82.

83.

84.

-30-

In the circumstances, Claimant cannot rely today on Article 13(1)(d) of

Italian law No. 91 of 1992.

The Tribunal recognizes that it is difficult for Mr. Soufraki, whose
business interests span continents and who constantly travels the world, to
reconstruct his actual residence during a twelve or thirteen month period
more than ten years earlier. It recognizes that Mr. Soufraki, had he been
properly advised at the time, easily could have reacquired Italian
nationality by a timely application. It further appreciates that, had Mr.
Soufraki contracted with the United Arab Emirates through a corporate
vehicle incorporated in Italy, rather than contracting in his personal
capacity, no problem of jurisdiction would now arise. But the Tribunal

can only take the facts as they are and as it has found them to be.

Since, as found by the Tribunal, Claimant was not an Italian national under
the laws of Italy at the two relevant times, namely on 16 May 2002 (the
date of the parties’ consent to ICSID arbitration) and on 18 June 2002 (the
date the Claimant’s Request for Arbitration was registered with ICSID),

this Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to hear this dispute.

-31-

COSTS

85. | Taking into account the circumstances of the case and the Respondent’s
success with its jurisdictional objection, the Tribunal concludes that it is
appropriate that the costs of the proceeding, including the fees and
expenses of the Tribunal and the ICSID Secretariat, be borne two-thirds by
Claimant and one-third by Respondent, but that each party bears its own

legal costs and expenses in connection with the proceeding.

AWARD

86. For the reasons set out in the foregoing paragraphs, the Tribunal

unanimously decides:

a. That the present dispute falls outside its jurisdiction under Article
25(1) and (2)(a) of the ICSID Convention and Article 1(3) of the

BIT;

b. That the costs of the proceeding, including the fees and expenses
of the Tribunal and the ICSID Secretariat, be borne two-thirds by

Claimant and one-third by Respondent;

c. That each party shall bear its own legal costs and expenses in the

proceeding.

-32-

SIGNED in Washington, this 7th day of July 2004
signed. signed
Dr. Aktham El Kholy Judge Stephen M. Schwebel
Co-arbitrator Co-arbitrator

signed
L. Yves Fortier, Q.C.
Chairman

