Case 1:21-cv-02463-RJL Document 20-1 Filed 04/25/22 Page 50 of 207

 

‘SUBDIRECCION GENERAL DE
LOS SERVICIOS CONTENCIOSOS

 

Madrid, 7 February 2022

By email

Ms. Wendy J. Miles, QC, President of the ad hoc Committee
Dr. José Antonio Moreno Rodriguez, Member of the ad hoc Committee
Prof. Dr. Jacomijn J. van Haersolte-van Hof, Member of the ad hoc Committee

In copy: Counsel for Claimants

 

ARB/15/42, Annulment Proceeding

Dear Members of the ad hoc Committee,

1. The Kingdom of Spain respectfully requests the Ad hoc Committee to reconsider its
Decision on Stay of Enforcement of the Award, dated 26th March 2021 (hereinafter “the
Decision on Stay”) in light of the risk of non-recoupment of the amount of the Award in the

event the Award is paid and subsequently annulled.

2. As the Committee will be aware, neither the ICSID Rules nor the Arbitration Rules
expressly contemplate the possibility that an Arbitral Tribunal or Committee may reconsider
a decision. However, while the ICSID rules and Arbitration rules do not expressly
contemplate such a possibility, neither do they expressly prohibit it. In relation to the
Request for Stay of enforcement, Rule 54 of the Arbitration Rules provides for the

possibility that a Stay may be modified at the request of one of the parties.

3. Therefore the Respondent considers that the Committee has the possibility to reconsider its
previously adopted Decision when in view of new evidence the content of the Decisions on

Stay of Enforcement could certainly be affected.

Case 1:21-cv-02463-RJL Document 20-1 Filed 04/25/22 Page 51 of 207

 

‘SUBDIRECCION GENERAL DE
LOS SERVICIOS CONTENCIOSOS

 

4. After the Committee’s Decision on Stay, new information became available which shows
there is substantial risk that the Kingdom of Spain would be unable to recoup payment of

the Award should it be paid to Claimants and subsequently annulled.

5. In preparation for the hearing, the Kingdom of Spain located Claimants’ 2020 financial
statements! (Annex 1). As it will be developed this new information shows that Claimants
have sold an interest in the Award, creating a real risk of non-recoupment should the Award

be annulled.

a

In light of this development, Spain requests that the stay of enforcement should be re-

instated.

ra

The Decision on Stay recognized that a risk of non-recoupment may exist.’ The Committee
decided that the stay will be lifted contingent on Claimants’ providing “a binding and
unconditional undertaking to repay any monies recovered in the event that the Annulment

Application is successful.”*

~

In accordance, the Committee requested the following assurance from Claimants (the

“Assurance”):
“Hydro Energy 1 S.a r.l. and Hydroxana Sweden AB (the “Hydro Parties”)
hereby confirm that they undertake to promptly repay the Kingdom of Spain any
and all amounts received in satisfaction of the Award rendered on 5 August
2020 (the Award”) to the extent that the annulment application is successful.
The Hydro Parties further confirm that they undertake not to disburse or
transfer any amounts received in satisfaction of the Award to their investors or
to any other third party while the annulment proceeding is ongoing (or

thereafter to the extent the annulment application is successful).+”

' Annex 1 Hydro Energy 1 S.a.r.1., Annual Accounts for the financial year ended December 31, 2020
? Decision on Stay, If] 88-89.

5 Decision on Stay, J 122.

+ Decision on Stay, J 122 (emphasis removed).

Case 1:21-cv-02463-RJL Document 20-1 Filed 04/25/22 Page 52 of 207

 

‘SUBDIRECCION GENERAL DE
LOS SERVICIOS CONTENCIOSOS

 

9. The Decision on Stay states that the Assurance, which was provided by Claimants on 8
April 2021, should alleviate the risk of non-recoupment.’ However, Claimants appear to

have figured out a loophole and to have taken advantage of it.

10. According to the Assurance, Claimants are not permitted to disburse or transfer any
amounts received from Spain in satisfaction of the Award, but are not restricted from selling
the rights to the Award to a third party and distributing the proceeds from that sale of rights
to Claimants’ shareholders. In that case, the third party would effectively own the rights to
the Award and that third party is not subject to the Assurance. Thus, Claimants could
technically honor the Assurance but in fact be unable to repay “all amounts received in
satisfaction of the Award,” because the funds will be in the hands of the third-party buyer of
the rights to the Award. That third-party buyer would not be party to these proceedings or

to the Assurance.

11. The foregoing is not a theorical issue, but an actual problem. Based on publicly available
information, HydroEnergy sold an interest in the Award to a third party. The 2020 financial
statements of HydroEnergy state:

“On May 20, 2021, the Company entered into a funded participation agreement
with a third party whereas the Company accepts to grant a participation
interest in the award following the arbitration proceeding before the

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes Spain”.

12. This “participation agreement” was made after Claimants provided the Assurance to the
Committee on 8 April 2021. Since HydroEnergy’s financial statements for 2021 are not yet
publicly available, it is unknown how much it was paid in exchange for this participation

agreement, or any more details on the nature of that agreement.

5 Decision on Stay, {| 119 (stating: “Specifically in order to alleviate any risk of harm to the Kingdom of
Spain arising out of the Claimants’ financial position affecting its ability to recoup, the Claimants offered
to hold any recovered funds in escrow or to provide a binding and unconditional undertaking to repay
those monies in the event that the Annulment Application is successful.”).

© Annex 1 (Hydro Energy 1 S.a.r.1., Annual Accounts for the financial year ended December 31, 2020), p.
14 of PDF.

Case 1:21-cv-02463-RJL Document 20-1 Filed 04/25/22 Page 53 of 207

 

‘SUBDIRECCION GENERAL DE
LOS SERVICIOS CONTENCIOSOS

 

1

»

This transaction appears similar to the one involving the award in 9REN v. Spain. Please
note that REN v. Spain Decision on Stay is not in the public domain and in accordance
with article 3 (13) of the IBA Rules shall be kept confidential by the Arbitral Tribunal and

the Claimants in this annulment proceeding.

14. In this transaction, 9REN signed an agreement which gives a third-party (King Street
Capital) a right to the award in that case.’ Due to this fact, which was publicly known prior
to the decision on the continuation of stay in that case, the annulment committee concluded:

“132. These facts have not been convincingly rebutted by REN in its pleadings.
In particular, the Committee notes that:

a. Evidence has been provided by Spain that 9REN is a debtor to King Street
Capital for the amount of the Award;

b. There is no reason not to believe that, as soon as the proceeds of the Award
become available, namely with a lift of the stay of its enforcement, King Street
Capital’s rights are immediately enforceable;

c. Despite its apparent solvency, 9REN’s financial statements show a gap
between its current assets and the liability potentially arising from the
annulment of the Award.

d. Despite 9REN’s assertion that is [sic] would have the ability to repay the
Award amount, there is no evidence on the record supporting the assumption
that, if required, the Award amount would be paid back.

e. It is therefore reasonable to assume that 9REN would face serious difficulties
in paying back the amount of the Award to Spain if the Award were annulled by
the present Committee.

133. A real risk of non-recoupment of the amount of the Award in the event of

its annulment must therefore be deemed to exist in the instant case*”

15. The committee in 9REN v. Spain recognized that given 9REN’s lack of assets and the sale

of an interest in the Award, there was a real risk Spain would not be able to recoup the

7 Annex 2, 9REN v. Spain, Decision on Stay, {| 132.
8 Ibid, J 133.

 

%

6

Case 1:21-cv-02463-RJL Document 20-1 Filed 04/25/22 Page 54 of 207

 

‘SUBDIRECCION GENERAL DE
LOS SERVICIOS CONTENCIOSOS

balance of the award should an annulment be granted, and so it continued the stay of

enforcement.”

. The present circumstances are comparable to REN v. Spain. 9REN is a holding company
with a single asset. Claimants are holding companies with no assets other than their interest
in the hydroelectric facilities at issue in this arbitration (the “Hydro Plants”).'°

HydroEnergy, established under the laws in Luxembourg, owns a 93% interest in

Hydroxana.'' The remaining 7% interest is not involved in this arbitration.’

Hydroxana,
established under the laws of Sweden, owns a 100% interest in the Spanish holding entities
that hold the Hydro Plants.'’ HydroEnengy is wholly-owned by a private equity fund
through Asper Renewable Power Partners 2. While Hydroenergy appears to currently own
the Hydro Plants, the private equity fund can dispose of the Hydro Plants at any time either
to a third-party (via a sale) or transferring them to another company. Once the Hydro Plants
are no longer owned by the private equity fund, HydroEnergy and Hydroxana will be empty
shells with no assets to meet their obligations. Without any assets, Claimants would be

unable to abide by the Assurance even if they intend to.

. Due to HydroEnergy’s sale of an interest in the Award, a real risk of non-recoupment exists.

Given this development, Spain requests that the stay of enforcement be re-instated.

. As the Committee can confirm there is a real_and serious risk that in the event that the
Award is paid before a Decision of Annulment is taken by this Committee, the Kingdom of

Spain will not be able to recover any amount paid to the Claimants.

. The repayment undertaking submitted by HydroEnergy does not constitute sufficient
security in view of the circumstances that have arisen since the adoption of the Decision on

Stay'*. The security submitted by the HydroBnergy parties in these annulment proceedings,

° Ibid, | 144.

' Annex 1 (Hydro Energy | S.a.r.1., Annual Accounts for the financial year ended December 31, 2020),
p. 9 of PDF.

"! First Econ One Report, {ff 17, 19.

" First Econ One Report, { 18.

'S First Econ One Report, {ff 17, 31-32.

* Thid, Section II

Case 1:21-cv-02463-RJL Document 20-1 Filed 04/25/22 Page 55 of 207

 

‘SUBDIRECCION GENERAL DE
LOS SERVICIOS CONTENCIOSOS

 

in the Kingdom of Spain’s view, would not be in accordance with the Committee's intention
when it made the lifting of the Stay conditional upon adequate security being provided for
the repayment of any amounts that may be paid to HydroEnergy in the event that the Award

is ultimately annulled.

20. The Claimant’s 2020 financial statements have been made publicly available after the

Committee’s Decision on the Stay, and therefore is a new fact that should be considered by

 

the Committee in order to reconsider its Decision on the Stay.

21. In view of the above, the Kingdom of Spain respectfully requests the honorable Committee
to reconsider its Decision on Stay of enforcement of the Award, 26"" March 2021 and,
consequently, declare grant the stay of enforcement of the Award until the final decision on

the Application on Annulment is rendered.

Respectfully submitted,

 

