INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN

IBERDROLA ENERGIA S.A.

CLAIMANT

Vv.

THE REPUBLIC OF GUATEMALA

RESPONDENT

 

AWARD

 

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/5

Tribunal Members:

Eduardo Zuleta, President
Rodrigo Oreamuno, Arbitrator
Yves Derains, Arbitrator

Tribunal Secretary: Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski

Representing the Claimant
Miguel Virgés

José Miguel Fatas

Virginia Allan

Uria Menéndez

Principe de Vergara 187
28002 Madrid, EspaNa

Sean McCoy-Cador

Iberdrola Energia S.A.

Boulevard Manuel Avila Camacho
24 Lomas de Chapultepec

11000 Distrito Federal, México

Representing the Respondent
Dr. Guillermo A. Porras

Solicitor General (until 01/12/2011)
Dr. Larry Mark Robles Guibert
Solicitor General (from 01/12/2011)
15 Avenida 9-69 Zona 13
Guatemala City, Guatemala

Nigel Blackaby

Lluis Paradell

Noiana Marigo

Jean-Paul Dechamps

Lauren Friedman

Michelle Grando

Sebastian Yanine

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer US LLP
701 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
Washington D.C., 20004, U.S.A.

Alejandro Arenales

Alfredo Skinner-Klée

Rodolfo Salazar

Arenales & Skinner-Klée

13 calle 2-60 Zona 10, 01010
Edificio Topacio Azul, Of. 701
Guatemala City, Guatemala

Date of sending to the Parties: Washington, D.C., August 17, 2012

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

List of Defined Terms 6
I. PROCEDURAL STEPS 5
1. THE PARTIES...
The Clai 5
The 5
2. THE PROCEEDINGS.....cccccenecsenecsenecsenececneneenecsenecseneceenecsanegnaneges 6
II. BACKGROUND 14
1. PRIVATIZATION PROCESS. ...essscccsnenecenececenesesenecenenenesenenenenenenens 14
2. GENERAL ELECTRICITY LAW, ITS REGULATIONS AND ITS
MODIFICATIONS. 16
3. EEGSA 1998-2008 TARIFF PROCESS. ...ssscsssscscsneccnscnenencenensenneensenes 23
4. FIVE-YEAR TARIFF PROCESS 2008-2013 ..scsssscsnsscnerenenecsenenssnnensneess 23
5. THE SALE OF DECA II SHARES. uusssccsecnseneenensnnnnnensnnsnsnensnensenneensenes 35

III. POSITION OF THE PARTIES REGARDING THE TARIFF REVIEW
PROCESS IN THE FIVE YEAR PERIOD 2008-2013 ucsssssssssssnsssssssnnnssnnsssnsssssnsen 36

1. INTRODUCTION
2. POSSIBILITY OF DEPARTING FROM THE TERMS OF REFERENCE
3. CONTRACTING OF SIGLA .

4. BINDING OR NONBINDING NATURE OF THE REPORT OF THE
EXPERT COMMISSION 40

5. THE OPERATING RULES OF THE EXPERT COMMISSION .uessssssessensees 44

THE DISSOLUTION OF THE EXPERT COMMISSION ...46REJECTION OF
THE BATES WHITE STUDY AND TARIFF-SETTING

BASED ON THE SIGLA STUDY47REJECTION IN LIMINE OF THE APPEAL FILED
BY EEGSA AGAINST

 

 

 

CNEE RESOLUTIONS 144, 145 AND 146 OF 2008. .ssssssssssssssessensssensssnssnnnssenes 52
9. DECISIONS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL COURT .ussssssessseennensnsssensnnene 54
10. THE FORMULA OF THE FRC cecssscecssnscnscssnecnsencnsencnssnssesensesensnssaes 55
11. CALCULATING THE VNR wessscccsssncnennscnsnnsnecsssncnssnsnnnessasensenensnnsaes 59
12. Y LOSSES 61

 

 

13. ECONOMIC REASONABLENESS OF THE TARIFFS APPROVED BY THE
CNEE 63

 

IV. CONSIDERATIONS OF THE TRIBUNAL REGARDING THE OBJECTION TO
THE JURISDICTION AND COMPETENCE vcssscssssssnnsssnscsnsnssnnssnnssssnsssenssnnsssensnaes 63

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. DECISION ON BIFURCATION OF ARBITRAL PROCEEDINGS o+-s+ses+s1000: 63
2. POSITION OF THE PARTIES REGARDING THE COMPETENCE OF THE
TRIBUNAL 64
3B. ANALYSIS OF THE TRIBUNAL ooeessssssscssessesssessnssssessnesssessnesssesssesnnesasesis 68
4. ICSID JURISDICTION AND COMPETENCE OF THE
TRIBUNAL 69
4.1 POWER OF THE TRIBUNAL TO DECIDE ON ITS OWN COMPETENCE. 70
4.2 ARTICLE 11 OF THE TREATY.........
4.3 The Disp itted by the CI
the light of ARTICLE 11 OF THE TREATY.
(a) THE CLAIM FOR EXPROPRIATION.sessscsssssssssssssssesssssssssensees 77
(b) CLAIM FOR VIOLATION OF FAIR AND EQUITABLE
TREATMENT 79
(c) CLAIM FOR VIOLATION OF THE STANDARD OF FULL
PROTECTION AND SECURITY OF INVESTMENT.
(d) CLAIM FOR FAILURE TO MEET THE OTHER OBLIGATIONS OF
PROTECTION OF IBERDROLA’S INVESTMENT wosssssssssssssssssssssnsesssssesens 82
(e) CONCLUSIONS ON THE CLAIMS OF STANDARDS. .ssssssssesveees 84
5. CONCLUSIONS ON ICSID JURISDICTION AND COMPETENCE OF THE
TRIBUNAL 85

 

V. THE DENIAL OF JUSTICE CLAIM.
1. ANALYSIS OF THE TRIBUNAL ..
2. ICSID JURISDICTION AND COMPETENCE OF THE
TRIBUNAL IN THE CLAIM CONCERNING DENIAL OF JUSTICE. ...11ccsssssserseeees 98
3. STANDARD OF DENIAL OF JUSTICE .....ssssssssssnnsnnennnnscccnsssnennnnnenensenneees 100
4. ALTERNATIVE CLAIM OF DENIAL OF JUSTICE OF THE CLAIMANT ....... 104
4.1 VIOLATION BY THE CNEE OF ADMINISTRATIVE DUE PROCESS
4.2 THE REJECTION IN LIMINE AND ACCESS TO JUSTICE .
4.3 DECISIONS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL COURT AND THE DENIAL OF
Justi 113
(a) THE LACK OF SUBSTANTIATION... .114
(b) APPEARANCE OF SUBSTANTIATION -120

 

 

 

 

 

VI. COSTS. 124

VII. DECISION. 5

List OF DEFINED TERMS

Bates White: Bates White LLC.

ICSID: International Centre For Settlement of Investment Disputes in Washington
D.C.

CNEE: Comision Nacional de Energia Eléctrica.

Authorization Agreement: Authorization Agreement for distribution of electricity in the
departments of Guatemala, Sacatepéquez and Escuintla of May 15, 1998.

Purchase and Sales Agreement: Share Purchase and Sales Agreement signed
between DECA I and the Republic of Guatemala on September 11, 1998.

ICSID Convention: Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of Other States.

DECA I: Distribucion Eléctrica Centro Americana S.A.

DECA ITI: Distribucién Eléctrica Centro Americana Dos (II) S.A.
DEOCSA: Distribuidora de Electricidad de Occidente S.A.
DEORSA: Distribuidora de Electricidad de Oriente S.A.

EDP: Electricidade de Portugal S.A.

EEGSA: Empresa Eléctrica de Guatemala S.A.

EPM: Empresas Publicas de Medellin E.S.P.

FRC: Capital Recovery Factor.

Iberdrola: Iberdrola Energia S.A.

INDE: Instituto Nacional de Electrificacion.

LGE: General Electricity Law, Decree No. 93-96 of October 16, 1996.

MEM: Ministry of Energy and Mines.

Informational Memorandum of Sale: Informational Memorandum of Sale prepared
by Salomon Smith Barney, 1998.

Parties: Together, the Claimant and the Respondent.

Administrative and Financial Regulations: ICSID Administrative and Financial
Regulations:

Arbitration Rules: ICSID Arbitration Rules.

RLGE or Regulation: Regulations to the LGE, Government Agreement No. 256-97 of
March 21, 1997.

SIGLA: Association formed by the consultants Sigla S.A. and Sistemas Eléctricos y
Electronicos de Potencia, Control y Comunicaciones, S.A.

SSB: Salomon Smith Barney.

Treaty: Agreement on the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments signed
between the Kingdom of Spain and the Republic of Guatemala.

TECO: Teco Energy Inc.

Terms of Reference for the sale of EEGSA: Terms of reference for the national and
international public tender for the sale of the strategic package within the capital stock
process and sale of state-owned shares in EEGSA, April 1998.

ToR or Terms of Reference: Terms of Reference for conducting the VAD study for
EEGSA, CNEE Resolution 13680-2007 of April 30, 2007.

VAD: Value Added of Distribution:
NRV: New Replacement Value.

(1)

[2]

[3]
[4]

PROCEDURAL STEPS

L THE PARTIES
The Claimant

The Claimant in this case is Iberdrola Energia SA, a Spanish
limited company, belonging to the Iberdrola Group, established
in accordance with Spanish law and whose head office is in Spain.

In this procedure, the Claimant is represented by:

Miguel Virgos

José Miguel Fatas
Virginia Allan

Uria Menéndez

Principe de Vergara 187
28002 Madrid

Espafia

Sean McCoy-Cador

Iberdrola Energia S.A.

Boulevard Manuel Avila Camacho 24, piso 19
Lomas de Chapultepec

11000 Distrito Federal

México

The Respondent
The Respondent is the Republic of Guatemala.
In this proceeding, the Respondent is represented by:

Dr. Guillermo A. Porras

Solicitor General (until 01/12/2011) Dr.
Larry Mark Guibert Robles

Solicitor General (from 01/12/2011) 15
Avenida 9-69 Zona 13

Guatemala City, Guatemala

Nigel Blackaby, Lluis Paradell, Noiana Marigo, Jean-Paul Dechamps,
Lauren Friedman, Michelle Grando and Sebastian Yanine
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer US LLP

701 Pennsylvania Avenue NW

Washington, D.C. 20004, U.S.A.

Alejandro Arenales, Alfredo Skinner-Klée and Rodolfo Salazar
Arenales & Skinner-Klée

13 calle 2-60, Zona 10, 01010

Edificio Topacio Azul, of. 701 - Guatemala City, Guatemala

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

(11]

(12]

[13]

In the preparation of this Award, the Tribunal took into account,
discussed and evaluated all the arguments of the Parties; including their
claims and defenses, documents, witness statements, expert reports and
other evidence filed in this proceeding. In making their arguments, the
Parties have filed numerous awards and decisions that address issues
relevant to this decision. The Tribunal considers it pertinent to note that it
must resolve the dispute presented by the Claimant by an independent analysis
of the Treaty, the ICSID Convention, the Arbitration Rules and the particular
facts of this case. However, this does not prevent the Tribunal from taking
into account the conclusions reached by other international tribunals; if
deemed appropriate.*

2. THE PROCEEDINGS

On April 17, 2009, ICSID registered a request for arbitration filed by
the Claimant under the ICSID Convention.

By communication of May 27, 2009, the Claimant appointed Yves Derains as
Arbitrator. On June 9, 2009, this arbitrator signed the declaration referred
to in Arbitration Rule 6(2).

By communication of May 16, 2009, the Respondent appointed Rodrigo
Oreamuno as Arbitrator. On June 17, 2009, this arbitrator signed the
declaration referred to in Arbitration Rule 6(2).

On July 10, 2009, the arbitrators appointed by the Parties informed ICSID
that they had appointed Eduardo Zuleta as Tribunal President. On July 17,
2009, this arbitrator also signed the declaration referred to in Arbitration
Rule 6(2).

On July 20, 2009, ICSID informed the Parties and arbitrators of the
constitution of the Tribunal with Eduardo Zuleta as President and Yves
Derains and Rodrigo Oreamuno as coarbitrators. Sergio Puig was appointed
as Secretary.

On August 7, 2009, the Secretary reported that the Arbitrators of both
Parties had confirmed their agreement and availability to hold the first
meeting of the Tribunal on September 18, 2009, in Washington D.C.

On September 9, 2009, the Parties filed a joint proposal to the
Tribunal regarding the agenda of the first session.

The first session was held on September 18, 2009, at ICSID headquarters in
Washington, D.C. As stated in the transcript of the hearing, which was
accepted by both Parties, attending the hearing were:

2

ic

[14]

Representing the Claimant:

José Miguel Alcolea and Sean McCoy-Cador, of Iberdrola; Miguel Virgés,
of the firm Uria Menendez; and John C. Castillo of the firm Aguilar
Castillo Love.

Representing the Respondent:

Guillermo A. Porras, Solicitor General of Guatemala; Saul Oliva, Solicitor
General's Office of Guatemala; Anibal Samayoa, Under-Secretary General
of the Presidency; Carlos Colom B, President of the Comisién de Energia
Eléctrica; Romeo Lopez G. and Mynor Castillo, Finance Ministry;
Fernando de la Cerda and José Lambour, of the Embassy of Guatemala
in Washington D.C.; Alfredo Skinner-Klée, Alejandro Arenales and
Rodolfo Salazar, of the firm Arenales & Skinner-Klée; Nigel Blackaby,
Jean Paul Dechamps and Nicolas Mujfioz, of the firm Freshfields
Bruckhaus Deringer LLP.

At the first session:

The Parties recognized that the Tribunal was properly constituted and
expressed no objection to the appointment of Arbitrators. They also
confirmed their attorneys and reserved the right to appoint additional
representatives or legal counsel, subject to notice of such designation
to the ICSID Secretariat, pursuant to Arbitration Rule 18. The
attorneys confirmed were:

Claimant:

Miguel Virgés, José Miguel Fatas and Virginia Allan, of the firm
Uria Menéndez; and Sean McCoy-Cador, of Iberdrola Energia S.A.

Respondent:

Guillermo A. Porras, Solicitor General de Guatemala; Alejandro Arenales,
Alfredo Skinner-Klée and Rodolfo Salazar, of the firm Arenales &
SkinnerKklée; and Nigel Blackaby, Lluis Paradell and Jean Paul Dechamps,
of the firm Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP.

The Parties expressed their agreement with the provisions of the ICSID
Convention (Article 61), Administrative and Financial Regulations (Rule 14)
and the Arbitration Rules (Rule 28) on the apportionment of costs of the
proceeding and prepayments to ICSID. They also agreed to cover costs
incurred in the proceeding equally, until the Tribunal gave its decision
on costs.

The Parties also agreed with the rights, fees and charges of the Tribunal
under the ICSID Convention (Article 60), the Administrative and Financial
Regulation (Rule 14) and under the ICSID Tariff of Duties, Fees and
Charges.

The Parties expressed their approval to conduct the arbitration pursuant to
the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rules in force (April 10, 2006),
without prejudice to the possibility of the Parties reaching agreement on
specific issues.

[15]

[16]

[17]

It was agreed that the seat of arbitration would be Washington D.C.; the
city where the hearings would take place. The Parties authorized the
Tribunal to hold hearings in an alternate location, after consultation
with them. The Arbitrators were also authorized to hold meetings
without the Parties, in any place.

It was established that the award would be considered issued in Washington
D.C., regardless of where it is signed by the members of the Tribunal; that
the language of the proceedings would be Spanish; rules were set on the
translation of documents, on transcription and recording of the hearings and
the record of the hearings.

The application of Rule 24 of the Administrative and Financial Regulations was
accepted, rules were set on the content, filing and delivery of the instruments
of the Parties and it was agreed that the three Tribunal Arbitrators should be
present at meetings of the Tribunal.

It was also agreed that the Tribunal would make its decisions by majority
vote and that these would be communicated in writing. Additionally, the
Tribunal was granted the power to make decisions by correspondence or
by any other appropriate means, provided that all Arbitrators were
consulted.

The Parties expressed their agreement with the provisions of Rules 26(1)
and 26(2) of the Arbitration Rules, and agreed that the President, in
consultation with the other members of the Tribunal, could make
decisions about setting time limits.

The Parties decided that the arbitration process should include: (i) a
written proceedings stage, and (ii) an oral proceedings stage. The order
of the written proceedings, the rules applicable to the preliminary hearing
and the form of filing testimony and expert reports were also agreed.

The Parties agreed that the dates for subsequent meetings would be
fixed by the Tribunal, pursuant to Arbitration Rule 13(2).

The Parties expressed their agreement with the publication of the award and,
if any, of the decision on jurisdiction.

The Parties agreed that, if the Respondent should present
objections to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, the latter should
decide “in a timely manner and based on the briefs of the parties,
whether to suspend the proceedings on the merits of the dispute
(Decision on Bifurcation).”

Finally, the procedural schedule was agreed.

On November 30, 2009, the Claimant filed its Demand or Memorial
on the merits of the dispute (“Memorial”).

On December 15, 2009, the Respondent filed a Declaration of Intent
declaring that it would oppose objections to ICSID jurisdiction, to the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal and to the admissibility of the Claimant's
claim.

On December 28, 2009, the Respondent requested an extension of the
time limits to file its objections to jurisdiction, which originally expired on

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

January 15, 2010. On the same date, the Claimant objected to the
extension of that period. By communication dated January 5, 2010, the
President informed the Tribunal's decision to extend the time limit for
filing objections to jurisdiction and admissibility to January 25, 2010.

On January 25, 2010, ICSID received the Memorial of Objections of
Jurisdiction and Admissibility (‘Memorial of Jurisdiction”) filed by the
Respondent. On February 25, 2010, ICSID received the Memorial in
Answer to Objections of Jurisdiction and Admissibility (‘Memorial of
Answer of Jurisdiction”) filed by the Claimant.

In accordance with the agreement at the first session (paragraph 14 m
above), on March 24, 2010 the Tribunal issued its Decision on the
Bifurcation of the Arbitral Proceeding. Among other things, the Tribunal
held that “the main dispute between the Parties is whether the facts
alleged by the Claimant constitute a contractual and regulatory issue or if
they are in violation of the Treaty. This is a difference that is closely
linked to the merits of the dispute, which is difficult to separate from
that decision and which requires for its resolution a comprehensive
assessment of the facts and evidence." Following the same reasoning,
the Tribunal stated that "... if it is admitted, as proposed by Guatemala,
that the objections ratione materiae can also be seen as objections to the
admissibility of the claim, based on the lack of a valid basis for that claim,
it would be necessary to go into considerations on the merits of the claim,
to determine if grounds effectively exist that support Iberdrola’s claim.”
The Tribunal also noted that "... it is not admissible to apply the so-called
prima facie test invoked by the Claimant to make the decision to bifurcate
the proceeding as this applies once it has been decided that the
jurisdictional issues will be addressed separately and prior to the issues of
merit, i.e., when it has been decided to bifurcate the proceeding.”
Accordingly, the Tribunal found that bifurcation of the proceedings was
not warranted and that it would decide the jurisdictional issues together
with those of merit.

On July 26, 2010, the Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial.
On September 27, 2010, the Claimant filed its Reply.

By communication of October 22, 2010, the Claimant informed the
Tribunal that Iberdrola had made the decision to proceed with the
complete divestiture of its assets in Guatemala by selling them to a third
party, and therefore, on October 21 proceeded, “...together with its
partners, TECO and EDP, to sell to Empresas Publicas de Medellin E.S.P.
its shares in [Deca II], which includes, among other assets, the total
number of shares that the company held in [EEGSA]." In addition, the
Claimant declared that “... the international claim presented in this
arbitration against Guatemala... has not been transferred to the buyer.”

On October 25, 2010, the Respondent referred to the Claimant's
communication of October 22, 2010, stating, among other things, that it
reserved the right to: (i) respond to any arguments that the Claimant
might file on the sale, (ii) file additional jurisdictional objections, and (iii)
request a review of the schedule for the filing of its Rejoinder.

 

The Claimant sent the Tribunal an “Explanatory Note on the
Disinvestments of Iberdrola in the Republic of Guatemala”, dated
November 12, 2010, explaining that Iberdrola together with its partners

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

had sold DECA II to EPM, with which Iberdrola had sold its 39.64% indirect
share in EEGSA.

By communication of November 22, 2010, the Respondent requested the
Tribunal to order the Claimant to display documents related to the
Explanatory Note. It also requested a ninety-day extension for the
filing of its Rejoinder, counted from receipt of the requested
documentation.

By Procedural Order dated November 23, 2010, the Tribunal resolved: (i)
to grant the Claimant time until November 30, 2010 to respond to the
request for display of documents made by the Respondent; and (ii) provide
that the date for the filing of the Rejoinder would be set once the Claimant
had responded to the request for display of the documents presented by the
Respondent in accordance with point (1) above. It also provided that, upon
receipt of the statements of the Parties, the Tribunal would rule on the
request for display of documents.

By communication of November 30, 2010, the Claimant pronounced itself
regarding the request for display of documents made by the Respondent.
On December 2, 2010, the Respondent referred to the Claimant’s
communication and requested time to file a brief reply from the Tribunal.
The same day, the Claimant objected to its counterpart’s request.

By Procedural Order date December 6, 2010, the Tribunal resolved: (i) to
grant the Respondent until December 9, 2010 to deal with the
communication sent by the Claimant on November 30th of that year; (ii)
to grant the Claimant until December 13, 2010 to express its position on
the Respondent's declaration; and (iii) to announce the setting of a new
date for the filing of the Rejoinder, which would be made after the filing of
the brief mentioned in sub-paragraph (ii) of this paragraph.

On December 9, 2010, the Respondent referred to the Claimant's
response to the request for display of documents made by the former
and the Claimant filed its answer to the Respondent's brief on December
13, 2010.

By Procedural Order dated December 22, 2010, the Tribunal ruled on
the request for documents filed by the Respondent and granted some of
the requests presented. In particular, the Tribunal ordered “... the
display of documents held by the Claimant issued exclusively by its
financial, tax, accounting and in-house advisers which reflect the final
value assigned by the Claimant to EEGSA in the context of the sale of
DECA II.” It also ordered the Respondent to file its Rejoinder on the
merits within forty days from the day following that on which the
Claimant displayed the documents that the Tribunal ordered it to file.

By communication dated December 23, 2010, ICSID informed the
Tribunal that, thereafter, Ms. Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski
would act as Secretary of the Tribunal.

On January 12, 2011, in response to the Procedural Order mentioned
in paragraph 31 above, the Claimant submitted an Explanatory Note
regarding the documents that the Tribunal ordered it to display. In said
Note, the Claimant stated that “... in the context of the sale of DECA
II, it did not assign a final value to EEGSA to accept the Tender Offer
made by EPM... the parties to the Purchase and Sale Agreement did
not consider it necessary to assign a single value to the companies in

[33]
[34]

[35]

[36]

DECA II: the buyer had to purchase the holding as a whole... ".
On February 23, 2011, the Respondent filed its Rejoinder.

After consultation with the Parties, and these expressing their views,
by Procedural Order dated May 19, 2011, the Tribunal: (i) provided
that the hearing on jurisdiction and merits of the dispute would be held
during seven days, i.e. between July 25, 2011 and August 1, 2011,
excluding July 31st; (ii) established rules on the starting time and
duration of each session and the order and rules to be followed as
regards, inter alia, the cross-examinations and the participation of the
Parties in the hearing; and (iii) ruled that, no later than July 15, 2011,
each Party must inform the Tribunal and the other Party of the list of
persons who would attend the hearing to represent them.

Regarding the differences that had arisen between the Parties on the
relevance and need for the Claimant to furnish the publications cited
by the witness Leonardo Giacchino in his curriculum vitae, on June 10,
2011, the Tribunal issued a Procedural Order whereby: (i) it ordered
the Claimant to file the publications requested by the Respondent
through the communication of June 1, 2011, provided they had been
published or put in writing by any physical or digital media; and (ii)
indicated that it would be permitted to question the witness Giacchino
on the content of said documents in the hearing, under the control of
the Tribunal.

The hearing was held from the 25th to 30th July 2011, in Washington
D.C. As stated in the transcript, accepted by both Parties, attending
the hearing were:

Representing the Claimant:

José Miguel Alcolea Cantos, Rafael Gil Nievas and Antonio Martinez
Atienza, of Iberdrola; Miguel Virgés Soriano, Virginia L. Allan, Heidi
Lopez Castro and José Angel Rueda Garcia, of the firm Uria Menéndez;
Juan Carlos Castillo Chacon, of the firm Aguilar Castillo Love; Erica
VanSant, of Solutions Economics LLC; Ifigo Elorriaga Fernandez de
Arroyabe, Miguel Francisco Calleja Mediano, Luis Antonio Maté
Sanchez, Leonardo Giacchino and Carlos Manuel Bastos (witnesses);
Eduardo Mayora Alvarado, Jorge Rolando Barrios, Alexander Galetovic,
Juan Carlos Estanga, José Luis Suarez Munilla, Pedro G. Rosenfeld and
Carlos Lapuerta (experts); and José Antonio Garcia (analyst of The
Braille Group, assistant to Mr. Lapuerta).

Representing the Respondent:

Guillermo A. Porras, of the Solicitor General’s Office de Guatemala;
Nigel Blackaby, Lluis Paradell, Noiana Marigo, Jean Paul Dechamps,
Lauren Friedman, Michelle Grando, Ricardo Chirinos, Joel Kliksberg,
Katherine Ibarra and Sebastian Yanine, of the firm Freshfields
Bruckhaus Deringer U.S.A. LLP; Alejandro Arenales; Alfredo Skinner-
Klée; Rodolfo Estuardo Salazar, of the firm Arenales & Skinner-Klée;
Anibal Samayoa, Under-Secretary General of the Presidency of the
Republic of Guatemala; Saul Oliva, of the Solicitor General’s Office of
Guatemala; Romeo Lépez and Mynor René Castillo, of the Ministry of
Finance of the Republic of Guatemala; Marcela Peldez, of the CNEE;
Carlos Colom and Enrique Moller (witnesses); Manuel A. Abdala, Luis
Felipe Saenz Juarez and Mario Damonte (experts); Julian Delamer and
Ariel Medvedeff (assistants to Mr. Abdala).

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

On July 30, 2011, at the end of the hearing, the Parties told the
Tribunal that they had reached agreement on several issues related to
the filing of their later briefs. They also said they would send as soon
as possible a draft Procedural Order, which would contain the terms of
the agreement. For his part, the President of the Tribunal told them
that the Tribunal might raise some issues to be dealt with in their
respective post-hearing briefs.

By a communication dated August 15, 2011, the Tribunal invited the
parties to express in their closing statements “their position on certain
issues that have been discussed throughout the proceeding, without
prejudice to their pronouncing on any other issue that each of them
deems significant.” In this regard, the Tribunal proposed that, before
the close of the proceeding, in their closing statements, the Parties
give their views briefly on the following issues: “(i) reasons why they
consider that the Tribunal has or does not have jurisdiction to hear the
dispute at issue in this arbitration; (ii) indicate what the powers of the
Experts Commission are that are mentioned in the General Electricity
Law of Guatemala and its Regulation, and indicate the merits of their
Position; (iii) summarize, step by step, the procedure that should be
followed for determining the electricity distribution rates in Guatemala,
from the issuance of the Terms of Reference to the approval of tariffs,
indicating which person, body or entity intervenes at which stage and
the scope of said intervention; (iv) explain how the procedure dealt
with in (iii) above was implemented in the case of EEGSA, for rates for
the five years from 2008 to 2013; (v) indicate whether the facts that
each party considers as proven did or did not produce consequences
under the Bilateral Treaty of Investment Protection between Spain and
Guatemala or, in general, under International Public Law.” The Tribunal
emphasized that the issues raised did not imply any assumptions or
suggest any position of the Tribunal, nor did they constitute a
limitation of the issues that could be addressed by the Parties in their
respective closing statements.

On August 29, 2011, the Parties submitted to the Tribunal a draft
Procedural Order, which contained the agreement they reached at the
end of the hearing on July 30, 2011. The draft also included an
additional agreement of the Parties on the filing of a document relating
to costs incurred during this proceeding. At the same date, each of the
Parties sent to the Tribunal their position on the length that the post-
hearing briefs should have.

By Procedural Order dated September 1, 2011, the Tribunal ruled that:

The Parties would file agreed corrections to the transcript of the
hearing no later than September 23, 2011, according to the rules
outlined in the Procedural Order. Any differences that remained on the
revised transcription would be resolved by the Tribunal prior to October
3, 2011.

The Parties would file their post-hearing briefs, simultaneously, on
October 17, 2011. It also noted the length, exhibits and other
characteristics that said briefs should have.

Together with the post-hearing briefs, each Party might file new
documents directly related to the oral testimony of the witnesses of its
counterpart (not of the experts), received during the hearing, subject
to the procedure provided under the same Procedural Order. It also

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

indicated that, in case of disagreement on the admission of new
documents, the Parties would send a brief written statement of the
grounds for applying for the admission or rejection of each document
no later than September 23, 2011.

If necessary, the decision on the admissibility of the new documents
would be issued before October 3, 2011.

Each Party would file a brief in which it would make a summary of the
costs incurred in connection with this proceeding, no later than October
17, 2011.

On October 17, 2011, Plaintiff filed its Conclusions (“Claimant's Post-
Hearing Brief”) and its Brief on Costs (“Claimant's Brief on Costs”). On the
same date, the Respondent filed its Post-Hearing Brief and its Costs Claim
Brief (“Respondent's Brief on Costs”).

By a communication of July 12, 2012, the Tribunal, pursuant to Rule 38(1)
of the Arbitration Rules, declared the proceeding closed.

BACKGROUND
1 PRIVATIZATION PROCESS

By Government Agreement No. 865-97 dated December 17, 1997 the
Republic of Guatemala authorized the privatization of EEGSA and
authorized the sale of 96% of its shares through a public national and
international tender process.”

EEGSA and a “High Level Committee” - comprising EEGSA managers and
the Minister of Energy and Mines - selected the U.S. firm SSB, through a
bidding process, as Financial Advisor in the privatization process. SSB
offered its services in partnership with Luis Carlos Boholavsky, Carlos Osvaldo
Castro, Dmitri Pliones, Brown & Wood LLP, and the law firm Beltranena de la
Cerda and Chavez.

On May 4, 1998, the Government of Guatemala began the process of
selling the EEGSA shares by opening a “data room” and made available to
potential investors, among others: (i) the Terms of Reference for the sale
of EEGSA?; (ii) a Informational Memorandum of Sale’; and (iii) a draft of
the Share Purchase and Sale Agreement.® The text of the LGE, its
Regulations and an audit report on EEGSA were attached to the
Informational Memorandum of Sale.°

As stated in the text of the LGE and RLGE, the electricity distribution rate
setting would be based on the “efficient company” model. The Claimant
refers to said efficient business model noting inter alia that, “VAD is the
distributor’s compensation and legally corresponds to the mean cost of
capital and operation of a distribution network of an efficient reference
company providing the same service as the regulated company. Thus
defined, VAD should allow the distributor to recover the costs of a
company in conditions of competition, operating in the same physical
conditions as the actual distributor, and provide it with a ‘normal’ return.
This means that if the distributor operates efficiently, the tariffs must allow
it to at least recover all operating costs and investment and get an
adequate return for similar investments in the country.”

The Respondent states on this issue that, “the ‘efficient’ or ‘model’ company

[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]

system uses a theoretical creation that attempts to replicate how a
regulated company should operate within a framework of operation and
investments considered to be efficient. This efficient company system
neutralizes the perverse incentives of the natural monopoly in which the
distribution company works. So, if the distributor is more efficient than the
theoretical efficient company, this ensures a greater return on its
investment. Any inefficiency on its part, on the contrary, decreases its
margin of return."°

After opening the bidding process of EEGSA shares, several promotional
tours were initiated in different parts of the world to provide information
on the privatization to potential investors.°

On May 15,1998, while the privatization process was under way,
EEGSA and the MEM signed an Authorization Agreement for electricity
distribution in the departments of Guatemala, Sacatepéquez and
Escuintla, for a period of 50 years. Clause twenty of the Authorization
Agreement provided that, “it is agreed by the parties that this
agreement be construed as incorporating all the Laws, Regulations and
applicable standards in effect at the time of its subscription.”

Clause nine of the Authorization Agreement noted: "The Ministry
states that... d. It will not take actions that prevent or materially affect
the ability of THE SUCCESSFUL BIDDER to develop, design, construct,
operate and maintain the purpose of the Authorization in the form set out
in the Application and in this Agreement, or which significantly increase
the cost of such activities. ’"*

Clause seventeen established that: “The breach of any material
term or condition of this Agreement, the Law or the Regulation shall
constitute a default by THE MINISTRY." *?

On July 20, 1998 the investor groups competing for the EEGSA
strategic package went to Guatemala City to present their respective
bids for prequalification. Iberdrola presented as the leader of a
consortium together with TECO, through one of its subsidiaries and
EDP.

On July 30, 1998 Iberdrola and the other prequalified companies and
consortia attended the presentation of the financial bids. The
consortium that included Iberdrola was the winner as it presented the
best financial proposal, an offer of five hundred twenty million U.S.
dollars and twenty-five cents.¥?

Before the award of the EEGSA shares to that consortium, its partners
constituted, in accordance with the Terms of Reference for the sale of
EEGSA,'* a Guatemalan company, DECA I, which would sign the
shares sales and purchase contract and would be the owner of the
EEGSA shares. DECA I shares were distributed as follows: Iberdrola
49%, Teco 30%, EDP 21%.**

On September 11, 1998 DECA I and the Republic of Guatemala signed
the Share Purchase and Sale Agreement in virtue of which DECA I
acquired 80% of the shares of EEGSA.'® Later, DECA I acquired an
additional 0.88% from private shareholders, accumulating up to
80.88% equity interest in EEGSA.?”

[56]

[57]

[58]

Subsequently, Iberdrola and the partners of DECA I transferred the
EEGSA shares that DECA I had to another company called DECA II, a
company also incorporated under the laws of Guatemala. DECA I was
absorbed by EEGSA and replaced with DECA II for all purposes. As a
result of this new corporate structure Iberdrola, through DECA II,
retained 39.64% of EEGSA shares.

2. GENERAL ELECTRICITY LAW, ITS REGULATIONS AND ITS
MODIFICATIONS

The LGE and RLGE were in effect in Guatemala when the consortium,
which included Iberdrola, submitted its bid to acquire the EEGSA
shares and when it acquired part of those shares through DECA I.

Without prejudice to other specific articles of the LGE and RLGE cited
in different sections of this award, the Parties’ dispute focused
primarily on the provisions of the LGE referring to the form of
determining tariffs; to the VAD; the NRV; the cost of capital, the
functions and powers of the CNEE; and the powers of the Expert
Commission. The rules cited by the Parties as relevant, which were in
effect at the time of the acquisition of the EEGSA shares by DECA I,
are as follows:

LGE’®

"Article 61. User tariffs for Final Distribution Service will be determined by
the Commission by adding the components of acquisition costs of capacity
and energy; freely negotiated between generators and distributors and
referenced to the input of the distribution network with the components of
efficient distribution costs ...”

“Article 67. The toll in the main system is calculated by dividing the annuity
of the investment and the operation and maintenance costs of the main
system, for optimally-sized installations, between the total firm capacity
connected to the corresponding electricity system.

The annuity of the investment will be calculated on the basis of the New
Replacement Value of the facilities, optimally-sized, considering the
discount rate to be used in the calculation of tariffs and lifespan of thirty
(30) years. The New Replacement Value is the cost it would have to build
the works and physical assets of the authorization, with the technology
available in the market, to provide the same service. The concept of
economically adapted system involves recognizing in the New Replacement
Value only those facilities or parts of facilities that are economically
justified for providing the service that is required.”

“Article 71. The end consumer tariffs of the final distribution service, in
their capacity and energy components, shall be calculated by the
Commission as the sum of the weighted price of all the distributor’s
purchases, referenced to the inlet to the distribution network and Value-
Added for Distribution - VAD.... The VAD is the average cost of capital and
operation of the distribution network of a reference efficient company,
operating in a given density area.”

“Article 72. The VAD shall include at least the following basic components:
a) Costs associated with the user, regardless of their demand for capacity
and energy; b) Average distribution losses, separated into their

components of capacity and energy; c) Capital, operation and maintenance
costs associated with the distribution, expressed per unit of capacity
supplied.”

“Article 73: The cost of capital per unit capacity shall be calculated as the
constant annuity of the cost of capital corresponding to the New
Replacement Value of an economically dimensioned distribution network.
The annuity shall be calculated using the typical lifespan of distribution
facilities and the discount rate used in the calculation of tariffs. The cost of
operation and maintenance shall be that of the efficient management of a
reference distribution network.

“Article 74. Each distributor shall calculate the components of the VAD by a
study commissioned to an engineering firm prequalified by the
Commission. The Commission may prescribe that various distributors
contract a single study, if the distribution densities are similar in each
group and use a single VAD for determining the tariffs of all the
companies qualified in the same group.

The terms of reference of the VAD study or studies will be drawn up
by the Commission, which shall have the right to monitor the
progress of these studies.”

“Article 75. The Commission shall review the studies made and may
make comments to them. In the case of discrepancies are made in
writing, the Commission and the distributors must agree on the
appointment of an Expert Commission of three members, one
appointed by each party and the third by mutual agreement. The
Expert Commission will pronounce itself on the discrepancies within
60 days of its formation.”

“Article 76. The Commission shall use the VAD and the energy
purchase prices, referenced to the inlet of the distribution network,
to structure a set of tariffs for each contractor. These tariffs must
strictly reflect the economic cost of purchasing and distributing the
electricity.”

“Article 77. The methodology for determining the tariffs shall be
reviewed by the Commission every five (5) years, during the first
two weeks of January of the relevant year. The regulations shall
prescribe the periods for conducting the studies, their review,
formulation of comments and formation of the Expert Commission.
All the reports issued by the Commission shall be publicly
accessible.”

“Article 78. The methodology for determination of tariffs and their
adjustment formulas cannot be modified during their current term,
unless their readjustments triple the initial value of the originally
approved tariffs. In the event that, at the expiration of the term of
the tariffs, the tariffs for the following period have not been fixed
because of the Commission, those can be adjusted by the
contractors according to the automatic adjustment formulas. "

“Article 79. The discount rate to be used in the present law for
setting the tariffs shall equal the capital cost rate determined by the
Commission through studies contracted with private specialist
entities. The discount rate should reflect the capital cost rate for
activities with similar risk in the country. Different capital cost rates

may be used for transmission and distribution activities. In any case,
if the discount rate should prove less than real seven percent annual
or exceeds real thirteen percent annual, the latter values shall apply,
respectively.”

RLGE*®

“Article 29. Functions. The Comisiédn Nacional de Energia Eléctrica,
hereinafter the Commission, shall be a technical body of the Ministry.
The Commission shall have functional independence, its own budget
and exclusive funds, the function of which shall be to determine the
prices and quality of the provision of the services of transport and
distribution of electricity subject to authorization, control and ensure
the competitive conditions in the Wholesale Market, as well as all the
other responsibilities assigned to it by the Law and this Regulation.”

“Article 30. Appointment of Members of the Commission. The
Commission shall consist of three members who shall be appointed in
the manner prescribed in Article 5 of the Law...”

“Article 91. Value-Added for Distribution. Value-Added for Distribution
(VAD) is the average cost of capital and operation of the distribution
network of an efficient reference company, operating in an area of a
particular load density.

In the formulas of Articles 88 and 89, VAD is related to the following
variables: CDMT; CDBT; FPPMT; FPPBT; FPEMT; FPEBT; FPEST; NHU.

The first two variables (CDMT and CDBT) are called Cost Components
of VAD (CCVAD).

The next four components are called Losses Components of VAD
(LCVAD).

The NHU component is hours of typical use of tariffs without measuring
capacity.”

“Article 92. Adjustment Formulas of Cost Components of Value-Added
for Distribution. The adjustment formulas of VAD cost components VAD
shall be adjusted with representative formulas of the cost structures
calculated together with the base tariffs, according to the studies
referred to in Article 97 of this Regulation. An annual reduction factor
shall also be considered that takes into account the effect of economies
of scale and improved efficiency, which will be applied annually. These
studies must be approved by the Commission.”

“Article 95. Tariff Approval. The tariffs to users of the Final Distribution
service, their adjustment formulas, the tariff structures based on these
rates, the disconnection and reconnection charges, shall be approved
every five years and shall be valid for that period, unless the
Commission determines the need for an extraordinary review of the
base tariffs.”

“Article 97. Tariff Studies. The Distributors must contract the conduct
of studies to calculate the components of the Value-Added for
Distribution with specialized consulting firms.

The Commission shall establish a list of qualified consulting firms to
perform the tariff studies, and the terms of reference for contracting
them, which shall be based on the concepts in Articles 86 to 90 of this

Regulation.

The studies shall be based on the target costs of an efficient
Distribution company. The Commission shall determine the number of
reference efficient firms, characterized by their density of distribution,
which shall be considered in defining the VAD, and shall classify the
different Distributors, or parts of Distributors, in each of the reference
model efficient companies. If a Distributor, because of differences in
density in its different areas of distribution, has parts of it classified in
different efficient company models, the Commission may determine a
single tariff for all of it, resulting from taking the weighted average of
the corresponding VADs, or it may decide to apply different tariffs for
the different areas of the authorized service provider. The weighting
shall be based on the number of users in each area.

The VADs calculated for each Distributor shall be considered factors of
simultaneity resulting from load characterization studies that adjust
the total demand of the authorization to the sum of the capacity
contracted with its users plus the real losses.

Distributors must hire specialized firms, prequalified by the
Commission, to perform load characterization studies according to
Terms of Reference to be drawn up by the Commission. The VAD
studies must be updated once the information from these studies is
available.”

“Article 98. Periodicity of Tariff Studies. Every five years, anticipating
by eleven months the effective date of the tariffs, the Commission shall
deliver to the Distributors the terms of reference of the studies that
they must order from specialized consulting companies, prequalified by
the Commission. Three months before the effective date of the new
tariffs, each Distributor shall deliver the tariff study to the Commission.
The tariff study must include the resulting tariff charts and the
respective adjustment formulas, as well as the respective supporting
report. The Commission shall approve or reject the studies made by
the consultants within one month, and formulate comments that it
deems pertinent.

The Distributor, through the consulting firms, shall analyze the
comments, make the corrections to the tariffs and their adjustment
formulas, and send the corrected study to the Commission within
fifteen days of receiving the comments. Should discrepancies persist
between the Commission and the Distributor, the procedure
established in Article 75 of the Law shall be followed. The cost of this
contracting shall be covered by the Commission and the distributor in
equal parts.

As long as the distributor does not send the tariff studies or not make
the corrections to these, as established in the preceding paragraphs, it
shall not be able to change its tariffs and shall continue to apply the
tariffs current at the time of termination of the period of validity of
such tariffs. Once the tariff studies have been submitted or the
corrections made, the definitive tariffs shall be published, which shall
apply from the first day of the month immediately following that of
their publication. Delay in the publication shall not alter the validity
period of the tariffs, which shall always begin to be counted from May
ist. Retroactive application of tariffs is not permitted. All the above
should be considered without prejudice to the corresponding

[59]

sanctions."

“Article 99. Application of Tariffs. Once the tariff study mentioned in the
previous articles is approved, the Commission shall set the definitive
tariffs no later than one month from the date on which the definitive
study was approved and must publish them no later than April 30th in
the Diario Oficial. If the Commission has not published the new tariffs,
these may be adjusted by the distributors based on the current
adjustment formulas, except as provided in the last paragraph of the
previous article. The tariffs shall be applied as from May 1st
immediately following the date of approval by the Commission.”

The Reforms to the General Electricity Law Regulation

In their breifs the Claimant and the Respondent referred to three
changes introduced by Guatemala to the RLGE that are relevant to
the dispute. These changes are:

By Government Agreement No. 787-2003 of December 5, 2003 RLGE
Article 99 was amended. The new Article 99 says:

“Application of Tariffs. Once the tariff study referred to in the above
articles is approved, the Commission shall set the definitive tariffs as
from the date on which the definitive study was approved and shall,
when so decided, publish these in the Diario de Centroamérica, in a
period that shall never exceed nine months as from the date of expiry
of the validity of the five years of the previous tariff schedule. If the
Commission has not published the new tariffs, those of the previous
tariff schedule shall continue to apply with their adjustment formulas.
The tariffs shall apply from the first day of the month following their
publication.

In no event shall the activity of final distribution of the electricity
service be performed without a current tariff schedule. In the situation
that a Distributor does not have a tariff schedule, it is the responsibility
of the National Energy Commission to issue and enforce a tariff
schedule immediately, so as to comply with the principle enunciated. ’”°

RLGE Article 98, concerning the procedure for the five-year tariff
review, was amended by Government Agreement No. 68-2007 of March
5, 2007. The new Article 98 says:

“Every five years, anticipating by twelve months the effective date of
the tariffs, the Commission shall deliver to the Distributors the terms of
reference of the studies that will be the basis for the contracting of
specialized consulting companies, prequalified by the Commission.

Four months before the effective date of the new tariffs, each
Distributor shall deliver the tariff study to the Commission, which must
include the resulting tariff charts, the justifications for each cost item to
include and the respective adjustment formulas, as well as the
respective supporting report; the Commission shall decide on the
admissibility or inadmissibility of the studies made by the consultants
within two months, making the comments that it deems pertinent.

The Distributor, through the consulting firm, shall analyze the

[60]

comments, make the corrections to the studies and send them to the
Commission within fifteen days of receiving the comments. Should
discrepancies persist between the Commission and the Distributor, the
procedure established in Article 75 of the Law shall be followed. The
cost of contracting of the third member of the Expert Commission shall
be covered by the Commission and the Distributor in equal parts.

In case of failure by the Distributor to send the studies or corrections to
the same, the Commission is empowered to issue and publish the
corresponding tariff schedule, based on the tariff study made
independently by the latter or making corrections to the studies
initiated by the Distributor. The structure approved and published by
the Commission shall apply from the first day of the expiry of the
previous tariff schedule.’”*

Government Agreement No. 145-2008 of May 19, 2008, added Article
98 bis, concerning the appointment of the third member of the Expert
Commission, in the case of disagreement between the parties. That
article stated:

“Procedure and time limits for forming the Expert Commission. The
Commission and the Distributor, within three days of notification of the
discrepancies referred to in Article 75 of the Law, must form the Expert
Commission of three members, one appointed by each party and a third
member by mutual agreement. For the appointment of the third
member, the Commission and the Distributor shall each propose at
most three (3) candidates to participate in the selection process.

The candidates for membership of the Expert Commission must comply
with the following minimum requirements: a) Be a specialist in the field
and of recognized prestige. b) Not have had any relationship, during
the last five (5) years with entities or companies related to the
electricity sub-sector operating in the Republic of Guatemala, which
must be accredited by affidavit sworn before a notary.

The parties, when submitting their candidates, must accompany said
affidavit with the respective curriculum vitae of each nominee. The
persons who meet all the requirements listed above shall be the only
ones that may be taken into account for the selection process.

If, after the three-day time limit for selecting the third member, there
is no agreement between the parties, the Commission will submit the
respective file to the Ministry to definitively choose, within at most
three days of receiving the file, the third member of the Expert
Commission from among the candidates nominated. Once the
Commission and the Distributor are notified of the Ministry’s decision,
both parties shall, within a maximum period of two days from the date
of notification from the Ministry, set up the Expert Commission, as
established in Article 75 of the Law. The Expert Commission will
pronounce itself within sixty (60) days, as from its formation. Said
pronouncement must be founded on the existing legal framework and in
accordance with the terms of reference referred to in Article 74 of the
Law.’

3. EEGSA 1998-2008 TARIFF PROCESS

Having mentioned the most relevant articles of the LGE and the

20

[61]

[62]

[63]

[64]

[65]

[66]

[67]

[68]

[69]

RLGE, it should be noted that, in accordance with LGE Article 77, the
methodology for determining the tariffs must be reviewed by the
CNEE every five years.

The first tariff fixing by EEGSA was conducted for the period 1998-
2003. For these five years, EEGSA’s tariff VAD was determined using
values of other countries applying similar methodology, such as Chile,
Peru and El Salvador. Specifically, the EEGSA tariff VAD was based on
values of El Salvador.

The tariff review for the 2003-2008 period - which took place during
the period the LGE and RLGE were in force - was made without
resorting to the procedure before the Expert Commission and resulted
in an increase of the EEGSA VAD compared to the first five years.

4. FIVE-YEAR TARIFF PROCESS 2008-2013

The central debate of the Parties in this case was about the EEGSA
tariff process corresponding to the five years 2008-2013. The
following is a summary of the relevant facts.

The tariff schedule applicable to EEGSA for the five years 2003-2008
was to expire at the end of July 2008. Thus, in accordance with
Article 74 of the LGE, the CNEE had to conduct a prequalification
process of the engineering firms that could assist EEGSA in the
preparation process of the study of the VAD components for the next
five years.

On April 11, 2007 CNEE, through an international competitive tender
process, invited engineering firms interested in joining the “Register of
Prequalified that could make tariff studies to calculate the Value-Added for
Distribution - VAD - Components in the Electricity Distributor Companies of
Guatemala”.

The proposals received were reviewed by the Tariffs Division of the CNEE,
and its findings were presented to the CNEE Board. Of the nine firms that
submitted proposals, six were prequalified, namely: PA Consulting
Services S.A. (Argentina), Quantum S.A. (Argentina), Mercados
Energéticos S.A. (Argentina), Synex Ingenieros Consultores Ltda. (Chile),
Bates White LLC (United States), and the consortium of Sigla
S.A./Electrotek (Argentina).”4

Parallel to the prequalification of the consultant firms, CNEE was
working on the preparation of the Terms of Reference. These Terms of
Reference were published by the CNEE through Resolution CNEE-13680-
2007 dated April 30, 2007.75

Dated May 8, 2007, EEGSA lodged an appeal against Resolution CNEE-
13680-2007 that approved the Terms of Reference.”° In particular,
EEGSA objected to ToR numbers 1.7.4 and 1.9.

In its most important section, TOR number 1.7.4 provided that, “if any
Stage Report does not comply with the above premises, CNEE has legal
authority to require additional information and to suspend recognition of all
further development of the Study if, in its own judgment expressed
explicitly, with justification and reasonably, this was being executed

21

[70]

[71]

[72]

[73]

[74]

[75]

[76]

[77]

[78]

ignoring, distancing from or not complying with the ToR. The Distributor
shall make available to the CNEE all the information it requires for its
analysis and provide all the necessary means so that there is no delay in
the assessment of the Stage Reports.””’

ToR number 1.9 stated: "The study must be accompanied at both
presentations by the full set of Stage Reports. If any of them is missing,
the CNEE shall notify the Distributor and, pending receipt of the missing
information, the Study shall be deemed undelivered, for the purposes of
the provisions of Article 98 of the Regulation. Consequently, the delivery
of the Stage Reports shall not determine the time limits referred to in
Article 98 of the Regulation.

The CNEE may also consider the Study as not received if, in its own
judgment, the results requested in the ToR had been omitted in such a
way that it could be considered that the Study was incomplete or
presented a partial or distorted view’”®

The CNEE did not admit the appeal brought by EEGSA against the
Resolution containing the ToR?? and on May 29, 2007, EEGSA filed an
amparo challenging the ToR.*° The Sixth Civil Court of First Instance of
Guatemala, constituted as Court of Amparo, granted EEGSA a provisional
amparo on June 4, 2007 and suspended the effects of the Resolution
containing the ToR.*! This appeal was upheld by the same Court on June
11, 2007.”

On August 6, 2007, EEGSA withdrew its amparo application,?? after
reaching agreement with the CNEE on amendments to the original text of
the ToR and on the content of the new version.

Because of this, on October 9, 2007, CNEE, through Resolution CNEE-
124-2007, published an Addendum to ToR.**

Once the content of the ToR was defined, EEGSA had to proceed to
contract one of the consultants prequalified by the CNEE for the
preparation of the VAD study. Consequently, EEGSA contracted the
Bates White consultancy on January 23, 2008 to prepare the EEGSA
Tariff Study.

The CNEE, meanwhile, announced a public international tender process
to contract a consultant to provide support in the tariff review of
EEGSA.*° The CNEE Board finally contracted Sigla.*”

In accordance with the LGE, the RLGE and the ToR (section 1.4),
before delivering the full tariff study, EEGSA had to submit Stage
Reports to the CNEE containing the partial results of the study. The
CNEE reviewed the Stage Reports prepared by Bates White and, through
several letters to EEGSA, issued its comments and remarks.*® The Parties
disagree as to whether the Stage Reports complied with the provisions of
the ToR.*

On March 31, 2008, EEGSA presented to the CNEE the tariff study for the
five years 2008-2013.*°

On April 11, 2008, the CNEE published Resolution CNEE-63-2008
which presented comments on the study presented by EEGSA on
March 31, 2008 and resolved to, “declare inadmissible the Tariff

22

[79]

[80]

[81]

[82]

[83]

Study submitted by the Empresa Electrica de Guatemala... and that it
must make corrections to the same according to the comments made
and must send it to this Commission within 15 days."**

On May 5, 2008 Bates White sent to the CNEE and EEGSA response
letter to Resolution CNEE-63-2008." On the same date, EEGSA sent a
communication to the CNEE which stated, among other things, that,
“,.. still within the period provided for RLGE Article 98, my client hereby
submits to this Honorable Commission corrections to the Original Study,
deriving from the Resolution. Said corrections have been incorporated
into a new version of the Original Study, which contains (i) all the
corrections deriving from the comments made by the Commission
and contained in the Resolution which the Consultant, exercising
the independent judgment guaranteed to it by TORs, considered
pertinent; and (ii) the justifications and foundations, in each
corresponding Stage Report, for all the comments contained in the
Resolution that the Consultant, likewise exercising the independence
guaranteed to it by the ToR, did not consider appropriate...” Also EEGSA
noted that, “... the remaining discrepancies must be resolved by an Expert
Commission, in accordance with the provisions of Article 75 of the General
Electricity Law ("LGE”), and RLGE Article 98".*

On May 15, 2008, the CNEE decided, through Resolution 96-2008, to form
the Expert Commission indicated in LGE Article 75. In the preamble to this
Resolution, the CNEE noted that, “... dated May 5, 2008, EEGSA... filed
with the Comisién Nacional de Energia Eléctrica the Value-Added for
Distribution Study omitting the correction of all the comments made by
the Commission through the abovementioned Resolution CNNE-63-2008,
incorporating additional unrequested changes and amendments into the
Value-Added for Distribution Study. This consequently altered other
elements of the study; for which reason, in accordance with the
provisions of current legislation, it is the CNEE’s responsibility to
establish the discrepancies with the Value-Added for Distribution Study
to form the Expert Commission.” Therefore, the CNEE resolved: “that the
Expert Commission referred to in Article 75 of the General Electricity Law
be established, which must pronounce on the discrepancies with the Study
of Empresa Eléctrica de Guatemala, Sociedad Anénima, listed below,
verifying the correct application of the Terms of Reference... of the Value-
Added for Distribution Study approved by the Comisién Nacional de
Energia Eléctrica."**

As it was the first time that the Expert Commission was set up and that the
LGE did not specify what the Commission’s operating rules should be, the
CNEE and EEGSA sought to agree on the operating rules of the Expert
Commission. The Parties differ as to whether indeed there was an
agreement between them on all the operating rules of the Expert
Commission.

Further to the provisions of Resolution 96-2008, on June 6, 2008, EEGSA
and the CNEE signed before a notary the Act of Appointment of the Expert
Commission.*° In signing the Act, the CNEE appointed Jean Riubrugent as
a member of the Expert Commission and EEGSA named Leonardo
Giacchino. In agreement, the CNEE and EEGSA designated Carlos Bastos,
former Argentine Minister for Infrastructure, as the third member of the
Expert Commission.

As stated in the Instrument of Appointment of the Expert Commission, both

23

[84]

[85]

[86]

[87]

[88]

[89]

[90]

the CNEE and EEGSA stated that “... the Expert Commission is formed to
pronounce on the discrepancies with the Value-Added for Distribution
(VAD) Study of Empresa Eléctrica de Guatemala... contained in resolution
ninety-six two thousand eight (CNEE-96-2008), as well as on the responses
of Empresa Eléctrica de Guatemala and of its consultant to the same, as
provided in article seventy-five (75) and ninety-eight (98) of the Law and
the Regulations of the General Electricity Law respectively...’“©

The same day, June 6, 2008, the CNEE emailed a copy of the Instrument
of Appointment to the members of the Expert Commission.”

On June 26, 2008, Carlos Bastos signed a contract with the CNEE for
providing his services as third expert*® and another with EEGSA to the same
effect.“

On July 25, 2008, the Expert Commission issued its report in which it
pronounced on the discrepancies that EEGSA and the CNEE had submitted
to it.5° Along with its report, the Commission presented a letter of
"Notification of Delivery of the Expert Commission Report” which stated:
“the CNEE and EEGSA are asked to adopt the necessary steps to make
the Report known to the firm Bates White, so that it may proceed to
make the changes, amendments, additions and adjustments where
necessary to the Tariff Study filed before the CNEE on May 5, 2008,
taking into account the pronouncement made by this Expert
Commission with regard | to each of the discrepancies listed in
Resolution CNEE 96-2008.”

In its report, the Expert Commission noted that “the function of the Expert
Commission implies... putting an end to the discrepancies (in terms of article
75 of the LGE) between the CNEE and EEGSA. For this reason, the Expert
Commission shall resolve the discrepancies, taking into consideration the
positions of the Parties or by taking a third position from those presented by
these, always to the best knowledge and belief of its members. 2 Thus, in
analyzing the discrepancies referred for its consideration, the Expert
Commission, in some cases, pronounced in favor of the pertinence of the
comments of the CNEE, and in others, accepted EEGSA’s position. With
regard to certain discrepancies, the Commission adopted a position different
to that presented by the CNEE and by EEGSA.

Among the discrepancies analyzed, the Expert Commission pronounced
on the objections raised by the CNEE about the lack of delivery by the
EEGSA consultant, Bates White, of traceable and auditable models, “...
unanimously accepting the CNEE’s objection”™

The CNEE issued GJ-Ruling 3121 of July 25, 2008 which
acknowledged receipt of the report issued by the Expert Commission
and determined that “in virtue of having fulfilled the purpose of its
appointment, the Expert Commission is definitively dissolved...".°* In addition
to the above, the CNEE decided that the EEGSA tariff review should
continue, in accordance with the LGE and the RLGE.

According to the Claimant, GJ-Ruling 3121 was notified to it three days
after its issue, that is, on July 28, 2008.°° That same day, Bates White
delivered to the CNEE and to EEGSA a new version of its tariff study,
together with a letter stating that “attached there is a new version... of the
Value-Added for Distribution Study for [EEGSA] which has been amended

24

[91]

[92]

[93]

[94]

[95]

[96]

[97]

to take into account the pronouncements of the Expert Commission. ’°”

Having dissolved the Expert Commission by GJ-Ruling 3121, CNEE
notified the experts Jean Riubrugent and Carlos Bastos on July 28,
2008, that “...the activities corresponding to the execution ...” of their
respective contracts had ended with the delivery of the report of the Expert
Commission and they would proceed to arrange their corresponding
payment.*®

Through an appeal dated July 28, 2008, EEGSA challenged the
dissolution of the Expert Commission and asked for “... [GJ-Ruling
3121] to be revoked and that, in place of the impugned resolution, ... a
resolution be issued to declare that the Expert Commission shall not be
dissolved until it meets the provision in paragraph 4.2 of the report of the
Expert Commission, related to the operating rules of the Expert
Commission in which 12 points were fixed, the last of which establishes
that “The Distributor shall inform its consultancy firm of the
pronouncement of the Expert Commission, which must make the changes
requested in the pronouncement of the Expert Commission and send the
new version to the Expert Commission for its review and approval."°°

In addition to the appeal, EEGSA filed an action of amparo against the
CNEE, also dated 28 July, 2008, which inter alia requested that the First
Civil Court of First Instance should order the CNEE "...to cease in its threat
to violate the rights that articles 74 and 75 of the General Electricity Law
grant to the appellant, obliging it to follow the pronouncement of the Expert
Commission...."°°

 

By resolution of July 30, 2008, the First Court granted the amparo requested
by EEGSA and ordered that “...the requested interim amparo is decreed in
that it directs the Comisién Nacional de Energia Eléctrica that during the
processing of this amparo it must comply with the pronouncement of the
Expert Commission allowing it to complete its work especially the final
review of the changes presented to the Expert Commission by the firm Bates
White on twenty-eighth July of this year...."°"

Nevertheless, that same day, the First Court issued another resolution
that suspended the amparo proceeding initiated by EEGSA. The Court
found that, in view of EEGSA having brought an appeal against GJ-Ruling
3121, the action of amparo “lacks finality, as the proper resources for
resorting to this route have not yet been exhausted...."°7

Subsequently, EEGSA filed a complaint with the Constitutional Court
against the First Civil Court of First Instance, for this to annul the
resolution dated July 30, 2008, which suspended the action of amparo
that EEGSA had started as a consequence of the dissolution of the
Expert Commission. EEGSA also asked for the First Court to be ordered to
issue "...the resolution that legally corresponds...."°? By Resolution dated
September 1, 2008, the Constitutional Court accepted the complaint
presented by EEGSA, annulling the resolution of the First Court dated July
30, 2008, and ordering it to continue with the action of amparo filed by
EEGSA.°*

Carlos Bastos addressed the other two experts of the Expert Commission,
by a letter of July 29, 2008, noting, among other things, that “as you are
aware, last July 28th, the Comisiédn Nacional de Energia Eléctrica

25

[98]

[99]

[100]

[101]

(hereinafter, the CNEE) has notified us of the ruling dated July 25th...
whereby, the body decided to dissolve the Expert Commission, of which we
are the members, claiming that the tasks for which the Expert Commission
was convened had ended. On the other hand, as you are also aware, the
Empresa Eléctrica de Guatemala S.A. (hereinafter EEGSA) has challenged
that ruling by filing an appeal on the one hand, and on the other, by the
action of amparo. Finally, as part of the ongoing process, the
Consultant Bates White... has presented the corrections to the Tariff
Study, in the light of the Resolution of the Expert Commission... so
that, in the context of Rule 12 of the functioning of the Expert
Commission, the latter should pronounce itself on whether the
consultant Bates White did or did not incorporate the results of the
ruling of the Expert Commission... Considering the invitation
received from the Consultant to know in situ how the modifications
to the Tariff Study have been carried out, it is proposed that the
same be carried out in the offices of Bates White on July 31st at
11hrs....“°° Jean Riubrugent responded by noting that he would not
participate in the meeting convened by Bastos because " ...the scope of the
functions of the Expert Commission is in dispute and until there is a
definitive clarification of this, it is my responsibility to adhere to the
instructions of the CNEE....’°°

Leonardo Giacchino and Carlos Bastos met on July 31st at the offices of
Bates White in Washington. Later, Carlos Bastos, through a
communication of August 1, 2008, informed the CNEE and EEGSA,
personally because there was no quorum, that it was found that "... the
Modifications made by Bates White in its Tariff Study of July 28, 2008,
follow the pronouncements of the Expert Commission. The length and
complexity of the model itself prevent me from following in detail every
step of the calculation performed. However, it can be affirmed that the
result of the VAD calculated in its Tariff Study of July 28, 2008 is calculated
using a model that incorporates the decisions made by the Expert
Commission. ’*”

 

Meanwhile, the CNEE proceeded with the process for setting the tariffs of
EEGSA. So, on July 29, 2008, it issued Resolution 144 and on July 30th,
Resolutions 145 and 146° approving the tariff study prepared by SIGLA
and fixing the EEGSA tariffs for 2008-2013. These resolutions were
published in the Diario Oficial on July 31, 2008.

In particular, by means of Resolution 144 of 2008, the CNEE definitively
approved the study by Sigla and decided it would be the basis for issuing
and publishing the tariff schedule of EEGSA. As for the tariff study of Bates
White, CNEE noted inter alia that "...dated May 5th, two thousand eight,
Empresa Electrica de Guatemala, S.A. ... resubmitted the Tariff Study to the
Comisién Nacional de Energia Eléctrica, omitting to make the correction to
all the comments made by the Comisién Nacional de Energia Eléctrica
through said decision CNEE-63-2008 [by which it declared the Bates White
study inadmissible], as required by Article 98 of the Regulations of the
General Electricity Law.”°° Through Resolutions 145 and 146, the CNEE set
the EEGSA tariffs for 2008-2013.

EEGSA impugned the tariffs set by the CNEE before the courts of
Guatemala and filed another action of amparo against GJ-Ruling
3121, by which the CNEE dissolved the Expert Commission.
Furthermore, EEGSA challenged Resolution CNEE 144 of 2008. Below is a
summary of the legal proceedings brought by EEGSA, and later also by

26

[102]

[103]

[104]

[105]

[106]

[107]

the CNEE, in connection with: (I) the GJ-Ruling 3121 and (ii) Resolution
CNEE 144 of 2008.

Challenge by EEGSA to GJ-Ruling 3121

EEGSA filed a new action of amparo”® dated August 12, 2008 in which it
contested both GJ-Ruling 3121, which dissolved the Expert Commission,
and “what was done subsequently by the [CNEE], consisting of resolutions...
[CNEE-144, 145 and 146].”"*

In that amparo, EEGSA requested, inter alia, that: (i) GJ-Ruling-312177
and the subsequent actions taken by the CNEE, that is, Resolutions
CNEE 144, 145 and 146, be suspended definitively; (ii) CNEE be
ordered to issue a new resolution to replace that suspended, “...
guaranteeing the right to defense and the principles of due process and
legality, it being necessary to allow the Expert Commission already
formed to approve the tariff study presented by [Bates White] ... “; and
(iii) an order for damages be made against CNEE "... to indemnify the
serious effects it has caused by violating the constitutional and legal
rights possessed by Empresa de Energia Eléctrica de Guatemala S.A., in
open violation of national and international legislation that protects its
role in the country...” It also asked for a declaration of the “... joint and
several liability of the State of Guatemala with the Comisién Nacional de
Energia Eléctrica to compensate the Empresa Eléctrica de Guatemala SA
for the damages it has been caused...."”

 

By a brief of August 24, 2008, EEGSA filed with the Eighth Civil Court of First
Instance a partial withdrawal of the amparo of August 12, 2008 in relation to
the resolutions of the CNEE in which the Sigla study was approved and the
EEGSA tariffs for the five years 2008-2013 were fixed (Resolutions CNNE-
144, 145 and 146).”* Specifically, EEGSA stated that “being to my interest,
I appear to hereby file A PARTIAL WITHDRAWAL OF THE AMPARO [of August
12, 2008] in relation to the resolutions issued by the Comisién Nacional de
Energia Eléctrica [144, 145 and 146]).””° Subsequently, this court issued,
on September 25, 2008, a resolution which determined that the partial
withdrawal presented by EEGSA was accepted as filed and approved.”©

By judgment of August 31, 2009, the Eighth Civil Court of First
Instance, constituted in Amparo Court, granted the amparo requested
by EEGSA and suspended the effects of the third numeral of the GJ-
Ruling-3121, which dissolved the Expert Commission, and ordered the
CNEE to issue a new resolution replacing that suspended.’” The court
referred to the operating rules that it considered were agreed by EEGSA
and the CNEE and determined that the procedure to set the new tariff
schedule, “was left unfinished with the resolution issued by the Comisién
Nacional de Energia Eléctrica in which it dissolved the Expert Commission...”
It added that the CNEE “then [failed to comply] with the operating rules which
the parties had agreed to respect and comply with... [in violation of] the right
of defense of the appellant institution’”®

On October 12, 2009, the CNEE lodged an appeal with the Eighth Civil Court
of First Instance, constituted in Amparo Court, against the judgment of
August 31, 2009 which suspended the effects of GJ-Ruling-3121.”° In this
appeal, it sought that the judgment mentioned in the previous
paragraph be fully revoked.

The appeal of the CNEE was accepted by the Constitutional Court, in its

27

[108]

[109]

[110]

judgment dated February 24, 2010.8 The Court revoked the amparo
granted in favor of EEGSA and noted, among other things, that:

a. “As can be seen from the analysis of legislation studied, the General
Electricity Law and its respective Regulation, precisely establish and define the
procedure that both the electricity distributors in the country and the Comisién
Nacional de Energia Eléctrica should use prior to setting the amount of the tariff
that must be valid during each five years of provision of the electricity
service...”

b. . this Court notes that the proceedings conducted by both parties [the
CNEE ‘and EEGSA] until the impugned authority [CNEE] decided to dissolve the
Expert Commission and, based on a study conducted independently, dictate
the contested act, adhered strictly to the rules of Article 98 of the Regulation of
the General Electricity Law....”

“.. neither in the Law governing the matter, nor in its respective
Regulation - the only legislation applicable to the case within current
Guatemalan law - is there any rule that gives the Expert Commission any
other function beyond that of its pronouncing on the discrepancies already
deferred...”

d. “... having exhausted its legal function... no harm could be caused to the
applicant for amapro by the dissolution of [the Expert Commission]....”

e. “... to recognize its competence to issue a binding decision... would
be contrary to the traditional principle of legality... and would also
go against the principle of public function subject to the law...."°*

Challenge by EEGSA to Resolution CNEE-144 of 2008

By a brief of August 1, 2008, EEGSA appealed before the MEM against
Resolution CNEE-144, 2008. In particular, EEGSA requested the
recission by the MEM of Resolution CNEE-144 and the issue instead,
of a resolution that consisted of "... definitively approving the tariff
study prepared by the entity Bates White, duly approved by the Expert
Commission, which will be the basis for issuing and publishing the tariff
schedule corresponding to Empresa Eléctrica de Guatemala, S.A.”.°*
Additionally, by a brief of the same date, EEGSA appealed against the
Resolutions CNEE-145 and CNEE-146 of 2008, requesting the revocation of
the contested decisions and that a resolution be issued that consisted of a
“... new tariff schedule based on the Value-Added for Distribution
established in the study drawn up by Bates White, delivered on July 28,
2008 to the CNEE and that contains the modifications as established by the
Expert Commission. “*?

On August 20, 2008, the MEM rejected the appeals brought by EEGSA in full
and stated inter alia that the contested resolutions were not open to being
challenged by an appeal “... because the resolution demanded is not a
governmental action directed towards an individual per se, but is rather a
general resolution that encompasses all those who are considered as
consumers of the service of final distribution of electricity, which is
attended by the Empresa Eléctrica de Guatemala, Sociedad Andénima,
making no distinctions in terms of these individuals...."°*

Given the rejection by MEM of the appeal, on August 26, 2008, EEGSA

28

[111]

[112]

[113]

[114]

lodged an action of amparo against CNEE Resolution 144-2008, which
approved the tariff study made by Sigla. In the appeal, EEGSA requested
that “... resolution CNEE 144-2008 be definitively suspended as regards
the Empresa Eléctrica de Guatemala, Sociedad Anénima...” and that "...
consequently, all the subsequent resolutions that may have been issued
by said Commission be suspended provisionally...."°°

By judgment of May 15, 2009, the Second Civil Court of First Instance,
constituted in Amparo Court, granted EEGSA the amparo requested against
Resolution CNEE-144 of 2008 and provided that: “the resolution [CNEE-
144]... which constitutes the act in question, does not affect the
plaintiff.”°°

On May 21, 2009, the CNEE lodged an appeal with the Constitutional Court
against the judgment of May 15, 2009 referred to in the preceding
Paragraph. The CNEE asked that the entire judgment challenged be
revoked.®”

On November 18, 2009, the Constitutional Court, by a majority of its
members, accepted the CNEE’s appeal, revoked the judgment of May 15,
2009 and thus rejected the amparo granted to EEGSA by the Second Civil
Court of First Instance.®*

In that judgment, the majority of the Constitutional Court rejected the
amparo that had been granted to EEGSA based mainly on the following
reasoning:

a. “as can be seen from the analysis of the legislation studied, the General
Electricity Law and its respective Regulation, they precisely establish and
define the procedure that both the electricity distributors in the country and
the Comisién Nacional de Energia Eléctrica should use prior to setting the
amount of the tariff that must be valid during each five years of provision
of the electricity service...”

b. “... this Court notes that the proceedings conducted by both parties
[the CNEE and EEGSA] until the impugned authority [CNEE] decided to
dissolve the Expert Commission and, based on a study conducted
independently, dictate the act in question, adhered strictly to regulations
in Article 98 of the Regulation of the General Electricity Law...."

c. “Neither the Law nor the Regulation cited contain any provision
indicating another function of the Expert Commission, apart from its
pronouncement, which was fulfilled through its delivery; it is not seen...
that the expert activity had to remain in force, and thus its dissolution
was a simple consequence of the exhaustion of its deciding or advisory
capacity for the tariff definition mandated by the General Electricity Law
to the Comisién Nacional de Energia Eléctrica. Therefore, once the
Expert Commission had complied with delivering its report and no
longer had any other legal action in the proceeding, the dissolution of
the [Expert Commission] could not cause any grievance to the applicant
for the amparo."

d. “to suppose that the Expert Commission might have a conflict
resolution function and to recognize its competence to render a binding
decision, s contrary to the principle of legality... and this is because... the
power to approve tariff schedules corresponds to the Comisién Nacional

29

de Energia Eléctrica and in no way, directly or indirectly, to an Expert
Commission...”

e. "(the Comisidn Nacional de Energia Eléctrica], as the body
responsible for approving tariffs... must follow the legally regulated
process... however, if the point is reached at which discrepancies
continue between the operator of electricity distribution with the
terms of reference set by the authority of the electricity subsector,
despite having already delivered the report of an expert commission,
it must continue the process that meets the peremptory time limits
provided for in article 75 of the Law and [article] 98 third paragraph
of the Regulation, in order to comply with its responsibility in this
respect. ’®?

5. THE SALEE OF DECA II SHARES

[115] By the agreement of October 21, 2010,°° Iberdrola and the other partners
of DECA II sold the shares they had in DECA II to EPM, a Colombian entity
domiciled in the city of Medellin and organized in the form of an industrial
and commercial state company; which provides public services of electricity,
gas, water and telecommunications. The price paid for the shares of DECA
II, according to that agreement and the information provided by Iberdrola,
was the sum of USD$605,000,000.°"

[116] The sale included, among other assets, all of the shares that DECA II held
in EEGSA and, therefore, the indirect interest of 39.64% that Iberdrola
had in EEGSA.°?

[117] According to Iberdrola, the price quoted is for the shares of DECA II, a
holding company that brings together several companies, °? but “...
neither in the binding offer nor in the Purchase Agreement is the value
given by EPM to each of the companies making up the holding
specified. It is an overall price covering all of the holdings that DECA II
has in other companies in Guatemala, including EEGSA”™*

[118] The part that corresponded to Iberdrola for its shares in DECA II was
USD$296.45 million.

[119] The parties to the Purchase Agreement agreed that the vendor
companies Iberdrola and Teco reserved the rights and interests arising
from the claims against Guatemala.

III. POSITION OF THE PARTIES REGARDING THE TARIFF
REVIEW PROCESS IN THE FIVE-YEAR PERIOD 2008-2013

1. INTRODUCTION

[120] This dispute relates primarily to the actions of the Respondent, during the
process of review and pricing of electricity distribution tariffs for EEGSA for
the five-year period 2008-2013 which, according to the Claimant,
destroyed the value of its investment in Guatemala, in violation of
required legal and conventional guarantees.°” The positions of the Parties
on the relevant facts of the process of review and pricing of EEGSA tariffs
for the five-year period 2008-2013 are presented below.

LITY OF DEPARTING FROM THE TERMS OF

30

[121]

[122]

[123]

[124]

[125]

[126]

[127]

[128]

Position of the Claimant

The Claimant submits that in the final version of the ToR it was
expressly stated that these are guidelines from which the consultant
can justifiably depart. In particular, the Claimant relied on Section 1.10
of the ToR, which states: “the present ToR show guidelines to be
followed in conducting the Study and for each of its Stages and/or
described and defined studies. If there are variations of the
methodologies presented in the reports of the Study, these must be fully
justified, the CNEE shall make the comments it deems necessary on the
variations, verifying their consistency with the guidelines of the Study’”®

The Claimant adds that a mechanism of “self-correction” was contained in
the ToR so that if the requirements of the ToR were not adequate to
achieve the objectives of the LGE, or the VAD arising out of the study did
not correspond to that of an efficient company, the consultant could depart
from the ToR in order to be consistent with the purposes of the LGE.°?

In the same line of thought, the Claimant notes that the function of the
CNEE in reviewing the methodology for determining the tariffs every five
years should be understood as limited to GE Articles 71-73! and that
the ToR cannot predetermine the outcome of the VAD study because

..that would be equivalent to a de facto derogation of the function that
the LGE gives the distributor through its prequalified consultant: to
calculate the VAD and perform the study.”*°

In brief, the Claimant asserts that, contrary to the contention of the
Republic of Guatemala, “... the Tor are not imperative mandates, but
guidelines from which the consultant may depart, justifying the
variations....""°7

Position of the Respondent

The Respondent considers that the ToR, once they have been confirmed,
“... constitute ‘imperative mandate’ for the consultant in order to
calculate the VAD.""°°

The Respondent notes that the ToR are communicated to the distributor at
least twelve months before the date of the tariffs for the future five years
coming into effect. If the distributor considers that the ToR do not meet the
criteria of the LGE or of the Regulation, it may object to them through an
administrative appeal, and if the appeal is rejected, it may resort to the
courts to challenge them. According to the Respondent, once their validity is
legally confirmed, the ToR remain firm and their content cannot
subsequently be changed.‘

Following this line of reasoning, the Respondent notes that EEGSA accepted
the methodology set out in the ToR, despite having resources available to
challenge them, so that the final ToR were “... of compulsory compliance
and neither the distributor nor the consultant [ could] depart from them...”1°°

The Respondent adds that, contrary to the claim by Iberdrola, point 1.10 of
the ToR could in no way serve to eliminate the legal authority of the CNEE
to define the methodology for calculating the VAD. For the Respondent,
Iberdrola’s argument “...makes the Terms of Reference a sort of
recommendation with no obligation, which the distributor and its consultant

31

[129]

[130]

[131]

[132]

[133]

[134]

[135]

could freely ignore without consulting the CNEE. This interpretation would
allow it to set a tariff without any control of the regulator.

2 CONTRACTING OF SIGLA
Position of the Claimant

The Claimant contends that, pursuant to LGE Articles 74 and 76, the
distributor’s participation in determining the VAD is essential. Indeed, the
Claimant submits that “... the distributor's participation has an exclusive
competence for calculating the VAD.""”

Thus, the Claimant claims that the LGE does not contemplate, or even
suggest, that the VAD can be calculated by any person other than the
distributor through its consultant, nor that CNEE can use a different VAD
from that of the study commissioned by the distributor and reviewed, if
necessary, under the resolution of the Expert Commission.”

Contrary to the position put forward by the Republic of Guatemala, the
Claimant denies that the CNEE was required to have a parallel study to that
of the distributor.1°? The Claimant adds that “Guatemala expressly
recognizes that this alleged “obligation” to prescribe an independent
study did not exist before the 2007 reform of the RLGE. The presentation
that the CNEE conducted of the Guatemalan regulatory framework did not,
in fact, foresee any ‘parallel study',”°

The Claimant clarifies that the new wording of RLGE Article 98 introduced
an amendment to the effect that, in the extraordinary situation that the
distributor does not send its consultant’s study or does not correct it
where appropriate, the CNEE would be entitled to rely on its own tariff
study or itself make the corrections to that presented by the distributor.’**
According to the Claimant, in this case “... the extraordinary supposition of
omission provided as a condition of the CNEE’s faculty to make its own
study” did not occur. 11?

Finally, the Claimant notes that “... Guatemala creates the appearance
that there was an inexorable deadline for the new tariffs coming into
force”13 when the fact is that the CNEE had no obligation to publish the
new tariff schedule before the expiration of the previous schedule, that
is, before August 1, 2008, as the LGE expressly provided a solution for
the case that the new tariff schedule was not published for that date:
extending the current schedule. ‘"*

Position of the Respondent

The Republic of Guatemala, on the other hand, states that under LGE
Article 5 and RLGE Article 32, the CNEE has always been empowered to
make a parallel study. It adds that, as from the 2007 reform of Article 98
of the Regulation, that power became a regulated obligation, as any
discretion of the Directors of the CNEE about it was removed and the
technical nature of the analysis by the regulator was ensured to the
maximum.7?5

For the Respondent, Iberdrola’s objection to the CNEE having its own
parallel study has no justification from the technical point of view: “... the
function of defining the tariffs by the CNEE has to be performed in

32

[136]

[137]

[138]

[139]

[140]

accordance with the technical guidelines established in the LGE. The LGE
establishes that the distributor, in the first instance, must perform the VAD
tariff study and accords to the CNEE the power to observe, approve or
disapprove said study. Clearly it would be very difficult for the CNEE to be
able to perform its monitoring task without a technical reference for
comparing the values the distributor presents in its study....’2*°

Additionally, the Respondent argues that the obligation to conduct a
parallel tariff study “... responded to the usual regulatory practice in Latin
America, sought to correct failings in the previous tariff review and was
consistent with the objectives of efficiency and competitiveness that the LGE
aims for.""*”

The Respondent adds that the CNEE’s need to have a parallel study also finds
support in RLGE Article 99 (as amended in 2003), under which the CNEE must
“... ‘issue and enforce a tariff schedule immediately ° if for any reason there
is no current tariff schedule at the time of expiry of the schedules...."""8

Finally, the Respondent asserts that “Iberdrola’s complaint is unfounded
and untimely”"*® and that if Iberdrola’s argument “... were legitimate and
its guarantees had been harmed, it is not credible that EEGSA or
Iberdrola would not have made any objection or impugnation to the
regulatory reforms of 2003 or 2007.”"7°

4 BINDING OR NONBINDING NATURE OF THE REPORT OF THE
EXPERT COMMISSION

Position of the Claimant

The Claimant contends that the pronouncement of the Expert Commission
is binding and mandatory upon both the distributor, whose consultant must
correct the VAD study as needed to match the report of the Expert
Commission, and the CNEE, which must approve the VAD study once it has
been corrected, according to the pronouncement of the Expert
Commission, and set the tariffs based on the same.?7+

According to the Claimant, one of the basic guarantees offered by the
Government to investors in the process of restructuring the electricity
sector in Guatemala was the "“... resolution of any _ incidental
discrepancies with the regulator by a neutral technical body, the Expert
Commission.”*??

In this regard, the Claimant referred mainly to:

The promotional tours or “roadshows” that were made to induce
international investors to invest in Guatemala, in which emphasis was
laid on the new regulatory framework.?2?

The Informational Memorandum of Sale, which accompanied the
text of the LGE and its Regulation, stating that the CNEE “... shall review
the studies and will be able to make comments, but in the case of
discrepancies a Commission of three experts shall be named to resolve
on the differences."'**

The Authorization Agreement, in particular clauses nine,
seventeen and twenty of the same, which established, respectively, that
the MEM would not take actions to prevent or materially affect the

33

[141]

purpose of the authorization; that the MEM expressly undertook to
respect the regulatory framework as part of the commitments accepted
with EEGSA, and that all the applicable Laws, Regulations and rules in
effect at the time of its signing are understood to be incorporated. ‘75

The Claimant summarized its position on this matter by referring
mainly to:

The proper meaning of the words in LGE Article 75 and RLGE
Article 98, in particular, the phrase “The Expert Commission will
pronounce itself on the discrepancies": the combination of the words
“Expert Commission” with “will pronounce itself on the discrepancies," and
the term "parties" to refer to the distributor and the CNEE;*?°

The context of LGE Article 75, because “there is no intermediate stage
between Article 75, governing what happens in case of discrepancies on
the VAD Study and Art. 76, which says in ee. form that the CNEE
“shall use” that VAD to structure and set the tariffs...

he technical character of the Expert Commission, since “... the
alternative to it being the Expert Commission which resolves the
discrepancies is that the distributor has to resort to the administrative
courts against the decision taken by the CNEE (when this is not
prevented by the action of the MEM as happened in the present case),
for them to resolve highly technical issues in processes with various
instances which may last several years. For a tariff review process that
occurs every five years, this solution is not feasible. No business, no
user, would accept such instability in the tariff system”;'?®

The allocation of functions performed by the LGE and RLGE in
the tariff determination process and its effectiveness, which
would lose all sense "... if Guatemala’s interpretation about the
functions of the Expert Commission was followed... Indeed, if it were
the CNEE that decided on discrepancies arising between the distributor
and itself, the role assigned to the consultant contracted by the
distributor to perform the study and the power that is granted to it to
disagree, would be rendered meaningless. What sense would it have to
disagree with an comment of the CNEE, if it were finally the CNEE itself
which decided if its own comment prevailed?”;*?°

The finality of the rules, since "... if the decision of the Expert
Commission was not binding, it would break all the carefully balanced
procedure established by the LGE and the RLGE, enabling the CNEE to
achieve the full discretionality in setting the tariffs which the reform of
the electricity system of Guatemala precisely aimed to prevent”;1*°

 

The acts of Guatemala itself, in that “... Guatemala’s current
interpretation was not the interpretation that was presented to the
investors and that the CNEE and all the other members of the sector
defended until the latest tariff review...” as evidenced by: (i) the
Informational Memorandum of Sale, which unequivocally informed that
the Expert Commission was a body to resolve the discrepancies
between the distributor and the CNEE; (ii) the terms of reference of
2003, approved by the CNEE for the previous tariff review, in which it
was clearly established that “... it is on these interim differences,
constituting discrepancies made in writing, on which the Expert
Commission referred to in Article 75 of the Law will pronounce, in the

34

[142]

[143]

[144]

[145]

[146]

case that, at the end of the tariff review process, ifferences should
subsist between the CNEE and the DISTRIBUTOR, which have to be
reconciled by the aforementioned Expert Commission”; (iii) the ToR
themselves approved by the CNEE in the year 2007-2008, indicating
that these were guidelines from which the distributor could depart and
that the distributor had no obligation to incorporate all the comments of
the CNEE, as it would be “... inconsistent to allow the distributor to depart
from the ToR and disagree with the comments of the CNEE and then
affirm that the function of the Expert Commission is to express an opinion
on whether the distributor had departed or not from the ToR...”; and (iv)
the understanding of the Expert Commission itself that its role was to
“settle” disputes between the CNEE and EEGSA;***

The interpretation of the LGE and the RLGE before the
mo ication of RLGE Article 98 in 2007, since the system then
provided that "... while the distributor does not send the Study or does not
perform the corrections, the new tariffs would not be approved and those
previously approved would be maintained". Such amendments would be
‘ those derived from the comments of the CNEE that the
distributor/consultant accepts and, in case of discrepancies, the
corrections ordered by the Expert Commission."

 

Additionally, the Claimant contends that the Expert Commission is an
independent and impartial body. In this regard, it notes that “... the
composition of the members of the Expert Commission was agreed in
response to the desirability of it issuing its pronouncements on the
discrepancies formulated in the relatively short time agreed by the parties
(less than the already relatively short term fixed by the Law of sixty
working days) and resolving the discrepancies with sufficient knowledge of
the complex subject, but with the independence and impartiality given by
the appointment of the third expert. The affirmation of the CNEE on the
biased nature of the Expert Commission and the lack of independence of its
members is therefore refuted.“

Furthermore, and with respect to the judgments of the Constitutional
Court in which it was determined that the report of the Expert Commission
is not binding in nature, the Claimant states inter alia that “... the Court’s
decision can be likened to an unsubstantiated decision and, therefore,
without value internationally."">4

Position of the Respondent

Contrary to the position put forward by the Claimant, the Respondent
claims that the Expert Commission under LGE Article 75 is a technical body
of contingent existence whose pronouncement has no binding effect on the
determination of the VAD and tariffs.*°°

Firstly, when referring to the Informational Memorandum of Sale invoked by
Iberdrola, the Respondent emphasizes that this document was prepared by
bankers and that the Memorandum itself explained that it had no binding
force: “no information contained in this Memorandum is or should be
regarded as a promise or representation about the future.”"*°

The Respondent summarized its position on this matter in its Post-
Hearing Brief which referred mainly to:

The absence in the legislation of any specific provision conferring binding

35

[147]

[148]

[149]

character to the pronouncement of the Expert Commission;

The use of the word “pronunciarse [lit. pronounce oneself]” in LGE Article
75, according to the dictionary of the Spanish Royal Academy (RAE), in its
pronominal sense means “declare or show oneself in favor or against
someone or something” and according to the RAE’s Panhispanic dictionary
“express an opinion on something";

The use of the word “pericial [adj. expert]” in LGE Article 75, which
derives from “perito [an expert]", that, again according to the RAE
dictionary, means “person who, possessing certain scientific, artistic and
technical or practical knowledge, informs the judge on oath about
litigious points insofar as they are related with his/her special knowledge
or experience”;

The powers and responsibilities of the CNEE in the approval of tariffs (LGE
Articles 61 and 71 and RGLE Articles 3, 82 and 99) and of VAD (LGE Article
60 and RLGE Articles 83, 92, 98, 3rd paragraph and 99), as regulator
responsible for complying with and enforcing the law (LGE Article 4) and
responsible for its application (RGLE Article);

The fact that the LGE has been written using the model of the Chilean
Electricity Law, which did not include, nor does it still include today, the
mechanism of a binding Expert Commission for calculating the VAD; and

The advisory nature of the opinion of the experts according to the
Guatemalan civil procedure.*?”

The Respondent also mentions that “... Iberdrola [speaks] of an
independent and impartial Expert Commission,” and adds that ™... the
Expert Commission consisted of two consultants for the parties and
one president. Both consultants, particularly Mr. Giacchino had business
ties to the parties that named them. The president, Mr. Bastos, had done
work for EEGSA shortly before...”. It concludes declaring that the CNEE
would never have accepted an Expert Commission with binding character that
had Mr. Bastos or Mr. Giacchino among its members.*°°

Guatemala adds that the Claimant "... must not only prove that the
pronouncement of the Expert Commission is binding... It must also
demonstrate that the task of the Expert Commission is not onlyto
pronounce on the discrepancies, but also, at a second point, to
approve the tariff study presented by the distributor. That is, even if
the report of the Expert Commission were binding, which it is not, it
could be so only in relation to the task that the LGE entrusts to the
Expert Commission, which is only to pronounce on discrepancies...’"°°

The Respondent believes that the binding nature or otherwise of the
Expert Commission has already been decided by the Constitutional
Court, which emphasized that “to suppose that the Expert Commission
could have a deciding role in a conflict and to recognize its jurisdiction
to issue a binding decision, is contrary to the principle of legality... and
this is so because... the power of approving tariff schedules
corresponds to the Comisiédn Nacional de Energia E Electrica and in no
way, directly or indirectly, to an expert commission..

5. THE OPERATING RULES OF THE EXPERT COMMISSION

36

[150]

[151]

[152]

[153]

[154]

[155]

[156]

[157]

Position of the Claimant

According to the Claimant, in discussing the operating rules that would apply
to the Expert Commission, the CNEE and EEGSA reached agreement on
twelve operating rules for the commission. In particular, the Claimant
stresses that they agreed that Rule No. 12 reads as follows "the
Distributor shall inform its consultant of the pronouncement of the Expert
Commission, which shall perform all the changes requested in the
pronouncement of the [Expert Commission] and submit the new version to
the [Expert Commission] for review and approval.”***

The Claimant argues that the twelve operating rules of the Expert
Commission agreed by EEGSA and the CNEE “...have the nature and scope
of an agreement between the parties, complementing the agreement on the
incorporation of the Expert Commission."**?

The Claimant adds that the Expert Commission itself recognized the
agreement by EEGSA and the CNEE on the twelve operating rules and
accepted them as its own, by including them in its report, which pooled all
its pronouncements on the discrepancies.*4?

The Claimant also maintains that the contract that Carlos Bastos, the third
member of the Expert Commission, signed with the CNEE, incorporated by
reference the twelve operating rules.*“*

Lastly, the Claimant states that, given the operating rules of the Expert
Commission that were agreed by the CNEE and EEGSA, “ ny impartial
observer would say that: (i) the Expert Commission report is “final” and
therefore definitive, i.e., there is no room for second opinions
regarding the decision of the Experts Commission; (ii) the parties
(EEGSA - CNEE) have agreed that the Expert Commission should
review the corrected study of the distribution company and therefore;
(iii) it is clear from the rules that [the] revised study is the one that
must be used for setting the tariffs.’*4°

 

Position of the Respondent

In contrast, the Respondent contends that it is not true that the twelve
operating rules mentioned by Iberdrola were accepted by the CNEE and claims
that the Claimant bases itself on a draft of the Rules discussed by the Parties.
In particular, with regard to Rule 12, the Respondent maintains that
“the main reason for the CNEE’s opposition was that neither the LGE nor
the RLGE provided for an additional act after the pronouncement of the
Expert Commission on the discrepancies... To accept that the Expert
Commission would review the report corrected by the distributor and
confirm whether it fitted its pronouncement, would have meant reversing
the roles of the CNEE and the Expert Commission. “©

In this line, the Respondent asserts that EEGSA and the CNEE could not have
agreed upon operating rules of the Expert Commission that were contrary to
the LGE and RLGE since “... no operating rule (and much less ones that had
not passed through the discussion stage between the parties) could
reform the letter and spirit of the LGE, the Regulation or the
Agreements....""47

In addition to the above, the Respondent contends that EEGSA was aware
that it never came to an agreement with the CNEE with respect to the

37

[158]

[159]

[160]

[161]

[162]

[163]

[164]

operating rules of the Expert Commission, because Miguel Calleja, the
former manager of Planning, Control and Regulation of EEGSA, sent
Carlos Bastos, behind the backs of the CNEE, a draft of the Rules as if
these had been the result of an official agreement between the CNEE and
EEGSA. In this regard, the Respondent notes that: “if Calleja understood
such rules as a true agreement between parties, why did he decide to send
[them] without copying the CNEE?”**®

In allusion to Iberdrola’s argument regarding the incorporation by
reference of the operating rules of the Expert Commission to the
contract of Carlos Bastos with the CNEE, the Respondent emphasizes
that, at the Hearings, Mr. Bastos admitted that the operating rules that
were incorporated into his contract were not product of an agreement
of the CNEE and EEGSA.“*°

The Respondent adds that Iberdrola, erroneously and without legal basis,
intended to limit the functions of the CNEE regarding the VAD to “certain
powers of control or supervision”, when in fact the CNEE has, among
others, the power to define the methodology of calculating the tariffs and
distribution tariffs themselves, as stated in LGE Articles 71-77.'°°

Finally, the Respondent reiterates that the Constitutional Court already
ended the debate by determining that, once the Expert Commission issues
its final report, the law does not provide for any other additional
function.*5*

6. THE DISSOLUTION OF THE EXPERT COMMISSION

Position of the Claimant

On the dissolution of the Expert Commission by the CNEE by Ruling GJ-
3121, the Claimant maintains that “the CNEE unilaterally and abruptly
dissolved the Expert Commission and prevented its expert [Bates White]
completing its mission.”*>*

According to the Claimant, “a Commission which, by Law (LGE Art. 75) must
be constituted by agreement of both parties (even though one is the
regulator and the other the regulated), cannot be dissolved by the
unilateral will of one of them. No provision of the LGE authorizes the
CNEE to unilaterally organize or dissolve the Expert Commission. In
relation to the Expert Commission, a body created by the LGE, the CNEE
is only one party.”

The Claimant also notes that the Expert Commission had not yet reviewed
and approved the consultant's study, as amended to suit its
pronouncements, in accordance with the provisions of Rule 12, and that
the CNEE ruling that dissolved the Expert Commission involved a direct
violation of the operating rules agreed between the CNEE and EEGSA.‘"*
Thus, for the Claimant, the unilateral dissolution of the Expert Commission
was a“... manifest abuse of authority. “5°

Lastly, according to the favorable rulings that EEGSA obtained when
contesting GJ Ruling-3121,1°° the Claimant adds that the same Guatemalan
courts agreed with EEGSA in declaring that “...the unilateral dissolution of
the Expert Commission... [involves] a violation of the right of defence of
EEGSA and of the principles of due process and legality.""°”

38

[165]

[166]

[167]

[168]

[169]

[170]

[171]

[172]

Position of the Respondent

The Republic of Guatemala holds that the Expert Commission was dissolved
by the CNEE in accordance with the LGE and RLGE, and after it had fulfilled
its legal mandate to issue its pronouncement.1*°

The Respondent supports its argument that the Expert Commission
was dissolved once its legal mandate was completed, reiterating that
“Articles 75 of the LGE and 98 of the Regulation stipulate that with the
delivery of the pronouncement on the discrepancies, the function of the
Expert Commission is fulfilled.” The Respondent adds that, moreover, this
position is “... consistent with the functions entrusted to the Expert
Commission in the Instrument of Appointment that gave it the charge.”**°

Likewise, the Respondent notes that the CNEE provided that in GJ Ruling
3121 that the Expert Commission should be dissolved “... in virtue of having
fulfilled the object of its appointment."

Finally, the Respondent submits that the Constitutional Court ruled that
Guatemalan legislation “... gives the Expert Commission no other function
than that of pronouncing on the discrepancies between the CNEE and the
distributor... the dissolution of the Expert Commission when this had already
issued its pronouncement cannot cause injury to EEGSA...”°"

z REJECTION OF THE BATES WHITE STUDY AND TARIFF-SETTING
BASED ON THE SIGLA STUDY

Position of the Claimant

The Claimant considers that the CNEE, in rejecting the Bates White
study, approving that of Sigla and setting the tariffs based on the latter,
acted in violation of the LGE and RLGE.*

Firstly, the Claimant returns to the fact that, by Governmental
Agreement No. 68 of 2007, RLGE Article 98 was modified such that “in
case of failure by the Distributor to send the studies or corrections to the
same, the Commission is empowered to issue and publish the
corresponding tariff structure, based on the tariff study made
independently by the latter or making corrections to the studies initiated
by the Distributor.”*© In this regard, the Claimant notes that it did not object
to said Government Agreement because “EEGSA did not aim to incur in any
of those cases of omission....”'

Secondly, the Claimant notes that the CNEE based the rejection of the
Bates White study, corrected in accordance to the pronouncements of the
Expert Commission, on the consultant having failed “...to make the
correction of all the comments made by the CNEE.”'% The Claimant
considers that this argument directly contradicts the provisions of the LGE and
RLGE, because "... both the LGE and RLGE recognize and guarantee the
right of the distributor to dissent with the regulator. Otherwise, there
would be no possibility of discrepancies between the CNEE and the
distributor, and therefore the possibility of the formation of an Expert
Commission. The form of dissent is not accepting the CNEE comments and
explaining why a certain correction is not made.°°

According to the above, the Claimant alleges that “... the distributor is
not obliged to make corrections or, even less, to ‘correct all the

39

[173]

[174]

[175]

[176]

[177]

[178]

comments’ of the CNEE, which is a de facto supposition that the CNEE
invents to discard the Bates White study.”"©”

In addition to the above, the Claimant states that Article 98 as amended
provides for two different situations: (i) the failure of the distributor to
send the report provided for in LGE Article 74 four months before the
entry into force of the new tariffs; and (ii) the failure of the distributor to
send the corrections to said study.’©® For the Claimant the consequences
are different in each case: “in the case of failure to submit the study,
the CNEE can commission a tariff study to use as the basis for the
new tariff schedule; in the case of failure to send the corrections to
the study, the CNEE is empowered to make these itself." The
Claimant concludes this point by stating that “CNEE Resolution 144-2008
is dated July 29, 2009, after the delivery of the Bates White tariff study
corrected for the pronouncements of the Expert Commission, so that it is
patently clear that the CNEE cannot base itself on either of the two
situations of RLGE 98 (non-delivery of the study or of the pertinent
corrections), either to discard the Bates White study (as it did), or to
correct it.”"”°

In the Claimant’s opinion, CNEE’s interpretation of RLGE Article 98
directly suppresses the distributor’s right to disagree: “... the distributor
must include corrections that attend all the comments of the CNEE on its
study; otherwise, the consequence is not, as the LGE (art.75) provides,
that discrepancies are generated that the Expert Commission must
resolve, but that the de facto requisite of RLGE Article 98 would be met
and the CNEE would be legitimated to ignore the distributor's study and

approve its own".171

The Claimant also notes that the approval of the Sigla study to set the
EEGSA tariffs in 2008 occurred in the following circumstances:

“Throughout the tariff review process, EEGSA had no access to the
information that the CNEE supplied to Sigla, nor any form of knowing it.

The CNEE did not at any time give audience to EEGSA to consult the work
that Sigla was doing in calculating its VAD.

EEGSA had no access either to Sigla’s Stage Reports or to its final Study
before the CNEE approved Resolution CNEE-144-2008...

Before proceeding to approval of the Sigla Study, the CNEE had not even
contrasted the final Sigla Study with the Bates White Study of July 28,
2008....”7?

The Claimant also argues that by approving the Sigla study, the CNEE not
only discarded the Bates White Study of May 5, 2008, but also ignored
that of July 28, 2008, which was in line with the pronouncements of the
Expert Commission.‘”?

The Claimant adds that the Sigla study took no account at all of the
Expert Commission pronouncements regarding the EEGSA VAD
calculation.‘”*

The Claimant further states that the Sigla study is not independent
because: (i) the company is prequalified by the CNEE; (ii) it is contracted
by the CNEE; (iii) its study is based on the Terms of Reference drafted by

40

[179]

[180]

[181]

[182]

[183]

the CNEE; (iv) Sigla receives all its instructions from the CNEE; (v) it
accepts all the information that the CNEE deigns to give it; (vi) its report
is reviewed by the CNEE; (vii) Sigla receives comments from the CNEE;
and, (viii) in case of discrepancies with the CNEE, there is no mechanism
to resort to a third party, like the Expert Commission.’”°

In connection with the above, the Claimant refers to “Guatemala’s
insinuation" that the visit of Mr. Gonzalo Perez, in his capacity as Chairman
of EEGSA, to the Directors of the CNEE proves that “... the amounts
presented by the consultant of EEGSA did not correspond to the economic
reality of an efficient VAD and that EEGSA took these values as a starting
point for an eventual negotiation of the tariff with the CNEE”.1”° Iberdrola
argues that “the tariffs resulting from the procedure laid down in the LGE
and from the tariff study are maximum prices. Nothing prevents the
distributor agreeing with the regulator a lower price or a gradual price
adjustment, so that, if there has to be a rise, this is applied at least
gradually”7”

The Complainant contends that the CNEE, in discarding the Bates White
study and approving that of Sigla, acted arbitrarily because “even if the
decision of the Expert Commission on the discrepancies was not binding
on [EEGSA] and the CNEE, this did not mean that the latter could simply
discard the distributor's study... in discarding the Bates White study and
approving the alternative Sigla study, the CNEE gave no underlying reasons,
but procedural grounds, alleging in its Resolution 144-2008 that EEGSA had
incurred in the omission referred to in RLGE Article 98 as the cause for
discarding it. However... the Constitutional Court itself has said that that
is not true because, in its own words, 'the procedure carried out by
both parties until before the contested authority decided to dissolve
the Expert Commission... was strictly in accordance with the rules of
article 98 of the Regulations of the General Electricity Law’. The very
wording of the judgment implies, therefore... the illegality and
abritrary y,_hature of CNEE’s action in discarding the Bates White
study...

Finally, the Claimant asserts that, in issuing Resolutions 145 and 146 of
July 30, 2008, CNEE acted in clear violation of the interim amparo granted
to EEGSA on the same day by the First Civil Court of First Instance, in
which the CNEE was ordered to adhere “... fully to the pronouncement of
the Expert Commission allowing it to complete its work, especially the final
review of the changes presented to the Expert Commission by the firm
Bates White on July 28th of this year and to refrain from using
mechanisms that tend to manipulate, change or interpret unilaterally
those that are already approved. ”'’° The Claimant concludes by noting that
the CNEE did not receive notification of the suspension of the interim amparo
until July 31st, when Resolutions 144, 145 and 146 had already been published
in the Diario Oficial.’®°

Position of the Respondent

The Respondent maintains a contrary position; in its opinion, the CNEE
acted in accordance with the LGE and RLGE by approving the Sigla study
and setting the tariffs based on this study.*®

In support of its position, the Respondent points out, first, that the Expert
Commission itself confirmed that much of the Bates White Tariff Study did
not comply with the Terms of Reference as: (i) “... the Bates White study

41

[184]

[185]

[186]

[187]

[188]

[189]

[190]

had not included integrated and traceable models that would have enabled
the CNEE to audit information included in the VAD calculation"; and (ii) “the
information about the reference prices was incomplete as Bates White had
not presented the international comparisons necessary for the CNEE
to be able to audit and possibly approve the consultant’s price
proposal".‘®2

The Respondent argues that “a model that cannot be traced does not allow the
regulator to redo the calculations in order to check them or to link the model with
another model of the same study in order to verify the relationship between the
data and to establish whether the results produced by that model are correct,
beyond the veracity or otherwise of the data entered.”"®?

The Respondent adds that “... despite the written comment of the CNEE
about the non-traceability of the models and the lack of justification of
the costs in the stage reports and the final report, EEGSA refused to
amend the study. When the Expert Commission itself agreed with the
CNEE in this regard, it continued without amending its study...’“°*

Therefore, the Respondent submits that defects of the Bates White study
could not be corrected and in such a situation, “... the CNEE had no
option but to reject the Bates White tariff study and use the tariff study of
its own independent consultant to set the tariff schedule, as it was
permitted by the regulatory framework.”*®>

The Respondent also notes that, contrary to Iberdrola’s argument, the
contracting of Sigla for drawing up the independent EEGSA VAD tariff
study, was generally known to the distributors, was part of the
international public tender specification of that contracting and was also
published in various websites open to the public, including that of the
CNEE itself.18°

The Respondent points out that Sigla, just like Bates White, was a pre-
qualified firm and that it is not acceptable that Iberdrola, on the one hand,
recognizes that “the conduct of the study by an independent prequalified
consultant ensures that the study will be made in accordance with rigorous
technical criteria, in accordance with the regulatory framework, observing the
best practices and safe from any type of political pressure”, and on the
other, applies that principle only to the study prepared by its own
consultant (Bates White) and not to that prepared by the CNEE’s
consultant, which was also a pre-qualified firm.'®”

The Respondent also sustains its position adding that the visit of Mr.
Perez, Chairman of EEGSA and Director of Iberdrola for Latin America,
showed the lack of seriousness of the results of the tariff studies of Bates
White. According to the Respondent, Mr. Perez presented an “offer” to be
applied “outside the study” that reduced the VAD increase from 100
percent to 10 percent. The Respondent maintains that the offer of Mr.
Pérez places in doubt the results of the Bates White study and shows that
EEGSA and Iberdrola were willing at that time to settle for a 10 per cent
increase, but at the same time claimed 245 and then 100 per cent,
announced in the Bates White studies.*®*

In conclusion, the Respondent notes that in any case, the Constitutional
Court by the judgment of November 18, 2009, which resolved the
amparo requested by EEGSA against CNEE’s approval of the Sigla study,

42

[191]

[192]

[193]

[194]

[195]

[196]

“,.. interpreted the regulatory framework and recognized the power of the
CNEE to adopt the tariffs and the non-binding nature of the
pronouncement of the Expert Commission, apart from the wording of the
new article 98.”"°°

8. REJECTION IN LIMINE OF THE APPEAL FILED BY EEGSA AGAINST CNEE
RESOLUTIONS 144, 145 AND 146 OF 2008

Position of the Claimant

The Claimant considers that the MEM violated its rights by rejecting in
limine the appeals lodged against CNEE Resolutions 144, 145 and 146,
through which it approved the Sigla study and set the EEGSA tariffs based
on this study. In effect, the Claimant maintains that the argument used
by the MEM to reject in limine the appeals of EEGSA, that is, that the
path to be used is that of contesting general resolutions, is not
appropriate. '*°

The Claimant notes that it is clear that the rejection in limine was not
appropriate in the case of the decisive resolution, Resolution 144, by
which the Bates White was discarded and the Sigla study was approved,
since “in this case, it was undoubtedly an action directed specifically at
one person, EEGSA, whose study the CNEE discarded applying the same
sanction as if the study had not been delivered: it substituted the
distributor’s study with a study of the regulator itself.°' The Claimant
adds that the CNEE did not notify the decision to EEGSA, which got to
know it through its publication in the Diario Oficial de Centroamérica. +

As for the two resolutions that approved the EEGSA tariffs (numbers 144
and 145), the Claimant alleges that “... both were adopted within a
process between particular parties and that both set the price (tariffs) of the
services of a single distributor, EEGSA, through a procedure in which it is a
necessary party. This is not a case of abstract provisions applicable to the
majority. "%?

In view of the foregoing, the Claimant states that the MEM closed to
EEGSA the ordinary way of challenging the Resolutions and left it
without the possibility of going to the administrative tribunals, denying
it the right to judicial review of these resolutions that set its income.*™*

Finally, the Claimant notes that "... with a preliminary rejection of the
appeals lodged by EEGSA, the MEM knowingly placed the distributor in
a dilemma. While there might be a possibility (contested) of bringing an
action for amparo against the preliminary rejection by the MEM of the
appeal, it meant risking prescription of the legal period for filing the
action for amparo against the resolution itself issued by the CNEE, as
this is very short (30 days). Under these conditions, if the action of
amparo against the preliminary rejection of the MEM was unsuccessful,
EEGSA would have already lost both access to the route of the
administrative courtsand the action of amparo against the CNEE
Resolution. In this dilemma, it was most reasonable to opt for the action
of amparo against the CNEE Resolution. Thus, the Minister managed to
close the contentious-administrative route to EEGSA”®>

Position of the Respondent

The Republic of Guatemala maintains that EEGSA decided not to use the

43

[197]

[198]

[199]

[200]

[201]

[202]

[203]

[204]

administrative remedies that would have enabled it to initiate a complaint
in the contentious-administrative tribunals, and, in any case, that the
amparo was a suitable route for EEGSA to vent their claims.1%

The Respondent argues that “Iberdrola, through EEGSA, consciously and
deliberately decided not to initiate its amparo against the MEM resolutions
that rejected in limine its administrative remedies, deciding instead to
initiate amparo against the CNEE decisions fixing the tariffs... if EEGSA
had begun its amparo against the rejection in limine, and this had
proceeded, the court could have required the MEM to express itself on the
merits, which (assuming that this pronouncement of MEM did not satisfy
EEGSA), would have enabled it to start the contentious-administrative
action which Iberdrola now says was denied to it by Guatemala. EEGSA
decided instead to lodge actions of amparo against the CNEE resolutions, a
route that it evidently considered more adequate (and possibly quicker) for
the purpose of protecting its interests”%”

The Respondent points out that, in fact, EEGSA had already used the
amparo in order to contest a preliminary rejection to an administrative
appeal, and that in that case, the Constitutional Court had accepted
EEGSA's amparo, reverting the rejection and restoring it to the enjoyment
of its rights.*®

The Respondent adds that, in any event, the actions of amparo of EEGSA
against CNEE Resolutions 144, 145 and 146, “... allowed a very broad
framework for the analysis of the positions of the parties, including the
ability to offer and produce evidence for both sides, make
presentations in oral and public hearings, notifications to the
prosecutor’s office and control bodies. "°°

a DECISIONS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL COURT 7°°
Position of the Claimant

The Claimant considers that the Constitutional Court "[came out] in aid
of the government and [changed] the rules of the game with its
judgment of November 18, 2009."

The Claimant notes that, despite the serious inconsistencies in the
judgment of November 18, 2009, the Court recognized that the MEM’s
decision to reject outright EEGSA’s appeal against Resolution CNEE-144
was contrary to law.?°2

Also, for the Plaintiff, the Court ruled in favor of EEGSA when it said that
until the dissolution of the Expert Commission, EEGSA had followed the
correct procedure. The foregoing, it claims, leads to the conclusion that the
CNEE could not discard the Bates White study and take the Sigla study as
a basis for calculating the VAD.7°>

As for the determination of the Court that the pronouncement of the Expert
Commission is not binding, the Claimant contends that the justification of
the Court is “... only appearance of substantiation” and that “in this sense,
the Court's decision is tantamount to an unsubstantiated decision and,
therefore, of no value internationally.” 204

The Claimant asserts, referring both to the judgment of November 18, 2009
and to that of February 24, 2010, that those judgments “fsealed] for the

44

[205]

[206]

[207]

[208]

[209]

[210]

[211]

[212]

future the shift to a discretionary model in tariff setting.”*°°
Position of the Respondent

The Respondent maintains that, contrary to the claims of the Claimant,
the judgment of the Constitutional Court of November 18, 2009 “... was
not a decision made to measure for the present dispute, nor aimed to

give substantiations that are ‘only appearance of substantiation’.””°°

The Claimant further states that “neither is there truth in Iberdrola’s
claim that the Constitutional Court ‘came to the aid of the
Government.”°” It adds to this that "the Constitutional Court, as the
appellate court hearing the actions of amparo initiated by EEGSA, is the
last judicial body of defense of the Constitution of Guatemala's judicial
system. Iberdrola does not provide any evidence to substantiate this
allegation beyond criticizing both judgments that overturned the amparo
actions, in the same way that with certain logic it defends the judgments
of first instance in its favor.’”°°°

In short, for the Respondent, the judgments of the Constitutional Court
were properly substantiated and “a claimant who has voluntarily
submitted the interpretation of Guatemalan rules to Guatemalan
courts, cannot then decide whether or not it wishes to obey the
decision of the superior court of that country. Unless it alleges denial of
Justice... "09

10. THE FORMULA OF THE FRC
Position of the Claimant

The Claimant states that “... the cost of capital is the most important
component of the VAD” and that the capital cost is calculated using the
value of the assets - the remunerable capital base - a compensation factor
called FRC.?1°

The Applicant rejects the FRC formula used by the CNEE, alleging that: (i)
although the CNEE accepted a minimum capital cost of at least 7% real
annual after-tax, it applied this rate in an incorrect FRC equation, which
“... has the practical effect of breaking below the minimum rate of 7%,
which is transformed to 3.5%”; (ii) in the context of the LGE and under
the efficient company system, the value of the assets never
depreciates.71*

According to the Claimant, the FRC formula used by the CNEE halved the
return on investment. Specifically, it stated that the incorrect formula
used by the CNEE was as follows:?!?

| r
2*(q—
20 2*(-g)
The Claimant notes that this formula includes a 2 in the

denominator to divide the annual return on investment and that
“the inclusion of this divisor has no explanation."?7

FRC EEGSA =

 

  

According to the Claimant, “for the Guatemalan system, the correct FRC

45

[213]

[214]

[215]

[216]

a.

[217]

[218]

formula would be”:
r

—
T ° qd -—§ )

“.. Where T, represents the lifespan of the assets, r is the rate of return
approved by the CNEE (or 7% real after tax) and g represents the corporate
tax rate (31% in the case of Guatemala).”

FRC =

The Claimant alleges that the LGE provides in Article 73 that for
determining the capital cost, “the annuity will be calculated with the
typical lifespan of distribution facilities and the discount rate that is
used in calculating the tariffs”, and that the LGE says nothing about any
of these factors being divided by two.”!°

The Claimant states that by Resolution CNEE-5-2008 an Addendum to
the ToR was enacted and the FRC formula modified “...in flagrant
violation of Art. 70 of the LGE.’”*°

According to the Claimant, “... to somehow justify the arbitrary decision
to include a '2' in the denominator of the FRC formula for the calculation
of the VAD... Guatemala invents a new concept: the ‘depreciated new
replacement value’, also called by Guatemala the ‘depreciated value of the
new replacement value’. ’”*”

In this regard, the Claimant states that:

During the first ten years of the LGE, a formula for the FRC with a “2” (or
any other number that was not “1”) in its dividend, or the concept of
“depreciated replacement value”, was never suggested raised and was
never used;

The LGE does not mention even once this concept and speaks only of a
VNR (i.e., without depreciation);

The depreciated replacement value invented by CNEE is against the LGE
and RLGE as it is incompatible with the concept of VNR included in these
rules;

In the context of the efficient company, the asset value never
depreciates;

The depreciated replacement value is inconsistent with the efficient
company model itself on which the Guatemalan regulatory system is
based. 78

As for the depreciation of assets in the context of an efficient company, the
Claimant notes that “when regulating by efficient company, tariff-pricing is
at long-run average cost... In broad terms, this means that the value of
assets, without depreciating, is shared equally between all units
produced during the lifespan of the asset, net of flows at the
appropriate discount rate.””°

Finally, the Claimant notes that “... the Guatemalan tariff system
does not give EEGSA the opportunity to recover even the capital
employed, let alone obtain an adequate return. This means that

46

[219]

[220]

[221]

[222]

[223]

[224]

throughout the authorization period, every dollar invested in the
distribution network generates less than $0.50 in present value... the
VAD imposed by the CNEE implies that, of each dollar invested, EEGSA
is condemned to lose more than half.””*°

Position of the Respondent

In contrast, the Respondent maintains, “the calculation of return on
invested capital should be based on the optimized and depreciated value of
the VNR.”2+

The Respondent adds that, in order to calculate the investor’s return on the
capital invested, i.e., the cost of capital, the following should be used: (i)
the capital base, which in the case of the LGE is represented by the VNR;
(ii) optimized and depreciated; and (iii) applying the discount rate defined
by the regulator.?”

In this regard, the Respondent submits that, contrary to the contention of
Iberdrola, the LGE does state that “... for the purposes of compensating
the investor’s capital, the capital cost is calculated on the depreciated
VNR.” It adds that the LGE provides that “... the cost of capital is
calculated as the ‘annuity' of the capital cost considering the ‘lifespan
of the good’ and that that phrase would have no function if one
assumed a replacement of all assets every five years regardless of
their lifespan, which could be up to 30 years.”

The Respondent argues that the ToR reflected a correct calculation of the
capital cost made by means of the following FRC
formula:?74
r*(Ta/To) |. retorno

2*(-g)

 

T, = Vida util ponderada de los activos

  

T, = Periodo de amortizacion

r rasa de actualizacion definida por la CNEE

g =Impuesto sobre la renta!

2 = depreciacién de la base de capital (determinada en 2008 por la CNEE en un 50 por ciento)
In the Respondent's view, "... if Iberdrola’s argument were accepted,

EEGSA would receive a return on capital already recovered or would be
compensated as if the network were actually completely renewed every
five years. This is far from the reality: EEGSA does not renew its network
completely every five years, but uses its goods until the end of their
lifespan, so that compensating as if it did so would be
overcompensating....””25

The Respondent adds that “the methodology used in other countries
confirms that the return is calculated on the basis of depreciated capital
or VNR” and that “the return in the 2003 tariff review was also calculated
on a depreciated capital basis.”??6

47

[225]

[226]

[227]

[228]

[229]

[230]

[231]

[232]

As for how to determine the level of depreciation of the capital base and
the denominator 2 in the FRC formula, the Respondent asserts that “EEGSA
never provided evidence that its assets were not depreciated by 50
percent.” In effect, according to the Respondent, the various reference terms
that were developed for the tariff reviews of DEORSA, DEOCSA and EEGSA
estimated that the capital base of these distributors was depreciated by 50
percent (hence the denominator 2 in the FRC formula) and that if EEGSA
considered the depreciation level estimated by the CNEE was not right, it
should provide information during the tariff review on the precise depreciation
of its capital base (as the companies DEORSA and DEOCSA did, for which the
depreciation factor, initially set to 2, was adjusted to 1.73).”2”

Further to the above, the Respondent notes that “... Bates White insisted that
the return be calculated on the undepreciated capital basewithout offering
an alternative to the level of depreciation proposed in the Terms of
Reference. In particular, Bates White interpreted the "2” as a “typo” of
the CNEE in the Terms of Reference and directly eliminated it from its
formula, making the denominator equal to ‘1’."?28

The Respondent concludes that EEGSA’s position, which involved calculating
the return on a value of the new EEGSA network, is contrary to reality and
inadmissible.??°

11. CALCULATING THE VNR
Position of the Claimant

The Claimant states that “... the CNEE determined tariffs using as a capital
base to be remunerated a New Replacement Value (NRV) of EEGSA that
is arbitrarily low.’?>°

In particular, the Claimant argues concerning the Sigla study, based on
which the CNEE fixed the EEGSA tariffs, that “the theoretical network
design made by Sigla is intended to reduce on paper the distribution costs
and VNR, without taking into account whether the theoretical network can
be implemented in reality, if it complies with the municipal planning
standards and rules or if it generates extra costs for the user. The result is
a theoretical network that a gives very low VNR but that in real life would
prevent any dealer meeting the current demand of EEGSA: a network
impossible to incorporate and therefore impractical. ’??*

The Claimant states that EEGSA’s VNR calculation made by Sigla presents
numerous deficiencies and the financially most important are the following:
(i) it excludes much of the territory that necessarily has to be covered by
the real distribution network; (ii) the demand for which the study sizes the
network is insufficient; (iii) the study uses facilities that are unfit to provide
service at the voltages necessary; and (iv) the costs used do not match the
technical standards and requirements.7°*

The Claimant adds, to refute the Respondent's position that the EEGSA VAD
should diminish over time, that Guatemala's position that a mature network
grows vertically "is wrong” and that the thesis that vertical growth is
cheaper “is, in the best of cases, uncertain.”?°?

The Claimant concludes that Guatemala reduced EEGSA’s income artificially
by approving a VAD based on a VNR that corresponds to a reference
company serving an area smaller than EEGSA and that did not have similar

48

[233]

[234]

[235]

[236]

[237]

[238]

[239]

[240]

conditions to EEGSA, thus forgetting that the efficient company is a
“theoretical but not a fantasy” company.?**

Position of the Respondent

The Respondent, however, contends that the Sigla report did indeed fit
the ToR and that it set an efficient tariff under the legal framework of
Guatemala.”°°

In particular, the Respondent argues that the Sigla tariffs were fixed
according to the principles established in the LGE and that they reflect: (i)
the purchase cost of energy and capacity purchased by distributors based
on freely negotiated prices; and (ii) the capital and operating cost of an
efficient company.?°6

The Respondent points out that the vast majority of the differences that
Iberdrola noted in the Sigla study “... either do not exist or do not
significantly affect the final calculation of the VAD.’">”7 Consequently, it
rejects Iberdrola’s arguments concerning Sigla’s VNR calculations and
particularly in regard to the alleged deficiencies of the Sigla study
regarding the calculations of the urban area and the length of the low
voltage network, the calculation of the number of customers, the
optimization of the network and the area of coverage, among others.?*®

The Respondent adds that “... the VAD resulting from the Sigla study
reflects a very similar evolution of the VAD to that of El Salvador... a
country that was used as a comparison for distribution tariffs when the first
tariff setting for EEGSA was made in 1998.”

Guatemala argues that, as a result of its departure from the methodology of
the ToR, the VNR calculated by Bates White was substantially overvalued.?*°

In this regard, the Respondent notes that “... the VNR calculated by
EEGSA’s consultant in its first report of March 31, 2008 was US$1,695
million. This value was clearly disproportionate to the VNR value calculated
for the tariff review for 2003-2008 that had resulted in US$583.68 million...
This initial value of $1,695 million was significantly reduced in the following
versions of the tariff study prepared by Bates White to US$1,301 (May 5,
2008) and 973 million (July 28, 2008).’***

In the Respondent's view, there is no justification “... for such an increase in
the VNR value of a mature distribution network like that ofEEGSA.” It adds
that the lack of seriousness of the Bates White VNR calculations was
shown up by “... the substantial reduction (of almost US$¢400 million,
i.e., more than 23 percent) seen in the VNR between the March 31st
study and the May 5th study...."4?

Finally, referring to the VAD resulting from the May 5th study, the
Respondent argues that EEGSA’s increased VAD (relative to the VAD fixed
for the five years 2003-2008) contradicted the “... logic that VAD should
tend to diminish over time with mature networks like that of EEGSA, in
which vertical growth exceeds the horizontal.’?*?

12. ENERGY LOSSES

Position of the Claimant

49

[241]

[242]

[243]

[244]

[245]

[246]

[247]

[248]

[249]

[250]

The Claimant argues that the tariffs approved by the CNEE based on the
Sigla study “... oblige EEGSA to assume the costs associated with the
energy losses in the networks.’?4

In this regard, the Claimant states that “the new tariff regime approved by
the Government of Guatemala requires EEGSA to absorb the costs of
generation and distribution of the energy losses exceeding a theoretical
loss factor of around 6% without citing any objective source of information
that justifies the rationality of that figure.”*”°

The Complainant states that the only justification that could be invoked in
defense of such a low loss factor (around 6%) would be the setting of
financial incentives to reduce energy losses in the network. It considers,
however, that such a justification has no place in the case of EEGSA
because “... since 2004, EEGSA has reduced its losses from 10.3% to
8.2% in 2008, when the average percentage of losses in Guatemala was
around 17%. That percentage positions EEGSA as one of the distributors
with the lowest loss factors in all Latin America (including Guatemala). "*°

According to the Claimant, the measure imposed by the CNEE to EEGSA is
not realistic and contrasts openly with the measures applied to other
distributors in Guatemala, such as DEOCSA and DEORSA.”*”

The Claimant adds that Guatemala’s current system of compensation of
losses makes EEGSA responsible for energy losses it does not cause and
over which it has no influence.”

The Claimant adds that the change in the energy loss adjustment formulas
is arbitrary and inconsistent because “... the CNEE itself had approved in
the 2003 review the adjustment formulas that Bates White collected in
its Study [which] were never discussed during the 2008 review
process. “4°

Finally, as the Claimant argues, “the arbitrary decision committed about
energy losses is in the energy cost component of the tariffs, in which the
CNEE obliged EEGSA to assume not only the loss of VAD that would have
corresponded to it for the energy lost, but the cost itself of the energy
lost.

Position of the Respondent

The Respondent maintains that Iberdrola seeks to transfer all of the energy
and capacity losses to the tariffs for the remaining term of the Authorization
Contract. It adds that this is not only contrary to the regulatory practice of
the model company, which allows only a partial transfer of losses, but it is
also inconsistent with the Regulation, which “... in establishing guidelines
for load calculation by capacity and energy, provides that these are
affected ‘by a certain level of losses, which must be paid to the
distributor’. ’°>*

Further, the Respondent notes, “both international regulatory experience
and the regulatory framework of Guatemala only authorize transferring the
efficient losses to the tariff, i.e., the inevitable losses of the operation of
the efficient company."?°?

The Respondent adds that the policy of partial transfer of losses to the

50

[251]

[252]

[253]

[254]

[255]

Iv.

tariffs was applied to DEORSA and DEOCSA both in the 2003-2008 tariff
review (as opposed to EEGSA) and in that of 2008-2013. Thus, permitting
EEGSA to continue transferring its losses to the tariffs rates would be to
maintain discriminatory treatment vis-a-vis these distributors.7°*

As for Iberdrola’s allegation that the CNEE in its 2003-2008 tariff review had
accepted a total shift of losses, the Respondent asserts that the transfer
of losses to the tariffs authorized in the 2003-2008 review is contrary to
the regulatory framework which provides for only a partial transfer, and to
international regulatory practice... Iberdrola cannot claim this item as an
entitlement on the basis that it was accepted in the 2003-2008 tariff review,
if this is not consistent with the applicable legal regime. ’*°4

 

Finally, the Claimant concludes that “... the Expert Commission also
considered that the transfer to tariff of the cost of energy losses should
be only partial, to promote efficiency incentives, and ruled in favor of
CNEE’s comment in this matter. 75>

B ECONOMIC REASONABLENESS RATES APPROVED BY THE CNEE
Position of the Claimant

The Claimant maintains the position that, contrary to the assertions of the
Republic of Guatemala, EEGSA tariffs are unreasonable, to the extent that
“they make EEGSA non-viable."?°°

According to the Claimant, the new tariffs imposed by CNEE “... reduce the
VAD of EEGSA so significantly that they remove all the profitability from
Iberdrola’s investment, making it financially useless.""°”

Position of the Respondent

The Respondent argues that the tariffs are reasonable and adequate and
emphasizes that: (i) the tariffs set by the CNEE are adequate and similar to
tariffs in the region; (ii) the millionaire sale of Iberdrola shares in EEGSA
shows that the tariffs set by the CNEE are adequate; and (iii) Iberdrola left
Guatemala for commercial strategy reasons and not for the tariffs set by
the CNEE.?5°

CONSIDERATIONS OF THE TRIBUNAL

REGARDING THE OBJECTION TO THE JURISDICTION

AND

[256]

[257]

COMPETENCE

As indicated in Section I(2) above, the Republic of Guatemala raised, from its
first brief, an objection to the jurisdiction and a request for bifurcation of the
proceeding, for matters of the jurisdiction of ICSID and the competence of
the Tribunal to be decided in the first instance. Considering that the
Tribunal could only rule on the merits of the dispute that was raised, to
the extent that it has competence to do so, the Tribunal will pronounce
itself, first, on the objections raised by the Republic of Guatemala.

1 DECISION ON BIFURCATION OF ARBITRAL PROCEEDINGS
As seen in paragraph 19 above, on March 24, 2010, the Tribunal issued its

Decision on the Bifurcation of the Arbitral Proceeding. Among other things,
the Tribunal held that: “the main dispute between the Parties is whether the

51

[258]

[259]

[260]

facts alleged by the Claimant constitute a contractual and regulatory issue or
if they are in violation of the Treaty. This is a difference that is closely linked
to the merits of the dispute, which is difficult to separate from that decision
and which requires for its resolution a comprehensive assessment of the
facts and evidence." With the same reasoning, the Tribunal declared that
“if it is admitted, as proposed by Guatemala, that the objections
ratione materiae can also be seen as objections to the admissibility of
the claim, based on the lack of a valid basis for that claim, it would be
necessary to go into considerations on the merits of the claim, to
determine if grounds effectively exist that support Iberdrola’s claim.”
Likewise, the Tribunal noted that “... it is not appropriate to apply the
so-called prima facie test invoked by the Claimant to make the
decision to bifurcate the proceeding as this applies once it has been
decided that the jurisdictional issues will be addressed separately and
prior to the issues of merit, i.e., when it has been decided to bifurcate
the proceeding.”?°°

Accordingly, the Tribunal found that bifurcation of the proceedings was not
warranted and that it would decide the jurisdictional issues together with
those of merit.

2 POSITION OF THE PARTIES AS REGARDS THE COMPETENCE OF THE
TRIBUNAL

Position of the Respondent

Based on the arguments raised by Guatemala in the Jurisdiction Memorial,
which were summarized by the Tribunal in the Decision on Bifurcation, and
in other briefs provided by the Respondent during the arbitration,
including the Post-Hearing Brief, the principal arguments of the
Respondent as to the competence of the Tribunal can be summarized in
the following terms:

“a. Iberdrola submits a disagreement to the Tribunal the essential
basis of which is regulatory and contractual and that cannot be
described as a dispute under the Treaty. Consequently, there is no
jurisdiction ratione materiae.

b. Even if the disagreement could be classified as a dispute under the
Treaty (which it cannot), the local route has been chosen to resolve the
dispute to the exclusion of international arbitration, according to the clause
of election of routes of the Treaty; and

c. Even if clause of election of routes had not been activated, the
disagreement was submitted voluntarily by Iberdrola to the local
courts and international responsibility of Guatemala could exist only if
it was possible to prove a denial of justice which the Claimant has not
even alleged. °°

According to the Respondent, its objections relate to the jurisdiction
ratione materiae of the Tribunal and are based, in large part, on the fact
that the Claimant has not submitted a claim to the Tribunal “regarding
matters regulated by the Treaty," as established in its Article 11.
Additionally, the Respondent notes, as the objections “... may also be viewed
as based on the Iberdrola’s inability to give any valid foundation for its
claim under international law and the Treaty...”, these can also be
considered as objections to the admissibility of this claim. 7°

52

[261]

[262]

[263]

[264]

[265]

The Respondent argues that “... beyond the words used to describe it, at
the Hearing it became even clearer that what Iberdrola raises before
this Tribunal is merely a disagreement of Guatemalan law on the
interpretation and application of the regulatory framework applicable to
the electricity distribution system of Guatemala.”® It reiterates that
during the hearing, Iberdrola made no reference to international law and
merely referred to the discrepancies of Iberdrola and EEGSA with the CNEE on
the approval of the tariff study for the VAD calculation and to technical issues
of determining the VNR, FRC and energy losses.?©?

The Respondent adds that Iberdrola, in its presentation at the hearing “...on
‘the facts in the light of the Treaty’.. complains that ‘the distributor’s
participation is neutralized’ and ‘the Expert Commission is neutralized” but
that “the topics discussed are none other than the role of the CNEE and the
distributor in relation to the tariff study, the possibility of the CNEE approving
the study of another consultant, and the issue of the nature of the Expert
Commission. Iberdrola addressed the same issues at the Hearing under the
headings ‘expectations and legitimate confidence’ and ‘stable environment for
investment and legal certainty’. ’?™

According to the Republic of Guatemala regarding "...the alleged
“arbitrariness and economic expropriation,” Iberdrola is complaining of
technical issues. Specifically, [that] the VNR used by CNEE was supposedly
too low, the Capital Recovery Factor according to Iberdrola should not include
depreciation, and the CNEE had attributed too many energy losses to EEGSA.
This is a matter of specific disagreements of Iberdrola with the study of the
independent consultant Sigla, and includes a number of highly technical
issues, through which Iberdrola would have been nothing short of
expropriated by the State and treated arbitrarily in violation of international
law."

The Respondent indicated that “... at the Hearing, Iberdrola gave as an
‘illustrative example’ of the expropriatory and arbitrary measure of the
Guatemalan state, the disagreement between Bates White and Sigla on
designing the famous ‘checkerboards'. According to Iberdrola, another
‘demostrative example’ of expropriation and arbitrariness of Guatemala is the
disagreement between Bates White and Sigla on transformers, feeders and
stations. °°

The Republic of Guatemala concludes that it is clear “... that Iberdrola
complains about the work of the CNEE in the EEGSA tariff review process:
on the one hand, the issue of the nature of the Expert Commission and the
possibility of the CNEE approving the study of another consultant; and on the
other hand, the technical issues as to how the VNR, the Capital Recovery
Factor and the energy losses should be calculated under the local regulatory
framework." According to the Respondent these “... there are not issues for
an international tribunal like the present, which judges the international
liability of Guatemala under the Treaty. The function of this Tribunal
cannot be to redo the tariff study as if it were Sigla or Bates White, or
act as a third instance of appeal in matters that are purely of
Guatemalan law. If the CNEE was able to approve the Sigla study
discarding the Bates White study, and if the opinion of the Expert
Commission is binding, are issues already resolved by the highest court
in Guatemala, the Constitutional Court.”°”

Position of the Claimant

53

[266]

[267]

[268]

[269]

[270]

[271]

[272]

[273]

[274]

Based on the arguments raised by Iberdrola in the Jurisdiction Counter-
Memorial, which were summarized by the Tribunal in the Decision on
Bifurcation, and in other briefs provided by the Claimant during the
arbitration, including the Post-Hearing Brief, the principal arguments of the
Claimant as to the competence of the Tribunal can be summarized in the
following terms:

The Claimant submits that the Tribunal has competence to judge this
case and decide whether the facts it describes constitute a violation of
the Treaty.2%

As for the objection ratione materiae, the Claimant notes that, although
Guatemala files its objection as if it were three arguments, in fact, this is
a single argument against the “jurisdiction and admissibility” of the
Memorial: that the dispute raised by Iberdrola “is a merely regulatory
and/or contractual issue and of Guatemalan domestic law" and that this
dispute is unable to activate the application of the Treaty.7©°

Iberdrola adds that the elements of fact and law of this case fall squarely
within the scope of the Treaty and that “... it is not a matter of showing
sufficient elements for the Tribunal to preliminarily decide whether or
not there is a violation of the Treaty rules (that is a matter of merits),
but rather to prove that the allegations, if true, would constitute a
violation of the rules of the Treaty.””°

With regard to the clause of election of routes, Iberdrola states that “... it
has chosen a single route, ICSID arbitration to resolve the dispute. It also
alleges that Guatemala's thesis is inconsistent with the text of the Treaty
and that its plea does not have the necessary “triple identity” with the
actions taken at local level.’?”*

Regarding the objection to admissibility, the Claimant “... considers that it is
an incoherence in the Respondent's case and that that objection belongs to
the merits of the matter.’*7*

The Claimant states that "... Guatemala only objects to jurisdiction by
reason of the matter based on Article 11 of the Treaty and that it has
raised no objection at all to the bases of ICSID jurisdiction, thus
accepting the arguments on jurisdiction filed by Iberdrola in its claim.’”7?

Iberdrola believes that it meets all the requirements established in
Articles 25(1) and 25(2) of the ICSID Convention as to the jurisdiction
of ICSID and the Tribunal’s competence (ratione personae, ratione
material, ratione voluntatis and ratione temporis) ?”* and that given “... the
clarity of the jurisdictional requirements of the Convention and of the Treaty
that underpin the competence of this Tribunal, Guatemala decided to
misrepresent the facts presented by Iberdrola and filed an objection
supposedly to the Tribunal's ratione materiae jurisdiction... which is
actually an objection on the merits of the matter.’?”>

After noting that the Respondent has presented a circular argument
based on three false premises, and that it suffices to prove the falsity of
the first of these - that the dispute filed is not about issues regulated by
the Treaty but a mere regulatory and contractual disagreement - to “...
show that the characterization of the dispute between Iberdrola and
Guatemala as a mere "regulatory and/or contractual disagreement" as

54

[275]

[276]

[277]

[278]

[279]

[280]

well as being erroneous, in no way takes it out of the scope of issues
regulated by the Treaty."?”°

The Claimant notes further that, at the negotiations stage prior to the start
of the arbitration, Guatemala had already invoked the protection standards
of the Treaty and that therefore "... the argument that disputes arising in
the ‘regulatory’ field cannot lead to an international claim is a late creation
and only to raise the supposed ‘objection ratione materiae’.”””

Iberdrola considers that “... the long series of irregularities committed by
Guatemala during the tariff review process of EEGSA, described by
Iberdrola in its Memorials and fully confirmed in the course of the Hearing,
not only are susceptible to constituting a violation of the obligations of
investment protection contained in the Treaty (which is the test of
Jurisdiction); in fact they constitute that violation.’?7®

The Claimant argues that this case “... is a matter of clear abuses
committed by the authorities of Guatemala throughout the process
ofEEGSA tariff review, including trampling on the guarantees with which it
attracted foreign investment: the violation of due process during the tariff
review process and privation of economic utility of the investment. There
is no doubt, therefore, that the dispute between Iberdrola and
Guatemala refers to ‘matters covered by this Treaty’....”7”°

In the opinion of Iberdrola “as a result of the multiple irregularities
committed by the Guatemalan authorities in the tariff review process,
EEGSA submitted claims in local courts in defense of its own company
interest for infringements of local law. Iberdrola, meanwhile, has called for
this arbitration to claim the damages suffered in its investment in
Guatemala as indirect shareholder in EEGSA (39.64%) for violations of the
Treaty committed by Guatemala. As already explained, there is no triple
identity of object, party and cause between those proceedings and this
arbitration. °°

Iberdrola concludes that against the argument that only denial of justice
could be alleged, Guatemala’s argument is denied “...by one simple fact:
there are many existing cases in which an investor has promoted a
dispute that is ‘regulatory’ (i.e., when a dispute had arisen in the
regulatory domain) ‘and contractual’ (i.e., alleging non-observance
of a specific commitment of the State in relation to investment) in
nature, and in which the arbitral tribunals have finally condemned
the State for violating the standard of fair and equitable treatment.
In all these cases the tribunals have declared themselves competent to
hear the merits of the case. And in none of these cases was it understood
to be necessary that the investor must have alleged and expressly proved
the existence of denial of justice by the domestic courts to be able to
condemn the State. Therefore, the third premise of Guatemala is as false
as the previous two. 8

3 ANALYSIS OF THE TRIBUNAL

As a preliminary matter, the Tribunal notes that the Claimant in its
Memorial presents as a principal claim that the Tribunal “... declares that
the actions attributable to the Republic of Guatemala constitute
expropiation under Article 5 of the Treaty...” and “alternatively... that it
declares that the Republic of Guatemala failed to meet its obligations to
protect Iberdrola’s investment under Article 3 of the Treaty, in particular to

55

[281]

[282]

[283]

[284]

[285]

[286]

[287]

give fair and equal treatment to Iberdrola’s investments, and/or to give
them full protection and security, and/or not to interfere in the investment
and/or to observe its obligations undertaken in writing in relation to the
investments....""°

In its Reply, the Claimant maintained as its principal claim the declaration
that the Republic of Guatemala had expropriated its investment in EEGSA,
and presented as alternative claims the same that were claimed as such in
the Memorial, but adding the application, likewise alternative, that it be
declared that the Republic of Guatemala had incurred in denial of
justice.?8?

Subsequently, in its Post-Hearing Brief, the Claimant restates its claims
and asks the Tribunal “to declare that the actions attributed to
Guatemala constitute, alternatively, an expropriation under art. 5 of
the Treaty or a breach of its obligations to protect the Iberdrola’s
investment under art. 3 of the Treaty, in particular to give fair and equal
treatment to Iberdrola’s investments, and/or to give them full protection and
judicial security, and/or not to interfere in the investment with arbitrary
measures, and/or to observe its obligations undertaken in writing in relation to
the investments.’** Alternatively, it reiterates its claim that the Tribunal
declare that Guatemala has committed a denial of justice to Iberdrola under
Article 3 of the Treaty.785

The Tribunal emphasizes that the Respondent does not contest the
jurisdiction of ICSID or the competence of the Tribunal in the claim of
denial of justice. On the contrary, the Respondent contends that the Claimant
“could only... present a claim for denial of justice.”*°°

The Tribunal Court will now consider the issue of ICSID jurisdiction and its
competence over the claims of the Claimant in reference to objections of
jurisdiction of the Respondent. In Section V below - The Claim of Denial of
Justice - the Tribunal will address the issue of its competence with respect to
this claim.

4. ICSID JURISDICTION AND COMPETENCE OF THE TRIBUNAL

The objection to the jurisdiction of ICSID and the competence of the
Tribunal was raised by the Republic of Guatemala on the basis of
international bodies of regulations, and specifically, based on the
ICSID Convention and the Treaty.

From analysis of the arguments raised by the Parties, as discussed in
Paragraphs 259-279 above, the Tribunal notes that there is no dispute as
to: (a) the nationality of the Claimant; (b) that Spain and the Republic of
Guatemala signed the Treaty, and (c) the temporal application of the
Treaty. Accordingly, the Parties accept the jurisdiction ratione personae
and ratione temporis of ICSID. The objection of Guatemala refers
exclusively to jurisdiction ratione materiae; both Parties have understood
this.

41 POWER OF THE TRIBUNAL TO DECIDE ON ITS OWN COMPETENCE

Article 4 of the ICSID Convention establishes that, “the Tribunal shall
resolve on its own competence” thus unambiguously reflecting the
principle of “Kompetenz-Kompetenz” and imposing an obligation on the

56

[288]

[289]

[290]

[291]

[292]

[293]

Court to rule on the jurisdictional objections that may be formulated. This
obligation includes the need for the Tribunal to analyze the factual and
legal issues submitted to it and that are relevant in relation to the
matter.

In this context, the first task to be addressed by the Tribunal is to rule on
its own competence, i.e., on the power that it has to resolve the dispute
that has been raised by the Parties. Having decided on its competence,
the Tribunal may, if it reaches the conclusion that it has it, address the
merits of the issues raised.

First, the Tribunal will consider two aspects of the objection to
jurisdiction raised by the Respondent that it deems especially important.
On the one hand, the Respondent challenges the international nature of the
Claimant's claims, noting that they are not subject to the jurisdiction of a
Tribunal constituted under the ICSID Convention. On the other hand, it
considers that Article 11 of the Treaty is restrictive in the type of disputes
over which the Tribunal has competence, because it only admits the
discussion of disputes “regarding issues related to this Agreement”, in
contrast with other treaties concluded between Spain and Guatemala that
use broad language to extend the jurisdiction of ICSID and the
competence of the arbitral tribunals to “any dispute”, “every dispute”, “the
dispute”, “the differences” or “all kind of disputes or differences” on the
investment of a protected investor, without any other qualification.

For order purposes, the Tribunal will refer first to the scope of Article 11 of
the Treaty, and then to the type of dispute that the Claimant has submitted
to its decision, to determine whether this falls within its competence.

4.2 ARTICLE 11 OF THE TREATY

It is not a disputed point that the consent of the parties is the
fundamental basis of arbitration. In the particular case of investment
arbitration, such consent arises, first, from the State’s expressing - in a
treaty, a law or in a contract, for example - its willingness to submit
certain disputes to arbitration. And then, from the statement of the
investor’s willingness expressed, among others, in a contract, in an
investment application or in a request or demand for arbitration.

In the particular case of ICSID arbitration, Article 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention establishes that the consent of the parties to ICSID jurisdiction
must be given in writing and that, once granted, it cannot be withdrawn
unilaterally. The provision mentioned reads:

“Article 25.

(1) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute
arising directly out of an investment between a Contracting State (or
any constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State accredited
to the Centre by that State) and a national of another Contracting State,
which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to_the
Centre. When the parties have given their consent, no party may
withdraw its consent unilaterally. "?°”

It is clear then that consent is the fundamental requirement for disputes
between a Contracting State and an investor of another Contracting
State to be submitted to arbitration under the ICSID Convention.

[294]

[295]

[296]

[297]

[298]

However, the Tribunal cannot limit itself to affirm that the State
concerned, in this case the Republic of Guatemala, has consented to
ICSID jurisdiction. Instead, it must verify the scope of such consent, that
is, if it is a broad consent, including any dispute that may be included within
the scope of application of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, or if such
consent is in any way restricted or limited.

The consent of the Republic of Guatemala to the arbitration with
Spanish investors is contained in the Treaty and, therefore, the matters
in respect of which such consent was given are those that determine
the competence of the Tribunal. It is then up to the latter, considering
the matter of the dispute raised by the claimant investor, to establish
whether or not this is covered in the consent to arbitration and, therefore,
if it is a matter about which the Tribunal can decide. For this purpose, the
instrument by which the Republic of Guatemala consented to arbitration,
i.e. the Treaty, must be analyzed.

Article 11 of the Treaty provides in its relevant part:

"1. Any dispute relating to investments that arises between one of the
Contracting Parties and an investor of the other Contracting Party,
concerning matters governed by this Agreement shall be notified in
writing, including detailed information, by the investor to the Contracting
Party receiving the investment. As far as possible, the parties to the
dispute, shall endeavor to settle these differences by mutual agreement.

2. If the dispute cannot be settled in this way within six months from
the date of written notice referred to in paragraph 1, the dispute may
be submitted, at the option of the investor:

a) to the competent courts of the Contracting Party in whose territory the
investment was made; or

b) to an ad hoc arbitration tribunal established under the
Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law; or

c) to the International Centre For Settlement of Investment Disputes
(ICSID) created by the “Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States”, opened for
signature at Washington on March 18, 1965, when each State party to
this Agreement shall have acceded to it. Should one of the Contracting
Parties not be a Contracting State to that Convention, the dispute may
be resolved under the Additional Facility for the Administration of
Conciliation, Arbitration and Fact-Finding Procedures by the ICSID
Secretariat.’””**

The consent of the Republic of Guatemala for arbitration with Spanish
investors under the Treaty was given in Article 11 cited above. Thus, it
is for the Court to determine whether the text includes disputes that Iberdrola
has submitted to the Tribunal in this arbitration, or if one or more such
disputes are excluded from arbitration, which would imply the lack of
jurisdiction of ICSID and of the competence of this Tribunal.

From the above it is clear that, while it is the parties that determine what
matters they want to submit to arbitration, it is the Tribunal which is
responsible, in each case, for determining whether the disputes that are

58

[299]

[300]

[301]

[302]

[303]

[304]

submitted to it correspond or not to those for which the parties have
given their consent.?°?

In regard to the interpretation of the consent of the Republic of Guatemala,
expressed in Article 11 of the Treaty, as this is a consent given in an
international treaty, the Tribunal considers it necessary to apply the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties”®° and, particularly, its Article 31(1) which
establishes the following general rule of interpretation of treaties:

“31. General rule of interpretation. 1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good
faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of
the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose."

The first element of the rule of interpretation, good faith, is twofold. On the
one hand, it obliges the interpreter, in this case the Tribunal, to
interpret in good faith the treaty text to determine its own
competence. On the other hand, it obliges to start from the premise
that the consent of the parties was given in good faith and, therefore, at
the time of expressing their consent, “... the parties did so with the
sincere intention that this would produce all its effects in the
circumstances agreed by them."

As regards text and context, the natural meaning of the words
suggests that disputes for which the Republic of Guatemala gave its
consent are those that arise “regarding matters regulated by this
Agreement.” This is not a broad term that includes any kind of dispute; it
does not even refer to disputes arising out of or relating to an investment,
but only to disputes concerning matters covered by the Treaty.

States signing an investment protection agreement have broad freedom to
express their consent in the manner they consider appropriate. Thus, they
can give it for all kinds of investment-related disputes or limit it to
certain disputes. Thus, States may exclude certain types of disputes
from arbitration, condition the submission to arbitration to compliance
with certain prior steps or prerequisites and generally broaden or restrict
the scope of the matters that can be submitted to arbitration.”°?

As noted in previous decisions rendered by tribunals, jurisdictional
analysis must be made carefully, in each particular case, taking into
account the respective treaty or instrument of expression of consent
and without any presumption for or against ICSID jurisdiction or the
competence of the Tribunal.?%°

The Tribunal accepts the argument raised by one part of the specialized
doctrine that has identified four types of provisions in investment
protection treaties with regard to consent. The first group of treaties
allows “all” or “any” investment disputes to be submitted to arbitration.
The second group restricts consent to arbitration - the Tribunal’s ratione
materiae jurisdiction - to disputes arising out of or related to (i) an
investment authorization; (ii) an investment contract; or (iii) the
allegation of a violation of any right conferred, created or recognized by
the respective treaty in relation to an investment. The third group
restricts the subject of arbitration between the investor and the State
only to violations of the substantive provisions of the treaty itself. The
fourth and last group limits the Tribunal's ratione materiae jurisdiction to
disputes about the quantum to be paid in the event of an illegal

59

[305]

[306]

[307]

[308]

[309]

[310]

expropriation.79*

Some tribunals have stressed the importance of considering the text of the
respective treaty, to determine whether jurisdiction exists. Thus, for
example, the Tribunal in the case UPS v. Canada noted:

“A claimants’ party’s mere assertion that a dispute is within the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction is not conclusive. It is the Tribunal that must
decide. The formulation also importantly recognizes that the Tribunal
must address itself to the particular jurisdictional provisions invoked.
There is a contrast, for instance, between a relatively general grant of
jurisdiction over “investment disputes” and the more particularized
grant in article 1116 which is to be read, swith the provisions to which it
refers and which are invoked by UPS...

The Tribunal agrees on this point with the assertion of Guatemala in its
brief of Objections to Jurisdiction, that the Treaty contrasts with other
bilateral investment treaties signed by Guatemala and by Spain, which
extend arbitral jurisdiction to “any dispute”*°°, “every dispute"?°’, “the
disputes””°*, “the differences"”°° or “every class of disputes or of
differences”*”° as regards the extent of protection.°°* The language of
the Treaty is restricted and would correspond to the third of the
categories mentioned in the paragraph before last, which means that
the Republic of Guatemala did not give general consent to submit any
kind of dispute or difference related to investments made in its
territory to arbitration, but only those related to violations of
substantive provisions of the treaty itself.

In relation to the context, and pursuant to Article 31(2) of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties, the Tribunal considers that it must
assess the correct meaning of the statements contained in the Preamble
to the Treaty. Some of these statements express the Parties’ desire “... to
intensify economic cooperation to the mutual advantage of both
countries” and that they propose “... to create favorable conditions
for investments made by investors of each of the Contracting Parties
in the territory of the other.’”°°2 Those statements and the fact of
recognizing in the Preamble itself“... that the promotion and protection
of investments under this Agreement stimulate initiatives in this
field,’°°?, are objectives that the Parties propose and not legal principles
that the Tribunal must apply to resolve on its competence. The Tribunal's
mandate is to resolve the dispute that the Parties have raised and not
that of fostering the intensification of economic cooperation or creating
favorable conditions for investment.

Also, in regard to the context (Article 31(2) of the Vienna Convention on
the Law of Treaties), the Parties did not claim, or even less prove, the
existence of documents or agreements between the States signing the
Treaty, which may allow to reach the conclusion that they understood or
interpreted the scope of their consent in a different way.

In conclusion, the Tribunal considers that the consent of the Republic of
Guatemala to submit disputes under the Treaty to arbitration is clearly
limited to those disputes concerning “matters regulated by” the Treaty
itself.

The Tribunal will now rule on ICSID jurisdiction and its competence and,

60

[311]

[312]

[313]

[314]

[315]

[316]

[317]

for that purpose, must determine whether the disputes that Iberdrola has
submitted to this arbitration relate to matters regulated by the Treaty.

4.3 THE DISPUTE SUBMITTED BY THE CLAIMANT TO THE TRIBUNAL, IN
LIGHT OF ARTICLE 11 OF THE TREATY

Although the Parties seem to agree that, textually, the language of Article
11 cited concerns disputes involving matters covered by the Treaty, they
differ in the scope of that expression.

The Republic of Guatemala considers inter alia that the Claimant is
requesting the Tribunal “... to resolve which interpretation is correct, that of
Iberdrola and EEGSA or ” that of CNEE on Particular issues of an internal
regulatory procedure for tariff review...."°°

Thus, in relation to the matter in dispute, Guatemala states that in the
context of Article 11 of the Treaty “... there is no jurisdiction if the dispute
is not genuinely a dispute under the Treaty” and that in “...circumstances
in which the jurisdiction of an international tribunal is limited in this way,
it is the responsibility of said tribunal to ensure that the claims presented
to it are truly international in nature and not ‘disguised’ domestic
claims. °°

The Claimant considers that the “issues covered” in the Treaty that are
relevant in this matter are, for example, the protection of investment against
expropriation or equivalent measures (Article 5), the State’s obligation to
provide “fair and equitable treatment” to the investment and to guarantee it
“full protection and security” (Article 3.1); the prohibition of applying
“arbitrary or discriminatory measures” (Article 3.2) and the obligation to
comply with obligations undertaken in writing “in relation to the
investments” (Article 3.2). Iberdrola notes that these are, precisely, its
claims in this arbitration.°°”

The Claimant also adds that “the Iberdrola case is a matter of clear arbitrary
conduct on the part of the authorities of Guatemala throughout the EEGSA
tariff review process, including the abuse of the guarantees with which it
attracted foreign investment: the violation of due process during the tariff
review process and the privation of economic utility of the investment.
There is no doubt, therefore, that the dispute between Iberdrola and
Guatemala refers to ‘matters covered by this Treaty’ in words of Art.
11.1 of the Treaty....’°%

In this vein, the Claimant notes that it has sued Guatemala precisely
for violating its international obligations to protect the investment?°?
and that “the dispute derives from the obligations assumed by the
Parties under the Treaty, as it is a matter of the violation by the
respondent State of Iberdrola's rights as an investor under the
Treaty.”

Particularly with regard to the international nature of the dispute, the
Claimant states, among other things, that “... Guatemala has decided, in
order to justify its objection, to ignore both the character of Iberdrola as
a foreign investor and the protection due to the investment under the
Treaty” and that “the State itself has already recognized the importance,
at international level, of this dispute. The creation in May 2009 of an
Inter-institutional Commission, chaired by the President of the Republic,
who ‘is responsible for (...) conducting the foreign policy and international

61

[318]

[319]

[320]

[321]

[322]

relations’, made up of representatives of three ministries, including that
of Foreign Affairs and the Attorney General's Office, shows that
Guatemala does not see the dispute as a matter that is ‘domestic in
nature’,

Similarly, the Claimant emphasizes that the text of Government
Agreement 128-2009 denies that the dispute raised by Iberdrola is a
“regulatory and contractual disagreement of Guatemalan law” because
it sets as its object: “to support and monitor the international arbitrations
of investors of the Empresa Eléctrica de Guatemala, Sociedad Anénima,
IBERDROLA ENERGIA, S.A. and Teco Guatemala Holdings LLC, which
have raised proceeding[s] of disputes based on the ‘Agreement between
the Republic of Guatemala and the Kingdom of Spain for the Promotion
and Reciprocal Protection of Investments' and on the ‘Dominican Republic
Central America and United States Free Trade Area - DRCAFTA ',
respectively, against the State of Guatemala at the corresponding
Arbitration Centres. The Commission shall function until the end of the
arbitral processes and the issue of the respective arbitration awards or a
satisfactory agreement is reached for the parties.” For this purpose it is
necessary to appoint a temporary inter-institutional commission, which will
coordinate the actions to be followed for the progress of international
arbitration. ”**

Considering the above, the Tribunal will discuss below the way in which
the Claimant raised its claims regarding the standards of the Treaty that
it considers have been violated by Guatemala.

(A) THE CLAIM FOR EXPROPRIATION

As noted in paragraph 280 above, Iberdrola initially raised its expropriation
claim as main petitum and its claims for violation of the standards of full
protection and security, fair and equitable treatment, non-interference in the
investment and compliance with the other obligations assumed in writing by
the Republic of Guatemala in the Treaty, as ancillaries.°?? The Claimant
maintained the same petitum in its reply, and added a further alternative
application, that relating to the denial of justice. In its Post-Hearing Brief,
filed after the sale of Iberdrola’s share in EEGSA, the Claimant amended
its petitum and requested the Tribunal to declare that the actions of
Guatemala constitute, alternatively, an expropriation or a breach of its
obligation to give fair and equitable treatment to Iberdrola’s investment;
to provide full protection and judicial security; not to interfere in that
investment by arbitrary actions and to meet its obligations, undertaken in
writing, in relation to that investment. As an alternative claim, the
Claimant maintained that relative to the denial of justice.?** In that Post-
Hearing Brief, the argument that seemed to support the claim which was
principal - expropriation - becomes an argument for what appears to be a
new strategy of the Claimant: to centralize its claims in the alleged
violations of other standards other than that of expropriation,
particularly the standard of fair and equitable treatment.

Although the Claimant in its initial brief cited Article 5 of the Treaty
concerning expropriation and invoked numerous decisions of tribunals
concerning what is meant by indirect expropriation, the Tribunal found no
execution by the Claimant of acts by the Republic of Guatemala which, in
international law, could constitute expropriation under the Treaty.

The Claimant asserts a violation of the Treaty and that the Republic

62

[323]

[324]

[325]

[326]

of Guatemala is responsible for this. Indeed, Iberdrola argues inter alia
that “in calculating the VAD and the tariffs approved by the CNEE there
are at least three measures that, implemented together, destroy the
market value of EEGSA....”°"5 It states that these three measures are: (i)
the calculation of the FRC formula; (ii) the VNR calculation and (iii) the
incorrect imputation of energy losses.*!° However, after making these
statements, the Claimant reintroduces the discussion, in the light of
Guatemalan law, of, among other things, whether the VAD is insufficient
or not from the economic point of view; whether, in the light of the
Guatemalan laws, the resolution that put the tariffs into effect is general
or particular in nature; whether the calculation of the return on capital
should or should not include a factor 2 in the divisor; whether VNR should
include depreciation or not; and above all, from a theoretical point of view,
how the losses should be imputed to the distributor for VAS calculation. 717

Iberdrola maintains this same line of reasoning in the briefs filed throughout
the arbitration, at the hearing and in its final submissions in which, after very
brief reflections on the competence of the Tribunal, it again reiterates its
interpretation, based on Guatemalan law, of each of the differences
mentioned in Section III above. Beyond qualifying the behavior as aberrant
or as breaches of the Treaty, the Claimant at no time presents clear and
concrete reasoning about which are the actions or conduct which,
under international law and not only under local law, could constitute
acts of expropriation.

(B) CLAIM FOR VIOLATION OF FAIR AND EQUITABLE TREATMENT

Unlike its initial briefs, the Claimant’s emphasis in the post-hearing
submissions is not on the alleged expropriation but noting that fair and
equitable treatment is the Grundnorm for analyzing the conduct of
Guatemala. Indeed, the standard of fair and equitable treatment, the
alleged violation of which was initially just an alternative application
of the Claimant, becomes, in its Post-Hearing Brief, a principal claim
and the center of the Claimant's claim.

The Claimant has a very similar line of argument in regard to the alleged
violation of the standard of fair and equitable treatment. It invokes the
Treaty rules (Article 3.1) and cites the doctrine and arbitral decisions that
have referred to that standard; but it focuses the argumentation of the
claim of the alleged violation of the Treaty standard on the differences in
interpretation of Guatemalan rules and on the economic formulas to
calculate the VAD; on how the judges agreed with Iberdrola initially - in
court decisions that the Claimant considers correct - and later with EEGSA
in decisions which the Claimant describes as complacent.?!®

Indeed, once it has defined what it considers to be the standard of fair and
equitable treatment applicable under the Treaty, the Claimant asserts that
the Republic of Guatemala violated its obligation to accord fair and equitable
treatment to its investments, primarily because: (i) Guatemala submitted
EEGSA to an aberrant tariff review process, “... violating due process,
deceitfully and contradicting its own acts", (ii) the tariffs imposed by the
CNEE were based on three abuses, namely, an unrealistically low VNR, a
FRC reduced by a divisor "2" and an arbitrary calculation of energy losses;
(iii) the VAD approved by the CNEE is so low that it causes unjust harm
and deprives Iberdrola of the economic utility of its investment; (iv)
Guatemala betrayed the investor's legitimate confidence; and (v)
Guatemala breached its duty to maintain a stable environment for

63

[327]

[328]

[329]

investment.*?°

In order to support the above claims, the Claimant takes up the same
discussion of local law which was referred to in Section III above, and again
alleges, this time under the label of violation of the standard of fair and
equitable treatment, among other things that: 320

The CNEE set the tariffs based on a study that EEGSA never saw nor had
an opportunity to comment on, even though, according to LGE, the
participation of the distributor in determining the VAD is essential.

The CNEE unilaterally dissolved the Expert Commission and ignored its
pronouncements that were mandatory in nature. In this regard, the
Claimant notes that in interpreting the RLGE and LGE by applying the
rules of interpretation of Guatemalan law, it is concluded that the
pronouncements of the Expert Commission were binding for the Expert
Commission as well as the distributor.

The MEM rejected in limine the appeals brought by EEGSA against the
CNEE’s actions, although under Guatemalan law said rejection was not
legal.

The VNR of EEGSA that the CNEE recognized, based on the Sigla study, was
illogically low, as it considered a theoretical network much less than needed
and without capacity to serve all the real customers.

By introducing a divisor “2” in the FRC formula, the CNEE divided the legal
minimum rate of return, although the CNEE accepted a minimum capital
cost of 7% yearly in real terms after tax, and an efficient company system
in which the asset value does not depreciate when calculating VAD.

The CNEE required the distributor to absorb the costs of generation
and distribution of the energy losses exceeding a theoretical loss
factor of around 6%, without citing any objective source of
information that justifies the rationality of that figure.

In the introduction to its Memorial, the Claimant outlines a possible
alteration by the Republic of Guatemala of the “... established
legislative framework, which has gone from a stable and regulated tariff
procedures to a fickle and discretionary procedure.”*** Taking up this
approach further on, in the context of its claim on fair and equitable
treatment, Iberdrola mentions the alteration of essential elements of
established legal procedure, such as ™... the participation of the
distributor in the VAD calculation and the guarantees of neutrality
prescribed by law” and a “... substantial reduction of EEGSA’s VAD”
which it considers “... arbitrary and materially unjust."

In its Reply, the Claimant reaffirms its claim of a supposed change in the
legislative environment and refers to a “repeal of the legal framework.’?7
After stating that the Republic of Guatemala used the regulatory
framework to attract investment and making a description of what, in its
opinion, were the offerings of the Respondent, the Claimant concludes that
the three basic guarantees offered to investors were:

"i) an objective VAD, calculated on the basis of technical and economic criteria

64

[330]

[331]

[332]

[333]

[334]

[335]

predetermined by the Law (principle of objectivity)

ji) participation of the distributor in the tariff-setting process, through
the VAD calculation (principle of participation), and

iii) the resolution of any discrepancies with the regulator by a neutral
technical body, the Expert Commission (neutrality principle). ’°*4

Regarding the claimed cancellation of what it calls the “principle of
objectivity”, the Claimant again focuses its analysis on the financial and
technical discussion of whether the design of the theoretical distribution
network by Sigla for calculating the VNR could be incorporated in reality,
and whether the FRC formula should include a divisor, and if so, if 2 is the
correct divisor. All this focuses on an argument based on Guatemalan law,
specifically, the LGE and RLGE.°?°

As for what it calls the “principle of participation”, the Claimant, after
making an interpretation of the scope of the distributor’s participation in
the process of calculating the VAD under the LGE and RLGE, concludes that
Guatemala annulled this principle because the CNEE rejected the study
presented by Bates White and approved that of Sigla, in which neither
EEGSA nor its consultant had any participation. The Claimant adds that
these actions of the CNEE constitute a violation of due process, a fraud in
law and abuse of authority.°7°

Iberdrola focuses on the repeal of the “principle of neutrality” - taking up the
extensive argumentation in the Memorial - on the way that the expression
contained in LGE Article 75, prescribing that the Expert Commission “will
pronounce itself on the discrepancies”, should be understood according to
different criteria of interpretation of Guatemalan law.22”

The Claimant concludes regarding its alleged alteration or repeal of the
legal framework or of the guiding principles to attract investment - terms
that it uses interchangeably - that “Guatemala has destroyed the
fundamental principles on the basis of which the investment was made.”378
In conclusion, the Claimant refers to the alteration of the legislative
framework that may occur as a result of the “... change in the criteria that
the regulatory body follows to interpret the legal and regulatory
provisions of that framework and in the change of the policies and criteria
applied.”**° Similarly, it reiterates that the guiding principles of
participation, neutrality and objectivity, which Guatemala used to attract
Iberdrola’s investment, were annulled.*°° It ends by noting that it was the
judgments of the Constitutional Court, inasmuch as they endorsed the
regulator's interpretation, which modified the legal system.37?

In its Post-Hearing Brief, the Claimant reintroduces its claim that
“Guatemala has made a radical change in the regulatory framework" and
basically refers to issues related to the approval of the Sigla study, the
nature of the ToR and of the pronouncement of the Expert
Commission.*?

(C) CLAIM FOR VIOLATION OF THE STANDARD OF FULL PROTECTION AND
SECURITY OF INVESTMENT

According to the Claimant, the Republic of Guatemala also breached
its obligation to give full protection and security to its investment.
The Claimant considers that, under the Treaty and international

65

[336]

[337]

[338]

[339]

[340]

case-law, the Respondent was obliged by that standard to ensure
the legal security of the investment and maintain a stable legal
framework.

After citing various decisions of international tribunals, the Claimant
bases its claim primarily on the facts described under the standards
mentioned above, as follows: “with reference to the facts as reported,
it is demonstrated that, inasmuch as Guatemala has lowered the
electricity distribution tariffs to a level that represents the total
destruction of the value of EEGSA’s shares, and has modified the legal
framework regulating the sector in such a way that the legal guarantees
that were the basis of the decision to invest have disappeared, we find
ourselves in an unmistakable case of abuse of the principle of full
protection and security; and if the extension of this principle to legal
security is not accepted, of the principle of fair and equitable treatment,
that operates as a general protection clause in the Spain-Guatemala
Treaty"**> and “for the same reasons already stated, Guatemala has also
violated the standard of full protection and security enshrined in Art. 3.1 of
the Treaty.’°**

(D) CLAIM FOR BREACH OF OTHER OBLIGATIONS OF PROTECTION OF
IBERDROLA'S INVESTMENT

A. Obligation of non-interference in the Investment through
Arbitrary Measures

The Claimant states that the first judgment of Article 3.2 of the Treaty
lays down the general principle of non-interference in investment, in
such a way that Guatemala had an obligation to ensure proper evolution
of Iberdrola’s investment, free of obstacles or impediments for its
“management, maintenance, use [or] enjoyment” and for its “sale” or
“liquidation."?>

In the Memorial, Iberdrola argues that Guatemala violated Article 3.2 of
the Treaty and refers mainly to the dissolution of the Expert Commission,
the rejection of the Bates White study and the approval of the Sigla study,
which in its opinion suffered from various technical shortcomings.**° Later,
in its Reply, the Claimant returned to its alleged violation of Article 3.2 of
the Treaty and explains that the arbitrary measures of Guatemala were
mainly three: (i) an unreasonably low remunerable capital base or VNR; (ii)
a FRC arbitrarily divided by two; and (iii) an arbitrary energy losses policy.°°”

B. Obligation to Honor the Specific Commitments Undertaken in
Writing in Relation to Iberdrola’s Investment

For the Claimant, Guatemala’s conduct “... is also in violation of Art. 3.2
in fine of the Treaty, which provides that ‘each Contracting Party shall
observe any other obligation it may have entered in writing in relation to
investments of investors of the other Contracting Party”. 7°>

The Claimant notes primarily that “the two Authorization Contracts
between the MEM and EEGSA, which form the legal basis of electricity
distribution, contain a clause, 9.B.d), in which the MEM undertakes not to
do anything that may hinder or affect the evolution and operation of the
distribution company or that may significantly increase the cost of its
activity.” The Claimant also refers to clauses nine, seventeen and twenty
of the Authorization Contract. 339

66

[341]

[342]

[343]

[344]

[345]

[346]

[347]

The Claimant supports its claim referring, again, to “the devastating
effect" of the State-imposed VAD that, in its opinion, makes EEGSA’s
activity unreasonably expensive and to the VAD calculation made by
Sigla using a VNR, it claims, based on a network model that is non-
viable.*° The Claimant also notes that “for the reasons stated, as in our
report, the administrative acts already described have ignored this
obligation and have significantly increased EEGSA‘s costs. For example: the
network designed by the CNEE and Sigla for determining the cost of an
“efficient company” is clearly insufficient, as the demand which EEGSA has to
meet is much higher in reality. Another example: Sigla’s consideration of
materials that are not used in Guatemala results in lower costs, but
obviously they do not match the real situation of the distributor. These
costs - the description of which here is not exhaustive - cannot be
reduced, being necessary to meet the standards of quality and service
required of EEGSA. By not recognizing these costs in the network designed
by Sigla, the costs have increased proportionately."

The Claimant also contends that, faced with these acts, EEGSA claimed
remedial action from the MEM, filing actions to reverse each Resolution of
the CNEE, and that “... the MEM flatly rejected these, shielding itself
behind vacuous formal arguments and turning a blind eye to the
arbitrary and unfair conduct of its inferior. Thus the MEM, in exercise of
its sovereign power, ignored in turn and entirely its obligation toward
the distribution activity contracted under the Authorization Contract. 2“?

On the other hand, in relation to the Claimant's claim for the Respondent's
alleged violation of the obligation to honor the specific commitments
undertaken in writing regarding Iberdrola’s investment (Article 3.2 in fine of
the Treaty), the Parties submitted brief arguments on the language of this
article of the Treaty.

The Respondent argued that “Jberdrola does not analyze even the language of
the second judgment of Article 3.2, which does not reflect a classic umbrella
clause, nor does it explains how it can invoke the Contracts if it is not party to
the same.’**?

In this regard, the Claimant stated that “... it is sterile, in this particular
case, to discuss the concept of whether Art. 3.2.II of the Treaty clause
constitutes a more or less “classic” umbrella clause. Art. 3.2.II of the
Treaty says what it says: that Guatemala is obliged to observe ‘any other
obligation that it may have entered in writing in relation to the
investments’ of Iberdrola. As it is worded, the article is clear enough;
resorting to preset labels - especially if they are as elusive as this -
hampers, rather than eases, its interpretation.’

The Claimant did not submit a claim or application to the Tribunal to declare
that Article 3.2 in fine of the Treaty is an umbrella clause and, moreover, the
Parties gave no importance to the topic. Accordingly, the Tribunal will
not pronounce itself on this issue.

(E) CONCLUSIONS ON THE CLAIMS OF STANDARDS

As a preliminary matter, the Tribunal must note that the post-hearing
briefs are memorials of conclusions, i.e., briefs with the aim of
recapitulating what is claimed and proven during the course of the
arbitration. But they are not, nor can the Tribunal allow them to be, a new
opportunity for the Parties to reformulate their applications or arguments.

67

[348]

[349]

[350]

[351]

To accept that the Parties, in the briefs of conclusions, can introduce changes
to the petitum or to the structure of the claims, would constitute a clear
violation of right of reply and introduce chaos into the process.
Consequently, an tribunal - given a situation as described, in which one of
the parties amends its petitum in concluding brief - needs to specifically
study the petitum as it was formulated before the changes contained in
the post-hearing brief.

In this line of thought, the Tribunal cannot overlook the fact that the
Claimant, as detailed in paragraphs 280-282 above, formulated its petitum
in the Memorial, added an alternative petitum of denial of justice in its
Reply and reformulated its petitum in its Post-Hearing Brief. Nor can the
Tribunal ignore the fact that in the Memorial, the main claim of which is
expropriation, the Claimant itself defined what it considered the core of this
dispute, as follows: “the present dispute arises from the abuse of power by
the Government of the Republic of Guatemala... which resulted in the
imposition of electricity distribution tariffs for the five years 2008-2013
which destroy the net worth of Empresa Eléctrica de Guatemala..."°*° and
that “the unilateral setting of the VAD applicable to EEGSA by the CNEE, in
violation of all the required legal and conventional guarantees, constitutes
the core of the present dispute.”**°

 

As one can easily observe in the various briefs and claims formulated
throughout this arbitration, the Claimant’s foundation for the alleged
violation by Guatemala of the standards of the Treaty is based on
differences of interpretation of the laws of the Republic of Guatemala
and of the financial formulas for calculating the VAD held by EEGSA and
the CNEE, during the tariff review process for the five years 2008-
2013. Beyond labeling the actions of the Respondent, the Claimant does
not present clear, concrete reasoning on what are, in its opinion, the acts
of authority of the Republic of Guatemala that, in international law, could
constitute violations of the Treaty. In the Claimant’s arguments, the
Tribunal finds no more than a discussion of local law, which it is not
competent to take up and resolve again as if it were a court of appeal.
The Tribunal develops this theme below.

5 CONCLUSIONS ON ICSID JURISDICTION AND COMPETENCE OF THE
TRIBUNAL

For the Tribunal it is clear, as will be discussed below, that an international
tribunal does not have competence by the mere fact that one of the parties
to the process asserts that international law has been violated. In a case
like the one filed by the Claimant in this arbitration, the Tribunal would
have jurisdiction only if the Claimant had established that the facts it
alleged, if proven, could constitute a violation of the Treaty. As
discussed below, the Claimant has not demonstrated that basic premise and
has simply submitted to the consideration of the Tribunal a dispute of
Guatemalan national law.

As stated by the Tribunal and the file proves, beyond the qualification
that the Claimant gave the disputed issues, the substance of these
issues and, above all, of the disputes that the Claimant asks the
Tribunal to rule on, refer to Guatemalan law. In the various briefs filed in
the arbitration, the Parties discussed at length about how certain provisions
of Guatemalan law should be interpreted, and particularly, the provisions of
the LGE and RLGE.

68

[352]

[353]

[354]

Likewise, in the hearings, the discussion focused on aspects of
Guatemalan law and on the technical and financial differences for
calculating the VAD and its components. Extensive technical discussions
arose about the extent and characteristics of the network; discussions
of a financial nature on the calculation of VAD and its components, on
the rights and wrongs of the experts of the Parties and on how the
rules of the Guatemalan legal system should be interpreted. Except
marginally, there was no debate about violations of the Treaty or of
international law, or about which actions of the Republic of Guatemala, in
exercise of State authority, had violated certain standards contained in the
Treaty.

From the way the debate and hearings developed and from the issues
raised, this process was more like an international trade arbitration than
one of investment. Therefore, the Tribunal expressly requested from the
Parties a pronouncement on the alleged violations of the Treaty that had
taken place, what they were and in what specific acts they had materialized.
In its Post-Hearing Brief the Claimant, although it again cites the Treaty
rules and refers to decisions of other international tribunals, continued to
focus on the differences of interpretation, under Guatemalan law, of the
issues mentioned so often in this award. The Tribunal reiterates that,
beyond labeling the behavior of CNEE as violating the Treaty, the Claimant
did not raise a dispute under the Treaty and international law, but a
technical, financial and legal discussion on provisions of the law of the
respondent State.

Indeed, as the Claimant presented its claim in this case, what it asks of the
Tribunal - regardless of the name given to its claims - is the review of
regulatory decisions of the CNEE, the MEM and the judicial decisions of the
Guatemalan courts, not in the light of international law, but of the domestic
law of Guatemala. The Tribunal, according to the claim of the Claimant,
would have to act as regulator, as administrative entity and as court of
instance, to define, among others and in light of Guatemalan law, the
following matters:

If the background and models on which the tariff-setting regimen of
Guatemala is based, are relevant in interpreting the provisions of the LGE
and RLGE. If so, whether such background and models support the
interpretation of the investor or that of the State.

The extent of the distributor’s participation in the VAD calculation
(particularly, based on LGE Articles 74 and 75 and RLGE Articles 97 and
98) and if the consultant had the power to separate from the Terms of
Reference.

The correct formula for calculating the VAD and in particular to define: (a)
the VNR necessary to determine the remunerable capital base; (b) the FRC
that, multiplied by the VNR, results in the annual cost of capital; and (c)
the energy losses. The above would require the Tribunal to determine
whether the correct VAD was the result of the first study of Bates White,
that of the second study of the same company, that determined by the
Expert Commission, that defined by Sigla, that set by Estanga and
Suarez, that set by Damonte or, even, that offered by Mr. Perez in the
disputed meeting with EEGSA officials.

The correct interpretation of LGE Articles 73 and 79 that indicate the

69

discount rate to be used to calculate the tariffs.

e. If the rejection in limine made by the MEM of the appeals filed by EEGSA
against Resolutions CNEE-144, 145 and 146 of 2008 was appropriate or
not. If not, the effects and consequences of the MEM decision.

f. The correct interpretation of the rules concerning the contracting of tariff
studies and whether those rules authorized the CNEE to contract its own
tariff study, independent of the distributor’s study.

g. The powers of the CNEE and, particularly, but not exclusively, if these
powers were simply of supervision, with respect to the determination of
the tariffs, or whether it was responsible for setting those tariffs.

h. Whether the pronouncement of the Expert Commission was binding, (as
noted, this matter received extensive discussion based on the criteria of
interpretation of Guatemalan law).

If there was an agreement between the CNEE and EEGSA on the
operating rules of the Expert Commission. If so, whether that agreement
was valid.

j. Whether the unilateral decision of the CNEE to dissolve the Expert
Commission was legal.

k. If the conduct of the CNEE in rejecting the Claimant’s consultant’s
study and accepting that of Sigla was legal.

The scope of the clauses nine, seventeen and twenty of the Authorization
Contract.

[355] In summary, the Claimant requests the Tribunal to act as judge of
instance to decide the debate that took place in accordance with
Guatemalan law and to rule that it is right in its interpretation of each
of the issues discussed, so that as from the decision of this Tribunal,
the Claimant can construct and claim a violation of the standards of the
Treaty.

[356] It is evident to the Tribunal that the dispute raised by the Claimant in this
arbitration turns on Guatemalan national law and that the mere mention of
the Treaty and the qualification of the actions of Guatemala made by
Iberdrola, according to the standards of that Treaty, is not sufficient to
convert the dispute into one on “issues covered” by the Treaty.”

[357] As noted, the Claimant has not shown that, if its position regarding the
differences in local law that originated this conflict is correct, the
consequence would be that the Respondent violated the Treaty or
international law. Such a proof is necessary for the ICSID to have
jurisdiction and the Tribunal competence. The Claimant itself seems to
recognize this, when it declares that “... it is not a matter of showing
sufficient elements for the Tribunal to preliminarily decide whether or not
there is a violation of the Treaty rules (that is a matter of merits), but rather
to prove that the allegations, if true, would constitute a violation of the rules
of the Treaty.”°*8

[358] The discussion of international law that occurred during this process was

70

purely theoretical, concerning the applicability to this case of the
decisions in some awards that the Claimant cited, as well on as the
content of the protection standards. However, ultimately, in the briefs of
the Claimant there is no connection between the facts alleged and the
standards invoked, nor a realization of the act or acts of authority that,
in the light of international law, could have been considered violations of
its rights under the Treaty.

[359] The Tribunal cannot enter in the debate on domestic law that the

Claimant has repeatedly raised and point out the link, in the context of
international law - which the Claimant has not established - between the
acts of the Guatemalan regulator, of the MEM and of the Guatemalan
courts and the standards of the Treaty.

[360] The Claimant, to hold its opinion that the present dispute is international,

[361]

[362]

[363]

[364]

[365]

claimed that Guatemala recognized that character by creating an Inter-
institutional Commission which, in accordance with Governmental
Agreement 128-2009, had the purpose inter alia of “supporting and
monitoring the international arbitration" initiated by Iberdrola.*

The Tribunal does not share the Claimant's position. The creation of such a
commission cannot give a dispute the character of being a dispute under
international law. To admit otherwise would lead to the absurdity that
any act which a State carries out to defend itself from an international
claim, and even the actions that it carries out to conduct the prior
negotiations required by certain international investment agreements, would
imply ex ante recognition that there is an international dispute, in the light of
the instrument applicable to the case.

The Claimant states that Guatemalan law and the acts of its organs “...
form part of the assumption or factual substratum of facts that the
Tribunal must consider when judging and deciding the case, in light of
the protection standards under the bilateral Treaty.”°°. It also
indicates that, although the breach of an international ‘obligation
should be judged under the provisions of that law, “... in order to
establish the facts that give rise to the breach it is necessary to
analyze the concrete behavior of the Guatemalan bodies involved.”3°*
It adds that “... Iberdrola does not expect in this proceeding that
the Tribunal may say what the Law of Guatemala is or to check
the performances of its courts. What Iberdrola expects is that the
Tribunal rules on certain actions taken by the Administration and the
Government of Guatemala which violated its rights as an investor
enshrined in the bilateral investment protection Treaty between the
Kingdom of Spain and the Republic of Guatemala. ”**

The Tribunal does not share the Claimant’s reasoning in the context of the
dispute that it has raised.

First, as noted above, what Iberdrola raised is not a dispute regarding the
legality in the international context of the acts of a State that affect investor
rights. The Claimant did not formulate its claims in such a way that the
issues of national law it presented were “...part of the assumption or factual
substratum that the Tribunal must consider when judging and deciding the
case, in light of the protection standards under the bilateral Treaty."***

The Claimant cannot validly hold that the national law of Guatemala must

71

[366]

[367]

[368]

[369]

be taken as a fact in the dispute that it submitted to the Tribunal. The
Claimant raised this process in order to resolve a question of “law”, a series
of disputes over rules of the Guatemalan legal system for which there was,
in its opinion, an erroneous interpretation on the part of the regulator and
the Guatemalan judicial system, which it now requests this Tribunal to
review.

The only responsibility of the State that can be analyzed within the
competence of this Tribunal is the international, which is determined in the
light of international law. On this point the Parties have no differences. What
Iberdrola should have shown is that the Republic of Guatemala violated the
obligations it had assumed in an international instrument, he Treaty, and
that that implies a violation of Guatemala’s international obligations.

It is true, as the Claimant notes, that the legality of the conduct of a State
under its domestic law does not necessarily lead to the legality of such
conduct under international law.*°* But the fact remains that if the State
acted invoking the exercise of its constitutional, legal and regulatory
powers, by which it interpreted its domestic legislation in a certain way, an
ICSID tribunal, constituted under the Treaty, cannot determine that it has
the competence to judge, under international law, the interpretation made
by the State of its domestic legislation, simply because the investor does
not share this or considers it arbitrary or in violation of the Treaty.

It is not enough, therefore, that the Claimant convinces the Tribunal that
its interpretation of Guatemalan laws and of the technical and economic
models is correct and that the one adopted by the CNEE is wrong. Nor is it
enough to label its own interpretation of the antecedents of the LGE and
RLGE as “legitimate expectations”, nor is it enough to qualify the
interpretations of the regulatory body of Guatemala or the decisions of its
courts, to persuade the Tribunal that it must resolve the dispute of local
law as a violation of the Treaty. Neither is it enough to label the
interpretation of the CNEE or of the courts as “arbitrary” for the
Tribunal to consider that there is a genuine claim that Guatemala
violated the standard of fair and equitable treatment or that there was
a real international dispute regarding an expropriation, because the
Claimant considers that the financial criterion used by Bates White to
calculate the VAD is correct and all the others, (including the VAD
proposed by one of the EEGSA executives), erroneous. Or that the
interpretations of the LGE and RLGE, backed by the courts of Guatemala,
are in violation of the Treaty because they do not coincide with those of
Iberdrola.

Indeed, as the tribunal in the case Robert Azinian v. Mexico rightly said:

“Ready-made phrases, however, are no substitute for analysis. The terms
“confiscatory”, “destruction of contractual rights as an asset” or “revocation”
can be used to describe breaches of contract that must be considered
extraordinary and therefore constituting expropriation, but they certainly do
not indicate the bases on which the crucial distinction will be made between
expropriation and ordinary breach of contract. The gravity of any breach is
subject to the point of view of the one affected, which is not satisfactory
for present purposes. “°°>

[370] The Tribunal reiterates that it agrees with the Republic of Guatemala

in that:

72

[371]

[372]

[373]

“... Iberdrola’s demand, based on whether or not the CNEE could reject
the Bates White study or approve that of Sigla, whether or not it should
delegate this function to the Expert Commission, or whether the
technical aspects of VNR calculation and of the Capital Recovery Factor
were successfully met, is based solely on the interpretation of
Guatemalan regulation. Iberdrola's claim is not, nor can be, therefore, a
claim under international law.

“... what Iberdrola is asking this Court is plainly and simply to decide which
is the correct interpretation, that of Iberdrola and EEGSA on the one hand,
or that of the CNEE, on the other, on specific issues of Guatemalan tariff
review procedure. It also asks this Tribunal to re-do the tariff review as if it
were a national regulatory agency. It is clear that such actions are
completely outside the functions of an international tribunal. °°

If the situation is as described in the preceding paragraphs and the
interpretation of the regulatory body was supported by the local tribunals, for
this Tribunal to be able to resolve this process the Claimant should have
demonstrated, beyond doubt, that the action of the courts violated the
Treaty. As noted by the award in the case Azinian v. Mexico:

"It is a fact of life everywhere that people can be disappointed in their
dealings with public authorities, and this disappointment is repeated when
national courts reject their claims...NAFTA is not intended to provide
unrestricted protection to foreign investors against such
disappointments, and none of its provisions can be understood
otherwise... it is clear that to decide the plaintiffs are correct it is not
sufficient that the Tribunal disagrees with the decision of the City Council.
A public authority cannot be faulted for acting in a manner validated by its
courts unless the courts themselves are disauthorized at the international
level.”

In that same line of thought, which this Tribunal shares, the Tribunal in the
case Generation Ukraine v. Ukraine - which discussed a claim under a
BIT, because of regulatory acts of the municipality of Kiev - said:

“... This Tribunal does not exercise the function of an administrative review
body to ensure that municipal agencies perform their tasks diligently,
conscientiously or efficiently. That function is within the proper domain of
the domestic courts and tribunals that are cognizant of the minutiae of the
applicable regulatory regime [...] the only possibility in this case for the
series of complaints relating to highly technical matters of Ukrainian
planning law to be transformed into a BIT violation would have been for
the Claimant to be denied justice before the Ukrainian courts in a bona
fide attempt to resolve these technical matters.’°°>

For these reasons, the Tribunal will accept the objection to jurisdiction raised
by the Respondent, with respect to Claimant’s requests to declare the
existence of an expropriation, the violation of the standard of fair and
equitable treatment, the violation of the obligation to provide full protection
and security and the failure to recognize the obligation to comply with the
other obligations under the Treaty.

THE CLAIM OF DENIAL OF JUSTICE

73

[374]

[375]

[376]

[377]

[378]

[379]

[380]

[381]

[382]

Position of the Claimant

The Claimant rejects Guatemala’s argument that the only protection it
could claim under the Treaty is the denial of justice and formally
invoked this claim in its Reply, “strictly alternative in nature."°°

The Claimant asserts that it did not file the claim of denial of justice earlier
“..for the simple reason that [it was at that time] when [it
culminated]".3® It explains that the latest judgment of the
Constitutional Court, which resolved EEGSA’s amparo against GJ--
Ruling 3121 is dated February 24, 2010, that is, the day before that on
which the Counter-Memorial of Jurisdiction was filed (in which it expressly
reserved the right to formulate claims on the consequences of that
judgment) .2*

In the Claimant’s view, “the denial of justice requires assessing the concrete
protection given [the investor] by the justice system and is not limited to the
analysis of the specific judgment.”3© It adds that, through a series of acts of
various State bodies (the CNEE, the MEM and the Constitutional Court), the
Respondent “... stole from EEGSA the effective protection that this
repeatedly requested....”°°

According to the Claimant, Guatemala “stole” that effective protection
from EEGSA by: (i) the CNEE violating due administrative process; (ii) the
obstruction by the MEM of the right of access to justice; and (iii) the
violation by the Constitutional Court of due process, for lack of real
substantiation.°~*

As to the violation by the CNEE of due administrative process, the Claimant
reiterates that the CNEE committed several irregularities in the procedure for
determining the VAD, in particular, repudiating the Bates White study,
approving that of Sigla and also invoking RLGE Article 98 to justify these acts.
The Claimant considers that these actions of the CNEE were carried out
“simulating” the application of a rule to give the appearance of legality.7°

The above, for the Claimant, “... constitutes a manifest breach of due
process, with the immediate effect of silencing EEGSA in the
procedure and annulling its participation in the VAD calculation."

The Claimant adds that “the Guatemalan courts themselves
declared, in first instance, that the CNEE violated due process, the
principle of legality and the right of defense of EEGSA.”°°”

The Claimant also alleges that, while for purposes of this claim it
analyzes the facts from the perspective of the denial of justice, “the
arbitrary nature and the breaches of due process that have
characterized the fixing of the tariffs of Iberdrola’s investment, EEGSA,
and the damage that these measures have caused Iberdrola as an
investor, are per se sufficient to constitute an offence through breaching
the standard of fair and equitable treatment...."°°

On the second issue, that is, the alleged obstruction by the MEM of Iberdrola's
right of access to justice, the Claimant reiterates that the MEM, without
foundation, flatly rejected the appeal that EEGSA filed against Resolutions
CNEE 144, 145 and 146. In this regard, it notes that “the reasons that the
MEM gave for the closure were the allegedly general nature of the

74

[383]

[384]

[385]

[386]

[387]

[388]

[389]

[390]

[391]

resolutions and, in the case of the fundamental Resolution 144-2008, an
argument that transpires bad faith: it blames it for not having identified
accurately "the date of notification" (art. 11.III of the Administrative
Litigation Law), when it knows that EEGSA had not been notified, but
that the resolution was published in the Diario de Centroamérica.”°°

According to the Claimant, by rejecting outright the appeal without any
substantiation, the MEM “destroyed” EEGSA’s right to submit the merits of
the tariff question to the contentious-administrative jurisdiction.?”°

The Claimant further states that EEGSA was forced to file the amparo
directly against the decisions on the merits, and not against the
decision of the MEM, because “... the Constitutional Court, in recent but
already consolidated case-law, has authorized administrative authorities not to
admit in limine appeals.”

The Claimant also argues that the amparo is an extraordinary means of
defense, which does not replace the contentious-administrative court, so
that the closure in limine decreed by the MEM involved a real obstruction
to its right of access to justice.>”?

The Claimant adds that the MEM acted in a contradictory manner,
rejecting, on the one hand, EEGSA’s administrative remedies, and on
the other, arguing in court that EEGSA had not exhausted the
administrative remedies established in the law (“principle of
definitiveness").°”°

Finally, the Claimant reiterates that, while for purposes of this claim it
analyzes the facts from the perspective of the denial of justice, the
Guatemalan government's obstructive conduct is not compatible with the
Treaty obligations to provide full protection and judicial security to its
investment.?”*

Regarding the third point, concerning the violation by the Constitutional
Court of due process, the Claimant alleges that “with its judgments of
November 18, 2009, and February 24, 2010, the Constitutional Court
overturned the amparo granted by both Courts, confirmed the procedure
followed to determine EEGSA‘s VAD without its effective participation and
consolidated, giving permanence to, a mutation of the tariff-setting model,

which became based on the discretion of the CNEE.”*”°

The Claimant asserts that “what is said about the first [judgment] applies
to the second, because it merely repeats pieces of its same argumentation”
adding that the judgment of November 18, 2009 is characterized by a
“flagrant inconsistency of omission” and by the “absence of elemental
criteria of legal interpretation.”*’° It concludes that in that judgment “there
is not one word on the core issue of the discussion....”°””

The Claimant argues that substantiation is an essential requirement of
due process and that the Constitutional Court’s substantiation was, in
some cases non-existent, and in others only apparent.?”°

Iberdrola notes that the thema decidendum of the Court's decision was that
concerning the CNEE’s rejection of the Bates White study and approval of that
of Sigla, under RLGE Article 98. After presenting again the reasons why it
considers that this action of CNEE is untenable in the light of the

75

[392]

[393]

[394]

[395]

[396]

[397]

[398]

[399]

LGE and RLGE, the Claimant asserts that in the judgment “there is
no substantiation whatsoever" addressing this fundamental
point.379

Similarly, the Claimant notes that the Court’s decision is infra petita,
which in its opinion is always equivalent to a denial of justice as“... it
amounts to no answer at all, to deny all access to justice.”

As for the alleged “appearance of substantiation”, the Claimant refers to the
recitals of the Court on the binding nature or otherwise of the
pronouncements of the Expert Commission and claims that they are so poor
they do not reach the “category of legal argument.” The Claimant then
describes what it considers is the correct interpretation of the LGE under
the interpretative criteria of Guatemalan law (the literal, the systematic,
genetic and teleological).3°*

For the Claimant, the other considerations contained in the judgment of
the Constitutional Court “... are nothing more than pseudo-arguments, as
they put the conclusion as a premise, presuppose what they are trying to
prove, in short, they make the issue presupposed. So the excursus on the
nature of the expert decision and the indelegability of functions. °°?

The Claimant adds that in the context of treaties of investment protection,
the denial of justice is a species of the genus of fair and equitable
treatment and that “the denial of justice is thus defined today simply as
unfair treatment accorded by a State specifically through its system of
administration of justice.’

For the Claimant, three consequences derive from the above: (i)
identification of the concept of denial of justice with its reverse, due
process of law, so that there is denial of justice when there is no due
judicial process and vice versa; (ii) that the standard does not necessarily
include bad faith; and (iii) that in cases in which a bilateral treaty is
applicable that includes the obligation to provide investors with a fair and
equitable treatment - as does that of Spain-Guatemala - the standard of
denial of justice is necessarily broader compared with those cases in
which there is no treaty.°**

The Claimant alleges that in the present case “...the customary
standard of international law is not applicable - which, incidentally,
is also identified with the breach of due judicial process - but the
specific and qualified standard of the Spain-Guatemala Treaty. 7°

The Claimant concludes that, according to the “broad” standard of the
Treaty it could be determined that Guatemala “... incurred in denial of
justice, from the point of view of the protection actually given by its justice
system, as well as from the point of view of the analysis of the concrete
judgment (or judgments in this case) that finally reject the claims raised by
the company which is the target of the investment, violating the
international obligations to the investors assumed in virtue of the Treaty."3°°

Position of the Respondent
According to the Respondent, the dispute raised by the Claimant before the

Tribunal is, at the most, a controversy over Guatemalan law that has already
been submitted to the local courts. In this regard, the Respondent

76

reiterates that, given the mere discrepancies existing between the
investor and an administrative body, the only hypothetical claim under
the Treaty would be that the local courts denied justice.**”

[400] The Respondent points out, firstly, that the Claimant discovered "... for
the first time in its Reply Memorial that it considered it had been victim
of a denial of justice.” Therefore, the Respondent questions the credibility
of the Claimant’s complaint and further states that “... the allegation has
no legal and factual support whatsoever.”***

[401] The Respondent argues that Claimant's position that “...the standard of
fair and equitable treatment. would lower the bar for what constitutes
denial of justice...” is wrong.*

[402] For the Respondent, even though the claim of denial of justice can be
framed within the fair and equitable treatment standard, “... the
elements of this violation are the same as in the concept of denial of
justice in international law generally.’2°°

[403] The Respondent refers to several decisions of international tribunals
and adds that “... the denial of justice is not a mere error in
interpretation of local law, but an error that no merely competent judge
could have committed and that shows that a minimally adequate system
of justice has not been provided.” 3°"

[404] In the Respondent’s judgment, Iberdrola did not even develop its
argument on the implication of the standard of denial of justice and also
failed to analyze the decisions cited by Guatemala.?**

[405] The Respondent takes up the main arguments of the Claimant to show that
the CNEE cannot have committed a denial of justice, since “denial of justice
is not an irregularity that can be committed by a regulatory body which
applies a regulation, but the deficient performance of a body that
administers justice.” In the Respondent’s opinion, if the Distributor
believes that the CNEE has not respected the regulatory procedure, or
has committed irregularities from the point of view of the LGE or
RLGE, it should challenge its actions through the administrative or
judicial route, but such breaches in themselves cannot give rise to a
denial of justice.°>

[406] As to the Claimant’s complaint that the MEM obstructed its access to justice,
having declared the administrative appeals entirely inadmissible against the
CNEE resolutions, the Respondent avers that: (i) Iberdrola had access to
Guatemalan justice, made use of amparo appeals and the relevant
tribunals took into consideration all the arguments raised by EEGSA; and
(ii) Iberdrola's claim that the rejection in limine of administrative appeals
closed the contentious-administrative route is incorrect, since EEGGSA
could have made an amparo appeal against MEM’s rejections of the
administrative appeals in order for the rejections to be reversed and MEM
be obliged to to decide on the merits of [the cases]. The Respondent adds
to the latter argument that, in fact, EEGSA appealed successfully, once in
the past, precisely against a decision of the CNEE.°™*

[407] The Respondent argues, referring to the Claimant’s argument that the
Constitutional Court did not substantiate its judgments or did so so
incorrectly that it is as if there had been no substantiation at all, what

77

[408]

[409]

[410]

[411]

[412]

[413]

[414]

[415]

happens is simply that Iberdrola disagrees with the Constitutional Court’s
substantiation. The Respondent considers that the Court did indeed
resolve on the merits in a correctly reasoned manner, although Iberdrola
disagrees with the reasoning used. In this regard, the Respondent
asserts that the Claimant is looking for the Tribunal to act as a court of
third instance.*°°

Analysis of the Tribunal

As a preliminary matter, the Tribunal notes that the Claimant first made the
complaint about denial of justice for the first time in its Reply, “... to use all
possible means of defense...” and”... in a strictly alternative manner..."

The Claimant asserts that the facts it analyzes from the perspective of the
denial of justice - particularly those relating to the alleged violation by the
CNEE of administrative due process and the alleged obstruction by the MEM of
the right of access to justice - are per se sufficient to constitute an offence
through breaching the standards of fair and equitable treatment and full
protection and security.79”

In this regard, the Tribunal refers to the considerations outlined in Section
IV above, on the lack of jurisdiction of ICSID and of competence of the
Tribunal to hear the Claimant’s claims concerning alleged violations of the
standards of fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security.

Having made the above clarification, the Tribunal will proceed to examine
the question of ICSID‘s jurisdiction and of its competence to hear the
claim of denial of justice made by the Claimant.

2. ICSID JURISDICTION AND COMPETENCE OF THE TRIBUNAL
CONCERNING THE CLAIM OF DENIAL OF JUSTICE

Neither Party has questioned the jurisdiction of ICSID nor the
Tribunal’s competence to rule on the Claimant’s complaint of denial
of justice.

As the Tribunal determined when analyzing the objection to jurisdiction
presented by the Respondent against the Claimant’s main claims (see
Section IV above), there is no doubt in this arbitration regarding: (a)
the nationality of the Claimant; (b) that Spain and the Republic of
Guatemala signed the Treaty; and (c) the application within time limits of
the Treaty. Therefore, it is clear that the Tribunal has competence ratione
personae and ratione temporis to hear the claim of denial of justice made
by the Claimant.

With regard to competence ratione materiae, the Tribunal emphasizes that
the claim raised by the Claimant revolves around whether the Respondent “...
through a series of actions by various State bodies (CNEE, MEM and
Constitutional Court) ... stole from EEGSA the effective protection that the
latter repeatedly requested, thus incurring in denial of justice and violating the
obligations undertaken in virtue of Treaty."3°°

For purposes of analyzing the issue of competence ratione materiae on
the ancillary claim of denial of justice, the Tribunal recalls that, when
studying the main claims of the Claimant, it found that the latter raised
differences grounded only in Guatemalan domestic law. For that reason,
the Tribunal concluded that it had no competence to hear the merits of

78

[416]

[417]

[418]

[419]

[420]

such claims.

In the case of the claim of denial of justice, the matter is different. In
effect, although mere matters of domestic law are alleged, an international
claim could be accommodated if justice has been denied at the domestic
level.

The Respondent notes that “in a scenario such as the present one of mere
disagreements of the investor with the actions of an administrative entity and
in which moreover, and correctly, the said disagreements have been
submitted to the local judicial bodies, the only claim hypothetically
possible under the Treaty would be that the local courts have denied
justice. °°?

In connection with the above, the Tribunal’s decision in Generation
Ukraine v. Ukraine is illustrative, in which it noted that:

“... this Tribunal does not exercise the function of an administrative
review body to ensure that municipal agencies perform their tasks
diligently, conscientiously or efficiently. That function is within the
proper domain of domestic courts and tribunals that are cognisant of
the minutiae of the applicable regulatory regime... the only possibility
in this case for the series of complaints relating to_highly technical
matters of Ukrainian_planning law_to be transformed _into_a BIT
violation, would have been for the Claimant to be denied justice before
the Ukrainian courts in a bona fide attempt to resolve these technical

matters.“

 

As stated in the record, the disputes over national Guatemalan law that
EEGSA submitted to the local courts were again filed by the Claimant in
this arbitration. The Tribunal considers that, while it is not competent to
pronounce on these disputes in domestic law, in line with the Treaty it is
competent to decide whether the treatment that the said disputes received,
in the domestic context, is a violation of international law.

The Tribunal ruled in this way in Parkerings v. Lithuania:

“Under certain limited circumstances, a substantial breach of a contract could
constitute a violation of a treaty. So far, case law has offered very few
illustrations of such a situation. In most cases, a_ preliminary
determination by a competent court as to whether the contract was
breached under municipal law is necessary. This preliminary
determination is even more necessary if the parties to the contract have
agreed on a specific forum for all disputes arising out of the contract. For
the avoidance of doubt, the requirement is not dependent upon the
parties to the contract being the same as the parties to the arbitration.

However, if the contracting party is denied access to domestic courts, and
thus denied opportunity to obtain redress of the injury and to complain
about those contractual breaches, then an arbitral tribunal is in positions,

on the basis of the BIT, to decide whether this lack of remedies had
consequences on the _investment_and_thus whether _a_violation of
international law occurred. In other words, as a general rule, a tribunal
whose _ jurisdiction _is based solely on a BIT will decide over the
“treatment” that the alleged breach of contract _has received in _the
domestic context, rather than over the existence of a breach as such."

 

 

79

[421]

[422]

[423]

[424]

[425]

[426]

Likewise, the case Robert Azinian v. Mexico is also relevant, in which the
Tribunal ruled that:

“\.. a public authority can not be faulted for acting in a manner endorsed
by its courts unless the courts themselves are discredited at _the
international level. Because the Mexican courts considered that the
decision of the City Council to annul the Concession Contract was
according to Mexican law regulating the public service
concessions, the question is whether the decisions themselves of
the Mexican courts violate Mexico’s obligations under Chapter
Eleven [of the North American Free Trade Treaty].

From the foregoing, the Tribunal concludes that the Claimant’s claim of
denial of justice is a claim in international law and that it has competence
to resolve it.

3. THE STANDARD OF DENIAL OF JUSTICE

As previously noted in paragraph 396 above, the Claimant submits that
the standard of denial of justice under the Treaty is broader than that of
customary international law. The Claimant supports this position by
stating primarily that “the denial of justice is defined as ... unjust
treatment provided by a State specifically through its system of
administration of justice” and that, consequently, “... in cases in which a
bilateral Treaty is applicable which includes the obligation to provide fair
and equitable treatment to the investor - as does that of Spain-Guatemala
- the standard of denial of justice necessarily broadens....”“°? The Claimant
also states that both the standard applicable under the Treaty and that of
customary international law must be identified with the notion of judicial
due process.4™

Likewise, the Claimant contends that applying the “broad” standard of
the Treaty could include determining that Guatemala “... committed
denial of justice, whether from the point of view of the protection
actually given by its justice system, or from the point of view of the
analysis of the specific judgment (or judgments in this case) that finally
reject the claims raised by the target company of the investment,
violating the international obligations to the investors assumed in virtue
of the Treaty.“ This, despite that in making its claim for denial of
justice it states that “the denial of justice requires assessing the specific
protection given [to the investor] by the justice system and is not
limited to the analysis of the specific judgment.”°°

The Claimant’s argument that the standard of denial of justice under the
Treaty is broader than that of customary international law was not
substantiated or proven. On the contrary, the Tribunal finds that, as in
other claims on which it has already ruled, on this particular issue, the
Claimant limits itself to formulating a proposition without substantiating it
from the point of view of international law.

The Tribunal emphasizes that it cannot be deduced from the text of
Article 3.1 of the Treaty that the signatory States set, regarding the
standard of denial of justice, “broader” parameters for than those of
customary international law. In effect, what that article says is that
“the investments made by investors of one Contracting Party in the
territory of the other Contracting Party shall receive fair and equitable
treatment and shall enjoy full protection and security. Neither of the

80

[427]

[428]

[429]

[430]

Contracting Parties shall, in any case, give such investments a less
favourable treatment than that required by International Law.’“”

For the Tribunal, the fact that the Treaty includes the obligation of giving
the investor a fair and equitable treatment does not mean, per se, as
Iberdrola argues, that the standard of denial of justice of the Treaty is
broader than that of customary international law. The Claimant failed to
substantiate or prove its claim that the standard of denial of justice, according
to the Treaty, is broader than that established by international custom.
Accordingly, the Tribunal, based on the text of the Treaty, which sets as a
minimum treatment that of customary international law, will refer to the
concept of denial of justice in the current state of customary international
law, which has been consistently dealt with in the decisions of the
international arbitral tribunals.

The Tribunal considers it important to cite the award of the case Azinian, in
which it was determined that:

“A denial of justice could be claimed if the competent courts refuse to hear the
matter, if it suffers undue delay or justice is administered in a seriously
inadequate way. There is no evidence, nor even allegations, that such
defects can be imputed to the Mexican court proceedings in this case.

There is a fourth type of denial of justice, namely the clear and
malicious misapplication of the law. This type of wrong doubtless
overlaps with the notion of “pretence of form" to mask a violation of
international law. In the present case, not only has no such wrong-
doing been pleaded, but the Arbitral Tribunal wishes to record that it
views the evidence as sufficient to dispel any shadow over the bona
fides of the Mexican judgments. Their findings cannot possibly be said
to have been arbitrary, let alone malicious.“

The Tribunal also emphasizes the statement by the Tribunal in the Mondev
case:

“[t]he test is not whether a particular result is surprising, but whether the
shock or surprise occasioned to an impartial tribunal leads, on reflection,
to justified concerns as to the judicial propriety of the outcome, bearing in
mind on the one hand that international tribunals are not courts of
appeal, and on the other hand that Chapter 11 of NAFTA (like other
treaties for the protection of investments) is intended to provide a real
measure of protection. In the end the question is whether, at an
international level and having regard to generally accepted standards of
the administration of justice, a tribunal can conclude in the light of all the
available facts that the impugned decision was clearly improper and
discreditable, with the result that the investment has been subjected to
unfair and inequitable treatment. “°°

Likewise, it is relevant to mention the award in the Feldman case, in which the
Tribunal held that:

“Taking into account, as noted earlier, that the Claimant had unrestricted
access, at all material times, to the Mexican courts and administrative
procedures, the Claimant’s victory in the 1993 amparo decision, and the
availability of revision of the decisions on nullity and assessment filed by the
Claimant in 1998, there appears to have been no denial of due process or
justice which could reach in this case the level of a violation of international

81

[431]

[432]

[433]

[434]

[435]

[436]

law, 410

Finally, the award rendered in the case of Waste Management v. Mexico
should be cited in which the Tribunal stated that:

“[t]urning to the actual reasons given by the federal courts, the Tribunal would
observe that it is not a further court of appeal, nor is Chapter 11 of NAFTA a
novel form of amparo in respect of the decisions of the federal courts of
NAFTA parties. Certain of the decisions appear to have been founded on
rather technical grounds, but the notion that the third party beneficiary of
a line of credit or guarantee should strictly prove its entitlement is not a
parochial or unusual one...

In any event, and however these cases might have been decided in
different legal systems, this Tribunal does not discern in the decisions of
the federal courts any denial of justice as that concept has been
explained by NAFTA tribunals [...] The Mexican court decisions were
not, either ex facie or on closer examination, evidently arbitrary,
unjust or idiosyncratic. There is no trace of discrimination on account
of the foreign ownership of Acaverde, and no evident failure of due
process. The decisions were reasoned and were promptly arrived at.
Acaverde won on central procedural points, and the dismissal in the second
proceedings, in particular, was without prejudice to Acaverde’s rights in the
appropriate forum.’4**

The Tribunal concludes that under international law a denial of justice
could constitute: (i) the unjustified refusal of a tribunal to hear a matter
within its competence or any other State action having the effect of
preventing access to justice; (ii) undue delay in the administration of
justice; and (iii) the decisions or actions of State bodies that are
evidently arbitrary, unfair, idiosyncratic or delayed. In this matter, the
Tribunal shares the position of the Claimant in that “... denial of justice is not
a mere error in interpretation of local law, but an error that no merely
competent judge could have committed and that shows that a minimally
adequate system of justice has not been provided.”*!

4. ALATERNATIVE CLAIM OF DENIAL OF JUSTICE BY THE CLAIMANT

This complaint of the Claimant refers, in first place, to the Republic of
Guatemala having denied it justice because the CNEE did not follow due
process for the determination of tariffs, affecting EEGSA and Iberdrola, as
[the] investor in the latter.

Secondly, Iberdrola states that the Republic of Guatemala prevented
EEGSA’s access to justice when the MEM disallowed it the opportunity to
access the contentious-administrative jurisdiction, to discuss the merits of
the decisions issued by the CNEE, and left it the sole option of resorting to
the extraordinary mechanism of constitutional amparo through which the
merits of the regulator’s actions could not be debated.

Finally, Iberdrola argues that in the decisions that resolved the actions
of amparo raised by EEGSA, the Constitutional Court declined to rule
on the central point of the dispute - the application of RGLE Article 98
- and issued decisions lacking any substantiation.

The Claimant's position is not clear as to whether the denial of justice that

82

[437]

[438]

[439]

[440]

[441]

[442]

it claims results from each of these actions separately or all of these
actions together. While, when introducing this claim for the first time in
its Reply, Iberdrola said that the Republic of Guatemala through a series
of actions by various state bodies (MEM, CNEE and the Constitutional
Court) “... stole from EEGSA the effective protection that it repeatedly
requested, thus incurring in denial of justice and violation of its
obligations assumed under the Treaty”,*! it later seems to analyze each
case as a unique generator of the violation of the Treaty by denial of
justice. As already noted by the Tribunal, it appears that in this distinction
the Claimant finds the alleged, but unsubstantiated, difference between a
broad standard of denial of justice, in its opinion, in the Treaty and
restricted in customary international law.

The Tribunal has reviewed in its analysis of this claim by Iberdrola each of
the actions of the CNEE, the MEM and the Guatemalan courts separately,
as well as these activities combined, in the way in which they were
presented by the Claimant, in order to determine whether the violation of
the Treaty by denial of justice occurred.

41 VIOLATION BY THE CNEE OF ADMINISTRATIVE DUE PROCESS

In the first part of his its allegations about denial of justice, the Claimant
reintroduces the debate on domestic law, debate which characterized the
entire presentation of its case in this arbitration. This includes,
presenting in its claim of denial of justice, in a confusing way, the same
facts relating to the procedure followed by the regulator and its
disagreement with the interpretation followed by the CNEE, to conclude
that these facts in themselves involve a violation of the standard of fair
and equitable treatment.

In effect, the Claimant declares that it was denied justice because CNEE
did not follow due administrative process, committing several
irregularities in the procedure for determining the VAD, in particular,
repudiating the Bates White study, approving that of Sigla, and,
furthermore, invoking RLGE Article 98 to justify these actions.

Notwithstanding this, in explaining this alleged violation, the Claimant
again makes an interpretation, based on criteria of interpretation of
domestic law, of Guatemalan rules (particularly RLGE Articles 98 and
99) and contrasts it with that made by the CNEE. The Claimant does the
above in order to conclude that the CNEE really did not apply any rule but
based itself on rules and assumptions which in fact did not exist “... or, in
other words, to simulate the application of a rule in order, with
appearance of legality, to do what it had decided to do: discard the
distributor’s study and approve the new tariffs based on its own study,
commissioned to Sigla.’“"*

The above, according to the Claimant, “... constitutes a manifest breach of
due process, with the immediate effect of silencing EEGSA in the procedure
and annulling its participation in the calculation of the VAD.”

Contrary to what the Respondent suggests in its Rejoinder, the Tribunal is
not persuaded that the denial of justice can only occur as a result of judges’
actions or in the course of judicial proceedings in which conflicts are
resolved.*© If it were so, as noted by Jan Paulsson, cited several times by
the Respondent, the appointment of judges by the State to resolve a
particular case would not constitute a denial of justice; nor would the

83

[443]

[444]

[445]

[446]

[447]

[448]

[449]

[450]

legislative body imposing astronomical fees for foreigners to be able to
access justice. In neither of those cases would there be action by the
judiciary and, nevertheless, following the same author cited by the
Respondent, there would be a denial of justice.*’”

The State cannot escape its responsibility for denial of justice simply
by arguing that the state agency that denied access to justice is not
part of the judicial system. As Jan Paulsson notes, with regard to the
international wrong of denial of justice:

“... once one accepts [...] that states have an obligation to maintain a
decent and available system of justice, it simply cannot be accepted that
the state should be freed from its obligation by the simple expedient of
preventing or perverting the judicial process by legislative or executive
fiat.”

The Tribunal concludes that there is not only a denial of justice in relation to
the actions of the judiciary, but also, among other hypotheses, when a State
prevents an investor’s access to the courts of that State; in that case there will
be denial of justice even if the act comes from the executive or legislative
body.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the judgment of the Tribunal, the
Claimant's argument on this issue is confusing as, on one hand, it seems to
assert that it was denied justice because the regulator violated EEGSA’s
right to administrative due process and, on the other hand, it maintains that
the denial of justice is defined as “the unfair treatment given by a State
specifically through its judicial administration system."*19

As to the particular claim of the Claimant regarding the actions of
the CNEE, the Tribunal does not find that these actions constitute
a denial of justice.

On the one hand, the Tribunal reiterates that nothing in the Claimant’s
arguments supports its claims that the violation of administrative due
process and the action of the CNEE that it describes as arbitrary
constitute per se a denial of justice. Likewise nor does the Claimant
explain why the acts of the CNEE, analyzed together with the MEM’s
decision to reject the appeals in limine, or with the decisions of the
Constitutional Court or both, constitute denial of justice. What it indicates in
its argument and in its conclusion is that there was a violation of
administrative due process and that this constitutes denial of justice.

Even if the action of the CNEE in the tariffs setting process - specifically
the rejection of the Bates White study and the approval of the Sigla
tariffs, which are the main facts alleged by the Claimant - were taken as
violating due process, that action by itself would not imply denial of
justice.

The Tribunal considers that what the Claimant has raised, and in this the
Respondent is right, this is simply a disagreement with the procedure
followed by the CNEE, which itself cannot be described as a denial of
justice.

Nothing alleged by the Claimant nor the evidence it provided permit [the
Tribunal] to conclude that the actions of the CNEE in approving the tariffs
and, specifically, in the approval of the Sigla study and the rejection of that

84

[451]

[452]

[453]

[454]

[455]

[456]

of Bates White, had prevented EEGSA exercising its rights, through the
administrative route or before the courts of the Republic of Guatemala, to
attempt to have that decision revoked or reviewed.

Neither is there evidence, or even an allegation, that the claimed violation
of administrative due process by the CNEE was decisive in subsequent
decisions of the MEM - the rejection in /imine - and of the Constitutional
Court - in the judgments that decided the amparos - that the
Respondent considered as denying justice.

Those being the facts, the Tribunal considers that the actions of the CNEE,
rejecting the Bates White study and approving that of Sigla, do not
constitute a denial of justice. It considers, equally, that it has not been
proven that such action has had a determinative effect, or even an
interference set out and proven, in the subsequent actions of the MEM and
of the Constitutional Court, described by Iberdrola as denials of justice.

4.2 THE REJECTION IN LIMINE AND ACCESS TO JUSTICE

As shown in the record, EEGSA brought before the MEM an appeal to
revoke Resolution CNEE 144-2008 and an appeal to revoke Resolutions
CNEE 145-2008 and 146-2008. These appeals were entirely rejected
outright by the MEM, without a consideration of their merits.“”° The
outright rejection was because, according to the MEM, the appeal was
not against the said Resolutions as they were general in nature (and
not specific). Furthermore, the rejection was due, in the case of
Resolution 144-2008, to EEGSA supposedly not having precisely
identified the date of notification of the challenged Resolution, as
required by the Contentious Administrative Law.*7

Later, when EEGSA filed the amparo appeals against the Resolutions
mentioned in the previous paragraph, the MEM objected, arguing that the
amparo was not applicable against such administrative actions, as they
were not final, as the appeals against them in the administrative route
had not been exhausted.

In light of Guatemalan domestic law, the course of action of the
MEM, and particularly its arguments opposing the amparo appeals
by EEGSA against the said Resolutions, may seem incongruent.
However, what this Tribunal must analyze in order to resolve the matter
submitted for its consideration by the Claimant, is not the procedural
behaviour of the MEM; whether its arguments in the administrative process
were contrary to those it invoked when responding to the amparo appeals
initiated by EEGSA; or whether for the rejection in limine it was or was not
correct under Guatemalan law to qualify the administrative act as one that
was general in nature. The question the Tribunal must resolve is whether
the Republic of Guatemala, through the actions of its [public] bodies,
prevented EEGSA from having access to justice or limited that access in
such a way that it was prevented from discussing the merits of the dispute
before the judges.

The Tribunal is not persuaded that MEM’s action in rejecting in limine the
appeals raised by EEGSA against Resolutions CNEE 144-2008, CNEE 145-
2008 and 146-2008, denied EEGSA the possibility of presenting its case,
either concerning the alleged violation of its procedural rights or concerning
the merits of the matter.

85

[457] According to the Claimant’s arguments, the decision of the MEM to
entirely reject the appeals prevented EEGSA from taking the dispute on
merits relating to the said resolutions to the Guatemalan courts,
because:

a. Given the rejection, it could only bring an amparo appeal against the
resolutions that were object of the request for revocation and not against
the MEM’s decision as, under the case-law of the Constitutional Court,
administrative bodies like the MEM have the power to reject appeals flatly.

b. Upon being prevented from challenging the MEM’s decision on its merits, as
the appeal had been rejected in limine, and not being able to submit an
against the MEM’s decision, it was not possible to exhaust

   

Cc. In Guatemalan law, amparo is an extraordinary means of defence, which
does not replace the contentious-administrative jurisdiction, so that the
rejection in limine decreed by the MEM involved a real obstruction to its
right of access to justice.

[458] Regarding the first claim, the evidence adduced by the Parties, particularly
the judgments of the Constitutional Court cited to support the argument
referred to in subparagraph (a) above, confirm that that Court decided
that administrative bodies, such as the MEM, could flatly reject appeals
filed with them, when such appeals did not comply with the requirements
established in the law.

[459] The fact that the Constitutional Court has ruled that the administration
has the authority to flatly reject an appeal when it does not fill the
requirements of the law, does not mean, as the Claimant claims, that an
amparo appeal is not applicable to this kind of decision. That conclusion
does not come from the evidence adduced by the Claimant in this
proceeding, from the judgments cited, nor from the legal texts provided.

[460] In effect, the decisions cited by Iberdrola’s expert, Mr. Jorge Rolando
Barrios, on this subject reveal that:

“The power granted to the body of higher degree is implicit for it to qualify
aspects related to the viability of the appeal and to judge it as
inadmissible, when it becomes aware that the filing omitted certain
essential requirements, such as the subject of the amparo appeal under
discussion, according to which the resolution challenged in that way lacks
necessary characteristics for it to be considered a resolution strictly
speaking.” The aforementioned Constitutional Court concluded in that
specific case... that, at the time the appeal and its respective background is
raised to the Minister of Energy and Mines, this civil servant must qualify the
legal nature of the act which is being challenged via this route, in order to
verify the admissibility of the aforementioned administrative appeal
(Judgment of May 10, 2005. File # 2265-2004). “>

“It should be noted that a rejection based on failure to observe the
prerequisites of admissibility of an appeal - legitimization and time limits in
the filing, to name two of them - is a decision that can be taken without
having to exhaust the whole procedure referred to in Articles 7, 9, 12, 13
and 15 of the law ibid (referring to the Contentious Administrative Law),
and that agreement can be validly reached, after having performed a

86

[461]

[462]

[463]

[464]

[465]

[466]

previous task of qualification of the body before which the appeal is
promoted, upon compliance with such requirements, and having established
the breach thereof, through the basic procedural economy that informs the
administrative process (Judgment of the Constitutional Court dated March
15, 2006).’“?*

Evidently, the text of those judgments does not indicate that they
authorize a capricious or arbitrary rejection of a request for revocation.
Neither do those judgments impede access to an amparo appeal, as the
Claimant suggests. The referred judgments to simply indicate that the
administrative body may flatly reject the appeal when it fails to meet
“certain essential requirements” or for the “failure to observe
requirements of admissibility for an appeal.” In other words, if the appeal
does not comply with essential requirements or with the prerequisites of
admissibility, it can be flatly rejected.

  
  

In the same line of thought, the judgment of the Constitutional Court
of November 18, 2009, resolving one of the amparo appeals put
forward by EEGSA said:

“The amparo is established with the aim of protecting people against the
threat of their rights being violated or to restore the same when the
violation has occurred and shall be admitted whenever laws, resolutions,
rules or acts of authority carry an implicit threat, restriction or violation to
the rights that the constitution and the laws guarantee. There is no
violation of due process and of the right to defence guaranteed in Article
12 of the Political Constitution of the Republic, when the acts of the
authority are within its competence and are exercised in accordance to
the legal framework of the case. “7°

 

The documents found in the record show numerous cases in which EEGSA
resorted, sometimes successfully and sometimes not, to amparo
proceedings to assert its rights.**° They also confirm that EEGSA had
already successfully filed at least one amparo appeal against the rejection
in limine of an appeal for revocation.*7”

Finally, Article 265 of the Constitution of the Republic of Guatemala states
that any matter may be the subject of amparo: “Admissibility of amparo.
The amparo is established with the aim of protecting people against the
threat of their rights being violated or to restore the same when the
violation has occurred. There is no area that is not susceptible to an
amparo appeal, and it shall be admitted whenever acts, resolutions,
provisions or laws of authority imply a threat, restriction or violation of the
rights that the Constitution and laws guarantee.”*° Furthermore, the
decisions of the Constitutional Court invoked by the Claimant do not seem
to have interpreted this law in a sense that restricts access to the
amparo.*79

It is evident, therefore, that the jurisprudence of the Constitutional Court did
not prevent EEGSA bringing the amparo appeal against the rejection in limine
by the MEM. What the evidence provided shows is that the amparo was
admissible and that EEGSA chose not to file it against the rejection in
limine of the requests for revocation raised by it against Resolutions
CNEE 144-2008, CNEE 145-2008 and 146-2008.

Nor was it established in this proceeding that the rejection in limine by

87

[467]

the MEM has deprived EEGSA of the opportunity to discuss the merits of
the case before the Guatemalan courts.

Regarding the amparo against Resolutions CNEE 144-2008, CNEE 145-
2008 and CNEE-146-2008, EEGSA presented arguments on the merits
based on Guatemalan law, concerning aspects that go far beyond the
violation of guarantees or fundamental rights which, according to the
Claimant, are the only aspects that can be discussed under the amparo
route in Guatemala.*?° EEGSA’s requests to the Guatemalan courts and
the matters resolved by these courts concern judicial review; the
violation of higher laws; the interpretation and enforceability of rules
agreed between the Parties, such as the procedural rules of the Expert
Commission; the fundamental interpretation of Guatemalan laws; the
indemnifying against damages and joint liability of the Republic of
Guatemala and, finally, aspects of the merits of the dispute that today it
claims not to have been able to discuss. ***

[468] Additionally, the Claimant itself states that “with its Judgments of

November 18, 2009, and February 24, 2010, the Constitutional Court
overturned the amparo granted by both Courts, confirmed the procedure
followed to determine EEGSA’s VAD without its effective participation and
consolidated, giving it a permanent character, a mutation of the tariff-
setting model, which changed to become based on the CNEE‘’s
discretion."*?? For the Tribunal, it is confusing that the Claimant
alleges that EEGSA had no opportunity to submit the merits of the
tariff question to review and, at the same time, claims that the
Constitutional Court altered the Guatemalan tariff-setting model,
since the Court could hardly have done this without ruling on the
merits of the matter.

[469] The Constitutional Court, in deciding the amparo appeals not only

addressed fundamental issues of Guatemalan law, but also hinted
that it could have ruled on the reasonableness of the tariffs fixed by
noting that:

“It is considered that tariff-setting, when the report of the Expert
Commission has not been accepted as valid to guide this policy, cannot
be, within its discretion, ruinous or irrationally arbitrary, given the
references or indicators of efficient operators, such as that in transitory
article 2 of the respective Law, which alluded to “values used in other
countries that apply similar methodology.” However, the rationality of
the tariff schedules approved was not denounced as harmful nor as
object of proof under this amparo appeal, but it was only focused on
the concept of due legal process, which has already been discussed
above (paragraph a) of section VI of the preamble.”“*?

 

[470] This position of the Court seems to support the position of Mr. Saenz

Juarez, filed by the Republic of Guatemala, who said that:

The amparo does not offer fewer guarantees than an ordinary trial. Quite
the contrary. It is known within a process that follows the structure of
ordinary processes, including the taking of evidence. For subject matter
examined in amparo, it is a preferred process, which means that the
tribunals take a different role, of protectors of fundamental rights, with

838

[471]

[472]

[473]

[474]

[475]

the associated rigor and thoroughness.**

In his report, Mr. Barrios says the amparo process is specific, limited
and summary, as opposed to a plenary process like administrative
litigation. This differentiation is imprecise and also seems to imply that
the action of amparo is not an adequate defence route against acts of the
administration, or not as adequate as the administrative appeal. The
amparo process examines, thoroughly and in depth, if the decision or
administrative act in question is or is not properly based on law and on
special common law, and obviously, if it contains any violation of the laws
and constitutional guarantees. The examination that takes place in this way
must be complete and comprehensive, in order to protect fundamental
rights. For this, a detailed examination of the ruling and relevance of the
administrative or judicial act challenged may be necessary.*?>

EEGSA did not raise any complaints before the amparo judges or before
the Constitutional Court regarding the alleged closure of the
administrative route and violation of access to the contentious jurisdiction
as a consequence of the MEM’s decision (beyond responding to the
objections raised by the CNEE concerning the alleged lack of definition).
On the contrary, it seems EEGSA - and also the Claimant - were fully
satisfied with the amparo decisions of the judges of first instance. Such
decisions, in the words of Iberdrola, properly interpreted Guatemalan
regulations concerning the procedure for tariff-setting and the scope of
LGE and RLGE regulations; moreover, they accepted the interpretation
that the Claimant had as correct, in the pleadings that it filed in this
arbitration. °°

In its pleadings filed before this Tribunal, the Claimant considered that
the denial of justice was implemented through the decisions of the
Constitutional Court that decided the amparo appeals.*?”? The Claimant
further based this claim primarily on the fact that, in its opinion, the
Constitutional Court did not review the merits of the matter discussed, which
was the scope of RLGE Article 98, although this discussion of merits had been
raised by EEGSA.*2°

Finally, beyond the theoretical discussion of doctrinal and jurisprudential
differences that exist in Guatemala between the action of amparo and
contentious-administrative action, the Claimant did not specify in this
proceeding what the issues were that it could not open up before the
Guatemalan judges as a result of MEM’s action. On the contrary, as has
been noted, it complains that the Constitutional Court failed to review a
fundamental topic - that regarding the so often mentioned RLGE Article
98 - but does not question the power of the Constitutional Court to do so.

he facts mentioned above, show that EEGSA presented, successfully, an
amparo appeal against another rejection in limine; filed and argued
substantive issues through the amparo process; had the opportunity to
present its case before the Guatemala court system and fully shared its
decisions, when they favoured it, without any complaint concerning its
supposed inability to have recourse to the contentious-administrative
jurisdiction. They also show that EEGSA filed the case with its arguments
on merits, and even asked for the CNEE to be declared liable, jointly and
severally with the Guatemalan State, for the damages they had allegedly
caused it.*°°

These facts equally show that, when they occurred, there was no

89

regulation in Guatemala that would prevent EEGSA filing an action of
amparo against the decision of the MEM to reject the appeals in limine;
that, rather, it was a matter of a procedural strategy of EEGSA and not of a
constraint existing in Guatemalan law.

[476] Therefore, the Tribunal finds that MEM’s decision to reject in limine the

[477]

[478]

[479]

[480]

[481]

[482]

appeals filed by EEGSA did not prevent it airing its disagreements with the
CNEE before the Guatemalan courts. Whether EEGSA could or could not
have filed other arguments before the contentious-administrative judge
and which were the fundamental aspects for which the amparo judges
did not have competence and which only the contentious-administrative
judge could resolve, are matters that the Claimant did not raise and
even less prove during this process.

4.3 DECISIONS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL COURT AND DENIAL OF JUSTICE

The Claimant submits that the judgments of the Constitutional Court of
the Republic of Guatemala of November 18, 2009 and February 24,
2010, which reversed the amparo decisions favourable to EEGSA,
involve a denial of justice that was completed by the second
[judgment].**° It notes, equally, that “what is said about the first
[judgment] applies to the second, because the latter merely repeats
snippets of the same argument of the former.”*“*

The Claimant’s argument on this issue is confused because it does not
appear that the reasoning of the first judgment is applicable to the
second. In effect, according to Iberdrola, the judgments of the
Constitutional Court are a violation of due process as:

They did not resolve the dispute concerning the interpretation and
application of RLGE Article 98; and

Its reasoning is non-existent or barely apparent.

However, the claim that the Constitutional Court ignored the core issue
raised by EEGSA, that is, the rejection of the Bates White study and the
approval of that of Sigla based on RLGE Article 98,“42 seems not to have
been discussed in the case resolved by the judgment of February 24,
2010.

The central petitum of EEGSA, in the amparo that gave rise to the
judgment of February 24, 2010 was that “... resolution GJ-Ruling-three
thousand one hundred twenty-one (GJ-Providencia-3121) be definitively
suspended as regards the Empresa Eléctrica de Guatemala, Sociedad
Anoénima... and that the contested authority be ordered to issue a new
resolution in substitution of the suspended one, guaranteeing the right of
defence and the principles of due process and legality, and that the
Expert Commission formed should be permitted to approve the tariff
study presented by the consultant hired by the amparo applicant.’“*?
EEGSA’s demand in this amparo does not deal with the issue of Article 98.

Consequently, the Claimant's arguments on RLGE Article 98 do not
seem to be applicable to the judgment of February 24, 2010, as in the
latter the Constitutional Court was not able to analyze a question that
was not raised: that concerning RLGE Article 98.

There are two arguments raised by the Claimant in connection with these

90

[483]

[484]

[485]

judgments in order to argue that there was denial of justice: lack of
reasoning and appearance of reasoning.

(A) Lack OF SUBSTANTIATION

The Claimant alleges regarding CNEE’s approval of the Sigla study, based
on RLGE Article 98, that the Constitutional Court “... devotes not a single
word to this central issue.’““* The Claimant insists that in the judgment
there is no reasoning at all, leading to a decision lacking grounds or a
decision infra petita which implies “... a denial of justice ... as it is
equivalent to not answering at all, to completely denying access to
Jjustice."“*>

The Tribunal carefully reviewed the judgments challenged by the
Claimant and was not persuaded that the Court had declined to review
the issues that were submitted for its consideration and even less that
the judgment in question “devotes not a single word” to EEGSA‘s claim
concerning the approval of the Sigla study based on RLGE Article 98.

As discussed earlier in this Award, in the judgment of February 24, 2010,
the Court could not address this issue because it was not the matter of the
dispute. On November 18, 2009, the Court mentioned, among others, the
following matters:

“\.. the process that must govern the determination of the base tariffs, their
maximum values and periodic adjustment formulas and tariff application
conditions for all the consumers of the end distribution service is the
following: a) each distributor must calculate the components of value-
added for distribution -VAD- by a study commissioned from an
engineering firm prequalified by the [CNEE]. This procedure shall be
conducted every five years, and twelve months in advance of the entry into
force of the tariffs, the date on which the [CNEE] must give distributors the
terms of reference of the studies that will form the basis for the contracting
of specialized consulting firms; b) the consultant finally hired must carry out
that study and, afterwards, must submit their project to the distributor so
that the latter, four months before the date of entry into force of the new
tariffs, may submit to the [CNEE] the completed tariff study; c) the [CNEE]
receives the study and its exhibits and has a period of two months to review
it and make any comments it deems appropriate; d) in the case that the
Distributor fails to send the studies conducted by the Consultant prequalified
by the [CNEE] or, if the comments made by that entity are not corrected, it
shall remain able to issue and publish the corresponding tariff structure,
based _on_ the _tariff_study it may conduct independently; e) once the
comments are received, the consulting firm has a period of fifteen days to
make the corrections that were formulated in the original studies and return
the corrected study to the [CNEE]; f) if discrepancies are perceived with the
comments that the [CNEE] has made, both the latter and the Distributor
shall agree the formation of an Expert Commission, composed of three
members, one for each party and a third by common agreement, with the
aim that this Commission may rule on the discrepancies that arose; g) the
Expert Commission shall rule on the viability or non-viability of the
comments made by the [CNEE] within sixty days of its formation.’““°

“As can be seen from the analysis of the legislation studied, the General
Electricity Law [LGE] and its respective Regulation [RGLE] establish and
define the procedure that both the electricity distributors in the country and
the [CNEE] must exhaust prior to setting the amount of the tariff that must

91

govern during each five years the provision of the electricity service. This
Court, contrasting the rules set forth in those regulatory bodies and the
way in which the administrative record underlying this _amparo was
substantiated, determines that the procedure followed by the applicant
for amparo and the impugned authority was conducted in accordance to
the said Law [GLE] and Regulations [RGLE], as the Empresa Electrica de
Guatemala, in_accordance with the regulations in [GLE] Article 74 and
[RGLE] Article 98, contracted an engineering firm prequalified by [CNEE]
to conduct the electricity tariff study that must govern from the year two
thousand eight to two thousand thirteen, with the company Bates White
winning the contract; the project prepared by the latter was delivered
within the time period prescribed by law to the now contested authority
for this to proceed to formulate the comments it deemed appropriate.
Effectively, following the steps set out in [RGLE] Article 98, the
Commission formulated the comments it deemed appropriate, returning
the project to the Distributor, now the applicant for amparo, to proceed
to execute the corrections put to it. This entity formulated objections and
made the justifications it deemed applicable and in its note of fifth May,
two thousand eight stated: “... Such corrections have been
incorporated into a new version of the original study, which contains
(i) all the corrections resulting from the comments made by the
Commission ... and (ii) the justifications and foundations... for all
those comments... that the Consultant... did not deem applicable....”
This statement indicates that the now applicant for amparo, as it declares in
its initial amparo pleading, modified some points of the comments that were
made to it and in others justified those which, according to the consultant
hired, should remain unchanged. It was in this circumstance that the
Comisién Nacional de Energia Eléctrica decided to form an Expert
Commission as stipulated in Article 98 ibid and made clear its knowledge
regarding the failure of the applicant to comply with all of the comments
objected to by the former Commission. “*”

 

“This Court warns that the proceedings conducted by both parties until
the contested authority decided to dissolve the Expert Commission and,
based on a study conducted independently, announced the act in
question, adhered strictly the content of Article 98 of the Regulation of
the General Electricity Law. The attitude then adopted by the Comisién
Nacional de Energia Eléctrica, which was to dictate the act subject of the
claim herein, is the heart of the challenge to the process established both
by the General Electricity Law and its Regulations; while the powers of the
Commission to set the tariffs indicated (due to the failure of the distributor
to make the corrections) is the principal argument for justifying its
action, “8

“Noted by the Claimant for amparo the violation of legal due process, based
on the decision not to accept as done the corrections indicated by the
regulatory authority (which the Expert Commission did not take on either in its
opinion), it should be established that, in this case, it is not determined that in
the General Electricity Law and in the Regulation which develops it, any
obligation is imposed on the Comisién Nacional de Energia Eléctrica to accept
that opinion as binding, and therefore, given the nature of the opinion of the
experts, even when this is in agreement, it did not oblige it to accept its terms
for approving the tariffs of the case."““°

“Therefore, having terminated the procedure laid down in Articles 74
and 75 of the law, which concluded with the opinion of the Expert
Commission, which was not binding for the authority, it assumed its

92

[486]

[487]

[488]

responsibility, which it has no power to delegate, approving, based on
its own studies which it deemed pertinent, the tariffs questioned under
the amparo.”4%°

“This Commission, responsible for approving the tariffs mentioned in the case
file, had to follow the process regulated by law, as already referred to, that is,
according to the ways described in the previous consideranda segment (-V-).
However, as discrepancies continue between the operator of electricity
distribution with the terms of reference set by the authority of the
electricity subsector, despite having already delivered the report of an
expert co ission, the process must continue to meet the peremptory
time limits provided for in article 75 of the Law and 98 third paragraph
of the Regulation, in order to comply with its responsibility in this
respect.“

 

 

 

The judges who issued a dissenting opinion, which seems to be
accepted by the Claimant as a correct expression of the
interpretation of the Guatemalan regulations, expressly referred to
the discussion on Article 98 and the hypothesis of application of that
Article, which is, precisely, the issue which, according to the
Claimant, the Constitutional Court failed to deal with.

Judge Gladys Chacon Corado in her dissenting opinion expressed, among
other things, that:

“The Comisiédn Nacional de Energia Eléctrica did not adhere to the
pronouncement of this Expert Commission, which led to the unilateral
approval of a tariff study prepared by an independent consultant, not
having concurred with some of the requisites referred to in Article 98 of
the Regulation of the General Electricity Law, not having been met,
those being the only situations which would make viable an action in
that direction by the contested authority...

As was correctly stated in the judgment, the procedure carried out by
both sides was correct “until the contested authority decided to dissolve
the Expert Commission”; contrario sensu, the subsequent actions
contained anomalies, because the attitude which the contested authority
subsequently adopted, by using an independent tariff study, through
issuance of the contested act for it to serve as the basis for issuing the
tariff schedules, constitutes an act that the Comisién Nacional de Energia
Eléctrica could not perform under the related regulatory Article 98, as this
clearly states that the Commission can only use this power in two cases:
a) when the distributor does not submit the tariff studies; or b) when
the distributor does not submit the corrections to these. In this case,
the Resolution itself that constitutes the damaging act (CNEE-144-2008)
recognizes that the distributor (Claimant for amparo) did indeed comply
with these prerequisites, and so the contested authority was prevented
from proceeding in the way it did.’“°

Judge Mario Pérez Guerra stated in his dissenting opinion that:

“It is at this point that the undersigned deems the violation of procedure
to have been committed, as in the study of the content of said Article 98
it_is possible to see that this provision contemplates three paths -
mutually exclusive - for the formation of the tariff studies that will have to
be approved in the conclusion: 1) the first, which occurs when, without
express objections, the Commission accepts the studies that the

93

[489]

[490]

Distributor has submitted, involving a Consultant, after it has received
the so-called Terms of Reference from that Commission; 2) the second,
which arises after the qualification that the Commission makes when
discrepancies have arisen due to the contrary positions adopted by the
Commission and the Distributor after the formulation by the latter of the
original study and the subsequent which contains the correction of the
comments which the Commission has subsequently formulated. This
concludes with the report given by the Expert Commission and the
corrections, based on the same, made by the Distributor’s Consultant; 3)
the third - which the Commission used in this concrete case - arises
either when, after the Commission has given the Terms of Reference to
the Distributor, the latter fails to send the required tariff study, or when,
after this has been formulated and the Comisién Nacional de Energia
Eléctrica has expressed comments, the Distributor fails to send the
corresponding corrections to the study originally presented.

Note that the Comisién Nacional de Energia Eléctrica, by uttering the
contested Resolution in the sense in which it did, mistook the paths
described; this because if in this case, due to the circumstances arising
in the proceedings, it put into effect that specified in subsection 2) of
the preceding paragraph, that is, that it qualified its own position and
that taken by the Empresa Eléctrica de Guatemala Sociedad Anénima
as in disagreement and formed the Expert Commission provided for in
the Law and the Regulation, after it received the report provided by
the Commission it should not have rolled back the process to a stage
already ended, in which it could use the third of the paths described;
especially because, in the opinion of the undersigned, the Distributor
did not update the assumption that grants power to the Electricity
Commission to formulate the tariff study by itself, with the
involvement of an independent Consultant, because the position
assumed by the Distributor at that time cannot be described as the
omission provided for in the last paragraph of said Article 98 which, in
the opinion of the undersigned, occurs when, under that statutory
regulation, the Distributor does not submit any study or correction
when summoned to present them. And it seems contradictory that the
circumstance that constituted grounds for the formation of the Expert
Commission, the emergence of discrepancies on the structuring of the
original tariff study and the comments formulated - could not constitute
grounds, in turn, to qualify the position of the Distributor in the specific
case, as negligent.’“?

For the Tribunal it is clear that, contrary to what the Claimant claims,
the Constitutional Court of Guatemala in its judgment of November 18,
2009 did address the issue of Article 98 and referred to the assumptions
on which the CNEE could approve the tariffs based on its own study and
not founded in that of the distributor. The dissenting votes in no way
indicate that the Court did not rule on Article 98 and how this article
should be understood. On the contrary, the discrepancy of the two
judges refers precisely to the scope, mistaken in its meaning, that the
Constitutional Court gave this Article 98. For the Tribunal, it is not
possible to accept that the Claimant alleges, on one hand, that the
Constitutional Court completely ignored the issue, and on the other,
agree with the dissenting votes that refer precisely to this issue.

It is possible that the judgment could have been more precise in its
concepts or not have confused, as it seems it does, the sequence in

94

[491]

[492]

[493]

[494]

[495]

which certain facts in the process have to occur. What cannot be argued,
as the Claimant does, is that the Court “does not devote a single word” to
EEGSA's claim on the approval of the Sigla study based on RLGE Article 98.
For the Tribunal, the majority decision expressly referred to the thema
decidendum which the Plaintiff alleges was completely ignored by the
Court.

What is seen from the Claimant’s arguments and from the expert
reports it presented is a dissatisfaction with the decision of the
Constitutional Court and with the way the latter analyzed the case. For
the Tribunal, mere discrepancy with the reasoning of the court decision, with
the quality of the judgment, with the persuasiveness of its content or the
surprise that the result may cause the claimant, do not constitute a denial of
justice.

The judgment may have interpreted said Article 98 wrongly or contain
reasoning that does not conform to the domestic rules of interpretation
of Guatemalan law. However, accepting what is noted, among others, in
the case Mondev,*™ the Tribunal considers that for there to be a denial of
justice, it is not enough that the national judges' decision was a surprise
to the claimant or that it does not share the decision. For the purposes of
determining whether there was a denial of justice, the Tribunal must
determine whether the decision of the national judges raises justifiable
concerns in the light of international law about the appropriateness of
the decision, taking into account that international tribunals are not
courts of appeal and that the Treaty seeks to provide a real measure of
protection. In other words, it must establish whether the decision, in
light of the facts, was clearly inappropriate or ignominious.

The Tribunal concludes, following the criteria outlined in Mondev, similar
to that used in GEA Aktiengesellschaft v Ukraine,*°> that the Claimant did
not show that the Guatemalan courts took their decision without taking
into account (or with devoting a single word, as the Claimant says)
EEGSA’s arguments. On the contrary, what the evidence shows is that
the Constitutional Court analyzed the totality of EEGSA’s claim and that
they simply rejected it. The Tribunal does not find that there are justified
doubts in the decision about the adequacy of the decision in light of the
concept of denial of justice in international law.

(B) APPEARANCE OF SUBSTANTIATION

Iberdrola retakes the recitals of the Court on the binding character or
otherwise of the pronouncements of the Expert Commission to argue that
they are so poor they do not reach the “category of legal argument."*°°

Iberdrola submits that the Court hides particularly behind a supposed
literal interpretation of the provisions of the LGE and the RLGE;*°” that the
Court only uses the literal criterion in appearance*®® and that the lack of
substantiation is compounded because the Court grants “... to that self-
styled literal approach central space in the substantiation of the
Judgment.’“°° Thus, the Claimant concludes that “as regards the literal
interpretation, the decision of the Constitutional Court is unreasonable
and, therefore, is not law.”*©° Moreover, according to Iberdrola, the Court
should have made use of additional interpretation criteria, such as the
systematic, the genetic or the teleological.“

95

[496]

[497]

[498]

The Claimant adds that “the other considerations contained in the Judgment
are nothing more than pseudo-arguments, as they put the conclusion as a
premise, presuppose what they are trying to prove, in short, they make the
question into an assumption.”*®? Iberdrola notes that the Court made
considerations: (i) on the nature of expert decisions and (ii) concerning the
CNEE‘s power to approve tariff schedules, which in accordance with the
LGE and the RLGE, in no way, directly or indirectly, corresponds to an
expert commission.

The question that prompted the action of amparo filed by EEGSA, which
gave rise to the judgment of which the Claimant complains, was related
to the dissolution of the Expert Commission. The Claimant notes as
matters concerning the power to dissolve the Expert Commission before it
completed what EEGSA understood to be its mandate, those relative to the
binding nature or otherwise of the Expert Commission decisions and to the
application of its rules of operation, which the Claimant is sure were agreed
by EEGSA and the CNEE.

In its judgment of February 24, 2010, the Constitutional Court ruled on each
of the above issues, noting, inter alia, that:

“,.. in keeping with the decisions of this Court in the accrued
records one thousand eight hundred thirty-six and one thousand
eight hundred forty-six, both of two thousand nine (1836-2009
and 1846 - 2009), it should be noted that in_the General
Electricity Law (articles 75 and 77), as well as in its respective
Regulation (articles 98 third paragraph and 98 bis), the procedure
of forming the

Expert Commission is determined, the time periods for its membership
and for it to rule on the points subject to its knowledge, and that these
are the discrepancies that have arisen in relation to the tariff study based
on the terms of reference set. In the case in question, the above Expert
Commission was formed in accordance with the Law on the matter and
its regulation, and within the set time period issued its pronouncement
regarding the discrepancies found by the Comisién Nacional de Energia
Eléctrica between tariff study submitted by the present Claimant for
amparo and the terms of reference previously dictated by the present
contested authority. To this effect, it should be noted that, neither in
the Law governing the matter, nor in its respective Regulation - the
only legislation applicable _to the case within the Guatemalan
legislation in force - is there any rule that gives the Expert
Commission any other function beyond that of its pronouncing on the
discrepancies already _mentioned._As such, with the delivery of its
respective pronouncement, the Expert Commission fulfilled the function
that the Law on the matter and its respective Regulation entrusted it
with. So having exhausted its legal function, and being a permanent
type Commission, but rather temporary in character, the reporting
function of which, by law, should serve for the tariff definition by the
authority competent to do so, then not having any other part in the
procedure, by law, its dissolution could not cause any harm to the
Claimant for amparo, since the conduct of the contested authority
adhered to the procedure established in the Law and Regulation
governing the matter.“

 

 

 

 

“... this Court deems it appropriate, as it did in ruling on the issue at hand,
in the accrued records one thousand eight hundred thirty-six and one
thousand eight hundred forty-six, both of two thousand nine, (1836-2009

 

96

[499]

y 1846-2009) already mentioned, to stress that concerning the nature of
the expert decision in the case, in that “expertise, as wisdom, practice,
experience or skill in a science or art, has been traditionally an aid to
which the authority resorts when it must make a decision concerning a
particular matter. It is an aid to illustrate a better decision, but, according
to ordinary legislation and legal practice in Guatemala, it is understood that
scientific and technical knowledge do not in themselves provide judgments,
but elements to guide the decision of who has or in whom the authority
rests. Hence, the latter is not obliged to be tied by the opinion of the
experts....” Moreover, this Court, concerning the scope of opinions of
this nature, has spoken previously in the sense that: “In terms of its
scope, the opinion does not bind the advised body, this in respect of
those that the doctrine categorizes as optional - which is that which the
Administration is not obliged to request - or as mandatory - which is
that which must necessarily be sought because the law expressly
establishes this - but not so the one categorized as binding, in respect of
which the law imposes an obligation to produce and to the conclusions
of which the administrative will has to adapt.” (File one thousand three
hundred fifty-eight - ninety-six - 1358-96, Gaceta Jurisprudencial forty-
four, page sixty-six).

“As such, and based on the considerations made before, to attribute to the
Expert C ission of reference the function of settling the conflict existing
between the applicant_for amparo_and the defendant authority, and to
recognize its competence to render a binding decision, and even more, to
recognize its power to approve the tariff studies, as the Court decided on its
occasion, would be contrary to the known principle of legality, characteristic
of the rule of law and also, against the principle of public function subject to
law, because, as established by the General Electricity Law and its
Regulation - the only applicable rule within Guatemalan legislation in force -
it is the competence of the Comisién Nacional de Energia Eléctrica as the
sole entity responsible, the function consisting in setting the tariffs for
distribution and the approval of the tariff studies, and that it must continue
with the corresponding process, which is a public function, which, according
to what is set out in Article 154 of the Supreme Law in this respect, cannot
be delegated. Furthermore, from the review of the applicable law, it is
seen that Article 75 of the law governing the matter, already mentioned
several times throughout this analysis, the Expert Commission of
reference is attributed the limited and specific task of pronouncing itself
once) concerning the discrepancies in_relation to the comments
formulated by the Comisién Nacional de Energia Eléctrica_on the Tariff
study, in accordance with the terms of reference previously established;
and it cannot even be inferred from this that the Expert Commission
appointed can or should know all the tariff-fixing study, or that it may
issue several successive pronouncements, which would constitute a
procedural step and a power unknown to the applicable public law. “°°

 

 

The Constitutional Court therefore considers that, according to the
Guatemalan legal system, the functions that the law attributes to the
Expert Commission do not go beyond pronouncing itself on the
discrepancies between the distributor and the CNEE and that therefore
its role ends with the pronouncement it makes on those differences.
Consequently, in the opinion of the Court, not having any additional
function assigned, the decision of the CNEE to dissolve the Expert
Commission was in accordance with the legal regime applicable in
Guatemala.

97

[500]

[501]

[502]

[503]

[504]

[505]

[506]

As to the nature of the Expert Commission, the Constitutional Court, citing
previous decisions, equates it to that of an expert and concludes that its
decision, like that of the experts in the Guatemalan legal system, is not
binding. The Court considers finally that to attribute to the Expert
Commission the function of setting tariffs would be contrary to the principle of
legality and against the principle of the public function because, as
established by the LGE and RLGE, it is the competence of the CNEE as the
sole responsible entity, to fix the distribution tariffs and approve the tariff
studies.

The Claimant complains that, apparently, the Court applied only the
literal method of interpretation and refrained from using other methods -
systematic, genetic or teleological. If it had done so, in the opinion of the
Claimant, the Court would have reached a different conclusion. Supported
by the opinion of its legal expert, it likewise complains that the Court
starts from the conclusion to put it as a premise

In the Tribunal’s judgment, just as in the claim for denial of justice
deriving from the lack of substantiation, what the Claimant has is a
disagreement with the judgment of the Constitutional Court and with
the way the latter discussed the case. The Claimant disagrees with the
interpretation criteria of the Court, with the lack of application of some
methods of interpretation and with the misuse of others, with the
reasoning of the judgment and with the way in which the Court addressed
the issue. As already noted, mere discrepancies with the reasoning of the
court decision, with the quality of the judgment, with the persuasiveness of
its content, does not constitute a denial of justice.

What the Plaintiff is asking from this Tribunal is to review the decision of
the Constitutional Court and replace it with a new one, based on different
criteria of interpretation, or to declare that there is denial of justice
because the Court should have applied different interpretive criteria and
reasoning. Obviously this is not the function of this Tribunal.

The Tribunal finds that there is no basis for the Claimant’s argument that
under international law, the interpretation of the Constitutional Court is
aberrant or arbitrary; or is an unacceptable decision according to
international standards of due administration of justice. What happens is
simply that the Claimant disagrees with the reasoning, the method of
interpretation and the decision of that Court.

The Tribunal shares the criterion expressed in the case of Waste
Management, which provides:

“Turning to the actual reasons given by the federal courts, the Tribunal
would observe that it is not a further court of appeal, nor is Chapter 11 of
NAFTA a novel form of amparo in respect of the decisions of the federal
courts of NAFTA parties. Certain decisions appear to have been founded
on rather technical grounds, but the notion that the third party beneficiary
of a line of credit or guaraniee should strictly prove its entitlement is not a
parochial or unusual one..

With the same reasoning, in the above-mentioned case Azinian, the
Tribunal concluded that:

“Therefore, it would be sufficient that the claimants convince this Tribunal
that the actions or grounds of the Naucalpan City Council must be

98

[507]

[508]

vi.

[509]

[510]

[511]

[512]

disapproved, or that the reasons given by the Mexican courts in their
three judgments are not persuasive. These considerations are useless
while the claimants are not in a position to report a violation of an
obligation under Section A of Chapter Eleven attributable to the
Government of Mexico. ’“°”

The Tribunal concludes that what the Claimant has submitted for its
consideration is its discrepancy with the decision of the Court. EEGSA
presented its case; this was resolved but the Court did not say it was right
nor did it agree with the method of interpretation or the reasoning of
EEGSA. Obviously, this discrepancy does not constitute an act of denial of
justice.

After carefully analyzing the arguments and evidence submitted by the
Parties, the Tribunal determines that the Claimant’s allegation that the
Republic of Guatemala in this case committed an act of denial of justice
was not proven.

COSTS
1. THE POSITION OF THE PARTIES

Both Parties request the Tribunal to order the other Party to pay the full costs
and process costs, plus interest from the date of the Award until its
payment.‘

The Claimant submitted a claim for the costs incurred during the
procedure that amounts to the sum of USD $4,221,427.66.°® According to
the Claimant, condemning Guatemala for violation of the protections of the
Treaty should lead to condemning it to bear the costs that Iberdrola
incurred.47° The Claimant also alleges, among other things, that even if
the Tribunal does not grant all its claims, the Respondent must bear the
payment of costs because: (i) the facts established show lack of good
faith in the conduct of the Guatemalan authorities; (ii) the State's attitude
during the course of the procedure was obstructionist and dilatory.*”*

The Respondent submitted a claim for the costs incurred during this
arbitration that amounts to a total of USD $5,312,107. For the
Respondent, the Claimant’s conduct during the procedure deserves that
it be condemned to pay all the costs. It asks the Tribunal to consider the
following circumstances in deciding the distribution of costs: (i) the filing with
this Tribunal of a merely regulatory dispute, already resolved by the local
courts; (ii) the change in the amount claimed by Iberdrola between the date
of filing of the Reply and its Explanatory Note; (iii) the maintenance of the
claim of expropriation despite having made millions from the sale of its
assets; (iv) the refusal to provide full information regarding the valuation
of its assets in the context of the sales transaction.‘”*

2 ANALYSIS OF THE TRIBUNAL
In accordance with Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention:

“In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as the
parties otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the parties in
connection with the proceedings, and shall decide how and by whom those
expenses, the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the
charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre shall be paid. Such

99

[513]

[514]

[515]

[516]

[517]

[518]

vil.

decision shall form part of the award.”*7?
Rule 28 of the Arbitration Rules:

“(1) Without prejudice to the final decision on the payment of the cost of the
proceeding, the Tribunal may, unless otherwise agreed by the parties, decide:

(a) at any stage of the proceeding, the portion which each party shall
pay, pursuant to Administrative and Financial Regulation 14, of the fees
and expenses of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities
of the Centre;

(b) with respect to any part of the proceeding, that the related
costs (as determined by the Secretary General) shall be borne
entirely or in a particular share by one of the parties.”“”4

Under Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 28 of the Arbitration
Rules, the Tribunal has broad powers to determine the costs*”® of the
arbitration and the distribution of such costs between the Parties.

In exercise of this power, the Tribunal finds that the distribution of costs
should be made taking into account the success of the claims of each of
the Parties, together with the circumstances of the case and the conduct
of the Parties in the procedure. Other international arbitral tribunals
have pronounced themselves in this same line.*”

For purposes of determining the costs of the proceeding and their
distribution between the Parties, the Tribunal has considered the following
factors:

The objection to jurisdiction filed by the Respondent against the main
claims of the Claimant was successful;

The Claimant insisted that the proceeding should not be bifurcated,
thus opposing the Tribunal resolving the objection to jurisdiction of
the Respondent at a preliminary stage;

The only substantive claim that the Tribunal could find was dismissed;

The Claimant reformulated the petitum submitted in the Memorial in the
Reply and in its Post-Hearing Brief.

Neither of the Parties objected to the amount of the costs claimed by the
other Party and the Tribunal considers that those costs are reasonable.

The Tribunal could not confirm the Claimant’s allegation that the
Guatemalan authorities did not act in good faith. Furthermore, the
Tribunal considers that Claimant is not right in stating that the attitude of
the State during the course of the proceeding was obstructionist and
dilatory.*””

For these reasons, the Tribunal concludes that the Claimant must assume
all of the costs incurred by the Respondent Party, in the sum of
$5,312,107.

DECISION

The Tribunal, in accordance with Articles 41, 48 and 61 of the ICSID Convention
and Rules 28, 41 and 47 of the Arbitration Rules, unanimously resolves:

1. To accept the objection to the jurisdiction of ICSID and to the Tribunal’s
competence filed by the Republic of Guatemala, with respect to the
Claimant’s requests that it declare the occurrence of an expropriation; the
violation of the standard of fair and equitable treatment; the violation of
the obligation to provide full protection and security; the violation of the
obligation not to interfere in the investment and the obligation of
Guatemala to comply with the obligations undertaken in relation to the
Claimant's investments;

2. To deny the Claimant’s claim that the Republic of Guatemala incurred
in this case in acts of denial of justice;

3. To declare that the Claimant must assume all of its own costs and all of the
costs incurred by the Respondent Party, in the sum of USD $5,312,107.

illegible signature

Dr. Eduardo Zuleta
President

Date: August,10, 2012

illegible signature
Yves Derains Rodrigo Oreamuno

Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: July 31, 2012 Date: August 6, 201

[illegible signature]

+ See City Oriente Limited v. The Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del
Ecuador (Petroecuador), ICSID Case No. ARB/06/21, Decision on Provisional Measures, November
19, 2007, paragraph 87.’ Government Agreement No. 865-97 of December 17, 1997 (Exhibit D-14).
‘Terms of Reference for the sale of EEGSA (Exhibit D-19).
“Informational Memorandum of Sale: (Exhibit D-16).
“Terms of Reference for the sale of EEGSA, page 13 (Exhibit D-19).
© As stated in paragraph 125 of the Counter-Memorial, "the power sector reform provided for the
sale and transfer to the private sector of the shares of the three public companies that had
hitherto provided the service of electricity distribution, which together attended around 62 per
cent of the population of the Republic of Guatemala. This included in addition to EEGSA, the two
companies between which the area of distribution of INDE was divided: Distribuidora de
Electricidad de Oriente, S.A. (Deorsa) and Distribuidora de Electricidad de Occidente, S.A.
(Deocsa)...”
” Memorial, paragraph 70.
*Counter-Memorial, paragraph 48.
* Roadshows (Exhibit D-20).
* Authorization Agreement (Exhibit D-21).

Id.

id.

» Affidavit of Adjudication (Exhibit D-25).

“ Terms of Reference for the sale of EEGSA (Exhibit D-19).

= Bylaws of DECA I (Exhibit D-28).

* Sale and Purchase Agreement (Exhibit D-30).

"Memorial, paragraph 62.

1 LGE (Exhibit D-6).

19 RLGE (Exhibit D-10).

» Government Agreement No. 787-2003 of December 5, 2003 (Exhibit R-44).

» Government Agreement No. 68-2007 of May 19, 2008 (Exhibit R-48). [Erroneous date in original -

should be date in 2007. Trad.]

» Government Agreement No. 145-2008 of May 19, 2008 (Exhibit D-110).

» Agreement No. CNEE 51-2007 of April 11, 2007 (Exhibit R-49).

» CNEE Resolution 55-2007 of June 21, 2007 (Exhibit D-54).

» Terms of Reference (Exhibit D-48).

“ Appeal against Resolution CNEE 13680-2007 of May 8, 2007 (Exhibit D-49).

» Terms of Reference (Exhibit D-48).

»Id.

» DMJ-Ruling-543 of the CNEE of May 15, 2007 (Exhibit D-50).

* Action of amparo of EEGSA against the Terms of Reference of May 29, 2007 (Exhibit D-51).
Judgment of the Sixth Civil Court of First Instance, Amparo C2-2007-4329 of June 4, 2007

(Exhibit D-52).

“Resolution of the Sixth Civil Court of First Instance of June 11, 2007 (Exhibit D-53).

» Full withdrawal by EEGSA of Amparo C2-2007-4329, of August 6, 2007 (Exhibit D-56).

* Addendum to the Terms of Reference, Resolution CNEE-124-2007 of October 9, 2007 (Exhibit D-

» Contract between EEGSA and Bates White LLC for the development of the 2008-2013 Tariff Study
of January 23, 2008 (Exhibit D-72).

* Agreement CNEE-36-116-2007 of July 27, 2007, “Bases of International Public Tender for
contracting a Specialized Consulting Firm to provide support to CNEE, in the Supervision of the
Load Characterization Studies (ECC) and of the Value-Added for Distribution Components
(EVAD)” (Exhibit D-55).

» Agreement of the CNEE 150-2007 of October 26, 2007 (Exhibit R-54).

» Letter of the CNEE to EEGSA No. 15553-2008 of February 8, 2008 (Exhibit D-78); Letter of the
CNEE to EEGSA No. 15597-2008 of February 12, 2008 (Exhibit D-79); Letter of the CNEE to EEGSA
No. 16207-2008 of March 14, 2008 (Exhibit D-94); Letter of the CNEE to EEGSA No. 16208-2008 of
March 14, 2008 (Exhibit D-95); Letter of the CNEE to EEGSA No. 16232-2008 of March 25, 2008
(Exhibit D-100); and Letter of the CNEE to EEGSA No. 16230-2008 of March 25, 2008 (Exhibit D-
101

» See, among others: Memorial, paragraphs 275 and ff. and Counter-Memorial, paragraphs 214 and
ff

Letter of EEGSA (GG-45-2008) to the CNEE enclosing letter from Bates White to the CNEE and to
EEGSA informing the sending of the Stage Reports A to I and I.1, of March 31, 2008

* Resolution CNEE-63-2008 of April 11, 2008 (Exhibit D-105).

” Letter from Bates White to the CNEE and EEGSA of May 5, 2008 (Exhibit D-107).

” Letter from EEGSA to the CNEE No. GG-060-2008 of May 5, 2008 (Exhibit D-106)

“ CNEE Resolution 96-2008 of May 15, 2008 (Exhibit D-109).

© Affidavit Appointing the Expert Commission of June 6, 2008 (Exhibit D-114).

“Id.

© E-mail from Melvin Quijivix to Jean Riubrugent, Carlos Bastos and Leonardo Giacchino, indicating that
the Instrument of Appointment of the Expert Commission is attached, on June 6, 2008 (Exhibit D-115).
* Contract signed by Carlos Bastos and the CNEE on June 26, 2008 (Exhibit R-72).

* Contract signed by Carlos Bastos and EEGSA on June 26, 2008 (Exhibit D-120).

» Report of the Expert Commission of July 25, 2008 (Exhibit D-125).

102

© Notification of delivery of the Report of the Expert Commission of July 25, 2008 (Exhibit D-124)
» Report of the Expert Commission of July 25, 2008 (Exhibit D-125).
> Id

» GJ-Ruling-3121 of the CNEE of July 25, 2008 (Exhibit D-127).
» See, among others, Memorial, paragraph 338.

“ VAD Study for EEGSA of July 28, 2008 (Exhibit D-129).

» Letter from Bates White to the CNEE and to EEGSA delivering the VAD Study of July 28, 2008
(Exhibit D130).

= Communication of the CNEE to the experts Jean Riubrugent and Carlos Bastos of July 28, 2008
(Exhibit R74).

” Appeal by EEGSA against CNEE Resolution GJ-Ruling-3121 of July 28, 2008 (Exhibit D-133). By
brief dated August 8, 2008, EEGSA withdrew its appeal dated July 28, 2008, primarily noting that
it had no interest “in continuing with the Appeal presented and that the Constitutional Court has
upheld the criterion that an appeal is not admissible against rulings...." (Exhibit D-156 and D-166).
© Action of amparo by EEGSA against CNEE of July 28, 2008 (Exhibit D-134).

© Resolution of the First Civil Court of First Instance, Amparo C2-2008-6968 of July 30, 2008 (Exhibit
D-139)

© Resolution of the First Civil Court of First Instance of July 30, 2008 (Exhibit D-140).

© Action of complaint by EEGSA against the decision of the First Court of First Instance to suspend the
action of Amparo 6968-2008 of August 1, 2008 (Exhibit D-149).

“ Resolution of the Constitutional Court on September 1, 2008 (Exhibit D-178)

© Letter from Carlos Bastos to Jean Riubrugent and Leonardo Giacchino of July 29, 2008 (Exhibit D-
137).

© E-mail from Jean Riubrugent to Carlos Bastos and Leonardo Giacchino of July 31, 2008 (Exhibit D-
146).

© Letter from Carlos Bastos to Carlos Colom and Luis Maté of August 1, 2008 (Exhibit D-153).

© Resolution CNEE 144-2008 of July 29, 2008 (Exhibit D-136); Resolutions CNEE 145-2008 and
CNEE 146-2008 of July 30, 2008 (Exhibit D-145).

© Resolution CNEE 144-2008 of July 29, 2008 (Exhibit D-136).

» The description of the first action of amparo filed by EEGSA against GJ-Ruling-3121 is in
paragraph 93 above.

" Action of Amparo by EEGSA against CNEE Resolution GJ-Ruling-3121 and Resolutions CNEE 144,
145 and 146-2008 of August 12, 2008 (Exhibit D-157).

» EEGSA requested, specifically, that Roman numeral III of Resolution GJ-Ruling 3121 dated July 25,
2008, be suspended. That numeral establishes: “In virtue of having fulfilled the purpose of its
appointment, the Expert Commission is definitively dissolved...

” Action of Amparo by EEGSA against CNEE Resolution GJ- faling- 3121 and Resolutions CNEE 144,
145 and 146-2008 of August 12, 2008 (Exhibit D-157).

* EEGSA again lodged an action of amparo against Resolution CNEE-144. See paragraph 110 infra.

~ Partial withdrawal by EEGSA of Amparo 37-2008, of August 24, 2008 (Exhibit D-171).

* Resolution of the Eighth Civil Court of First Instance of September 25, 2008 (Exhibit D184).

” Judgment of the Eighth Civil Court of First Instance, Amparo 37-2008 of August 31, 2009
(Exhibit D-194).

> Appeal of the CNEE against Amparo 37-2008, of 12 October 12, 2009. (Exhibit R-22).

© Resolution of the Constitutional Court on February 24, 2010 (Exhibit D-206).

= Judgment of the Constitutional Court on February 24, 2010 (Exhibit D-206), pages 27 and 28, 30-
32 and 34, respectively.

© Appeal by EEGSA against CNEE Resolution 144-2008 of August 1, 2008 (Exhibit D154).

= Appeal by EEGSA against Resolutions CNEE 145-2008 and 146-2008 of August 1, 2008 (Exhibit D-
155).

© Resolution of MEM totally rejecting the appeal against Resolution CNEE 144-2008 of August 20,
2008 (Exhibit D-167) and Resolutions of MEM totally rejecting the appeals against Resolutions CNEE
145-2008 and 146-2008, of August 20, 2008 (Exhibit D-168).

© Action of Amparo by EEGSA against Resolution CNEE 144-2008 of August 26, 2008 (Exhibit D-
175).

= Judgment of the Second Civil Court of First Instance, Amparo C2-2008-7964 of May 15, 2009
(Exhibit D-191).

© Appeal of the CNEE against Amparo C2-2008-7964 of May 21, 2009. (Exhibit R-18).

= Judgment of the Constitutional Court of November 18, 2009 (Exhibit D-198).

© Judgment of the Constitutional Court of November 18, 2009 (Exhibit D-198), pages 20, 22, 25-26,
29 and 31, respectively. .

= “Stock Purchase Agreement Dated as of October 21, 2010 by and among IBERDROLA ENERGIA, S.
TPS DE ULTRAMAR LTD. and EDP - ENERGIAS DE PORTUGAL, S.A. as Sellers, and EMPRESAS
PUBLICAS DE MEDELLIN, E.S.P. and EPM INVERSIONES S.A. as Purchasers", supplied in its most
pertinent aspects (Exhibit D-226).

» Explanatory Note from Iberdrola to the Arbitration Tribunal of November 12, 2010, paragraph 13.
°Id., paragraph 1.

= According to the Explanatory Note of Iberdrola to the Tribunal of November 12, 2010, DECA II owns
the following shareholdings: 80.88% in EEGSA, 99.7% in Almacenaje y Manejo de Materiales
Eléctricos, S.A. (AMESA); 80.88% in Inmobiliaria y Desarrolladora Empresarial de América, S.A.
(IDEAMSA); and 80.88% in the local holding Inversiones Eléctricas Centroamericanas, S.A.

 

103

(INVELCA). Through INVELCA, DECA II also has the following direct or indirect holdings: 100% in
Comercializadora Eléctrica de Guatemala, S.A. (COMEGSA); 100% in Transportista Eléctrica
Centroamericana, S.A. (TRELEC); 100% in Credieegsa S.A. (CREDIEEGSA); and 85% in Enérgica
S.A. (ENERGICA).
™ Explanatory Note from Iberdrola to the Arbitration Tribunal of November 12, 2010, paragraph 14.
© Id., paragraph 15.
*Id., paragraph 16.
» Memorial, paragraph 1.
=Id., paragraph 271.

Reply, paragraph 164.

For the text of the articles, see Section II(2) above.
 Post-Hearing Brief of the Claimant, paragraph 63.

"Reply, paragraph 163.

® Rejoinder, Section 2(a), page 126.

“ Id., paragraphs 312 and 313.

* Id., paragraphs 313 and ff.

“Id., paragraph 330.

” Reply, paragraph 547.

Memorial, paragraph 226.

Reply, paragraphs 103 and 104.

* Id., paragraph 108.

“Id., paragraph 113.

°Id., paragraph 116.

“Id., paragraph 88.

“ Id., paragraph 91.

» Rejoinder, paragraph 262.

“Id., paragraph 263.

"Id., paragraph 269.

* Counter-Memorial, paragraph 508.

 Post-Hearing Brief of the Respondent, Section 3, page 34.
=Id., paragraph 81.

» Post-Hearing Brief of the Claimant, para 84.

» Memorial, paragraph 69.

»Id., paragraph 33.

“Id., paragraph 40.

= Id., paragraphs 44 - 46. The Claimant also refers to the Preliminary Memorandum (Exhibit D-15),
the Terms of Reference for the sale of EEGSA (Exhibit D-19) and Organizational Scheme and
Proposed Work Plan (Exhibit D-29). See: Memorial, paragraphs 29 and ff. and Reply, paragraphs
494 and ff.

 Post-Hearing Brief of the Claimant, paragraphs 88 - 94.

"Id, paragraph 95.

“Id., paragraph

=Id., paragraphs 98 and 99.

= Id., paragraph 100.
““Id., paragraph 102.
"= Id., paragraphs 104 and 105.
Reply, paragraph 143.
™ Memorial, paragraph 456.
™ Post-Hearing Brief of the Respondent, page 40.
» Rejoinder, paragraph 273.
» Post-Hearing Brief of the Respondent, page 40.
»* Rejoinder, paragraphs 426 - 429.

 Post-Hearing Brief of the Respondent, paragraph 97.
 Counter-Memorial, paragraphs 403 and 408.
“ Memorial, paragraphs 316 and 317.
“Id., paragraph 3

 Post-Hearing Bret of the Claimant, paragraph 150.
“Id., paragraph 151.
Memorial, paragraph 318.
 Post-Hearing Brief of the Respondent, paragraphs 174 and 175.
 Counter-Memorial, paragraph 275.
“Id., paragraph 274.
 Post-Hearing Brief of the Respondent, paragraph 183.
"Rejoinder, paragraphs 247 - 258.
“Id., paragraph 238, subsection
= Post-Hearing Brief of the Respondent, Section 4.3, page 43.
“Id., paragraph 155.
= Memorial, paragraphs 341 and 343.
= Post-Hearing Brief of the Claimant, paragraph 155.
“ See events described in Section II (4) above.
© Memorial, paragraph 423.

 

104

= Counter-Memorial, paragraphs 298 and 299.
"Id., paragraph 298.

“Id., paragraph 299.

“ Rejoinder, paragraph 239.

© Memorial, paragraphs 377 and ff.

Government Agreement No. 68-2007 of May 19, 2008 (Exhibit R-48).
“ Memorial, paragraph 254.

“Id., paragraph 651.

* Id., paragraph 388.

» Id., paragraph 382.
» Id., paragraph

= Post-Hearing Bret of the Claimant, paragraph 208.

"Id., paragraph 163.

~Memorial, paragraph 398.

Reply, paragraph 85.

“Id., paragraph 296.

”Id., paragraph 301.

~ Id., paragraph 463.

Memorial, paragraph 374.

“Id., paragraph 375.

" Rejoinder, paragraphs 309 and ff.

© Id., paragraph 388.

~ Counter-Memorial, paragraph 235.

“Id., paragraph 353.

“ Rejoinder, paragraph 391.

“ Counter-Memorial, paragraph 212.

Memorial of Jurisdiction, paragraph 90.

= Rejoinder, paragraphs 370 and ff. and Post-Hearing Brief of the Respondent, paragraph
13:

” Counter-Memorial, paragraph 510.
= Memorial, paragraph

“Id., paragraph 432.

= Id.

"Id., paragraph 433.

*Id., paragraph 435.

* Post-Hearing Brief of the Claimant, paragraph 223.

* Counter-Memorial, paragraphs 367 and ff.

” Id., paragraph 370.

= Rejoinder, paragraphs 230 and 231.

* Counter-Memorial, paragraph 371.

»» As stated in paragraphs 200-207 below, the Parties hold contrary positions on the content and
effect of the rulings of the Constitutional Court, embodied in the judgments dated November 18,
2009 and February 24, 2010, by which the judicial processes initiated by EEGSA before the
tribunals of Guatemala against GJ-Ruling-3121 and Resolution CNEE-144 of 2008 were ended. The
differences of the Parties over these judgments are a central point in the Claimant's claims for denial of
justice. Thus, the position and arguments of each Party in this regard are also discussed in the
chapter on "Denial of Justice" (see Section V below).

»: Memorial, Section 8.2.2., Page 136.

~ Id., paragraph 446,

»Id., paragraphs 447 and 448.

»Id., paragraph 456

»» Reply, paragraph 413. See also id., paragraph 459 and Counter-Memorial of Jurisdiction, paragraph
70.

»» Counter-Memorial, paragraph 404.

»Id., paragraph 405.

~=Id., paragraph 405.

»Id., paragraph 5.

» Reply, paragraph 172.

» Memorial, paragraph 404 and Reply, paragraphs 170, 177-183.

» Reply, paragraph 175.

» Memorial, paragraph 406.

» Id., paragraph 404.

» Id., paragraph 406.

» Reply, paragraph 170.

» Id., paragraph 177.

» Id., paragraphs 177 - 183.

» Id., paragraph 182. The Applicant presents this statement invoking the report of its expert
Galetovic (Exhibit D-601).

105

» Memorial, paragraph 407.

™ Rejoinder, Section VI(1), page 225.

= Id., paragraph 535.

» Id., paragraph 536.

» Id., paragraph 537.

» Id., paragraph 544.

»Id., paragraphs 552 and 563.

» Id., paragraphs 579 and 580

= Id., paragraph 55

»Id., paragraphs 580 and 581.

» Id., paragraph

» Memorial, paragraph 412.

~Id., paragraphs 413 - 414,

» Reply, paragraphs 194 and ff.

> Post-Hearing Brief of the Claimant, paragraph 252.

» Rejoinder, paragraph 478.

» Counter-Memorial, paragraph 351.

» Rejoinder, paragraph 480.

™ Id., paragraphs 480 - 484.

» Id., paragraph 488.

» Id., paragraphs 593 and ff.

» Id., paragraph 593.

* Id., paragraph 594.

» Post-Hearing Brief of the Respondent, paragraph 150.

™ Memorial, paragraph 415.

»=Id., paragraph 416.

» Id., paragraph 417.

» Id., paragraph 418.

» Reply, paragraph 889.

» Post-Hearing Brief of the Claimant, paragraph 277.

» Id., paragraph 266.

= The Respondent's arguments on this point were made mostly referring to the Lapuerta opinion
filed by the Applicant (Exhibit D-600); Counter-Memorial, paragraphs 801 and ff.
» Rejoinder, paragraph 649.

» Counter-Memorial, paragraph 804.

» Id., paragraphs 802 and 803.

~Id., paragraph 805.

™ Reply, paragraph 321.

» Memorial, paragraph 566.

» Post-Hearing Brief of the Respondent, paragraphs 237 - 242.

» Decision on the Bifurcation of Arbitral Proceeding, paragraphs 22 - 24.

»= Id., paragraph 8, citing the Memorial of Jurisdiction, paragraph 29.

» Memorial of Jurisdiction, paragraphs 29 and 30.

» Post-Hearing Brief of the Respondent, paragraph 21.

» Id., paragraph 21.

» Id., paragraph 22.

» Id., paragraph 23.

~ Id., paragraph 24.

» Id., paragraphs 25 and 26.

» See, among others, Counter-Memorial of Jurisdiction, paragraphs 1 and ff.
» Decision on the Bifurcation of Arbitration, paragraph 11, citing the Counter-Memorial of Jurisdiction,
paragraphs 9 and 10

»= Id., paragraph 12, citing the Counter-Memorial of Jurisdiction, paragraph 37.
»:Id., paragraph 13, citing the Counter-Memorial of Jurisdiction, paragraph 130 - 134.
» Id., paragraph 15, citing the Counter-Memorial of Jurisdiction, paragraph 193.
~ Id., paragraph 16, citing the Counter-Memorial of Jurisdiction, paragraph 22.

» Post-Hearing Brief of the Claimant, paragraphs 13 and 14.

» Id., paragraph 15.

= ‘e,, paragraph 17.

 

 

 

 

= i paragraph 18.

» Id., paragraph 19.

»Id., paragraph 20.

» Id., paragraph 22.

* Memorial, Petitum, page 243.

» Reply, Petitum, paragraph 904.

» Post-Hearing Brief of the Claimant, Petitum, page 122.

~ Id.

» Memorial of Jurisdiction, Section IV(A), page 69.
Highlighting not in the original text. Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.

» Highlighting not in the original text. Article 11 of the Treaty.

106

» Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States of America), Preliminary Objection,
Decision, C. I. J. Report 1996, page 803, paragraph 16 (“Oil Platforms”); Legality of Use of Force
(Yugoslavia v. Italy), Provisional Measures, Order of June 2, 1999, ICJ 1999, page 481, paragraph
25; SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. c. Philippines, ICSID Case No.. ARB/02/6, Decision
on Jurisdiction, January 29, 2004, paragraph 157 ("SGS v. Philipines”), United Parcel Service of
America Inc. v. Canada, UNCITRAL case, Decision on Jurisdiction, November 22, 2002, paragraph
34,

s»» The 1969 Vienna Convention is in force for the Republic of Guatemala (ratification July
21, 1997) and for the Kingdom of Spain (accession May 16, 1972). United Nations, United
Nations Treaty Collection, Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties [on line]
http://treaties.un. e: \etailsI TREATY&mtdsgno=XXxIII~18chapter=238Temp
=mtdsq_38lang=en (consulted March 14, 2012). The Tribunal also notes the recognition of the
general rule of interpretation contained in Article 31 of that treaty as part of customary
international law. See: Kasikili/Sedudu Island (Botswana v. Namibia), Judgment, ICJ Report 1999,
page 1045, paragraph 18; Oil Platforms, Preliminary Objection, Decision, paragraph 22.

" Inceysa Vallisoletana v. El Salvador, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/26, Award, August 2, 2006,
paragraph 181 ("Inceysa c. El Salvador"). On the relationship between the principle of good faith
and pacta sunt servanda rule in the context of treaty interpretation, see: Case Concerning the
Territorial Dispute (Libya v. Chad), Separate Opinion of Judge Ajibola, IC)., February 3, 1994, in: E.
Lauterpach, C.J. Greenwood & A.G. Oppenheimer, International Law Reports, Cambridge University
Press, 1995, pages 69 ff; Taslim Olawale Elias, The Modern Law of Treaties, Oceana-Sijthoff, 1974,
pages 41-42, Ian Sinclair, The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, Manchester University
Press, 1973, pages 119-120.

= In that regard, in AES Corporation v. Argentina, the Tribunal recognized that “...the BIT
establishes in what conditions and events the respondent consented to ICSID jurisdiction....” AES
Corporation v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/17, Decision on Jurisdiction, April 26, 2005,
paragraph 38.

» Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID Case No.
ARB/83/3, Decision on Jurisdiction, April 27, 1985, paragraph 63. Inceysa v. El Salvador, Award,
August 2, 2006, paragraph 176.

~ Zachary Douglas, The International Law of Investment Claims, Cambridge University Press,
2009, page 234-235. Christoph H. Schreurer with Loretta Malintoppi, August Reinisch and Anthony
Sinclair, The ICSID Convention, 2009, A Commentary, Cambridge University Press, Second
Edition, page 233-236.

» United Parcel Service of America Inc. v. Canada, UNCITRAL case, Decision on Jurisdiction,
November 22, 2002, paragraph 34.See also: SGS v. Philippines, Decision on Jurisdiction, January
29, 2004, paragraph 157; Methanex v. United States, UNCITRAL Case, Partial Award of
jurisdiction, August 7, 2002, paragraphs 119-121; Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve
SanayiA.S. v. Pakistan, ICSID Case No ARB/03/29, Decision on Jurisdiction, November 14, 2005,
paragraphs 197 and 263.

™ Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Guatemala and the Economic Union
of Belgium-Luxembourg for the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments, April 14,
2005, art. 10, Agreement between the Republic of Guatemala and the Czech Republic for the
Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments, June 8, 2003, Article 8.

" Agreement between the Kingdom of Spain and the Republic of Latvia for the Promotion

and Reciprocal Protection of Investments, June 26, 1995, Article 11.

» Treaty between the Republic of Guatemala and the Federal Republic of Germany for the
Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Capital Investments, October 17, 2003, Article 10;
Agreement between the Republic of Guatemala and the Swiss Confederation for the Promotion
and Reciprocal Protection of Investments, September 9, 2002, Article 8; Agreement of
Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments between the Kingdom of Spain and the
Republic of Indonesia, May 30, 1995, Article 10.

” Agreement on the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments between the
Kingdom of Spain and the Republic of Tunisia, May 28, 1991, Article 11.

"= Agreement on the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments between the Kingdom of
Spain and the Republic of the Philippines, October 19, 1993, Article 9.

» Memorial of Jurisdiction, paragraph 40.

” Treaty (Exhibit D-36).

“Id.

 

“: See Zachary Douglas, The International Law of Investment Claims, Cambridge University Press,
2009, pages 83-84.

»: Memorial of Jurisdiction, paragraph 2.

~ Post-Hearing Brief of the Respondent, paragraphs 43 and 44
” Counter-Memorial of Jurisdiction, paragraph 118

~ Post-Hearing Brief of the Claimant, paragraph 19

~ Counter-Memorial of Jurisdiction, Section 2.4, page 18.

»° Memorial, paragraph 524.

* Counter-Memorial of Jurisdiction, paragraphs 84 and 85.

2 Id., paragraph 86.

» Memorial, Petitum, page 243.

~ Post-Hearing Brief of the Claimant, Petitum, page 121.

>» Memorial, paragraph 402.
~ Id., paragraphs 402 - 420.
» Id., paragraphs 555, 559-561 and 584.

 Id., paragraph 582 and Title 12, pages 179-216.
~ Post-Hearing Brief of the Claimant, Section 6.1, pages 62-73, Section 6.2, pages 73-89, Section
6.3.1, pages 91-96, Section 6.4.2., Pages 102-104, Section 6.5.1, pages 108-11.
= The claims dealt with in points a-f of this paragraph 323, were reiterated by the Claimant inter alia
in the Memorial, paragraphs 638 and ff.; Reply, paragraphs 422 and ff.; Post-Hearing Brief of the
Claimant, Section 6, page 60 and ff.
= Memorial, paragraph 2.
=Id., paragraph 639.
= Reply, paragraph 492.
™Id., paragraph 524
= Id., paragraph 527-544.

»“Id., paragraph 545-555.

” Id., paragraph 556-564. Throughout its briefs, the Claimant refers several times to the
interpretation criteria of Guatemalan law, such as the literal, systematic, genetic and teleological
approach
"Id. Section 5.3.5, page 157.
= Id., paragraph 570
~ Id., paragraph 571.

» Id., paragraph 572.

» Post-Hearing Brief of the Claimant, paragraphs 342 and ff.

= Memorial, paragraph 749.

> Post-Hearing Brief of the Claimant, paragraph 358.

= Memorial, paragraph 767.

~ Id., paragraphs 767 and ff.

» Reply, paragraphs 657 and ff. In its Post-Hearing Brief, the Claimant alleges that the three measures
identified constitute a violation of the standard of fair and equitable treatment and of Article 3.2 of the
Treaty, paragraph 282.

= Post-Hearing Brief of the Claimant, paragraph 336.

» Id., paragraph 337 and Reply, paragraph 709. See clauses transcribed in Section II(1) above.

>» Memorial, paragraphs 781 and 782.

* Reply, paragraph 720.

>» Post-Hearing Brief of the Claimant, paragraph 340.

»» Counter-Memorial, paragraph 766.

™ Reply, paragraph 702.

* Memorial, paragraph 1.

» Id., paragraph 176.

” By the way the Claimant presented its case, the Tribunal does not even have competence to
consider the claims of the Parties regarding the regulatory or contractual nature of the dispute, as this
would be, above all, a question relating to the merits of the dispute.

° Counter-Memorial of Jurisdiction, paragraph 37.

“°Id., paragraph 86.

» Id., paragraph 151.
» Id, paragraph 97.
»Id., paragraph 152.
= Id., paragraph 151.

“ International Law Commission of the United Nations, The Articles of the International Law
Commission on International Liability of the State, Article 3.
= Robert Azinian et al. v. Mexico, ICSID Case No ARB (AF)/97/2, Award, November 1, 1999, paragraph
90 ("Robert Azinian v. México”).
~ Post-Hearing Brief of the Respondent, paragraph 2-3.

» Robert Azinian v. México, Award, November 1, 1999, paragraphs 83-84 and 97.

“" Generation Ukraine, Inc. v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/9, Award, September 15, 2003,
paragraph 20.33 ("Generation Ukraine v. Ukraine").

» Reply, paragraph 750.

» Id., paragraph 751

 Id., paragraph 751.

~ Id., Section 10.4, page 215

» Id., paragraph 752.

» Id., Section 10.4, page 215 and ff.

“Id., paragraph 761.
~Id., paragraph 762.

» Id., paragraph 757.
» Id., paragraph 763.
~ Id., paragraph 765.

» Id., paragraphs 764 and ff.

“Id., paragraph 768.

“Id., paragraphs 769 and 770.

» Id., paragraph 771.

 

108

» Id., paragraph 772.

» Id., paragraph 775.
= Id., paragraph 777.
» Id., paragraphs 788 and ff.
» Id., paragraph 791.
» Id., paragraphs 793 and ff.
* Id., paragraph 816.
» Id., paragraph 830.
ni, paragraph 830.

= “1d, paragraph 831.

~ Memorial of Jurisdiction, paragraphs 151 and ff.

» Rejoinder, paragraph 210.

» Id., paragraph 213.

"= Id., paragraph 214.

» Id., paragraph 220.

» Id., paragraphs 210 and 215.

" Id., paragraphs 222 and 224.

= Id., paragraphs 226, 229 and 230 and Post-Hearing Brief of the Claimant, paragraph 290.

» Rejoinder, paragraphs 234 and ff. and Post-Hearing Brief of the Respondent, paragraph 296.

» Reply, paragraph 750.

» Id., paragraphs 763 and 772.

»Id., paragraph 752.

» Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 152.

“= Underlining added to original text. [...] Generation Ukraine v. Ukraine, Award, 15 September
2003, paragraph 20. [...]

 Underlining added to original text. [...] Parkerings-Compagniet AS v. Lithuania, ICSID Case No.
ARB/05/8, Award, 11 September 2007, paragraphs 316 and 317. [...]

“= Underlining added to original text. Robert Azinian v. Mexico, Award, 1 November, 1999, paragraph

97.
“© Reply, paragraph 830.
“= Id., paragraph 830.
= Id., paragraph 831.
«© Id., Section 10.4, page 215.
«© Treaty, Article 3.1.
“= Robert Azinian v. Mexico, Award, 1 November, 1999, paragraphs 102 and 103.
“[...] Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of America, ICSID Case No. ARB (AF)/99/2,
Award, 11 October 2002, paragraph 127 (“Mondev v. U.S.") [...]
* Marvin Feldman v. México, Case No. ARB (AF)/99/1, Final Award, 16 December 2002, paragraph
140.
“[...] Waste Management Inc. v. Mexico, ICSID Case No. ARB (AF)/00/3, Partial Award, 30 April
2004, paragraphs 129 and 130 ("Waste Management v. Mexico”). [...]
+ Rejoinder, paragraph 220
«© Reply, paragraph 752.
««Id., paragraph 761.
**Id., paragraph 762.
“" Rejoinder, paragraphs 222 and 223.
+» Jan Paulsson, Denial of Justice in International Law, Cambridge University Press, 2005, pages 44
and 45.
" [..] Id., page 46. [...]
+ Underlining added to original text. Reply, paragraph 830.
*» Memorial, paragraphs 427 and ff.
*: Resolution of the MEM rejecting outright the appeal against Resolution CNEE 144-2008, notified
August 20, 2008 (Exhibit D-167).
Report of the expert Jorge Rolando Barrios, provided by the Claimant, paragraph 56 (Exhibit D-
610)
Td., paragraph 57
** Underlining added to text. Constitutional Court, Judgment of November 18, 2009, page 14 (Exhibit
D-198)
“= See, among others, Rejoinder, paragraphs 226 and ff.
* Id., paragraphs 226 and ff.
** Political Constitution of Guatemala (Exhibit R-29). See, likewise, the report of the expert Luis
Saenz Felipe Juarez, provided by Respondent, paragraph 57 (Appendix VI).
*° Report of the expert Luis Saenz Felipe Juarez, provided by Respondent, paragraph 61 and ff.
(Appendix VI).
»» Reply, paragraph 7
©: Amparo filed on aly 23, 2008 (Exhibit D-134); Amparo filed on August 14, 2008 (Exhibit D-157);
and Amparo filed on August 27, 2008 (Exhibit D-175).
Reply, paragraph 773.
© Underlining added to text. Judgment of November 18, 2009, pp. 32-33 (Exhibit D-198).

109

* Report of Mr. Luis Saenz Felipe Juarez, provided by Respondent, paragraph 70 (Appendix R-VI)

“= Summary paragraphs 8 - 15 of the Supplementary Report of Mr. Luis Felipe Saenz, provided by
the Respondent (Appendix R-XV).

»* Reply, paragraph 757.

 Id., paragraph 751.

= Id., paragraphs 773 and ff.

© See, among others, Memorial, paragraphs 421 and ff. and Amparo of EEGSA of August 12, 2008
(Exhibit D157).

“© Reply, paragraph 751.

«= Judgment of February 24, 2010, pp. 4-5 (Exhibit R-92).
“* Reply, paragraph 785.

“© Id., paragraph 791.

“© Underlining added to text. Judgment of November 18, 2009, pp. 16-17 (Exhibit D-198).
“ Underlining added to original text. Id., pages 20 and 21.

“* Underlining added to original text. Id., pages 22 and 23.

“Underlining added to original text. Id., page

~ Underlining added to original text Judgment oof 18 November, 2009, Dissenting Opinion of Judge
Gladys Chacén Corado (Exhibit D-198).

“© Underlining added to original text. Judgment of 18 November, 2009, Dissenting Opinion, Judge
Mario Pérez Guerra (Exhibit D-198).

* Mondev v. USA, Award, 11 October 2002, paragraph 127.

GEA Group Aktiengeselischaft v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/O8/16, Award, 31 March 2011,
paragraphs 318 - 319.

“Reply, paragraph 794.

“ Id., paragraph 795.

“ Id., paragraph 803.

© Id., paragraph 804.

“© Id., paragraph 805.

“= Id., paragraph 806.

“© Id., paragraph 816.

“=Underlining added to original text. Judgment of 24 February 2010, pages 31-32 (Exhibit R-92).

“ Underlining added to original text. Id., pages 32-33.

“Underlining added to original text. Id., pages 33-34.

“« Waste Management v. Mexico, Partial Award, April 30, 2004, paragraph 129.

“© Robert Azinian v. México, award, November 1, 1999, paragraph

Brief on the Costs of the Claimant, paragraph 3; Post-Hearing Brief of the Claimant, Petitum, page
122; and Brief on the Costs of the Defendant, paragraphs 1 and 9

~ Brief on the Costs of the Claimant, page 14.

“» Post-Hearing Brief of the Claimant, paragraph 381.

\Id., paragraphs 384 and ff.

© Brief on the Costs of the Defendant, paragraph 8.

* ICSID Convention, Article 61.2.

* Arbitration Rules, Rule 28.

»=The Tribunal uses the term costs to refer to all the expenses and fees that the Parties assume in the
proceeding.

* See, among others, Cementownia "Nowa Huta” S. v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/06/2, Award, September 17, 2009, paragraphs 176 and ff., Libananco Holdings co. Limited
v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/8, Award, September 2, 2011, paragraphs 562 and ff.,
Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Award, August 27, 2008,
paragraphs 316 and ff. and EDF (Services) Ltd. v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/O5/13, Award,
October 8, 2009, paragraphs 321 and ff.

«” See Post-Hearing Brief of the Claimant, paragraphs 384 and ff.

110

