INTERNATIONAL CENTRE
FOR THE SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
Washington, D.C.

IBM World Trade Corporation, Claimant
Vs.
Republic of Ecuador
(ICSID case No. ARB/02/10)
DECISION ON JURISDICTION AND COMPETENCE

1. Members of the Tribunal
Rodrigo Jijon Letort, President
Alejandro Ponce Martinez, Arbitrator
Leén Roldds Aguilera, Arbitrator

2. Secretary of the Tribunal

Gabriela Alvarez Avila

Representatives of the Claimant Representatives of the Respondent

Mr. Edgar Teran Teran Mr. José Maria Borja

Ms.. Maria del Carmen Arcos State Attorney General of the Republic of
Mr. Santiago Concha Ecuador

Avenida 12 de Octubre No. 26-97 y Calle Robles No. 731

Lincoln, Edificio Torre 1492 Quito, Ecuador

Office 1601

Quito, Ecuador Mr. Mauricio Pozo
Ministry of Finance and Economy
Av. 10 de Agosto y Jorge Washington

Quito, Ecuador

Ms. Maria Mufioz Villacis
Juridical Sub-Secretariat General
Av. Amazonas 3535 y Av. Atahualpa

Quito, Ecuador

|. BACKGROUND:

1. On September 6, 2002, the Assistant Secretary General of the International
Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (hereinafter referred to as
ICSID), registered the request for arbitration filed under the protection of the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between Governments and
Nationals of Other Governments, (hereinafter referred to as “the Convention”),
by IBM World Trade Corporation, (hereinafter referred to as “IBM”), a
company established under the laws of the State of New York, United States of

America, against the Republic of Ecuador.

2. The request for arbitration was filed based on an arbitration clause contained in
the Treaty between the Republic of Ecuador and the United States of America on
the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments (hereinafter referred to
as BIT), ratified by Ecuador on April 11, 1995 and which entered into force on
May 11, 1997.

3. Claimant alleges that the lack of payment of monies payable to IBM del Ecuador
C.A. (hereinafter referred to as “IBM Ecuador”), all the shares of which
company belong to IBM in virtue of a concession contract entered into with the
Republic of Ecuador, constitutes a violation of the BIT by the Ecuadorian

Government.

4. Pursuant to article 39 of the Convention, the parties, by common consent,
appointed Mr. Alejandro Ponce Martinez and Mr. Leon Roldés Aguilera as
arbitrators of the present cause, and Mr. Rodrigo Jijon Letort as President of the

Tribunal.

5. On June 5, 2003, the first session of the Tribunal was held in the city of Quito,
Republic of Ecuador, in the auditorium of the Faculty of Jurisprudence of the

Pontifical Catholic University of Ecuador, and both parties thereto assisted.

In said session, the President declared to the parties that the Tribunal recognized
the objection made by the Republic of Ecuador regarding the jurisdiction of the

Centre and the competence of the Arbitral Tribunal.

Indeed, the Minister of Finance and Economy of the Republic of Ecuador,

expressly states in his Official Letter No. 7254 as of December 10, 2002:

“There exists no legal nor conventional provision that obliges the
Minister of Economy and Finance to submit himself to a procedure other
than the one expressly agreed upon by means of contracts between the
parties, i.e. the Ministry of Finance and Economy and IBM Ecuador, and
that there is no legal support to reason the requested arbitral process,
without therefore this communication implying the acknowledgement of
the origin of the arbitration and only with the purpose of avoiding that
the Ministry of Finance and Economy would be exposed to a
defenselessness, with the purpose of complying with the formality set
forth in the Regulations for Arbitration for the integration of the

Tribunal...”

Pursuant to article 41 of the Convention and regulation 14 of the Regulations of
Arbitration of the ICSID, the Tribunal decided to resolve upon the exception of
the lack of jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of the Tribunal, raised
by the Ecuadorian Government, as a previous question and set a calendar for the
parties to present memorials in order to support their points of view about that

exception.

On June 7, 2003, The Republic of Ecuador filed its memorial objecting to the
jurisdiction of the Centre and to the competence of the Tribunal. The claimant
IBM has been served notice of this Memorial and on July 21, 2003, it presented
its Memorial containing its legal criterion about the objections to the lack of
jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of the Arbitral Tribunal raised by

the Republic of Ecuador.

10. On September 11, 2003, the Arbitral Tribunal met in Quito, and pursuant to
article 41 of “the Convention”, which empowers it to resolve upon its own
competence, it discussed and resolved on the objections raised by the Republic

of Ecuador.

Il: ANALYSIS OF ECUADOR’S OBJECTIONS:

 

2.1. First objection to the competence of the Tribunal: lack of
jurisdiction of the Centre and of competence of the Tribunal, since
the difference arises from a null and void contract.-

11. The Ecuadorian Government alleges that it is not obliged to submit itself to the
Jurisdiction of the Centre, since the provisions contained in the BIT, published
in the Official Register No. 49 , dated April 22, 1997, are not applicable to the

present case.

12. ‘It maintains that, pursuant to the BIT, “Investment” means “every kind of
investment in the territory of one Party owned or controlled directly or indirectly
by nationals or companies of the other Party, such as equity, debt, and service
and investment contracts” and that it comprises, according to the respondent,
among other aspects “any right conferred by law or contract, and any licenses

and permits pursuant to law;”

13. The Ecuadorian Government furthermore states that, in its opinion, for the
purposes of the application of the BIT, the affected party who seeks to submit
itself to the arbitral proceedings, “shall be the holder of a right that arises out
of a legitimate and applicable contract” and that, in this case, the contracts
which could bring forth the right, contain defects of absolute nullity. It adds that
the contract subscribed with IBM Ecuador on June 20, 1996, never entered into
force and shall be considered as not entered into force, since it was never
fulfilled the condition set forth in its ninth clause which says if a trust agreement
is not executed it is understood that the contract has not been signed. Finally, it

declares, that such trust agreement has never been executed.

In its reply Memorial, the claimant maintains that the Republic of Ecuador’s
allegation is inadmissible, since the Ecuadorian Government itself has admitted
the validity of the concession contract. It quotes in its favor some decisions of
the Ecuadorian State Attorney, contained in the Official Letters 15558 dated
December 14, 2000 and No. 16103 dated January 31, 2001, in which said
official, judicial representative and defender of the Ecuadorian Government

would have acknowledged the validity of the contract.

IBM additionally alleges that the Government has never claimed the declaration
of nullity of the contract and that no judge has declared such nullity, the contract

therefore being, under Ecuadorian law, law to the parties.

The Tribunal considers that it cannot declare the nullity of the contract “prima
facie”. The declaration of nullity of a contract usually should be carried out by a
judge. The argument brought forth by the Republic of Ecuador, that the contract
is null and void and therefore shall be considered as not entered into, cannot be
considered at this procedural stage when solely and exclusively the competence
itself of the Tribunal is being resolved upon. Likewise, the Tribunal cannot
accept, at this procedural stage, the Ecuadorian Government’s allegation that the

contract has not been entered into because no trust has been executed.

Taking into account what has previously been stated, at this procedural stage, the
Tribunal has to admit “prima facie” the existence of the concession contract, and
therefore the existence of the investment claimed by IBM, without meaning by
this that the Tribunal can not reach a different conclusion, when analyzing the

background of the controversy and the evidence presented by the parties.

In addition, it shall be taken into account that IBM’s claim is also sustained in
the right to collect money, capital and interests coming forth from the Certificate
of Final Delivery-Receipt of the Contract, entered into on November 11, 1999,

which also constitutes an investment that is protected by the BIT.

2.2.

20.

21.

22.

Second objection: Lack of consent of the Ecuadorian Government to ICSID

jurisdiction.-

The Ecuadorian government alleges that there is no document which
demonstrates the acceptance of the Ecuadorian government to submit the

controversy, the subject matter of this arbitration, to the ICSID proceedings.

It argues that number 2 of article 36 of the Convention, Regulation 2, number 1
letter c) and number 3, of the Rules of Procedure for the Institution of
Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (hereinafter referred to as “Institution
Rules”) determine that the obligation to submit oneself to arbitration is
conditioned to the express acceptance of each of the parties. The present case
does not fulfill that condition, since the Republic of Ecuador has not given its
consent for the present difference to be resolved through the arbitral proceedings
of the ICSID and on the contrary, in its Official letter SIM-2002-6410 dated
October 29, 2002, Ecuador objects to the jurisdiction of the Centre and the

competence of the Tribunal.

The claimant, in turn, rejects the Ecuadorian Government’s reasoning and
maintains that what the BIT establishes is the obligation of the Parties, one of
which is the Ecuadorian government, to submit themselves to the arbitral
proceedings enumerated in Art. VI of the Treaty and that such submission to the
arbitral proceedings does not set forth any other requirement than the signature
of the BIT and its being into force. This way, the claimant adds that no other
consent in addition to the one uttered through the BIT signature is required to
initiate the arbitral proceedings. IBM alleges that the parties, ic. Sovereign
States, by signing the BIT have resolved that the arbitration is the norm to solve
conflicts without the possibility for one of these States to veto or retract from
submitting itself to such proceedings, if such proceeding is requested by a

national or company of the other State.

The Claimant concludes that the “submission” to the arbitral proceedings, which
the BIT refers to, is the unilateral proceeding of the party that files its claim and

chooses the arbitral system under which it wants to carry out the process. Thus,

23.

24.

25.

the State remain bound to the ICSID provisions or to the Arbitration Regulations
of the UNCITRAL (United Nations Commission on International Trade Law) or
to any other arbitral institution which is selected according to the BIT. On the
assumption that the States have submitted themselves already to arbitral systems,
through the signature of the BIT, the party that initiates the proceeding has the
right to choose the Tribunal or Arbitral System.

The Tribunal considers that unlike the state jurisdiction, which the State imposed
upon those submitted to its sovereignty, arbitral jurisdiction presupposes the
acceptance of the parties to have their disputes resolved by a Tribunal, composed
of people who are not part of the jurisdictional organ of any State and who
therefore do not have the power nor the judicial authority to impose their

decisions to third parties.

In the case of the ICSID, the parties may express their consent for arbitration in
several ways: a) By means of a concrete agreement of the parties to submit their
specific differences to the arbitration of an Arbitral Tribunal of the ICSID. That
agreement may be conventionally instrumented in an investment contract, an
investment guarantee contract or any other contract, or subsequently, through an
arbitral commitment reached by the parties once the difference arose; b) By
means of the unilateral commitment of the Government receiving the
investment, set forth in its legislation, for example, about the promotion of
investments in which it proposes to submit the differences, arisen from any
investment or any kind of investment, to the ICSID jurisdiction; and c) Through
the reciprocal commitment of the Governments, contained in Treaties or
Agreements of Investment Promotion and Guarantee, to submit to the ICSID
jurisdiction the differences coming forth in matters of investments, between any

of the contracting Governments and the nationals of the other Government.

IBM has filed its claim based on the BIT in force between the Republic of
Ecuador and the United States of America. Article VI of the BIT establishes
among the alternatives to solve investment disputes, to recourse to judicial or

administrative tribunals of any of the Contracting Governments, or to recourse to

compulsory arbitration, among other possible of been elected, over the one

administered by the ICSID (article VI, numbers 2, 3 and 4).

26. Pursuant to the BIT, the Republic of Ecuador irrevocably commits itself to the
ICSID jurisdiction for the solution of disputes arising from the BIT and as long

as the requirements imposed by it and by the Convention are met.

27. It also establishes beyond any doubt that the investor is the one to select the
different ways of solving controversies provided for in Article VI of the BIT, at
the moment he files his claim. Therefore, in the present case, such selection has
been executed by IBM, by filing its claim before the ICSID, thereby expressly
manifesting its decision to have the dispute resolved by an ICSID Arbitral

Tribunal.

28. | The Ecuadorian Government therefore cannot unilaterally withdraw itself from
the duties it acquired in a sovereign manner when it freely negotiated the BIT
with the United States of America, and in which it committed itself among other

ways to solve the investment controversies, to the ICSID arbitral jurisdiction.

29. Precisely an Agreement like the BIT is meant to ensure that the Contracting
States fulfill the obligations that come forth from the investments made by
foreigners on their territories. Wit these the intention is to agree upon
mechanisms to solve controversies, which are to be compulsorily imposed
towards the future, whichever may be the national or investor of another State
who considers himself, real or presumably, affected by acts or facts that, in his

opinion, affect the rights over his investments.

30. That means that, once Ecuador expressed its will to solve in that manner any
controversies that may arise in the future, no new agreement is necessary for

such submission to arbitration, as the Republic of Ecuador alleges at this point.

2.3. Third objection: Lack of consent of the Ecuadorian Government to have
IBM del Ecuador S.A. considered as an investor of the United States of

America.

31.

32.

33.

34,

35.

36.

The Respondent Government maintains that there does not exist any arbitral link
between the Ecuadorian Government and IBM, since the juridical relationship
was established between the Ministry of Finances and Public Credit -currently
the Ministry of Finances and Economy- and the company IBM del Ecuador C.A.

constituted under the protection of the Company Law of Ecuador.

In the opinion of the Ecuadorian Government, that lack of contractual link
causes the ICSID arbitration not to “operate”, since the claimant has not been
able to fulfill the condition imposed in number (iii) of Regulation 2 of the

Institution Rules.

The Ecuadorian Government refers to number (iii) of letter (d) of paragraph (1)

of Regulation 2 of the Institution Rules, which states:

“(iii) if the party is a juridical person which on the date of consent had the
nationality of the Contracting State party to the dispute, the agreement of
the parties that it should be treated as a national of another Contracting

State for the purposes of the Convention; ”

The Ecuadorian Government alleges that the agreement, required in the quoted
regulation does not exist, in order for IBM Ecuador to be treated as a national of
the United States of America and that, therefore, the arbitration is not

appropriate.

As to that objection, the Tribunal considers that the claimant or plaintiff in this
arbitral process is IBM World Trade Corporation, a company created and
existing under the laws of the State of New York, i.e. a national company of the

United States of America.

The claim was not filed by IBM Ecuador C.A., a company constituted in the
Republic of Ecuador, and therefore, to the opinion of this Tribunal, the
requirement invoked on behalf of the respondent party, i.e. the consent for the

respondent to be treated as a national of the United States, is unfounded.

37.

38.

39.

One thing this Tribunal does have to analyze, is whether the difference invoked
by the claimant, IBM World Trade Corporation, i.e. the lack of payment by the
Ecuadorian Government refers to an investment protected by the BIT, which
causes the discrepancies arising from this investment to be compulsorily

submitted to an ICSID Tribunal.

Article 25 of the ICSID Convention grants jurisdiction to the Centre to know
about the differences of juridical nature that arise directly from an investment of

a Contracting State (...) and the national of another Contracting State (...).

Considering the fact that the Convention does not define what exactly is to be
understood by “investment”, but that the ICSID! jurisprudence has considered
objective criteria for the concept of investment, said concept shall be analyzed
both in light of the ICSID jurisprudence as from the BIT perspective. The BIT

states in its article 1:

“For the purposes of this Treaty:

a) “Investment” means every kind of investment in the territory of one
Party owned or controlled directly or indirectly by nationals or
companies of the other Party, such as equity, debt, and service

and investment contracts; and includes:

i) Tangible and intangible property, including rights, such as

mortgages, liens and pledges;

' See Salini Costruttori SpA and Italstrade SpA vs..Kingdom of Morocco, Decision on

competence as of July 16, 2003, paragraphs 43 and following, Journal du droit international,

129, Année 2002, January-February-March, No. 1, p.196 to 206. and Fedax N.V. vs. Republic

of Venezuela, Decision on competence as of July 11, 1997, paragraphs 21 and following, ICSID

Reports, vol. 5, 2002.

40.

41.

ii) a company or shares of stock or other interests in a company
or interests in the assets thereof;
iii) a claim to money or a claim to performance having economic
value, and associated with an investment;
iv) intellectual property which includes, inter alia, rights relating
to:
literary and artistic works, including sound recordings;
Inventions in all fields of human endeavor;
Industrial designs;
semiconductors mask works;
trade secrets, know-how, and confidential business
information; and
trademarks, service marks and trade names; and
vy) Any right conferred by law or by contract, and any licenses and

permits pursuant to Law.”

As shown in the claim, the claimant maintains that the “difference in matter of
investment” is formed by the breach of the Republic of Ecuador of its obligation
to pay to IBM Ecuador for the contract and other additional contracts, being

IBM Ecuador fully owned by IBM.

In its letter dated August 14, 2002, the claimant adds that the lack of fulfillment
of the obligation to pay money, listed as liquidated in the certificate of final
delivery-receipt of the concession contract and which remains unpaid in spite of
having required the payment to the Ecuadorian Government, creates the legal
obligation to pay interests. It states, moreover, that such difference arises from
an investment of IBM since: (i) it realized a direct investment of 100% of the
capital of IBM del Ecuador C.A.; (ii) the contracts of IBM del Ecuador C.A.
constitute an investment to IBM, since they indirectly belong to it; and (iii) the
right to collect money, capital and interests is a legal and contractual right
derived from the contracts and the certificate of final delivery-receipt, IBM

being the indirect holder of this right.

42.

43.

44.

There is no doubt that the concession contract was executed by IBM Ecuador, as
it was that company the one which execute the final liquidation certificate. It is
true that IBM Ecuador is an Ecuadorian company and that its legal personality

cannot, in any way, be mistaken with that of IBM.

The existence of the contract as a source of obligations generates a link by virtue
of which IBM Ecuador can request from the Republic of Ecuador, represented
by its government and the pertinent authorities, the compliance of obligations
arising from the contract,. Moreover, by the BIT definition, contracts do also
constitute or represent investments. In that context, a contract is not only
regarded as a source of obligations, but also as a mechanism through which a
capital flows from one country towards another one. If the BIT conceives the
contract as in investment, it is necessary to analyze and discover why the high
contracting parties, the Republic of Ecuador and the United States of America,

deemed that contracts had to be considered as investments.

The interpretation of international treaties does not only submit itself to
principles such as the parties’ intention, literality according to the natural and
ordinary meaning, good faith, interpretation according to the context, practical
application by the parties or by the international organizations, interpretation
based on the preparatory works, restrictive and effective interpretations (in
accordance with the nature of the matters the treaty deals with), but it shall also
take into account the specific purposes of the treaty (teleological interpretation)?
Hence, in the case sub judice, it is necessary to look for the purpose pursued by
an investment treaty, when it enumerates the contracts as one of the ways in
which an investment can take form and, therefore, to the opinion of this
Tribunal, only for the purposes of such concept (the contract as an investment)
one can argue that the investor is the only shareholder of IBM Ecuador, since it
was the company that, possibly authorized or attracted by the legal or
economical conditions the Ecuadorian State offered, decided to establish a

company in Ecuador with the purpose of carrying out the activities set forth in

? Cfr. Brownlie, Ian “Principles of Public International Law”, Oxford Country Press, London,

1966, p. 503 to 507.

45.

46.

its corporate purpose. Hence, the one who effectuated the investment and who,
therefore, could eventually be affected by a possible breach of the rules that

guarantees such investment, would be IBM.

For those reasons, rather than for the ones expounded by the claiming party, this
Tribunal rejects the objection of the Ecuadorian Government based on the

certain fact that IBM Ecuador was the company that entered into the contract.

The Tribunal furthermore emphasizes that, in the ICSID arbitration initiated by
Salini Costruttori SpA and Italstrade SpA against the Kingdom of Morocco,
based on an investment agreement between Morocco and Italy, the competence
of the Arbitral Tribunal (composed by Robert Briner as President and Bernardo
Cremades and Ibrahim Fadlallah as arbitrators) was based on the fact that
contracts are a source of investment.’ Regarding such decision, the editor of the

mentioned Journal makes the following observation:

« La décision par laquelle le tribunal arbitral constitué dans l’affaire
Salini Costruttori SpA et Italstrade SpA c/ Royaume du Maroc retient
sa compétence pour connaitre des demandes formées par les deux
sociétés italiennes adjudicataires du marché de la construction d'une
autoroute au Maroc est importante a un double titre. La premier (sic)
tient au fait qu'elle admet pour la premiére fois dans la jurisprudence
due Centre qu’un contrat de construction puisse étre qualifié
d’investissement au sens de Varticle 25 de la Convention de
Washington ; le second au fait qu'elle illustre la situation relativement
fréquente dans laquelle la compétence du Centre pour connaitre des
litiges opposant l’investisseur a l’Etat sur le fondement d’un traité
vient en concours avec celle des juridictions ou des tribunaux
arbitraux désignés par les parties a l’opération pour connaitre des

différends de nature contractuelle susceptibles d’en découler (II). »

> See Salini Costruttori SpA and Italstrade SpA vs..Kingdom of Morocco, Decision on competence dated

July 16, 2003, Journal du droi

to 206.

international, 129, Year: 2002, January-February-March, No. 1, pages 196

 

47. In like manner, in the case filed by SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A
against the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, the respondent objected to the arbitral
jurisdiction of the ICSID on the base of the contract entered into between the
parties, in which they submitted themselves to arbitration under the Arbitration
Law of Pakistan.; the Tribunal, with Judge Florentino P. Feliciano as President
and further integrated by André Faurés and Christopher Thomas, decided that it
was competent, since the allegation of the claimant company was that Pakistan
had breached the Investment Treaty between the Swiss Confederation and

Pakistan.*

48. | This way, with the quoted cases as precedents, the present Tribunal considers
that, since IBM had acquired shares in one Ecuadorian company - IBM Ecuador-
the former has made investments in the Ecuadorian Government. On this matter,
the Tribunal wants to emphasize that the IBM investment constitutes IBM
Ecuador, a company which carries out a series of activities and businesses on
Ecuadorian territory; and, therefore, in an indirect manner, the breach of
Ecuador of its payment obligation, which is part of the commercial activity of
IBM Ecuador, affects its investor, IBM. Therefore, IBM has the right to request

this arbitration.

49. Considering al the foregoing, there is no ground for the objection of the

Ecuadorian Government.

2.4. Fourth Objection: Lack of jurisdiction and competence of the Arbitral
Tribunal, since in the concession contract, the parties agreed upon the

jurisdiction of the ordinary judges of the city of Quito.-

50. The Ecuadorian State alleges that even if it is accepted that the concession

contract entered into between the Ministry of Finances and Public Credit on June

* Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. vs. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Decision on competence dated
August 6, 2003, Mealey’s International Arbitration Report, Vol. 18, No. 9, ber 2003, pages 3 to
66.

51.

52.

53.

54.

20, 1996, is a valid contract, its twenty-third clause provides that any
controversy arising in relation with the interpretation, application, execution or
cause of breach of the contract, the parties bound themselves to submit the
controversy solely to the jurisdiction of the competent judges or tribunals of the

city of Quito, thereby expressly renouncing any other jurisdiction.

It also alleges on its favor the provision of Art. VIII of the BIT, which states that
the BIT shall not discredit “a) laws and regulations, administrative practices or

procedures, or administrative or adjudicatory decisions of either Party;”.

The claimant objects to this exception, stating that the Constitution of the
Republic of Ecuador acknowledges the arbitration as alternative means for the
solution of controversies, that the BIT, a juridical regulation of higher hierarchy,
establishes the unilateral right of a company or national of one Party to seek
arbitration against the Government hosting the investment and that, therefore,
those are valid rights and cannot be annulled by a contract entered into before
the establishment of alternative procedural rights. It furthermore alleges that,
pursuant to the provisions of the Civil Code of Ecuador about conflict of laws in
time, the proceedings set forth in the subsequent law prevail over the ones
provided in the previous law, the more when the new proceedings come forth

from a law of higher hierarchical value, as is the case of international treaties.

The claimant maintains that IBM Ecuador could have sought ordinary justice in
Ecuador, had it been advisable, while IBM has the right to submit itself to the
ICSID arbitral jurisdiction, since it has never before initiated any claim process

in the Republic of Ecuador.

In short, what the Tribunal has to decide with regard to this objection is whether
the fact that IBM Ecuador and the Ministry of Finances and Public Credit
(currently Ministry of Economy and Finances) voluntarily agreed in the contract
for providing Information Technology Services, under the concession system,
signed June 20, 1996, to submit the differences arising from that contract to the
ordinary justice of the city Quito, cause this Tribunal not to have competence to

tule on the existing dispute.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

The Tribunal considers that the arguments set forth in the foregoing paragraph
2.3 are sufficient to ensure its own competence; nevertheless, it considers

appropriate to add other arguments about this point.

The arbitral system finds its origin and support in the will of the parties to
resolve their conflicts by means of this alternative. Such will of the parties may

be expressed in contracts or in international treaties.

In the contract entered into by and between IBM Ecuador and the Ministry of
Finances and Public Credit of the Republic of Ecuador, the parties voluntarily
submitted their differences to the ordinary justice of Ecuador, for which the
conflicts arising from that contract should be resolved by the judges selected by
them, (should such clause be applicable, pursuant to the existing regulations in
Ecuador on public contracting) an aspect about which this Tribunal does not or

cannot issue any opinion.

The Convention and the BIT require, in order for a party to have the possibility
to seek ICSID arbitration, that the party commencing the arbitral proceedings
had not sought justice before the judges of the country where the investment has
taken place. That means that, pursuant to the Convention and the BIT, there is
the alternative to call upon the aforementioned judges or to appeal to this
international arbitration, as happens with the International Court of Justice.° The
Parties may grant arbitral jurisdiction by virtue of an arbitration clause contained
in a bilateral or multilateral treaty. The Convention is a multilateral treaty; while
the BIT is a bilateral agreement. Had IBM sought ordinary justice in Ecuador,

such fact would have impeded IBM to call upon this arbitral jurisdiction.

By ratifying the BIT, the Republic of Ecuador consented that the differences in
matter of investment under the protection of the BIT could be resolved by means

of arbitral proceedings by the ICSID. Therefore, the fact that in a contract

5 Cfr. Roséenme Shabtai, The law and practice of the International Court, 1920-1996, volume II,
“Jurisdiction”, Martines Nijhoff publishers, The Hague, 1997, p. 665-668.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

(which is a form of investment) the contracting parties have submitted
themselves to the jurisdiction of the Ecuadorian State does not impede the
investor to have recourse to the BIT and to seek arbitration from the ICSID, in
order to appeal against the alleged violation of his rights over the investment,
provided that he has not previously initiated any proceeding before the

Ecuadorian judges.

Moreover, whatever is not resolved by the arbitral jurisdiction, in the finding on
the merits that this Tribunal may reach because it is not a matter of an

investment, the Ecuadorian jurisdiction will subsist.

From another point of view, the claimant IBM has additionally alleged in its
claim that the lack of payment of the values that were allegedly payable to IBM

Ecuador constitutes a breach of the investment regulations.

This Tribunal therefore considers that the IBM claim is based on an alleged
violation of the BIT and not on an alleged violation of the contract, and that
therefore the proceeding provided for by the BIT, in accordance with the
provisions of the Convention, grants jurisdiction and competence to this Arbitral
Tribunal to know and resolve upon the claim filed by IBM against the Republic

of Ecuador.

The claimant maintains that his rights as investor have been violated, which arise
from the contract dated June 20, 1996 and from its supplements; within the
provisions of the BIT we find that a difference in matter of investments refers,
among other aspects, to “an alleged breach of any right conferred by this Treaty
with respect to an investment.” Therefore, if the claimant considers that a breach
is committed upon a right granted by the BIT, such allegation is sufficient for
this Tribunal to declare itself competent to hear about it, provided that the other

conditions imposed by the Convention and the BIT are complied with.

In accordance with the foregoing, there are previous pronouncements of other

arbitral tribunals, organized under the ICSID, on the same topic.

65.

66.

67.

68.

The Tribunal considers it appropriate to quote the process between the
Compajiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. & Vivendi Universal vs. The Republic
of Argentina (ICSID case No. ARB/97/3), in which the Republic of Argentina
raised the exception of lack of jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal, since a
clause of the concession contract entered into by and between the parties
established the submission of matters of interpretation or application of the
contract to the exclusive jurisdiction of the Tribunals related to administrative

litigation of the Tucuman Province.

The Arbitral Tribunal considered that the claim was based on the allegation that
Argentina had violated its obligations under the BIT and not on a breach of the
provisions of the concession contract and consequently it decided that its

jurisdiction under the ICSID was not precluded.°

The aforementioned Tribunal maintained furthermore that the contractual
provision which regulated the controversies between the parties did not despoil
the Tribunal of jurisdiction to hear the case, since such provision did not
constitute and cannot constitute a waiver on behalf of the claimant of his rights

under the BIT.’

In the Vivendi case®, the Ad Hoc committee, referring to what the Arbitral
Tribunal had ruled, emphasized that the violation of the BIT and the violation of
a contract are two different matters and that, therefore, each and every of those

matters shall be resolved upon with the applicable law, which in the case of the

° Compaiiia de Aguas del Aconquija y Vivendi Universal vs. Republic of Argentina, Award

dated November 21, 2000, ICSID Review Foreign Investment Law Journal, Vol. 16, No. 2,
2001, paragraph 50, p. 19.

7 Compaiiia de Aguas del Aconquija y Vivendi Universal vs. Republic of Argentina, Award

dated November 21, 2000, ICSID Review Foreign Investment Law Journal, Vol. 16, No. 2,
2001, paragraph 53, p. 21.

* Compaiiia de Aguas del Aconquija y Vivendi Universal vs. Republic of Argentina, Decision

on the annulment dated July 3, 2002, 41 ILM 1135, 2002, paragraph 95, p. 1154.

BIT is international Law and in the case of the contract is the law agreed upon

by the parties in said instrument.

69. In particular, in the Vivendi case, the Tribunal decided that when the essential
base of the claim is a contract, the Tribunal shall apply any jurisdiction that is
valid under the contract. Nevertheless, when the fundamental base of the claim
is a bilateral investment treaty, the existence of a clause, related to the
controversies, included into the contract entered into between the claiming
company and the responding State, does not impede the jurisdictional

submission to the arbitration provided for in the treaty to operate.

70. | IBM’s allegation about the application over the time of the procedural laws, by
virtue of which the latter are in effect since the moment they entered into force,
is not applicable to the case, since there is no contradiction between the two
regulations on jurisdiction, the contractual one and the regulation of the
International Treaty. The contractual regulation shall be applied to controversies
arising from the contract and the regulation of the BIT shall be applied to

differences that come forth from violations of the guarantees granted by the BIT.

2.5. Fifth objection: The matter of arbitration is not capable of being settled
since there is no constitutional or legal provision that empowers the
Ecuadorian Government to engage in the settlement of contracts which are

in violation of the Law.

71. By ratifying both the Convention in 1986 and the BIT in 1997, Ecuador
acknowledged that none of these two instruments altered its juridical
constitutional body of laws. At the moment when a State deposits the ratification
documents of international conventions, it solemnly declares that all the
requirements for their full effect have been met, and therefore, unless the treaty
is denounced, it cannot free itself from the obligations coming forth from it.
Hence, it is not admissible for the Ecuadorian State to seeks at this point,
seventeen years after depositing the ratification instrument of the Convention
and six years after doing the same regarding the BIT, to subtract itself from a

jurisdiction that the Ecuadorian State committed itself to accept, in front of the

20

72.

international community, precisely to promote investments in Ecuador and give
them a framework of juridical certainty. To act like in this manner, Ecuador
should, through the agency that handles its international relations, to free itself
from the Convention or the BIT. While such international treaties are still in
force, it is the international obligation of the Ecuadorian State to respect them,
under prevention of the international responsibility that carry out their violation.
The fact that a State fails to recognize the norms that it voluntarily has accepted
in international conventions is a breach of the international juridical order;
breach that in the present case is evidenced by affirmation that the matter of the

arbitration (violation of the BIT) is not capable of settlement.

International treaties establish norms of conduct between and for the States, the
mandatory character of which cannot be avoided, the more since current
International Law has the tendency to have its norms to prevail even over the
provisions of the Political Constitutions themselves. It appears as such in
doctrine and constitutional texts, but also in jurisprudence on human rights and
community law. Indeed, Max Sorensen affirms that in the event of “a conflict
between international and internal law that arises before the jurisdiction of an
international tribunal, the supremacy of the international law is consequently
resolved upon. When it arises within the internal law and is not resolved upon in
the same way, the position to be adopted is of a violation of the international law
and it brings forth the same consequences as any other illegal act. Therefore, in
either of the two cases, the primacy of the international law is affirmed”.? From
different points of view, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights! and the
Tribunal of Justice for Andean Community of Nations''have issued alike

pronouncements.

° Max Sorensen, Manual on Public International Law. Fondo de Cultura Economica, Mexico,
2000, p. 196.
° Cfr. Case “The Last Temptation of Christ”, judgment dated February 3, 2001, Series C No.

73, paragraphs 72 and 87.

"' Cfr. Action of nonfulfillment against the Republic of Colombia, process No. 03-11-97,

judgment dated December 7, 1998.

21

73. Even from the exclusive point of view of the municipal law of Ecuador, the BIT
and The Convention are international treaties validly subscribed by the Republic
of Ecuador, and their provision are therefore part of the national juridical body
of laws in force, as provided in article 163 of the Political Constitution of said
State. Hence, even the internal juridical code of laws of Ecuador acknowledges
and authorizes that the juridical differences in matter of investment, in the terms

set forth in those two international treaties, be submitted to ICSID arbitration.

2. Sixth objection: About the lapsing of the right to complain.-

74. The Ecuadorian Government affirms that the legal action of the claimant is
lapsed, according to the Ecuadorian Law and that arbitral proceedings would

restore the validity of an expired right.

75. This allegation cannot be considered by the Tribunal at this procedural stage,
since it is now ruling on its own competence exclusively, as previous defense.
To analyze the affirmation of the Ecuadorian Government, which refers to a

question of law, therefore turns out to be unlawful.

76. Therefore, it is worth to remind the parties that the Tribunal has declared itself
competent to hear only the possible violations to the BIT, which constitutes

international obligations protected under International Law.

2.7. Seventh objection: The exhaustion of the administrative or judicial as
remedies as a requisite for arbitration.-

77. The Ecuadorian Government argues in its Memorial, that it conditions its
consent to the ICSID arbitration to the existence of a previous and definitive
pronouncement by the competent internal judicial organ to resolve the case,
pursuant to the Ecuadorian legislation, principally with regards to the nullity of

the contract.

78. It bases this exception on the provision of article 26 of the Convention, which

states:

22

79.

80.

81.

82.

“Consent of the parties to arbitration under this Convention shall, unless
otherwise stated, be deemed consent to such arbitration to the exclusion
of any other remedy. A Contracting State may require the exhaustion of
local administrative or judicial remedies as a condition of its consent to

arbitration under this Convention.”

As this Tribunal has already said, at the moment when the Ecuadorian State
ratified the BIT, it already gave its consent to submit the disputes in matter of
investments between the Ecuadorian Government and a national of the United
States of America to the ICSID arbitration; it is therefore not necessary nor
appropriate that the Ecuadorian Government gives its consent again to initiate

this arbitral proceeding.

The provision of article 26 of the Convention authorized the Ecuadorian
Government to establish certain conditions for the applicability of an
International Treaty; i.e., the Ecuadorian Government should have included, as
previous requirement, the condition of exhausting the administrative or judicial
channels, at the moment it ratified the BIT. And it has not. On the contrary, the
first part of article 26 of the Convention, as well as number 2 of article 11 of the
BIT, excluded the possibility to call on the national judges if the ICSID

arbitration has been sought first.

The Ecuadorian Government not only imposed this condition at the moment it
entered into the BIT, but is also, expressly, authorized the national of the other
country to choose between initiating the administrative or judicial actions in
Ecuador to solve the investment divergence, or to directly seek the ICSID

arbitration.

Number 2 of article VI of the BIT states indeed:

“In the event of an investment dispute, the parties to the dispute should
initially seek a resolution through consultation and negotiation. If the

dispute cannot be settled amicably, the national or company concerned

23

83.

84.

85.

may choose to submit the dispute, under one of the following

alternatives, (emphasis added by the Tribunal) for resolution:

a) to the courts or administrative tribunals of the Party that is a party to
the dispute; or

b) in accordance with any applicable, previously agreed dispute-
settlement procedures; or

c) in accordance with the terms of paragraph 3.”

The referred 3" paragraph provides in turn:

“a)_ Provided that _the_national_or company concerned _has_not
submitted the dispute for resolution under paragraph 2 (a) or_(b) and

that six months have elapsed from the data on which the dispute arose,
the national or company concerned may choose to consent in writing

to the submission of the dispute for settlement by binding arbitration.”

The wording of article VI of the BIT clearly indicates that the Ecuadorian State
did not condition the possibility to seek compulsory arbitration to the exhaustion
of the administrative or judicial remedies in the Republic of Ecuador. On the
contrary, the BIT establishes that in order to resort to arbitration, the interested
company or national shall not have submitted the controversy to the judicial or

administrative tribunals of Ecuador.

The Tribunal reiterates, once more, that the consent of the Republic Ecuador to
submit itself to arbitration was already granted, by means of the ratification of
the BIT and that in accordance with the provisions of article 25 of the
Convention, when both parties have granted their consent, the latter cannot be
revoked unilaterally, nor conditioned it to the exhaustion of administrative or

judicial remedies.

DECISION:

24

86.

87.

88.

Considering the foregoing background, the Tribunal, rejecting the exception of
lack of jurisdiction and competence proposed by the Republic of Ecuador,
declares itself competent to hear the breaches of the BIT, filed by the claimant
party, in accordance with the provisions of article VI, paragraph | section c) of
the BIT, the claimant having the procedural burden to proof the violations to

said Treaty.

Since the respondent’s objection to the jurisdiction of the Centre and to the
competence of the present Arbitral Tribunal has been resolved upon, in
accordance with the Regulation of Arbitration 41 (4) the process shall continue,

and as such it is declared.

Therefore, pursuant to number 15.3 of the abridged act of the first session of the
Tribunal as of June 5, 2003, it is hereby provided that within a term of thirty
days counting from the service of the notice of the present decision, the claimant

shall issue its Memorial.

Quito, December 22, 2003

Rodriguez Jijon Letort

President

Alejandro Ponce Martinez

Arbitrator

25

