PCA Case No. 2010-9

IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION PURSUANT TO THE AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT
BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE

REPUBLIC OF ARGENTINA FOR THE PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF

INVESTMENTS, SIGNED 11 DECEMBER 1990
- and -
THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES 1976

- between -

ICS INSPECTION AND CONTROL SERVICES LIMITED
(UNITED KINGDOM)

(“Claimant”)
- and -
THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC

(“Respondent”)

 

Award on Jurisdiction

 

Date: 10 February 2012

Tribunal
Professor Pierre-Marie Dupuy, presiding arbitrator
Dr. Santiago Torres Bernardez
The Honorable Marc Lalonde
Secretary to the Tribunal

Martin Doe

Registry

Permanent Court of Arbitration

PCA 63992

PCA Case No. 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 2 of 116

 

ABLE OF CONTE

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A. THE PARTIES TO THE ARBITRATION.
B. THE TRIBUNAL 7
C. SHORT IDENTIFICATION OF THE CASE
D. PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 12
E. THE JURISDICTIONAL ISSUES 24
F. THE PRINCIPAL RELEVANT LEGAL PROVISIONS...
F.I. UK-ARGENTINA BIT 25
F.Il. ARGENTINA-LITHUANIA BIT 29

 

F.ILL. VIENNA CONVENTION ON THE LAW OF TREATIES.......
G. SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS ..

 

 

G.I. THE PRE-ARBITRATION REQUIREMENTS OF ARTICLE 8 OF THE BIT AND THE INVOCATION OF
THE MOST-FAVOURED-NATION CLAUSE IN ARTICLE 3 OF THE BIT .. 33

 

1. Arguments by the R 33,
(i) Prior submission of disputes to the Argentine courts for a period of 18 months is a requirement
for jurisdicti
(ii) Article 8 of the BIT is part of the “offer to arbitrate” and cannot be altered by the Claimant. 36

(iii) Asa rule, MEN clauses do not apply to jurisdictional matters 36

 

(iv) No clear and unequivocal intention to apply the MFN clause derives from the text of the
Treaty 38

(v) | The usual practice of the Contracting Parties confirms that the MFN clause in the BIT does
not apply to dispute settl issues. 42

(vi) Alternatively, the circumstances of the case preclude the application of the MFN clause to

 

 

 

 

 

 

dispute p \s 43
2. Arguments by the Claimant 45
(i) The majority of tribunals have adopted a broad interpretation of MEN clauses. 45
(ii) | The MFN clause allows UK investors in Argentina to resort directly to international
arbitrati 48
(iii) Decisions adopting a restrictive approach to the interpretation of the MFN clause are factually
rane 30
G.I THE UMBRELLA CLAUSE 54
1. Arguments by the R 54

 

(i) A contractual claim, governed by Argentine law, is distinct from a claim for violation of the
BIT, governed by international law 34

(ii) | The Claimant did not conclude an investment agreement and thus cannot rely on the BIT’s

 

 

 

I
(iii) _ In the alternative, the umbrella clause is not as broad as the Claimant argues ...
(iv) The Claimant erroneously invokes the decision in SGS v. Philippines ..

 

(v) | The Claimant disregards the forum selection clause stipulated in the Contract.. os
2. Arguments by the Claimant 62

(i) The Tribunal should follow a broad approach to the interpretation of the umbrella clause...... 62

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 3 of 116

(ii) |The Respondent’s breaches of its contractual obligations constituted violations of the BIT... 64
(iii) The forum selection clause in the Contract does not deprive this Tribunal of jurisdiction...... 66
G.III. ACQUIESCENCE AND PRESCRIPTION OF THE CLAIMANT’S CLAIMS...

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Arguments by the R 68

(i) i 69

(ii) Prescription 10

2. Arguments by the Claimant 2
@ i B

(ii) inctive prescription B

G.IV. THE ASSIGNMENT ISSUE 75
1. Arguments by the R 75

2. Arguments by the Claimant 11

 

H. RELIEF SOUGHT BY THE PARTIES REGARDING JURISDICTION...
H.I. RELIEF SOUGHT BY THE RESPONDENT ...

 

 

 

H.II. RELIEF SOUGHT BY THE CLAIMANT .....
I. ANALYSIS OF THE TRIBUNAL 81
LI. THE 18-MONTH LITIGATION PREREQUISITE UNDER ARTICLE 8...

 

 

1. The nature of the i of prior ission to ine court 81

2. Is compliance with the requirement of prior submission to Argentine courts a question of
jurisdiction, admissibility, or procedure? 84

3. Is the Tribunal empowered to ignore the 18-month litigation prerequisite on the basis that it would be
fatile or inefficient?

 

LII. DOES THE Most-FAVOURED-NATION CLAUSE AT ARTICLE 3(2) APPLY TO DISPUTE
SETTLEMENT PROVISIONS? 91

 

1. Preliminary considerations: consent and treaty interpretation .....

 

2. The terms of the most-favoured-nation clause of Article 3...

(i) The meaning of “treatment”, 95

(ii) The meaning of “treatment” as regards investors’ “management, maintenance, use, enjoyment
or disposal” of i 99

 

 

(iii) The meaning of treatment by the host State “in its territory” ..

(iv) The expressio unius est exclusio alterius principle as applied to the exceptions to MFN
treatment

 

 

3. Effet utile and subsequent BIT practice by Argentina....
LIL. DOES THE ARGENTINA-LITHUANIA BIT PROVIDE “MORE FAVOURABLE” TREATMENT? ... 106

 

 

LIV. CONCLUSION ON JURISDICTION 110
LV. Costs 111
J. DECISIONS 114

 

ANNEX 1: ARGENTINE BITS BY DATE OF SIGNATURE.

 

PCA 63992

AFIP

Assignment
Agreement

Bianchi Report (First

and Second)

BIT

cl
cll
cll
civ
CV
CL#
C-LA-[#]

Contract

IcJ
ICSID

ICSID Convention

ILC

Mata Report
(First and Second)

MECON
MFN

Ostram

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 4 of 116

ABBREVIATIONS

Administracién Federal de Ingresos Piblicos

Assignment Agreement between the Claimant and Ostram dated 13 June 2001
First Bianchi Report: Expert Report of Mr. Alberto B. Bianchi, dated 24
January 2011; Second Bianchi Report: Expert Report of Mr. Alberto B.
Bianchi, dated 20 April 2011

Bilateral Investment Treaty, specifically the Agreement between the
Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
the Government of the Republic of Argentina for the Promotion and Protection
of Investments, signed on 11 December 1990

Claimant’s Statement of Claim

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction

Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction

Claimant’s Post-Hearing Memorial

Claimant’s Post-Hearing Reply

Claimant’s Exhibit No. [#]

Claimant’s Legal Authority No. [#]

Contract signed by the Parties on 11 March 1998 relating to the provision of
auditing services

International Court of Justice
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
nationals of other States, signed at Washington, DC, on 18 March 1965

International Law Commission

First Mata Report: Expert Report of Mr. Ismael Mata, dated 8 November 2010;
Second Mata Report: Expert Report of Mr. Ismael Mata, undated

Ministerio de Economia y Obras y Servicios Publicos
Most Favoured Nation

Ostram Holdings Limited

Parties
PCA

RI

RII

RI
R-[#]
R-LA-[#]

UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules

VCLT

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 5 of 116

Claimant and Respondent

Permanent Court of Arbitration
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction
Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction
Respondent’s Post-Hearing Memorial
Respondent’s Exhibit No. [#]
Respondent’s Legal Authority No. [#]

Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law, 13 December 1976

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 6 of 116

A. THE PARTIES TO THE ARBITRATION

The Claimant

Represented by:

The Respondent

Represented by:

PCA 63992

ICS Inspection and Control Services Limited
Sth Floor

86 Jermyn Street

London SWIY 6AW

United Kingdom

Mr. Christopher Colbridge

Mr. Benjamin Sanderson

Kirkland & Ellis International LLP
30 St Mary Axe

London EC3A 9AF

United Kingdom

Tel.: +44 20 7469 2010

Fax: +44 20 7469 2001

E-mail: ccolbridge@kirkland.com
benjamin.sanderson@kirkland.com

The Argentine Republic

Dra. Angelina Maria Esther Abbona

(Procuradora del Tesoro de la Nacién)

Dr. Gabriel Bottini

(Director Nacional de  Asuntos  y  Controversias
Internacionales)

Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacion.

Calle Posadas 1641

C1112ADC Buenos Aires

Argentine Republic

Tel.: +54 11 480 45 169
Fax: +54 11 480 47 718
E-mail: grupo_ciadi@ptn.gov.ar

 

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 7 of 116

B. THE TRIBUNAL

 

Appointed by the Claima:

The Hon. Marc Lalonde, P.C., O.C., Q.C.
1155 Rene-Levesque Blvd West, 33rd Floor
Montréal, QC H3B 3V2

Canada

Appointed by the Respondent:

Dr. Santiago Torres Bernardez
Calle Jorge Juan 40 - 2° Izd.
28001 Madrid

Spain

Appointed by agreement of the Co-Arbitrators:

Prof. Pierre-Marie Dupuy

Graduate Institute of International Studies and Development
Case Postale 136

16, Voie Creuse, Office No. 337

CH 1211 Geneva 21

Switzerland

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 8 of 116

Cc. SHORT IDENTIFICATION OF THE CASE

1. The following quotation from the Claimant’s Statement of Claim summarises the main
aspects of the dispute:

5. [...] In summary, the dispute relates to the treatment accorded to ICS by
Argentina in connection with the agreement entered into by ICS and the
Ministerio de Economia y Obras y Servicios Publicos (“MECON”) on March
11, 1998 relating to the provision of auditing services (the “Contract”.

6. On May 22, 1997, through Presidential Decree 477/97 (“PD 477/97”), the
Respondent approved a government-supervised programme under which
goods bound for import into Argentina would be inspected prior to shipment
to Argentina (the “Programme”). The goods were to be inspected by private
companies, authorised by the Respondent through international public tender
(“Pre-Shipment Inspection Companies”). The inspections were designed to
detect inaccurate import declarations and thereby help to combat the loss of
tax revenue to the Respondent, which would result from such inaccuracies.

7. The responsibility for the day-to-day supervision and enforcement of the
Programme, including the coordination of its audit, was given to a special
committee within MECON, known as the Comité Ejecutivo del Programa de
Inspecciones de Preembarque de Importaciones (the “Comité”). The
Administracién Federal de Ingresos Publicos (““AFIP”) was the entity within
the Argentine government responsible for the Respondent’s customs
administration and was mainly responsible for paying the invoices approved
by the Comité.

8. The operation of the Programme was to be audited by a private company
which was to be selected by the Respondent through a national and
international public tender (the “Auditor”). Under the Programme, the
Auditor was required to audit the services provided by the Pre-Shipment
Inspection Companies and thereby enable the Respondent to identify any
shortfalls in the taxable values which were attributed to imported goods which
were caused by the failure of the Pre-Shipment Inspection Companies to
properly perform their duties.

9. ICS (at that time known as Swipco Limited) was awarded the role of Auditor
after winning tender No. 13/97.

So

. Pursuant to Clause 3 of the Contract, ICS’ fees for the auditing of inspection
certificates were calculated as 0.64% of the FOB, FOR or FOT value of each
inspection certificate audited. Subsequent to the execution of the Contract, on
September 11, 1998, MECON altered ICS’ fee structure through Resolution
No. 1106/98 (“Resolution 1106/98”), such that ICS’ fees for Ordinary
Services were to be calculated as 80% of the fees received by the Pre-
Shipment Inspection Company in respect of each inspection certificate
audited by ICS. In addition, ICS fees were never to be less than 4% nor to
exceed the 10% of fees paid to the Pre-Shipment Inspection Companies (the
“10% Fee Cap”).

. In order for ICS to be in a position to be able to adhere to the 10% Fee Cap,
the Respondent was under the obligation to provide an adequate selection
system of inspection certificates to be audited.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 9 of 116

12. From the outset of the Contract, it was apparent that the Respondent had not
set up an adequate framework for the services to be rendered by ICS. Despite
several requests from ICS to the Comité requesting it to implement a suitable
selection system (which would allow the Auditor to identify those inspection
certificates it should audit and would thereby enable it to fall within the 10%
Fee Cap), the Respondent failed to implement any selection system, making it
very difficult for ICS to keep within the 10% Fee Cap.

13. The initial term of the Contract expired in March 2000. However, a year later,
on March 2, 2001, the Comité retroactively confirmed a one-year extension of
the Contract until March 2001.

14. Following March 2001, ICS made written requests, on at least two further
occasions, to the Comité asking it to set up an adequate framework to govern
the provision of the services. Indeed, the services were requested and
rendered up until December 2001, despite the formal termination of the
Contract.

15. By the end of 2001, ICS had not received payment for many of the services
rendered since 1998.

16. On January 6, 2002, Law 25.561 (the “Emergency Law”) repealed Law
23.928 (“the Convertibility Law”). The Convertibility Law had previously
stabilised the exchange rate between Argentine Peso and the US Dollar such
that 1 Argentine Peso was equal to 1 US Dollar. This measure, taken after ICS
had already provided and invoiced for its services, destroyed the economic
framework on which ICS had relied.

17. On February 20, 2002, the Programme officially terminated.

18. On that same date, ICS filed a request before the Comité for the approval and
subsequent payment of the outstanding invoices which had been submitted
but remained unpaid and outstanding.

19. In light of the Respondent’s failure to respond to the Claimant’s request, ICS
filed an administrative claim (the “Administrative Claim”) on March 15,
2002, seeking payment of the outstanding invoices which had been duly
presented in February 2002.

20. Pending resolution of the Administrative Claim, on August 22, 2002, the
Comité returned all invoices presented by ICS in February 2002 and
requested some of them to:

(i) be changed into the equal amount in Argentine Pesos (“Pesos”) i.e.
“pesified”; and

(ii) be reduced to fall under the 10% Fee Cap.

21. Due to its poor financial position, ICS proceeded as requested by the Comité
but expressly reserved its right to claim any differences between these
reduced invoices and the invoices initially submitted, together with damages
and interest.

22. Further, on June 30, 2003, AFIP sought to apply a 13% reduction to the
invoices already pesified in accordance with Presidential Decree 1060/01
(“PD 1060/01”).

23. Following two years of constant and repeated requests for the payment of the
invoices claimed in the Administrative Claim, ICS decided to amplify its
Administrative Claim on December 6, 2004 (the “Amplified Administrative

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 10 of 116

Claim”). In this way, it included all outstanding amounts and demonstrated its
opposition to some of the actions which had been taken by the Respondent
against ICS.

2

&

On January 10, 2006, almost five years after the date of termination of the
Inspection Programme, the Comité authorised payment of Pesos
1,230,181.68. No monies were paid by the Respondent until March 9, 2006.
Even when this payment was made, the only invoices which were paid were
in respect of services provided between April and December 2001 after the
application of the 10% Fee Cap, its pesification and, in the case of invoices
for services provided from July 2001 to December 2001, an additional 13%
reduction.

25. To date, no further payment of the principal amount has been made to ICS.

26. The Claimant contends that Argentina’s actions throughout this period have
violated basic and fundamental standards of protection granted to ICS by the
bilateral investment treaty applicable to this matter.’

2. As set out in the Claimant’s Statement of Claim, the Claimant asks the Tribunal to
award as follows:

248. In this proceeding ICS will be seeking relief including, without limitation:

(a) a declaration from the Tribunal that the dispute is within the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal;

(b) a declaration that the Respondent breached Article 2(2) of the BIT by
violating the standards of treatment provided therein with respect to
ICS’ investment;

(c) an order that Argentina compensate ICS in respect of the losses it has
suffered through Argentina’s unlawful conduct in an amount to be
quantified precisely during these proceedings, but in no event in an
amount less than US $25,277,011.10. This sum comprises the
following elements:

 

 

 

 

Amounts unlawfully pesified US $3,374,947.53
Amounts unlawfully reduced by 13% US $90,703.01

Amounts exceeding the 10% Fee Cap US $4,538,571.58
Unpaid invoices corresponding to US $3,035,026.68

Special Services performed between
June 1998 and July 2001

 

 

Ordering that Argentina pay pre-award US $14,237,762.29
interest
Total US $25,277,011.10

 

 

 

 

(d) damages for loss of opportunity - as a result of Argentina’s failure to
fulfil the terms of the Contract, ICS has incurred a substantial cost
derived from its efforts to recover the amounts due. ICS could have

"CL, 495-26.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 11 of 116

employed the resources it devoted to debt recovery activities in other
investments that would have yielded a return. At a minimum, ICS
should be compensated for the costs devoted to its extensive debt
recovery effort. Moreover, to make ICS whole, i.e. put it in the same
situation as if Argentina had fulfilled the Contract, ICS should also be
compensated for the return it would have earned on these costs if the
resources were invested in productive uses, earning the company’s
usual rate of return;

(e) further or in the alternative an order that Argentina has been unjustly
enriched in the amount of the value of the benefit it received;

(f) ordering that Argentina pay post-award interest as appropriate;

(g) award ICS any additional relief as the Tribunal considers appropriate;
and

(h) order that Argentina pay ICS’ costs occasioned by this arbitration
including, without limitation, the Tribunal’s fees and expenses,
administrative costs fixed by UNCITRAL, the expenses of the
arbitrators, the fees and expenses of any experts, and the legal costs
incurred by the parties (including fees of counsel), and interest.”

2 CI, 9248.

PCA 63992

S

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 12 of 116

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

By a Notice of Arbitration dated 26 June 2009, received by the Respondent on 30 June
2009, the Claimant commenced the current arbitration proceedings against the
Respondent pursuant to Article 8 of the Agreement between the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Government of the
Republic of Argentina for the Promotion and Protection of Investments, signed on 11
December 1990. Article 8 of the BIT provides, inter alia, that disputes arising under the
Treaty may be submitted to an arbitral tribunal established under the Arbitration Rules
of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law.

The Notice of Arbitration presents a dispute which is said to have arisen from the
treatment accorded to the Claimant by the Respondent in connection with the agreement
entered into by the Claimant and the Ministerio de Economia y Obras y Servicios
Publicos on 11 March 1998 relating to the provision of auditing services.

On 28 July 2009, the Claimant appointed Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov as the first
arbitrator.

On 12 August 2009, the Respondent challenged the appointment of Mr. Alexandrov in
these proceedings.

On 27 August 2009, the Respondent appointed Dr. Santiago Torres Bernardez as the
second arbitrator.

On 23 September 2009, in accordance with Article 12(1)(c) of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, the Claimant requested that the Secretary-General of the Permanent
Court of Arbitration designate an appointing authority to decide the Respondent’s
challenge.

On 26 October 2009, the Secretary-General of the PCA designated Mr. Jernej Sekolec
as appointing authority for all purposes under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

On 17 December 2009, having considered the Parties’ submissions with regard to the
challenge made by the Respondent, Mr. Sekolec sustained the challenge against Mr.
Alexandrov.

On 8 January 2010, the Claimant requested an extension of 14 days to the 30-day period
for the appointment of a replacement arbitrator. On 11 January 2010, the Respondent
consented to the 14-day extension requested by the Claimant.

On 28 January 2010, the Claimant appointed the Hon. Marc Lalonde as arbitrator.

On 26 February 2010, pursuant to agreement between the co-arbitrators, Professor
Pierre-Marie Dupuy was appointed the Presiding Arbitrator.

On 15 March 2010, the newly-constituted Tribunal requested the Parties’ comments
regarding, inter alia, the desirability of having the PCA administer the case and the
holding of a preliminary meeting to discuss further procedural issues.

PCA 63992

20.

21.

22.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 13 of 116

On 16 March 2010, the Claimant indicated its agreement with the Tribunal’s suggestion
of having the PCA administer the case, as well as its availability for a preliminary
procedural meeting in May 2010.

On 26 March 2010, the Respondent sent its reply to the Tribunal’s letter, confirming its
agreement with the Tribunal’s suggestion of having the PCA administer the case, as
well as its availability for a preliminary procedural meeting in May 2010.

On 27 March 2010, the Tribunal circulated a draft Procedural Order No. 1 to the Parties,
inviting the Parties to attempt to reach agreement on procedural matters in advance of a
procedural meeting to take place on 17 May 2010, either in person at the Peace Palace
in The Hague or by way of a telephone or video conference.

On 5 May 2010, the Parties informed the Tribunal that they had been able to “reach an
agreement in principle in respect of the main procedural issues” set out in the Tribunal’s
draft Procedural Order No. 1, and therefore believed “there should be no need for an in
person hearing in the Hague on May 17 unless the Tribunal disagrees. It might,
however, be useful to hold a conference call with the Tribunal on May 17.”

On 7 May 2010, the Tribunal communicated to the Parties that it had decided to proceed
with a conference call in lieu of an in-person meeting to be held on 17 May 2010.
Additionally, the Tribunal requested the Parties to report back with any further
developments and with information regarding the exact procedural matters agreed
between them by 13 May 2010.

On 13 May 2010, the Parties submitted to the Tribunal a revised copy of the draft
Procedural Order No. 1, setting out the Parties’ agreement with respect to outstanding
procedural matters.

On 17 May 2010, the Tribunal held a preliminary procedural meeting with the Parties
by telephone conference.

On 18 May 2010, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1 establishing, inter alia,
basic procedural rules and a timetable for the proceedings as follows:

4 Applicable Procedural Rules
41 The proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with the UNCITRAL
Rules.

4.2 For issues not dealt with in the UNCITRAL Rules or in the Treaty, the
Tribunal shall apply the rules it deems appropriate, subject to Article 1(2) of
the UNCITRAL Rules.

43 The Tribunal is empowered to issue Procedural Orders on specific procedural
issues if and when needed. These Procedural Orders may be signed solely by
the Presiding Arbitrator after consultation with the co-arbitrators.

5 Tribunal’s Fees and Expenses

5.1 Each member of the Tribunal shall be remunerated at the rate of €500 per
hour for all time spent in connection with this arbitration.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 14 of 116

5.2 Members of the Tribunal shall be reimbursed in respect of all disbursements
and charges reasonably incurred in connection with this arbitration,
including, but not limited to, travel expenses, hotels, telephone, fax, delivery,
and copying.

5.3 Members of the Tribunal may bill for reimbursement of disbursements and
charges as and when they are incurred, and may submit periodic bills in
respect of fees.

5.4 All payments to the Tribunal shall be made from the deposits referred to in
section 6.

6 Deposits

6.1 In accordance with Article 41(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules, the Parties shall
establish an initial deposit of €100,000 (€50,000 from each Party) within 30
days of the adoption of this order. The deposit shall be placed with the PCA.
by wire transfer to the following account:

Bank: ING Bank N.V., The Hague, The Netherlands
Account number: 68 55 45 369

IBAN: NL71 INGB 068 55 45 369

BIC: INGBNL2A

Account name: Permanent Court of Arbitration

Reference: ICS-AR [name of Party]

6.2 The PCA will review the adequacy of the deposit from time to time and, at
the request of the Tribunal, may invite the Parties to make supplementary
deposits in accordance with Article 41(2) of the UNCITRAL Rules.

6.3 The unused balance held on deposit at the end of the arbitration shall be
returned to the Parties as directed by the Tribunal.

6.4 Any transfer fees or other bank charges will be charged to the account. No
interest will be paid on the deposit.

7 Case Administration
7A The PCA shall administer this arbitration on the following terms:
(i) | The PCA shall maintain an archive of filings and correspondence.

(ii) The PCA shall handle Party deposits and disbursements as provided
for above.

(iii) The PCA shall make its hearing and meeting rooms in the Peace Palace
in The Hague or its facilities in Costa Rica and elsewhere available to
the Parties and the Tribunal at no charge. Costs of catering, court
reporting, or other technical support associated with hearings or
meetings at the Peace Palace or elsewhere shall be borne by the Parties
in equal parts.

(iv) Upon request, the PCA shall carry out administrative tasks on behalf of
the Tribunal, the primary purpose of which is to reduce the cost that
would otherwise be incurred by the Tribunal carrying out purely
administrative tasks. Work carried out by the PCA shall be billed in
accordance with the PCA schedule of fees. PCA fees and expenses
shall be paid in the same manner as the Tribunal’s fees and expenses.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 15 of 116

7.2 The contact details of the PCA are as follows:

Attn: Mr. Martin Doe

Permanent Court of Arbitration

Peace Palace

Carnegieplein 2

2517 KJ The Hague

The Netherlands

Tel.: +31 70302 4140

Fax: +31 70302 4167

E- mail: bureau @pca-cpa.org
mdoe@pca-cpa.org

8 Procedural Meeting

8.1 Further details of the procedure shall be discussed and, as far as possible,
agreed at a procedural meeting with the Parties to be held on 17 May 2010,
by way of a telephone conference.

9 Communications

91 The Parties shall not engage in any oral or written communications with any
member of the Tribunal ex parte in connection with the subject matter of the
arbitration.

9.2 The Parties shall send all correspondence and submissions, including

pleadings and memorials, by e-mail simultaneously to opposing counsel and
the PCA on the date the submission in question is due. The PCA shall
promptly transmit all correspondence and submissions received from the
Parties to each member of the Tribunal. The e-mail delivery of pleadings and
memorials will include witness statements and expert reports, but not
accompanying exhibits or legal authorities. The paragraphs of the written
submissions of the Parties (including witness statements and expert reports)
shall be numbered.

9.3 Electronic versions in DVD or CD of all accompanying exhibits and legal
authorities shall be sent by courier three days after the due date to the other
party. On that date, by international courier, one original and three (3) copies
of the pleadings, witness statements, expert reports and four (4) copies of the
DVD or CD shall be sent to the PCA, which shall distribute one (1) copy to
each of the members of the Tribunal and retain one (1) copy for its records.

9.4 Documents shall be submitted unbound in binders separated from briefs and
preceded by a list of such documents consecutively numbered, with
consecutive numbering in later submissions (C-1, C-2 etc. for Claimant’s
Exhibits and C-LA-1, C-LA-2 etc. for Claimant’s Legal Authorities; A RA-1,
A RA-2 etc. for Respondent’s Exhibits and AL RA-1, AL RA-2 for
Respondent’s Legal Authorities). To the extent possible, digital copies of
documents shall also be submitted in searchable Adobe Portable Document
Format (“PDF”).

9.5 To facilitate citations and word processing, each Party shall also provide
digital copies of written pleadings, including witness statements and expert
reports, in searchable PDF, preceded by a table of contents. These documents
shall be submitted as attachments to the e-mail referred to in section 9.2.

PCA 63992

PCA 63992

9.6

9.7

9.8

9.9

10.1
10.2

10.3

11
IL
11.2

11.3

12.1

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 16 of 116

All written communications shall be deemed to have been validly made when
they have been sent:

Parties: to the respective addresses of counsel in section 1;
Registry: to the address in section 7.2.

The Parties shall send copies of correspondence between them to the PCA
only if such correspondence relates to a matter where the Tribunal is required
to take action or not to take action or if it gives notice of a relevant event that
the Tribunal and the PCA should be apprised of.

Any change of name, description, address, telephone number, facsimile
number, or e-mail address shall immediately be notified by the Party or
member of the Tribunal to all other addressees referred to in sections 1, 3,
and 7.

The date of filing of an instrument shall be the date of delivery to the PCA by
e-mail of the electronic version of the submission.

Language of the Arbitration
The languages of this arbitration shall be English and Spanish.

Pleadings (including but not limited to, Statements of Claim and Defence,
Reply and Rejoinder), witness statements, and expert reports submitted in
one |; shall be ac panied by a lation into the other |

within fifteen (15) days from the original due date. Exhibits and legal
authorities need not be translated unless required by the Tribunal and
provided they are in either English or Spanish.

The Tribunal will provide its decisions in both languages. Communications
from the PCA to the Parties will be made in either language. The PCA will
arrange simultaneous interpretation services from and into English and
Spanish for future hearings. In case of any conflict between English and
Spanish language versions of memorials, witness statements, and expert
reports, the version of the originally filed instrument shall be the
authoritative version.

Seat of the Arbitration
The seat of the arbitration shall be The Hague, The Netherlands.

Meetings and hearings may be held at other locations if so decided by the
Arbitral Tribunal, after consultation with the Parties.

The Arbitral Tribunal may deliberate at any convenient location, without
consulting the Parties.

Timetable

Within 90 days from the day of the Procedural Meeting, the Claimant shall
submit its Statement of Claim together with all relevant evidence
(documents, witness statements, expert statements) it wishes to rely on in its
Statement of Claim.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 17 of 116

12.2 In the event that the Respondent wishes to raise objections to jurisdiction, the
Respondent shall submit its Memorial on Jurisdiction within 60 days from its
receipt of the Claimant’s Statement of Claim.

12.3. Within 60 days from its receipt of the Respondent’s Memorial on
Jurisdiction, the Claimant shall submit its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction.

12.4 Following the submission of the Memorial and Counter-Memorial on
Jurisdiction, the Tribunal shall decide whether a second round of written
pleadings on jurisdiction is necessary and/or whether a Hearing on
Jurisdiction is necessary.

12.5 The procedure set out in paragraphs 12.2 to 12.4 above, constitutes the
Jurisdictional Phase. Within 90 days of the completion of the Jurisdictional
Phase, should the proceedings continue, the Respondent shall submit its
Statement of Defence together with all evidence (documents, witness
statements, expert statements) it wishes to rely on in its Statement of
Defence.

12.6 Within 40 days of the Respondent’s submission of the Statement of Defence,
the Parties may request disclosure of documents from the other Party
(without a copy to the PCA).

12.7. Within 40 days of the documents request made by either Party, the receiving
Party shall produce the requested documents.

12.8 If either Party objects to any of the requests for documents, it shall reply by a
reasoned objection to the other Party (without a copy to the PCA) within 10
days of receipt of the other Party’s request for documents.

12.9 If within 10 days of the reasoned objections the Parties cannot agree
regarding the documents to which objections have been made, the Parties
may submit reasoned applications to the Tribunal to order production of the
documents.

12.10 As far as possible, within 10 days of the Parties’ application, the Tribunal
shall decide on such applications.

12.11 Within 10 days of the Tribunal’s decision, the Parties shall produce
documents as ordered by the Tribunal.

12.12 Within 90 days of the production of documents, the Claimant shall file its
Reply Memorial with any further evidence (documents, witness statements,
expert statements) but only in rebuttal to Respondent’s Statement of Defence
or regarding new evidence from the procedure for document production in
paragraphs 12.6 to 12.11 above.

12.13 Within 90 days from its receipt of the Claimant’s Reply Memorial, the
Respondent shall file its Rejoinder Memorial with any further evidence
(documents, witness statements, expert statements) but only in rebuttal to
Claimant’s Reply Memorial or regarding new evidence from the procedure
for document production in paragraphs 12.6 to 12.11 above.

12.14 Thereafter, no new evidence may be submitted, unless agreed between the
Parties or expressly authorised by the Tribunal.

12.15 At the end of the hearing, the Tribunal will consult with the Parties as to
whether the Parties shall submit post-hearing briefs and claims for arbitration
costs, and by which dates.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 18 of 116

13 Organisation of Hearings

13.1 After consultation with the Parties, the Tribunal shall issue, for each hearing,
a Procedural Order convening the meeting, establishing its place, time,
agenda, and all other technical and ancillary aspects.

13.2 The Parties agree that a record of the hearings shall be kept in English and
Spanish. The Parties agree to have sound recordings and written transcripts
of any oral hearing and “Real Time” or “Live Note”. Also it was decided by
the Parties to have simultaneous translation from English into Spanish and
Spanish into English in all hearings.

13.3. The Parties also agree that the PCA would prepare summary minutes of the
first session of the Tribunal.

14 Evidence

A) Documentary Evidence

14.1 All d (including texts and lati into the | of the
arbitration of all substantive law provisions) considered relevant by the
Parties shall be submitted with their pleadings and memorials, as established
by the Timetable.

14.2 All documents shall be submitted in the form established above in the section
on communications.

14.3. New factual allegations or evidence shall not be permitted after the
respective dates for the Reply and Rejoinder Memorials indicated in the
above Timetable unless agreed between the Parties or expressly authorized
by the Tribunal.

B) Witness Evidence

14.4 Written Witness Statements of all witnesses shall be submitted together with
the Statements and Memorials mentioned above by the time limits
established in the Timetable.

14.5 Witnesses, having submitted a written Witness Statement, shall be made
available for examination during the oral hearing. If a witness is not available
for examination for good cause during the oral hearing, the Tribunal — after
consulting the Parties — may accord such weight to the written testimony as it
deems appropriate.

14.6 In order to make most efficient use of time at the hearing, written Witness
Statements shall generally be used in lieu of direct oral examination though
exceptions may be admitted by the Tribunal. Therefore, insofar as, at the
hearing, such witnesses are invited by the presenting Party or asked to attend
at the request of the other Party, the presenting Party may introduce the
witness for up to 20 minutes and within that time frame may add direct
examination on issues, if any, which have occurred after the last written
statement of the witness has been submitted. The remaining hearing time
shall be reserved for cross-examination and re-direct examination, as well as
for questions by the arbitrators.

Cc) Expert Evidence

14.7 Should the Parties wish to present expert testimony, the same procedure shall
apply as for witnesses.

PCA 63992

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 19 of 116

15 Extensions of Deadlines and other Procedural Decisions

15.1 Short extensions may be agreed between the Parties as long as they do not
affect later dates in the Timetable and the Tribunal is informed before the
original date due.

15.2 Extensions of deadlines shall only be granted by the Tribunal on exceptional
grounds.

16 Tribunal’s Immunity from Suit

16.1 The Parties shall not seek to make the Tribunal or any of its members liable
in respect of any act or omission in connection with any matter related to the
arbitration.

16.2 The Parties shall not require any member of the Tribunal to be a party or
witness in any judicial or other proceedings arising out of or in connection
with this arbitration.

On 16 August 2010, the Claimant submitted its Statement of Claim.

On 21 September 2010, the Respondent requested an extension of the deadline for
submission of its Memorial on Jurisdiction, in light of the Claimant’s failure to file a
Spanish translation of its Statement of Claim within the deadlines established in
Procedural Order No. 1. The Claimant agreed to this request by letter dated 22
September 2010, and the Tribunal granted it by letter dated 27 September 2010.

On 28 September 2010, the Claimant submitted the Spanish translation of its Statement
of Claim.

On 13 November 2010, the Respondent submitted its Memorial on Jurisdiction. On 26
November 2010, the Respondent submitted an English translation of its Memorial on
Jurisdiction.

On 9 December 2010, the Claimant requested that the Tribunal grant a short extension
to submit its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction. On the same date, the Respondent
informed the Tribunal that it had no objection to this request. This request was then
granted by the Tribunal by letter dated 13 December 2010.

On 25 January 2011, the Claimant submitted its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction. A
Spanish translation was submitted by the Claimant on 8 February 2011.

On 9 February 2011, pursuant to Section 12.4 of Procedural Order No. 1, the Tribunal
informed the Parties that it had decided to request a second round of written pleadings
on jurisdiction and confirmed the holding of a Hearing on Jurisdiction to take place on
17 May 2011, extending to 18 May 2011 if necessary, at the Peace Palace in The
Hague.

On 11 February 2011, the Parties jointly communicated to the Tribunal a proposed
modification to the schedule fixed by the Tribunal for the second round of submissions
on jurisdiction. By letter dated 14 February 2011, the Tribunal confirmed its agreement
with the modified schedule proposed by the Parties.

PCA 63992

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 20 of 116

On 16 March 2011, the Respondent submitted its Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction. An
English translation was submitted by the Respondent on 23 March 2011. By separate
e-mail on 23 March 2011, the Respondent also submitted a list of errata to its Reply
Memorial on Jurisdiction.

On 20 April 2011, the Claimant submitted its Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction. A
Spanish translation was submitted by the Claimant on 27 April 2011.

On 25 April 2011, the Parties informed the Tribunal that they had agreed to waive their
right to examine and cross-examine witnesses and experts at the Hearing on
Jurisdiction.

On 28 April 2011, the Tribunal circulated a draft Procedural Order No. 2 to the Parties,
inviting them to attempt to reach agreement on organisational and administrative
matters related to the Hearing on Jurisdiction.

On 6 May 2011, the PCA held a pre-hearing telephone conference with the Parties in
order to resolve any organisational and administrative matters related to the Hearing on
Jurisdiction not already agreed upon by them or addressed in draft Procedural Order No.
2. Minutes of that conference were provided to the Tribunal and the Parties by the PCA
on 6 May 2011, drawing to the Tribunal’s attention, inter alia, a proposal by the
Respondent, not objected to by the Claimant, to extend the Hearing schedule through
the morning of 18 May 2011.

On 12 May 2011, the Tribunal issued the Procedural Order No. 2, convening the
Hearing on Jurisdiction, establishing its place, time, agenda, and other technical and
ancillary aspects. In particular, the Tribunal accepted the Respondent’s proposed
Hearing schedule.

On 11 May 2011, the Respondent requested authorisation to submit two additional
exhibits and eight additional legal authorities, enclosed with its request, to be used at the
Hearing on Jurisdiction, following disagreement between the Parties over the matter.
The Respondent asserted that it had informed the Claimant of its intention to submit the
referred additional documents in accordance with a procedure previously established by
them for the introduction of any additional documents after the submission of their
written pleadings preceding the Hearing on Jurisdiction. According to the Respondent,
the Claimant did not submit any additional documents of its own and objected to the
Respondent’s request to that effect, as it did not accept the Respondent’s explanations
on the relevance of the newly submitted documents. With respect to the additional
exhibits submitted, the Respondent argued that these were simply original signed
versions, in English and in Spanish, of documents that had already been introduced in
Spanish by the Claimant, as Exhibit C-71 to its Statement of Claim.

On 12 May 2011, the Claimant urged the Tribunal to reject the Respondent’s request to
submit additional documents and enclosed a record of its communications on that
matter with the Respondent. The Claimant contended that the Respondent refused to
provide a satisfactory explanation of the relevance of the additional documents and their
intended use, despite several requests to that end. Additionally, the Claimant expressed
concerns that the Respondent was seeking to submit new evidence and new legal
authorities at a late stage, in order to advance only at the Hearing on Jurisdiction a new

PCA 63992

39.

40.

Al.

42.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 21 of 116

argument not previously pleaded. The Claimant stated that it was being denied the
ability to fully understand the burden it was required to meet as a result of the
Respondent’s lack of proper explanation of the relevance and intended use of the
additional documents submitted. Furthermore, new expert evidence was being
submitted in violation of the agreement between the Parties that no further expert
evidence would be introduced and no cross-examination of experts would take place at
the Hearing on Jurisdiction. If the Tribunal allowed the submission of the new
documents, the Claimant requested that the Respondent be required to identify the
specific issues each document was relevant to, as well as the specific paragraphs in each
of the legal authorities submitted on which it intended to rely during its oral pleadings,
and requested that it be afforded the right to adduce responsive material.

On 13 May 2011, with due regard to its powers and duties under Section 14.3 of the
Procedural Order No. 1, Section 2.2 of the Procedural Order No. 2, and Articles 15(1)
and 25(6) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the Tribunal granted the Respondent
leave to submit new exhibits and legal authorities. With respect to the former, the
Tribunal shared the Claimant’s concerns regarding the lack of proper clarification on
the part of the Respondent and set a deadline for the Respondent, to the extent that its
submission had any purpose other than ensuring a more complete record of the case, to
indicate what specific factual matters it sought to address. With regard to the latter, the
Tribunal also set a deadline for the Respondent to indicate the specific paragraphs of the
Claimant’s Rejoinder to which these authorities responded and the specific paragraphs
within each authority to be relied on by the Respondent. Lastly, the Tribunal set a
deadline for the Claimant to submit further legal authorities, provided that they were
strictly limited to responding to those introduced by the Respondent and that the
Claimant indicate the specific paragraphs to which they responded and the specific
paragraphs within each authority on which it intended to rely.

On 13 May 2011, the Respondent provided an explanation regarding its intended use of
its additional exhibits and identified the specific paragraphs of the Claimant’s Rejoinder
to which they responded, as well as the specific paragraphs within each authority on
which it intended to rely.

On 14 May 2011, the Claimant commented that the Respondent seemed to be relying
upon three additional legal authorities in relation to expert evidence matters, contrary to
the Parties’ agreement and without the presence of the Claimant’s expert witness at the
Hearing on Jurisdiction. It also asserted that the Respondent had not originally disclosed
the real motivation behind its request to submit the new exhibits and objected to being
“ambushed”, one working day before the Hearing on Jurisdiction, with a new
jurisdictional issue that had not previously been pleaded. Accordingly, the Claimant
requested that the Tribunal clarify that its authorisation for the submission of the new
exhibits was limited to the extent they were relevant to the Respondent’s previously
pleaded case.

On 14 May 2011, the Tribunal decided that, to the extent that the Respondent’s
introduction of new exhibits raised a new issue not previously pleaded, the Claimant
would not be expected to respond to this issue during the Hearing on Jurisdiction. The
Tribunal further decided that the issues of whether any argument constituted a new issue
not previously pleaded and whether any new legal authorities were introduced in breach

PCA 63992

43.

44.

4S.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

Sl.

52.

53.

54.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 22 of 116

of any agreement between the Parties on waiver of cross-examination would be taken
up with the Parties at the start of the Hearing on Jurisdiction.

On 16 May 2011, the Claimant submitted the outline of its argument to be delivered at
the Hearing on Jurisdiction and expressed its expectation of receiving the same or a
PowerPoint presentation from the Respondent. On the same date, the Respondent
replied that it had no obligation or intention of submitting its outline or PowerPoint
presentation of its arguments and that it had already made this clear to the Claimant
previously.

On 17 and 18 May 2011, the Hearing on Jurisdiction took place at the Peace Palace,
The Hague.

On 20 May 2011, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3, in which it established,
inter alia, deadlines for the submission of any further documents relating to jurisdiction,
a schedule for the submission of simultaneous Post-Hearing Memorials on Jurisdiction
by the Parties, and a deadline for the Claimant to submit a further short reply
submission, restricted to rebutting any new arguments presented by the Respondent in
its Post-Hearing Memorial on Jurisdiction in relation to the “Assignment Issue”which
the Claimant considered that it had not had an adequate prior opportunity to address.

On 27 May 2011, both Parties submitted further documents relating to jurisdiction.

On 22 June 2011, both Parties submitted their Post-Hearing Memorials on Jurisdiction,
with their respective translations following on 28 June 2011 from the Respondent, and 7
July 2011 from the Claimant.

On 27 June 2011, the Claimant submitted a short reply to the Respondent’s Post-
Hearing Memorial on Jurisdiction, in accordance with section 2.2 of Procedural Order
No. 3. A Spanish translation was submitted by the Claimant on 7 July 2011.

On 28 June 2011, the Respondent submitted a letter to the Tribunal objecting to the
filing by the Claimant of an Expert Report together with its Post-Hearing Memorial,
alleging that this submission violated Procedural Order No. 3.

On 29 June 2011, the Claimant submitted a letter to the Tribunal contesting the
Respondent’s objection and requested that its Expert Report be considered together with
its other submissions.

On 30 June 2011, the Tribunal informed the Parties that their recent submissions would
be considered to the extent that they complied with the terms of Procedural Order No. 3.

On 11 July 2011, the Claimant submitted a letter to the Tribunal, enclosing a recently
published award in another case.

On 13 July 2011, the Tribunal requested that the Parties refrain from submitting any
further unsolicited documents.

On 14 July 2011, the Respondent requested leave from the Tribunal to file comments in
response to the Claimant’s letter dated 11 July 2011.

PCA 63992

55.

56.

57.

58.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 23 of 116

On 18 July 2011, the Tribunal rejected the Respondent’s request for leave, given the
fact that the Claimant’s last submission had been sent after the record of the
jurisdictional phase had been closed according to Procedural Order No. 3, and had
consequently been ignored by the Tribunal. The Tribunal noted that it could consider
any publicly-available awards rendered after the close of the proceedings on
jurisdiction, and that the Tribunal might ask the Parties to comment thereon, but that the
Tribunal did not consider any comments from the Parties to be necessary at that time.
The Tribunal reiterated its request that the Parties refrain from making any further
unsolicited submissions without first seeking leave from the Tribunal.

On 4 November 2011, the Claimant referred to the recent release of another publicly-
available award and requested that the Tribunal indicate whether it wished to receive
any comments from the Parties thereon.

On 7 November 2011, the Tribunal recalled that it could consider any publicly-available
awards rendered after the close of the proceedings and informed the Parties that it did
not consider any comments from the Parties to be necessary at that time.

On 14 December 2011, the Tribunal informed the Parties that it expected to issue its
Award on Jurisdiction in mid-January 2012.

PCA 63992

E.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 24 of 116

THE JURISDICTIONAL ISSUES

Without prejudice to the full presentation of the factual and legal details of the case by
the Parties, the issues raised by the Parties in this jurisdictional phase centre around four
principal subjects.

The first issue concerns the required 18-month period of recourse to local courts before
resorting to international arbitration and whether the MFN clause permits the Claimant
to circumvent this requirement by reference to other BITs that do not impose such a
requirement (see Section G.I below).

The second issue concerns the scope of the umbrella clause invoked by the Claimant,
and whether the Claimant’s claims arising from the Contract are covered by the BIT.
Also at issue is whether the Claimant is under an obligation to submit its claims to the
Argentine courts in accordance with Article 23 of the Contract (see Section G.II below).

The third issue concerns whether the Claimant has acquiesced to the measures it now
complains of in its claim and whether its claim is prescribed (see Section G.III below).

The fourth issue concerns the assignment by the Claimant of its rights under the
Contract to Ostram and whether the Claimant has standing to pursue any claims in this
arbitration due to the assignment to Ostram (see Section G.IV below).

These issues have been considered by the Tribunal in the order in which they were
argued by the Parties in their submissions.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 25 of 116

F. THE PRINCIPAL RELEVANT LEGAL PROVISIONS

F.I. =UK-ARGENTINA BIT

65. For ease of reference, the principal relevant provisions of the BIT are set out below in

both authentic versions:

ARTICLE 2
Promotion and Protection of Investment

(1) Each Contracting Party shall encourage and
create favourable conditions for investors of the
other Contracting Party to invest capital in its
territory, and, subject to its right to exercise
powers conferred by its laws, shall admit such
capital.

(2) Investments of investors of each
Contracting Party shall at all times be accorded
fair and equitable treatment and shall enjoy
protection and constant security in the territory
of the other Contracting Party. Neither
Contracting Party shall in any way impair by
unreasonable or discriminatory measures the
management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or
disposal of investments in its territory of
investors of the other Contracting Party. Each
Contracting Party shall observe any obligation it
may have entered into with regard to
investments of investors of the other
Contracting Party.

ARTICLE 3
National Treatment and Most-favoured-nation
Provisions

(1) Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory
subject investments or returns of investors of the
other Contracting Party to treatment less
favourable than that which it accords to
investments or returns of its own investors or to
investments or returns of investors of any third
State.

(2) Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory
subject investors of the other Contracting Party,
as regards their management, maintenance, use,
enjoyment or disposal of their investments, to
treatment less favourable than that which it
accords to its own investors or to investors of any
third State.

PCA 63992

ARTICULO 2
Promocién y proteccién de inversiones

(1) Cada Parte Contratante promovera y creara
condiciones favorables para que inversores de la
otra Parte Contratante inviertan capitales dentro
de su respectivo territorio y, sujeto a su derecho
de ejercer los poderes conferidos por su
legislacion, admitira dichos capitales.

(2) Las inversiones de inversores de cada Parte
Contratante recibiran en toda ocasion un
tratamiento justo y equitativo y gozaran de
proteccion y seguridad constante en el territorio
de la otra Parte Contratante. Ninguna Parte
Contratante perjudicara de alguna manera con
medidas injustificadas o discriminatorias la
gestion, mantenimiento, uso, goce o liquidacion
en su territorio de las inversiones de inversores
de la otra Parte Contratante. Cada Parte
Contratante observara todo compromiso que
haya contraido con relacién a las inversiones de
inversores de la otra Parte Contratante.

ARTICULO 3
Trato nacional y clausula de la nacién mas
favorecida

(1) Ninguna Parte Contratante sometera en su
territorio las inversiones y las ganancias de
inversores de la otra Parte Contratante a un trato
menos favorable que el otorgado a_ las
inversiones y ganancias de sus propios inversores
© a las inversiones y ganancias de inversores de
cualquier tercer Estado.

(2) Ninguna Parte Contratante sometera en su
territorio a los inversores de la otra Parte
Contratante, en cuanto se refiere a la gestion,

imi uso, goce o liquidacion de sus
inversiones, a un trato menos favorable que el
otorgado a sus propios inversores o a los
inversores de cualquier tercer Estado.

L-]

ARTICLE 7
Exceptions

The provisions of this Agreement relative to the
grant of treatment not less favourable than that
accorded to the investors of either Contracting
Party or to the investors of any third State shall
not be construed so as to oblige one Contracting
Party to extend to the investors of the other the
benefit of any treatment, preference or privilege
resulting from

(a) any existing or future customs union,
regional economic integration agreement or
similar international agreement to which either
of the Contracting Parties is or may become a
party, or

(b) the bilateral agreements providing for
concessional financing concluded by the
Republic of Argentina with Italy on 10
December 1987 and with Spain on 3 June 1988
respectively, or

(c) any international agreement or
arrangement relating wholly or mainly to
taxation or any domestic legislation relating
wholly or mainly to taxation.

ARTICLE 8
Settlement of Disputes Between an Investor
and the Host State

(1) Disputes with regard to an investment
which arise within the terms of this Agreement
between an investor of one Contracting Party
and the other Contracting Party, which have not
been amicably settled shall be submitted, at the
request of one of the Parties to the dispute, to the
decision of the competent tribunal of the
Contracting Party in whose territory the
investment was made.

(2) The aforementioned disputes shall be
submitted to international arbitration in the
following cases:

(a) if one of the Parties so requests, in any of

the following circumstances:

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction

Page 26 of 116
LJ
ARTICULO7
Excepciones
Las disposiciones del presente Convenio,

relativas a la concesién de un trato no menos
favorable del que se concede a los inversores de
una de las Partes Contratantes o de cualquier
tercer Estado, no seran interpretadas en el
sentido de obligar a una Parte Contratante a
conceder a los inversores de la otra Parte
Contratante los  beneficios de cualquier
tratamiento, preferencia o privilegio proveniente
de

(a) una unién aduanera existente o futura, un
acuerdo de integracién econémica regional o
cualquier acuerdo internacional semejante, al que
una u otra de las Partes Contratantes haya
adherido o pueda eventualmente adherir; 0

(b) los acuerdos bilaterales que proveen
financiacion concesional respectivamente
concluidos por la Republica Argentina con Italia
el 10 de noviembre de 1987 y con Espaiia el 3 de
junio de 1988; 0

(c) un convenio o acuerdo internacional que
esté relacionado en todo o principalmente con
tributacién o cualquier legislacion interna que
esté relacionada en todo o principalmente con
tributacion.

ARTICULO 8
Solucién de controversias entre un inversor y
el Estado receptor

(1) Las controversias relativas a una inversion
que surjan, dentro de los términos de este
Convenio, entre un inversor de una Parte
Contratante y la otra Parte Contratante, que no
sean dirimidas amistosamente, seran sometidas a
solicitud de cualquiera de las partes en la
controversia a decision del tribunal competente
de la Parte Contratante en cuyo territorio la
inversion se realizo.

(2) Las controversias arriba mencionadas
seran sometidas a arbitraje internacional en los
siguientes casos:

(a) a solicitud de una de las partes, en
cualquiera de las circunstancias siguientes:

(i) where, after a period of eighteen
months has elapsed from the moment when the
dispute was submitted to the competent tribunal
of the Contracting Party in whose territory the
investment was made, the said tribunal has not
given its final decision;

(ii) where the final decision of the
aforementioned tribunal has been made but the
Parties are still in dispute;

(b) where the Contracting Party and the
investor of the other Contracting Party have so
agreed.

(3) Where the dispute is referred to
international arbitration, the investor and the
Contracting Party concerned in the dispute may
agree to refer the dispute either to:

(a) the International Centre for the Settlement
of Investment Disputes (having regard to the
provisions, where applicable, of the Convention
on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of other States,
opened for signature at Washington DC on 18
March 1965 (provided that both Contracting
Parties are Parties to the said Convention) and
the Additional Facility for the Administration of
Conciliation, Arbitration and Fact-Finding
Proceedings); or

(b) an international arbitrator or ad hoc
arbitration tribunal to be appointed by a special
agreement or established under the Arbitration
Rules of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law.

If after a period of three months from written
notification of the claim there is no agreement
to one of the above alternative procedures, the
Parties to the dispute shall be bound to submit it
to arbitration under the Arbitration Rules of the
United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law as then in force. The Parties to the
dispute may agree in writing to modify these
Rules.

(4) The arbitral tribunal shall decide the
dispute in accordance with the provisions of

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 27 of 116

(i) cuando, luego de la expiracion de un
plazo de dieciocho meses contados a partir del
momento en que la controversia fue sometida al
tribunal competente de la Parte Contratante en
cuyo territorio se realizo la inversion, dicho
tribunal no haya emitido una decision definitiva;

(ii) cuando la decisién definitiva del
tribunal mencionado haya sido emitida pero las
partes continuen en disputa;

(b) Cuando la Parte Contratante y el inversor
de la otra Parte Contratante asi lo hayan
convenido.

(3) En caso de recurso al arbitraje
internacional, el inversor y la Parte Contratante
involucrados en la controversia pueden acordar
someterla:

(a) al Centro Internacional de Arreglo de
Diferencias Relativas a Inversiones, teniendo en
cuenta, cuando proceda, las disposiciones del
Convenio sobre Arreglo de Diferencias Relativas
a Inversiones entre Estados y Nacionales de otros
Estados, abierto a la firma en Washington D.C el
18 de marzo de 1965 (siempre y cuando ambas
Partes Contratantes sean partes de dicho
Convenio) y de la Facilidad Adicional para la
Administracion de Procedimientos de
Conciliacién, Arbitraje e Investigacidn); o

(b) a un rbitro internacional o tribunal de
arbitraje ad hoc a ser designados por acuerdo
especial o establecido de acuerdo con las Reglas
de Arbitraje de la Comision de las Naciones
Unidas para el Derecho Mercantil Internacional
(C.N.U.D.MLL).

Si, después de un periodo de tres meses a
partir de la notificacién escrita del reclamo, no
se hubiera acordado uno de los procedimientos
alternativos antes mencionados, dichas partes
deberan someter la controversia a arbitraje
conforme al Reglamento de Arbitraje de la
Comisién de las Naciones Unidas sobre el
Derecho Mercantil Internacional vigente en ese
momento. Las partes en la controversia podran
acordar por escrito la modificacion de dicho
Reglamento.

(4) El tribunal = arbitral = decidira la
controversia de acuerdo con las disposiciones

this Agreement, the laws of the Contracting
Party involved in the dispute, including its rules
on conflict of laws, the terms of any specific
agreement concluded in relation to such an
investment and the applicable principles of
international law. The arbitration decision shall
be final and binding on both Parties.

(5) The provisions of this Article shall not
apply where an investor of one Contracting
Party is a natural person who has been
ordinarily resident in the territory of the other
Contracting Party for a period of more than two
years before the original investment was made
and the original investment was not admitted
into that territory from abroad. But, if a dispute
should arise between such an investor and the
other Contracting Party, the Contracting Parties
agree to consult together as soon as possible so
that they can reach a mutually acceptable
solution.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 28 of 116

de este Convenio, el derecho de la Parte
Contratante que sea parte en la controversia —
incluidas las normas relativas a conflicto de
leyes-, los términos de acuerdos especiales
concluidos con relacién a la inversion y los
principios de derecho internacional que resulten
aplicables. La decision arbitral sera definitiva y
obligatoria para ambas partes.

(5) Las disposiciones de este Articulo no se
aplicaran cuando un inversor de una Parte
Contratante sea una persona fisica que hubiese
residido habitualmente en el territorio de la otra
parte Contratante por mas de dos ajios antes de
la fecha de la inversi6n inicial y ésta no hubiese
sido admitida en dicho territorio desde el
extranjero. No obstante, si una controversia
surgiere entre tal inversor y la otra Parte
Contratante, las Partes Contratantes convienen
en consultarse tan pronto como sea posible a fin
de alcanzar una solucién mutuamente aceptable.

F.II. =ARGENTINA-LITHUANIA BIT

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 29 of 116

66. For ease of reference, the principal relevant provisions of the Argentina-Lithuania BIT
are set out below in their authentic English and Spanish versions:

Article 9
Settlement of Disputes between an investor
and the host Contracting Party

(1) Any dispute which arises within the terms of
this Agreement concerning an investment
between an investor of one Contracting Party
and the other Contracting Party shall, if possible,
be settled amicably.

(2) If the dispute cannot thus be settled within
six months following the date on which the
dispute has been raised by either party, it may be
submitted, upon request of the investor, either
to:

- The competent tribunal of the Contracting
Party in whose territory the investment was
made;

- International arbitration according to the
provisions of Paragraph (3).

Where an investor has submitted a dispute to the
aforementioned competent tribunal of the
Contracting Party where the investment has been
made or to international arbitration, this choice
shall be final.

(3) In case of international arbitration, the
dispute shall be submitted, at the investor's
choice, either to:

- The International Centre for the Settlement
of Investment Disputes (ICSID) created by
the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and
National of other States opened for
signature in Washington on 18th March
1965, once both Contracting Parties herein
become members thereof. As far as this
provision is not complied with, each
Contracting Party consents that the dispute
be submitted to arbitration under the
regulations of the ICSID Additional Facility
for the Administration of Conciliati

PCA 63992

Articulo 9

Solucién de controversias entre un inversor y

la parte receptora de la inversién

(1) Toda controversia relativa a las disposiciones
del presente Acuerdo respecto de una inversion
entre un inversor de una Parte Contratante y la
otra Parte Contratante, sera, en la medida de lo
posible, solucionada por consultas amistosas.

(2) Si la controversia no hubiera podido asi ser
solucionada en el término de seis meses a partir
de la fecha en que hubiera sido planteada por una
u otra de las partes, podra ser sometida, a pedido
del inversor a:

los tribunales competentes de la Parte
Contratante en cuyo territorio se realizo la
inversion;
arbitraje internacional en las condiciones
descriptas en el parrafo (3).

Una vez que un inversor haya sometido la

controversia a

los tribunales competentes

mencionados de la Parte Contratante en la cual se
realizo la inversi6n o al arbitraje internacional, la
elecciOn sera definitiva.

(3) En el

caso de recurso al  arbitraje

internacional, la controversia podra ser llevada, a
elecci6n del inversor:

al Centro Internacional de Arreglo de
Diferencias Relativas a Inversiones
(C.LA.D.I.), creado por el "Convenio sobre
Arreglo de Diferencias relativas a las

Inversiones entre Estados y Nacionales de
Otros Estados", abierto a la firma en
Washington el 18 de marzo de 1965, cuando
cada Estado Parte en el presente Acuerdo haya
adherido a aquél. Mientras esta condicién no
se cumpla, cada Parte Contratante da su
consentimiento para que la controversia sea
sometida al arbitraje conforme a_ las
regl i del Mecanismo

Arbitration and Fact-Finding Proceedings,
or

- An arbitration tribunal set up from case to
case in accordance with the Arbitration
Rules of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL).

(4) The arbitration tribunal shall decide in
accordance with the provisions of this
Agreement, the laws of the Contracting Party
involved in the dispute, including its rules on
conflict of law, the terms of any specific
agreement concluded in relation to such an
investment and the relevant principles of
international law.

(5) The arbitral decisions shall be final and
binding for the parties in the dispute. Each
Contracting Party shall execute them in
accordance with its laws.*

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 30 of 116

Complementario del CLAD... para la
Administracion de  Procedimientos de
Conciliacion, de Arbitraje 0 de Investigacion,
°

 

 

- aun tribunal de arbitraje establecido para cada
caso de acuerdo con las reglas de arbitraje de
la Comision de las Naciones Unidas para el
Derecho Mercantil Internacional
(C.N.U.D.M.L).

(4) El tribunal arbitral decidira en base a las
disposiciones del presente Acuerdo, el derecho de
la Parte Contratante que sea parte en la
controversia, incluidas las normas relativas a
conflictos de leyes a los términos de eventuales
acuerdos especificos concluidos con relacién a la
inversion como asi también a los _principios
pertinentes del derecho internacional en la
materia.

(5) Los fallos del tribunal arbitral sera definitivos
y obligatorios para las partes en la controversia.
Cada Parte Contratante las ejecutara de
conformidad con su legislacion.

> English translation taken from UNITED NATIONS TREATY SERIES, vol. 2033, pp. 264-265.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 31 of 116

F.III. VIENNA CONVENTION ON THE LAW OF TREATIES

67. The principal relevant provisions of the VCLT are set out below in both English and

Spanish:
SECTION 3. INTERPRETATION OF
TREATIES
ARTICLE 31

General rule of interpretation

1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in
accordance with the ordinary meaning to be
given to the terms of the treaty in their context
and in the light of its object and purpose.

2. The context for the purpose of the
interpretation of a treaty shall comprise, in
addition to the text, including its p ible and
annexes:

(a) any agreement relating to the treaty which
was made between all the parties in connection
with the conclusion of the treaty;

(b) any instrument which was made by one or
more parties in connection with the conclusion of
the treaty and accepted by the other parties as an
instrument related to the treaty.

3.There shall be taken into account, together
with the context:

(a) any subsequent agreement between the
parties regarding the interpretation of the treaty
or the application of its provisions;

(b) any subsequent practice in the application of

the treaty which establishes the agreement of the
parties regarding its interpretation;

(c) any relevant rules of international law
applicable in the relations between the parties.

4. A special meaning shall be given to a term if
it is established that the parties so intended.

PCA 63992

SECCION 3. INTERPRETACION DE LOS
TRATADOS

ARTICULO 31
Regla general de interpretacién

1. Un tratado debera interpretarse de buena fe
conforme al sentido corriente que haya de
atribuirse a los términos del tratado en el contexto
de estos y teniendo en cuenta su objeto y fin.

2. Para los efectos de la interpretacion de un
tratado, el contexto comprenderd, ademas del

texto, incluidos su y anexos:

(a) todo acuerdo que se refiera al tratado y haya
sido concertado entre todas las partes con motivo
de la celebracion del tratado;

(b) todo instrumento formulado por una o mas
partes con motivo de la celebracion del tratado y
aceptado por las demas como instrumento
referente al tratado.

3. Juntamente con el contexto, habré de tenerse
en cuenta:

(a) todo acuerdo ulterior entre las partes acerca de
la interpretacion del tratado o de la aplicacion de
sus disposiciones;

(b) toda practica ulteriormente seguida en la
aplicacién del tratado por la cual conste el acuerdo
de las partes acerca de la interpretacién del
tratado;

(c) toda forma pertinente de derecho internacional
aplicable en las relaciones entre las partes.

4. Se dara a un término un sentido especial si
consta que tal fue la intencién de las partes.

ARTICLE 32
Supplementary means of interpretation

Recourse may be had to supplementary means of
interpretation, including the preparatory work of
the treaty and the circumstances of its
conclusion, in order to confirm the meaning
resulting from the application of article 31, or to
determine the meaning when the interpretation
according to article 31:

(a) leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; or

(b) leads to a result which is manifestly absurd
or unreasonable.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 32 of 116

ARTICULO 32
Medios de interpretacién complementarios

Se podran acudir a medios de interpretacion
complementarios, en particular a los trabajos
preparatorios del tratado y a las circunstancias de
su celebracion, para confirmar el sentido
resultante de la aplicacion del articulo 31, 0 para
determinar el sentido cuando la interpretacion
dada de conformidad con el articulo 31:

(a) deje ambiguo u oscuro el sentido; o

(b) conduzca a un resultado manifiestamente
absurdo o irrazonable.

G.

68.

69.

70.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 33 of 116

SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS

G.I. THE PRE-ARBITRATION REQUIREMENTS OF ARTICLE 8 OF THE BIT AND THE
INVOCATION OF THE MOST-FAVOURED-NATION CLAUSE IN ARTICLE 3 OF THE
BIT

1. Arguments by the Respondent

The Respondent argues this claim falls outside the jurisdiction of the Tribunal because
the Claimant has failed to comply with the requirements set forth in Article 8 of the
BIT, which demand that the dispute be submitted to the Argentine courts for a period of
18 months prior to resorting to international arbitration. According to the Respondent,
the Claimant cannot invoke the Most-Favoured-Nation clause in Article 3 of the BIT to
avoid this jurisdictional requirement by reference to the allegedly less-demanding
provisions of the Argentina-Lithuania BIT.

(i) Prior submission of disputes to the Argentine courts for a period of 18 months is
a requirement for jurisdiction

The Respondent submits that Article 8 of the BIT “articulates a multi-layered,
sequential dispute resolution system” in which all subsections of the Article “are inter-
dependent and interlinked.”* The BIT limits the State’s consent to arbitration to the
strict fulfilment of the requirements set forth in Article 8 of the BIT. Therefore, since
the Claimant has not submitted — and has not even attempted to submit — its claim to the
Argentine courts for a period of 18 months as required by Article 8(1) and (2), it has
failed to comply with a jurisdictional requirement under the BIT and cannot resort to
international arbitration.”

To support its characterisation of the nature of Article 8(1) and (2), the Respondent
refers to the Maffezini v. Spain’ and the Wintershall v. Argentine Republic’ cases, where
provisions similar to the one in the present BIT were found to constitute jurisdictional
requirements and not mere procedural steps. These tribunals found that the wording of
the BIT imposes an obligation, and not a mere option. In the alternative, the Respondent
argues that this is a matter of admissibility and that, in any event, the requirements of
Articles 8(1) and (2) of the UK-Argentina BIT cannot be perceived as merely
procedural, rather than jurisdictional, since they establish conditions that relate to a

4RLQ7.
SRL (2; RIL, 916-19.

° Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, \CSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Decision on Objection to Jurisdiction, 25 January
2000 (hereinafter “Maffezini”), 4934-37.

” Wintershall Aktiengesellschaft v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/14, Award, 8 December 2008
(hereinafter “Wintershall”), 9133-153.

PCA 63992

71.

72.

73.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 34 of 116

stage that precedes the arbitration proceedings.* The Respondent cites several decisions
from the ICJ and international arbitral tribunals to support this argument.?

Additionally, the Respondent argues that the use of the modal verb “shall” in Article
8(1) of the BIT clearly suggests the idea of an obligation to first resort to the local
courts before submitting the dispute to international arbitration. Even if the requirement
were to be considered procedural, it may not be set aside by anyone but the parties to
the Treaty.'° In this sense, the tribunal in Murphy v. Ecuador recently reaffirmed that
procedural requirements may not be ignored without giving rise to procedural
consequences.'! If the procedural conditions to a State’s consent to international arbitral
jurisdiction are overlooked, there is no consent to international jurisdiction.

Further, the Wintershall tribunal also rejected the idea that recourse to local courts for a
period of 18 months could be treated as a mere waiting period, as contended by the
Claimant. The tribunal’s analysis was as follows:

It is incorrect to characterise the obligation imposed by Article 10(2) of the
Argentina-Germany BIT as a “mandatory waiting period”. The obligation under
Article 10(2) is two fold: being constituted both by a ratione fori element and a
ratione temporis element. The circumstance that “waiting periods” are held in some
decisions to be “procedural” rather than imposing a jurisdictional requirement has
no bearing in the present case on the characterization of the eighteen-month
requirement before the local Courts as a jurisdictional requirement. The wording
used in the Argentina-Germany — BIT prescribed the two requirements differently,
Article 10(1) mentions that “Disputes... shall as _far_as_ possible be settled
amicably between the parties in dispute” (emphasis added), while the imperative
word “shall” (standing alone) is used in Article 10(2), without further qualification.
A waiting period for amicable settlement (or for “negotiation”) is definitely not the
same as a requirement to invoke the jurisdiction of domestic Courts for a given
period of time; — the former is dealt with in the Argentina~-Germany BIT in
paragraph (1) of Article 10. The latter forms the subject matter of paragraph (2) of
Article 10."

Moreover, this jurisdictional requirement represents a vital matter of international law'*
and cannot be circumvented just because it is claimed to be “burdensome,” “leads to

* Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1" day (English version), p. 35:4-12.

° Case concerning Armed Acti

 

ities on the Territory of the Congo (Democratic Republic of Congo v. Rwanda),

Judgment of 3 February 2006, 2006 ICJ Reports 6,§§[87-88; Case concerning Application of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Georgia v. Russian Federation), Decision
on Preliminary Objections, Judgment of 1 April 2011, ICJ, 9133-134; Wintershall, supra note 7, 4127 and 4145;
Murphy Exploration and Production Company v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No. ARB/08/4, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 15 December 2010 (hereinafter “Murphy”), $142.

RIL47.

"RIL 48. Murphy, supra note 9, 9142.
P RIL 49; RIL 425.

'. Wintershall, supra note 7, 4145.

'4 Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1° day (English version), p. 29:2-9.

PCA 63992

74.

75.

76.

77.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 35 of 116

inefficiency and inequity,” or that it would be “futile as the dispute would not be
resolved in eighteen months.”!*

First, it was the Claimant who let eight years go by between the adoption of the first
measures challenged and the submission of this dispute, a fact which alone defeats the
Claimant’s argument regarding the futility of resorting to local courts.'° Furthermore,
the fact that the Claimant had previously filed administrative claims is irrelevant. When
faced with silence on the part of the administrative authorities, the Claimant could have
resorted to the courts, as recognised by the Claimant’s own expert.'’ Indeed, the
Claimant’s assertion that it attempted to amicably resolve the dispute in observance of
Article 8(1) of the BIT indicates that the Claimant has been selective in its compliance
with the dispute resolution provisions, thereby contradicting its own thesis that these
provisions should be replaced by a more-favourable mechanism established in another
treaty.

Secondly, with respect to the arguments regarding “inefficiency and inequity, in that the
dispute would not be resolved in the eighteen-month period”, the Claimant has provided
no evidence that it has been prevented from filing claims with the local courts, nor that
it would not receive effective judicial protection of its rights. ®

Thirdly, the Respondent notes that, according to the expert report by Mr. Ismael Mata,
“the Argentine legal system provides for a wide range of possibilities for Claimant to
submit its claim to the local courts in a prompt manner and to eventually have such a
claim decided within the term specified by the Treaty.”” Indeed, the Respondent
stresses that the BIT does not impose on the Claimant the need to exhaust local
remedies or even necessarily to litigate the dispute before the Argentine courts for 18
months. Rather, the Claimant might file a suit and obtain a final decision from a
competent Argentine judge (who is bound to give primacy to an international treaty
such as the BIT over local laws) before the lapse of that period, thus becoming entitled
to refer the dispute to international arbitration, if it so desires.”! Otherwise, should the
dispute remain unresolved after 18 months, whether due to the lack of a final decision
or otherwise, the dispute may thereafter be submitted by the Claimant to arbitration.”
The Claimant’s argument that the dispute would not have been finally resolved within
18 months is therefore irrelevant.

Lastly, with regard to the Claimant’s argument that it would incur additional costs, the
Respondent alleges that it has been proven that the costs of judicial proceedings in

SRI G12; RIL, (21.
'RILQIL.
"RIL, 412; Expert Report of Mr. Albert B. Bianchi, dated 24 January 2011 (hereinafter “First Bianchi Report”),

438

'S R III, (24; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), p. 28:5-18.
MRILGI3.

°° Expert Report by Mr. Ismael Mata, dated 8 November 2010 (hereinafter “First Mata Report”); Expert Report
of Mr. Ismael Mata, undated (hereinafter “Second Mata Report”), §4]19-20; R I, (14.

2! Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1‘ day (English version), pp. 29-31.

» Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), p. 29:17-22.

PCA 63992

78.

79.

80.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 36 of 116

Argentina are low enough as to not prevent anyone from resorting to judicial relief, and
refers to the Second Mata Report in this respect.”*

In conclusion, the Claimant has not proven that the requirement to first submit the
dispute to the local courts is futile and since the Claimant has failed to comply with
Article 8(1) and (2) of the BIT, it has not fulfilled the requirement to establish arbitral
jurisdiction.

(ii) Article 8 of the BIT is part of the “offer to arbitrate” and cannot be altered by
the Claimant

In addition, the Respondent argues that the requirement of filing the claim with the local
courts before initiating international arbitration proceedings “is part of the offer to
arbitrate made by the Contracting Parties under the BIT.””* This standing unilateral
offer must be accepted by the investor for an arbitration agreement to exist. An investor,
such as the Claimant, may accept or not the offer as it appears in the BIT, but may not
unilaterally modify it. In this case, the 18-month period during which the dispute must
be filed before the local courts is an essential prerequisite to instituting arbitration
proceedings and constitutes an integral part of the standing offer of the host State to
arbitrate disputes. The host State’s consent to arbitration “is premised on there being
first submitted to the courts of competent jurisdiction in the Host State the entire dispute
for resolution in local courts.”?> The Respondent refers to several arbitral awards, as
well as ICJ cases to support this view.”

(iii) As arule, MFN clauses do not apply to jurisdictional matters

The Respondent notes that international jurisdiction is premised on the principle of
consent. It then goes on to reason that, since an MFN clause is not an arbitration
agreement, and does not form part of the offer to arbitrate, it must constitute a separate
consent to arbitration in order for it to apply to jurisdictional matters. Such consent
would have to derive from the clear and unequivocal intention of the Contracting Parties
to the BIT and therefore could not result from the incorporation of dispute resolution
provisions from other treaties through the application of the MFN clause.?” Doing so,
according to the Respondent, would render the requirements contained in the dispute
resolution provision of the BIT pointless, as any given investor would be able to side-
step them.”

* RIL, 415; Second Mata Report, 4446-49.
ARIS.
SR 422.

°6 Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1‘ day (English version), pp. 31-35.

27 1, 425; RIL, 17-18; R IIL, 426; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), pp. 40-
42.

°8 Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 2"! day (English version), pp. 22::4-23::4.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 37 of 116

81. The Respondent asserts that consent under public international law must be
“unequivocal” and cites a passage from Djibouti v. France in which the ICJ summarised
its jurisprudence on consent as follows:

The consent allowing for the Court to assume jurisdiction must be certain... As
the Court has recently explained, whatever the basis of consent the attitude of the
respondent State must “be capable of being regarded as ‘an unequivocal
indication’ of the desire of that State to accept the Court’s jurisdiction in a
‘voluntary and indisputable’ manner.””?

82. Moreover, the Respondent refers to Democratic Republic of the Congo v. Rwanda in
which the ICJ held that the observance of a dispute settlement provision is a conditio
sine qua non in order for an international court to exert its jurisdiction. The Respondent
concludes that an MFN clause cannot be applied to modify a jurisdictional clause,
unless this is expressly provided for.*°

83. More specific to investment treaty arbitration, the Respondent quotes the Plama®!
tribunal which held that “an MFN provision in a basic treaty does not incorporate by
reference dispute settlement provisions in whole or in part set forth in another treaty
unless the MFN provision in the basic treaty leaves no doubt that the Contracting
Parties intended to incorporate them.” The Respondent further refers to similar rulings
which were issued by the tribunals in Berschader,” Tecmed,® Salini,* Telenor,*and
Wintershall.*°

84. The Respondent stresses that the determination of whether consent to arbitration exists
is not the same as the interpretation of the scope of an arbitration agreement the
existence of which has been established. In the present case, the Claimant seeks to
establish the existence of a distinct and separate arbitration agreement through the
operation of an MEN clause. Therefore, for an MFN clause to serve as such a dispute
settlement provision, the intention of the Contracting Parties must be clear and
unequivocal, absent which the MFN clause cannot apply to jurisdictional matters. In
this case, the BIT lacks such clear and unequivocal intent.

»° Case concerning Certain Questions of Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters (Djibouti v. France), Judgment
of 4 June 2008, 2008 ICJ Reports 177, 962.

°° R IL, 4919-20. Case concerning Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo (New Application: 2002)
(Democratic Republic of the Congo v. Rwanda), Judgment of 3 February 2006, 2006 ICJ Reports 6, 4491-93.

5! Plama Consortium Limited v. Bulgaria, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction, 8 February
2005 (hereinafter “Plama”), (223.

* Berschader and Berschader v. Russian Federation, SCC Case No 080/2004, Award and Correction, signed
21 April 2006 (hereinafter “Berschader”), 4181.

3 Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed, S.A. v. Mexico, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2, Award, 29 May 2003
(hereinafter “Tecmed”), 474.

* Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. vy. Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/13,
Decision on Jurisdiction, 15 November 2004 (hereinafter “Salini”), 441 18-119.

*> Telenor Mobile Communications AS v. Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/15, Award, 13 September 2006
(hereinafter “Telenor”), 91.

*° Wintershall, supra note7, 4167.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 38 of 116

85. The Respondent further challenges the Claimant’s reliance upon certain academic
writers to support its argument in favour of the extension of the MFN clause to dispute
settlement provisions, and in particular notes that Peter Turner “does not say what
Claimant states at all. Quite on the contrary, he even supports Argentina’s position by
contending that the Treaty contains an ‘offer to arbitrate’ made by the Contracting
States, the terms of which must be accepted by the investor in order to be able to submit
the dispute to arbitration.”*”

86. Lastly, with reference to the Claimant’s reliance on the Maffezini case** to invoke a
broad interpretation of the MFN clause, the Respondent notes that the Maffezini
decision was based on an erroneous interpretation of the Ambatielos case.” In
particular, the Respondent stresses that “the citation from the Commission’s statement
about the MFN clause on which the Maffezini tribunal relies referred to matters of
substance and had no relation whatsoever to matters of procedure.”“”

87. In this regard, the Respondent refers to Professor Zachary Douglas who finds the
Ambatielos case to be irrelevant:

This analysis of the Ambatielos case reveals that the Arbitration Commission’s ruling
in abstracto that the scope of an MFN clause expressed to relate to matters of
“commerce and navigation’ might encompass ‘the administration of justice’ is of little
significance in deciding whether an MFN clause expressed in general terms might
encompass the jurisdictional framework for the submission of claims to international
arbitration.”'

(iv) No clear and unequivocal intention to apply the MFN clause derives from the
text of the Treaty

88. The Respondent submits that Article 3 of the BIT is to be construed in accordance with
the rules of treaty interpretation contained in Articles 31 and 32 of the VCLT.
According to Article 31, the starting point for treaty interpretation is the ordinary
meaning of the text, rather than attempting to extrinsically determine the intent of the
parties. Thus, when the ordinary meaning of the text is clear, there should be no resort
to other means of interpretation. This has been confirmed by numerous ICJ cases and
scholarly works.” Moreover, the Respondent argues that the only authentic interpreters

7 R IL, 4921-24; PETER J. TURNER, Ch. 10 — Investor-State Arbitration in MANAGING BUSINESS DISPUTES IN
TODAY’S CHINA: DUELLING WITH DRAGONS (Michael J. Moser ed., 2007), p. 235 (C-LA-47).

8 Maffezini, supra note 6.

* R IL, 9925-26; Ambatielos Case, Award of the Commission of Arbitration established by the agreement
concluded on 24 February 1955 between the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the Government of Greece, 6 March 1951, REPORTS OF INTERNATIONAL ARBITRAL AWARDS, vol.
XII (hereinafter “Ambatielos”), p. 106 (R-LA-22).

RIL, §926-34.

4 ZACHARY DOUGLAS, INTERNATIONAL LAW OF INVESTMENT CLAIMS (2009), p. 355 (R-LA-60).

®©R 1, 4932-35; Case concerning the Arbitral Award of 31 July 1989 (Guinea-Bissau v. Senegal), Judgment of
12 November 1991, ICJ, 448, citing Case concerning the Competence of the General Assembly for the
Admission of a State to the United Nations, Advisory Opinion of 3 March 1950, ICJ, p. 8; Case concerning

PCA 63992

89.

90.

91.

92.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 39 of 116

of treaties are the States themselves, as they are the only parties thereto. Consequently,
the Claimant’s opinion regarding the Contracting Parties’ intention should be
disregarded.*

Further, when interpreting an MFN clause, the ejusdem generis principle also applies.
Accordingly, an MFN clause “can only attract matters belonging to the same category
of subject as that to which the clause itself relates.”** The Respondent states that “the
fact that the ‘dispute settlement’ mechanism is not placed among the clauses which may
be imported from other treaties is sufficient evidence of the fact that Contracting States
did not intend to include it.”** Although the Claimant recognises the applicability of this
principle, the Respondent asserts that the Claimant erroneously argues that this principle
is the primary rule to be applied in the interpretation of the MFN clause, contrary to the
VCLT’s provisions on treaty interpretation.”

With regard to the textual interpretation of Article 3 of the BIT, the Respondent notes
that both paragraphs of the Article coincide in that they establish what kind of
behaviour may be contrary to the MFN clause by stating that neither of the Contracting
Parties shall “subject...to treatment...” According to the Respondent, the verb “to
subject” (as distinguished from “to grant” used in other BITs concluded by the
Respondent) has a negative connotation, suggesting that not all conduct is covered by
the MEN clause. In addition, use of the noun “treatment” implies a limitation to the
substantive rights of the investors.

The Respondent cites the tribunal in the Telenor case, which found such a distinction
between procedural and substantive rights and their relation to MFN clauses:

In the absence of language or context to suggest the contrary, the ordinary meaning
of “investments shall be accorded treatment no less favourable than that accorded
to investments made by investors of any third State” is that the investor’s
substantive rights in respect of the investments are to be treated no less favourably
than under a BIT between the host State and a third State, and there is no warrant
for construing the above phrase as importing procedural rights as well. It is one
thing to stipulate that the investor is to have the benefit of MFN investment
treatment but quite another to use an MFN clause in a BIT to bypass a limitation in
the very same BIT when the parties have not chosen language in the MFN clause
showing an intention to do this, as has been done in some BITs.*

The Respondent also cites the holding in Berschader to the same effect.” That
conclusion was reinforced by the fact that the expression “in its territory” (also found in

 

Maritime Delimitation and Territorial Questions between Qatar and Bahrain (Qatar v. Bahrain), Judgment of 15
February 1995, ICJ, 33.

*R IL, §35; CARLOS FERNANDEZ DE CASADEVANTE ROMANi, LA INTERPRETACION DE LAS NORMAS
INTERNACIONALES (1996), p. 55 (R-LA-62).

“RL, 4935-36. Ambatielos, supra note 39, p. 107.
* RIL, 452; RIL, 32.

4 RIL, 9937-39.

“RI, 4937-39; RIL, 9941-43.

* Telenor, supra note 35, 492.

® Berschader, supra note 32, 4185.

PCA 63992

93.

94.

95.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 40 of 116

Article 3 of the instant BIT) “appears to indicate that what the Contracting Parties had
in view was the material rights accorded to investors within the territory of the
Contracting States.”°° The scope of the MFN clause is thus limited to matters taking
place within its territory, which does not include recourse to international dispute
resolution.”

The Respondent also draws a distinction between paragraphs (1) and (2) of Article 3 of
the UK-Argentina BIT with respect to the scope of the MFN clause: while the former
applies to “investments and returns of investors”, the latter applies to “investors” and is
limited to the “management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal” of their
investments. As a result, the Respondent concludes that the parties to the BIT expressly
agreed upon wider MEN protections to investments and profits than to investors. It
also argues that the wilful wording of the MFN provision applicable to the investors —
namely, the ones allowed to invoke the treaty’s dispute resolution provisions — indicates
that the MEN treatment to which they are entitled is not absolute and that it is restricted
to issues expressly referred to in Article 3(2). Accordingly, this provision is related to
certain substantive protections granted to an investor rather than to dispute settlement. It
refers to the daily operations or activities of the investment, which clearly do not
include exceptional events such as the institution of legal proceedings against the host
State. This interpretation is supported by Article 2(2) of the BIT, which also refers to
“management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal” in relation to “unreasonable or
discriminatory measures.” The difference in nature between the dispute settlement
clause and the substantive provisions is further evident in Article 21 of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, which expressly recognises that the arbitration clause is to be
considered independently from the other terms of the contract. **

The Respondent further submits that the MFN clause of the BIT does not refer to “all
matters” or “all issues,” phrases on which tribunals, such as in Maffezini v. Spain,*
have relied when making broad interpretations of the scope of MFN provisions in other
BITs. The Respondent refers to several tribunals that have refused to extend the scope
of the MFN clause to dispute settlement when the wording of the clause neither
envisaged it explicitly nor encompassed “all rights or all matters covered by the
agreement.”*>

Additionally, the Respondent argues, as recognised by the Claimant itself, that the
placement of the dispute settlement provision is relevant for the interpretation of the
MEN clause. In addition, the Respondent argues that the placement of the MFN clause
amongst provisions relating to substantive treatment is yet another indication that the
parties to the BIT did not intend to extend its application to dispute resolution matters,

* Berschader, supra note 32, $185; R I, §40.

*! R IIL, 430; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1 day (English version), p. 39:7-16.

* Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), p. 27:22-25, and p. 38:1-19. Transcript of

the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 2" day (English version), pp. 18:11-19:10.

 

®R 1, 9946-50; RI, §953-54; R I, 4455-56; R Ill, 28; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1% day
(English version), pp. 39:17-40:2.

* RL, 4946-50; Maffezini, supra note 6, {49.
RL, 4948-49; Salini, supra note 34, (118-119; Telenor, supra note 35, 498.

PCA 63992

96.

97.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 41 of 116

which are dealt with in the treaty’s final provisions.°° The Respondent thus concludes
that the dispute resolution provision is not encompassed by the scope of the MFN
clause.*”

Contrary to the Claimant’s argument that, since the exceptions to MFN treatment in
Article 7 of the BIT fail to refer to any matter connected to dispute settlement, the MFN
clause must apply to the dispute settlement provision, the Respondent asserts that the
expressio unius exclusio alterius principle is only a supplementary means of
interpretation that is not determinative where a treaty contains other decisive elements.
To the contrary, the Respondent notes that the fact that the exceptions enumerated in
Article 7 of the BIT are not even remotely connected with dispute settlement, as
recognised by the Claimant, indicates that the Contracting Parties already did not
contemplate the application of the MFN clause to dispute settlement matters. The
Respondent asserts that the Contracting Parties only included exceptions for those
aspects about which there could be some doubt concerning the scope of the MFN
clause.** If the Claimant’s position were to be accepted, that would entail the “absurd”
conclusion that the treaty’s ratione temporis provisions are within the scope of the MFN
clause as well.”

Lastly, the Respondent argues that reference to the alleged purpose of the BIT does not
authorise a breach of Article 8. Even if the Claimant asserts that the requirement to
submit to the local courts for a period of 18 months would defeat the purpose of the
BIT, the Respondent refers to the Wintershall tribunal who in this regard held:

Resort to the Preamble of the BIT in support of unrestricted direct access to ICSID
Arbitration is also misplaced. The assertion [...] that the purpose of the Germany-
Argentina BIT is to protect and promote investments and to stimulate private
initiative and that therefore direct access to ICSID is in accordance with the
purpose of the BIT is not a correct reading of the Preamble. The Preamble in this
BIT states: (1) the desire of the States to intensify economic cooperation between
the two [of] them; (2) the aim at creating favourable conditions of investment by
nationals and companies of one State in the territory of the other State; and (3) the
recognition of the promotion and protection of such investments “on the basis of an
agreement” would be conducive to stimulating private business initiative and
enhance the well being of both nations. The “agreement” is the BIT itself.

Undoubtedly, the promotion and protection of investment is an object or purpose of
the BIT but that promotion and protection in the Argentina-Germany BIT is to be
“on the basis of an agreement” (i.e. on the basis of the terms of the Treaty — the
BIT): which could not possibly exclude the provisions of Article 10(2). If the
object and purpose had been to have an immediate unrestricted direct access to
ICSID arbitration, then inclusion of Article 10(2) would have been otiose and
superfluous. Therefore, the assumption and assertion made in this proceeding (and
in some decisions of ICSID Tribunals as well), that since the object and purpose of
a BIT is to protect and promote investments, unrestricted direct access to ICSID

°° R III, 432; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), p. 37:8-21.
RIL, 946-48.

SRI, 4951-52.

* RIL 9.

PCA 63992

98.

99.

100.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 42 of 116

must be presumed, is contrary to the text (and context) of this BIT, i.e. the
Argentina-Germany BIT.”

According to the Respondent, the Claimant’s allegation regarding the “object and
purpose” of the BIT relies on equivalent wording analyzed by the Wintershall tribunal
and should be dismissed for the same reasons, which have been echoed by various other
tribunals and scholars.°! The Respondent further notes that, contrary to the arguments
advanced by the Claimant, the wording of the MFN clause before Wintershall was
actually wider than the clause in the BIT at hand, since it encompassed “activities
related to investment.”® The Respondent concludes that there are no grounds to
maintain that the “object and purpose” of the BIT authorise a breach of the requirements
of Article 8(1) and (2) of the BIT.

(vy) The usual practice of the Contracting Parties confirms that the MFN clause in
the BIT does not apply to dispute settlement issues

According to the Respondent, the United Kingdom’s BIT practice evidences that,
whenever it wanted to extend the application of the MFN clause to dispute settlement
provisions, it has done so in a clear and unequivocal manner. Between 1975 and 1989,
the United Kingdom concluded 35 BITs, none of which established that the MFN clause
would apply to dispute settlement matters. However, since 1990, some BITs concluded
by the United Kingdom have included an additional paragraph in the MFN clause that
extends the MEN treatment to dispute settlement clauses. After having concluded a first
BIT with this clear extension of the MFN treatment (the UK-Burundi BIT, concluded
on 13 September 1990), the United Kingdom went on to execute other BITs that did not
include this specific language (e.g., the UK-Argentina BIT, concluded on 11 December
1990).°

The phrase “for the avoidance of doubt...” that sometimes precedes the provision
extending the scope of the MEN treatment does not affect this conclusion. This phrase,
whose use is inconsistent, only shows the clear and unequivocal intention to include
dispute settlement provisions within the scope of the MFN clause in a specific treaty
where consent to arbitration would otherwise be unclear, and does not reflect any
intention with respect to the interpretation of previous BITs.° In this regard, the
Wintershall tribunal held as follows:

Ordinarily, an MFN Clause would not operate so as to replace one means of
dispute settlement with another. This is (presumably) why the drafters of the UK
Model BIT had provided (in Article 3(3)) that “for avoidance of doubt MFN

© Wintershall, supra note 7, §§154-155.

°' Plama, supra note 31, 4163; DOUGLAS, supra note 41, p. 345.

© R III, 29; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 2"! day (English version), pp. 17:15-20:9.
RL, 4959-69; R IL 433.

“ Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 2"! day (English version), pp. 20:10-22:3.
RL, 9963-64.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 43 of 116

treatment shall apply to certain specified provisions of the BIT including the
dispute settlement provision.”
101. The Respondent concludes therefore that the Tribunal should not extend the scope of
the MFN clause when such clause fails to contain a clear and unequivocal indication
that it is applicable to dispute settlement provisions.

(vi) Alternatively, the circumstances of the case preclude the application of the
MEN clause to dispute settlement provisions

102. In the alternative, the Respondent argues that even if the Tribunal were to adopt a broad
interpretation of the MFN clause, it still cannot be applied to dispute settlement
provisions given the circumstances of the present case.

103. First, the 18-month clause is an essential clause of the Treaty that was specially
negotiated by Argentina, not only in this BIT, but also in many others. Yet, it is not
uniformly included in every single Argentine BIT. This evidences the Contracting
Parties’ intention to include it as a special and binding provision. Moreover, the
Respondent notes that, after executing treaties that did not include the 18-month clause,
Argentina continued executing treaties that did include this requirement.” This
constitutes further proof that the 18-month clause was not meant to be covered by the
MEN clause: why else would Argentina have continued to conclude BITs with this
requirement, when the MFN clause would have already rendered it nugatory? Any other
conclusion would render the 18-month provision useless. As soon as Argentina signed a
BIT without this requirement, any such provision in future BITs would be automatically
suppressed through the effect of the MEN clause.°*

104. The Respondent stresses that the importance of the 18-month provision is also reflected
in the United Kingdom’s BIT practice. Only two of its treaties contain this requirement.
Both BITs were signed after the United Kingdom had begun its practice of including
explicit provisions where it intended to extend the scope of the MFN clause to dispute
resolution provisions, but neither of the treaties which contain the 18-month provision
include the more broadly-worded MEN clause.”

105. Moreover, the Respondent refers to the UK-Paraguay BIT, which shows that the
expression “for the avoidance of doubt it is confirmed that...” is not aimed at clarifying
a prior intention, but is actually included in order to distinguish the BIT from other BITs
in which the MFN clause does not apply to dispute settlement provisions. The BIT
between United Kingdom and Paraguay, signed in 1981, did not extend the scope of the
MEN clause to include dispute settlement provisions. However, in 1993, the
Government of Paraguay proposed to amend the BIT and include a third paragraph to
the MEN clause that would state that “[fJor the avoidance of doubt it is confirmed that
the treatment provided for in paragraphs (1) and (2) above shall apply to the provisions

° Wintershall, supra note 7, 4167.
RI, 4970-73.

RL, 4973-75.

ORL G4.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 44 of 116

of Articles 1 to 11 of this Agreement.” The United Kingdom accepted this amendment.
The Respondent concludes that this interaction demonstrates that the inclusion of an
express reference to dispute settlement provision in the MFN clause constituted an
amendment to the treaty, and not just a mere clarification.”°

106. Secondly, the Claimant cannot seek to import discrete parts of the arbitration provision
of the Argentina-Lithuania BIT as it establishes a distinct dispute settlement system.
According to the Respondent, the differences between the dispute settlement clause in
the Argentina-Lithuania BIT and the UK-Argentina BIT are sufficiently pronounced
(e.g., the Argentina-Lithuania BIT’s fork-in-the-road provision and option of ICSID
arbitration at the investor’s choice) that the Claimant is precluded from importing it
even under a broad conception of the MEN clause.’!

107. Thirdly, the Respondent argues that Article 9 of the Argentina-Lithuania BIT expressly
precludes any of its provisions from being exported by limiting the application of the
dispute settlement provision to “[a]ny dispute which arises within the terms of this
Agreement.” 2

108. Fourthly, in the event the MFN clause were applicable to Article 8 of the BIT, the
Claimant would need to prove that the provision foreseen in the Argentina-Lithuania
BIT grants “more favourable” treatment “within the territory” of the Argentine
Republic.” According to the Respondent and scholars it cites, the mere fact that the BIT
requires that potential claimants first endeavour to settle the dispute in the host State’s
domestic courts cannot be axiomatically considered to be less favourable treatment. In
particular, the Respondent refers to Christer Sdderlund who cautions against such an
assumption:

In order for the MFN clause to be considered in a procedural context, one will, for
instance, need to ask whether —as a matter of principle- a possibility to proceed to
international investment dispute arbitration without exhausting local remedies is
“more favourable”. As an empirical experience, there is no doubt that investors will
consider the latter alternative more favourable, in fact it is the perceived
inadequacy of domestic judiciaries, particularly in capital-importing countries, that
have created the impetus toward international arbitration in the first place.
However, on the level of principle, there is nothing that dictates that domestic court
review must necessarily be less favourable alternative.

It was noted by the Gas Natural Tribunal that having to submit to the minimum 18
months’ period in a local court (inappropriately referred to as “waiting” period)
was “a less favourable degree of protection”. This was, indeed an axiomatic
statement which even if it may be true in the particular instance, was not supported
by any empirical evidence and, on the level of principle, questionable.”

(emphasis added)

RII, 4934-36.

™ RL, 4976-78; R IIL, §37; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), p. 44.
PRILG79.

Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), p. 45:2-14.

74 R I, §§82-83; C. SODERLUND, Most Favoured Nation (MFN) Clauses in Bilateral Investment Treaties in LIBER
AMICORUM BERNARDO CREMADES (M.A. Fernandez-Ballesteros and David Arias eds., 2010), p. 1125.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 45 of 116

109. Additionally, analyzing this matter in light of the Maffezini v. Spain case, Professor
Jiirgen Kurtz comes to a similar conclusion:

The Maffezini approach is to simply assume that access to the Spanish courts in the
eighteen-month period is ‘less favourable treatment’ than direct arbitral proceedings.
This view in itself seems almost reflective of an epistemological belief in the
superiority of investment arbitration. The lack of a rigorous comparison between the
two forms of adjudication is a serious flaw in the Tribunal’s reasoning and one
which should (but most likely will not) weaken its influence amongst later arbitral
tribunals.”

110. Indeed, even the scholars cited by the Claimant, Andrew Newcombe and Lluis Paradell,
recognised that one of the matters that has to be taken into account in order to determine
the application of the MFN clause is whether there has been less favourable treatment or
not.”° The Respondent goes on to argue that “it cannot be reasonably concluded that
there is inequality on account of the treatment accorded to Lithuanian investors, since
one could consider that having the opportunity to first resort to the Argentine courts
and, then, if the dispute is not settled, to international arbitration is more beneficial.”””

111. In the present case nothing prevented the Claimant from filing a claim before the
competent Argentine courts and, as stated in the Mata Report, the Claimant could have
potentially received a final decision in less than 18 months.”*

2. Arguments by the Claimant

112. The Claimant rejects the Respondent’s arguments regarding the impossibility of
invoking the MFN clause to benefit from a more favourable dispute settlement
procedure. The Claimant argues that its ability to invoke the MFN clause to overcome a
procedural hurdle, such as the 18-month provision, is based on sound treaty
interpretation and is confirmed by a majority of arbitral decisions on the matter.

(i) — The majority of tribunals have adopted a broad interpretation of MFN clauses

113. According to the Claimant, States have used MFN clauses in BITs to ensure that they
obtain any advantages, privileges, and concessions that the granting State has accorded
or accords in the future to third States. Therefore, the MFN treatment prohibits the
granting State from discriminating between investors and ensures that the investor from
one State receives no less favourable treatment than the treatment provided to the
investor from a third State. Additionally, MFN clauses “promote investor-State
relations, economic competition and help to harmonize the degree of investment
protection.” Consequently, a broad interpretation of MFN clauses helps to satisfy these

75 ANDREW NEWCOMBE & LLUIS PARADELL, LAW & PRACTICE OF INVESTMENT TREATIES: STANDARDS OF
TREATMENT (2009), p. 229 (citing J. Kurtz, The MFN Standard and Foreign Investment: An Uneasy Fit?, 5 J.
WORLD INVESTMENT & TRADE 861 (2004)) (C-LA 38).

76 NEWCOMBE & PARADELL, supra note 75, p. 196.
7 RIL, 4957-61; R IL, 938.
RI, 4984-85.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 46 of 116

goals “by viewing BITs not as expressions of quid pro quo bargains but rather
components of an international economic order based on basic principles of investment
protection and guarantees.” In this context, the Claimant further stresses that one of the
essential rights that the MFN clause is designed to protect, is the right of an investor to
initiate arbitration against a host State.

114. Even though the Claimant acknowledges that investment tribunals have given
seemingly conflicting answers to the question of whether MFN clauses can be applied
to import more favourable dispute resolution provisions, these conflicting answers can
be explained by variations in the drafting of the clauses and the purpose for which the
MEN was invoked. Accordingly, the Claimant contends that in cases that have involved
the overcoming of procedural obstacles, tribunals have regularly allowed investors to
bypass such unfavourable procedural requirements (e.g., Maffezini v. Spain).*° On the
other hand, tribunals have not allowed investors to use an MEN clause to import entire
dispute resolution mechanisms beyond those set forth in the BIT itself (e.g., Salini v.
Jordan*! and Plama v. Bulgaria®’), The Claimant further cites several authorities that
support its view, for example, Professors Rudolf Dolzer and Christoph Schreuer explain
that:

The two sets of cases may be distinguishable on factual grounds. The cases in
which the tribunals accepted the applicability of the MFN clauses to dispute
settlement all concerned procedural obstacles. The cases in which the effect of the
MEN clauses was denied concerned attempts to extend the scope of jurisdiction
substantively to issues not covered by the arbitration clause.**

115. The Claimant refers in more detail to the tribunal’s findings in the Maffezini case, where
it was held that, “if a third-party treaty contains provisions for the settlement of disputes
that are more favorable to the protection of the investor’s rights and interests than those
in the basic treaty, such provisions may be extended to the beneficiary of the most
favored nation clause as they are fully compatible with the ejusdem generis principle.”™
The Claimant further rejects the arguments raised by the Respondent against the
Maffezini tribunal’s interpretation of the Ambatielos and Anglo-Iranian Oil Company
cases.*° The Claimant contends that Ambatielos supports its position.*° The decision
states that the MFN clause can encompass matters belonging to the same category of
subject as that to which the clause itself relates; meanwhile, in the present case, dispute
settlement activities fall within the field of application of the “management,
maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal” of the investment foreseen in the MFN clause.
The Claimant refutes the Respondent’s position that the ICJ, in the Anglo-Iranian Oil

* CIL 95-8.

CIV, 4971-74; Maffezini, supra note 6.
S| Salini, supra note 34.

® Plama, supra note 31.

83 TI, 912-14; RUDOLF DOLZER & CHRISTOPH SCHREUER, PRINCIPLES OF INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT LAW
(2008), p. 256 (C-LA-49).

“ Maffezini, supra note 6, 456; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1°‘ day (English version), pp. 103-108.
5 CII, #q15-20.
‘6 Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1‘ day (English version), pp. 98-100.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 47 of 116

Company case, found that the MFN clause had no relation to jurisdictional matters.
According to the Claimant, the ICJ explicitly stated that it was not “considering the
meaning and the scope of the most-favoured-nation-clause.”*”

116. The approach followed in Maffezini has also been followed in UNCITRAL cases,
including cases under the UK-Argentina BIT. In National Grid PLC v. Argentine
Republic,** the tribunal considered whether the MFN clause of the UK-Argentina BIT
was applicable to provide the investor with a more favourable dispute resolution
mechanism.” The tribunal “concur[red] with Maffezini’s balanced considerations in its
interpretation of the MFN clause,” finding that “‘treatment’ under the MFN clause of
the Treaty makes it possible for UK investors in Argentina to resort to arbitration
without first resorting to Argentine courts.”®° This tribunal further noted that although
the MEN clause does not expressly reference dispute resolution, this matter was not
included among the exceptions to the clause in Article 7 of the BIT.*! The Claimant
asserts that the Respondent has failed to examine and refute this case or the AWG case
explained in further detail below.”

117. Similarly, the AWG Group Ltd. v. Argentine Republic tribunal found that the MFN
clause in Article 3 of the UK-Argentina BIT could be invoked in order to benefit from
the more favourable dispute resolution procedures afforded to French investors under
the France-Argentina BIT, thereby avoiding the requirement to first resort to local
courts.” In particular, the wording of the UK-Argentina BIT’s MEN clause, did not
pose an obstacle to its use in this manner:

Despite the difference in language of the most-favoured-nation clauses in the [UK-
Argentina and Spain-Argentina] BITs, the Tribunal believes an interpretation of
each leads to the same result. The Argentina-U.K. BIT, like the Argentina-Spain
BIT, does not define the word “treatment.” The Tribunal gives that word the same
interpretation in the two treaties: the rights and privileges granted and the
obligations and burdens imposed by a Contracting State on investments made by
investors covered by the treaty.”*

118. According to the Claimant, these cases confirm a well-settled approach in international
investment arbitration recognizing the possibility of relying on MFN clauses to avoid
procedural obstacles that are nonsensical and cumbersome.’ The Claimant further cites

*7C IIL, 4915-18; Case concerning the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company (United Kingdom v. Iran), Judgment of 22
July 1952, 1952 ICJ Reports 93, p. 109 (R-LA-66).

*8 National Grid ple v. Argentine Republic, UNCITRAL, Decision on Jurisdiction, 20 June 2006 (hereinafter
“National Grid”) (C-LA-42).

 

* Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), pp. 112-115.

°° National Grid, supra note 88, 4992-93.

°! National Grid, supra note 88, 482.

CII, 422.

°°’ AWG Group Ltd. v. Argentine Republic, UNCITRAL, Decision on Jurisdiction, 3 August 2006 (hereinafter
“AWG?”), 457 (C-LA-53); Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), pp. 108-111.

” AWG, supra note 93, 457.

9s

CIV, 4968-70 and 85-86; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), p. 98:2-13 and p.
117.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 48 of 116

the Case Concerning the Rights of Nationals of the U.S. in Morocco before the ICJ as
evidence that international courts have also endorsed a broad reading of MFN clauses.”°

(ii) The MFN clause allows UK investors in Argentina to resort directly to
international arbitration

119. The Claimant contends that the MFN clause must be interpreted in accordance with
Articles 31 and 32 of the VCLT, as the Respondent also argued. Additionally, the
Claimant refers to the National Grid tribunal, which stated that the VCLT “does not
establish a different rule of interpretation for different clauses. The same rule of
interpretation applies to all provisions of a treaty, be they dispute resolution clauses or
MEN clauses.””’

120. According to the ejusdem generis principle, which is recognised as a governing
principle for interpreting MFN clauses, the MFN clause can only attract rights from
other treaties belonging to the same category of subject as that to which the clause itself
relates. In the present case, however, even though the MFN clause at Article 3 does not
include any reference to dispute resolution, Article 7 of the BIT also does not include
any reference to dispute resolution among the exceptions to the scope of the MFN
clause.”* Consequently, according to the Claimant, dispute resolution mechanisms must
be considered to be included under the MFN clause. In support of this argument, the
Claimant refers to the Suez/InterAgua case, where the tribunal determined that “[tJhe
failure to refer among these excluded items to any matter remotely connected to dispute
settlement reinforces the interpretation” that the term “treatment” in Article 3(2)
“includes dispute settlement matters.”

121. The Claimant argues that the ordinary meaning of “treatment” encompasses “the rights
and privileges granted and the obligations and burdens imposed by a Contracting State
on investment made by investors covered by the treaty.”!°’ According to this definition,
the term is not restricted to any substantive standard of treatment. Besides, the terms
“management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal” listed in Article 3(2) of the
BIT encompass the protection of an investment and include dispute settlement
activities. This was the conclusion reached by the tribunal in AWG.'"' Citing the
RosInvest decision, the Claimant also notes that the characterisation of its right to resort
to arbitration as either procedural or substantive has no foundation since both concern

°© Case concerning the Rights of Nationals of the United States of America in Morocco (France v. United States),
Judgment of 27 August 1952, 1952 ICJ Reports 176, p. 190 (C-LA-44).

°T National Grid, supra note 88, 480.
°8 © IV, 4957-67; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), p. 109:23-25 and p. 110:1-
12.

°° Suez Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. & InterAguas Servicios Integrales del Agua S.A. v.
Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/17, Decision on Jurisdiction, 16 May 2006 (hereinafter
“Suez/InterAgua”), §56 (C-LA-56).

1 AWG, supra note 93, 455.
1! 4WG, supra note 93, 457.

PCA 63992

122.

123.

124.

125.

126.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 49 of 116

the treatment given to the bundle of rights whose protection is ensured by the applicable
BIT.”

Turning to the purpose of the MFN clause, the Claimant argues that tribunals have
found that “[aJn MFN clause is aimed at ensuring equality of treatment to the
beneficiaries in respect of its subject matter at the most advantageous level.”!" Since
foreign investment is not static, MFN clauses serve exactly the purpose of progressively
maintaining a level playing field and equality of treatment between the parties
involved.'™ In this context, the Claimant recalls that the Contracting Parties’ intention
under the BIT was to promote favourable conditions for investment and to stimulate
private initiative. Thus, the Claimant argues, protection of foreign investors in this
regard is essential and it cannot be excluded from the context of the BIT.

Contrary to the Respondent’s argument, the Claimant contends that MFN clauses are
not generally limited to substantive obligations. The Claimant supports this argument by
citing scholars and case law, and in particular the decision in Renta 4 S.V.S.A. et al. v.
Russian Federation which found that “access to international arbitration has been a
fundamental and constant desideratum for investment protection and therefore a
weighty factor in considering the object and purpose of BITs” and also that there was
“no textual basis or legal rule to say that ‘treatment’ does not encompass the host state’s
acceptance of international arbitration.”

Lastly, with regard to Argentina’s BIT practice, the Claimant notes that out of the 41
BITs signed by the Respondent since October 1992, only one (signed in 1994) includes
the requirement of prior submission to local courts, thereby evidencing that Argentina
has clearly abandoned any once-held policy requiring prior submission to local
courts.

Consequently, the Claimant concludes that the ordinary meaning of the MFN clause in
the BIT in context and in light of its object and purpose makes clear that the MFN
clause can be extended to afford the Claimant with more favourable dispute resolution
procedures found in other BITs entered into by the Respondent.

In order to support this conclusion, the Claimant refers to other tribunals which have
considered comparable or identical MFN clauses to the one at hand, and who have
reached the same conclusion as argued by the Claimant. The most analogous decision
was the one issued in National Grid, which was also an UNCITRAL tribunal and which
analysed the same BIT. Argentina raised many of the same arguments as it does before
this Tribunal. The National Grid tribunal, however, rejected Argentina’s objections and
held that “in the context in which the Respondent has consented to arbitration for the

'® Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), p. 118; Ros/nvestCo UK Ltd. v. Russian
Federation, SCC Case No. 079/2005, Award on Jurisdiction, 5 October 2007 (hereinafter “Rosinvest”).

13° I], 4929 -31; Telefonica S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/20, Decision of the Tribunal
on Objection to Jurisdiction, 25 May 2006 (hereinafter “Telefénica”), 498.

' Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), p. 16.

15 © III, 9924-25; Renta 4 S.V.S.A. et al. v. Russian Federation, SCC Case No. 24/2007, Award on Preliminary
Objections, 20 March 2009 (hereinafter “Renta 4”), {100-101 (C-LA-117).

16 © II, 32. Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1° day (English version), p. 115:19-25.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 50 of 116

resolution of the type of disputes raised by the Claimant, ‘treatment’ under the MFN
clause of the Treaty makes it possible for UK investors to resort to arbitration without
first resorting to Argentine courts.” |

127. This was the same conclusion reached by the AWG tribunal which was also confronted
with the analysis of the UK-Argentina BIT.’ A line of tribunals analyzing the Spain-
Argentina BIT have also reached the same conclusion, emphasizing the fact that dispute
resolution does not figure among the exceptions to MFN treatment. Accordingly, the
Claimant concludes that, given that tribunals faced with identical MFN clauses have
consistently allowed a claimant to overcome procedural requirements in the BIT’s
dispute resolution clause, this Tribunal ought to reach the same conclusion and
recognise jurisdiction over its claims.

128. Lastly, in response to the Respondent’s argument regarding whether the dispute
settlement provision of the Argentina-Lithuania BIT is in fact more beneficial to the
Claimant, the Claimant refers to the Gas Natural tribunal which rejected this same
argument stating that “provision for international investor-state arbitration in bilateral
investment treaties is a significant substantive incentive and protection for foreign
investors; further, that access to such arbitration only after resort to national courts and
an eighteen-month waiting period is a less favorable degree of protection than access to
arbitration immediately upon the expiration of the negotiation period.”!”

(iii) Decisions adopting a restrictive approach to the interpretation of the MFN
clause are factually distinguishable

129. The Claimant submits that the cases relied upon by the Respondent to defend a
restrictive view with regard to the interpretation of the MFN clause, mainly Salini,
Plama, Telenor, and Berschader, are inapposite. Unlike in Maffezini, the claimants in
these cases attempted to import entire dispute resolution mechanisms beyond those set
forth in the BITs they claimed under, and are therefore distinguishable from the
situation faced by this Tribunal.

130. For example, in the Salini case, Article 9(2) of the Italy-Jordan BIT foresees that, “[i]n
case the investor and an entity of the Contracting Parties have stipulated an investment
Agreement, the procedure foreseen in such investment Agreement shall apply.”!'°
Consequently, the claimant’s contractual remedies under the Italy-Jordan BIT were
specifically limited to the dispute settlement procedures contained in the investment
agreement, unlike here.

'°7 © Il, 4934-36; National Grid, supra note 88, §93. Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English
version), pp. 112-115.

18 AWG, supra note 93, {61.

®C IIL, 426; Gas Natural SDG, S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/10, Decision of the
Tribunal on Preliminary Question of Jurisdiction, 17 June 2005 (hereinafter “Gas Natural”), §31 (C-LA-45). See
also Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1° day (English version), pp. 111:20-112:7.

"0 Salini, supra note 34, 472; C IL, 4940-42.

PCA 63992

131.

132.

133.

134.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 51 of 116

In Plama, Bulgaria’s consent to arbitration in Article 4 of the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT was
limited to ad hoc UNCITRAL arbitration of disputes with regard to the amount of
compensation due to an investor, and only after the merits of the investor’s claim had
been tried through the regular administrative and legal procedures of Bulgaria. Thus, the
claimant sought to import into the basic treaty an arbitral mandate that was absent from
the treaty’s text. According to the Claimant, the situation before this Tribunal is
completely different, as the Parties have already agreed to arbitration under the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, and the Claimant merely seeks to avoid a procedural
obstacle that investors from other countries are not obliged to overcome. '!!

In the Telenor case, the dispute resolution clause was again much narrower than the one
in this case: arbitration was only available in the event of expropriation. The claimant in
Telenor was attempting to extend the scope of jurisdiction to the consideration of the
breach of other substantive standards under the BIT such as fair and equitable
treatment.''? The dispute resolution clause analyzed in Berschader was also limited to
arbitration of the amount or mode of compensation in the event of expropriation and
therefore also distinguishable.''?

The Claimant next analyses the Wintershall case and concludes that this decision is also
inapposite to this case for five reasons: (1) the dispute resolution clause in the Germany-
Argentina BIT is distinct and more restrictive from that of the BIT in that it
contemplated a further negotiation period following recourse to the local courts for a
period of 18 months, and was wrongly characterised by that tribunal as an exhaustion of
local remedies clause; (2) the MFN clause at issue contained completely different
language; (3) the claimant in that case sought to benefit from a different system of
arbitration in its request; (4) the case was an ICSID arbitration, and Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention imposes an additional jurisdictional bar; and (5) that tribunal
misinterpreted the National Grid decision with respect to placing on the host State the
burden of proving that dispute resolution is excluded from the scope of the applicable
MEN clause.''*

Additionally, the Claimant notes that the Wintershall approach was expressly
disavowed in the UNCITRAL case of Austrian Airlines v. Slovak Republic. The
majority of the tribunal in that case stated:

Having determined that it has jurisdiction to do so, the Tribunal must now turn to the
interpretation of the [MFN clause]... In this regard the Tribunal does not consider
that provisions embodying a State’s consent to arbitration must be strictly interpreted.
This view, which was adopted by the tribunals in Plama v. Bulgaria, Telenor v.
Hungary, Berschader y. Russia and Wintershall v. Argentina is not an accurate
reflection of international law on this matter. As noted by [numerous decisions

"© TI, 4943-47.
"2 © II, 948-49; Telenor, supra note 35.
"3 © TI, 4950-51; Berschader, supra note 32.

"4 TI, 4952-59; C IV, 4975-79; Wintershall, supra note 7. Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1 day
(English version), pp. 161-162.

PCA 63992

135.

136.

137.

138.

139.

140.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 52 of 116

referred to] there is no principle of either restrictive or extensive interpretation of an
agreement to arbitrate in international law.''*

Additionally, the majority tribunal in Austrian Airlines v. Slovak Republic found:

As a general matter, the Tribunal observes that it sees no conceptual reason why an
MEN clause should be limited to substantive guarantees and rule out procedural
protections, the latter being the means to enforce the former. The Tribunal notes in
this connection, that the potential application of an MFN clause to procedural
protections is widely accepted by investment tribunals. This view has been held
mostly with respect to the avoidance of procedural requirements prior to commence
[sic] arbitration, but also, more recently, with respect to the import of a dispute
settlement clause.'"®

However, even if the Tribunal were to follow the Wintershall decision, the Claimant
submits that the standard of “clear and unambiguous” intent to apply the MFN clause to
dispute resolution matters is satisfied in the present case. Subsequent United Kingdom
BITs concluded after 1993 demonstrate that the United Kingdom’s intent was not to
exclude dispute resolution settlement from the coverage of the MFN clause.

This is shown by the fact that the United Kingdom started adding an additional
paragraph to its MFN clauses, which stated that, “[fJor the avoidance of doubt it is
confirmed that the treatment [of the MFN clause shall apply to the dispute settlement
clause].” This new paragraph only clarified and emphasised what had been the United
Kingdom’s pre-existing intention in negotiating BITs.''”

As held by the National Grid tribunal, “[t]he implication in the wording of this
additional paragraph is that, all along, this was the UK’s understanding of the meaning
of the MEN clause in previously concluded investment treaties.”''* Accordingly, the
Claimant submits that there is a clear and unambiguous intention to include dispute
settlement in the scope of the MFN provisions.

With regard to the Respondent’s reliance on Murphy v. Ecuador, the Claimant notes
that this case did not involve an MEN clause.

The Claimant lastly notes that compelling resort to domestic courts for a limited period
of 18 months is not a jurisdictional but merely a procedural matter. Therefore, requiring
the Claimant to comply with the 18-month requirement would be futile, as it only
postpones the timing of Argentina’s consent to arbitration; the Tribunal would later
have jurisdiction over the claims in any event. ~ Moreover, according to the Bianchi
Report, there is no possibility that the dispute would be resolved within 18 months by

"5 Austrian Airlines v. Slovak Republic, UNCITRAL, Final Award, 9 October 2009 (hereinafter “Austrian
Airlines”), 4119.

"6 Austrian Airlines, supra note 115, 9124.

"7 Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1 day (English version), p. 160:1-15 and pp. 163-164.

"8 National Grid, supra note 88, 485.
"°C TIL, Ql; Murphy, supra note 9.
20 C TIL, 497-9.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 53 of 116

the Argentine national courts.'?! Lastly, the court costs to comply with this procedural

requirement would be substantial and the Claimant would have no assurance that such
12d
fees would be recoverable at a later point.'7

"°! First Bianchi Report, supra note 16, 64.
2 C TIL, 10.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 54 of 116

G.I. THE UMBRELLA CLAUSE
1. Arguments by the Respondent

(@) A contractual claim, governed by Argentine law, is distinct from a claim for
violation of the BIT, governed by international law

141. The Respondent asserts that the Claimant distorts the distinction between a contractual
claim, arising out of the alleged breach of contractual provisions and governed by
Argentine law, and a claim for violation of the BIT governed by international law.
According to the Respondent, the Claimant’s claim is premised on “the erroneous belief
that it may invoke a breach of contract as if it were a violation of the BIT.”'?? The
Contract and the BIT are different instruments, governed by different legal systems and
are therefore not equivalent. BITs are not instruments drafted so that investors can
resort to them every time there is a dispute related to contracts they have concluded.'**

142. The Respondent asserts that both international tribunals and legal scholars agree that a
contract violation is not comparable to the violation of an international treaty. This
distinction has been defended by many international courts, such as in the Serbian
Loans and ELST cases.'*° Investment tribunals have also confirmed that an investor
cannot bring an international claim against a host State grounded on merely contractual
breaches. For example, in Waste Management IT, the tribunal described the distinction
as follows:

The mere non-performance of a contractual obligation is not to be equated with a
taking of property, nor (unless accompanied by other elements) is it tantamount to
expropriation. Any private party can fail to perform its contracts, whereas
nationalization and expropriation are inherently governmental acts, as is envisaged
by the use of the term “measure” in Article 1110(1). It is true that, having regard to
the inclusive definition of “measure”, one could envisage conduct tantamount to an
expropriation which consisted of acts and omissions not specifically or exclusively
governmental. All the same, the normal response by an investor faced with a
breach of contract by its governmental counter-party (the breach not taking the
form of an exercise of governmental prerogative, such as a legislative decree) is to
sue in the appropriate court to remedy the breach. It is only where such access is
legally or practically foreclosed that the breach could amount to a[] definitive
denial of the right (i.e., the effective taking of the chose in action) and the
protection of Article 1110 be called into play.'”°

PSR 1, q92.
PAR 1, 9992-96.

5 R 1, 4997-98. Payment of Various Serbian Loans Issued in France (France v. Yugoslavia), 1929 P.C.LJ. (ser.
A) No. 20 (July 12); Case concerning Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI) (United States of America v. Italy),
Judgment of 20 July 1989, ICJ.

26 Waste Management, Inc. v. Mexico, \CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3, Award, 30 April 2004 (hereinafter
“Waste Management IT’), 4174.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 55 of 116

143. The Respondent refers to numerous further investment arbitration cases, in particular
the Vivendi Annulment Committee decision, that have also found that purely contractual
claims cannot be brought under the BIT.'2”

144. The Respondent describes all of the claims brought by the Claimant as purely
contractual.“ The Respondent contends that they relate to the application of
Argentina’s emergency laws (which have, for instance, converted into Argentine pesos
all debts then held in foreign currencies), and not to their enactment. The Respondent
accordingly submits that what gives rise to the claims in this arbitration is its application
of the emergency laws as if it were a private entity or a simple merchant (acta jure
gestionis) and not its actions as a sovereign (acta jure imperii). As a result, the
Respondent asserts that the dispute is purely contractual and therefore not within the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal, which is limited to treaty claims under the BIT.'?°

(ii) The Claimant did not conclude an investment agreement and thus cannot rely
on the BIT’s provisions

145. In the present case, the Respondent argues that it did not undertake any specific
commitment under the BIT regarding the investment since it did not conclude any
investment agreement with the Claimant. According to scholars cited by the
Respondent, an investment agreement can only exist if two requirements are met: (1)
there must be an agreement concluded between a State or a State-controlled entity anda
foreign investor; and (2) the agreement must be governed by international law.'*” These
criteria have been followed in several notable arbitration proceedings, such as Revere
Copper Brass Inc. v. OPIC,"*! Saudi Arabia v. ARAMCO,'® and Texaco v. Libya,'** as
well as the investment decisions in E/ Paso'** and Pan American.'*°

146. In the present case, although an agreement exists between Argentina and the Claimant,
the international element is missing. The Contract between the Parties did not provide

?7R I, 4100-107; Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. & Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment, 3 July 2002 (hereinafter “Vivendi Annulment Committee”).

128 R TIL, 4945-47; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1‘ day (English version), pp. 49-51.
° R IIL, 48-49; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), pp. 51-56.

8OR J, 4§109 -111. Piero Bernardini, The Renegotiation of the Investment Contract, 13 ICSID REVIEW —
FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL 411, 412-5 (1998-1); MUTHUCUMARASWAMY SORNARAJAH, THE PURSUIT
OF NATIONALIZED PROPERTY (1986), pp. 81-86.

8! Revere Copper & Brass Inc. v. OPIC, 17 1.L.M. 1321 (1978), pp. 1332-1338.

'32 Saudi Arabia v. Arabian American Oil Company (ARAMCO), 27 1.L.R. 117 (1963), cited in
MUTHUCUMARASWAMY SORNARAJAH, THE INTERNATIONAL LAW OF FOREIGN INVESTMENT (2004), p. 418.

'3 Texaco Overseas Petroleum Company and California Asiatic Oil Company v. Libyan Arab Republic, 17
LL.M. 1 (1978), 922, 941-42, 9944-45.

'4 ET Paso Energy International Company v. Argentine Republic, (CSID Case No. ARB/03/15, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 27 April 2006 (hereinafter “EI Paso”).

5 Pan American Energy LLC, and BP Argentina Exploration Company v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case
No. ARB/04/8, Decision on Preliminary Objections, 27 July 2006, 4106.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09

Award on Jurisdiction

Page 56 of 116

for the application of international law or grant international jurisdiction.'° Nor does

the Contract refer to the BIT, expressly or impliedly. The Contract is governed by

Argentine law and is subject to Argentine jurisdiction. The Parties freely agreed not to

include any type of reference to the application or protection of the BIT.'*” The

Respondent contends, therefore, that the Contract is a domestic contract rather than an

investment agreement. Simply alleging that a foreign investor entered into an agreement
with the Argentine Republic is insufficient to invoke protection under the BIT.'**

147. Additionally, the Respondent notes that the treaty violations alleged by the Claimant do
not stand by themselves in any of the claims it submitted, and although the Claimant
attempts to disguise these as treaty violations, the truth is that the essential basis of
those claims is the Contract.'*? In this regard, Professor Georges Abi-Saab remarked in
his Concurring Opinion issued in TSA that:

In the present case, I find that TSA’s claims as formulated in Claimant’s Memorial
on the Merits, are all fundamentally rooted in, or based on allegation of violations
of the concession contract. In other words, they turned on who violated the contract
and whether its termination and consequent action by Argentina were justifiable (as
contended by Argentina) or not (as maintained by TSA) according (i.e. by
reference) to the terms of the contract. The TSA recharacterises the same as
expropriation or another violation in terms of the BIT. But such recharacterisation
would not stand by itself if the termination of the contract was found by an
adjudicative body to have been legally justified as a result of grave breaches of the
contract by TSA. In other words, if these were all the arguments that TSA could
offer, the latter claims would not be “self standing” and should not be admissible as

“treaty claims”.'“°

148. Moreover, according to the Respondent, the particular relationship existing between the
Parties prevails over any other general law which may be applied thereto, including the
BIT, in application of the principle of lex specialis derogate legi generali.'*' The
principle of /ex posterior derogate anterior is also applicable to this case as the Contract
between the Parties was signed after the execution of the BIT and therefore prevails
over any provision foreseen in the BIT.!

149. The Respondent concludes that the specific commitments referred to in Article 2(2) of
the BIT (i.e., the umbrella clause) do not cover the commitments of the Argentine
Republic towards the Claimant under the Contract at hand. Only if the contractual
commitments had been made within the ambit of the BIT would the umbrella clause
extend its scope to reach the Contract. But in the present case, the umbrella clause
foreseen in Article 2(2) of the BIT has no application to this dispute.

BOR 1, FH108-118.
87 R IL, 4987-95.
BERL GIS.
MRIL BL.

0 TS4 Spectrum de Argentina S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/5, Award, 19 December
2008, Concurring Opinion of Georges Abi-Saab (R-LA-69).

MUR TL, 989-92.
2 R TL, 4992-93.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 57 of 116

(iii) In the alternative, the umbrella clause is not as broad as the Claimant argues

150. In the alternative, even if the Tribunal were to consider that the Respondent did
undertake specific commitments towards the Claimant under the BIT, the Respondent
rejects the broad interpretation that the Claimant makes of the umbrella clause and
asserts that the specific contractual obligations invoked by the Claimant would still fall
outside the scope of the clause.

151. The Respondent rejects the Claimant’s arguments regarding the history and evolution of
the umbrella clause. It notes, for example, that the umbrella clause included in the Abs-
Shawcross Draft, which the Claimant cites, came under substantial criticism and was
finally set aside.'*? On the contrary, the Respondent alleges that umbrella clauses, when
these began to be included in treaties, were meant to allow States to invoke the
violations of a contractual obligation under international law. At that time, BITs did not
include any direct mechanism for the settlement of investor-State disputes and claims
thus had to be espoused by the State through diplomatic protection within the
framework of the State-State dispute settlement regime.'“* However, this logic started to
change in the 1980s when investor-State dispute settlement provisions were introduced.

152. The Respondent thus argues that not all contractual claims become BIT claims
automatically by virtue of the umbrella clause. This ignores the difference between the
domestic and international legal systems. The Respondent points to decisions where
tribunals have developed a different interpretation of the umbrella clause.

153. The Respondent first cites SGS v. Pakistan,'* the first tribunal to hear a dispute on the

interpretation and effects of an umbrella clause. In that case the tribunal found as

follows:

Applying these familiar norms of customary international law on_ treaty
interpretation, we do not find a convincing basis for accepting the Claimant’s
contention that Article 11 of the BIT has had the effect of entitling a Contractual
Party’s investor, like SGS, in the face of a valid forum selection contract clause to
“elevate” its claims grounded solely in a contract with another Contracting Party,
like the PSI Agreement, to claims grounded on the BIT, and accordingly to bring
such contract claim to this tribunal for resolution and decision.

L-

The text itself of Article 11 does not purport to state that breaches of contract
alleged by an investor in relation to a contract it has concluded with a State (widely
considered to be a matter of municipal rather than international law) are
automatically “elevated” to the level of breaches of international treaty law.'*°

3B TL, 4999-100.
M4 R TL, 4102-106.

'45 SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/13,
Decision on Jurisdiction, 6 August 2003 (hereinafter “SGS v. Pakistan”).

146 SGS v. Pakistan, supra note 145, 9165-166.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 58 of 116

154. A similar interpretation of the umbrella clause has been adopted by other tribunals as
well, including in Joy Mining v. Egypt,'*” Salini v. Jordan,\** El Paso v. Argentine
Republic,'” and Pan American v. Argentine Republic.'*° The Respondent concludes
that the Contract for auditing services entered into with the Claimant falls into the
category of ordinary commercial agreements referred to by these cases.

155. In particular, with regard to the governmental breach approach criticised by the
Claimant, the Respondent notes that this approach has been followed and thoroughly
developed in numerous decisions, such as E/ Paso v. Argentine Republic, leading to a
reasonable interpretation of the umbrella clause.'*? The doctrine deriving from this case,
and others such as Pan American v. Argentine Republic, is adamant in its conclusion
that that the broad interpretation of the umbrella clause contained in the Argentina-US
BIT would render the remaining provisions of the BIT meaningless as it would be
sufficient to include any contractual claim with the scope of protection of the BIT.'*?
Lastly, the Respondent states that the Claimant’s criticism of these decisions, on the
basis of the Sempra v. Argentine Republic decision, is unsound as the Sempra award
was recently annulled by an ad hoc annulment committee.'**

156. Moreover, the Respondent rejects the Claimant’s attempts to discredit the decision in
the SGS v. Pakistan case as well as the Claimant’s statement that this decision is not
necessarily irreconcilable with the broad approach of interpretation. In particular, the
Respondent asserts that the Claimant has implicitly acknowledged that the tribunal in
that case, presented with analogous facts, adopted a restrictive approach as to the
interpretation and scope of the umbrella clause. Consequently, the Respondent states
that the findings of the decision are applicable mutatis mutandis to the instant case.'*>

7 Joy Mining Machinery Ltd v. Arabic Republic of Egypt, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/11, Award, 6 August 2004.
48 Salini, supra note 34.
'4 Fl Paso, supra note 134.

180 Pan American Energy LLC, BP Argentina Exploration Company, BP America Production Company, Pan
American Sur S.R.L., Pan American Fueguina, S.R.L. and Pan American Continental, S.R.L. v. Argentine
Republic, 1CSID Cases No. ARB/03/13 and ARB/04/8, Decision on Jurisdiction, 27 July 2006.

SUR T, §9119-137; RH, $9127-128.
12 R TL, WL17-128.

'S3.R TL, 4124-125.

SR TL, 126.

15. R TL, 4131-136.

PCA 63992

157.

158.

159.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 59 of 116

(iv) The Claimant erroneously invokes the decision in SGS v. Philippines

The Respondent argues that the Claimant misinterprets the decision in SGS v.
Philippines.'*° In the Respondent's view, this decision also supports its position as that
tribunal advocated for a restrictive scope of the umbrella clause:

It does not convert questions of contract law into questions of treaty law. In
particular it does not change the proper law of the CISS Agreement from the law of
the Philippines to international law. Article X(2) addresses not the scope of the
commitments entered into with regard to specific investments but the performance
of these obligations, once they are ascertained.’

The Respondent maintains that the tribunal in SGS v. Philippines did not find that the
contractual obligations contained in the agreement between SGS and Philippines were
converted into international obligations. In fact, at paragraph 128 of the decision, quoted
by the Claimant, the tribunal maintains a view which is exactly opposite to the
Claimant’s position. The tribunal indicated that the umbrella clause in the Switzerland-
Philippines BIT does not convert a contractual obligation into an obligation under
international law.'** The tribunal held as follows:

[I]t does not convert the issue of the extent or content of such obligations [i.e. the
content of contractual obligations] into an issue of international law. That issue (in
the present case, the issue of how much is payable for services provided under the
CISS Agreement) is still governed by the investment agreement.'”

The Respondent further stresses that there is an essential difference between the present
case and SGS v. Philippines: in that case, the agreement between SGS and the
Philippines was an investment agreement. By contrast, in the case at hand, the Parties
have concluded an administrative contract governed by Argentine law and subject to the
Argentine federal courts.'©°

186 SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Philippines, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/6, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 29 January 2004 (hereinafter “SGS v. Philippines”), 9126.

'57 SGS v. Philippines, supra note 156, 9126.
18 R TL, 4108-116.
189 SGS v. Philippines, supra note 156, $128.
1 R TL, WL 14-116.

PCA 63992

160.

161.

162.

163.

164.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 60 of 116

(vy) The Claimant disregards the forum selection clause stipulated in the Contract

The Respondent contends that, in its attempt to invoke the application of the umbrella
clause in this arbitration, the Claimant disregards a forum selection clause freely agreed
upon and incorporated into the Contract. In Article 23 of the Contract, the Parties
agreed to submit any disputes arising out of the Contract to the exclusive jurisdiction of
the competent federal courts of the Argentine Republic. According to the Respondent,
the Claimant is thus in breach of its contractual obligation to respect the forum selection
clause in the Contract.'°!

The inclusion of Article 23 into the Contract was neither arbitrary nor deceitful and the
Claimant agreed to it freely, after assessing the advantages and disadvantages of doing
so. Article 23 of the Contract was already included in the Bidding Conditions, under
which the Claimant freely submitted its bid. The Respondent concludes that the clause
is valid as the Claimant was never forced to sign the Contract or accept a forum
selection clause against its will.'°

Moreover, the Respondent states that agreeing to a different manner of resolving
disputes in connection with the Contract for a given bidder, to the detriment of the
Bidding Conditions applicable to all participants (which included the forum selection
clause), would have violated the principle of equality governing administrative
contracts, thus rendering the Contract null and void.'®

The Respondent also refers to several tribunals that have found that the jurisdiction of
an international tribunal was precluded by the commitments undertaken by individuals
regarding the submission of the dispute to the jurisdiction of the local courts.'“ The
Respondent asserts that the Claimant cannot be permitted to obtain the benefits of the
Contract it executed, while ignoring its own obligations thereunder.

In this regard, the Respondent refers to the holding of the tribunal in SGS v. Philippines:

[T]he question is whether a party should be allowed to rely on a contract as the
basis of its claim when the contract itself refers that claim exclusively to another
forum. In the Tribunal’s view the answer is that it should not be allowed to do so,
unless there are good reasons, such as force majeure, preventing the claimant from
complying with its contract. This impediment, based as it is on the principle that
a party to a contract cannot claim on that contract without itself complying with
it, is more naturally considered as a matter of admissibility than jurisdiction. [...]

But the tribunal should not exercise its jurisdiction over a contractual claim when
the parties have already agreed on how such a claim is to be resolved [...] The
Philippine courts are available to hear SGS’s contract claim. Until the question of

1OlR 1, 99145-157.

1 R TL, 9gj142-149; R IIL, §§]53-57; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1° day (English version), pp. 15:3-
16:4; and p. 19:11-15.

'® Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1° day (English version), p. 16:20-17:1; p. 18:23-19:15.

14 R 1, 49145-157. Woodruff Case, REPORTS OF INTERNATIONAL ARBITRAL AWARDS, vol. IX, p. 213; North
American Dredging Company of Texas (U.S.A.) v. Mexico, REPORTS OF INTERNATIONAL ARBITRAL AWARDS,
vol. IV, p. 34.

PCA 63992

165.

166.

167.

168.

169.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 61 of 116

the scope or extent of the Respondent's obligation to pay is clarified [...] a decision
by this Tribunal on SGS’s claim to payment would be premature.'®

Additionally, the Respondent argues that the doctrine deriving from Vivendi also
supports its position, because, insofar as the essential basis of the Claimant’s claims is
contractual, the provisions on law and jurisdiction set forth in the Contract must be
observed.'® The Respondent concludes that, where the essence of a claim falls within
the scope of a forum choice clause agreed upon by the parties in a contract, any such
clause is to be observed.

Moreover, the BIT contains no other provision that could prevail over the forum
selection clause.' In this regard, the Tribunal in SGS v. Philippines found as follows:

The first consideration involves the maxim generalia specialibus non derogant.
Article VIII is a general provision, applicable to investment arrangements whether
concluded “prior to or after the entry into force of the Agreement” (Article II). The
BIT itself was not concluded with any specific investment or contract in view. It is
not to be presumed that such a general provision has the effect of overriding
specific provisions of particular contracts, freely negotiated between the parties. As
Schreuer says, “[a] document containing a dispute settlement clause which is more
specific in relation to the parties and to the dispute should be given precedence over
a document of more general application.” The second consideration derives from
the character of an investment protection agreement as a framework treaty,
intended by the States Parties to support and supplement, not to override or replace
the actually. negotiated investment arrangements made between the investor and the
host State.

In response to the Claimant’s argument regarding the comparison of the forum selection
clauses analyzed by the SGS v. Philippines tribunal and the one at hand — drawing a
difference because the former includes imperative words, whereas the one at hand does
not — the Respondent argues that this interpretation is contrary to the content of the
Contract and would amount to a violation of the principle of good faith.'

The Respondent concludes that, given the clear wording in Article 23 of the Contract
and the fact that no provision could prevail over the specific forum chosen by the
Parties in the Contract, the Claimant should have referred its claims to the Argentine
courts in compliance with the Contract’s terms, even if it were not already bound to do
so by Article 8 of the BIT. Therefore, even in the event the Tribunal allows contract
claims to be brought under the BIT, the forum selection clause in the Contract would
ultimately limit their admissibility.'”°

The Respondent also challenges the Claimant’s English translation of the phrase “a todo
evento”, contained in the forum selection clause. According to the Respondent, this

165 SGS v. Philippines, supra note 156, 9154-155.
166 RTL, 4150-151.

'TR 1, 4G153-155.

168 SGS v. Philippines, supra note 156, 9141.

1 R TL, 4156-163.

' Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), p. 70:7-13.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 62 of 116

phrase establishes that the Argentine courts shall have jurisdiction “for all purposes”.
The Respondent argues that this grants the Argentine courts exclusive jurisdiction over
any disputes arising out of the Contract. However, according to the Respondent, the
Claimant has attempted to diminish the relevance and meaning of that provision, by
mistranslating the aforementioned phrase as if, instead of having jurisdiction “for all
purposes”, the Argentine courts would “nevertheless” have jurisdiction over any
disputes.

170. Lastly, the Respondent states that the Claimant should not be entitled to claim the non-
performance of contractual obligations undertaken by the Respondent when it has not
complied with its own obligations under the Contract, by breaching the forum selection
clause.

2. Arguments by the Claimant

171. The Claimant advances four lines of argument against the Respondent’s second
objection to the jurisdiction of this Tribunal. The Claimant first argues that the
Respondent has disregarded the fact that the Claimant advances claims for breach of
treaty. Secondly, it asserts that breaches of contractual obligations arising out of the
Contract in this case amount to breaches of the BIT under the umbrella clause that was
freely agreed by the contracting States. Thirdly, the Claimant contends that the
Respondent has misapplied SGS v. Philippines, as the tribunal in that case did not deny
jurisdiction. Lastly, the Claimant argues that the forum selection clause in the Contract
does not deprive this Tribunal of jurisdiction over this claim. Accordingly, the Claimant
requests that the Tribunal reject the Respondent’s second objection.

(@) ~The Tribunal should follow a broad approach to the interpretation of the
umbrella clause

172. The Claimant traces the history of the umbrella clause and argues that, since its origins,
the umbrella clause was meant to be interpreted in a broad way so as to protect
contractual undertakings entered into between States and foreign private investors and it
was never understood to be limited only to certain international obligations.'”* Contrary
to the Respondent’s arguments, the Claimant contends that, historically, according to
scholars, umbrella clauses provided “procedural remedies for breaches of host State
promises” and they were “intended to stabilize investor-State cooperation more
comprehensively against any form of ex post opportunistic behaviour of the host State
by allowing for effective third-party dispute settlement. The historic perspective, in

'" R TIL, 454; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1" day (English version), pp. 56-60.
' Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), p. 61.

"© TI, 64-67; Herman Abs & Hartley Shawcross, “Draft Convention on Investments Abroad” in The
Proposed Convention to Protect Private Foreign Investment: A RoundTable, 9 J. Pub. L. 115 (1960) (C-LA-73)
(t “Abs-Sh Draft”); Organisation for Co-operation & Develop (OECD), Draft
Convention on the Protection of Foreign Property and Resolution of the Council of the O.E.C.D. on the Draft
Convention, OECD Pub. No. 23081 (1967), reprinted in 7 LL.M. 117-43 (1968) (C-LA-79) (hereinafter “OECD
Draft”).

 

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 63 of 116

other words, seamlessly fits in with understanding of the umbrella clauses as breaking
with the dualist framework of international law and providing an enforcement
mechanism for host State promises, independent of whether breaches were of a
sovereign or a commercial nature.”'™ Lastly, the Claimant observes that, like all
individuals or corporations, States have the freedom to agree upon a treaty provision
whereby breaches of contract with respect to a protected investment assimilate to
breaches of the treaty itself, as has been exercised by the Contracting Parties to the
present BIT.!5

173. According to the Claimant, over the course of the last decade commentators have
articulated three divergent approaches regarding the scope of the umbrella clause. Under
the first approach, followed in SGS v. Philippines, violations of a contract automatically
become treaty violations. As stated by the tribunal in SGS v. Philippines, the umbrella
clause “means what it says” and “makes it a breach of the BIT for the host state to fail
to observe binding commitments, including contractual commitments, which it has
assumed with regard to specific investments.”!”° The second approach, also named the
“governmental breach” approach and followed in Sempra, holds that “only
governmental breaches of contract, not commercial breaches, [are] covered by the
umbrella clause.”'”’ Lastly, the third approach, adopted by the tribunal in SGS v.
Pakistan, “simply denies any effect to the observance of undertakings clause and does
not consider that the breach of a contract may amount to a violation of the investment
treaty.”

174. The Claimant argues that the three approaches are not necessarily irreconcilable.
According to the Claimant, the tribunal in SGS v. Pakistan recognised that its finding
was extremely limited, restricted to the interpretation of the specific wording of and
intention behind the umbrella clause in the Switzerland-Pakistan BIT. Consequently, the
Claimant argues that this tribunal’s findings are not necessarily inconsistent with the
broader approaches.'””

© IIL, 442; Stephan W. Schill, The Robert E. Hudec Article on Global Trade: Enabling Private Ordering,
Function Scope and Effect of Umbrella Clauses in International Investment Treaties, 18 MINN. J. INT’L L. 1
(2009), pp. 57-58 (C-LA-126).

"5 © TV, 4105; Noble Ventures, Inc. v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/11, Award, 12 October 2005, 54;
Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1° day (English version), p. 140:17-23.

© II, 469; SGS v. Philippines, supra note 156, 4119, 128.

"7 Sempra Energy Int'l v, Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16, Award, 28 September 2007
(hereinafter “Sempra”), 4311.

"SC IL, (71; Gaillard, Treaty Arbitration and Jurisdiction over Contract Claims — the
SGS Cases Considered in INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT LAW AND ARBITRATION: LEADING CASES FROM ICSID,
NAFTA, BILATERAL TREATIES AND CUSTOMARY INTERNATIONAL LAW (Todd Weiler ed., 2005), p. 388 (C-LA-
83).

" CTL, 472.

PCA 63992

175.

176.

177.

178.

179.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 64 of 116

(ii) The Respondent’s breaches of its contractual obligations constituted violations
of the BIT

The Claimant maintains that the administrative measures carried out by the Respondent
in 2001 and 2002 giving rise to its claims do not arise out of the Contract, but rather of
the way in which the Respondent sought to impair, distort, and reduce the obligations
that it had undertaken in the Contract through its emergency laws. As a result, its claims
are based upon a violation of Article 2(2) of the BIT.'*°

The Claimant’s interpretation of Article 2(2) of the BIT in accordance with Articles 31
and 32 of the VCLT focuses on (1) the placement of Article 2(2) amongst the primary
substantive obligations of the BIT, which suggests that it was intended to impose
substantial international obligations; (2) the fact that the plain meaning of the provision
is not obscure, as “shall observe” is categorical and unambiguous, and “any” is
capacious, meaning not only obligations of a certain type, but all obligations; and (3)
the clear reference to investment contracts without distinguishing between different
categories of contracts.'*! Furthermore, according to the Claimant, an inclusive, broad
reading of the umbrella clause is also consistent with the object and purpose of the
BIT.

Contrary to the Respondent, the Claimant argues that the BIT includes no requirement
regarding the necessary existence of an investment agreement for the umbrella clause to
become applicable. The instant BIT has no limitation in this respect; by contrast, the
Argentina-US BIT does define an “investment dispute” as a dispute relating to an
“investment agreement.” The UK-Argentina BIT does not include this requirement.'**
The Claimant argues that the authorities cited by the Respondent do not support the idea
that an investor needs to enter into an “investment agreement” in order to benefit from
the BIT’s protections. Moreover, the internationalisation theory does not imply that
failing to include internationalised clauses into a contract would impede access to
protection under the BIT. Such a conclusion would render the protection of
undertakings in investment treaties meaningless.'**

The Claimant further analyses the decisions referred to by the Respondent to support its
position giving a limited scope to the umbrella clause. The Claimant states that the
Respondent has in certain cases misinterpreted and misapplied some of the decisions,
and in other cases the decisions are distinguishable on the facts of the present case.

First, with regard to SGS v. Pakistan, the Claimant stresses that the factual matrix in that
case was unique. In that case, local arbitration had been a “deal-breaker” for Pakistan,
Pakistan had already commenced an arbitration against SGS, and SGS had already
participated in the arbitration for a significant period before seeking to commence an

'89 Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), pp. 125:6-126:13.
‘5! TL, 4973-78.

2 © TI, 479-81.

'83 © IIL, 4927-30; C IV, 4987-90.

'S TIL, 4931-33.

PCA 63992

180.

181.

182.

183.

184.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 65 of 116

ICSID arbitration.'** The specific wording of the umbrella clause at issue and its
placement within the BIT were also important factors in that tribunal’s decision.
Moreover, as certain doctrinal writers have stated, the restrictive approach adopted in
SGS v. Pakistan “deprives the umbrella clause of any content” in contravention of the
text, object, and purpose of the provision.

With respect to Salini v. Jordan, the Claimant argues that the claims in that case were
solely contractual and the BIT did not contain a proper umbrella clause, but rather a
clause whose content is comparable to fair and equitable treatment and legitimate
expectations provisions.'*” Indeed, the Claimant notes that the tribunal itself deemed the
wording of the umbrella clause in the Italy-Jordan BIT to be “appreciably different”
from the one at hand.'**

The same reasoning applies with regard to the Joy Mining v. Egypt decision, where the
Claimant asserts that there was no treaty claim at stake; the claim was based upon a
contingent liability that did not even rise to the level of a contract claim for it had not
materialised.'*? Additionally, the tribunal made clear that its decision was predicated on
the specific wording and context of the BIT and acknowledged that differently-worded
umbrella clauses might produce the effects argued for here.”

The Claimant contends that, in E/ Paso v. Argentine Republic, a misinterpretation of the
umbrella clause in view of the restrictive content of the dispute resolution clause led the
tribunal to mistakenly interpret the former in a way that it would otherwise not have
done if confronted with the wording of the present BIT.'*!

Lastly, with regard to Pan American v. Argentine Republic, the Claimant argues that the
circumstances of that case and the particular wording of that BIT also explain the
findings of that tribunal. The tribunal denied jurisdiction in that case because it found
that the claims did not fall within the definition of an “investment dispute” under the
BIT due to the fact that the contract at issue did not constitute an “investment
agreement” as defined under that BIT. Furthermore, the tribunal’s middle ground
acting-as-a-sovereign test is unsupported in State responsibility or general public
international law and is premised on false assumptions about the effect of a wider
interpretation. !

On the other hand, the Claimant refers to investment arbitration decisions that support
its position. For example, SGS v. Philippines, although factually similar to SGS v.
Pakistan, involves a different umbrella clause. Given the imperative wording (“shall”)
used in that clause and the fact that BITs are entered into for the promotion and

'85 Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1° day (English version), pp. 127-131.
186 © TI, 4983-89; C IIL, §953-56; C IV, $991-94.

'87 Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1 day (English version), pp. 142:16-143:22.
188 CTV, 4108.

'° Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), pp. 141:13 142:15.

199 CTI, 4993-95; CIV, 4107.

'! © 1V, 99 109-113; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1" day (English version), pp. 143:23-146:14.
' © TL, 4996; C IIL, 4946-50.

PCA 63992

185.

186.

187.

188.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 66 of 116

protection of investments, that tribunal found that the umbrella clause transformed
contractual disputes into treaty-based disputes. Nonetheless, while the tribunal found
that it had jurisdiction over the contractual claim, the claim was still inadmissible
because it dealt with a determination of the amount to be paid by the Philippines to SGS
(which is not a matter of breach of contract) and there was a specific dispute resolution
clause agreed upon by the parties in their contract according to which local courts were
exclusively competent to resolve that issue.'°* The Claimant quotes the tribunal in this
regard:

Article X(2) makes it a breach of the BIT for the host State to fail to observe
binding commitments, including contractual commitments, which it has assumed
with regard to specific investments. But it does not convert the issue of the extent
or content of such obligations into an issue of international law. That issue (in the
present case, the issue of how much is payable for services provided under the
CISS Agreement) is still governed by the investment agreement.

The Claimant insists that this language demonstrates, contrary to the Respondent’s
assertions, that the tribunal held that the umbrella clause could cover contractual claims
and that a host State’s breach of contractual commitments can amount to a breach of the
BiT.'”°

The Claimant further refers to Eureko v. Poland, where an UNCITRAL tribunal
analysed an umbrella clause that is identical to the one at hand. In that case, the wording
of the clause as well as the object and purpose of the BIT also led the tribunal to rule in
favour of granting jurisdiction over contractual claims arising out of the investment
contract.'°° The Noble Ventures tribunal also reached the same conclusion. '°”

(iii) The forum selection clause in the Contract does not deprive this Tribunal of
jurisdiction

Contrary to the Respondent, the Claimant argues that the forum selection clause in the
Contract does not prevail over the Respondent’s more general consent to arbitration
under the BIT, and that the Respondent’s arguments disregard the fact that the Claimant
is advancing claims before this Tribunal for treaty breaches.

First, the Claimant refers to Vivendi'®* where it was held that the existence of a forum
selection clause in an underlying contract does not deprive a tribunal of jurisdiction over
treaty claims, including those arising out of a contract. This finding was confirmed by

3 IL, 9103-108; C IV, 4995-99: Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), pp.
131:13-138:5.

'4 © TIL, 4944-45; SGS v. Philippines, supra note 156, 4128.
15 C TIL, 9944-45.

196 © II, 9109-112; C IV, 4100-102; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1% day (English version), pp.
138:6-139:5.

°7C II, 9113-115; C IV, 99 103-105; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1*t day (English version), p. 139.

'8 Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. & Vivendi Universal (formerly Compagnie Générale des Eaux) v.
Argentine Republic, (CSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Award, 21 November 2000, 953.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 67 of 116

the ad hoc committee in the annulment proceedings of the Vivendi case, who added that
“[a] state cannot rely on an exclusive jurisdiction clause in a contract to avoid
characterization of its conduct as internationally unlawful under the treaty.”'®? These
decisions were also followed by the tribunal in the Eureko case.”

189. The Claimant further argues that the Respondent’s argument suffers from two additional
flaws: (1) the Parties did not mutually agree upon the chosen forum, as it was not
specifically negotiated and it merely acknowledges a legal requirement under Argentine
law;?"! and (2) the forum selection clause in Article 23 of the Contract does not provide
for exclusive jurisdiction, as it contains no specific language to that end.” By contrast,
the Claimant also notes that both in SGS v. Pakistan and SGS v. Philippines the
exclusive jurisdiction clauses had been negotiated and agreed upon, and that their
wording left no doubt that it embraced questions relating to the contracts at stake for the
purpose of the particular jurisdictions designated thereunder.”

190. With regard to this second issue above, the Claimant notes that the Respondent had
never before the Hearing on Jurisdiction challenged its English translation of the
Contract’s forum selection clause” and contends that the decisions quoted by the
Respondent in this regard, namely Woodruff, North American Dredging Company, and
SGS vy. Philippines, are irrelevant to this Tribunal, as the forum selection clauses
analyzed by those tribunals contained mandatory language that expressly limited access
to other fora.”°* Lastly, while the Claimant acknowledges that it freely opted to sign a
Contract containing a forum selection clause (that was not the object of negotiation
between the Parties), this does not imply a waiver of its right to accept the Respondent’s
standing offer to arbitrate treaty-based disputes.”

191. Irrespective of whether the forum selection clause is exclusive or not, the Claimant
concludes that this Tribunal has jurisdiction, as the Claimant’s claims are Treaty claims
precisely because the Respondent invoked changes in Argentine law to retrospectively
undermine and diminish its obligations towards the Claimant. Since the fair and
equitable treatment treaty claims cannot be evaluated without considering what the
Respondent did vis-a-vis the Contract, it would be inconsistent with the meaning and
effect of the umbrella clause to leave apart the questions arising from the Contract.””

'° Vivendi Annulment Committee, supra note 127, §101.

2 © IL, 4120; C IIL, 4957-58.

291 © II, 121; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), p. 124:3-23.

2 © II, 4121-122. Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1° day (English version), pp. 124:23-125:6.
°° © IV, 4114-115; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1" day (English version), pp. 121:18-122:8.
24 © TV, 4115; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1* day (English version), p. 97.

25 © IL, 9123-124; C IIL, 959.

2° © IV, 4116-118; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), p. 158:6-10.

27 CTV, G 119-121.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 68 of 116

G.IIL. ACQUIESCENCE AND PRESCRIPTION OF THE CLAIMANT’S CLAIMS

1. Arguments by the Respondent

192. The Respondent recalls that the Claimant filed the Administrative Claim on 15 March
2002, requesting the payment of outstanding invoices, and only after more than four
years did the Claimant notify the existence of a dispute under the BIT. With regard to
the present dispute, the Claimant presents three main complaints: (1) the 22 August
2002 decision which allegedly pesified the invoices; (2) the reduction of the amount to
comply with the 10% Fee Cap pursuant to the same decision; and (3) the 13% reduction
in the invoices following a decision adopted by AFIP. The Respondent alleges that the
Claimant itself consented to each of these measures, as acknowledged by one of their
witnesses.

193. The Respondent stresses that the alleged grievances that give rise to this claim occurred
between August 2002 and June 2003, and that the Claimant only communicated the
existence of a BIT dispute to the Argentine Republic in November 2006. Thus, the
Claimant has voluntarily waited without explanation for more than four years since the
alleged BIT violations took place before submitting its dispute to international
arbitration.”

194. In response to the Claimant’s argument that this objection should be dismissed as it
would require that the Tribunal undertake an analysis of the underlying facts, the
Respondent argues that this Tribunal is not only entitled to do so, but in fact has a duty
to analyze all elements which may be necessary to render a decision on its jurisdiction.
In this sense, the Jnceysa tribunal found that:

It is obvious that because the ICSID Convention obligates the Arbitral Tribunal to
decide on its own competence, it implicitly gives the Tribunal the right to analyze
all factual and legal matters that may be relevant in order to fulfil this obligation.””

When deciding on its own competence, the Arbitral Tribunal has the power to
analyze all of those issues that may have legal relevance to define it, regardless of
whether these are issues that may be qualified as substantive or of ‘merits’ or
procedural issues. If, in order to rule on its own competence, the Arbitral Tribunal
is obligated to analyze facts and substantive normative provisions that constitute
premises for the definition of the scope of the Tribunal’s competence, then it has no
alternative, but to deal with them, under penalty of infringing its obligation under
Article 41 of the ICSID Convention.

In the case before the Arbitral Tribunal, the controversy concerning the competence
of the Tribunal focuses on determining whether the consent given by El Salvador to
submit to the jurisdiction of ICSID includes the investments not made in
accordance with its law. Consequently, to decide on its own competence, this
tribunal is obligated to analyze, first, whether said argument is admissible and,
second, whether it is founded based on the facts of the case brought before it.

28 R 1, 49177-183; R IIL, 4959-62, 969.

2” Inceysa Vallisoletana SI v. El Salvador, \CSID Case ARB/03/26, Award, 2 August 2006 (hereinafter
“Inceysa’”), 9149 (R-LA-76).

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 69 of 116

Thus, even though it might be considered that the analysis that the Arbitral
Tribunal is obligated to make involves the determination of issues of a substantive
nature, such as the conformity of Inceysa’s investment with the laws of El
Salvador, it is obvious that these issues constitute a premise that must necessarily
be examined in order to decide the issue of the competence of the Arbitral
Tribunal.”

(i) Acquiescence

195. With respect to acquiescence, the Respondent first observes that the Claimant never
challenged the Argentine emergency laws of 2001 and 2002 themselves, neither at the
time of their enactment nor at a later stage. Rather, the Claimant challenged only their
application by the Respondent. In any case, the Respondent argues that the Claimant
only did so after the lapse of considerable amount of time, by means of administrative
filings of a merely contractual nature, against general measures applied to both nationals
and foreigners.

196. The Respondent refers to scholars who have acknowledged that “the inaction on behalf
of a State may lead to the loss of a right or claim if, under the circumstances, that State
would have been expected to display some form of activity,” or if a claimant “has failed
to assert its claim and that it thereby has implicitly accepted its extinction.”?!! The
doctrine of acquiescence is rooted in general notions of good faith and equity and can be
applied to this dispute too, as it is not limited to State responsibility. Moreover, the
Respondent refers to the decisions cited by the Claimant, the Grisbdarna case and the
Alaska Boundary case, and states these cases in fact support its position, as they
recognise the existence of the principle of acquiescence under public international law
and its legal consequences.” In particular, the doctrine of acquiescence has the
following requirements for its application: (1) that the claimant has not made a claim;
(2) the failure to bring the claim should have occurred during a reasonable period of
time; (3) the claimant must have been expected to act, but failed to do so.

197. The Respondent argues that the Claimant has acquiesced since its conduct meets the
three requirements mentioned above: (1) it failed to bring the claims under the BIT for
more than four years; (2) it failed to do so over a long period of time — more than three
years passed without notifying the existence of the claims since the last disputed event;
and (3) the Claimant was inactive in a situation where it would be expected to pursue its
claims. However, despite the fact that the Claimant notified the Respondent of a BIT
dispute and threatened international arbitration in its 27 November 2006 letter, the
Claimant did nothing further until June 2009.2"

2! Inceysa, supra note 209, 4155-157.

2" R IL, §165-170; NS Marques Antunes, Acquiescence in THE MAX PLANCK ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PUBLIC
INTERNATIONAL LAW (R. Wolfrum ed., 2008), 42; Christian J. Tams, Waiver, Acquiescence, and Extinctive
Prescription in THE LAW OF INTERNATIONAL RESPONSIBILITY (J. Crawford, A. Pellet, and S. Olleson eds.,
2010), p. 1043.

222 R TL, 4G 185-187.
213. R I, 9184-187.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 70 of 116

198. The Respondent asserts that the Claimant’s behaviour demonstrates that it acquiesced to

199.

200.

201.

the measures it now complains of, regardless of whether the relevant moment that the
Claimant’s inaction commenced is taken to be (a) the enactment of the emergency laws
in 2001 and 2002, (b) the application of the emergency laws to the invoices under the
Contract or (c) the refusal by the administrative authorities to pay the amounts
claimed.?'* The Claimant’s acquiescence is also clear regardless of whether its inaction
is asserted to end (a) at the time of the notice of the existence of a dispute under the BIT
in 2006 or (b) upon the submission of the notice of arbitration in 2009,?'5

Additionally, even though the Claimant argues that it did not acquiesce since it filed
administrative claims and pursued them from 2002 through 2006, the Respondent
contends that the Claimant never alleged any violation of the BIT in that context.”'

Moreover, the Respondent also dismisses the Claimant’s assertion that it had reserved
its rights to later submit treaty claims to an international arbitral tribunal in an
extendable claim jointly submitted with Ostram. Initially, the Respondent points out that
to reserve a right means that the right has not been exercised yet. Secondly, no
references were made in that claim as to which provisions of the UK-Argentina BIT
were being violated. Thirdly, the reservation also extended to the submission of a
judicial claim before the Argentine Supreme Court. Fourthly, and most importantly, the
Claimant was not entitled to file that claim due to the assignment of the invoices under
the Contract and Ostram is not a qualified investor under the BIT as a Cayman Islands
company. Consequently, that complaint is irrelevant to the present issue.”!”

(ii) Prescription

Extinctive prescription has also been widely recognised in international law. The ICJ in
the Nauru case stated that “even in the absence of any applicable treaty provision, delay
on the part of a claimant State may render an application inadmissible.”*'* Several
arbitration decisions have also recognised this principle. Extinctive prescription has also
been recognised as a general principle of law by civilized nations since the early 20"
century. It requires that the State who wishes to rely on it prove that the conduct was
attributable to the claimant and that the claimant could have made the claim at any time
and that it voluntarily failed to do so.”!° It is further necessary to show that the party
relying on prescription has been disadvantaged by the delay in presentation of the claim.

?!4 Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), p. 81:12-20.

2!5 Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), pp. 78-80; Transcript of the Hearing on
Jurisdiction, 2" day (English version), pp. 3:12-4:8.

216R IL, 9172-177; R IIL, §9163-66; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), pp. 75-
76.

217 R IIL, 4967; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1" day (English version), pp. 76-78.

218 Case concerning Certain Phosphate Lands in Nauru (Nauru v. Australia), Judgment of 26 June 1992, 1992
ICJ Reports 240, 432.

29 R 1, GH171-176.

PCA 63992

202.

203.

204.

205.

206.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 71 of 116

Extinctive prescription not only seeks to avoid disadvantage to a defendant because
evidence might no longer be available, as argued by the Claimant, but also seeks to
achieve legal certainty. The Respondent contends that “if the foreign investor does not
submit its claim within a reasonable period of time, he is deemed to have acquiesced
and the claim is forfeited by virtue of the extinctive prescription rules under
international law.”””°

According to the Respondent, the Claimant’s claim is also time-barred due to the time
elapsed without having activated the dispute settlement mechanism foreseen in Article 8
of the BIT. This delay is solely and entirely attributable to the Claimant who should
have, inter alia, submitted the dispute for resolution before the Argentine courts
pursuant to both Article 8 of the BIT and the forum selection clause in the Contract.
Instead, the Claimant now seeks, despite substantial delay to the Respondent’s
disadvantage, to subvert these requirements through its disingenuous and incorrect
arguments on the scope and effect of MFN and umbrella clauses.”*! Indeed, the
Respondent notes that none of the many investment claims filed against it before
international tribunals as a result of the emergency laws have taken so long to be
submitted as the present one.”

Moreover, contrary to the Claimant’s argument that the prescription period in
international law “is more of decades rather than years,”°”> the Respondent argues that
there is no specific time limit and just the passing of a reasonable period of time is
required. For example, the Respondent points out that human rights and regional
investment treaties such as NAFTA and CAFTA provide for a short statutory
prescription of claims.”*

Further, the Respondent asserts that its position is supported by Argentine law, which
governs the matter since it is the applicable law to the dispute along with the BIT itself,
by operation of Article 8(4) of the BIT. The Respondent contends that the claims are
contractual and the Tribunal therefore lacks jurisdiction over them; however, if the
claims are deemed treaty claims as argued by the Claimant, they would be subject to a
two-year prescription period applicable under Argentine law to non-contractual claims
(such as those founded upon treaties and statutory rights).

The relevance of domestic laws of the host State has been confirmed by the decision in
Yury Bogdanov v. Republic of Moldova, where the arbitral tribunal found that:

The Republic of Moldova has made an objection based on statutory limitation
arguing that the charges for the year 2005 are time-barred. The Treaty itself does
not say anything about limitation as regards claims based on the Treaty. It would,
however, appear that the limitation period applying under the laws of either
Contracting Party must be applicable lest claims could be made indefinitely. Mr

2 R IL, G1 78-182.
21 R 1, 4188-196.

>? Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), p. 81:6-11.
2301, 4156.
24 R IIL, 474; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), pp. 81:21-82:16.

5 R IL, (4183-184. Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1° day (English version), pp. 83:13-84:22.

PCA 63992

207.

208.

209.

210.

211.

212.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 72 of 116

Bogdanov does not contest that the limitation period is 3 years under Moldovan
law and does not invoke any provisions of Russian law which would entail a longer
period. This objection on the part of the Republic of Moldova thus appears to the
Sole Arbitrator to be well founded.”°

The Respondent adds that no interruption or suspension of the statutory prescription has
taken place, since the first action by the Claimant that could have this effect was the
submission of the claim to arbitration, which occurred long after the two-year time-bar
had elapsed. According to the Respondent, the administrative filings by the Claimant
would not be deemed as having interrupted or suspended the time-bar neither because
they were contractual, while the instant claims are allegedly treaty-based. The natural
consequence for the Respondent is that, if the present claims are found to be treaty-
based rather than merely contractual, then they have been rendered inadmissible by
operation of acquiescence or prescription.”””

Lastly, the Respondent notes that nothing in the decisions cited by the Claimant
undermines the prescription objection raised by the Respondent.”

2. Arguments by the Claimant

The Claimant submits that the Respondent’s third objection has no basis, as neither
acquiescence nor extinctive prescription are applicable to the present case.

In addition, the Claimant asserts that the claims are subject both to principles of
international law and Argentine law, but that disregarding the applicability of the former
on this point would allow respondent States to conveniently amend their laws in order
to change prescription periods and avoid their commitments.”

The Claimant alleges that the Respondent misinterprets and misapplies both concepts in
the present case. The Claimant did not let more than four years elapse since the initial
violation of the BIT. On the contrary, the Claimant argues that from 2002 through 2006
it continued to pursue its claim and was in contact with the Respondent on a consistent
basis."*° Moreover, whenever it complied with the Respondent’s requests throughout
this time it always expressly reserved its rights to claim any differences between the
reduced invoices and the invoices originally submitted.”*!

Additionally, the Claimant argues that the Respondent’s third objection should not even
be considered at this stage, as determining issues of prescription and acquiescence in
international law requires an analysis of the underlying facts.

26 Yury Bogdanoy, citizen of the Russian Federation v. Republic of Moldova, Final Award, SCC Case No.
114/2009, 30 March 2010, 494.

27 R TIL, §§73-82; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1° day (English version), pp. 85:7-86:18.
28 R IL, FG188-192.

»° Transcripts of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), p. 149:4-21.

© Transcripts of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), pp. 92:9-93:21.
31 11 49142-147.

PCA 63992

213.

214.

215.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 73 of 116

(i) Acquiescence

The Claimant defines the concept of acquiescence in international law as a tacit
agreement or an implied consent to act. In particular, to acquiesce is to ascribe a legal
consequence to certain factual circumstances. It must therefore be restrictively
interpreted to ensure that acquiescence corresponds accurately with the implied
intention. The Claimant notes that the ILC has stated that the “conduct of a party” is the
“determining criterion” and not the “[m]ere lapse of time.”**? In particular, “the decisive
factor is whether the respondent State has suffered any prejudice as a result of the delay
in the sense that the respondent could have reasonably expected that the claim would no
longer be pursued.”?*? Moreover, any form of protest, action, or activity aimed at
protecting rights or negating the status quo will preclude acquiescence.”**

The Claimant denies that it has acquiesced to the Respondent’s measures. First, the
Claimant actively asserted its rights in national proceedings through the Administrative
Claim and the Claimant’s voluntary delay in notifying its international claim whilst
doing so cannot constitute a sufficient form of inaction. Second, the lapse of time which
has occurred is not long enough to lead the Respondent to believe the Claimant had
acquiesced to its actions. Third, the circumstances as a whole in this case did not call for
any specific action on the Claimant to assert its rights that it failed to take. Fourth, the
Respondent has not provided any evidence as to why four years in this case is a lapse of
time that would have made the Respondent believe that the Claimant was not going to
bring a claim under the treaty.”*> Lastly, the Respondent’s own actions, such as when it
requested an extension of time in March 2007 to consider settlement of the matter,
demonstrate that the Respondent itself did not consider that the Claimant had ever
abandoned its claims.

(ii) Extinctive prescription

On the other hand, extinctive prescription is an equitable defence which occurs when a
right of action becomes extinguished because the person entitled thereto neglects to
exercise it. In particular, the Claimant notes that the international concept of extinctive
prescription “is premised on the theory that a claim that is plagued with undue delay
prejudices a defendant because evidence is no longer available to defend against the
claim.””** Extinctive prescription requires not only an element of lapse of time, but also
an essential element of undue prejudice to the other party. According to scholars cited
by the Claimant, extinctive prescription requires: (1) unreasonable delay; (2) the
imputability of the delay to the negligence of the claimant; (3) the absence of a record

22 © II, 9128-132. Commentaries to the Draft Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful
Acts, adopted by the International Law Commission, Official Records of the General Assembly, 56th Session,
Supplement No. 10 (UN Doc. A/56/10) (hereinafter “ILC Commentaries”), Art. 45.

3 ILC Commentaries, supra note 232, Art. 45.

4 CIIL 461.

25 © IL, 4148-153; C IIL, 9962-67.

236 NEWCOMBE & PARADELL, supra note 75, p. 525.

PCA 63992

216.

217.

218.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 74 of 116

of facts; and (4) that the respondent be placed at a disadvantage in establishing its
defence.?*”

The Claimant argues that this argument on behalf of the Respondent has no merit. First,
with regard to the lapse of time, as opposed to domestic law, there is no set period to
determine when a claim is barred in international law. The Claimant further asserts that,
according to case law, the period is more of decades rather than years, citing Ambatielos
as an example.”** As a consequence, to base a prescription objection solely on a two-
year extra-contractual statutory period set forth in Argentine law as the Respondent
advances is inappropriate and unsupported by any authority.”

Second, the Claimant’s conduct has not put the Respondent at an unfair disadvantage in
establishing its defence, and no proof of prejudice has been established by the
Respondent.” Additionally, the Respondent was aware of the existence of the dispute
with the Claimant since the beginning of 2002, when the Claimant filed the
Administrative Claim, engaged in continuous correspondence with the Claimant
concerning the dispute, and was notified of a BIT dispute in 2006.7"!

Lastly, the Phoenix Action Ltd. v. Czech Republic case cited by the Respondent simply
has no relation to issues of prescription under international law. 2

27 C IL, 49133-141; C IIL, 74; NEWCOMBE & PARADELL, supra note 75, p. 525; KAJ HOBER, EXTINCTIVE
PRESCRIPTION & APPLICABLE LAW IN INTERSTATE ARBITRATION (2001); B.E. King, Prescription of Claims in
International Law, 15 BRIT. Y.B. INT’L L. 82 (1934).

8 Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), p. 150:5-21.

> Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), pp. 149:21-151:7.

*° Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), p. 150:5-21.

*! Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), pp. 151:8-153:13.

22 © IL, 9154-157; C IIL, 9170-73, 75-78; Phoenix Action Ltd. v. Czech Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/5,
Award, 15 April 2009 (hereinafter “Phoenix Action”) (C-LA-131).

PCA 63992

219.

220.

221.

222.

223.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 75 of 116

G.IV. THE ASSIGNMENT ISSUE

1. Arguments by the Respondent

The Respondent objects to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal on the basis that the Claimant
lacks standing to pursue any claims in this arbitration."

The Respondent argues that the Claimant’s claims are inadmissible, since they are based
on rights relating to the Contract between the Claimant and the MECON that were
assigned by the Claimant to Ostram, a company incorporated in the Cayman Islands.
The Respondent further stresses that the Claimant assigned the rights relating to the
invoices due and to be issued in connection with the Contract before the measures
allegedly carried out by the Respondent giving rise to the claims at stake in this
arbitration took place."

Accordingly, as the Claimant had disposed of its investment before the Respondent
adopted the measures leading to the present claim, only Ostram could be entitled to
pursue any rights against the Respondent. However, Ostram would have to do so before
the Argentinean courts, given that the dispute is contractual, that the Contract contains a
forum selection clause, and that there is no investment protection treaty between
Argentina and the Cayman Islands that could allow Ostram to file a treaty claim, if any
such claim existed.***

The Respondent cites the decision in the GEA v. Ukraine case, where the Tribunal
found that “in order for the Tribunal to hear the Claimant’s claims, the Claimant must
have held an interest in the alleged investment before the alleged treaty violations were
committed.”“° Following the principles established by this decision, the Respondent
argues that the Tribunal must determine the dates on which the Claimant held an
interest in the alleged investment and the dates when the contested measures were
adopted. The Respondent concludes that since the Claimant was not the holder of any
interest when the measures were adopted, it lacks legal standing to bring this case.7*”

As to the context within which the assignment occurred, the Respondent notes that the
assignment was executed a few months before the Contract expired, and that in
exchange for the assignment of the rights, the Claimant became entitled to further
receive from Ostram indeterminate, non-capped loans that it would commit to
reimburse. However, the Respondent submits that, by the time the assignment was

28 R TIL, 4G 1-13; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), pp. 20-25; Transcript of the
Hearing on Jurisdiction, 2" day (English version), p. 17:4-7.

*4R IIL, §§]3-4; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, Ist day (English version), pp. 5:14-6:6 and pp. 22-25

(English version); Transcripts of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 2 day (English version), pp. |

:23-16:18.

 

*5 R IIL, jl; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1‘ day (English version), p. 87; Transcript of the Hearing
on Jurisdiction, 2"! day (English version), pp. 3:19-4:8.

6 GEA Group Aktiengesellschaft v. Ukraine, \CSID Case No. ARB/08/16, Award, 31 March 2011, 4170.
TR TIL fl-4.

PCA 63992

224.

225.

226.

227.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 76 of 116

carried out, the Claimant was laying off some of its employees, who in turn filed
lawsuits against the Claimant. According to the Respondent, these suits eventually
resulted in attempts to seize assets from the Claimant in order to satisfy decisions in
favour of the employees. The seizures were, however, frustrated precisely because the
Claimant had previously willfully assigned its rights under the Contract to Ostram, who
still received from the Respondent part of the amounts due under the invoices in its
capacity as assignee. In this context, the Respondent recalls a letter sent by the Claimant
to AFIP on 22 March 2006, in which the Claimant stated that “the amount payable is a
receivable which does not belong to ICS but to OSTRAM; therefore, the
abovementioned attachment [...] may not affect it in any way and it must be paid at
once to OSTRAM.”2“*

The Respondent also states that no evidence has been submitted by the Claimant to
support its contention that the assignment was later cancelled.’ Nevertheless, the
Respondent points out that even if the Claimant were able to prove that the cancellation
occurred, it would still lack jus standi, for it would have reacquired the rights
underlying the dispute only after the measures were carried out by the Respondent.?”

According to the Respondent, if an alleged investor acquires its assets or claims after
the adoption of the contested measures it cannot benefit from the protections offered by
the BIT. The Respondent supports this conclusion citing legal scholars and case law
rejecting this practice.”

Lastly, the Respondent asserts that the alleged cancellation of the assignment would not
have had retroactive effect, since the assignment agreement itself sets forth that it will
remain in force until payment of all obligations due by the Respondent under the
Contract or until the assignment is cancelled — from which point on the rights at stake
are re-acquired by the Claimant.”

The Respondent therefore concludes that the Claimant lacks the necessary jus standi to
bring its claims as it was not the holder of the rights upon which its claim is based when
the contested measures were adopted. Moreover, the lack of legal standing is aggravated
by the fact that the Claimant only re-acquired the investment after the contested
measures had been adopted, and therefore the Claimant should not be allowed to
complain about measures that were already in force before it made its alleged
investment.?*

8 R II, 495-9; Exhibit R-3; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 2"! day (English version), p. 8:18-10:9,
13:9-16:6.

> Transcripts of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), pp. 5:19-23, 20:17-24, 24:13-25:1.

°50 Transcripts of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1 day (English version), pp. 25:1-26:1.

51 R TIL, §10; C. SCHREUER, THE ICSID CONVENTION: A COMMENTARY (2009), $350, 360; Phoenix Action,
supra note 242, 4§[138, 144; Cementownia “Nowa Huta” S.A. v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/06/2, Award,17 September 2009, 154-156, 175; Europe Cement Investment & Trade S.A. v.
Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/07/2, Award,13 August 2009, 4156.

2? R TIL, §fl 1-13; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 2"! day (English version), pp. 2-3.
23. R TIL, 413.

PCA 63992

228.

229.

230.

231.

232.

233.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 77 of 116

2. Arguments by the Claimant

First, the Claimant contends that the Respondent’s argument regarding the Assignment
Issue is inadmissible. Article 21(3) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules bars the
Respondent’s late assertion of this jurisdictional objection. The Claimant asserts that “a
party [should] raise jurisdictional objections as early as possible — and certainly in its
pleadings on jurisdiction.” Since the Respondent raised the Assignment Issue only at
the Hearing on Jurisdiction, it is inadmissible.?

In response to the potential unfairness of preventing a party from raising an objection,
the Claimant alleges that the “the balance of fairness” favours the Claimant, given that
the Respondent never raised the Assignment Issue at any earlier stage, even though it
had all the relevant documentation in its possession since July 2001.7°°

Secondly, the Claimant argues that, even if the Assignment Issue were admissible, the
Tribunal should find that the Respondent has shown through its conduct an intention not
to raise this point. According to the Claimant, the Respondent must have been aware of
the facts giving rise to the Assignment Issue in at least eighteen separate moments in
time, but never raised the issue before. The Respondent was mindful of the provision
contained in Article 21(3) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules regarding the need to
advance jurisdictional objections in the pleadings; however, it never raised the
Assignment Issue before.”°

The Claimant considers that the Respondent never previously raised this objection
because from the beginning the Respondent accepted that the Claimant was an investor
that had legal standing to bring the claim it has advanced, subject only to the three
objections that the Respondent raised in its Memorial on Jurisdiction.**

Furthermore, the Claimant notes that every time the Respondent sought to communicate
in respect of governmental measures which had an impact on the amounts payable
under the Contract, the Respondent communicated with the Claimant, not with Ostram;
in particular, all communications between 2002 and 2006 relating to the material
aspects of the Contract were conducted between the Respondent and the Claimant.??

In addition, that Claimant continued to be the counterparty to the Contract and
maintained the status of investor is also evidenced by the fact that all correspondence
during the settlement negotiations since November 2006 were carried out solely with
the Claimant. During these negotiations the Respondent never challenged the
Claimant’s status as the legitimate counterparty."

54 CTV, 4929-33.

°55 © TV, 433; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1° day (English version), p. 8:19-23.

56 CIV, 4925, 34-36.

57 CTV, 4937-39.

258 © TV, 440; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1° day (English version), p. 8:2-19 and pp. 94-95.
2° CIV, 941-42.

2 CIV, 943; C V, 493-9.

PCA 63992

234.

235.

236.

237.

238.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 78 of 116

The Claimant therefore concludes that the Respondent has raised the Assignment Issue
too late, as the Respondent had already accepted that the Claimant occupies the position
of an investor.”°

Thirdly, the Claimant rejects the Respondent’s position that the effect of the
Assignment Agreement was to divest the Claimant of the alleged investment. The
Respondent has not submitted any Argentine law authority to support this position.”
The Claimant also argues that the only rights assigned under the Assignment Agreement
were “account receivables” and that the Claimant continued to perform the Contract
until early 2002. The Claimant pursued monies due from the Respondent thereafter and
as a matter of Argentine law remained at all times a proper party to any legal
proceedings whereby monies due and owing pursuant to the Contract were being
recovered. Further, the cancellation of the Assignment on 14 June 2007 confirms that
the Claimant is presently entitled to seek recovery of the monies due by the
Respondent.

The Claimant also asserts that notice of the assignment to Ostram was received by the
Argentinean Federal Revenue Administration Authority to whom powers had been
delegated by MECON on 14 June 20072" Additionally, the Claimant further asserts
that proof of cancellation of the assignment has always existed and been available to the
Respondent. In fact, the previous Attorney General of Argentina asked for proof of the
Claimant’s status as a foreign investor in Argentina on 4 December 2006 and received it
shortly thereafter.?°

According to the Claimant, the assignment included only the credit rights arising from
the Contract, it did not include the Contract, nor the investment; the Claimant remained
as the proper party to the Contract. The Claimant concludes that under Argentine law,
the Claimant remains the contracting party and the investor, and it retains all its rights
under the Contract which give rise to the Claimant’s rights under the BIT.7°°

Fourthly, the Claimant states that the cancellation of the Assignment Agreement was
notified to the Respondent on 13 June 2007. In particular, regarding the retroactive
effect of the cancellation, the Claimant states that the Respondent has not provided any
proof or legal doctrine that supports the Respondent’s position that the cancellation has
no retroactive effect. The Claimant recognises that there is no retroactive effect in
respect of any credit rights which had been satisfied in full by the Respondent during
the period in which the Assignment Agreement was in force. However, the cancellation
does have retroactive effect with respect to credit rights which remained due to the
Claimant.”°

5 CIV, 944.
28 © IV, 4945-46; C V, 993-15.
263 © TV, 4926-28; Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), p. 171:10-172:18.

24 Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), p. 95:11-21.

°65 Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, 1“ day (English version), p. 92:21-97:1.
26 CTV, 450.
257 CTV, 4951-53; CV, 12-15.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 79 of 116

239. The Claimant thus concludes that, upon the cancellation taking effect, it became entitled
to, not only any future credits, but also, with retroactive effect, the outstanding credits
which the Respondent had failed to pay. Consequently, throughout the period in which
the Assignment Agreement was in force, the Claimant remained the contracting party
and was the investor for the purposes of the BIT.”

240. Lastly, the Claimant additionally argues that, taking into account the intertwined factual
nature between the contractual context of the Claimant’s claims and the separate BIT
claims, even if the Assignment Issue was admitted, “it must be considered within the
context of the evaluation of the merits of the claim and adjudicated at that juncture — as
provided for by Article 21(4) of the UNCITRAL Rules.””*

28 CTV, 455.
2° CIV, 956.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 80 of 116

H. RELIEF SOUGHT BY THE PARTIES REGARDING JURISDICTION

H.I. RELIEF SOUGHT BY THE RESPONDENT

241. As identified in the Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, the Respondent asks the
Tribunal to award as follows:

193. In view of the foregoing and in light of the fact that Claimant did not comply
with a condition to which the Argentine Republic’s consent to international
arbitration was made subject; that this case refers to contractual disputes which
are subject both to Argentine law and jurisdiction, pursuant to the provisions of
the Treaty and the contract in question; that Claimant has acquiesced to the
Argentine Republic’s actions; and that its claim is time-barred, the Argentine
Republic respectfully requests that the Arbitral Tribunal:

1) DECIDE (pursuant to Articles 21.1. and 21.3 of the UNCITRAL Rules) to
ADMIT this MEMORIAL; and

2) DETERMINE, pursuant to Article 21.4 of UNCITRAL Rules, the Tribunal’s
lack of jurisdiction over this case and thus DISMISS the Statement of Claim,

ordering Claimant to pay costs and interest."””

HII. RELIEF SOUGHT BY THE CLAIMANT

242. As identified in the Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, the Claimant asks the
Tribunal to award as follows:

79. For all of the reasons explained in Sections I through III above, the Claimant
respectfully requests that the Tribunal:
(a) reject all of the Respondent’s arguments;

(b) decide as a preliminary matter that it has jurisdiction to examine the
merits of the dispute pursuant to the Rules of Arbitration of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law; and

(c) defer the decision on costs to the second phase of the arbitration on the
merits.

(d) In the alternative, should the Tribunal decide to rule on costs at this
stage, the Claimant respectfully submits that the Respondent should be
liable for all costs of this jurisdictional phase and requests that the
Tribunal allow the parties to make post-hearing submissions to that
effect.

7 R TL, 4193.
711 C TIL, 479.

PCA 63992

L ANALY:

 

OF THE TRIBUNAL

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 81 of 116

LL THE 18-MONTH LITIGATION PREREQUISITE UNDER ARTICLE 8

1. The nature of the requirement of prior submission to Argentine courts

The first question that the Tribunal must consider is the nature of the pre-arbitral

requirement of submission of the dispute to the Argentine courts, both as to its
mandatory or permissive nature, as well as in relation to the effects of non-compliance

Article 8 sets out a sequence of events leading to the submission of a claim by an

investor to international arbitration. For ease of reference, Article 8 is set out again

243.
with this requirement.
244.
below:
ARTICLE 8
Settlement of Disputes

Between an Investor and the Host State

(1) Disputes with regard to an investment which
arise within the terms of this Agreement
between an investor of one Contracting Party
and the other Contracting Party, which have not
been amicably settled shall be submitted, at the
request of one of the Parties to the dispute, to the
decision of the competent tribunal of the
Contracting Party in whose territory the
investment was made.

(2) The aforementioned disputes shall be
submitted to international arbitration in the
following cases:

(a) if one of the Parties so requests, in any
of the following circumstances:

(i) where, after a period of eighteen
months has elapsed from the
moment when the dispute was
submitted to the competent tribunal
of the Contracting Party in whose
territory the investment was made,
the said tribunal has not given its
final decision;

(ii) where the final decision of the
aforementioned tribunal has been
made but the Parties are still in

PCA 63992

ARTICULO 8
Solucién de controversias
entre un inversor y el Estado receptor

(1) Las controversias relativas a una inversion que
surjan, dentro de los términos de este Convenio,
entre un inversor de una Parte Contratante y la
otra Parte Contratante, que no sean dirimidas
amistosamente, seran sometidas a solicitud de
cualquiera de las partes en la controversia a
decision del tribunal competente de la Parte
Contratante en cuyo territorio la inversion se
realizo.

(2) Las controversias arriba mencionadas seran
sometidas a arbitraje internacional en los
siguientes casos:

(a) a solicitud de una de las partes, en
cualquiera de las circunstancias siguientes:

(i) cuando, luego de la expiracion de un
plazo de dieciocho meses contados a
partir del momento en que la
controversia fue sometida al tribunal
competente de la Parte Contratante en
cuyo territorio se realizé la inversion,
dicho tribunal no haya emitido una
decisi6n definitiva;

(ii) cuando la decision definitiva del
tribunal mencionado haya _ sido
emitida pero las partes continien en

(b)

245.

246.

247.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 82 of 116

dispute; disputa;
where the Contracting Party and the (b) cuando la Parte Contratante y el inversor de
investor of the other Contracting Party la otra Parte Contratante asi lo hayan
have so agreed. convenido.

The provision sets forth that a prospective arbitral claimant “shall”, upon the arising of
an investment dispute and the failure to reach an amicable settlement thereof, submit the
dispute to the Argentine courts. Notably, the provision indicates that, not only the
investor, but the State Contracting Party to the Treaty may also exercise an option to
submit the dispute to its domestic courts (“at the request of one of the Parties to the
dispute”). Paragraph 2 then follows by stipulating three situations where investment
disputes “shall” be submitted to international arbitration, including two situations
allowing unilateral invocation of arbitral jurisdiction at the investor’s request. The first
of these allows resort to arbitration where the Argentine court to which the dispute was
submitted has not rendered a final decision within eighteen months. The second allows
submission to arbitration upon the rendering of a final decision that does not yet resolve
the dispute.

It is common ground between the Parties that the Claimant has not submitted the
present dispute to the Argentine courts and thus has not complied with the above
provision, regardless of what effect is to be given to such non-compliance. The
Claimant, however, argues that, according to its object and purpose, this provision
establishes a mere procedural waiting period which is satisfied by the passing of 18
months from when the dispute might have been so submitted. Moreover, the Claimant
submits that requiring the Claimant to litigate before the Argentine courts would be a
futile exercise that would simply postpone the dispute’s inevitable return to arbitration,
and that the Tribunal can set aside the requirement on this basis. The Respondent
meanwhile asserts that the provision acts as a strict limit on its consent to arbitration and
must be strictly complied with before the investor’s right to proceed to international
arbitration arises. The Tribunal must thus assess the intention of the Contracting Parties
to the UK-Argentina BIT behind Article 8’s requirement of litigation for 18 months
before the Argentine courts.

After consideration of the language of the Treaty and the arguments of the Parties, the
Tribunal finds itself in agreement with the Respondent’s view. The Tribunal finds no
ambiguity as to the mandatory character of the phrase “shall be submitted...to the
decision of the competent tribunal of the Contracting Party in whose territory the
investment was made” in either the English or Spanish versions of the Treaty. Article 8
of the Treaty does not exhibit the same juxtaposition between permissive language as to
negotiation requirements and mandatory language for pre-arbitral submission to local
courts as in the case of the Germany-Argentina BIT in the Wintershall case. However,
Article 9 of the Treaty does: disputes between the Contracting Parties “should, if
possible” be settled through diplomatic channels and “shall” otherwise be submitted to
arbitration.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09

Award on Jurisdiction

Page 83 of 116

248. The requirement is neither a mere “waiting period’?”” nor a requirement of “exhaustion

of local remedies’?”? and falls instead between these extremes, both in respect of its
content and object and purpose.

249. Given the above, the Wintershall tribunal’s analysis in this regard remains apt:

It is incorrect to characterise the obligation imposed by Article 10(2) of the Argentina-
Germany BIT as a “mandatory waiting period”. The obligation under Article 10(2) is
two fold: being constituted both by a ratione fori element and a ratione temporis
element. The circumstance that “waiting periods” are held in some decisions to be
“procedural” rather than imposing a jurisdictional requirement has no bearing in the
present case on the characterization of the eighteen-month requirement before the
local Courts as a jurisdictional requirement. The wording used in the Argentina-
Germany — BIT prescribed the two requirements differently, Article 10(1) mentions
that “Disputes... shall as far_as possible be settled amicably between the parties in
dispute” (emphasis added), while the imperative word “shall” (standing alone) is used
in Article 10(2), without further qualification. A waiting period for amicable
settlement (or for “negotiation”) is definitely not the same as a requirement to invoke
the jurisdiction of domestic Courts for a given period of time; — the former is dealt
with in the Argentina-Germany BIT in paragraph (1) of Article 10. The latter forms
the subject matter of paragraph (2) of Article 10.°

250. Moreover, the trend in public international law has clearly favoured the strict
application of procedural prerequisites. For example, in the recent case of Georgia v.
Russia before the ICJ, despite the absence of mandatory language, a majority of the ICJ
found that the phrase “dispute...which is not settled by negotiation or by the procedures
expressly provided for in this Convention” established a precondition to resort to
negotiations or to the procedures expressly provided for under the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (CERD), prior to
the seisin of the ICJ.°”

251.

The Tribunal finds no reason thus to deem this requirement as permissive and non-
mandatory. Nor can the Tribunal concur with the interpretation that this requirement is
satisfied by anything less than what it explicitly calls for: the submission of the
investment dispute to the Argentine courts for a period of 18 months or until a final
decision is rendered, whichever is shorter.

2? Contra, e.g., Gas Natural, supra note 109.
3 Contra, e.g., Wintershall, supra note 7.

4 Wintershall, supra note 7, 4145.

 

5 Case ing Application of the ional Ce ion on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination (Georgia v. Russian Federation), supra note 9, 4§133-135. In the investment treaty context, the
tribunal in the recent Murphy v. Ecuador case also rejected an argument that the six-month waiting period
provided for in the US-Ecuador BIT was not a jurisdictional requirement but rather a mere procedural formality
breach of which has no legal consequences. The tribunal held that the lack of mandatory language did not permit
it “to ignore the existence of the norms contained in Article VI of the BIT”. The tribunal also rejected the
argument about the futility of the negotiations required under Article VI of the BIT based on the alleged failure
of other negotiations between Ecuador and other investors, since to find out whether negotiations would succeed
or not, “the parties must first initiate them” (Murphy, supra note 8, §§144-149).

PCA 63992

252.

253.

254.

255.

256.

257.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 84 of 116

2. Is compliance with the requirement of prior submission to Argentine courts a
question of jurisdiction, admissibility, or procedure?

The above determination that the prior submission of the investment dispute to the
Argentine courts is mandatory still leaves the Tribunal faced with the question of what
effect is to be given to non-compliance with this requirement. That question, in turn,
depends on whether compliance with Article 8(1) is properly considered to be a
question of jurisdiction, admissibility, or procedure. In particular, it is the line between
jurisdiction and admissibility that is important.

The Tribunal holds an inherent power over procedure. This power is implicit, but is also
set out in Article 15(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules:

Subject to these Rules, the arbitral tribunal may conduct the arbitration in such manner as it
considers appropriate, provided that the parties are treated with equality and that at any stage
of the proceedings each party is given a full opportunity of presenting his case.

Within the bounds of equality, due process, and the explicit stipulations of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the Tribunal has nearly unlimited discretion in relation
to procedural matters. It has even been noted that under the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules, as opposed to other procedural frameworks, a tribunal may even enjoy broad
power in certain cases to overrule the parties’ agreements on procedural matters.””°

By contrast, arbitral jurisdiction is based exclusively on consent. The only inherent
jurisdiction held by an arbitral tribunal is its competence-competence power to
determine its own jurisdiction, which also finds its source in both general principles”””
and explicit provisions such as Article 21(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. Even
competence-competence, however, can be conceived of as a product of consent to a
function inherent and necessary to the proper functioning of international judicial
bodies. Once a tribunal has conclusively determined that it has no jurisdiction, it is
rendered functus officio and ceases to exist and act in relation to the dispute.

Admissibility falls somewhere in between these extremes. It is not an area where a
tribunal enjoys discretion to simply disregard the requirement that has not been fulfilled,
but rather one in which the tribunal enjoys some discretion as to how to deal with its
non-fulfillment, such as by staying instead of terminating the proceedings.

The Wintershall tribunal comprehensively analysed and demonstrated why the 18-
month litigation prerequisite should not be considered merely “procedural and directory
rather than as mandatory and jurisdictional in nature”, as has been held by some

276 Michael Pryles, Limits to Party Autonomy in Arbitral Procedure, 24 J. INT'L ARB. 327 (2007), p. 335.

on BIN CHENG, GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LAW AS APPLIED BY INTERNATIONAL COURTS AND TRIBUNALS, (1953),
pp. 275-279.

28 There may, of course, be exceptions to this rule in respect of procedural issues, such as the allocation of costs,
incidental to the procedure in which the tribunal determined its own lack of jurisdiction. See, in the investment
treaty context, e.g., Pope & Talbot Inc. v. Government of Canada, UNCITRAL (NAFTA), Final Award, Award
in Respect of Costs, 26 November 2002; Nova Scotia Power Incorporated v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
UNCITRAL, Award on Costs, 30 August 2010.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 85 of 116

investment treaty tribunals cited by the Claimant.”” The Tribunal nonetheless considers
it necessary to address the finer distinctions that might be made.

258. So, what distinguishes an issue of admissibility from one of jurisdiction? The ICJ
addressed the issue in the Democratic Republic of the Congo v. Rwanda,*° explaining
the distinction as follows:

The Court will however first address the DRC’s argument that the objection based on non-
fulfilment of the preconditions set out in the compromissory clauses, and in particular in
Article 29 of the Convention, is an objection to the admissibility of its Application rather than
to the jurisdiction of the Court. The Court recalls in this regard that its jurisdiction is based on
the consent of the parties and is confined to the extent accepted by them (see paragraph 65
above). When that consent is expressed in a compromissory clause in an international
agreement, any conditions to which such consent is subject must be regarded as constituting
the limits thereon. The Court accordingly considers that the examination of such conditions
relates to its jurisdiction and not to the admissibility of the application. [citations omitted]

The question is therefore whether the requirement of prior submission to the Argentine
courts falls within the “conditions to which [Argentina’s] consent [to arbitration] is
subject” or whether non-compliance nevertheless does not affect the underlying consent
to arbitrate the present dispute.

259. Jan Paulsson has attempted to come up with a further “lodestar” to guide such
determinations:

There is promise in the notion of ‘relevance to the nature of the forum’. It enables us to see
that the nub of the classification problem is whether the success of the objection necessarily
negates consent to the forum. Our lodestar takes the form of a question: is the objecting party
taking aim at the tribunal or at the claim?**!

260. Paulsson thus posits that, if one speaks of a choice of forum for the adjudication of the
claim, then the question is one of jurisdiction; if the question regards a defect particular
to the claim advanced, then one is dealing with a problem of admissibility.” Paulsson
then concludes that issues going to the ripeness of a claim are typical of admissibility
but recognises that “[t]he exhaustion of remedies goes beyond mere ripeness...In the

2 See Wintershall, supra note 7, 4§133-153; contra, e.g., Maffezini, supra note 6, 464; National Grid, supra
note 88, 74; AWG, supra note 93, 68; Suez/InterAgua, supra note 99, 4963, 66.

°89 Case concerning Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo (New Application: 2002) (Democratic
Republic of the Congo v. Rwanda), supra note 30, 88.

8! Jan Paulsson, Jurisdiction and Admissibility in GLOBAL REFLECTIONS ON INTERNATIONAL LAW, COMMERCE
AND DISPUTE RESOLUTION, LIBER AMICORUM IN HONOUR OF ROBERT BRINER (2005), p. 616.

8 The recent majority decision in Hochtief v. Argentina adopts a nominally similar characterisation of the
distinction between jurisdiction and admissibility when it states that “[j]urisdiction is an attribute of a tribunal
and not of a claim, whereas admissibility is an attribute of a claim but not of a tribunal.” The Hochtief majority,
however, takes the distinction too far. The decision appears to substitute the tribunal-vs.-claim dichotomy for the
question of consent instead of using it as an analytical tool for the determination of whether consent exists
(Hochtief AG y. Argentine Republic, Decision on Jurisdiction, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/31, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 24 October 2011, §{90-96). In this respect the Tribunal therefore disagrees with the analysis of the
majority in Hochtief and prefers the analysis contained in the Separate and Dissenting Opinion (Hochtief v.
Argentina, supra, Separate and Dissenting Opinion of J. Christopher Thomas, QC, 24 October 2011, §31).

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 86 of 116

absence of exhaustion of local remedies, the underlying claim may still be perfectly ripe
and appropriate for adjudication, but not before a particular forum that requires
exhaustion as a precondition of access to it. The problem is one of jurisdiction.”

261. As already noted,’ the 18-month litigation prerequisite is not a requirement of
exhaustion of local remedies in the technical sense. It cannot, however, be presumed
that the prerequisite does not share many of the same rationales behind the local
remedies rule. Article 8(1) is thus, according to its terms, a choice of forum for the
submission of disputes in the first instance and not merely a question of ripeness. The
Tribunal is therefore left with a distinction without a difference.*™*

262. The Claimant argues that consent to arbitration is merely postponed and is, for all
intents and purposes, inevitable. Consent is nonetheless not yet present. The Treaty
explicitly provides at Article 8(2)(b) for a mechanism by which the Respondent might
agree to proceed directly to international arbitration. However, the Claimant has not
claimed that any such agreement exists. As a result, the failure to respect the pre-
condition to the Respondent’s consent to arbitrate cannot but lead to the conclusion that
the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over the present dispute. Not only has the Respondent
specifically conditioned its consent to arbitration on a requirement not yet fulfilled, but
the Contracting Parties to the Treaty have expressly required the prior submission of a
dispute to the Argentine courts for at least 18 months, before a recourse to international
arbitration is initiated. The Tribunal is simply not empowered to disregard these limits
on its jurisdiction.

3. Is the Tribunal empowered to ignore the 18-month litigation prerequisite on
the basis that it would be futile or inefficient?

263. Only one decision has been drawn to the Tribunal’s attention where an element of
futility has been used successfully to allow derogation from a similar domestic courts
submission prerequisite: Abaclat and Others v. Argentina,’ rendered shortly after the
close of proceedings in the present case.*° In Abaclat, the majority of the tribunal found
that non-compliance by the Claimants with the 18-month litigation prerequisite could
not preclude them from resorting to arbitration. The Abac/at majority considered that
strict application of this requirement would be inconsistent with an object and purpose
“aimed at providing the disputing parties with a fair and efficient dispute settlement

253 See 4248, above.

24 The Telefonica tribunal also considered the requirement to be “a mitigated form of the exhaustion of local
remedies requirement, to which [Latin American] countries have adhered in accordance with the Calvo doctrine”
(Telefonica, supra note 103, citing H.A Grigera Naon, Arbitration and Latin America: Progress and Setbacks in
21 ARBITRATION INTERNATIONAL 127 (2005), p. 137). The Siemens tribunal’s conclusion in this regard is
curious in that the tribunal recognises a certain identity of purpose behind the two rules, but then distinguishes
them for purely formal reasons. In any event, that characterisation was in relation to the issue of tacit waiver and
not the consequences of non-compliance (Siemens v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8, Decision
on Jurisdiction, 3 August 2004 (hereinafter “Siemens”)).

*85 Abaclat and Others (Case formerly known as Giovanna a Beccara and Others) v. Argentine Republic, \CSID
Case No. ARB/07/5, Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 4 August 2011 (hereinafter “Abaclat”).

28° For an example of futility applied successfully to a simple “waiting period” not combined with a ratione fori
requirement, see Ethyl Corp. v. Canada, UNCITRAL (NAFTA), Decision on Jurisdiction, 24 June 1998.

PCA 63992

264.

265.

266.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 87 of 116

mechanism.””*’ The tribunal then weighed the interests of the parties to the dispute, i.e.,
for the host State to have “a fair opportunity to address the issue through its domestic
legal system”, and for the Claimants to be provided with “an efficient dispute resolution
mechanism.””** Given the “overall circumstances of the case”, and in particular the
Emergency Law and other laws and decrees in effect in Argentina which precluded the
relief sought by the claimants and the absence of any available mass claims process
before the Argentine courts, the tribunal concluded that the opportunity to address the
dispute through the domestic courts “was only theoretical and/or could not have led to
an effective resolution of the dispute”, and thus “it would have been unfair to deprive
the investor of its right to resort to arbitration based on the mere disregard of the 18
months litigation requirement.””*”

In particular, the overriding preoccupation driving the Abaclat majority’s analysis
appears to be the lack of any natural forum in the Argentine legal system for the
presentation and resolution of the mass claim brought by the claimants. There was no
way for the claimants to actually pursue their claim—as a mass claim—before the
Argentine courts in order to satisfy the condition precedent to arbitration. The
majority’s desire not to leave the claimants without any real and effective forum in
which to pursue their claims is evident. The majority thus felt compelled to allow an
exception to the 18-month litigation prerequisite.

The Tribunal agrees with the idea that limitations on the excessively strict application of
a treaty provision can be implicit and need not be stated expressly. Futility has also been
recognised as an exception to jurisdictional prerequisites in international law in other
contexts.” However, judicially-crafted exceptions must find support in more than a
tribunal’s personal policy analysis of the provisions at issue. This is especially
dangerous in the absence of conclusive evidence adduced to support a tribunal’s
teleological inferences: the same provision may strike some as “nonsensical”?! and
others as genius.”

The task of the Tribunal is to decide the case according to the instrument as written by
the Contracting Parties thereto, applying the rules of treaty interpretation under
international law. A tribunal may take policy matters arising in the case into account in
accordance with VCLT Article 31’s instructions to consider object and purpose,
context, and relevant rules of international law, as well as other means of interpretation
set forth in the general rule of VCLT Article 31, as they may be relevant in the case at
hand. Where appropriate, policy matters may also be discussed in order to provide

87 Abaclat, supra note 285, 4579.
288 Abaclat, supra note 285, 4582.
°° Abaclat, supra note 285, 583.

2 Such as in the case of the customary international law rule of exhaustion of local remedies (see, e.g., C.F.
AMERASINGHE, LOCAL REMEDIES IN INTERNATIONAL LAW, 2“ ED. (2004), pp. 204-209; Jan Paulsson, DENIAL
OF JUSTICE IN INTERNATIONAL LAW (2005), pp. 101-102).

°°! Plama, supra note 31, 4224.

> See, e.g., William S. Dodge, Investor-State Dispute Settlement Between Developed Countries: Reflections on
the Australia-United States Free Trade Agreement, 39 VAND. J. TRANSNAT’L L. 1 (2006).

PCA 63992

267.

268.

269.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 88 of 116

context in the reasoning of a decision, as well as to provide some insight for future
drafting exercises.

Otherwise, even when the application of Article 31 of the VCLT “leads to a result
which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable”, a tribunal’s “recourse” is to resort to the
supplementary means of interpretation of Article 32 of the VCLT. The Tribunal cannot
therefore create exceptions to treaty rules where these are merely based upon an
assessment of the wisdom of the policy in question, having no basis in either the treaty
text or in any supplementary interpretive source, however desirable such policy
considerations might be seen to be in the abstract.

In this context, it is pertinent to recall the commentary of the International Law
Commission to Articles 27 and 28 of its Draft Articles on the Law of Treaties (that
subsequently became Articles 31 and 32 in the VCLT):

Admittedly, the task of formulating (general rules of interpretation of treaties) is not easy, but
the Commission considered that there were cogent reasons why it should be attempted. First,
the interpretation of treaties in good faith and according to law is essential if the pacta sunt
servanda rule is to have any real meaning...”

As much as any given rule of interpretation is liable to produce results in certain cases
that some regard as undesirable, the need for a rule, and for that rule to be respected, is
unavoidable for the establishment of the rule of law.

In any event, futility has not been demonstrated to the Tribunal’s satisfaction in this
case.” Both Parties have submitted together with their Memorials expert reports by
distinguished Argentinean lawyers. These reports extensively analyse this issue and
arrive at conflicting conclusions.””* After considering this expert evidence as well as the
Parties’ submissions, however, the Tribunal is not convinced that futility has been
demonstrated in this case. Even if the Tribunal were to accept Mr. Bianchi’s report
insofar as it suggests that a resolution of the dispute within 18 months is unlikely, this
would not be sufficient to establish futility.2°° This is not a case of obvious futility,
where the relief sought is patently unavailable within the Argentine legal system. There
is an open and legitimate debate between the Parties’ experts as to availability of

3 United Nations Conference on the Law of Treaties, Official records, Documents of the Conference, p. 38,
para. (5).

4 See 4974-78, 111, above.

2°5 While Mr. Mata concludes that a case against the Government could be submitted and adjudicated within less
than 18 months (First Mata Report 22-83; Second Mata Report §{]19-20), Mr. Bianchi considers that a claim
would not have been settled within 18 months and, had the Claimant filed it, it would have been a “jurisdictional
and economical waste without any useful results whatsoever” (Second Bianchi Report p. 24; First and Second
Bianchi Reports).

2° See, e.g., with regard to the aforementioned customary international law rule of exhaustion of local remedies,
ILC DRAFT ARTICLES ON DIPLOMATIC PROTECTION WITH COMMENTARIES (2006), Article 15, comment (4):

In order to meet the requirements of paragraph (a) it is not sufficient for the injured person to show that
sibility of success is low or that further appeals are difficult or costly. The test is not whether a

 
 
 

 

 

mstances. This is a question to be decided by the competent international tribunal
charged with the task of examining the question whether local remedies have been exhausted.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 89 of 116

remedies within the Argentine legal system which may have resolved the dispute within
18 months. Therefore, in the absence of even a cursory attempt by the Claimant,” the
Tribunal simply cannot conclude that recourse to the Argentine courts would have been
completely ineffective at resolving the dispute.””

270. The above analysis is bolstered by a brief consideration of the nature of arbitral
jurisdiction for investor-State disputes arising under investment treaties. Whereas in
public international law in the State-to-State context, the jurisdictional analysis usually
focuses on the consent expressed in the instrument containing the arbitration provision,
investor-State arbitration requires the additional and posterior consent by a
non-signatory to that treaty: the investor. The formation of the agreement to arbitrate
occurs through the acceptance by the investor of the standing offer to arbitrate found in
the relevant investment treaty.

271.

The terms and conditions of the offer, however, were negotiated earlier and separately
by the contracting parties to the treaty and are directed at investors of the other
contracting State generally, rather than at any particular investor. According to the law
of treaties, when exercising a right provided for it in a given treaty, a third party like the
investor, shall comply with the conditions for the exercise of that right provided for in
the treaty or established in conformity with the treaty.”

272. At the time of commencing dispute resolution under the treaty, the investor can only
accept or decline the offer to arbitrate, but cannot vary its terms. The investor,
regardless of the particular circumstances affecting the investor or its belief in the utility
or fairness of the conditions attached to the offer of the host State, must nonetheless
contemporaneously consent to the application of the terms and conditions of the offer
made by the host State, or else no agreement to arbitrate may be formed. As opposed to
a dispute resolution provision in a concession contract between an investor and a host
State where subsequent events or circumstances arising may be taken into account to
determine the effect to be given to earlier negotiated terms, the investment treaty
presents a “take it or leave it” situation at the time the dispute and the investor’s

7 The Tribunal is conscious of the fact that the Claimant cannot maintain its argument that it is entitled to the
more favourable dispute resolution provisions of the Argentina-Lithuania BIT by virtue of the MFN clause in
this Treaty and—at the same time—have submitted the dispute to the Argentine courts for resolution. The
fork-in-the-road clause in the Argentina-Lithuania BIT would make the submission to the Argentine courts
irrevocable. This does not, however, excuse the Claimant from the consequences flowing from its decision to
forego recourse to the Argentine courts.

2°8 Moreover, beyond resolving the dispute, various other purposes might be served by the requirement: (1) the
submission to domestic courts might serve to familiarize them with the State’s international obligations towards
foreign investors and promote their capacity to handle and resolve international investment disputes; (2) the
submission to domestic courts may help to highlight areas of inconsistency between local law and the State’s
international obligations for potential reform; (3) the State may prefer to avoid the publicity of an international
claim if the dispute is able to be resolved locally; and (4) the delay and process involved may better allow the
State to assess the claim, gather evidence, and prepare a defence to a possible international arbitration claim.

2» See, in the analogous context of treaties providing for rights for third States, Article 36(2) of the VCLT: “A
State exercising a right in accordance with paragraph | shall comply with the conditions for its exercise provided
for in the treaty or established in conformity with the treaty.”

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 90 of 116

circumstances are already known. This point is equally poignant in the context of
jurisdiction grounded on an MEN clause, which will be examined next.*°°

273. To conclude on this point, the Tribunal finds that the intention of Article 8(1) was the
establishment of the exclusive jurisdiction of domestic courts for a period of either 18
months or until a final decision is rendered, whichever is shorter. The Tribunal further
finds that the Claimant has manifestly not complied with this prerequisite and that there
is no compelling reason to exempt the Claimant from its application on the basis of
futility or otherwise. The Tribunal must thus decline jurisdiction unless it can find an
alternative basis for the Respondent’s consent to arbitration.>”!

 

5° This issue was examined recently in the dissent in the Hochtief v. Argentina case in relation to the issue of
consent to jurisdiction by way of an MEN clause (Hochtief v. Argentina, supra note 282, Separate and
Dissenting Opinion of J. Christopher Thomas, QC, §14-27).

 

°°! The Tribunal notes that the above analysis accords with the recent judgment of the US Court of Appeals in
the proceedings to set aside the award in the BG Group ple v. The Republic of Argentina case, also under the
UK-Argentina BIT, where the court rejected the tribunal’s decision to excuse the claimant’s non-compliance
with the 18-month litigation prerequisite on the sole basis that the requirement would “produce an ‘absurd and

result” in the ci (Republic of Argentina v. BG Group ple, No. 11-7021 (D.C. Cir. Jan.
17, 2012)).

PCA 63992

274.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 91 of 116

LI. DOES THE MOst-FAVOURED-NATION CLAUSE AT ARTICLE 3(2) APPLY TO
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT PROVISIONS?
1. Preliminary considerations: consent and treaty interpretation
Having found that the Claimant has not complied with the requirement of prior

submission to the Argentine courts, the Tribunal turns to the question of whether the
Claimant may be exempted from its application through the effect of the MFN clause
found at Article 3(2). Again, for ease of reference, Article 3 is reproduced in full below:

ARTICLE 3
National Treatment and Most-favoured-nation
Provisions

(1) Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory
subject investments or returns of investors of the
other Contracting Party to treatment less
favourable than that which it accords to
investments or returns of its own investors or to
investments or returns of investors of any third
State.

(2) Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory
subject investors of the other Contracting Party,
as regards their management, maintenance, use,
enjoyment or disposal of their investments, to
treatment less favourable than that which it
accords to its own investors or to investors of any

ARTICULO 3
Trato nacional y clausula de la nacién mas
favorecida

(1) Ninguna Parte Contratante sometera en su
territorio las inversiones y las ganancias de
inversores de la otra Parte Contratante a un trato
menos favorable que el otorgado a_ las
inversiones y ganancias de sus propios inversores
© a las inversiones y ganancias de inversores de
cualquier tercer Estado.

(2) Ninguna Parte Contratante sometera en su
territorio a los inversores de la otra Parte
Contratante, en cuanto se refiere a la gestion,

imi uso, goce o liquidacion de sus
inversiones, a un trato menos favorable que el
otorgado a sus propios inversores o a los

third State.

275

276.

302 B

inversores de cualquier tercer Estado.

. The effects of MFN provisions in general have been much disputed and tribunals have
generated increasingly complex answers to the basic question of whether MFN
provisions can be used to overcome jurisdictional defects. The question is an important
one that has the ability to change the nature of international investment treaty arbitration
from a scheme of bilateral relationships into a multilateral system nearing compulsory
arbitral jurisdiction.” In the mass of different answers to this question and the many
articulations of each answer, it should not be forgotten that, at its root, what is being
engaged in is an exercise of treaty interpretation, the results of which are inherently
particular to the treaty being interpreted. A few salient general points nonetheless bear
noting in relation to the interpretation of MFN clauses and the jurisdiction of investment
treaty tribunals.

The first principle to keep in mind is the trite statement that States are free to conclude
MEN clauses that have the effects advocated by either side in the instant case. This is

rigitte Stern, JCSID Arbitration and the State’s Increasingly Remote Consent: Apropos the Maffezini Case

in LAW IN THE SERVICE OF HUMAN DIGNITY: ESSAYS IN HONOUR OF FLORENTINO FELICIANO (Steve Charnovitz,
Debra Steger, and Peter Van den Bossche eds., 2005), pp. 252-259.

PCA 63992

277.

278.

279.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 92 of 116

particularly so where they do so clearly and explicitly, as the UK has done in a later
generation of its BITs. Such provisions will be applied and enforced in accordance with
their terms pursuant to the principle of pacta sunt servanda. The problem arises when,
as with the majority of MFN clauses, the clause is not explicit as to its application to
dispute settlement matters.

Once again, the Tribunal’s task is not to question the wisdom of the Contracting Parties
in concluding a particular agreement, even if this is thought to give rise to a disruptive
tendency towards treaty-shopping or general uncertainty as to the exact extent of
obligations undertaken. The Tribunal cannot thus concur with the Telenor decision
insofar as policy considerations underlie its reasoning in substitution of proper and
thorough analysis of the treaty text and relevant principles of international law.°° This
principle cuts both ways, however, such that the Tribunal can agree with the statements
of the same Telenor decision that reject other tribunals’ reliance on abstract policy
considerations in favour of greater investor protection or the importance of international
arbitration to investor protection.*** The comments of the Renta 4 tribunal encapsulate
well sentiments that are also shared by the present Tribunal:

To choose one of the contending policy theses as the reason to read a BIT in a
particular way may be presumptuous. The stakes are high and the policy
decisions appertain to the State-parties to the treaties. Speculations relied upon
as the basis of purposive readings of a text run the risk of encroachment upon
fundamental policy determinations. The same is true when ‘confirmation’ of a
hypothetical intention is said to be found in considerations external to the text.
The duty of the Tribunal is to discover and not to create meaning.*”*

Thirdly, the Respondent is correct in highlighting that in order to be of assistance to the
Claimant in the present case, the MFN clause must constitute more than a mere
prohibition of discrimination between investors based on their provenance: the MFN
clause must also be in itself a manifestation of consent to the arbitration of investment
disputes according to the rules that the MFN provision might attract from other
comparator treaties. Should the MFN provision not be found to operate in a
jurisdictional manner, that is to act independently as a substitute for the consent found
in the basic treaty’s dispute resolution clause, it cannot have the effect advocated for by
the Claimant here.

Fourthly, the standard of consent is firmly established in international law and does not
vary according to the context in which it is considered. BITs are treaties and as such are
instruments belonging to the international legal order and deriving their force from the
pacta sunt servanda rule of that order. BIT terms and provisions must therefore be
interpreted according to the normal rules of interpretation of treaties and without losing
sight of the principles and rules of international law applicable in the relations between

%% Telenor, supra note 35, 4993-94.

*4 Telenor, supra note 35, 495.

°° Renta 4, supra note 105, 493 (emphasis added).

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 93 of 116

the Contracting Parties to the BIT (particularly those of a systemic nature such as, for
example, the rules regarding the State’s consent to jurisdiction).°°°

280. Moreover, a State’s consent to arbitration shall not be presumed in the face of
ambiguity. Consent to the jurisdiction of a judicial or quasi-judicial body under
international law is either proven or not according to the general rules of international
law governing the interpretation of treaties. The burden of proof for the issue of consent
falls squarely on a given claimant who invokes it against a given respondent. Where a
claimant fails to prove consent with sufficient certainty, jurisdiction will be declined.*””

5° Case concerning Arbitral Award of 31 July 1989 (Guinea-Bissau v. Senegal), supra note 42, §9]47-48:

 

The Court could not act in that way in the present case. It has simply to ascertain whether by rendering
the disputed Award the Tribunal acted in manifest breach of the competence conferred on it by the
Arbitration Agreement, either by deciding in excess of, or by failing to exercise, its jurisdiction.

Such manifest breach might result from, for example, the failure of the Tribunal properly to apply the
relevant rules of interpretation to the provisions of the Arbitration Agreement which govern its
competence. An arbitration agreement (compromis d'arbitrage) is an agreement between States which
must be interpreted in accordance with the general rules of international law governing the interpretation
of treaties.

°°’ The Respondent’s citations to the ICJ cases of Djibouti v. France and Democratic Republic of the Congo v.
Rwanda are apposite in this respect. In Djibouti v. France, the ICJ stated as follows:

   

The consent allowing for the Court to assume jurisdiction must be certain. That is so, no more and no
less, for jurisdiction based on forum prorogatum. As the Court has recently explained, whatever the basis
of consent, the attitude of the respondent State must “be capable of being regarded as ‘an unequivocal
indication’ of the desire of that State to accept the Court’s jurisdiction in a ‘voluntary and indisputable”
manner” [citations omitted]. For the Court to exercise jurisdiction on the basis of forum prorogatum, the
element of consent must be either explicit or clearly to be deduced from the relevant conduct of a State.

  

(Case concerning Certain Questions of Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters (Djibouti v. France),
supra note 29, $93)

The ICJ’s statements in Djibouti v. France built upon and summarised the jurisprudence of the ICJ on the
subject of consent, including the Democratic Republic of the Congo y. Rwanda case which, not unlike the
present matter, also considered the question of consent to jurisdiction in light of the failure to abide by
procedural prerequisites stipulated by the treaty. In that case, the ICJ stated as follows:

 

The Court notes that in the present case the DRC made numerous protests against Rwanda’s actions in
alleged violation of international human rights law, both at the bilateral level through direct contact with
Rwanda and at the multilateral level within the framework of international institutions such as the United
Nations Security Council and the Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights of the Organization of
African Unity. In its Counter-Memorial and at the hearings the DRC presented these prot s proof that
“the DRC has satisfied the preconditions to the seisin of the Court in the compromissory clauses
invoked”. Whatever may be the legal characterization of such protests as regards the requirement of the
existence of a dispute between the DRC and Rwanda for purposes of Article 29 of the Convention, that
Article requires also that any such dispute be the subject of negotiations. The evidence has not ied
the Court that the DRC in fact sought to commence negotiations in respect of the interpretation or
application of the Convention,

         

 

       

 

The Court further notes that the DRC has also failed to prove any attempts on part to initiate
arbitration proceedings with Rwanda under Article 29 of the Convention. The Court cannot in this regard
accept the DRC’s argument that the impossibility of opening or advancing in negotiations with Rwanda
prevented it from contemplating having recourse to arbitration; since this condition formally set out
in Article 29 of the Convention on Discrimination against Women, the lack of agreement between the
parties as to the organization of an arbitration cannot be presumed. The existence of such disagreement
can follow only from a proposal for arbitration by the applicant, to which the respondent has made no
answer or which it has expressed its intention not to accept [citations omitted]. In the present case, the
Court has found nothing in the file which would enable it to conclude that the DRC made a proposal to
Rwanda that arbitration proceedings should be organized, and that the latter failed to respond thereto.

 

 

 

PCA 63992

281.

282.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 94 of 116

This principle follows from the lack of a default forum for the presentation of claims
under international law. Whereas the inherent jurisdiction or hermetic division of
competence over claims before general courts is a common feature of municipal judicial
systems, the default position under public international law is the absence of a forum
before which to present claims. The absence of a forum before which to present valid
substantive claims is thus a normal state of affairs in the international sphere. A finding
of no jurisdiction should not therefore be treated as a defect in a treaty scheme that runs
counter to its object and purpose in providing for substantive investment protection.>”*

This is what the Tribunal understands the Plama v. Bulgaria decision to mean when it
says, “an MEN provision in a basic treaty does not incorporate by reference dispute
settlement provisions in whole or in part set forth in another treaty unless the MFN
provision in the basic treaty leaves no doubt that the Contracting Parties intended to
incorporate them”. The Tribunal believes that the Pama award is interpreted incorrectly
when it is taken to stand for the restrictive interpretation of MFN clauses as compared to
other treaty provisions. Any general rule of restrictive treaty interpretation is plainly in
conflict with the VCLT and customary international law. In any event, the question of
the existence or not of any purported rule of restrictive interpretation does not, in the
Tribunal’s view, represent the basic distinction between the Maffezini and Plama lines
of jurisprudence.

 

It follows from the foregoing that Article 29, paragraph 1, of the Convention on Discrimination against

Women cannot serve to found the jurisdiction of the Court in the present case.

 

(Case concerning Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo (New Application: 2002) (Democratic
Republic of the Congo v. Rwanda), supra note 30, 4491-93)

°° The ICJ made this clear in Democratic Republic of the Congo v. Rwanda even in respect of erga omnes and
peremptory norms in international law:

The Court will begin by reaffirming that “the principles underlying the [Genocide] Convention are
principles which are recognized by civilized nations as binding on States, even without any conventional
obligation” and that a consequence of that conception is “the universal character both of the condemnation
of genocide and of the co-operation required ‘in order to liberate mankind from such an odious scourge’
(Preamble to the Convention)” (Reservations to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide, Advisory Opinion, I.C.J. Reports 1951, p. 23). It follows that “the rights and
obligations enshrined by the Convention are rights and obligations erga omnes” (Application of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and Herzegovina v.
Yugoslavia), Preliminary Objections, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1996 (II), p. 616, para. 31).

 

The Court observes, however, as it has already had occasion to emphasize, that “the erga omnes character
of a norm and the rule of consent to jurisdiction are two different things” (East Timor (Portugal v.
ralia), Judgment, 1.C.J. Reports 1995, p. 102, para. 29), and that the mere fact that rights and
obligations erga omnes may be at in a dispute would not give the Court jurisdiction to entertain that
dispute.

   

 

The same applies to the relationship between peremptory norms of general international law (jus cogens)
and the establishment of the Court’s jurisdiction : the fact that a dispute relates to compliance with a norm
having s i:

itself provide a basis for the jurisdiction of the Court to entertain that dispute. Under the Court’s Statute
that jurisdiction is always based on the consent of the parties.

    
 

(Case concerning Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo (New Application: 2002) (Democratic
Republic of the Congo v. Rwanda), supra note 30, 64)

PCA 63992

283.

284.

285.

286.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 95 of 116

2. The terms of the most-favoured-nation clause of Article 3

The Tribunal thus turns to the interpretation of the text of the provision. This exercise
focuses, in accordance with Article 31(1) VCLT, on the identification of the ordinary
meaning of the terms of the MFN clause in context and in light of the object and
purpose of the BIT. Several textual characteristics of the provision, as highlighted by
both Parties, suggest broad or narrow constructions of the clause.

Before commencing the interpretative exercise, however, it bears noting that the
Tribunal is only concerned with the MFN clause at Article 3(2). As the Respondent has
noted, Article 3(1) deals with MFN treatment of investments and Article 3(2) deals with
MEN treatment of investors. By its terms, dispute settlement under Article 8 is limited
to “investors” and only investors can invoke international arbitration. MFN treatment
can therefore only extend to dispute settlement activities through the operation of
Article 3(2) of the Treaty. The Tribunal restricts itself to the consideration of this latter
provision.

(i) The meaning of “treatment”

The key to the question of whether MFN clauses were intended to allow their use as a
substitute for the consent provided in the text of the treaty that contains them is the
meaning ascribed to the term “treatment”. This term, used in almost all MFN clauses, is
not specifically defined in any BIT that the Tribunal is aware of. The question is then
whether the term encompasses jurisdictional as well as substantive treatment.

The ordinary meaning of the term “treatment” is broad. Some tribunals have defined
treatment as “the rights and privileges granted and the obligations and burdens imposed
by a Contracting State on investments made by investors covered by the treaty.”>”
Others have stated that ““[t]reatment’ in its ordinary meaning refers to behavior in
respect of an entity or a person.”*!° Such definitions may be considered as
encompassing dispute resolution provisions as well as substantive treatment provisions
and “[t]here is no textual basis or legal rule to say that ‘treatment’ does not encompass
the host state’s acceptance of international arbitration.”*'' Even decisions coming out
firmly against the extension of MFN treatment to jurisdictional matters have recognised
this possibility.*!” It is here as well that the Ambatielos case is apposite: it clarifies that

5 Suez/InterAgua, supra note 99, 955; AWG, supra note 93, 955.

3! Siemens, supra note 284, 485.

5!" Renta 4, supra note 105, 4101.

32. The Wintershall tribunal, for example, recognised that it rejected the application of the MFN clause to the 18-
month litigation prerequisite “not because ‘treatment’ may not include ‘protection’ of an investment by the
investor adopting ICSID arbitration” (Wintershall, supra note 7, §162). See also, e.g., Impregilo v. Argentine
Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/17, Concurring and Dissenting Opinion of Professor Brigitte Stern, 21 June
2011, §{36; Hochtief v. Argentina, Separate and Dissenting Opinion of J. Christopher Thomas, QC, supra note
282, 57.

PCA 63992

287.

288.

289.

290.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 96 of 116

public international law has rejected formal divisions between substance and procedure
in the interpretation of treaties.°"°

The Respondent, however, contends that the phrase forming the immediate context of
the term, wherein the clause speaks of investments and investors being “subject...to
treatment” supports the implication that the term was intended to be limited to
substantive treatment standards. The first such indication is the use of the verb “to
subject”. The Respondent argues that this formulation has negative connotations in
comparison to other possible formulations, such as “to grant”. The argument follows
that an investor’s right to initiate an international arbitration is a privilege that is
“granted” and that the substantive protections under the Treaty generally constitute
limits on the measures that the host State might otherwise be entitled to “subject” the
investor to. This is combined with the formulation of the provision in the negative sense
(“no less favourable”). The Respondent further suggests that the noun “treatment” also
holds a negative connotation implying its relation to the substantive rights of investors.

While this might accord with meanings for “treatment” that define the term by reference
to actions by others unto the person or thing being “treated” in a certain way, this
element is not conclusive. For instance, Article 7 of the Treaty, in excluding certain
subjects from MFN “treatment”, refers to the exclusion of “any treatment, preference, or
privilege” that might otherwise have been attracted by the MFN clause. The clear
implication is that positive grants by the host State are not excluded from the scope of
“treatment”, even when that term is used alone. Moreover, both national treatment and
MEN provisions essentially function as non-discrimination provisions. They are only
engaged when the investor alleges being “subject to [differential] treatment” vis-a-vis
nationals of the host State or nationals of third States. The strong negative implication
involved in differential treatment sufficiently explains the choice of language.

There are, however, other clues that suggest that the term “treatment” was not simply
intended to hold the broad ordinary meaning suggested by the Claimant. The Tribunal
notes that neither party to the present case submitted direct evidence revealing the
particular understanding held by the Contracting Parties of the term “treatment” as at
the time of the conclusion of the Treaty. As such, it is appropriate and helpful to resort
to the principle of contemporaneity in treaty interpretation, particularly pertinent in the
case of bilateral treaties. This principle requires that the meaning and scope of this term
be ascertained as of the time when the UK and Argentina negotiated their BIT.

The Treaty was concluded by Argentina and the UK late in 1990. This was a time when
scholars and tribunals insisted on the autonomy or severability of the arbitral clause so
as to protect the right of the investor to obtain reparation in case of arbitrary revocation
of contracts by a State party, a general trend which also informed the negotiation of

513 Indeed, the flaw in Maffezini was to extrapolate too far from this general point, as aptly noted by the Renta 4
tribunal:

It is undoubtedly fair to compare BITs for the purpose of assessing compliance with promises of MFN
treatment given their congruent objective: the promotion and protection of investments. Yet such a
general statement is insufficient to decide any particular case. It is a matter of the wording of the
relevant instruments. This is one of the reasons awards under BITs are of variable relevance and value
in subsequent cases.

(Renta 4, supra note 105, 490)

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 97 of 116

bilateral treaties aimed at protection foreign private investment. This was thus long
before Maffezini brought treaty-based questions concerning the interplay between MFN
clauses and international investor-State dispute resolution mechanisms into focus;
indeed, these issues remained entirely unexplored.

291. This was nonetheless a fair time after the completion of ILC’s Draft Articles on MFN
Clauses in 1978.*"* It has been said that the ILC’s work is ultimately irrelevant to the
present question.*!> Yet, the conspicuous absence of any explicit discussion of the
subject is notable in itself.°'° The commentary to Draft Article 9 cites the Anglo-Iranian
Oil Company*!” and Ambatielos*"* cases as the “sedes materiae” on the interpretation of

MEN clauses as have a number of investment treaty tribunals.*"” These cases must

therefore be taken into account not only as legal authorities on the proper interpretation

of MEN clauses, but also as precedent that informed subsequent treaty drafting.

292. The Anglo-Iranian Oil Company case concerned a fact pattern that is completely
different from the modern investment treaty arbitration context. Two particular
distinguishing features present themselves. First, the treaties containing MFN provisions
did not deal with jurisdictional questions at all. The treaties contained no arbitration
provisions for disputes arising under those treaties. Second, the instrument whose
benefits were sought to be accessed through the MFN clause was Iran’s declaration
under the Optional Clause in the ICJ Statute, not an analogous treaty. The decision
nonetheless clearly expresses the finding that “the most-favoured-nation clause...has no
relation whatever to jurisdictional matters between the two Governments.”*”°

293. The Ambatielos case meanwhile dealt with procedural rights relating to the
“administration of justice”. As noted above,>”' the decisions, both before the ICJ and the
Arbitration Commission, can thus be taken to support the idea that treaty rights of a
procedural (as opposed to substantive) nature are not inherently excluded by their nature
from the “treatment” guaranteed by a broadly-worded MFN clause. However, the rights
in question still clearly formed the object of the treaty in question. The “treatment”
examined comprised the measures taken by municipal courts as an organ of the State

514 TLC DRAFT ARTICLES ON MOST-FAVOURED-NATION CLAUSES (1978).

515 See, e.g, Donald M. McRae, Annex: Discussion Paper, MOST-FAVOURED-NATION CLAUSE, REPORT OF THE
WORKING GROUP, 59th Session (UN Doc. A/CN.4/L.719), p. 11:

The 1978 draft articles provide limited guidance on the question. Under draft article 9, a beneficiary State
acquires under an MFN clause “only those rights which fall within the subject matter of the clause.” But,
determining the subject matter of the clause is the very question with which the Maffezini and other
tribunals have been grappling,

 

é

*' Albeit in a non-exhaustive list, the ILC Draft Articles mention a number of subjects to which MFN clauses
have been applied. While matters of “administration of justice” are included, as would be expected in light of the
Ambatielos case, no category clearly references dispute settlement matters between parties to a given treaty.

*'7 Case concerning the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company (United Kingdom v. Iran), Judgment of 22 July 1952, 1952
ICJ Reports 93.

318 Ambatielos, supra note 39.

5! For a thorough analysis of the import of these decisions and other precedents on the question at hand, with
which the Tribunal largely concurs below, see DOUGLAS, supra note 41, pp. 345-356.

*° Case concerning the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company (United Kingdom v. Iran), supra note 317, p. 110.

*! See 4286, above.

PCA 63992

294.

295.

296.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 98 of 116

 

vis-a-vis a foreign national. The guidance offered by the Ambatielos case is therefore
limited and does not contradict the statements of the ICJ in the Anglo-American Oil
Company case.” The same can be said for the other precedent in this area, the Case
Concerning the Rights of Nationals of the United States of America in Morocco,”
where the United States claimed expanded rights of consular jurisdiction, rather than
any expansion of the jurisdiction of the ICJ by virtue of the MFN clause in the basic
treaty.

  

Shortly after the time of conclusion of the Treaty, in 1992, the Development Committee
of the World Bank also adopted Guidelines on the Treatment of Foreign Direct
Investment. This instrument also does not explicitly define the term “treatment”.
However, the structure of the World Bank Guidelines, and in particular Part III devoted
to “treatment” and setting forth the range of common substantive standards of
investment protection, suggests that the prevailing view at the time was that treatment
was meant to cover discrete principles of conduct applicable to the State hosting the
foreign investment: the legal regime of the investment safeguarding it from any
discriminatory or unfair and inequitable practices within the host State’s territory.
Meanwhile, “dispute settlement” is dealt with in Part V of those Guidelines, separately
from standards of “treatment”.

The World Bank Guidelines are a “soft law” instrument that does not directly bear on
the interpretation of the UK-Argentina BIT. Nonetheless, through the interpretative
principle of contemporaneity, they provide a valuable indication of the prevailing view
among the community of States during the period leading up to the adoption of the UK-
Argentina BIT to which no countervailing evidence has been offered. The World Bank
Guidelines therefore cast doubt upon whether the broad meaning discussed above is
indeed the ordinary meaning intended by the Contracting Parties.

On the basis of the above examination of sources contemporary to the BIT, the
Tribunal’s view is that the term “treatment”, in the absence of any contrary stipulation
in the treaty itself, was most likely meant by the two Contracting Parties to refer only to
the legal regime to be respected by the host State in conformity with its international
obligations, conventional or customary. The settlement of disputes meanwhile remained
an entirely distinct issue, covered by a separate and specific treaty provision. Thus,
when the text of the MFN clause is silent about extending its application to dispute
settlement provisions and Article 8(1) of the same BIT provides a mechanism for
dispute settlement between an investor and the host State in respect of all investment
disputes which “arise within the terms of this Agreement”, the context represented by
Article 8(1) plays a determinative role in the ascertainment of the ordinary meaning of
the terms of the MFN clause. Further elements confirm this conclusion.

> Ambatielos, supra note 39.

°° Case concerning the Rights of Nationals of the United States of America in Morocco (France v. United
States), supra note 96, p. 176.

°°4 World Bank, GUIDELINES ON THE TREATMENT OF FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT (1992) (hereinafter “World
Bank Guidelines”), available at http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/WorldBank.pdf.

PCA 63992

297.

298.

299.

300.

301.

RST]

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 99 of 116

a6

(ii) The meaning of “treatment” as regards investors’ “management, maintenance,

use, enjoyment or disposal” of investments

The next relevant aspect of the MFN provision at Article 3(2) is its reference to the
“management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of” investments. In order to
further elucidate the meaning of “treatment” intended by the Contracting Parties, this
passage must be interpreted in accordance with the principle of ejusdem generis to
determine what class of matters the MFN clause relates to and can therefore attract from
other treaties.

The imperfect parallelism between Article 3(1) and Article 3(2) is also relevant here.
While Article 3(1) speaks of according MFN treatment to “investments or returns of
investors” with no qualification, Article 3(2) accords investors MFN treatment only “as
regards their management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of their
investments.” The clear implication is that the phrase was intended to have some
limiting effect on the kinds of treatment covered.*”°

The formulation of Article 3(2) is also different and narrower in scope than clauses
which provide for MFN treatment in relation to “all matters” or “all issues” relating to
the BIT. The latter language has been relied upon by various tribunals, including the
Maffezini tribunal itself, in order to support the application of the MFN clause to dispute
settlement,*”° whereas the absence of this phrase has also often supported a narrower
interpretation of the coverage of the MFN clause.

It may be said that the phrase “as regards their management, maintenance, use,
enjoyment or disposal of their investments” does not itself imply any significant
limitation. It is a broad formulation that would seem designed to cover almost all
conceivable activities undertaken by investors in relation to their investments, and
which certain tribunals have considered to encompass dispute settlement activities.**
There are again, however, reasons to doubt that the broadest scope of the phrase was
what was intended by the Contracting Parties. International arbitration against the State
is not a normal activity in the sense that it only happens, per essence, when disputes
remain unsettled, unless one already takes for granted the existence of the BIT or of
another agreement providing for international arbitration.

Other tribunals have interpreted this language narrowly, particularly when comparing it
to MFN clauses covering “all matters” under the given BIT. Other States have in
practice also given this language a narrow scope. As noted by the P/ama tribunal among
others, the Free Trade Agreement of the Americas (FTAA) draft of 21 November 2003,

 

is is the interpretation given by the Plama tribunal to the inclusion of similar phrases in NAFTA and the

FTAA draft (Plama, supra note 31, §91201-202).

6 See, e.g., Maffezini, supra note 6, $49; Telefonica, supra note 103, 4100,

*7 See, e.g., Salini, supra note 34, JJ 18-119; Telenor, supra note 35, 498

8 See, e.g., AWG, supra note 93, 957; RosInvest, supra note 102, 4130.

>? This reasoning partially underlies the Wintershall decision, supra note 7, §§169-171.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 100 of 116

inspired by similar language at Article 1103(2) of NAFTA,*” contained a footnote to its
MEN clause which read as follows:

Note: One delegation proposes the following footnote to be included in the negotiating history
as a reflection of the Parties’ shared understanding of the Most-Favored-Nation Article and
the Maffezini case. This footnote would be deleted in the final text of the Agreement:

The Parties note the recent decision of the arbitral tribunal in the Maffezini (Arg.) v. Kingdom
of Spain, which found an unusually broad most favored nation clause in an Argentina-Spain
agreement to encompass international dispute resolution procedures. See Decision on
Jurisdiction §§ 38-64 (January 25, 2000), reprinted in 16 ICSID Rev.-F.LL.J. 212 (2002). By
contrast, the Most-Favored-Nation Article of this Agreement is expressly limited in its scope
to matters “with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct,
operation, and sale or other disposition of investments.” The Parties share the understanding
and intent that this clause does not encompass international dispute resolution mechanisms
such as those contained in Section C.2.b (Dispute Settlement between a Party and an Investor
of Another Party) of this Chapter, and therefore could not reasonably lead to a conclusion
similar to that of the Maffezini case.””!

302. The parties to the CAFTA-DR went one step further in a footnote to the negotiating
history of that instrument’s investment chapter:

1. The Parties agree that the following footnote is to be included in the negotiating history as a
reflection of the Parties’ shared understanding of the Most-Favored-Nation Treatment Article
and the Maffezini case. This footnote would be deleted in the final text of the Agreement. The
Parties note the recent decision of the arbitral tribunal in Maffezini (Arg.) v. Kingdom of
Spain, which found an unusually broad most-favored-nation clause in an Argentina-Spain
agreement to encompass international dispute resolution procedures. See Decision on
Jurisdiction {38-64 (Jan. 25, 2000), reprinted in 16 ICSID Rev. — F.LL.J. 212 (2002). By
contrast, the Most-Favored-Nation Treatment Article of this Agreement is expressly limited in
its scope to matters “with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management,
conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of investments.” The Parties share the
understanding and intent that this clause does not encompass international dispute resolution
mechanisms such as those contained in Section C of this Chapter, and therefore could not
reasonably lead to a conclusion similar to that of the Maffezini case.”

Other recent investment treaties have similarly included provisions explicitly indicating

that this language intends to specifically limit the MFN clause to substantive treatment
333

matters.

5% Independently of subsequent clarifying instruments, the wording of NAFTA Article 1103(2) has also been
interpreted to clearly exclude dispute settlement matters from its scope, as succintly put by Emmanuel Gaillard:
“La clause de réglement des différends ne figurant pas dans cette énumération des matiéres couvertes, elle s’en
trouve naturellement exclue” (CIRDI, Chronique de sentences arbitrales, Journal de droit international n°
1/2005, p. 162).

>! Plama, supra note 31, 4202.

> Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) (Draft Text), January 28, 2004, available at
http://www.sice.oas.org/TPD/USA_CAFTA/Jan28draft/CAFTAind_e.asp.

*3 See, e.g., Chile-Colombia Free Trade Agreement (2006), Annex 9.3; Canada-Peru Free Trade Agreement
(2008), Annex 804.1.

PCA 63992

303.

304.

305.

306.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 101 of 116

As further noted by the National Grid tribunal, in reaction to the Siemens decision,
Argentina and Panama exchanged diplomatic notes with a view to clarifying that the
MEN clause in their 1996 investment treaty was not intended to extend to dispute
resolution clauses.**4

To the contrary, the UK has similarly manifested that its intention was to have the MFN
clause include dispute settlement matters and, for that purpose, has included a third
paragraph in the MFN clauses of many of its BITs and its Model BIT:

For the avoidance of doubt, it is confirmed that the treatment provided for in paragraphs (1)
and (2) above shall apply to the provisions of Articles 1 to 11 of this Agreement.

No such provision or other such indication of the sort is, however, to be found in the
present BIT. The Respondent also aptly cites the case of the UK-Paraguay BIT where
this language was inserted by way of an amendment rather than clarification. One may
nevertheless find other elements demonstrative of the narrow scope of the MFN clause
in the bilateral treaty at stake.

(iii) The meaning of treatment by the host State “in its territory”

The third key textual aspect of note is the precision that MFN treatment will be
provided for activities taking place “in [the Contracting State’s] territory”. In other
words, the MFN guarantees are territorially limited. This territorial limitation runs
through the BIT. It applies in various places within the definition of “investment”. A
similar territorial limitation to that found in the MFN clause is also found in every other
provision establishing a substantive treatment standard, with the exception of Article 6
on “Repatriation of Investment and Returns”. The limitation is indeed present in every
provision of the Treaty, except the aforementioned transfer provision (Article 6), the
exceptions to MFN treatment (Article 7), and the dispute settlement provision (Articles
8 and 9).

This practice is highly suggestive. Not only does this create a textual link between all
the provisions establishing substantive treatment standards in distinction to the dispute
settlement provisions, but it also highlights the non-territorial nature of dispute
resolution. It would have been illogical to include territorial limitations in the
aforementioned provisions in which they do not appear. In the context of the dispute
settlement provisions, this is because international arbitration is not an activity
inherently linked to the territory of the respondent State. Just the contrary is true. The
only significant territorial link may be that with the legal seat of the arbitration. The
seat, however, is usually located in the territory of a neutral third State that is not party
to the dispute, as it is in the present case. It is further to be noted that the Treaty also
provides for the possibility of arbitration under the ICSID Convention, where there is no
seat of arbitration. Nor is there likely to be any seat in an arbitration between the
Contracting Parties under Article 9 of the Treaty.

*4 National Grid, supra note 88, 485.

PCA 63992

307.

308.

309.

310.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 102 of 116

Meanwhile, the litigation of an investment dispute before the domestic courts of the
host State would constitute an activity that takes place within its territory. The
Ambatielos case, for example, dealt with treatment falling squarely within the bounds of
a territorial limitation on the operation of an MFN clause. In Ambatielos, Greece
invoked an MFN clause in order to obtain for its national a type of treatment in the
domestic courts of the UK which the UK had accorded by treaty to the nationals of
certain third States and which Greece alleged to be more favourable.**° Thus, if one
Contracting Party were to accord to the investors of some third State more favourable
rights in relation to domestic dispute resolution than the rights accorded to the investors
of the other Contracting Party, this could give rise to a violation of the MFN clause.
Yet, in the present case, what is at stake is not the recourse to domestic jurisdiction but
to international arbitration which, as already noted, takes place outside the national
territory of the host State.

Therefore, even if the term “treatment” could be understood as encompassing not only
“substantive” protections but also the international dispute resolution provisions of
investment treaties, the instant MFN clause still does not apply to international
arbitration. The host State’s obligation extends no further than providing the covered
investor with “treatment” in respect of domestic dispute resolution (i.e., dispute
resolution “in its territory”) that is no less favourable than the domestic dispute
resolution treatment provided to investors from third States. Where an MFN clause
applies only to treatment in the territory of the host State, the logical corollary is that
treatment outside the territory of the host State does not fall within the scope of the
clause.

In short, the very concept of extra-territorial dispute resolution and a host State’s
consent thereto are both ill-fitted to the clear and ordinary meaning of the words
“treatment in its territory” as used in the Treaty’s MFN clause. It is difficult to see how
an MEN clause containing this phrase could be applied to international arbitration
proceedings without discounting the explicit territorial limitation upon the scope of the
clause. This pragmatic incongruity prevents the Tribunal from presuming — in the
absence of any affirmative evidence — that the Contracting Parties to the present Treaty
implicitly intended to include international dispute resolution within the purview of the
MEN clause. If such were their intent, it would seem strange that they should impose a
territorial limitation so at variance with that aim.

(iv) The expressio unius est exclusio alterius principle as applied to the exceptions
to MFN treatment

The Claimant counters the above conclusion by resort to the Roman law maxim
expressio unius est exclusio alterius as applied to the exceptions to MFN treatment
enumerated at Article 7 of the Treaty. Several distinguished tribunals have also relied
thereon — including with respect to the Treaty at hand — in order to conclude that, where
a treaty lists certain exceptions to MFN treatment, any treatment not specifically

*35 Other similar examples involving the administration of justice are given in the commentary to the ILC DRAFT
ARTICLES ON MOST-FAVOURED-NATION CLAUSES (1978) at 28-29.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 103 of 116

excluded is necessarily covered by the MFN clause.**° These tribunals have pointed to
these exceptions as evidence that the issue of MFN treatment of dispute settlement was
live in the minds of the Contracting Parties and that they therefore must be presumed to
have intended to include international dispute resolution provisions within the scope of
the MEN clause.**” With due respect to the aforementioned tribunals, the present
Tribunal does not view the presence of these exceptions as an indication that the
Contracting Parties intended to include the Treaty’s international investor-State dispute
resolution provisions within the scope of its MFN commitments.

311. The MEN treatment exceptions mentioned at Article 7 the Treaty are reproduced below:

ARTICLE 7
Exceptions

The provisions of this Agreement relative to the
grant of treatment not less favourable than that
accorded to the investors of either Contracting
Party or to the investors of any third State shall
not be construed so as to oblige one Contracting
Party to extend to the investors of the other the
benefit of any treatment, preference or privilege
resulting from

(a) any existing or future customs union,
regional economic integration agreement or
similar international agreement to which
either of the Contracting Parties is or may
become a party, or

(

the bilateral agreements providing for
concessional financing concluded by the
Republic of Argentina with Italy on 10
December 1987 and with Spain on 3 June
1988 respectively, or

(c

any international agreement or arrangement
relating wholly or mainly to taxation or any
domestic legislation relating wholly or
mainly to taxation.

ARTICULO7
Excepciones

Las disposiciones del presente Convenio,
relativas a la concesion de un trato no menos
favorable del que se concede a los inversores de
una de las Partes Contratantes o de cualquier
tercer Estado, no seran interpretadas en el sentido
de obligar a una Parte Contratante a conceder a
los inversores de la otra Parte Contratante los
beneficios de cualquier tratamiento, preferencia 0
privilegio proveniente de

(a) una unién aduanera existente o futura, un
acuerdo de integracion econémica regional o
cualquier acuerdo internacional semejante,
al que una u otra de las Partes Contratantes
haya adherido o pueda _ eventualmente
adherir; 0

los acuerdos bilaterales que proveen
financiacion concesional respectivamente
concluidos por la Republica Argentina con
Italia el 10 de noviembre de 1987 y con
Espaiia el 3 de junio de 1988; 0

un convenio o acuerdo internacional que
esté relacionado en todo o principalmente
con tributacion o cualquier legislacion
interna que esté relacionada en todo o
principalmente con tributacién.

312. These exceptions, which exclude treatment in connection with any customs union, any

regional economic

integration agreement, two

specific concessional financing

agreements concluded by Argentina, and any international taxation agreement, deal
exclusively with the Contracting Parties’ direct treatment of foreign investments. In

6 See, e.g., National Grid, supra note 88, 82; Suez/InterAguas, supra note 99, 456; Siemens, supra note 284,

4183-86.

557 RosInvest, supra note 102, 4135.

PCA 63992

313.

314.

315.

316.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 104 of 116

addition, the exceptions in Article 7 refer to types of treatment that would normally
occur within the territory of the host State — i.e., they conform to the MFN clause’s
territorial limitation.

The exceptions to MFN treatment do not suggest any exclusion of matters relating to
international dispute settlement. To the extent that the Contracting Parties may have
turned their minds to the question of MFN treatment of international dispute settlement,
the Contracting Parties may be taken not to have excluded dispute settlement because
they never imagined that it was included in the first place. The Tribunal thus concurs
with the Plama tribunal’s conclusion that the deduction may apply with equal force in
either direction and only serves to confirm a prior conclusion about the effect of the
MEN clause.

3. Effet utile and subsequent BIT practice by Argentina

The Contracting Parties’ prior and subsequent BIT practice is the next issue that falls to
be considered in connection with the interpretation of the MFN clause. The treaty
practice of the Contracting Parties is undoubtedly a relevant consideration in the
interpretation of the current Treaty. However, the Tribunal doubts its usefulness in the
manner deployed in this case.

The Respondent has argued that, if the MFN clause applies to dispute resolution and it
had already concluded treaties that did not include this requirement, there would no
reason to include the 18-month litigation prerequisite in future treaties. All future such
stipulations would be automatically rendered null. Why would Argentina then have
continued including such stillborn provisions in future BITs? This would make little
sense and run counter to the principle of effectiveness (“effet utile”) by which it is
presumed that these provisions were intended to serve some purpose.

The Tribunal finds the Respondent’s argument persuasive. Out of 29 BITs signed by
Argentina with various States between 22 May 1990 and 17 May 1994, ten treaties
contained the 18-month litigation prerequisite while the other 19 did not.***If Argentina
had generally intended for its BITs’ MFN clauses to apply to their international dispute
resolution provisions, then it concluded no less than five subsequent BITs*? which
included the 18-month litigation prerequisite for no good reason, given that it had
already concluded three BITs without this requirement.**° Two of these treaties (the
BITs with Netherlands and South Korea) were even signed at a time when at least one
BIT omitting the 18-month litigation prerequisite (the Poland BIT) was already in force.
If one instead looks at the BITs by date of entry into force, then not a single one of
Argentina’s ten BITs establishing the 18-month litigation prerequisite would have come
into force before the exclusion of such a requirement in the Argentina-Poland BIT
would have already rendered it nugatory.

*38 A table listing the BITs concluded by Argentina and indicating their date of conclusion, date of entry into
force, and inclusion of the 18-month litigation prerequisite is attached to this Award (Annex 1).

> These are Argentina’s BITs with Spain, Canada, Austria, the Netherlands, and South Korea.

° These are Argentina’s BITs with Poland, Sweden, and France.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 105 of 116

317. These patterns cannot be reconciled with the Claimant’s assertions concerning the MFN
clauses. The doctrine of effet utile would be violated with respect to the noted treaties,
because the 18-month litigation prerequisite would have been void ab initio —
immediately superseded by means of the treaties’ MFN clauses. In this sense, and as
already mentioned above, the text of the BIT, including its Article 8, serves as “context”
relevant to ascertaining the ordinary meaning of the terms of the MFN clause in Article
3(2) of the BIT. The terms of the former, the MFN clause, should not be interpreted in a
way that deprives the latter, the dispute resolution clause, of any meaning without a
clear intention to achieve that result. The principle of contemporaneity avoids this
incongruity by preferring the interpretation consistent with Argentina’s demonstrated
treaty practice — namely, that Argentina did not in 1990 understand the term “treatment”
to include the BIT’s international arbitration procedures.

PCA 63992

318

319.

320.

321.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 106 of 116

L.1II. DOES THE ARGENTINA-LITHUANIA BIT PROVIDE “MORE FAVOURABLE”

TREATMENT?

. The Tribunal has already concluded that the MFN clause in the Treaty does not extend
MEN treatment to international dispute settlement issues. Nonetheless, given that the
Parties addressed the issue in detail, the Tribunal briefly turns to address another aspect
of the scope of application of the MFN clause — the question of the comparison between
the basic treaty and the comparator treaty — which confirms its conclusions on its lack of
jurisdiction even if the MFN clause did apply to the dispute settlement provisions of the
Treaty.

The question of what constitutes “more favourable” treatment cannot be taken for
granted. Differential treatment does not automatically constitute “less favourable”
treatment.**! The issue must be evaluated objectively and identify how investors under
the basic treaty are put at a disadvantage as compared to their brethren under the
comparator treaty. It may be possible in certain circumstances to identify discrete issues
in which clearly differential treatment confers an advantage or imposes a disadvantage
on one versus the other. The analysis cannot, however, be limited to a simple
consideration of what is more or less favourable for a given investor in the particular
circumstances in which they find themselves when a dispute arises. The treatment
identified must be more favourable in a general manner such that the clause performs its
purpose of averting distortions in the competition between investors of different
provenance. On the other hand, the treatment accorded need not be found to be more
favourable under all circumstances.

In the context of dispute settlement, the above principle requires that the dispute
settlement provisions in two treaties must be compared as a whole, and not part-by-part,
to determine whether the treatment accorded by the comparator treaty is indeed more
favourable in general. Absent a clear apples-to-apples comparison, differential treatment
in relation to dispute resolution may not necessarily equal less favourable treatment.

The Claimant has here invoked the Argentina-Lithuania BIT as the comparator treaty
that allegedly offers “more favourable” treatment in contravention of the MFN clause in
the UK-Argentina BIT, the basic treaty. The full dispute resolution provision of the
Argentina-Lithuania BIT is set forth below:

Article 9
Settlement of Disputes between an investor
and the host Contracting Party

(1) Any dispute which arises within the terms of
this Agreement concerning an investment
between an investor of one Contracting Party
and the other Contracting Party shall, if possible,
be settled amicably.

Articulo 9
Solucién de controversias entre un inversor y
la parte receptora de la inversién

(1) Toda controversia relativa a las disposiciones
del presente Acuerdo respecto de una inversion
entre un inversor de una Parte Contratante y la
otra Parte Contratante, sera, en la medida de lo
posible, solucionada por consultas amistosas.

1 Such a distinction has been clearly recognised in the national treatment context. See, e.g., UPS v. Canada,

UNCITRAL, Award, 24 May 2007.

PCA 63992

(2) If the dispute cannot thus be settled within
six months following the date on which the
dispute has been raised by either party, it may be
submitted, upon request of the investor, either
to:

- The competent tribunal of the Contracting
Party in whose territory the investment was
made;

- International arbitration according to the
provisions of Paragraph (3).

Where an investor has submitted a dispute to the
aforementioned competent tribunal of the
Contracting Party where the investment has been
made or to international arbitration, this choice
shall be final.

(3) In case of international arbitration, the
dispute shall be submitted, at the investor's
choice, either to:

- The International Centre for the Settlement
of Investment Disputes (ICSID) created by
the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and
National of other States opened for
signature in Washington on 18th March
1965, once both Contracting Parties herein
become members thereof. As far as this
provision is not complied with, each
Contracting Party consents that the dispute
be submitted to arbitration under the
regulations of the ICSID Additional Facility
for the Administration of Conciliation,
Arbitration and Fact-Finding Proceedings,
or

- An arbitration tribunal set up from case to
case in accordance with the Arbitration
Rules of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL).

(4) The arbitration tribunal shall decide in
accordance with the provisions of this
Agreement, the laws of the Contracting Party
involved in the dispute, including its rules on
conflict of law, the terms of any specific
agreement concluded in relation to such an
investment and the relevant principles of

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 107 of 116

(2) Si la controversia no hubiera podido asi ser
solucionada en el término de seis meses a partir
de la fecha en que hubiera sido planteada por una
u otra de las partes, podra ser sometida, a pedido
del inversor a:

los tribunales competentes de la Parte
Contratante en cuyo territorio se realiz6 la
inversion;

arbitraje internacional en las condiciones
descriptas en el parrafo (3).

Una vez que un inversor haya sometido la

controversia a

los tribunales competentes

mencionados de la Parte Contratante en la cual se
realizo la inversi6n o al arbitraje internacional, la
elecciOn sera definitiva.

(3)En el

caso de recurso al arbitraje

internacional, la controversia podra ser llevada, a
elecci6n del inversor:

al Centro Internacional de Arreglo de
Diferencias Relativas a __Inversiones
(C.LA.D.L), creado por el "Convenio sobre
Arreglo de Diferencias relativas a_ las
Inversiones entre Estados y Nacionales de
Otros Estados", abierto a la firma en
Washington el 18 de marzo de 1965, cuando
cada Estado Parte en el presente Acuerdo
haya adherido a aquél. Mientras esta
condicion no se cumpla, cada Parte
Contratante da su consentimiento para que la
controversia sea sometida al arbitraje
conforme a las reglamentaciones del
Mecanismo Complementario del C.LA.D.I.
para la Administracion de Procedimientos de
Conciliacion, de Arbitraje 0 de Investigacién,
oO

a un tribunal de arbitraje establecido para cada
caso de acuerdo con las reglas de arbitraje de
la Comision de las Naciones Unidas para el
Derecho Mercantil Internacional
(C.N.U.D.M.L).

(4) El tribunal arbitral decidiraé en base a las
disposiciones del presente Acuerdo, el derecho de

la

Parte Contratante que sea parte en la

controversia, incluidas las normas relativas a
conflictos de leyes a los términos de eventuales
acuerdos especificos concluidos con relacién a la
inversion como asi también a los principios

international law.

(5) The arbitral decisions shall be final and
binding for the parties in the dispute. Each
Contracting Party shall execute them in
accordance with its laws.”

PCA Case 2010-09

Award on Jurisdiction

Page 108 of 116

del internacional en la

pertinentes derecho

materia.

(5) Los fallos del tribunal arbitral sera definitivos
y obligatorios para las partes en la controversia.
Cada Parte Contratante las ejecutara de
conformidad con su legislacion.

322.

323.

324.

325.

In comparison to Article 8 of the UK-Argentina BIT, this provision provides first that
disputes are to be the object of amicable negotiations. Should these fail to resolve the
dispute within six months, the investor may submit the dispute to its choice between the
domestic courts of the host State or various international arbitration fora. The clause
then makes clear that “[o]nce an investor has submitted the dispute to the
aforementioned competent courts of the Contracting Party in whose territory the
investment was made or to international arbitration, this choice shall be final.” This
provision constitutes a “fork-in-the-road” provision common to many BITs. The
Lithuanian investor is thus given a choice between local remedies and international
arbitration. However, the investor cannot resort to international arbitration once the
investor has made a choice in favour of local remedies, or vice versa.

By contrast, the UK investor in Argentina is required to litigate the dispute before the
Argentine courts for 18 months or until a final decision is rendered, whichever is earlier.
As noted by the Respondent, this effectively gives an investor two bites at the apple:
once before the domestic courts of the host State, and again before an international
arbitral tribunal. Although there are costs and delay involved in litigating before the
Argentine courts if this fails to achieve a resolution, in many circumstances, this may be
more favourable than direct access to international arbitration after only six months of
amicable negotiations. The Tribunal therefore does not find that Lithuanian investors
are necessarily accorded more favourable treatment as compared to the UK investor in
Argentina. Accepting that “access to international arbitration has been a fundamental
and constant desideratum for investment protection”*? does not change this result.

The Claimant’s assertion that it is improbable that investment disputes would see a first
instance decision within 18 months is of only limited relevance. The requirement of
litigation before the Argentine courts is set as a minimum. The Argentine courts remain
seised of the matter and the investor does not waive its right to commence international
arbitration by continuing its domestic action through to a decision past 18 months
before deciding to resort to international arbitration.

If an investor were to prove a general need for urgent resort to international arbitration,
such that investors who are forced to litigate for 18 months are put at a consistent
disadvantage as compared to investors who may directly or more expeditiously seise an
international tribunal, this might satisfy the Tribunal that this requirement leads to less
favourable treatment. However, no such general disadvantage has been shown here. In
this case, the only reason offered as to why the Claimant does not wish to resort to local
remedies is one particular to the present Claimant. This was the Respondent’s allegation

>” English translation taken from UNITED NATIONS TREATY SERIES, vol. 2033, pp. 264-265.
“8 Renta 4, supra note 105, 4100.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 109 of 116

that the Claimant is attempting to evade debts that might be set off against its current
claims by obtaining an international award that it may enforce in a jurisdiction that will
not recognise such debts or allow their set-off. The Tribunal need not express any
opinion on the veracity of this allegation. Suffice it to say that it does not satisfy the
standard set forth above.

PCA 63992

326

327.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 110 of 116

I.IV. CONCLUSION ON JURISDICTION

. The Tribunal has analysed the Parties’ arguments and come to four main conclusions:
(1) Article 8 of the Treaty establishes a mandatory 18-month litigation prerequisite to
international arbitration that the Claimant has manifestly not complied with; (2) the
failure to comply with the prerequisite deprives the Tribunal of jurisdiction; (3) the
MEN clause at Article 3 of the Treaty does not extend to international dispute resolution
matters; and (4) even if the MFN clause extended to international dispute resolution

this requirement has not been shown to constitute “less favourable” treatment

s other foreign investors. All of the above are related to the fundamental

conclusion that underlies the Tribunal’s finding of no jurisdiction: Argentina’s consent

to arbitration in absence of compliance with the 18-month litigation prerequisite in the
present Treaty has not been proven.

  

In light of the above conclusions, the Tribunal finds that it must decline jurisdiction
over any and all of the Claimant’s claims without regard to their nature or basis. The
Tribunal therefore does not need to consider the Respondent’s further objections to
jurisdiction.

PCA 63992

328

329.

330.

331.

332.

333.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 111 of 116

IV. Costs

. The Tribunal observes that the Treaty contains no provision on the allocation of the
costs of arbitration arising out of a dispute between an investor and the host State. The
provisions regarding the Tribunal’s decision in the matter of costs are instead to be
found in the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules which govern the proceedings, specifically
Articles 38 to 40 thereof.

Article 38 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules defines the “costs of arbitration” as
follows:

The arbitral tribunal shall fix the costs of arbitration in its award. The term “costs” includes
only:

(a) The fees of the arbitral tribunal to be stated separately as to each arbitrator
and to be fixed by the tribunal itself in accordance with article 39;

(b) The travel and other expenses incurred by the arbitrators;

(c) The costs of expert advice and of other assistance required by the arbitral
tribunal;

(d) The travel and other expenses of witnesses to the extent such expenses are
approved by the arbitral tribunal;

(e) The costs for legal representation and assistance of the successful party if
such costs were claimed during the arbitral proceedings, and only to the extent
that the arbitral tribunal determines that the amount of such costs is
reasonable;

(f) Any fees and expenses of the appointing authority as well as the expenses
of the Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague.

The Parties deposited a total of EUR 400,000 (EUR 200,000 by each of the Claimant
and the Respondent) with the PCA to cover the costs of arbitration.

The fees of the Hon. Marc Lalonde, the arbitrator appointed by the Claimant, amount to
EUR 74,000.00. The fees of Dr. Santiago Torres Bernardez, the arbitrator appointed by
the Respondent, amount to EUR 72,500.00. The fees and expenses of Professor Pierre-
Marie Dupuy, the Presiding Arbitrator, amount to EUR 88,000.00.

Pursuant to Procedural Order No. 1, the International Bureau of the PCA was
designated to act as Registry in this arbitration. The PCA’s fees for registry services
amount to EUR 64,135.00.

All other tribunal expenses, including travel, transcription, translation, interpretation,
courier deliveries, conference calling, catering, bank charges, and all other costs relating
to the arbitration proceedings, amount to EUR 62,852.22.

PCA 63992

334.

335.

336.

337.

338.

339.

340.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 112 of 116

Based on the above figures, the combined tribunal costs, comprising the items covered
in Articles 38(a) to (c) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, total EUR 361,487.22.

The Parties’ respective portions of these tribunal costs, amounting to EUR 180,743.61
for each side, shall be deducted from the deposit and the PCA shall reimburse the
amount of EUR 19,256.39 to each side in accordance with Article 41(5) of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

Having fixed the costs of the arbitration, Articles 40(1) and (2) of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules provide the criteria to be applied by the Tribunal in awarding costs:

1. Except as provided in paragraph 2, the costs of arbitration shall in principle be borne by the
unsuccessful party. However, the arbitral tribunal may apportion each of such costs between
the parties if it determines that apportionment is reasonable, taking into account the
circumstances of the case.

2. With respect to the costs of legal representation and assistance referred to in article 38,
paragraph (e), the arbitral tribunal, taking into account the circumstances of the case, shall be
free to determine which party shall bear such costs or may apportion such costs between the
parties if it determines that apportionment is reasonable.

Article 40 thus contains distinct rules regarding the awarding of arbitration costs and the
costs of the parties’ legal representation and assistance. The principle governing the
awarding of the costs of arbitration, according to Article 40(1) of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, is that the costs shall be borne by the unsuccessful party, in this case
the Claimant, unless the Tribunal finds an apportionment of the costs between the
parties to be reasonable under the circumstances.

In light of the Tribunal’s conclusion that it has no jurisdiction over any of the
Claimant’s claims, there is a clearly successful party, the Respondent, and a clearly
unsuccessful party, the Claimant. Given this outcome, the Tribunal finds no reason to
deviate from the presumption in Article 40(1) and consequently awards the costs of
arbitration to the Respondent. The Claimant shall thus reimburse the Respondent the
amount of EUR 180,743.61 in respect of the costs of arbitration.

With respect to the costs of legal representation and assistance as defined in Article
38(e), Article 40(2) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules provides that the arbitral
tribunal, taking into account the circumstances of the case, is free to determine which
party shall bear such costs or may apportion such costs between the parties if it
determines that apportionment is reasonable. Article 40(2) thus grants near total
discretion to an arbitration tribunal.

The traditional position in investment treaty arbitration, in contrast to commercial
arbitration, has been to follow the normal practice under public international law (as
exemplified in Article 9(5) of the Treaty) that the parties shall bear their own costs of
legal representation and assistance. The Tribunal is aware that a number of investment
treaty tribunals have opted instead to apply the principle of awarding costs of legal
representation and assistance to the prevailing party as with the costs of arbitration. The
Tribunal accepts that this developing practice may be appropriate in some cases, but is
not convinced that it should be adopted as a rule and prefers to follow the public

PCA 63992

341.

342.

343.

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 113 of 116

international law practice unless a more holistic assessment of the circumstances of the
case justifies a departure from that practice.

In this case, the Tribunal notes once again that the Respondent has been the prevailing
party. Nonetheless, the Claimant’s arguments can hardly be said to have been
unreasonable, having been previously adopted by other tribunals even with respect to
the Treaty at issue in this case. As such, while firmly convinced of its interpretation of
Article 3 of the Treaty, the Tribunal is aware of the difficulty posed by the inconsistent
jurisprudence on the interpretation of MFN clauses in investment treaties and their
application to jurisdictional issues.

The Tribunal further notes that it has found for the Respondent and against the Claimant
on only one of the various objections to jurisdiction that were raised by the Respondent
and argued by the Parties, albeit one that disposes of the entirety of the claims. The
Tribunal has made no finding on these other issues and shall not presume that the
Claimant’s arguments were without merit and would not have succeeded. The
Respondent’s success is therefore not absolute.

The Tribunal thus, despite its finding against the Claimant, decides that the Parties shall
bear their own costs of legal representation and assistance.

PCA 63992

PCA Case 2010-09
Award on Jurisdiction
Page 114 of 116

J. DECISIONS

1. The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over all of the Claimant’s claims due to the
Claimant’s failure to comply with the mandatory 18-month litigation prerequisite set
forth in Article 8 of the Treaty.

2. The MEN clause at Article 3 of the Treaty does not apply in such a way as to permit
the Claimant to avail itself of the dispute resolution provisions of the Argentina-
Lithuania BIT.

3. The Claimant’s claims are therefore dismissed in their entirety, without prejudice to

the Claimant’s rights to submit them to arbitration before a new tribunal after
complying with Article 8 of the Treaty.

4. The Claimant shall bear the costs of arbitration and shall consequently reimburse the
Respondent the amount of EUR 180,743.61.

5. The Parties shall bear their own costs of legal representation and assistance.

6. The PCA shall reimburse EUR 19,256.39 to each Party in respect of the unexpended
balance of the deposit.

Place of Arbitration: The Hague

Date: 10 February 2012

—— Taka! Prt ewtiaty

The Hon. Marc Lalonde, P.C., O.C., Q.C. Dr. Santiago Torres Bernardez

 

Eo

Prof. Pierre-Marie Dupuy
(Presiding Arbitrator)

PCA 63992

ANNEX 1:

ARGENTINE BITS BY DATE OF SIGNATURE

(Information taken from UNCTAD, (Country specific Lists of BITs”, available at:
http://w ‘tad.o1 lat e.aS|

 

?intItemID=2344&lang=1.)

Counterparty Date of Signature Date of Entry into Force
Italy 22 May 1990 14 October 1993
Belgium/Luxembourg 28 June 1990 20 May 1994
United Kingdom 11 December 1990 19 February 1993
Germany 09 April 1991 08 November 1993
Switzerland 12 April 1991 06 November 1992
France 03 July 1991 03 March 1993
Poland 31 July 1991 01 September 1992
Chile 02 August 1991 01 January 1995
Spain 03 October 1991 28 September 1992
Canada 05 November 1991 29 April 1993
United States 14 November 1991 20 October 1995
Sweden 22 November 1991 28 September 1992
Turkey 08 May 1992 01 May 1995
Egypt 11 May 1992 03 December 1993
Tunisia 17 June 1992 23 January 1995
Austria 07 August 1992 01 January 1995
Netherlands 20 October 1992 01 October 1994
China 05 November 1992 01 August 1994
Denmark 06 November 1992 2 January 1995
Hungary 05 February 1993 01 October 1997
Senegal 06 April 1993 01 February 2010
Armenia 16 April 1993 20 December 1994
Romania 29 July 1993 01 May 1995
Bulgaria 21 September 1993 11 March 1997
Venezuela 16 November 1993 01 July 1995
Jamaica 08 February 1994 1 December 1995
Ecuador 18 February 1994 1 December 1995
Bolivia 17 March 1994 01 May 1995
Korea, Republic of 17 May 1994 24 September 1996

Portugal 06 October 1994 03 May 1996

PCA 63992

18-Month
Requirement
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
NO
YES
YES
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
YES
YES
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
YES
NO

Croatia
Peru
Israel
Ukraine
Australia
Finland
Lithuania
El Salvador
Panama
Vietnam
Morocco
Czech Republic
Mexico
Costa Rica
Guatemala
Russia
South Africa
Nicaragua
India
New Zealand
Philippines
Greece
Thailand

Dominican Republic

PCA 63992

02 December 1994
10 November 1994
23 July 1995

09 August 1995

23 August 1995

05 November 1995
14 March 1996

09 May 1996

10 May 1996

03 June 1996

13 June 1996

21 September 1996
13 November 1996
21 May 1997

21 April 1998

25 June 1998

23 July 1998

10 August 1998

20 August 1999

27 August 1999
20 September 1999
26 October 1999
18 April 2000

16 March 2001

01 June 1996

24 October 1996
10 April 1997

06 May 1997

11 January 1997
03 May 1996

01 September 1998
8 January 1999

22 June 1998

01 June 1997

19 February 2000
23 July 1998

22 July 1998

01 May 2001

07 December 2002
20 November 2000
01 January 2001
01 February 2001
12 August 2002
Not in force

01 January 2002
Not in force

07 March 2002

Not in force

NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO

