IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION
COMMENCED PURSUANT TO THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF
THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND AND THE
GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARGENTINA FOR THE PROMOTION AND
PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS, SIGNED DECEMBER 11, 1990

-and-
THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES

- between -

ICS Inspection and Control Services Limited (United Kingdom)
(the “Claimant”)

- and -

The Republic of Argentina

(the “Respondent” and together with the Claimant, the “Parties”)

 

DECISION ON CHALLENGE TO ARBITRATOR

 

ICS Inspection and Control Services Limited v. The Republic of Argentina
Decision on challenge to Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov

December 17, 2009

Page 2 of 5

WHEREAS according to the Claimant, a dispute has arisen between the Parties under the Agreement
between the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
Government of The Republic of Argentina for the Promotion and Protection of Investments, signed
December 11, 1990 (the “Treaty”);

WHEREAS Article 8(3) of the Treaty provides for, among other things, the submission of disputes
under the Treaty to an arbitral tribunal established under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules (the
“UNCITRAL Rules”);

WHEREAS in accordance with Article 5 of the UNCITRAL Rules, this matter is to be submitted to a
three-member arbitral tribunal;

WHEREAS according to the Claimant, it sent a Notice of Arbitration dated June 26, 2009 to the
Respondent;

WHEREAS by letter dated July 28, 2009 the Claimant appointed Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov as an
arbitrator;

WHEREAS by letter dated August 7, 2009, in accordance with Article 9 of the UNCITRAL Rules,
Mr. Alexandrov made the following disclosure to the Parties:

He My law firm, Sidley Austin LLP, has in the past represented PWC Logistics, which I
understand may be, or may have been, an affiliate or a parent of ICS, the Claimant in this
case. My firm no longer represents PWC Logistics. The last invoices issued to PWC Logistics
date back to 2005. The total billings amounted to less than $60,000. The representation had
no relation to the present case (to the extent of my knowledge of the facts of the present case,
which is based on the Notice of Arbitration). I was not involved in any way in that
representation.

2. My law firm and I personally are involved in the ICSID case of Compaiiia de Aguas
del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi S.A. v. Argentine Republic, /CSID Case No. ARB/97/3,
where my law firm and I represent Claimants and are adverse to the Argentine Republic. The
subject matter of the Vivendi dispute is not related to the subject matter of this case.

I do not believe that these ci affect my impartiality and inder as an
arbitrator in this case.

WHEREAS on August 12, 2009, the Respondent challenged the appointment of
Mr. Alexandrov in these proceedings pursuant to Article 10(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules, which
provides that, “[a]ny arbitrator may be challenged if circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable
doubts as to the arbitrator's impartiality or independence” (the “Challenge”);

WHEREAS on September 23, 2009, in accordance with Article 12(1)(c) of the UNCITRAL Rules,
the Claimant requested that the Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration (“PCA”)
designate an appointing authority to decide the Respondent’s challenge to
Mr. Alexandrov (the “Request”);

ICS Inspection and Control Services Limited v. The Republic of Argentina
Decision on challenge to Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov

December 17, 2009

Page 3 of 5

WHEREAS by letter dated September 25, 2008, the PCA invited the Respondent to comment on the
Claimant’s Request by October 9, 2009;

WHEREAS by letter dated October 9, 2009, the Respondent first noted that Mr. Alexandrov had not
yet replied to the challenge made by the Respondent, and that the designation of an appointi
authority was therefore premature. The Respondent second outlined the characteristics that the
appointing authority to be designated should meet, if an appointing authority were designated. These
characteristics included that “the appointing authority should be a person or entity that has the
capacity and obligation to state reasons for its decision on the Request for the Disqualification of Mr.
Stanimir A. Alexandrov” and that the appointing authority should not be of the nationality of either of
the Parties;

 

WHEREAS by letter dated October 12, 2009, the PCA invited the Claimant to comment on the
Respondent’s letter by October 19, 2009;

WHEREAS by letter dated October 19, 2009, the Claimant stated that under the UNCITRAL Rules
“there is no requirement [...] for the party appointed arbitrator [...] to make any written or oral
statement in relation to his or her challenge.” The Claimant also concurred with the Respondent that
the appointing authority should not be of either of the Parties’ nationality, but did not respond to the
Respondent’s comment regarding the appointing authority’s duty to give reasons;

WHEREAS on October 26, 2009, the Secretary-General of the PCA, having established to his
i ion his to desi: al inting authority, desi; d Mr. Jernej Sekolec as

ip in app
appointing authority in this matter for all purposes under the UNCITRAL Rules;

WHEREAS on October 29, 2009, Mr. Sekolec invited the Parties to make submissions in accordance
with the following schedule:

1. By November 6, 2009, the Claimant shall submit a response to the Respondent's

Challenge together with any supporting documentation (“Claimant's Response”).

2. By November 20, 2009, the Respondent shall submit any further comments it may have,

November 20, 2007,
but only in rebuttal to the Claimant's Response (“Respondent's Rebuttal”).

3. By December 4, 2009, the Claimant shall submit any further comments it may have, but

December 4, 2007,
only in rebuttal to the Respondent's Rebuttal (“Claimant's Reply”).

4. By December 11, 2009, Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov may submit any comments he may

have on the Parties’ submissions.

WHEREAS on November 6, 2009, the Claimant filed its Response to the Respondent’s Challenge;

WHEREAS by letter dated November 12, 2009, the Respondent advised that it was “available to hold
a brief hearing [...] in case you consider that a hearing could be useful in order for each party to
develop its position on the grounds for disqualification of Mr. Alexandrov.”

WHEREAS by letter dated November 16, 2009, Mr. Sekolec informed the Parties that he did not
foresee any need for a hearing on the challenge;

 

ICS Inspection and Control Services Limited v. The Republic of Argentina
Decision on challenge to Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov

December 17, 2009

Page 4 of 5

WHEREAS on November 20, 2009, the Respondent filed its Rebuttal to the Claimant’s Response;
WHEREAS on December 4, 2009, the Claimant filed its Reply to the Respondent’s Rebuttal;

WHEREAS the deadline of December 11, 2009 passed without Mr. Stanimir Alexandrov having
filed any comments on the challenge;

NOW THEREFORE I, Jernej Sekolec, appointing authority in this matter, having considered all of
the submissions and supporting documents of the Parties:

HEREBY SUSTAIN the challenge against Mr. Alexandrov as arbitrator in the above-referenced
matter for the following reasons:

1. In his disclosure, Mr. Alexandrov indicates that he and his law firm currently
Pp the clai in the long-running i treaty p di

Compatiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi S.A. v. Argentine Republic
(the “Vivendi” case). This puts Mr. Alexandrov in a situation of adversity
towards Argentina, a situation that is often a source of, justified concerns and that
I believe should in principle be avoided, except where circumstances exist that
eliminate any justifiable doubts as to the arbitrator's impartiality or
independence.

2. It is noted that, in their submissions on the challenge, both Parties have referred
to the IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration (the
“IBA Guidelines”). Although the IBA Guidelines have no binding status in the
present proceedings, they reflect international best practices and offer examples
of situations that may give rise to objectively justifiable doubts as to an
arbitrator’s impartiality or independence. Specifically, in support of its challenge,
the Respondent relied on the scenario set forth at section 3.4.1 of the “Orange
List” of the IBA Guidelines which provides that circumstances in which “[t]he
arbitrator’s law firm is currently acting adverse to one of the parties or an affiliate
of one of the parties” may give rise to justifiable doubts as to the arbitrator’s
impartiality or independence. I also note that the scenario posited at section 3.1.2
of the “Orange List” provides that circumstances in which “[t}he arbitrator has
within the past three years served as counsel against one of the parties or an
affiliate of one of the parties in an unrelated matter” may give rise to justifiable
doubts as to the arbitrator’s impartiality or independence. Given that the facts
underlying Mr. Alexandrov’s disclosure are reflected in both of these scenarios, I
am of the opinion that the conflict in question is sufficiently serious to give rise
to objectively justifiable doubts as to Mr. Alexandrov’s impartiality and
independence.

3. It has been argued in opposition to the challenge, inter alia, that the Vivendi case
may soon come to a close and is unrelated to the present case. However, I do not
consider that these circumstances resolve all justifiable doubts. While no more
action appears to be required from Mr. Alexandrov in the current annulment
proceedings in the above case, I do not consider that this possibility entirely
negates Mr. Alexandrov’s conflict as envisaged in section 3.4.1 of the IBA
Guidelines inasmuch as the possibility exists that the case may continue in some
form and engage Mr. Alexandrov’s firm’s continued representation.

ICS Inspection and Control Services Limited v. The Republic of Argentina
Decision on challenge to Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov

December 17, 2009

Page 5 of 5

4. As to the relation between the cases, I note again that this is not merely a case in
which the arbitrator's law firm is acting adversely to one of the parties in the
dispute, but rather a case where the arbitrator has personally and recently acted
adversely to one of the parties to the dispute. The scenario set forth in section
3.1.2 of the IBA Guidelines provides that past, personal representation against
one of the parties “in an unrelated matter” can be sufficient to give rise to
justifiable doubts. Moreover, while the Claimant has argued that the cases are
unrelated and there are technical differences between the issues raised in the two
cases, they are not entirely dissimilar. Both matters are investment protection
actions of considerable magnitude which raise broadly similar concerns against
the same State party in a manner that reinforces any justifiable doubts as to the
arbitrator's impartiality or independence.

5. I wish to add that I find no reason to doubt Mr. Alexandrov’s personal intention
to act impartially and independently but that, for the reasons stated above, it is
prudent that another arbitrator be appointed by the Claimant.

6. In light of my conclusion above, the further grounds of challenge raised by the
Respondent need not be considered.

7. In accordance with Articles 38 and 40 of the UNCITRAL Rules, the power to fix
and apportion costs, including the fees and expenses of the appointing authority
and other costs associated with a challenge, is reserved to the arbitral tribunal.
Therefore, I do not find it appropriate to rule on the Respondent’s request for the
costs of this challenge.

ACCORDINGLY, the Claimant is invited to appoint a substitute arbitrator within 30 days in
accordance with Article 12(2) of the UNCITRAL Rules.

Done at Vienna, Austria, on December 17, 2009.

Jernej Sekolec

