INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the annulment proceeding between

IMPREGILO S.P.A.

and

ARGENTINE REPUBLIC
(Applicant)

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/17
(Annulment Proceeding)

 

DECISION OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE
APPLICATION FOR ANNULMENT

 

Members of the Committee
Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno, President
Mr. Eduardo Zuleta
Ms. Teresa Cheng

Secretary of the Committee
Ms. Alicia Martin Blanco

Date of dispatch to the Parties: January 24, 2014

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Impregilo S.p.A.: Representing the Argentine Republic:
Mr. Doak Bishop Dr. Angelina Maria Esther Abbona

Mr. Roberto Aguirre Luzi Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién

Mr. Craig S. Miles Posadas 1641

Ms. Silvia Marchili C1112ADC, Buenos Aires

Mr. David Weiss ARGENTINE REPUBLIC

Mr. Louis-Alexis Bret

King & Spalding

1100 Lousiana Street, Suite 4000
Houston, Texas

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

AGBA:
Argentina:

MEN clause:
ICSID Convention:

Impregilo:
Award:
Arbitration Rules:

Argentina-US BIT:

Argentina-ltaly BIT or BIT:

Tribunal:

ABBREVIATIONS

Argentine company formed by Impregilo S.p.A. and other
partners
Argentine Republic

Most Favored Nation clause.

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States.

Impregilo S.p.A., incorporated under the laws of Italy.

Award rendered on June 21, 2011 in the arbitration of
Impregilo S.p.A. v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/17.
Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings.

Treaty between United States of America and the Argentine
Republic concerning the Reciprocal Encouragement and
Protection of Investment.

Agreement between the Republic of Italy and the Argentine
Republic on the Promotion and Protection of Investments
(Fra la Republica Italiana e la Republica Argentina sulla
Promozione e Protezione degli Investimenti)

Arbitration Tribunal that issued the Award.

D.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION .........ccccscsssssscsnessscscesesesescsnssesescesessscseansssscscesesesescanessscsnessssseeeaesseeaeeeees 1
PROCEDURAL HISTORY. ........csccccsescssssesesneseseseesesssessnessscsnesesesssanessscssesesssseeanesseeseeeeea 2
ARGUMENTS OF THE PARTIES ........ccscccsscscssssesssessesseeseeeseseeseseseeeeeneseanenessssseeseeeseanes 3
ARGENTINA’S ARGUMENTS

 

1.The Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers .
2.The Tribunal manifestly exceeded the material limits of its competence..

 

 

3.The Tribunal abrogated the normative content of the standard requiring the
investment to be accorded fair and equitable treatment, by failing to clarify its

MOANING oo. e cs eececees ce eeeee cece ceceeeescsesesesssessececscesssssseseesaseasenecesesssseasseeesaneessenenesesseneneee 15
4.The Tribunal failed to state the reasons on which the Award was based and

exceeded its powers in deciding on the defenses based on the extraordinary

situation faced by Argentina

 
 

5.Compensation

IMPREGILO’S RESPONSE TO ARGENTINA'S ARGUMENTS..........0ceeeeeeeeeeee 23
ANALYSIS OF THE COMMITTEE ...0.....ccc cece cece cece ceneaeseeneeeeteneneaesneneseeneneneaeets 30
1.Manifest excess of powers of the TribUMAl «0.0.0... cece cece ce eee csetese tees te teeeteneeeeeeee

 

2.Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure
3.Failure to state the reasons on which the Award is based ...

 

4.Other arguments for ANNUIMENE ....... se cece cece cece ee cece ceeee nesses cesceeesseessesesaeeeeeeeteee 59
COSTS oo oececcccccccececececscecscsesescscsssesecececeseesseseesesssssesssecesssesssaseesesssasessseeecesesesseieeeeeeeeeeaees 60
DECISION ..0...cecccccecececesceceeseececscececseseseseseesaseeecesesssseseseseseseasensssnesessesaeeeeecesssenenenas 61

INTRODUCTION

Pursuant to Article 52 of the ICSID Convention, on October 19, 2011, Argentina
filed an application requesting the annulment and stay of enforcement of the
Award. The Award was issued on June 21, 2011 by an Arbitral Tribunal
consisting of Judge Hans Danelius (President), Judge Charles N. Brower, and
Professor Brigitte Stern, in the arbitration between Impregilo and Argentina.

In order to arrive at this decision the Committee reviewed and evaluated all the
arguments of the parties and the documents submitted by them in this
proceeding. The fact that the Committee does not specifically mention a given
argument or reasoning does not mean that it has not considered the same. In
their submissions the parties produced and cited numerous awards and
decisions dealing with matters that they consider relevant to this decision on
annulment. The Committee has considered these documents carefully and may
take into account the reasoning and findings of other committees on annulment.
However, in coming to a decision on the matter of annulment raised by Argentina
the Committee must perform, and in fact has performed, an independent analysis
of the ICSID Convention, the Arbitration Rules, and the particular facts of this

case.

In order to summarize some of the factual circumstances mentioned in the
Memorial on Annulment, the Committee quotes the following background history
that was included in the Award:

“In the 1990s, water and sewage services in the Province of
Buenos Aires were provided by the public utility [company] .... In
1996, the Province decided to privatize these services and adopted
for this purpose Law No. 11,820 ... and set up as regulator the
Organismo Regulador de Aguas Bonaerense... It also organized a
bidding process for the concessions to be issued for the various
parts of the Province.

Impregilo formed a consortium with other international companies
(Sideco Americana S.A. and Aguas de Bilbao Bizkaia), and, by

1

Provincial Decree No. 2907/99 of October 18, 1999, was awarded
one of the concession areas into which the Province’s territory had
been divided. Pursuant to the bidding rules, Impregilo and its
partners incorporated and funded AGBA, an Argentine company.
On December 7, 1999, the Province and AGBA executed the
Concession Contract to provide water and sewage services...”1

I PROCEDURAL HISTORY

4. On October 25, 2011, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Application
pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 50(2)(b), granted the provisional stay of
enforcement of the Award pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(2) and notified
the Parties accordingly.

5. On January 30, 2012, the ICSID Secretariat informed the Parties of the
constitution of the ad hoc Committee comprising Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno
(President), a Costa Rican national, Mr. Eduardo Zuleta, a Colombian national,
and Ms. Teresa Cheng, a Chinese national, (the “ad hoc Committee” or
“Committee”). On the same date the ICSID Secretariat transmitted copies of the
Committee members’ signed declarations in accordance with ICSID Arbitration
Rules 53 and 6(2).

6. On March 28, 2012, the first session of the ad hoc Committee was held by
telephone conference. During such session, various procedural matters were
agreed between the Parties and the ad hoc Committee. The Parties agreed, inter
alia, that the present proceedings would be governed by the 2006 ICSID
Arbitration Rules, and that they had no objection to the constitution of the ad hoc
Committee as described above. They also agreed on a provisional timetable.

7. On June 26, 2012, Argentina filed its Memorial on Annulment, followed by a
translation into English on July 6, 2012.

8. On October 4, 2012, Impregilo filed its Counter-Memorial on Annulment, followed
by a translation into Spanish on October 15, 2012.

+ Impregilo S.p.A. v. Argentina. ICSID Case No. ARB/07/17, Award of June 21, 2011, 41 4/13 and 14
2

On November 30, 2012, Argentina filed its Reply on Annulment, followed by a
translation into English on December 10, 2012.

On January 23, 2013, Impregilo filed its Rejoinder on Annulment, followed by a
translation into Spanish on February 1, 2013.

By email of March 8, 2013, the ICSID Secretariat invited the Parties to inform the
ad hoc Committee of any proposal they would like to make with regard to the
agenda for the hearing and related questions of procedure. On March 13, 2012,
Impregilo submitted an agreed draft agenda for the hearing on annulment, which
was confirmed by Argentina on March 14, 2013.

On March 19 and 20, 2013, a hearing was held at the seat of the Centre in
Washington, D.C. The proceeding was closed on December 18, 2013, in
accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rules 53 and 38(1).

In the following paragraphs the Committee will summarize the position of the
parties in relation to each annulment argument, and then examine each of the
grounds for annulment under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention and alleged by
Argentina.

ARGUMENTS OF THE PARTIES

ARGENTINA’S ARGUMENTS

. The Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers

This section contains a summary of the arguments submitted by Argentina. All
arguments were carefully analyzed and considered by the Committee and the
fact that one or more specific allegations are not summarized does not mean that
they have not been considered.

Argentina’s first argument is that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers
established in the ICSID Convention and the BIT. Argentina based this argument
on the fact that, in its opinion, the Tribunal improperly extended the MFN clause
to matters of jurisdiction. In this regard Argentina said: “In the case of the
Argentina-ltaly BIT, arbitral tribunals can only exercise their jurisdiction if the
dispute has been previously submitted ‘to a competent administrative or judicial
jurisdiction of the Contracting Party in whose territory the investment is located‘
and continues to exist after a period of 18 months has elapsed ‘since notification
of the commencement of the proceeding before the national jurisdictions’...”2
Argentina emphasized that this requirement was recognized by the Tribunal as a
general condition that has no exception.®

For ease of reference and given that it was invoked by Argentina, the Committee
sets out below Article 8 of the BIT:

“1, Any dispute regarding an investment between an investor of one
of the Contracting Parties and the other Party, arising out of or
relating to this Agreement, shall, to the extent possible, be settled
through friendly consultation between the parties to the dispute.

2. If the dispute cannot be settled amicably, it may be submitted to
the competent judicial or administrative courts of the Party in whose
territory the investment is made.

3. Where, after eighteen months from the date of notice of
commencement of proceedings before the courts mentioned in
paragraph 2, the dispute between an investor and one of the
Contracting Parties has not been resolved, it may be submitted to
international arbitration”

Argentina noted that the majority of the Tribunal recognized in paragraph 89 of
the Award that Article 8(3) of the BIT contains a general condition subject to no
exception. Based on that recognition, Argentina concluded that under Article 8(3)
of the Argentina-ltaly BIT, the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to decide the dispute
between the parties.* Argentina considered that notwithstanding the recognition

? Memorial on Annulment, 4 21
3\d.,9.22
“Id. 19 22 and 24; Reply, 11 31 and 36

20.

of that general condition, the majority of the Tribunal was wrong in concluding
that Impregilo “... could choose not to meet the requirement demanding prior
submission of disputes to domestic courts by invoking the most favored nation
(MFN) clause contained in Article 3(1) of the Argentina-ltaly BIT,” because it
effectively authorized Impregilo to benefit from the provisions in the Argentina-US
BIT, which does not require prior submission of the dispute to the administrative
or judicial courts of Argentina.° According to Argentina, in coming to this decision,

the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers “... in exercising its jurisdiction
without the condition for consent having been satisfied...”° It also stated that the
Tribunal “... failed to state the reasons on which its decision was based, and also
seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure.”’ The reference to the
alleged serious departure from the fundamental rule of procedure is also

expressed in paragraphs 29 and 54 of its Reply.

According to Argentina, the Tribunal’s action, as described in the preceding
paragraph, sets out the grounds for annulment contained in Article 52(1)(b),(d),
and (e) of the ICSID Convention and “... it even de facto abrogated a provision of
the Treaty.”

Argentina subdivided its first argument entitled “The Tribunal manifestly
exceeded the limits of its competence” into several parts: “failure to state
reasons,” “manifest excess of powers,” and “serious departure from a rule of
procedure.” The Committee shall deal with these charges in the same order in
which they were put forward by Argentina.

. Failure to state reasons

In developing the concept of failure to state reasons Argentina referred to Article
3.1 of the Argentina-ltaly BIT, which provides:

*1d.,.9.27
*id., 128
"1d.,9.28
*1d.,.9.28

21.

22.

23.

24.

“Each Contracting Party shall, within its own territory, accord to
investments made by investors of the other Contracting Party, to
the income and activities related to such investments and to all
other matters regulated by this Agreement, a treatment that is no
less favorable than that accorded to its own investors or investors
from third-party countries.”

Argentina stated that “the failure to state the reasons upon which the jurisdiction
of the Tribunal is based is, thus, self-evident ...”° Argentina argued that articles
8.3 and 8.5(a) of the Argentina-ltaly BIT are the rules that confer jurisdiction on
an ICSID Tribunal and, according to Argentina, the reference to Article 3.1 by the
Tribunal did not cure the failure to state reasons in order to find jurisdiction.

Argentina also claimed that the majority of the Tribunal held in paragraph 99 of
the Award that the term “treatment” in Article 3.1 of the BIT was in itself wide
enough to be applicable to procedural matters. According to Argentina, the term
“treatment” could not be a reason for the decision of the Tribunal to assert

jurisdiction over the case.'°

According to Argentina, the majority of the Tribunal did not even refer to the first
argument that Argentina stated in its Memorial on Jurisdiction, in relation to
Article 3.1 of the Argentina-ltaly BIT. In its opinion, the Tribunal “... never stated
its reasons for claiming that an MFN clause that applies only to the treatment
accorded to investments is applicable as well to the treatment afforded to
investors, bearing in mind especially, in this case, that it is investors and not
investments that can set the jurisdictional mechanisms into motion.”"'

Argentina also claimed that the majority of the Tribunal, in paragraph 100 of the
Award, accepted that the phrase “within its own territory” used in Article 3(1) of
the BIT limits the scope of the MFN clause. Despite that, according to Argentina
the majority “ruled that ‘the question as to what legal protection Argentina shall
give to foreign investors is in no way an issue over which Argentina has no power

*\d., 1.30
id. 19.31 and 32
"1d.,933

25.

26.

27.

to decide, nor is it tied to any particular territory. The Tribunal therefore considers
that the wording ‘within its own territory’ does not exclude the application of the
MEN clause to dispute settlement.’ Thus, the majority of the Tribunal failed to
state the reasons upon which this conclusion is based or, at best, it stated
genuinely contradictory reasons.”"? Argentina also stated that this interpretation
is a manifest excess of powers due to the failure to apply the express provisions
of the BIT."

Argentina submitted that, moreover, the Award lacks any reasons whatsoever
because the Tribunal did not even perform a preliminary analysis of the
conclusion expressed in paragraph 101 of the Award in which it affirmed that the
requirement to first resort to domestic courts or administrative agencies is a less
favorable treatment for investors.'*

In relation to paragraph 102 of the Award, Argentina claims that the Tribunal
acknowledged that several BITs signed by that Nation require an 18-month
waiting period, is an indication that Argentina did not intend such requirement to
be replaced via MFN clauses in those treaties. “However, it reached the
conclusion that ‘the argument becomes less persuasive in the present case,
because the ltaly-Argentina BIT (signed on 22 May 1990) preceded the
Argentina-US BIT (signed on 14 November 1991).’ Once again in this case, the
majority of the Tribunal failed to state the reasons upon which its decision was
based, since the Argentina-US BIT came into force before the Argentina-ltaly
BIT.”"°

Argentina noted that the majority of the Tribunal, after referring to certain
decisions concerning the application of the MFN clause to jurisdictional issues,
and noting the lack of uniformity on the approach to this matter, held in
paragraph 108 of the Award that “in cases where the MFN clause has referred to

.. 191 33 and 34
- 135
. 136
- 138

28.

29.

30.

‘all matters’ or ‘any matter’ regulated in the BIT, there has been near-unanimity in
finding that the clause covered the dispute settlement rules”. On this basis, the
majority of the Tribunal reached the conclusion that Impregilo is entitled to rely, in
this respect, on the dispute settlement rules in the Argentina-US BIT. According
to Argentina, the Tribunal’s conclusion regarding the “near-unanimity” of the
decisions on these matters is erroneous, because “there is no principle of stare
decisis in the field of international arbitration. Therefore the alleged majority of
the decisions of Tribunals on the matter cannot be considered as a valid basis for
this decision.”'® Moreover, according to Argentina the majority of the Tribunal did
not consider whether the reasons for the other tribunals’ decisions it referred to

were correct.'”

In its Reply, Argentina stressed that various committees have insisted that
annulment for failure to state the reasons for the decision applies where such
failure might have affected the Tribunal’s conclusion."®

. Manifest excess of powers

Argentina claimed that the above facts are also a manifest excess of powers of
the Tribunal given that it lacked the power to rely on case law—which is non-
binding and is not a source of law— and instead should rely upon its own
interpretation of the rules.'°

Argentina also noted that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by
asserting jurisdiction over the dispute without Impregilo having met the
mandatory requirements provided in the BIT in order to give consent. According
to Argentina, this excess of power is manifest from a plain reading of the
Award.2°

* id, 19.38 and 39

1d.,9.40

* Reply, 4.18

*® Memorial on Annulment, 4 43
1d. 144

31.

32.

33.

34.

Argentina emphasized that where a tribunal fails to act within the scope of its

jurisdiction, the excess of powers is always manifest.”!

Argentina stated that “[t]he MFN clause in the Argentina-Italy BIT does not allow
the tribunal to exercise its jurisdiction over disputes with regard to which consent
has not been given by the host State [of the investment], and that is the case
here[...].” ®? It also added that the MFN clause cannot be allowed to
fundamentally modify the dispute settlement method set forth in the BIT, as the
Tribunal did.

Argentina further argued that “... the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by
failing to apply the relevant law’? and stated that “... the majority of the Tribunal
began by recognizing that prior submission of disputes to the local courts is a
mandatory requirement for the submission of those disputes to an ICSID arbitral
tribunal. However, when referring to Impregilo’s failure to meet it, such majority

simply dismissed that mandatory requirement.’”“*

In its Reply Argentina stated that, based on annulment decisions rendered by
various Committees, the excess of powers by a Tribunal is always manifest when
it concerns matters of jurisdiction. Argentina claimed that “...the manifest excess
of powers by the Tribunal is absolutely clear and self-evident, among other
things, because the excess of powers by a tribunal is always manifest when it
concerns matters of jurisdiction.” Argentina also stated that “... the Committee
must determine whether the Tribunal had jurisdiction or not —by applying the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties to interpret the applicable
instruments— since, if it lacked jurisdiction, then it manifestly exceeded its
powers”.

*1d., 1.43, 44 and 46
1d. 1.47

1d.,951

1d. 152

* Reply, 14] 10 and 13.

35.

36.

37.

Argentina also argued in its Reply that the Tribunal determined that Impregilo
failed to meet the requirement of Article 8(3) of the BIT and that Article 3(1) of
that treaty cannot remedy the deficiency since it is not a jurisdictional clause and
also, it only applies to investments and not to investors.”° It also stated that
Impregilo breached the obligation under the BIT to submit the case to the local
courts for a period of 18 months and clarified that this requirement does not
mean that in that period the dispute should be resolved by the Argentine courts.
What Article 8(3) of the BIT provides is that, if the dispute is not settled within that
period, the investor may resort to international arbitration. Additionally, it
concluded that the only legitimate interpreters of the BIT are Argentina and
Italy.2”

. Serious departure from a rule of procedure

In its Memorial on Annulment Argentina claimed a serious departure from a rule
of procedure because the Tribunal “... did not observe the consent of the States
Parties to the Treaty””° by not applying the condition of prior submission to local
courts. It noted that this departure from a rule of procedure is serious since if the
Tribunal had followed the principles set forth in the Treaty, then the outcome of
this arbitration would have been substantially different.

It also argued that the Tribunal “ ... failed to render a decision on the compliance

by Impregilo with the dispute settlement provisions contained in the Argentina-
United States BIT or on Argentina’s fundamental arguments, such as that
referring to the fact that the MFN clause only applies to the ‘investments’ and not
‘investors.’ In view of the foregoing, the Tribunal must be deemed to have
seriously departed from a rule of procedure...”°°

id. 4.32

*"1d., 1942, 47 and 48

?8 Memorial on Annulment, 4153
1d, 154

38.

39.

40.

2. The Tribunal manifestly exceeded the material limits of its competence

Argentina also argued that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded the material limits of
its competence by admitting the indirect claim of Impregilo. It exercised a
“manifest excess of powers,” “failure to state reasons” and “risk of double
recovery in indirect claims” by accepting that the shares held by Impregilo in
AGBA were investments protected under the Argentina-ltaly BIT. It added that
“this type of claims is not allowed under Argentine law” and that “under general
international law indirect actions such as those of this case are not permitted.”
Again the Committee will summarize these arguments in the same order in which
they were put forward by Argentina.

a. Manifest excess of powers

Argentina stated that the Tribunal failed to consider the arguments it laid out in its
Memorial on Jurisdiction and at the hearing that took place during the arbitration
proceedings which “... are therefore fully incorporated herein by reference.”° It
said the Tribunal, without making any analysis, accepted that the shares held by
Impregilo in AGBA are protected investments under the Argentina-ltaly BIT and
accepted that expropriation of AGBA’s rights affected Impregilo rights; it also
stated that the Tribunal rejected, without stating the reason for such rejection, the

objection raised by Argentina with regard to its material competence.*"

Argentina also claimed that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by
exercising its jurisdiction over Impregilo’s claims for damages, specifically claims
arising from the Concession Contract entered into by the Province of Buenos
Aires, to which Impregilo was not a party.°* Argentina also submitted that the
Tribunal mistakenly regarded Impregilo and AGBA as if they were a single entity.
For example, in the Award it considered whether or not “AGBA was given fair

id. 155
1d. 156
1d. 158

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

and equitable treatment;”®? and the Tribunal was inconsistent when it indicated
that AGBA is not a protected investor under the ICSID Convention and the
Argentina-Italy BIT.**

Argentina insisted that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in exercising
jurisdiction over the claims for alleged damages caused to Impregilo because
that company argued that there was interference with the rights deriving from the
Concession Contract to which AGBA, and not Impregilo, was a party.°°

Argentina claimed in its Memorial on Annulment: “... the Tribunal allowed a
shareholder to take the place of the company [AGBA], to file claims based on the
actual rights of that company, and to obtain compensation for the alleged
infringement of those rights.”°°

Argentina claimed that the Tribunal exercised its jurisdiction over the rights that
belonged to AGBA (not Impregilo) and so it manifestly exceeded its powers.°”

According to Argentina, the Tribunal’s decision to admit its jurisdiction over
Impregilo’s claims based on alleged rights of AGBA is inconsistent with the ICSID
Convention and the Argentina-Italy BIT because these bodies of law do not
provide for the possibility that a shareholder can claim for alleged rights of a local
company.

b. Failure to state reasons

According to Argentina, “the Tribunal failed to specify how Impregilo could assert
rights relating to the Concession Contract.”® It added: “... the Tribunal had

. 160
162

2 164

165

.. 19 64 to 71
. 19 70 and 71
2 174

acknowledged that Impregilo could not assert the rights vested in AGBA. The

contradiction in the Tribunal’s reasoning [in this case] is manifest.”*°

46. Argentina also claimed that the following conclusion of the Tribunal is unfounded
“... lf AGBA was subjected to expropriation or unfair treatment with respect to its
concession ... such action must also be considered to have affected Impregilo’s
rights as an investor, rights that were protected under the BIT.”*'

47. Argentina concluded its discussion of indirect claims by asserting that the
Tribunal referred to the second objection to jurisdiction raised by it in only four
paragraphs of the Award. It added that in paragraph 140 the Tribunal based its
reasoning on case law which, in Argentina’s opinion, “does not constitute valid
grounds for the decision.” In its Reply, Argentina also indicated that the Tribunal
reproduced the arguments of the parties and did not base its decision on the
issue of indirect claims.*°

c. Risk of double recovery in filing indirect claims

48. Argentina noted that the Tribunal recognized the existence of a legal problem by
“the risk of double recovery” by AGBA and Impregilo. According to Argentina,
with the real possibility that this problem could exist, the Tribunal “... went on to
speculate about the possibility of it being resolved, in the future, by someone.”4
Argentina further stated that the possibility of there being double recovery “...
must be avoided through legal considerations established for these purposes ...
and through the correct interpretation of the applicable instruments. This is not
what the Tribunal did.”*°

1d.,49174

1d.,4975

1d.,475

* Reply, 169

“ Memorial on Annulment, 41 76
* Id. 1.77; Reply, 91 70 to 72

49.

50.

51.

52.

Even though, in strict logic, the arguments contained in sections (d) and (e)
below should be part of Argentina's disagreement with the acceptance by the
Tribunal of the indirect claims described in paragraphs 38-43, the Committee will
follow the order in which Argentina presented its arguments.

d. These type of claims are not allowed under Argentine law

Argentina claims that derivative or indirect actions are “not provided for under
Argentine law, which is part of the applicable law in accordance with Article 8(7)
of the BIT.” It added that, “[uJnder Argentine law, a shareholder may not file any
action on its own behalf and for its own benefit for the purpose of receiving
compensation for alleged losses in proportion to its shareholding,” *” and
explained that Argentine law provides for a whole series of actions which were
not used by Impregilo.*®

e. Under international law, indirect actions such as those of this case are
not permitted

Argentina argued that “[u]nder international law, in order for derivative claims to
be admitted, they must be expressly provided for, since they constitute an
exception to the general principle that no one can bring a claim on behalf of

another.”9

Following this line of argument, Argentina stated that in order to make the claim,
Impregilo should be the owner of the rights invoked. Argentina based its
arguments on the words of the International Court of Justice, stating that there
are other treaties in which the legality of an indirect claim is expressly provided
for. In its Reply, moreover, it stated that Impregilo and the Tribunal made the
mistake of not providing reasons and simply referred to decided cases.

"1d. 78

1d.,981

* Id., 182; Reply, 11 73 to 76
*Id., 1184; Reply, 177

53.

54.

55.

56.

. The Tribunal abrogated the normative content of the standard requiring the

investment to be accorded fair and equitable treatment, by failing to clarify
its meaning

Argentina's third argument is that the Tribunal failed to clarify the content of the
standard requiring the investment to be accorded fair and equitable treatment,
and the notion of that standard in the Argentina-Italy BIT, and therefore implicitly
abrogated the normative content of the standard. It further argued that the
Tribunal contradicted itself in its reasoning leading to the conclusion that
Argentina violated such standard.® It also stated the following: “Upon drawing a
distinction between two different approaches regarding the scope of the fair and
equitable treatment standard and apparently adopting neither of them, the
Tribunal deliberately failed to establish the criterion applied in eventually holding
Argentina liable for the violation of the alleged legitimate expectations.”*"

Argentina argued that the Tribunal linked the fair and equitable treatment and
investor expectations, but there is nothing in the BIT referring to expectations or
demonstrating that the Contracting States meant to protect them. It concluded
that holding a State liable based on “alleged” expectations entails a manifest

excess of powers.**

Argentina also stated that “... the Tribunal makes a number of statements that
are not only implausible in light of the established facts ...but are also in conflict
with other submissions contained in the Award.” (translation of the Committee.)
In its Reply it insisted “How is it possible for a tribunal to hold a country liable for
the violation of a Treaty standard if the content of such standard is not defined
first?”4

°° id., 19.87 and 91
1d. 190
?1d.,991

1d. 194

* Reply, 1.83

57.

58.

59.

60.

In its Reply Argentina concluded, on this argument, that because the Tribunal “...
held Argentina liable for the alleged violation of the fair and equitable treatment
standard both contradicting itself and failing to state the reasons for its decision,
the Award should be annulled...”°°

Argentina went on to present three lines of reasoning under this section: a) “The
Tribunal acknowledged that since the beginning of the concession period, ABGA
had experienced difficulties in complying with its obligations under the
Concession Contract”; b) “In arriving at this conclusion, the Tribunal relied on
Presidential Decree No. 878/03, which established a New Regulatory
Framework, despite the fact that such decree could only be applied with AGBA’s
consent, and that, in any event, it was basically never applied”; and c) “the
Tribunal recognized the Concessionaire’s contributory fault.”

In the first part of this argument Argentina explained that the Tribunal, in
paragraph 311 of the Award, recognized that from the beginning AGBA had
difficulties in complying with its obligations under the Concession Contract.
According to Argentina, this shows that the “economic and financial equation”
was already disrupted before they knew the measures challenged by Impregilo.
According to Argentina, the alteration of the contractual equilibrium was caused
by the actions of the concessionaire, but the Tribunal, contradicting itself, held
Argentina liable for the alteration of that equilibrium.°°

As for the second part of its argument, Argentina explained that the
aforementioned Presidential Decree 878/03, which established a new regulatory
framework, was never applied to AGBA and this was recognized by Impregilo’s
witness Albarracin. In the opinion of Argentina, the Tribunal contradicted itself
when it claimed violation of fair and equitable treatment in the application of that
rule and indicated, in paragraph 291 of the Award, that the legitimate
expectations cannot be that the State will never modify the legal framework but

* Reply, 4] 103
** Id., 191.98 to 100.

61.

62.

63.

64.

that investors must be protected if there are unreasonable modifications of that

legal framework.°”

In the latter part of its argument Argentina noted that the Tribunal recognized in
paragraph 377 of the Award the contributory fault of AGBA and the Province of
Buenos Aires, which is inconsistent with condemning Argentina for violation of
the fair and equitable treatment standard.®®

Argentina also argued that the Tribunal recognized the contributory fault of AGBA
and therefore there are contradictions and inconsistencies in the Award. After
quoting paragraph 377 of the Award, which states: “The failure of the concession
can therefore be ascribed partly to events for which AGBA stood the risk and
partly to acts or failures by the Province,” Argentina stated that “ ... the Tribunal
thus made another unfounded statement, which constitutes a ground for
annulment..."°°

Argentina said in its Reply that the Tribunal “... based on a series of
contradictions and unreasonable statements” concludes that Argentina violated
the fair and equitable treatment standard and that this way of proceeding is

grounds for annulment.

. The Tribunal failed to state the reasons on which the Award was based and

exceeded its powers in deciding on the defenses based on the
extraordinary situation faced by Argentina

As part of its fourth argument, Argentina stated that the Tribunal recognized in
several paragraphs of the Award that the emergency legislation was enacted in
reaction to a very serious economic crisis in the country and that drastic
measures were required because the crisis was critical and alarming. However,
contradicting its own position, the Tribunal held Argentina liable for the

*" Id., 91 103 to 106.
** Id., 107 to 110.
* Id., 109

* Reply, 14186 and 103

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

emergency measures adopted, holding that Argentina failed to restore a
reasonable equilibrium in the concession, and thus aggravated its situation and
violated the Argentina-ltaly BIT.*

Argentina concluded that “the Tribunal failed to consider the measures adopted
in light of the international (customary and contractual) provisions that apply in
emergency situations. Therefore, it failed to rely on the applicable law, thus

manifestly exceeding its powers.”©

In its Reply Argentina stated that the severity of the crisis was recognized by the
Tribunal, but that “...upon arriving at this conclusion, the Tribunal—contradicting
itself, that is, rendering an unfounded award—held Argentina liable for the
emergency measures adopted.”

Argentina divided its fourth argument in two parts entitled: “The Tribunal did not
apply Article 4 of the BIT” and “Consideration of the state of necessity under
customary international law.” The Committee will refer to them in the following

paragraphs:

a. The Tribunal did not apply Article 4 of the BIT

Article 4 of the Argentina-Italy BIT states:

“Investors of one Contracting Party whose investments suffer
losses ... owing to ... a state of national emergency, or other similar
political economic events shall be accorded, by such other Party in
whose territory the investment was made, treatment no less
favorable than that accorded to its own nationals or legal entities or
to investors of any third country as regards damages.”

In connection with the provisions of this Article, Argentina claimed that the
Tribunal recognized, in paragraph 339 of the Award, that the crisis that the

® Memorial on Annulment, 9141111 and 112
1d.,9114
* Reply, 4] 106

70.

71.

72.

country experienced in 2002 should be interpreted as a political-economic
occurrence equivalent to a national state of emergency. Therefore, Article 4
should apply to the case. However, in contradiction with its prior reasoning, the
Tribunal concluded that this provision was not applicable. °* According to
Argentina the interpretation of the Tribunal was unfounded depriving the above-
mentioned Article 4 of any useful effect.© In doing so, states Argentina, the
Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and failed to apply the applicable law.

b. Consideration of the state of necessity under customary international
law

Argentina cited paragraphs 346, 349, and 350 of the Award in which the Tribunal
recognized the gravity of the crisis that hit Argentina and that there was a serious
and imminent threat to the public interest. However, according to Argentina, the
Tribunal concluded that that nation contributed significantly to the situation of
necessity and, for that reason, could not invoke it as a defense. Argentina further
noted that the Tribunal relied on the report of Mr. Edwards, Impregilo’s expert,
without establishing the legal criteria applied in coming to its conclusion. ©”

Argentina also stated that “In sum, the position adopted by the Tribunal renders
the necessity defense meaningless, as it would be sufficient for an economist to
take the opposite view (and there will always be one willing to do so) for the state
of necessity to become inadmissible.”

Argentina argued that the Tribunal failed to take the evidence submitted by it into
consideration, including reports prepared by economic and legal experts that
demonstrated that the measures adopted were necessary, but also that the
report of Impregilo’s expert was flawed.®? Argentina also indicated the reasons

© Memorial on Annulment, 44 115 and 116

. 1118
., 1120

+, 19121 to 126
., 4129

, 19 134 and 135

73.

74.

75.

for stating that the expert contradicted himself at the hearing and was not an
independent expert.

Argentina concluded that the Tribunal, by relying solely on a report, and failing to
specify the legal criteria on which it was based, failed to state the reasons and
seriously departed from a rule of procedure.” In its Reply, Argentina insisted that
the Tribunal “... seriously departed from the rules of procedure in failing to
consider all the significant body of evidence submitted by the Argentine
Republic...”.”'

Finally, Argentina stated “Furthermore, in this regard, there is a manifest excess
of powers by the Tribunal, as it failed to rely upon the applicable law, which
includes the notion of state of necessity.””

. Compensation

In its plea related to the decision on compensation Argentina argued failure to
state reasons, manifest excess of powers and a departure from fundamental
rules of procedure. The Committee will address these issues in the following
paragraphs.

. Failure to state reasons

76. — Argentina cited paragraph 375 of the Award where the Tribunal said it had not
been established categorically that the concession granted to AGBA would have
been profitable, even in the absence of state actions allegedly contrary to the
principle of fair and equitable treatment. In light of this, according to Argentina,
the Tribunal had no discretion to determine the amount of damages.”° Argentina
added that even in those cases where the assessment of damages is made on a

1d.,9140

” Reply, 1.136

” Memorial on Annulment, | 140

Bid.,91143

20

77.

78.

discretionary basis, the Arbitral Tribunal must assess the evidence produced.
According to Argentina, in this case the Tribunal failed to address the evidence
submitted on damages.’*

Argentina stated “... even in those cases where a tribunal is deemed to have
discretion over the assessment of damages, the committees have established
that, in making that assessment, the tribunal must refer to the relevance and
evaluation of the evidence produced. In this case, even though the Tribunal
found that ‘it is incumbent on Impregilo to prove that it suffered the damage for
which it asks to be compensated,’ it failed to address the evidence produced in
the damages section of the Award, thus disregarding the evidence submitted in
relation to the amounts invested.””°

. Manifest excess of powers

The Tribunal stated that Impregilo should prove damages allegedly suffered but,
according to Argentina, the Tribunal “... did not analyze any of the alleged losses
invoked by Impregilo.””° According to Argentina, the Tribunal awarded Impregilo
compensation that had no causal connection with the disputed measures, with
the evidence produced, nor with the applicable law; it only cited an award, and,
Argentina insisted that case law is not a source of law. The Tribunal held that
Impregilo should be placed in the same position as it would have been, had
Argentina’s unfair and inequitable treatment not occurred. Actually the profitability
of the investment had not been proved and, according to Argentina, awarding
compensation to Impregilo for the total amount allegedly invested by the
company, placed it in a better position than it would have been, had Argentina
not taken any action.”” According to Argentina the compensation awarded by the
Tribunal is contrary to the applicable law and is therefore tantamount to a
manifest excess of powers by the Tribunal.

1d. 19145
*id., 9145
id. 9.146
7 1d.,9.149

21

c. Serious departure from fundamental rules of procedure

79. Argentina noted that in this case there was a serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure because the Tribunal awarded the damages
claimed by Impregilo, without considering the defenses raised by Argentina.
According to Argentina, the Tribunal stated that it had no reason to doubt the
figures of Impregilo’s experts without even considering the defenses raised by
Argentina, which clearly warrants the annulment of the award.

80. According to Argentina, the Tribunal did not consider the defenses it raised as to
the amounts that Impregilo invested in AGBA. “There is no doubt that this
departure is ‘serious’ since, had it not taken place, the Tribunal would have
reached a substantially different conclusion from that of the decision.”

81. At the bottom of page 182 of its Memorial on Annulment and in its Reply,
Argentina expanded on this argument and said:

“In the present case, Argentina presented numerous challenges
regarding the alleged amounts invested by Impregilo in AGBA.
Indeed, valuation experts Dapena and Coloma noted that (i) the
funds actually contributed by AGBA should be denominated in
Argentine pesos; (ii) only a portion of the capital that was
contributed and paid in translated into investments in fixed assets;
(iii) the value of those assets decreased substantially in terms of
US Dollars in 2002, owing to the devaluation; (iv) the investments
made, in 2000, started to be recovered as from 2001, to 2006,
through operating revenues, and the amounts recovered should be
subtracted from the historical value of AGBA’s contributions and;
(v) should the historical cost method be applied, the more objective
approach would be to consider the Financial Statements submitted
by AGBA as of December 2005 and to take the net value of fixed
assets. Such net value, restated in US dollars, and taking into
account Impregilo’s participation in AGBA, adds up to USD 3.6
million.””

1d. 4155
” Reply, 1165
22

82.

83.

84.

85.

Argentina concluded in its Reply that the object and purpose of an ICSID
annulment proceeding is to control the fundamental integrity of the ICSID arbitral
process in all its facets: the integrity of the tribunal, the integrity of the procedure
and the integrity of the award.® It argued that “Ignoring the defences raised by
one party and inverting the burden of proof is a ground for annulment ...” It also
said “... this departure is ‘serious’ since, had it not taken place, the Tribunal
would have reached a substantially different conclusion from that of the
decision.”*'

For the foregoing reasons Argentina requested the annulment of the Award and
asked the Committee to order that Impregilo pay the costs of Argentina, as well
as the costs incurred in the annulment proceedings by Argentina and ICSID.°?

. IMPREGILO’S RESPONSE TO ARGENTINA’S ARGUMENTS

This section contains a summary of the arguments submitted by Impregilo. All
arguments were carefully considered by the Committee and the fact that one or
more specific allegations are not summarized does not mean that they were not
considered by the Committee.

Impregilo stated that Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention should be construed
in accordance with Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties. It further argued that the five grounds for annulment set forth in Article
52 of the ICSID Convention relate to the integrity of the arbitration. It added that
nothing in this Article suggests that annulment allows a substantive review of the
Award, as the annulment is not an appeal. It emphasized that the travaux
preparatoires of the ICSID Convention show that the fundamental objective of the
system was to ensure the finality of arbitration awards and the first Secretary

1d.,128
®T1d.,9.168
®2 Memorial on Annulment, | 156

23

86.

87.

88.

89.

General of ICSID characterized annulment as a remedy concerning procedural
errors.®?

Impregilo also noted that the annulment process is not a mechanism created in
order to check if there was any alleged misapplication of the applicable law or a
mistake in fact. It stated that the Legal Committee involved in the drafting of the
ICSID Convention indicated that even a manifestly incorrect application of the
law is not a ground for annulment. It also argued, based on several decisions on
annulment, that the annulment system is intended to safeguard the integrity of
the proceedings and the legitimacy of the award, not the outcome of the
arbitration proceedings, or the correctness of the award.®4

Impregilo stated that according to the ordinary meaning of the terms, Article
52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention refers to the excess of power that is manifest,
that is, obvious and clear, discernible without the need for an elaborate analysis
of the award.®©

According to Impregilo, Argentina did not state the reasons for its claim that the
Tribunal exceeded its powers, and insisted that the Tribunal should rule on its
jurisdiction. It stated that “There is nothing in the Convention’s travaux
preparatoires that supports a different interpretation. Moreover, under the
kompetenz-kompetenz principle, ICSID tribunals have the express power to
decide their own jurisdiction. It follows that their decision should not be annulled
under Article 52(1)(b) unless the exercise of that power is manifestly beyond any
reasonable interpretation of that power.”®° It argued that “Only when a tribunal
deliberately and manifestly refuses to apply the applicable law can an award be
annulled on the grounds of manifest excess of power.””

Impregilo cited Professor Schreuer who stated the following:

®3 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, 441 31 to 33
* id., 19.34 to 37

* Id., 191 38 to 40

*id., 991.41, 44 and 45

"1d. 1.46

24

90.

91.

92.

93.

94.

“... misapplication of the applicable law ...did not constitute an
annullable error, even if it is a ‘manifest error of law,’ provided it is
not of such a magnitude as to, amount to a veritable non-application
of the proper law as a whole.”®

Impregilo argued that the ICSID Convention provides solutions where the
Tribunal fails to address a question in the award: a supplementary decision or
interpretation of the award. Argentina chose neither of those options. It noted that
other Annulment Committees have indicated that whether the reasoning is
incorrect or unconvincing is beyond the authority of the Committee and is not
grounds for annulment.®?

Based on the criterion reiterated by Professor Schreuer, Impregilo stated that for
a procedural violation to constitute a ground for annulment it must be serious and
relate to a fundamental rule of procedure. It added, based on several decisions
on nullity, that the fundamental rules of procedure are equal treatment of the
parties, the right to be heard, the right to an independent and impartial tribunal,
the burden of proof and the necessity of deliberations among the members of the
Tribunal.°°

According to Impregilo, Argentina’s application for annulment does not meet the
threshold for annulment of the Award. It is an attempt to re-argue the merits of
the case and replace the vote of the majority with the dissenting opinion.°'

Impregilo, in sum, answered Argentina’s allegations as follows:

1. The Tribunal did not exceed its powers

Impregilo stated that there is no prohibition against including most favored nation
clauses in investment treaties that extend to dispute settlement provisions.

Sid. 148

* 1d. 150 to 52
*1d., 19153 to 57
1d, 958

25

95.

96.

97.

98.

According to Impregilo, the Tribunal gave several ample reasons as the basis of
its interpretation and there is no element that constitutes a manifest excess of
powers by the Tribunal. It noted that the Tribunal considered and rejected each
of the arguments of Argentina and, although the Tribunal did not rely exclusively
on existing jurisprudence, if it did, it would have been sufficient grounds on which
to base the Award, for relying on jurisprudence means that the Tribunal agrees
with the reasoning in the cited cases and that in itself constitutes a statement of
reasons.°?

Impregilo also noted that Argentina argued that the interpretation of the most
favored nation clause by the Tribunal was incorrect and, therefore, constitutes a
manifest excess of powers. Impregilo stressed that, in order to constitute grounds
for annulment, the excess must be manifest. It also stated that Article 53 of the
ICSID Convention provides that the substance of an ICSID award may not be
reviewed and this rule makes no exception for jurisdictional decisions.°°

Impregilo also criticized the fact that Argentina cited legal authorities that were
issued after the Tribunal issued its Award and requested that they not be
considered by this Committee.

In its Rejoinder Impregilo reiterated that based on the drafting history of the
ICSID Convention, to be grounds for annulment, the excess of powers must be

manifest as various Annulment Committees have confirmed.*°

2. The Tribunal did not depart from any rule of procedure

According to Impregilo, to meet the request of Argentina, the Committee would
necessarily have to determine whether the decision of the Tribunal was correct,

1d. 19199 to 102

1d, 1103

**1d., 4.105 and footnote No. 127
® Rejoinder, 14 10 to 13

26

99.

101.

102.

which clearly exceeds its mandate. According to Impregilo, the 18-month-
domestic court requirement (Article 8(3) of the BIT) is related only to admissibility

and “it does not affect the legitimacy of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the claim.
96

3. The Tribunal did not manifestly exceed its powers by asserting
jurisdiction over the investment

Impregilo said Argentina’s claim regarding the jus standi is a request for review of
the merits of the Award and not a decision on any potential violations of the
fundamental principles of law.°”

Impregilo insisted that most Committees have interpreted manifest excess of
powers of a Tribunal to mean an excess that is so egregious or self-evident that it
is discernible without the need for analyzing the award. It added that jurisdictional
issues are not subject to “... heightened scrutiny.”

4. The Tribunal did not fail to state reasons for its award

Impregilo said the Tribunal devoted more than six pages to explaining the
Parties’ arguments and summarizing the authorities supporting their respective
arguments. The Tribunal cited several arbitral awards and, based on them, used
analogies and laid out syllogisms, which is the most common form of legal
reasoning.

In relation to the Tribunal’s interpretation of Article 4 of the BIT in respect of
recovery of damages, Impregilo said the Tribunal provided reasons for its

°© Counter-Memorial on Annulment, 914 107 and 108
"\d., 14) 110 and 111

“1d. 1114

Id, 14120 to 122

27

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.

interpretation and therefore did not commit any annullable error regarding this
holding.'”°

Impregilo also noted that the Tribunal expressed detailed findings to support its
ruling on the necessity plea. It added that the Tribunal extensively analyzed
Argentina’s contribution to the country’s crisis.'°"

5. The Tribunal did not fail to apply the applicable law

Impregilo stated that the Tribunal did not apply the report of Professor Edward
presented in this case, as the applicable law, as claimed by Argentina. In the
opinion of Impregilo, the Tribunal cited the report and its supporting evidence and
identified four specific situations which in the opinion of the Tribunal had

contributed to Argentina’s “situation of necessity.”"

6. The Tribunal did not fail to state reasons for its damages award

Impregilo stated that “... annulment committees afford significant discretion to
tribunals’ reasoning. That is not a failure to apply the annulment standard
correctly; it is, rather, a reflection of the fact that the requirement to state reasons
is inherently more flexible in the damage context due to the discretionary nature
of the exercise.”'™ It cited several decisions of annulment committees on this
subject.

Impregilo noted that the Tribunal discussed in the Award the damage models of

the experts of both sides and explained why it would not adopt those models.'*

Impregilo criticized Argentina’s position that contradictory reasons in an award
are sufficient in themselves to annul the award. Impregilo cited the decisions

9135

., 19140 to 156

., 1 157 and 158
., 1.168

., 1.172

28

109.

110.

111.

105

issued by annulment committees in the Klockner |, Rumeli, and Vivendi | cases,
in which those committees referred to contradictions in the awards that were
questioned. '°°

Impregilo stated in its Rejoinder that the Tribunal did analyze the evidence
presented by Argentina and as a basis for its claim it quoted paragraphs 372 and
378 of the Award. '°°

7. The Tribunal did not exceed its powers when it awarded damages

According to Impregilo, the Tribunal cited and discussed the fundamental legal
principle of international law concerning damages (the Chorzéw principle) and
held that the measures taken by Argentina contributed to the concession’s
failure. Regarding Argentina’s argument that the Tribunal did not consider the
risk of double recovery (for Impregilo and AGBA), Impregilo stated that was
obviously not a legitimate annulment argument.

Impregilo responded to Argentina’s allegation that, supposedly, the Tribunal did
not respect the international legal principle that damages must be certain and
proven and put Impregilo in a better situation than that in which it would have
been but for the measures taken by Argentina. It stated that even if these
assertions were true (which they are not), they would not constitute a manifest

excess of powers on the part of the Tribunal.'°”

8. The Tribunal did not depart from any rules of procedure
Regarding Argentina’s allegation that the Tribunal failed to take into account the

items of evidence that Argentina offered as a counter to the testimony of
Professor Edward (Impregilo's expert), because the Tribunal did not expressly

Rejoinder, 1] 14 to 16

8 1d. 1.92

107

Counter-Memorial on Annulment, 414] 174 to 177

29

112.

113.

114.

115.

mention them, Impregilo stated that Tribunals are not obliged to refer specifically

to each piece of evidence introduced into the record.'°

Impregilo also noted that, even if true that the Tribunal failed to consider the
evidence disputing the amounts of money that Impregilo invested, this does not

constitute an error that would lead to annulment of the Award.'°?

Impregilo concluded that the Tribunal committed no error capable of annulling the
Award and requested that the Committee deny each of Argentina’s grounds for
annulment. It also asked the Committee, under Articles 52(4) and 61(2) of the
Convention, to order Argentina to bear all costs, fees, and expenses of these
proceedings, plus interest.

. ANALYSIS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee has carefully considered the annulment claim submitted by
Argentina. In its submissions, Argentina raised five “grounds for annulment of the
award,” which were summarized by the Committee in section III.A of this
decision. Following the same order proposed by Argentina as to the “grounds”
could result in unnecessary repetitions as each “ground” or argument made by
Argentina was then divided into sections that repeat the grounds for annulment
governed by Article 52 of the ICSID Convention. For this reason, the Committee,
after carefully studying each argument or “ground” for annulment, will follow the
order in which Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention enumerates the grounds for
annulment applicable to the case and refer under each section of article 52 (1) to
each of the “grounds” raised by Argentina.

As stated, to begin the analysis of the merits of the application for annulment, the
Committee will quote the rules governing the matter, and express some general

comments.

1d. 1159
1d. 1.179

30

116.

117.

118.

Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention lists the grounds for annulment as follows:

“(1) Either party may request annulment of the award by an
application in writing to the Secretary-General on one or more of
the following grounds:

(a) that the Tribunal was not properly constituted;

(b) that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers;

(c) that there was corruption on the part of a member of the
Tribunal;

(d) that there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule
of procedure; or

(e) that the award has failed to state the reasons on which it is
based.”

The first paragraph of Article 53 of this Convention provides:

“(1) The award shall be binding on the parties and shall not be
subject to appeal or to any other remedy except those provided for
in this Convention. Each party shall abide by and comply with the
terms of the award except to the extent that enforcement shall have
been stayed pursuant to the relevant provisions of this Convention.”

Article 53 sets out the fundamental features of an arbitration award, reiterating
the well-established doctrine of finality in arbitration and the binding effect of the
awards on the parties. The only recourse against the award available to the
parties is limited to what is set out in Article 52 of the ICSID Convention. No
appeal is allowed by said Article, which indicates clearly that an Annulment
Committee should not review the merits. This approach is rightly accepted by
both parties here. Given this framework, this Committee concludes that in
balancing these principles and interests, annulment is an exceptional recourse
that should respect the finality of the award. Thus, the grounds for annulment
should be interpreted as being exhaustive and restrictive. This conclusion is
consistent with those of various committees which have asserted repeatedly that
the role of an Annulment Committee is restricted to assessing the legitimacy of
the award, to examining the integrity of the proceedings, and not to correct the

31

award.''° The Committee agrees with the following statements of Professor Aron
Broches:

“Annulment is an essential but exceptional remedy. It is well
understood that the grounds listed in Article 52(1) are the only
grounds on which an award may be annulled...After these
determinations have been made on the basis of objective legal
analysis, the ad hoc committees may be faced with the delicate
final task of weighing the conflicting claims of finality of the award,
on the one hand and, on the other, of protection of parties against
procedural injustice, as defined in the five subparagraphs of Article
52(1). This requires that an ad hoc committee be able to exercise a
measure of discretion in ruling on applications for annulment.”""'

119. As pointed out by various committees, the action for annulment is not and cannot
be used as an appeal against the decision in the award.''? The Committee in
Amco II expressed this concept clearly when it said, “[i]t is incumbent upon ad

hoc Committees to resist the temptation to rectify incorrect decisions or to annul

unjust awards.”"'

120. This Committee agrees with the aforementioned approach and therefore
disagrees with an approach that would imply reviewing the correctness of the
reasoning of the award, because Article 53 states unequivocally that the Award
“shall not be subject to appeal”.

121. To properly identify the matters discussed in this proceeding, the Committee will
set out below the rules relating to the arguments that will be discussed in the
following paragraphs.

4 M.C.I. Power Group, L.C. and New Turbine, Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador. ICSID Case No. ARB/03/6, Decision on

Annulment, October 19, 2009, 4] 24; Eduardo Vieira S.A. v. Republic of Chile. ICSID Case No. ARB/04/7, Decision on

Annulment, December 10, 2010, 4] 236

“2 ICSID, Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council of ICSID, August 10, 2012, 4111

Compafiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentina. ICSID Case No. 97/3. Decision on

Annulment, July 3, 2002, 41 {| 62 and 64; Repsol v. Petroecuador. ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/10, Decision on

Annulment, January 8, 2007, 4] 38; MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile. ICSID Case No.

ARB/01/7, Decision on Annulment, March 21, 2007, 4] 31; CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic,

ICSID Case No. ARB/01/8, Decision on Annulment, September 25, 2007, 4] 44; Sempra Energy International v.

Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16. Decision on Annulment, June 29, 2010, 4] 4] 73 and 74; Enron

Creditors Recovery Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, LP v. Argentina. ICSID Case ARB/01/3. Decision on

Annulment, July 30, 2010, 4] 63

*3 AMCO v. Republic of Indonesia. ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1. Decision on Annulment, December 3, 1992, 1.18

32

a2

122. Article 3 of the BIT states:

“1, Each Contracting Party shall, within its own territory accord to
investments made by investors of the other Contracting Party, to
the income and activities related to such investments and to all
other matters regulated by this Agreement, a treatment that is no
less favorable than that accorded to its own investors or investors
from third-party countries.

2. The provisions set forth in paragraph 1 of this Article shall not
apply to advantages and privileges accorded by either Contracting
Party to any third country by virtue of that Party's binding
obligations that derive from its membership in a customs or
economic union, common market, or free trade area, or as a result
of regional or subregional agreements, multilateral international
economic agreements or double taxation agreements, or any other
tax-related arrangements or agreements to facilitate cross border
trade.”

123. Article 8 of the BIT provides in its relevant part:

124.

125.

“1, Any dispute relating to an investment between an investor of
one of the Contracting Parties and the other Party, arising out of or
relating to this Agreement, shall, to the extent possible, be settled
through friendly consultation between the parties to the dispute.

2. If the dispute cannot be settled amicably, it may be submitted to
the competent judicial or administrative courts of the Party in whose
territory the investment is made.

3. Where after eighteen months from the date of notice of
commencement of proceedings before the courts mentioned in
paragraph 2 above, the dispute between an investor and one of the
Contracting Parties has not been resolved, it may be referred to
international arbitration...”.

The Committee will now discuss the first ground of annulment alleged in this
proceeding: the manifest excess of powers on the part of the Tribunal, pursuant
to Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention.

. Manifest excess of powers of the Tribunal
From the decisions of various ad hoc Committees, it is clear and not disputed by

the parties in this case, that manifest excess of powers may relate to
jurisdictional or substantive issues. Manifest excess of powers may occur when

33

126.

127.

4
us

an arbitral tribunal decides on matters which the parties did not submit to it, when
the tribunal failed to apply the proper law, or did not apply the law agreed upon
by the parties. In those cases the excess of powers must be considered
“manifest”.

The Committee considers it important to quote the following about the first form
of manifest excess of powers, that is when the tribunal decided on matters not
submitted to it:

“... [A]ld hoc committees have acknowledged the principle
specifically provided by the Convention that the Tribunal is the
judge of its own competence. This means that the Tribunal has the
power to decide whether it has jurisdiction to hear the parties’
dispute based on the parties’ arbitration agreement and the
jurisdictional requirements in the ICSID Convention. In light of this
principle, the drafting history suggests—and most ad hoc
committees have reasoned—that in order to annul an award based
on a Tribunal’s determination of the scope of its own jurisdiction,
the excess of powers must be ‘manifest.’ However, one ad hoc
committee found that an excess of jurisdiction or failure to exercise
jurisdiction is a manifest excess of powers when it is capable of
affecting the outcome of the case.”""*

The concept of “manifest excess of powers” has been defined by several
Annulment Committees as something that is obvious, clear or self-evident; can

"8 For other

be discerned with little effort and without deeper analysis.
Committees that concept is more complex. For example for the Committee in the
Fraport case, manifest excess must be demonstrable and substantial and not
doubtful. According to the Committee’s decision in the Fraport case, “the excess

of jurisdiction should be demonstrable and substantial and not doubtful.” “It

Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council of ICSID, August 10, 2012, 4] 89
Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt. ICSID Case No. ARB798/4. Decision on Annulment, January 28,

2002, 4] 25; Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic. ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12. Decision on Annulment, September 1,
2009, 41 68; MCI Power Group PL.C and New Turbine Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador. ICSID Case ARB/03/6. Decision on
Annulment, October 19, 2009, 4] 49

34

128.

129.

130.

131.

us

seems to this Committee that a manifest excess of power implies that the excess

of power should at once be textually obvious or substantially serious.”""®

For this Committee, it is clear that not every excess of powers could result in an
annulment of an award issued under the ICSID Convention. The standard
imposed by Article 52 makes it clear that an award could only be annulled if the
excess of powers is “manifest”. In the views of this Committee, the word
“manifest” has to be given its plain meaning, in the context of the purpose of
Article 52, bearing in mind the features of finality and binding effect of awards set
out in Article 53. This means that the excess of power has to be obvious, self-
evident, clear, flagrant and substantially serious, as found by other Committees.

In relation to the second form of manifest excess of powers, i.e., failure to apply
the proper law, “The drafting history of the ICSID Convention shows that a
Tribunal’s failure to apply the proper law could constitute a manifest excess of
powers, but that erroneous application of the law could not amount to an
annullable error, even if it is manifest ... there is no basis for an annulment due to
an incorrect decision by a Tribunal, a principle that has been expressly

recognized by many ad hoc committees.”''”

Some annulment committees have considered that a flagrant misapplication or
misinterpretation of the law may lead to annulment of an award, while others

think that such an approach relates to an appeal, not an annulment.''®

In the opinion of this Committee it is necessary to differentiate between a failure
to apply the proper law and an error in applying the law. The first is a ground for
annulment under Article 52, the second is not. Reviewing the substantive
reasoning by which the Tribunal arrived at its conclusions would demand
reviewing how the Tribunal applied the law or interpreted the same, resulting in

Fraport Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines. ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25. Decision

on Annulment, December 23, 2010, 4] 44; Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. The United Arab Emirates. ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/7. Decision on Annulment, June 5, 2007, 4] 40

uy
us

Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council of ICSID, August 10, 2012, 4 91
Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council of ICSID, August 10, 2012, 4 94

35

132.

133.

134.

the Committee acting as a court of appeal, thereby exceeding the powers
granted to it by Article 52 of the ICSID Convention. In order to decide whether the
Tribunal misapplied or misinterpreted the law to the matter decided, the
Committee would necessarily have to evaluate the facts and evidence as well as
the correctness of the legal principles submitted by the parties, assessed and
applied by the Tribunal. Obviously that is the function of an appellate court and
not of an Annulment Committee.

Failure to apply the law is part of the concept of manifest excess of powers and
for the reasons set out above, should be self-evident, clear, obvious, flagrant and
substantially serious. As stated above, this Committee agrees with the views of
Prof. Schreuer that there is a difference between a failure to apply the proper law
and the misapplication of the applicable law, and that the latter does not
constitute grounds for annulment, even if it is a “manifest error of law”, unless it is
of such a magnitude as to amount to the non-application of the proper law as a

whole.

In light of the above, the Committee will review below Argentina's arguments on
the alleged manifest excess of powers on the part of the Tribunal.

As stated in paragraphs 15,17,30,32, and 37 above, Argentina stated that the
Tribunal had no jurisdiction to resolve the dispute between the parties and that it
manifestly exceeded its powers when it assumed jurisdiction based on the MFN
clause contained in the Argentina-Italy BIT which the majority of the Tribunal
found allowed recourse to the Argentina-US BIT, which does not require prior
submission to the administrative or judicial courts of Argentina.

The Tribunals in cases that have ruled on the most favored nation clause in
relation to jurisdictional issues have expressed divergent positions. In Mafezzini
(Argentine investor) v. Spain, the Arbitration Tribunal applied this clause
contained in the Argentina-Spain BIT and, based on it, referred to the provisions
of the Treaty between the Kingdom of Spain and the Republic of Chile and

36

assumed jurisdiction.'"? In Siemens (German investor) v. Argentina, the Tribunal,
based on the most favored nation clause of the Argentina-Germany BIT had
recourse to the current treaty between the Republics of Argentina and Chile and

declared that it had jurisdiction to hear the case. '7°

In Gas Natural (Spanish
company) v. Argentina the Tribunal, based on the MFN clause of the Argentina-
Spain BIT referred to the Treaty between the United States and Argentina and
also decided that it had jurisdiction.'?' In the opposite direction, Argentina cited
the case of ICS (UK investor) against that nation, in which the Tribunal applied
the provisions of the Argentina-United Kingdom BIT, denied that the MFN clause
was applicable to jurisdictional issues and stated that it had no jurisdiction.'?? In
Salini (Italian investor) v. Jordan the Tribunal analyzed the MFN clause in the
Italy-Jordan BIT and considered the treaties signed between Jordan and the
United States and Great Britain. It held that it could not extend the procedural
rights of the dispute resolution clause under those treaties to circumvent the
requirement to have recourse to the mechanisms established under the
investment contract.'@° In the Plama case (Cypriot company) v. Bulgaria, the
Tribunal analyzed the most favored nation clause and the treaty between
Bulgaria and Finland and concluded that the claimant could not rely on other
treaties signed by Bulgaria to access ICSID.'*4

136. The above cited decisions suggest that there are two extreme positions on this
issue: one supports the application of the MFN clause to dispute resolution
mechanisms as a means of access to ICSID jurisdiction, the other considers that
the MFN clause cannot be given effect for jurisdictional purposes. In each

*° Emilio Agustin Mafezzini v. the Kingdom of Spain. ICSID Case ARB/97/7. Decision of the Tribunal on Objections

to Jurisdiction, January 25, 2000.

%° siemens A. G. v. Argentina. ICSID Case ARB/02/8. Decision on Jurisdiction, August 3, 2004

Gas Natural SDG SA v. Argentina. ICSID Case ARB/03/10. Decision of the Tribunal on Preliminary Questions on
Jurisdiction, June 17, 2005

2 ICs Inspection and Control Services Limited v. Argentine Republic. CPA Case No. 2010-9. Award on Jurisdiction,
February 10, 2012, cited in paragraph 33 of the Memorial on Annulment.

3 salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Kingdom of Jordan. ARBA/O2/13 ICSID Case. Decision on
Jurisdiction, November29, 2004

4 Blama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria. ICSID Case ARB/03/24. Decision on Jurisdiction, February 8,
2005.

aaa

37

137.

125

particular case the wording of the Treaty, the circumstances of the dispute and
the evidence and arguments submitted have had a substantial role in the
decision of Tribunals as to whether or not to apply the MFN clause to
jurisdictional issues. Thus, this matter should be analyzed on a case-by-case
basis and it is not possible to establish, for the purposes of the annulment of an
award, a general rule that an MFN clause applies or does not apply to
jurisdictional issues. If the Treaty — as some do — expressly prohibits the
application of the MFN clause to jurisdictional issues and the tribunal disregards
such prohibition and applies the MFN clause to assume competence; or if the
Treaty expressly extends the MFN clause to jurisdictional issues and the Tribunal
does not assume jurisdiction, regardless of the clear wording of the clause, one
could say that there is a manifest excess of powers. In such events, the mere
comparison between the text of the Treaty and the decision of the tribunal could
lead to the conclusion that there is an excess of powers, and that such excess
would be evident.

The issue is different, however, when there is no express prohibition or
authorization and the applicability or non-applicability of the MFN clause to
jurisdictional matters requires, inter alia, an interpretation of the provisions of the
given Treaty, a review of the intent of the parties and the evidence and
arguments submitted in the case at hand. Such are the cases that give rise to
controversy and to a division in the reasoning of the tribunals. In an article
published in 2011, Professor Zachary Douglas of the University of Cambridge
stated:

“In this article the author revisits the vexed question of whether the
jurisdiction of an international tribunal, established in accordance
with the terms of the basic treaty, can be expanded by reference to
the terms of a third treaty through the investor’s reliance upon the
MEN clause in the basic treaty.”"7°

Douglas, Zachary. The MFN Clause in Investment Arbitration: Treaty Interpretation Off the Rails. In: Journal of

International Dispute Settlement, Vol. 2, No. 1 ( 2011), page 97.

38

138.

140.

126

Professor Douglas concludes that the MFN clause does not extend to
jurisdictional matters and adds that:

“It is notorious that this question has proved to be among the most
divisive in the jurisprudence.”

The controversial nature of this matter is evidenced also by the fact that two
respected jurists members of the Tribunal opted for the argument that, in this
particular case, the MFN clause contained in the Argentina-Italy BIT permitted
Impregilo to have recourse to the Argentina-US BIT that did not require
submission to the administrative or judicial courts of Argentina before filing a
request for arbitration. Another jurist, equally distinguished, also a member of the
Tribunal, held the opposite view in a long and detailed dissenting opinion
containing a thorough analysis of the MFN clause.

From the discussion in the preceding paragraphs, it is clear to this Committee
that the issue of whether the MFN clause in the Argentina-ltaly BIT has
jurisdictional effects in the circumstances of this case that allowed Impregilo to
have recourse to the Argentina-US BIT, which does not require recourse to local
courts before resorting to the ICSID jurisdiction, is a complex issue, subject to
debate, with opposite views that were discussed by the majority and the
dissenting arbitrator. Neither applying an MFN clause to jurisdictional issues nor
refusing to apply it to assume jurisdiction may be considered, per se, as a
manifest excess of powers. The Committee is being asked to review in detail and
de novo the complex issues involved in the jurisdictional debate in this case, to
support the analysis of the dissenting arbitrator and to consider that such
analysis is the one to prevail, and to conclude that the majority manifestly
exceeded its powers. This is not the task of the Committee. The analysis
required to reach a conclusion other than the majority’s would imply a new and
complex analysis of the issues at stake, a review that is far from the responsibility
of this Committee according to Article 52.

Id., page 98

39

141. For these reasons, it is clear that this Committee has no authority to determine
whether or not the Tribunal should apply Article 3.1 of the BIT in order to
establish its jurisdiction to review the merits of the dispute. The interpretation
made by an Arbitration Tribunal in one way or another on the possible extension
of the MFN clause to jurisdictional issues can never by itself constitute a clear,
obvious, and self-evident excess of powers.

142. Argentina also claimed manifest excess of powers because the Tribunal, in its
opinion, did not apply the applicable law (paragraph 33 above). In making this
claim, Argentina referred to paragraphs 94 and 108 of the Award.

143. Paragraph 94 of the Award states:

“In sum, Article 8(3) contains a jurisdictional requirement that has to
be fulfilled before an ICSID tribunal can assert jurisdiction. This
decision is in accordance with the decision in Wintershall, where it
was found for a very similar clause in the Argentina-Germany BIT,
that “ Article 10(2) contains a time-bound prior-recourse-to-local-
courts-clause, which mandates (not only permits) litigation by the
investor (for a definite period) in the domestic forum,” before the
right to ICSID can even materialize. Impregilo not having fulfilled
this requirement, the Tribunal cannot find jurisdiction on the basis of
Article 8(3) of the Argentina-ltaly BIT.”

144. Paragraph 108 of the Award states:

“Nevertheless, the Arbitral Tribunal finds it unfortunate if the
assessment of these issues would in each case be dependent on
the personal opinions of individual arbitrators. The best way to
avoid such a result is to make the determination on the basis of
case law whenever a clear case law can be discerned. It is true
that, as stated above, the jurisprudence regarding the application of
MFN clauses to settlement of dispute provisions is not fully
consistent. Nevertheless, in cases where the MFN clause has
referred to “all matters” or “any matter” regulated in the BIT, there
has been near-unanimity in finding that the clause covered the
dispute settlement rules. On this basis, the majority of the Tribunal
reaches the conclusion that Impregilo is entitled to rely, in this
respect, on the dispute settlement rules in the Argentina-US BIT
and that the case cannot be dismissed for non-observance of the
requirements in Articles 8(2) and (3) of the Argentina-ltaly BIT.”

40

145.

146.

147.

148.

149.

Argentina's complaint is, then, that the Tribunal exceeded its powers by not
complying with the provisions of Article 8(3) of the BIT.

For the reasons explained in paragraph 131 above, the ground for annulment
under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention would be the lack of application of
Article 8(3). In this case the Tribunal did not fail to apply Article 8(3). On the
contrary, it examined said article in paragraphs 79 to 93 of the Award and
concluded in paragraph 94 that it lacked jurisdiction based on that specific article.
However, the Tribunal proceeded further with the analysis of other provisions of
the treaty and, after analyzing and discussing the MFN clause contained in
Article 3(1) of the Argentina-Italy BIT, in paragraphs 95 to 108 of the Award, the
majority of the Tribunal concluded that it could rely on the Argentina-US BIT to
not require Impregilo to have recourse to Argentine courts before filing a request
for arbitration.

Argentina’s plea actually does not refer to the lack of application of Article 8(3) of
the BIT; it is rather an expression of disagreement with the Tribunal’s
interpretation and specifically with the conclusion reached by the Tribunal
concerning the scope of Article 3(1) of the BIT. It is not the task of this
Committee to review whether the interpretation of article 8(3) by the Tribunal is
correct or not. Even if the standard of article 52 were to allow a Committee to
consider that a gross error in the application of the law equals a lack of
application of the proper law, the Committee finds no self-evident, clear, obvious
or substantially serious failure to apply the proper law, nor an error in the
application of the law that would allow annulment within the ambit of Article 52,
as requested by Argentina.

Argentina also claimed the failure to apply Article 4 of the BIT (paragraphs 67,
68, and 69 above).

According to Argentina, the Tribunal did not apply Article 4 of the BIT which
refers to losses in case of war, states of emergency or other events, and the type

41

151.

152.

27

128
129

of treatment that should be given to compensation as may be warranted under
the circumstances. It stated that in the Award the Tribunal deprived Article 4 of

any useful effect. '?”

The Tribunal stated, in paragraphs 340-343 of the Award, the reasons for its
conclusions in relation to Article 4 of the BIT and cited in support of these
conclusions, the analysis made by two Arbitral Tribunals that heard other cases
against Argentina (CMS and Suez), of a rule that the Tribunal considered similar
to Article 4 of the BIT.'*° The interpretation of article 4 by the Tribunal and the
scope of its application in the Award are grounded by reference to other awards.
Moreover, the Tribunal explained why it considered that this rule should not apply
to the case at hand. Argentina does not agree with the analysis nor the
conclusion reached by the Tribunal. This is different from a failure to apply the
law. It is incorrect, therefore, to say that the Tribunal did not apply the applicable
law simply because one does not agree with the Tribunal’s interpretation.
Obviously, the determination of whether the interpretation of Article 4 of the BIT
by the Tribunal is correct or not is a matter unrelated to this Committee and to
any annulment proceeding.

Argentina also claimed that there was a manifest excess of powers by the
Tribunal which occurred in other ways: by exercising jurisdiction over Impregilo’s
claims for compensation based on a contract that said company did not sign
(paragraphs 40, 41, and 43 above) and basing its decision on case law, which is
not mandatory nor a source for the creation of law (paragraph 28).

The Tribunal stated in the Award that Impregilo formed a consortium with other
companies, which were awarded one of the concession areas for the provision of
drinking water services in the Province of Buenos Aires. In accordance with the
bidding requirements, that consortium formed an Argentine company, AGBA.'?
The Tribunal added that Argentina itself admitted the existence of a substantial

Memorial on Annulment, 4] 120
Award, 9 341 and 342
Award, 941 14 and 137

42

153.

154.

155.

130
131

case-law showing that claims such as those presented by Impregilo enjoy
protection by ICSID under the applicable BITs, and found no reason to depart
from that case-law.'*° The Tribunal also said that Impregilo owns 42.58 percent
of the shares of AGBA and made an equity investment of US$21.3 million in the
company.

The Tribunal concluded in the Award, after mentioning another similar case, that
“... AGBA does not qualify as a protected investor under the ICSID Convention
and the BIT, and its contractual rights cannot be considered protected
investments. On the other hand, Impregilo’s shares in AGBA were an investment
protected under the BIT.”"*' Argentina argued in its Memorial on Annulment, and
was quoted in paragraph 42 above, that the Tribunal was wrong to allow
Impregilo to take the place of AGBA in order to obtain compensation.

Even though Argentina claims that Impregilo was authorized by the Tribunal to
“take the place” of AGBA, to claim compensation, the issue that was decided by
the Tribunal was whether Impregilo, as one of AGBA’s shareholders, could file an
independent claim for acts that affect AGBA, the local company. This is a topic
that was debated extensively by Argentina and is a matter of interpretation of the
BIT and its standards. This Committee may not analyze such interpretation and
decide otherwise because it cannot review the merits of the Award. The
characterization of the debate related to independent claims of shareholders as a
situation where one company has “taken the place” of another would not change
the aforesaid conclusion.

Moreover, Argentina did not identify specifically what facts or matters the
Tribunal failed to take into account in its analysis. If the Award needed to be
supplemented or rectified, Argentina could have requested so, pursuant to Article
49 (2) of the Convention but, certainly, this is not a ground for annulment.
Furthermore, the Tribunal considered that the shareholder had an independent

Award, 41 140
Award, 4] 245

43

157.

132

claim for acts that affect the local company, which is a matter of interpretation of
the TBI and of its standards that the Committee may not review as it would be
imply a decision on the merits.

Regarding the Tribunal’s use of case law as the basis of the Award, the
Committee is of the opinion that it is not possible to annul an award alleging
manifest excess of powers because the Arbitral Tribunal based the award on
other arbitration decisions. A tribunal is entitled to and often quotes from other
decisions in deriving or in support of its own reasoning and quoting from rulings
of other arbitral tribunals certainly constitutes a valid form of reasoning.

Another claim of Argentina founded on the alleged manifest excess of powers by
the Tribunal is set forth in paragraph 53 above in which it is stated that Argentina
accused the Tribunal that it deliberately “failed to establish the criterion applied
[in relation to fair and equitable treatment] in eventually holding Argentina liable
for the violation of the alleged legitimate expectations.” Before making such a
claim Argentina had stated the following:

“The Tribunal itself acknowledged that ‘[t]he term ‘fair and equitable
treatment’ appears in many BITs. It cannot be easily defined, and it
is generally believed to require at least respect for the international
minimum standard of protection which, according to international
customary law, any State is obliged to afford to foreign property in
its territory. The Tribunal considers that the term ‘fair and equitable
treatment,’ as it appears in the present BIT and in other similar
BITs, is intended to give adequate protection to the investor's
legitimate expectations,’ yet it only referred to general terms—
without providing any supporting argument—and did not specifically
state on which grounds Argentina was found to be liable.”"

In this Committee’s opinion, the failure to fully conceptualize the content of a
standard is not a ground for annulment of an award. In this case, the Tribunal
gave reasons for its interpretation of the scope of the standard but even the
failure to give reasons for its reasoning would not be a ground for annulment.

Memorial on Annulment, 4] 89

44

159.

160.

Importantly, Argentina contradicted itself because it stated that the Tribunal did
not explain the content of the fair and equitable treatment standard and later
affirmed what was quoted in the previous paragraph, from which it may easily be
deducted that the Tribunal did analyze the standard in question. In any case, it is
obvious that the annulment mechanism is not devised to address the alleged
omissions.

Finally, Argentina alleged manifest excess of powers of the Tribunal when it fixed
the compensation granted to Impregilo in the Award, which in its opinion is
contrary to applicable law and, therefore, it stated that the Tribunal became liable
for that ground of annulment (paragraph 78 above). As explained in that
paragraph, Argentina argued that the Tribunal placed Impregilo in a better
position than it would have been in if Argentina had not taken any action.

The Committee cannot review de novo the facts, evidence and criteria used by
the Tribunal in assessing the damages nor the amount of compensation awarded
to Impregilo. It is clear that Argentina disagrees with the causal connection found
by the Tribunal between the damages and the disputed measures; that it
considers that there was a gap in the analysis of causation and that the evidence
produced should have resulted in a different compensation; and that it disagrees
with the interpretation by the Tribunal of the applicable law in the assessment of
the damages. However, a disagreement with the analysis of the Tribunal as to
causation, or with respect to the assessment of the evidence or the interpretation
of the law does not constitute ground for annulment under Article 52. None of the
criticism that Argentina raises in connection with the Tribunal’s analysis on
compensation resulted in an excess of powers for the Tribunal not having applied
the proper law. Of course, the assessment of damages cannot be arbitrary, but a
Tribunal’s determination of the amount of compensation allows for a high level of
discretion and a disagreement with the criteria used by the Tribunal cannot be a

ground for annulment of an award.

45

161.

162.

163.

164.

165.

133,

In conclusion, as discussed in the preceding paragraphs, the Committee
considers that none of the five “grounds” for requesting annulment submitted by
Argentina in relation to the Tribunal’s alleged manifest excess of powers
constitutes grounds for annulment. For that reason, Argentina’s application for
annulment of the Award, based on Article 52(1) (b) of the ICSID Convention will
be rejected.

The Committee then discussed the second ground for annulment alleged by
Argentina in this proceeding: serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure pursuant to Article 52(1) (d) of the ICSID Convention.

. Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure

The ground cited in Article 52 (1) (d) has an important connotation: the word
“serious” means that not any departure from a rule of procedure can lead to the
annulment of an award; it must be “a serious departure from a fundamental rule
of procedure”. Further the violation has to be akin to a “fundamental” rule of
procedure.

This Committee agrees with the determinations made by other committees as
regards the requirement that the departure has to have a material impact on the
outcome of the award for the annulment to succeed.'°° In the opinion of the
Committee, the word “serious” expresses that impact.

With a view to defining the scope of this ground for annulment, other Committees
have identified the following “fundamental rules of procedure”: the equal
treatment of the parties, the right to be heard, an independent and impartial
tribunal, the treatment of evidence and burden of proof, and deliberations among
members of the Tribunal.'** This Committee agrees with such formulations of the
fundamental rules of procedure.

Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council of ICSID, August 10, 2012, 4 101

14.4100

46

166.

167.

168.

169.

170.

The arguments put forward by Argentina with regard to this alleged breach
committed by the Tribunal in the Award will be analyzed in the following
paragraphs.

In paragraph 17 above the Committee noted that Argentina alleged a serious
departure from a rule of procedure because the Tribunal assumed jurisdiction
without the condition for consent having been met (Article 8(3) of the BIT). In this
argument on grounds for annulment, which is being analyzed in this section,
Argentina failed to indicate which fundamental rules of procedure the Tribunal
had allegedly departed from or the manner in which said departure was made,
when the Tribunal interpreted Article 8(3) of the BIT. The Committee is therefore
unable to address this claim. Furthermore, in paragraphs 29 and 54 of its Reply,
Argentina reiterated this argument with the same omissions.

The second argument supporting this ground for annulment relating to the issue
of consent is set forth in paragraphs 35 and 36 above. Argentina claimed that the
Tribunal failed to observe the consent of the parties to the BIT by not applying
the condition of prior submission to local courts (Article 8(3) of that Treaty).

The Committee understands that, according to Argentina, the fundamental rule of
procedure from which the Tribunal allegedly departed from was consent. The
Committee carefully reviewed the part of the Award that makes reference to this
issue and determined that there had been no such departure, as the Tribunal
analyzed Articles 8(3) and 3(1) of the BIT and deduced that in this specific case
Impregilo could benefit from the provisions of the Argentina-USA Treaty, where
referral to local courts prior to submission to ICSID arbitration is not required.

In the Award, the Tribunal reviewed Article 8(3) of the BIT, which requires the
investor to first refer disputes to Argentine courts. It did indeed analyze that
Article and examined the arguments put forward by the parties relating to this
Article and Article 3(1) of the BIT. Argentina’s claim is in fact a disagreement
with the Tribunal’s interpretation of Articles 3(1) and 8(3) of the BIT.

47

171.

172.

173.

174.

As has repeatedly been stated in the previous paragraphs, the fact that a
Tribunal interprets the jurisdictional consequences of the MFN clause in one
sense or another (i.e., as applying or not to jurisdictional matters) cannot be a
ground for annulment on the basis that the given interpretation constitutes a
serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.

The third argument put forward by Argentina as a ground for serious departure
from a rule of procedure was summarized in paragraphs 79, 80, 81, and 82
above. In these paragraphs, Argentina argues that the Tribunal awarded the
compensatory damages claimed by Impregilo without considering the defenses
raised by Argentina.

The Tribunal reviewed the matter of the compensation awarded to Impregilo in
paragraphs 361 through 381 of the Award. In these paragraphs, the Tribunal
mentioned the difficulties obtaining financing that AGBA experienced, noted that
the Argentine authorities had adopted an ambiguous position on this situation,
and examined the effects of the measures adopted by Argentina in 2002. In
paragraph 371 the Tribunal also stated that it could not be established with
certainty in what situation Impregilo would have been had Argentina not
breached the fair and equitable treatment standard. Based on that analysis, the
Tribunal determined that reasonable probabilities and estimates were a sufficient

basis for Impregilo’s claims for compensation.

In paragraph 372 of the Award the Tribunal referred to the expert reports
submitted by both parties. With regard to those submitted by Argentina it noted
that “in the latter reports, MM. Dapena and Coloma [who were questioned by the
Parties and by the Tribunal] argue that the concession had no economic value
and that no compensation can therefore be justified.” The Tribunal then
summarized the testimony of the experts presented by Impregilo. This
Committee believes that it would have been appropriate that the Tribunal had
provided a more thorough explanation of the reasons why it determined that the
opinions of the experts for Argentina were not credible. However, that omission

48

175.

176.

177.

cannot, in any way, be a ground for annulment of the Award. In order to reinforce
that conclusion, the Committee herein reiterates what it stated in paragraph 158
above.

If the Tribunal had not considered the defenses raised by Argentina in relation to
this matter in the Award, no reference to the reports from the experts presented
by Argentina would have been made. It is clear that the Tribunal searched for a
way to determine the amount in damages, for which, in accordance with the
discretionary authority of Arbitral Tribunals, it used reasonable probabilities and
estimates.

The Committee concludes that the Tribunal evaluated the evidence submitted by
both parties on the amount of compensation, and reviewed the conclusions
presented therein. There is, therefore, no serious departure from fundamental
rules of procedure as Argentina has had the opportunity to present its defenses
and evidence on this matter and the Tribunal established the amount of
compensation in a reasonable manner. There is no requirement whatsoever for
arbitral tribunals to indicate in an award the reasons why some types of evidence
are more credible than others. Discretionary authority that is reasonable and
reasoned is the rule in this regard, and it is clearly not within the purview of
Annulment Committees, which do not have direct and immediate access to the
evidence submitted by both parties, to determine whether the determinations
made in an award were correct. Attempting to do so would involve a subsequent
assessment of the conclusions of arbitral tribunals, which would destroy the basic
principles of the institution of arbitration and outside the power of ad hoc
Committees.

Argentina also pointed out in this part of its claim that a ground for annulment
exists where there is a reversal of the burden of proof. It is not evident in the
Award that there was such reversal that materially affected the outcome of the
case. The Committee further points out that neither the Memorial on Annulment
nor the Reply submitted by Argentina provided adequate substantiation or

49

178.

179.

180.

181.

135
136

analysis for its position. With respect to this issue, Argentina expressed a purely
theoretical opinion, making no reference to the specific case.

For the reasons outlined in the previous paragraphs, the Committee rejects
Argentina's arguments for annulment, which were based on the alleged serious
departure from fundamental rules of procedure (Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID
Convention).

The Committee will now address the third ground for annulment put forward by
Argentina in this proceeding: the failure to state the reasons on which the Award
is based, pursuant to Article 52 (1)(e) of the ICSID Convention.

. Failure to state the reasons on which the Award is based

For this requirement to be established, an ad hoc Committee shoud not be
concerned with the correctness of the Tribunal’s reasoning but is confined to
ascertaining whether the reasoning would allow an informed reader to
understand how the Tribunal reached its conclusions. The Committee fully
agrees with the following paragraph in the Background Paper on Annulment for
the Administrative Council of ICSID:

“Ad hoc Committees [Klécher, MINE, Viviendi |, Wena, CDC, MCI,
Fraport, Vierira, and Transgabonais] have explained that the
requirement to state reasons is intended to ensure that parties can
understand the reasoning of the Tribunal, meaning the reader can
understand the facts and law applied by the Tribunal in coming to
its conclusion. The correctness of the reasoning or whether it is
convincing is not relevant.”"

Article 52 (1) (e) does not allow a committee to assess the correctness or
persuasiveness of the reasoning in the award or to inquire into the quality of the
reasons. '° As indicated by the Committee in MINE “... The requirement that an
award has to be motivated implies that it must enable the reader to follow the

Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council of ICSID, August 10, 2012, 4 106
See Schreurer, C et al The ICSID Convention, A Commentary (Cambridge University Press, 2009), 1011.

50

182.

183.

184.

reasoning of the Tribunal on points of fact and law. It implies that, and only
that...” “... the requirement to state reasons is satisfied as long as the award
enables one to follow how the tribunal proceeded from Point A to Point B, and
eventually to its conclusion, even if it made an error of fact or of law”. If the
reasoning of the Arbitral Tribunal with respect to an award cannot be understood
by the parties and an informed reader, the reasons and basis for the award
cannot be considered to have been stated; the issue of whether or not the
conclusions of the Arbitral Tribunal are satisfactory to the parties can never be
used as a valid ground for annulment of an award.

Argentina stated that the Tribunal declared itself competent to hear the dispute
between the parties, without the condition for consent established in the BIT
having been satisfied and added that the Tribunal did not state the reasons on
which the decision regarding its jurisdiction was reached (paragraph 17 above).
This was again stated in the section entitled “Failure to state reasons,” where
reference was made to Article 3(1) of the BIT (paragraphs 20 through 24).

In paragraphs 79 and 80 of the Award the Tribunal analyzed the content of
Article 8 of the BIT and the connection between clauses (2) and (3) of said
Article. The Committee will summarize the Tribunal’s findings in this regard as
follows: in paragraph 82 it noted the possible interpretations of those clauses and
in paragraphs 86 through 90 it analyzed the context in order to reach the
conclusion outlined in paragraphs 90 and 91 that Impregilo did not comply with
the conditions set forth in that rule. It also made reference in paragraphs 92 and
93 to what other Arbitral Tribunals (such as Maffezini and Wintershall) had
decided with respect to jurisdictional requirements and in paragraph 94 of the
Award it established a parallel between that latter case and this current one.

In subsequent paragraphs of the Award (95 through 109), the Tribunal analyzed
the MFN clause. Paragraph 97 mentions the four arguments invoked by
Argentina to oppose the application of the most favored nation clause in this
case. In paragraph 99 the Tribunal explained its interpretation of the term

51

186.

187.

“treatment” and of the phrase “all other matters regulated by this Agreement,”
both of which appear in Article 3(1) of the BIT, and explained why it did not
consider the allegations made by Argentina in its first argument in which it
rejected the application of the MFN clause to jurisdictional issues.

The Tribunal was of the opinion that in this case the Argentina-US BIT could be
applied, pursuant to Article 3(1) of the Argentina-ltaly BIT, and determined that,
on the basis of that application, the failure to meet the requirement established in
Article 8(3) of the Argentina—Italy BIT had no bearing on Impregilo’s claim.
Argentina did not agree with that reasoning and has expressed its disagreement
repeatedly. In the opinion of the Committee, it is evident that disagreement of the
reasoning cannot constitute a valid ground for its application for an annulment for
lack of reasons.

As indicated in paragraph 25 above, Argentina stated that the conclusion
expressed in paragraph 101 of the Award fails to set out the reasons therefor.
This paragraph relates to the third argument presented by Argentina during the
arbitral proceedings, against ascribing jurisdictional effects to the most favored
nation clause. The Tribunal explained its conclusion noting that a system that
provides the option of having recourse to domestic courts and to arbitration is
more favorable than a system that does not offer this choice. Argentina does not
agree with that conclusion. In the opinion of the Committee the Tribunal’s
conclusion and Argentina’s opposing view on this issue is a matter that has no
bearing whatsoever on this Application for Annulment.

Argentina also argued that paragraph 102 of the Award did not state the reasons
on which it was based (paragraph 26 above). Argentina (in paragraph 38 of its
Memorial on Annulment) and Impregilo (in paragraphs 86 and 95 of its Counter-
Memorial) discussed the dates on which the Argentina-Italy BIT and the
Argentina-US BIT were signed and came into effect. Obviously, this discussion
relates to the Tribunal’s reasoning and not to the absence of reasoning or
grounds, and as such is of no relevance to this annulment proceeding.

52

188.

190.

191.

137

Argentina also indicated that the Tribunal’s conclusion in paragraph 108 of the
Award cannot be considered to be a valid ground, as the Tribunal did not even
indicate whether it agreed with the reasoning of other decisions rendered by
Arbitral Tribunals that it cited (paragraph 27 above).

For purposes of continuing the analysis of Argentina's line of argument, the
Committee once again quoted a part of said argument in relation to paragraph
108 of the Award:

“Notwithstanding the fact that the conclusion arrived at by the
Tribunal with regard to the “near-unanimity” of the decisions on this
matter is erroneous, the principle of stare decisis does not apply in
the context of international arbitration. Therefore, the fact that this
position was adopted by an alleged majority of the tribunals cannot
be considered a valid reason for this decision.”'*”

The Committee points out that, contrary to the assertion made by Argentina, the
Tribunal did not assume that it was bound by decisions rendered by other Arbitral
Tribunals nor the preponderance of decisions in a particular way. The Committee
considers that the Tribunal believed that the decided cases and the “near
unanimity” that it cited allowed it to reinforce its reasoning and findings, arrive at
a conclusion and settle the dispute in the manner in which it did. This line of
argument of Argentina is not a ground for annulment. While decisions rendered
by Arbitral Tribunals are not binding, the reasoning contained therein can indeed
be used by a Tribunal as a basis for its decision.

It should be made clear as well that no annulment committee can determine
whether or not an arbitral tribunal used a “valid reason” to arrive at a specific
conclusion. While the reasons for awards must be stated, the reasoning used by
the arbitrators as grounds for the awards cannot and should not be subject to
substantive and critical analysis by annulment committees.

Memorial on Annulment, 91] 38 and 39

53

192.

193.

194.

As indicated in paragraph 39 above, Argentina also stated that the Tribunal failed
to consider the arguments Argentina laid out with respect to the “material
competence” of the Tribunal in its Memorial on Jurisdiction and at the hearing
held from May 4-6, 2009. “The Tribunal failed to consider fundamental arguments
which were presented on those occasions and which are therefore fully
incorporated herein [Memorial on Annulment] by reference.” '® Moreover, it
stated that the Tribunal, without conducting any analysis, accepted that the
shares held by Impregilo in AGBA are protected investments under the BIT and
that the violation of AGBA’s rights must be considered to be a violation of
Impregilo’s rights; it therefore rejected, without stating the reasons, the objection
raised by Argentina with regard to the material competence of the Tribunal.

Argentina specifically argued that, with regard to the issue of material
competence, the Tribunal failed to consider the fundamental arguments that it
presented in its Memorial on Jurisdiction; hence, it requested that these
arguments be reproduced in its Application for Annulment. The Committee notes
that Argentina did not indicate which of its arguments on jurisdiction it deemed to
be fundamental and that, in its view, had not been analyzed by the Tribunal. On
the issue of “reproduction” of the arguments presented by Argentina, the
Committee reiterates the fact that it is not an appeal court and that its role is not
to review Argentina’s arguments on jurisdiction, but instead to render a decision
on the alleged invalidity of the Award.

With regard to the determination of the Tribunal that the shares held by Impregilo
in AGBA are protected investments under the BIT, the Committee points out that
the Tribunal based its decision on Article 1(1)(b) of the BIT quoted below.

“ARTICLE 1

Definitions

For the purposes of this Agreement:

1. “Investment” means, in accordance with the host country laws
and irrespective of the selected legal form or any other related
laws, any kind of asset invested or reinvested by an individual or a

id. 155

54

legal entity of a Contracting Party in the territory of the other Party,
in conformity with the laws and regulations of the latter.

Within this general framework, it included, in particular though not
exclusively:

b) shares of stock, interests or any other form of participation,
including minority or indirect interest, in a company established in
the territory of each Contracting Party;...”

195. The Tribunal based its decision on its interpretation of the BIT and its
understanding of what the BIT defines as an investment. The Committee cannot
review the accuracy of such interpretation and therefore finds no grounds here to
support the application for the annulment of the Award.

196. Another claim included by Argentina in the section entitled “failure to state
reasons” was described in paragraphs 45 through 47 above, in which Argentina
stated that the Tribunal failed to specify how Impregilo could assert rights relating
to the Concession Contract; in the Memorial on Annulment, it cited paragraphs
138, 245, 325, and 331 of the Award that address this claim.

197. Although Argentina named this specific claim as a “failure to state reasons,” it is
actually contending that the Tribunal’s reasoning is contradictory (“[t]he

contradiction in the Tribunal’s reasoning is manifest”)'®

and that such alleged
contradiction is so evident that it could be assimilated to lack of reasoning. The
Committee disagrees. The fact that Argentina does not agree with the Tribunal’s
reasoning, which is the case here, is no failure to state reasons and this ground

should therefore be dismissed.

198. As indicated in paragraph 47 above, Argentina criticized the fact that the Tribunal
made reference to an award handed down by another arbitral tribunal and
insisted that this other award could not serve as a basis for the Award. Argentina
claims that the foregoing constitutes a “manifest failure to state reasons under
Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention.”

M1d.,49.74
55

199.

200.

201.

202.

140

The Committee noted that in paragraphs 137 through 140 of the Award, the
Tribunal stated its opinion on the second objection to jurisdiction raised by
Argentina. Furthermore, in paragraph 140, it stated, as Argentina itself noted,
that there is substantial case law showing that claims such as those filed by
Impregilo enjoy protection under the BITs.

As noted by Argentina, arbitration case law is not binding on any Arbitral
Tribunal. However, that fact does not mean that a tribunal cannot base its opinion
on decisions rendered by other tribunals or uphold the decisions of other
tribunals on a specific matter. The Tribunal summarized Argentina’s position on
the second objection that it raised, referring in that summary to CMS v.
Argentina. \t noted that the same approach had been adopted for other awards
“allowing shareholders to bring indirect claims in respect of the reduction in the
value of their shares.”"*°

If the Tribunal concluded that other Tribunals have accepted indirect claims and
that it found no reason to depart from that case law, this is, in the Committee’s
opinion, a valid reason on which to base its decision. Argentina agreed with this
opinion but argued that the reference to decided cases is not a valid way to state
reasons for an award. Yet, it did not explain why this is the case; why an Arbitral
Tribunal cannot state the reason for its decision, indicating that other cases have
been decided in a particular manner and that with respect to the case that it is
considering it can find no reason to depart from that decision. Stating that it has
no ground to disagree with decisions in another case means that the Tribunal
accepted the reasoning in those decisions and applied that to the specific case
submitted to it. Based on the foregoing, the Committee finds that Argentina's
assertion of a failure to state reasons is without merit.

Argentina put forward another argument on the alleged failure to state reasons in
paragraph 114 of its Reply (referred to in paragraph 66 above). The issue in
question is the Tribunal’s analysis of Article 4 of the BIT and the emergency

Award, 9 114 and 127

56

204.

measures adopted by Argentina during the economic crisis in which it was mired.
In sum, Argentina stated that the Tribunal handed down an award for which it
failed to state the reasons and held it liable for the emergency measures that it
had adopted.

In paragraphs 336 through 360 of the Award, the Tribunal examined Argentina’s
state of necessity plea. In these paragraphs, the Tribunal analyzed Article 4 of
the BIT in light of customary international law and considered the provisions of
Article 25 of the Draft Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally
Wrongful Acts adopted by the International Law Commission of the United
Nations. It also examined the conclusions of the CMS and Suez Arbitral
Tribunals; it made reference to facts on the Argentine crisis which are of public
knowledge; it reviewed reports on Argentina’s economic situation (paragraph 350
of the Award), and considered Argentina’s contribution to the crisis. In short, the
Tribunal based its decision on several solid sources; it is therefore not correct
that it failed to state the reasons for its conclusions on this matter.

Argentina argued in paragraph 70 above that the majority of the Tribunal relied
mainly on the report from Impregilo’s expert without establishing the legal criteria
in arriving at its conclusions, and, consequently, failed to state the reasons
(paragraph 73 above).

As mentioned in paragraphs 71 and 72 above, Argentina disagrees with the
conclusions of the Tribunal on this matter, because it does not agree with the
testimony of Impregilo’s expert at the arbitration proceedings. A disagreement
with the decision of the Tribunal clearly falls outside the competence of this
Committee.

On this same point Argentina asserted the following:

“The Tribunal also failed to consider Edwards’ contradictions during
his examination at the merits phase, which is an additional ground
for annulment of the Award, as it seriously departed from a rule of
procedure. Indeed, at the hearing, the expert contradicted himself

57

207.

209.

aan
342

and his prior submissions or statements regarding the Argentine
crisis and the measures under analysis. Furthermore, Edwards’
lack of reliability became evident, as he attached to his report the
documents or instruments on which he relied in preparing his
opinion, excluding such pages or parts as supported Argentina’s
position. This is clear evidence of the fact that Edwards was far
from being an independent expert. Therefore, the Tribunal should
not have relied on his report to hold Argentina liable.”'

It is evident that, based on the argument of an alleged failure to state the reasons
for this part of the Award, Argentina is expecting the Committee to assess the
credibility that the testimony of Mr. Edwards, Impregilo’s expert, should have had
for the Tribunal, which was the responsibility of the Tribunal, and which is clearly
impossible under the standards of Article 52. The credibility of an expert is not a
matter for review in an annulment proceeding.

Finally, in the section entitled “Compensation” (paragraphs 75 and 76 above)
Argentina argued that there was a failure to state reasons.

The Tribunal analyzed the issue of compensation in paragraphs 361 through 384
of the Award. At the arbitral proceedings, Impregilo requested payment for all
losses suffered plus compound interest. The Tribunal noted that Impregilo had
the burden of proof, but that the circumstances of the case made it difficult to
assess damages. As a result, the Tribunal pointed out that “...probabilities and
estimates have to suffice...” The Tribunal also noted that it had serious doubts
about the forecasts made by AGBA in its Business Plan'** and added that AGBA
only made a minor part of the envisaged investments and that it could not
establish that the concession would have been profitable. '“* The Tribunal
explained further down that the compensation amount would be based solely on

Memorial on Annulment, 4] 139
Award, 41371

814.4373

aaa

Award, 91375

58

210.

211.

212.

213.

the capital contribution made by AGBA shareholders and indicated the evidence

used to determine that amount (MM. Walck’s and Giacchino’s reports).'“°

In light of the foregoing paragraph, the Committee concludes that the Tribunal
provided detailed information and analysis on the evidence that it considered and
clearly outlined how it arrived at its ruling against Argentina. Evidently, this
Committee does not have authority nor is it empowered (among other reasons,
because it did not have direct access to the evidence submitted by the parties) to
ascertain whether or not the Tribunal’s conclusions were correct.

Based on the reasons set forth in the foregoing paragraphs, the Committee will
reject the arguments for annulment put forward by Argentina which are based on
the alleged failure to state the reasons for the Award.

In the following section the Committee will refer to other arguments raised by
Argentina in its Memorial on Annulment and its Reply to request annulment of the
Award.

. Other arguments for annulment

Argentina presented other arguments to request annulment of the Award:

a. “Contradictions,” “inconsistencies,” and “unreasonable
statements,” in the Award (paragraphs 45, 55, 61, 62, 63, 64, 69
of this Decision).

b. Risk of “double recovery” (paragraphs 48 y 49 above).

c. Derivative or indirect actions are not provided for under
Argentine law (paragraph 50).

d. Indirect actions are not provided for under international law
(paragraphs 51 and 52 above).

e. “The Tribunal abrogated the normative content of the standard
requiring the investment be accorded fair and equitable
treatment, by failing to clarify its meaning” (paragraphs 53
through 63).

1d. 1381

59

214.

215.

216.

217.

218.

219.

With respect to the alleged “contradictions,” “inconsistencies,” and “unreasonable
statements” in the Award the Committee points out once again that Articles 49
and 50 of the ICSID Convention provide parties with the opportunity to request
that the Tribunal address omissions, rectify material errors, and clarify the
interpretation of an award. Argentina could make use of those mechanisms if, in
fact, there were grounds to do so. Obviously, they cannot be heard by this
Committee because pursuant to Article 52 of the ICSID Convention they are not

grounds for annulment.

The Committee is also unable to make reference to the remaining arguments
supporting the application for annulment set forth in paragraph 211(b) through (e)
above, as none of them constitutes grounds for annulment, pursuant to Article 52
of the ICSID Convention.

For the above reasons the Committee will dismiss completely Argentina’s
application for annulment of the Award.

The Committee will decide on the payment of costs of this annulment proceeding
and render its final decision in the following section.

. COSTS

Pursuant to Article 52(4) of the ICSID Convention, Chapter VI of the Convention
(Articles 59 through 61) shall apply mutatis mutandis to the proceedings before
this Committee.

Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention states:

“In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as
the parties otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the
parties in connection with the proceedings, and shall decide how
and by whom those expenses, the fees and expenses of the
members of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities
of the Centre shall be paid.”

60

220.

221.

222.

As reflected in paragraph 4 of the April 23, 2012 minutes of the First Session, the
Parties did not agree on a method for apportionment of costs different from that
envisaged in Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention.

Although the Argentine Republic’s Application is being rejected in its entirety, the
Committee does not consider the Application frivolous. Accordingly, exercising its
discretion under Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention, the Committee decides
the following: (a) the Applicant shall bear the costs of the proceeding, comprising
all of the fees and expenses of the Committee Members, and the costs of using
the ICSID facilities; and (b) each party shall bear its own legal costs and
expenses incurred with respect to this annulment proceeding.

. DECISION

For the reasons set forth above, the Committee unanimously decides:

To dismiss in its entirety the Application for Annulment of the Award submitted by
the Argentine Republic.

To declare the stay of enforcement automatically terminated, in accordance with
ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(3).

That each party shall bear its own legal costs and expenses incurred with respect
to this annulment proceeding.

That the Applicant Argentine Republic shall bear the costs of the proceeding,
comprising the fees and expenses of the Committee Members, and the costs of
using the ICSID facilities.

61

[Signed] [Signed]

Teresa Cheng Eduardo Zuleta
Member of the ad hoc Committee Member of the ad hoc Committee
[January 10, 2014] [January 14, 2014]
[Signed]

Rodrigo Oreamuno
President of the ad hoc Committee
[January 16, 2014]

62

