International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

Washington, D.C.

Impregilo S.p.A.

Argentine Republic

(ICSID Case No. ARB/07/17)

 

Award

 

Members of the Tribunal
Judge Hans Danelius, President
Judge Charles N. Brower, Arbitrator

Professor Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal:

Mr. Gonzalo Flores

Representing Impregilo S.p.A.: Representing the Argentine Republic:
Mr. R. Doak Bishop Dra. Angelina Maria Esther Abbona
Mr. Craig S. Miles Procuradora del Tesoro de la Nacién
Mr. Roberto Aguirre Luzi Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Ms. Silvia Marchilli Posadas 1641

Mr. David Weiss Buenos Aires, Argentina

Mr. Joost Pauwelyn

King & Spalding LLP

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: June 21, 2011

Table of Contents

I. PROCEDURAL HISTORY... wen
II. THE INVESTMENT PROTECTION: TREATY.
II. FACTUAL BACKGROUND.
IV. ISSUES OF JURISDICTION
A. First objection: Impregilo has not complied with the requirements set. ‘forth in
Article 8 of the Argentina-Italy BIT... 7 16-
B. Second objection: ICSID lacks the ju isdiction and the Tribunal lacks the
competence to hear indirect and derivative claims filed by shareholders...... - 28 -
C. Third objection: The claims address contractual matters over which the
Tribunal has no jurisdi
‘V. MERITS OF THE CASE.......
A. Re for relief:
B. The Parties’ posi
C. The Arbitral Tribunal’s reasoning .
(i) The Concession Contract
(ii) Impregilo’s Investment ..
(iii) AGBA’s performance and the termination of the Con

  
 
 
  
 
  

 

 

 

ion Contract. -

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

52-
(iv) Expropriation -63-
(v) Fair and equitable treatment -67-
(vi) Further allegations -74-
(vii) State of necessity.......... cesteeeeeseeseeeeees deteeeseseteestteeseteeesteeteeeee DO
(viii) Comp ion -80-
(ix) Interest - 84-
(x) Costs and expenses -85-
VI. THE AWARD - 86 -

 

I. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

1. On July 25, 2007, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered a Request for
arbitration submitted by Impregilo S.p.A., a company incorporated in Italy, against
the Argentine Republic. The dispute concerns a concession of water and sewage
services under a Concession Contract (hereinafter called the “Concession Contract”)
concluded on December 7, 1999 by Aguas del Gran Buenos Aires (“AGBA”), an
Argentine company in which Impregilo had a dominating interest, and the Province of
Buenos Aires, and terminated on July 11, 2006 by the Province.

  

2. On August 28, 2007, the Claimant appointed Judge Charles N. Brower, a U.S.
national, as arbitrator. On October 23, 2007, the Respondent appointed Professor
Brigitte Stern, a French national, as arbitrator. On May 22, 2008, the Chairman of the
ICSID Administrative Council appointed Judge Hans Danelius, a Swedish national, as
President of the Tribunal.

3. By letter of May 27, 2008, the Parties were notified by the Centre that, in
accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 6(1), the Tribunal was deemed to have been
constituted and the proceeding to have begun on that date. The Parties were also
notified that Mr. Gonzalo Flores, Senior Counsel, ICSID, would serve as Secretary of
the Tribunal. He was subsequently succeeded in this capacity by Dr. Sergio Puig de la
Parra, Counsel, ICSID. Following Dr. Puig de la Parra’s departure from the ICSID
Secretariat, Mr. Flores was reappointed as Secretary of the Tribunal.

4. A First Session of the Tribunal and the Parties was held via telephone conference
call on July 16, 2008. During the Session the Tribunal and the Parties discussed a
number of procedural matters, including the schedule for the written pleadings.
Alternative timetables were agreed depending on whether or not the Argentine
Republic would raise jurisdictional objections. It was also agreed that, even if such
objections were raised, there would be no separate Award or Decision on the
jurisdictional matters.

5. On October 16, 2008, the Claimant, in accordance with the agreed schedule, filed
its Memorial on the Merits in which the Claimant alleged that the Respondent had
violated the Agreement between Italy and the Argentine Republic for the Promotion
and Protection of Investments (the “Argentina-Italy BIT”) and international law with
respect to the Claimant’s investments and in which the Claimant also requested
compensation for damages. On January 16, 2009, the Respondent submitted a
Memorial containing objections to the jurisdiction of the Centre and to the
competence of the Tribunal. On March 16, 2009, the Claimant submitted a Counter-
Memorial on jurisdiction.

6. On May 4-6, 2009, the Tribunal held a hearing at the seat of the Centre in
Washington, D.C. on the jurisdictional issues.

7. On August 18, 2009, the Respondent filed a Counter-Memorial on the Merits. A
Reply on the Merits was submitted by the Claimant on November 2, 2009 and a
Rejoinder on the Merits by the Respondent on January 22, 2010.

8. On March 9-18, 2010, the Tribunal held a hearing on the merits in Paris. The
following people attended the hearing on behalf of Claimant: Mr. R. Doak Bishop,
Mr. Craig S. Miles, Mr. Roberto Aguirre Luzi, Prof. Joost Paulwelyn, Ms. Silvia
Marchili, Mr. David Weiss, Mr. Louis Alexis Bret, Mr. Esteban Sanchez and
Ms. Carol D. Tamez of the law firm of King & Spalding LLP, and Mr. Eduardo
Albarracin of Impregilo S.p.A. The following people attended the hearing on behalf
of Respondent: Mr. Adolfo Gustavo Scrinzi, Mr. Gabriel Bottini, Mr. Ignacio Pérez
Cortés, Mr. Ignacio Torterola, Ms. Alejandra Mackluf, Mr. Javier Pargament,
Ms. Soledad Romero Caporale, Ms. Maria Alejandra Etchegorry, Mr. Nicolas Grosse,
Mr. Patricio Arnedo Barreiro and Ms. Cristina Otegui, of Argentina’s Procuracion del
Tesoro de la Nacion.

9. On April 26, 2010, each Party submitted a chronological summary of the main
documents in the case.

10. Cost claims were submitted by the Parties on May 10 and 11, 2010.

11. A further submission was made by the Claimant on October 11, 2010 to which the
Respondent replied on November 19, 2010. The proceedings were closed, in
accordance with Rule 38(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, on April 15, 2011.

II. THE INVESTMENT PROTECTION TREATY

12. The Argentina-Italy BIT was signed on May 22, 1990 and entered into force on
October 14, 1993. It is drafted in Spanish and Italian and contains, inter alia, the
following provisions (in translation into English):

“ARTICLE 1

Definitions

For the purposes of this Agreement:

1."Investment” means, in accordance with the host country laws and irrespective of the selected
legal form or any other related laws, any kind of asset invested or reinvested by an individual or
a legal entity of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other Party, in conformity with the
laws and regulations of the latter.

Within this general framework, it includes, in particular though not exclusively:

b) shares of stock, interests or any other form of participation, including minority or indirect
interest, in a company established in the territory of each Contracting Party;

ARTICLE 2
Promotion and Protection of Investments

1. Each Contracting Party shall promote investments in its territory by investors of the other
Contracting Party and shall accept such investments in accordance with its laws.

2. Investments made by investors of each Contracting Party shall at all times be accorded fair
and equitable treatment. Neither Party shall impair by arbitrary or discriminatory measures the
management, maintenance, enjoyment, transformation, cessation or disposal of investments
made in its territory by the other Contracting Party’s investors.

ARTICLE 3
National Treatment and Most-Favored Nation Provisions

1. Each Contracting Party shall, within its own territory, accord to investments made by
investors of the other Contracting Party, to the income and activities related to such investments
and to all other matters regulated by this Agreement, a treatment that is no less favorable than
that accorded to its own investors or investors from third-party countries.

2. The provisions set forth in paragraph 1 of this Article shall not apply to advantages and
privileges accorded by either Contracting Party to any third country by virtue of that Party’s
binding obligations that derive from its membership in a customs or economic union, common
market, or free trade area, or as a result of regional or subregional agreements, multilateral
international agreements or double taxation agreements, or any other tax-related arrangements
or agreements to facilitate cross border trade.

ARTICLE 4
Damages

Investors of one Contracting Party whose investments suffer losses in the territory of the other
Party owing to war or other armed conflict, a state of national emergency, or other similar
political economic events shall be accorded, by such other Party in whose territory the
investment was made, treatment no less favorable than that accorded to its own nationals or
legal entities or to investors of any third country as regards damages.

ARTICLE 5
Nationalization or Expropriation

1. (a) Neither Contracting Party may adopt any measure that restricts, whether for a definite or
indefinite period of time, the right to property, possession, control or enjoyment in relation to
the investments made by investors of the other Contracting Party, except upon specific
provisions laid down by law, judgments, or decisions rendered by a competent court and other
general non-discriminatory provisions intended to regulate economic activities.

(b) Investments by investors of one of the Contracting Parties shall not be nationalized,
expropriated, seized or otherwise appropriated, either directly or indirectly, through measures
having an equivalent effect in the territory of the other Party, unless the following conditions are
complied with:

- the measures are for a public purpose, of national interest or security;

- they are taken in accordance with due process of law;

- they are non-discriminatory or contrary to the commitments undertaken;

- they are accompanied by provisions for the payment of prompt, adequate and effective
compensation.

(c) The compensation shall be equivalent to the actual market value of the investment
immediately before the expropriation or nationalization decision was announced or became
public and shall be determined in accordance with internationally accepted technical standards.
Where the market value cannot be readily ascertained, the compensation shall be determined
based on a fair assessment of the constituent and distinctive elements of the company as well as
the components and results of the business activities involved.

The compensation shall include interest accrued until the date of payment at a normal
commercial rate of interest. In the event an agreement is not reached between the investor and
the Contracting Party that has taken such measure, the compensation shall be determined in
accordance with the dispute settlement procedures set out in Article 8 hereof. Once it is

-4-

determined, the compensation shall be paid without delay in the currency in which the
investment was made or in a freely convertible currency accepted by the investor, and its
repatriation shall be authorized.

2. The provisions laid out in paragraph 1 hereof shall also apply to the returns from an
investment as well as, in the event of liquidation, the proceeds thereof.

Article 8
Settlement of Disputes between Investors and Contracting Parties

1. Any dispute regarding an investment between an investor of one of the Contracting Parties
and the other Party, arising out of or relating to this Agreement, shall, to the extent possible, be
settled through friendly consultation between the parties to the dispute.

2. If the dispute cannot be settled amicably, it may be submitted to the competent judicial or
administrative courts of the Party in whose territory the investment is made.

3. Where, after eighteen months from the date of notice of commencement of proceedings
before the courts mentioned in paragraph 2 above, the dispute between an investor and one of
the Contracting Parties has not been resolved, it may be referred to international arbitration.

4, From the time arbitration proceedings are commenced, each party to the dispute shall take
any such measures as may be necessary to dismiss any pending court proceedings.

5. Where the dispute is submitted to international arbitration, the investor may choose to refer
the dispute either to:

a) The International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) established under
the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other
States, opened for signature in Washington on March 18, 1985, provided that each Party to this
Agreement is a signatory State to such Convention. Where such condition is not met, each
Contracting Party hereby consents to submit the dispute to arbitration in accordance with the
ICSID Additional Facility Rules regarding conciliation and arbitration, or

b) An ad hoc arbitration tribunal is established for each particular case. The arbitration shall be
conducted in accordance with the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) contained in Resolution No. 31/98 adopted by the
United Nations General Assembly on December 15, 1976. The panel shall consist of three
arbitrators. If the arbitrators are not nationals of the Contracting Parties, they shall be nationals
of States having diplomatic relations with them.

6. Neither Contracting Party shall, at any stage of the arbitral proceedings or the enforcement of
the arbitral award, assert, as a defense, counterclaim, right of set-off or otherwise, that the
investor concerned has received, pursuant to an insurance policy or guarantee contract as
indicated in Article 7 hereof, indemnification or compensation for all or part of any alleged loss.

 

7. The arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute in accordance with the laws of the Contracting
Party involved in the dispute — including its rules on conflict of laws -, the provisions of this
Agreement, the terms of any possible specific agreement concluded in relation to the investment
as well as with the applicable principles of international law.

8. The arbitral award shall be final and binding on the parties to the dispute. Each Party
undertakes to comply with any such award in accordance with its domestic laws and the relevant
international conventions in force for both Contracting Parties.

9. The Contracting Parties shall refrain from pursuing, through diplomatic channels, any matter
related to any pending court proceedings or the arbitration until the relevant proceedings have

-5-

been concluded, unless either party to the dispute has failed to comply with the arbitral award or
court decision, in accordance with the terms of compliance set forth in such award or decision.

ARTICLE 10
Application of other Rules

1. Where a particular matter is governed by this Agreement as well as by another International
Agreement between both Contracting Parties or by International Law, such provisions or rules
shall, to the extent they are more favorable, prevail over this Agreement.

2. If, under any law, regulation, provision, or specific contract, either Contracting Party has
adopted rules entitling investors of the other Contracting Party to a more favorable treatment
than that provided for by this Agreement, such rules shall prevail over the provisions of this
Agreement.”

III. FACTUAL BACKGROUND

13. In the 1990s, water and sewerage services in the Province of Buenos Aires were
provided by the public utility Administracion General de Obras Sanitarias de la
Provincia de Buenos Aires (“AGOSBA”). In 1996, the Province decided to privatize
these services and adopted for this purpose Law No. 11,820 (the “Regulatory
Framework”) and set up as regulator the Organismo Regulador de Aguas
Bonaerense (““ORAB”). It also organized a bidding process for the concessions to be
issued for the various parts of the Province.

 

14. Impregilo formed a consortium with other international companies (Sideco
Americana S.A. and Aguas de Bilbao Bizkaia), and, by Provincial Decree No.
2907/99 of October 18, 1999, was awarded one of the concession areas into which
the Province’s territory had been divided. Pursuant to the bidding rules, Impregilo
and its partners incorporated and funded AGBA, an Argentine company. On
December 7, 1999, the Province and AGBA executed the Concession Contract to
provide water and sewerage services in an area covering seven municipalities.

 

 

 

15. The Concession Contract contained, inter alia, the following clauses (in
translation into English):

“1.4 PURPOSE OF THE CONVENTION

The purpose of the Concession is to perform, within the Concession Area, the following
activities: collection, treatment, transportation, distribution and commercialization of Drinking
Water, collection, treatment, disposal and potential reuse or commercialization of Sewage,
including Industrial Sewage, pursuant to the provisions set forth in Article 3.14. In all cases, the
Service shall include maintenance, project design, construction, rehabilitation and expansion of
all works required for service provision.

1.6 EXCLUSIVE RIGHTS. NON INTERCONNECTED SYSTEMS WITHIN THE
CONCESSION AREA

The Concessionaire shall enjoy an exclusive right to provide the Service within the Concession
Area, subject to the Regulatory Framework and the provisions of Article 5.6 and the remaining
provisions hereof.

1.7 TERM

The term of the Concession shall be thirty (30) years from Takeover.

1.8 CONDITIONS OF THE CONCESSION

The Concession is granted in consideration of the payment by the Concessionaire of an initial
canon of US$ 1,260,000 (one million two hundred and sixty thousand United States Dollars).
Such amount was effectively paid by the Concessionaire to the Province at the time of execution
of the Contract, and is equal to the price offered by the Successful Bidder in the Bidding Process
for the Concession Area. Without prejudice to that, the Concessionaire undertakes to make all
the investments required to implement the POES,' as described in Annex F, and guarantee the
adequate protection of the Service subject to the terms of the Contract, provided that the tariff
adjustments established in Annex N shall be conditioned upon the fulfillment of such
undertaking.

1.9 REGULATORY AGENCY

The Concessionaire, the Service and any other aspect related to the performance of the Contract
shall be subject to the control and regulation of the Regulatory Agency.

1.10 APPLICABLE LAWS

The Concession shall be governed by the laws and regulations listed below, in the following
order of prevalence:

1.10.1 The Regulatory Framework

1.10.2 The Terms of Reference

1.10.3 The Bid

1.10.4 The Contract and the Decree approving such Contract

1.10.5 The rules and regulations issued by the Regulatory Agency. Any regulations currently
applicable to the Service shall continue to apply, except where they are in conflict with the rest
of the rules and regulations listed above.

3.2 RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF THE CONCESSIONAIRE

In connection with Service provision, the Concessionaire shall have the rights and duties
established in the Regulatory Framework, this Contract and any regulations established from
time to time by the Regulatory Agency. Especially, the Concessionaire shall perform all tasks
related to Service provision required under the applicable laws to guarantee effective supply to
Users, the protection of public health and the rational use of resources. The Service shall be
supplied subject to the principles of continuity, regularity, quality and generality.

' The POES (Service Oj ion and ion Program) the quantitative and qi
goals to be attained by the Concessionaire and includes the Five-Year Plans pursuant to Chapter 5 and
in Annex F.

-7-

3.3 SERVICE COVERAGE

The Drinking Water Supply through Connections to the Mains shall be expanded to guarantee
availability to all persons residing in urban areas within the Concession Area, pursuant to the
POES and Five-Year Plans. The Concessionaire must efficiently meet the demand for Drinking
Water, by providing a Service compliant with the quality standards established in the
Regulatory Framework and the Contract.

In turn, the Sewage Service through Connections to the Mains shall be expanded to all urban
population to fulfill the goals established in the POES and Five-Year Plans. The Concessionaire
must ensure the adequate capacity of the facilities allocated to the collection and transportation
of liquid waste so as to effectively meet Service demand and guarantee the proper operation of
the systems.

The areas eligible as urban areas shall be determined pursuant to Law 8912.
3.4 DUTY TO PROVIDE THE SERVICE

The Concessionaire shall maintain and renew all civil and electromechanical facilities and shall
expand, renew and/or recondition the external networks for the distribution of Drinking Water
and Sewage in such a way as to guarantee regular Service supply to all premises within the
Service Area and Expansion Area, pursuant to the provisions of the POES and Five-Year Plans.

3.5 DUTY TO CONNECT AND PAY THE SERVICE

Owners, owners’ associations created pursuant to Law 13,512, persons in possession of or using
real property located in urban areas within the Service Area shall be under a duty to connect to
the network by paying the applicable fee for Connection to the Mains to the Concessionaire.
Moreover, they shall be under a duty to connect and install, at their own cost and expense,
residential Water and Sewage services and maintain said facilities in good condition.

In turn, owners, owners’ associations, usufruct holders, and persons in possession or use of real
property located in an area serviced by a Drinking Water distribution main or a Sewage main
shall be under a duty to pay the Service pursuant to the applicable Tariff Regime even if the
property has no connection to external Service networks. Nonetheless, this provision shall not
apply to vacant properties if there has been a request for non-connection or Service
disconnection, which shall be subject to the charges established in the Tariff Regime for those
special cases.

5 SERVICE EXPANSION AND OPTIMIZATION PROGRAM (POES)
5.1 CONCEPT

The POES to be performed by the Concessionaire during the Concession is included in Annex F
and covers Service expansion, Service goals and action plans, the works required to attain
quantitative, qualitative and Service efficiency goals and commitments, and to comply with the
requirements regarding geographic coverage to be fulfilled and performed by the
Concessionaire pursuant to the terms established therein, in accordance with the provisions set
forth in the Regulatory Framework and the Contract.

The POES consists of six (6) consecutive Five-Year Plans, pursuant to Article 5.3. Moreover, it

includes updates, adjustments, and changes incorporated through the POES progress annual
report established in Article 6.5 upon approval by the Regulatory Agency.

-8-

Failure to comply with the POES shall be considered a serious fault, pursuant to Article
13.2.5.5.

5.2 PURPOSE

The purpose of the POES is to promote expansion in the Concession Area and to guarantee
maintenance and improvement of the systems required for Service provision, enabling efficient
administration and operation in such a way as to fulfill Service Standards and the obligations
established in the Regulatory Framework and the Contract.

5.3 FIVE-YEAR PLANS

For each of the five-year periods covered by the term of the POES, the Concessionaire shall
present to the Regulatory Agency draft Five-Year Plans explaining, adjusting and providing the
necessary updates to fulfill the coverage goals and Service goals established in the POES, with
indication of the districts where the POES is to be executed.

The project for the first Five-Year Plan shall be submitted within three (3) months since
Contract execution. The draft for each subsequent Five-Year Plan must be presented at least one
year in advance of the end date of the applicable five-year period. The Regulatory Agency must
request any changes and clarification deemed necessary. Upon approval of the draft presented
by the Concessionaire, it shall become a Five-Year Plan and shall become an integral part of the
POES, and its fulfillment shall be mandatory. The drafts submitted by the Concessionaire shall
be certified by Auditors.

12.1 TARIFF REGIME

The Tariff Regime applicable to the Service provision is attached hereto as Annex N.

12.1.1 TARIFFS

The calculation of applicable tariffs pursuant to Article 28.11 of Law 11,820 shall be based on
the general principle that tariffs shall cover all operating expenses, maintenance expenses and
service and provide a return on the C subject

to efficient management and operation by the Concessionaire and strict compliance with the
applicable service quality and expansion goals.

12.2 TARIFFS AND PRICES

Tariffs and prices applied to Service provision after Takeover arise from the application of the
provisions established in the Tariff Regime.

12.3 ADJUSTMENT OF TARIFFS AND PRICES
12.3.1 GENERAL PRINCIPLES
Without prejudice to the provisions established in the Tariff Regime, Service tariffs and prices

shall remain in force throughout the term of the Concession unless modified pursuant to the
review procedures established in this section.

12.3.4 ORDINARY FIVE-YEAR REVIEWS.

Ordinary reviews shall be the reviews carried out every five years due to changes in the goals
established in the POES based on the Five-Year Plan applicable to the second five-year term.

12.3.5 EXTRAORDINARY REVIEWS DUE TO CHANGES IN COST INDICES.
12.3.5.1 Concept

These are extraordinary reviews that may be carried out when the Concessionaire or the
Regulatory Agency claims an increase in the cost indices associated to the Concession in excess
of three percent (3%) in absolute value terms, pursuant to the provisions established in Article
23.3.5.2.

The Concessionaire cannot request an extraordinary review due to modifications in cost indices
until twelve (12) months have elapsed since the last review; the foregoing notwithstanding, the

accumulated change in cost indices shall be taken into consideration at the time of calculating
the applicable tariff review.

12.4 CHANGES TO THE TARIFF REGIME
12.4.1 General Principles

The Tariff Regime may be modified once the third year of the Concession has concluded.

12.4.2 Grounds for Adjustment at the Request of the Concessionaire

The Tariff Regime may only be modified at the request of the Concessionaire if the
Concessionaire proves that:

a) it has been impossible to balance service supply and demand due to reasons attributable to the
current Tariff Regime in spite of taking all necessary steps for that purpose and having operated
efficiently,

b) the Tariff Regime in force does not promote rational use of the assets and resources applied
to Service provision or is unsuited to attain the sanitary goals directly related to Service
provision,

c) a modification of the Tariff regime in force will result in a significant reduction of operating
expenses with the resulting benefits to Users.

13, DUTIES AND SANCTIONS

13.1 DUTIES OF THE CONCESSIONAIRE

The Concessionaire assumes the responsibility for the Concession and all legal, technical,
economic and financial risks associated thereto, and shall be liable to the Province, Users and
third parties for the fulfillment of the duties and requirements necessary to provide the Service
as from Takeover. Under no circumstances will the Province, the granting authority, the

Regulatory Agency or OSBA be liable to Users or third parties in connection with the duties
assumed by the Concessionaire.

? The OSBA is equivalent to the AGOSBA.

-10-

13.2 SANCTIONS
Without prejudice to the provisions established in Chapter 14, if the Concessionaire fails to

fulfill its duties it shall be subject to the following sanctions: warning, fine and provisional state
takeover pursuant to the following terms and conditions.

13.2.5.5 Delays in the POES
‘Any delay in fulfilling the POES shall be sanctioned pursuant to the provisions below:

a) A fine in the amount of one hundred thousand US Dollars (US$ 100,000) shall be applied for
non-essential delays in fulfilling an approved Service goal or completing a work committed - - -
b) A fine in the amount of one million US Dollars (US$ 1,000,000) - - - shall be applied for
essential delays in fulfilling an approved Service goal or completing a work committed. - - -

14 TERMINATION OF THE CONCESSION
14.1 GROUNDS FOR TERMINATION
The Concession shall terminate upon expiration of the term, upon the occurrence of an act of

God or force majeure, due to the Concessionaire’s or the Granting Authority’s fault, and
repossession of the Service by the Granting Authority.

14.1.3 TERMINATION DUE TO THE CONCESSIONAIRE’S FAULT

The Granting Authority may terminate the Contract due to the Concessionaire’s fault on the
following grounds:

a) Serious with legal, or regulatory p licabl
Service.

to the

b) Repeated and unjustified delays in fulfilling the coverage goals set forth in the POES.

h) Repeated violation of the User regulations provided for in Article 13-II of the Regulatory
Framework.

i) Repeatedly withholding or concealing information from the Regulatory Agency.

k) Failure to furnish, renew or refurnish the Contract guaranty as provided for in Article 11.1,
and the Operator guaranty provided for in Article 11.2.

If any non-compliance or violation can be cured, the Regulatory Agency shall demand that the
Concessionaire correct its actions, cure the breach in any suitable way and submit the relevant
response, in the period fixed according to the circumstances of the situation, the nature of the
violation and in view of the public interest, which shall never be shorter than thirty (30) days.
Upon expiration of the period accorded to the Concessionaire, the Regulatory Agency shall give

-ll-

notice to the Granting Authority of the subsistence of the non-compliance or breach if it has
been duly proved, and the Granting Authority may terminate the Contract due to the
Concessionaire’s fault.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Regulatory Authority shall take part in the termination
proceedings, and shall submit its justified conclusions to the Granting Authority.

16.7 JURISDICTION

Any dispute arising between the Granting Authority and the Concessionaire related to the
interpretation and performance of the Contract shall be resolved by the administrative courts of
competent jurisdiction in and for the city of La Plata, and such parties waive any other
applicable jurisdiction or venue.”

16. Annex F to the Concession Contract contains details about the Service Expansion
and Optimization Program (the “POES”) mentioned in Article 5 of the Concession
Contract.

 

17. Article 1 of Annex F, which concerns “Managements Indexes”, specifies the goals
related to Service quality and business management permitting values to be
accomplished within the time frames in Table | in the Annex — minimum values for
micro-metering efficiency (from 75% in year 3 to 98% in year 30), maximum values
for water not accounted for (from 40% in year 3 to 25% in year 30) and minimum
values for Service continuity (from 96% in year 3 to 100% in year 30).

18. Article 2 of the Annex indicates goals for the Service expansion in respect of
drinking water and sewerage (minimum number of new connections per year), the
installation of individual metering devices for water and the revamping and/or
reconditioning of pipes.

19. Annex N concerns the Tariff System applicable to the Concessionaire’s provision
of the Service. It defines in Article 2 the persons obliged to pay for the Service and in
Article 4 the tariffs applicable to Non-metered and Metered Service. Article 10 deals
with the work fees to be paid by the users when the public service for the drinking
water supply and sewage services is connected. Article 19 provides that the
Concessionaire shall have the right to bill and collect all of the Services it provides.
Article 29 deals with Service interruption in cases where users are late in paying their
bills. Article 20 deals with Billing Currency and provides as follows:

   

“Tariffs are stated in US Dollars; however, users shall receive bills stated in pesos. The
applicable conversion shall be performed on the basis of the 1 Dollar = | Peso parity established
in the Convertibility Law or any other exchange rate from time to time established by law to
replace such parity in force at bill cut-off date.”

 

20. On January 3, 2000, AGBA took possession of the concession, and on March 21,
2000, AGBA presented its first Five-Year Plan to ORAB. On July 21, 2000, ORAB
requested amendments to the Five-Year Plan, and on November 8, 2000, AGBA
acquiesced by presenting a revised Five-Year Plan. The revised Plan was approved by
ORAB on January 31, 2001.

-12-

21. In a letter of May 17, 2001 to the Minister of Public Works and Services of the
Province of Buenos Aires, AGBA stated that, despite AGBA’s efforts, there were
considerable difficulties in receiving payment for its services from customers. The
non-collection rates within the Concession Area had reached spectral figures of
around 60%, and this had affected AGBA’s capacity to make the investments required
under the expansion program. Consequently, AGBA was facing a significant
alteration of the economic and financial equilibrium of the concession and was
experiencing considerable difficulties in obtaining bank loans. As a result, it had also
been impossible to achieve the goals of the current Five-Year Plan. By way of
conclusion, AGBA requested that a work commission be created in order to jointly
analyze appropriate solutions and alternatives and that, as a provisional measure, the
expansion goals be temporarily suspended until the said commission had made a
decision.

 

22. On May 30, 2001, the Undersecretary of Public Services of the Province of
Buenos Aires replied that the issue of non-collection rates was a business risk which
AGBA had to bear in accordance with the terms of the Concession Contract.
Nevertheless, the Ministry agreed to set up a working commission whose work could
lead to contractual modifications that would harmonize the objectives of the
Regulatory Framework and the Concession Contract with the interests of the users in
the relevant area.

  

  

23. Ina letter of July 17, 2001, AGBA, with reference to the severe economic crisis in
Argentina, asked ORAB to suspend temporarily the execution of the POES. The
request was repeated in a letter of August 15, 2001.

24. On August 7, 2001, ORAB requested that AGBA should refrain in certain areas
from billing work charges on the basis of Article 10 of Annex N to the Concession
Contract.

25. On August 27, 2001, ORAB’s Technical Department found that AGBA’s
performance during the first year of the concession had shown an acceptable degree
of compliance with the POES. The Technical Department also supported the request
for a suspension of the POES in view of the economic hardship facing the province
and the country. A favorable opinion was also expressed by ORAB’s Economic
Regulation Department on November 23, 2001 and by ORAB’s Law and Resolution
Department on December 3, 2001.

26. In a letter of September 13, 2001, AGBA asked the Governor of the Province of
Buenos Aires to intervene and arrange a meeting to discuss the serious situation that
had arisen in regard to the implementation of the Concession Contract. On December
27, 2001, AGBA asked the Province Governor to arrange immediately bilateral
negotiations in order to decide on the most suitable mechanisms to restore the
equilibrium of the economic and financial equation of the Concession Contract, which
had been disrupted by various events.

 

27. In an internal letter of October 10, 2001, ORAB’s Technical Department noted
that, despite AGBA’s efforts, neither the goals set forth in the Concession Contract
nor those specified in the POES had been attained. In view hereof, ORAB decided, on

-13-

October 17, 2001, not to allow AGBA to increase tariffs according to a coefficient
indicated in Annex N to the Concession Contract.

28. On January 6, 2002, the Federal Argentine Government enacted Law No. 25,561
on Public Emergency and Exchange Regime Reform in which utilities contr: were
“pesified” at parity level and tariffs were frozen. The Government was also authorized
to renegotiate public utilities contracts.

   

29. In a letter of January 9, 2002 to the Province Governor, AGBA pointed out that
the latest economic and social developments had further worsened AGBA’s situation.
AGBA requested a meeting at which AGBA could apprise the Governor of the many
factors that were putting the concession on the brink of collapse.

 

30. On January 11, 2002, ORAB “pesified” AGBA’s tariffs at parity rate. On January
24, 2002, AGBA demanded the reversal of this decision as being contrary not only to
the Concession Contract but also to the law and the Argentine Constitution.

31. On February 18, 2002, ORAB issued Resolution No. 14/02 which prevented
AGBA from billing work charges.

32. On February 19, 2002, AGBA requested the renegotiation of the Concession
Contract. The request was repeated in a letter of April 17, 2002 to the Province
Governor.

 

33. On February 28, 2002, Law No. 12,858 was enacted by the Province. According
to this law, the Executive was authorized to create a New Regulatory Framework for
water services.

34. By Decree 517/02 of March 13, 2002, the Province approved the statutes of the
company Aguas Bonaerenses S.A. (“ABSA”), which was to take over a concession
for other areas in the Province of Buenos Aires, which had until then been held by the
company Azurix.

  

35. By Decree No. 1175/02 of May 13, 2002, the Province set up a Special
Commission for the Evaluation of the Impact of the Crisis on the Tariffs and
Contracts of Public Service. The task of the Special Com: ion was to examine the
problems in the area of public utilities and to propose solutions.

  

 

36. In a letter of June 11, 2002 to ORAB, AGBA referred to changes in tax laws
which had created further difficulties for AGBA and asked for a review of the
Concession Contract. The need for a renegotiation of the Concession Contract was
further explained in AGBA’s letter of June 28, 2002 to the Province Governor.

37. On July 23, 2002, the Undersecretary of Public Services of the Province, in a
letter to ORAB, pointed out that AGBA had undertaken by contract to fulfill the
obligations in the POES and obtain itself the necessary funds for this purpose. The
Undersecretary did not find it reasonable to make adjustments in favor of AGBA as
this would have negative effects for the customers whose economic interests required
protection.

-14-

38. In a letter of August 14, 2002 to the Undersecretary, AGBA referred to a meeting
in his office that had taken place on August 2, 2002, and again emphasized the need
for contract renegotiation. AGBA repeated its request for renegotiation in letters of
September 30 and October, 24, 2002 to the Province Governor, and also in a letter of
October 8, 2002 to the President of the Commission for the Evaluation of the Impact
of the Crisis on the Tariffs and Contracts of Public Service as well as in a letter of
October 30, 2002 to ORAB.

39. On August 27, 2002, ORAB, in Resolution No. 56/02, suspended AGBA’s right
to interrupt water service to customers who had not paid their bills.

40. In a report of December 2, 2002 to the President of ORAB, the Technical
Department of ORAB found that AGBA had essentially satisfied the goals established
for the first concession year 2000. In Resolution No. 69/02 of December 5, 2002,
ORAB resolved that AGBA had met the service expansion and quality goals of the
first year of the concession (year 2000), as provided in Annex F to the Concession
Contract and incorporated into the first Five-Year Plan which was an integral part of
the POES.

41. On December 30, 2002, in Resolution No. 77/02, ORAB also granted AGBA’s
request for a suspension of the POES obligations in the second concession year 2002
with the effect that measures which had not been accomplished during that year
should not lead to penalties according to Article 13.2.5.5 of the Concession Contract.

42. On June 9, 2003, the Province issued Decree No. 878/03 which contained a New
Regulatory Framework for the Provision of the Drinking Water and Wastewater
Public Services in the Province. According to the Decree, the Control Agency would
be the Organismo de Control del Agua de Buenos Aires (“OCABA”). On July 17,
2003, AGBA challenged the Decree. AGBA also repeatedly —- on August 27,
September 22 and December 2, 2003 and on January 13, 2004 — asked for
renegotiation of the Concession Contract. On June 30, 2004, the Province Governor
rejected AGBA’s request for revocation of the Decree issuing the New Regulatory
Framework.

43. On April 26, 2005, the Province adopted Decree No. 757/05 in which an
Agreement with ABSA was approved. ABSA was permitted to make gradual
increases of tariffs and was granted certain subsidies. In its letter of July 15, 2005 to
the competent Minister and Undersecretary, AGBA argued that AGBA was
discriminated against in comparison with ABSA and demanded similar treatment.

44. A request by AGBA to be allowed to make tariff increases was rejected in a letter
from the Undersecretary of Public Services on August 25, 2005.

45. On March 10, 2006, Resolution No. 84/06 was adopted by which the Ministry of
Public Services ordered OCABA to gather information about AGBA’s performance
as concession holder. OCABA issued its report on April 21, 2006 in which it
concluded that AGBA had violated in several ways its obligations under the
Concession Contract and the POES.

-15-

46. In a letter of June 14, 2006 to the Minister and the Undersecretary of Public
Services and also to the President of ORAB, AGBA accused the Province of violating
its obligations under the Concession Contract and declared that, unless this was
corrected within 45 days, AGBA would find it necessary to rescind the Concession
Contract.

47. On July 10, 2006, OCABA, in Resolution No. 36/06, fined AGBA for having
failed to handle certain complaints in a timely fashion.

48. Finally, on July 11, 2006, the Province Governor, by Decree No. 1666/06,
terminated the Concession Agreement due to AGBA’s fault pursuant to Article 14.1.3
(a), (b), (h), (i) and (k) of the Concession Contract. By Decree No. 1677/06, the
Province Governor, on July 13, 2006, transferred AGBA’s water and sewage service
concession to ABSA.

IV. ISSUES OF JURISDICTION

49. The Argentine Republic requests the Arbitral Tribunal to issue an award finding
under ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(4) the lack of jurisdiction of ICSID and the lack of
competence of the Tribunal to hear the case:

(a) the lack of jurisdiction of ICSID and the lack of competence of the Tribunal
since Impregilo failed to meet the requirements established in Article 8 of the
Argentina-Italy BIT;

(b) in the alternative, the lack of jurisdiction of ICSID and the lack of

competence of the Tribunal since Impregilo’s claim is an indirect claim;

(c) in the alternative, the lack of jurisdiction of ICSID and the lack of
competence of the Tribunal since the claim refers to contractual issues on which
the ICSID has no jurisdiction; and

The Argentine Republic also requests that Impregilo must pay all the court expenses
and professional fees that Argentina will have incurred under Arbitration Rule 47(1) j.

50. Impregilo requests:

(a) a declaration that the dispute is within the jurisdiction of the Centre and
within the competence of the Arbitral Tribunal, and

(b) an order dismissing all of Argentina’s objections to the jurisdiction of ICSID
and the competence of the Tribunal.

A. First objection: Impregilo has not complied with the requirements set forth in
Article 8 of the Argentina-Italy BIT

The Argentine Republic:

51. The dispute resolution clause contained in Article 8(2) and (3) of the Argentina-

Italy BIT requires investors to submit their dispute to domestic courts for 18 months
before filing international arbitration proceedings. The use of the permissive verb

-16-

“may” (“podra” in Spanish and “potrd” in Italian) indicates that an investor is not
required to submit the dispute to a binding resolution system but may continue with
the amicable consultations for as long as he wishes or even leave the dispute dormant
for an indefinite term. It does not mean, however, that the investor, if he wishes to
initiate international arbitration proceedings, is exempted from first submitting the
dispute to domestic courts and from then waiting for 18 months before proceeding to
international arbitration.

52. In fact, if amicable negotiations fail, then, pursuant to Article 8(3), an investor
may submit the dispute to international arbitration only if it was previously submitted
to the jurisdiction of the competent administrative or judicial bodies for at least 18
months. A different interpretation would deprive the first half of Article 8(3) of any
purpose and effect, in violation of the canons of treaty interpretation of effet utile
(useful effect) or ut res magis valeat quam pereat (the matter must have effect rather
than not).

53. As Impregilo failed to meet the requirement contained in the Argentina-Italy BIT
to submit the dispute to the jurisdiction of the competent administrative or judicial
bodies of the Argentine Republic for 18 months before filing the arbitration
proceedings, this claim must be rejected. The awards rendered by the tribunals in the
ICSID cases Wintershall Aktiengesellschaft v. Argentine Republic’ and TSA v.
Argentine Republic* support the Argentine Republic’s position in this regard.

54. In fact, Impregilo did not submit the dispute to the “competent administrative or
judicial bodies” and can therefore in no case be deemed to have fulfilled the condition
in Article 8(3) of the Argentina-Italy BIT with respect to its consent to international
arbitration.

55. Moreover, Impregilo cannot rely upon the most-favored-nation (“MFN”’) clause
in Article 3(1) of the Argentina-Italy BIT for the purpose of avoiding the obligation to
resort to the local courts for 18 months. This clause cannot be used to circumvent the
obligation to resort to the competent administrative or judicial bodies for 18 months.
There are at least four arguments for rejecting the position that Article VII of the
Argentina-US BIT should be imported into the Argentina-Italy BIT by application of
the MFN clause: (i) it does not give proper effect to the terms of the MFN clause; (ii)
the MFN clause refers to treatment “in the territory”, whereas arbitration takes place
outside Argentina and beyond its sovereign powers; (iii) resorting to domestic courts
cannot be deemed as unfavorable for investors; and (iv) the 18-month clause is an
essential clause of the BIT and, therefore, Impregilo cannot invoke the MFN clause in
order not to abide by it.

  

56. The subjects of the MFN clause, contained in Article 3(1) of the Argentina-Italy
BIT, are “investments made by the investors of the other Contracting Party, income
and activities related to such investments and all other matters regulated by this
Agreement”. There are two specific items listed — “investments” and “income and

* Wintershall Aktiengesellschaft v. Argentine Republic, (CSID Case No. ARB/04/14 (“Wintershall”),
Award, Dec. 8, 2008, paras. 114-22.

+ TSA Spectrum de Argentina S.A. v. Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/0S/S (“TSA”), Award,
Dec. 19, 2008, paras. 98, 107 and 110-12.

-17-

activities related to such investments” — followed, in the same clause without
separation by a comma, by a third general term: “all other matters regulated by this
Agreement”. Under the ejusdem generis principle, the general term applies only to the
subject-matter of the specific items, i.e. investments. Thus, when the MFN clause
requires “a treatment that is no less favorable” for “all other matters regulated by this
Agreement”, it is referring to matters related to investments. Arbitration and its
preconditions under Article 8, including the 18-month judicial recourse requirement,
do not concern investments, but instead a dispute settlement procedure under the BIT.
Moreover, ICSID arbitration is not “a treatment” which Argentina affords the
investor, but instead a procedure to which Argentina is subjected on the initiative of
the investor. Accordingly, the MFN clause does not apply to Article 8.

 

57. The effet utile principle provides the basis for such conclusion. If the final, general
term of the MFN clause, “all other matters”, encompassed everything mentioned in
the BIT, including Article 8, it would render the first two specific terms meaningless —
the BIT could have stated only the final, general term and it would have had the same
meaning.

58. Furthermore, while precedents interpreting whether an MEN clause applies to a
dispute settlement clause are divided, the awards universally agree that, under Article
31 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, each case depends on the exact
language and context of the MFN clause at issue.

59. The MEN clause is also limited in its territorial application. Each State is only
required to accord no less favorable treatment “within its own territory” (“en el
ambito de su territorio” in Spanish; “nel proprio territorio” in Italian). It does not
require most favorable treatment outside the State’s territory. Under the Argentina-
Italy BIT, the Argentine Republic’s territory is defined physically and is considered to
include its “land and ocean boundaries” and “maritime zones”. This territorial
limitation excludes the conditions for participation in an ICSID arbitration from the
scope of the MEN clause, because ICSID is genuinely transnational arbitration that is
governed by a multilateral treaty and is totally detached from any national
jurisdiction, whether of ICSID’s seat or of the location where the arbitration is
conducted, much less that of the respondent State. Accordingly, there is no basis for
invoking the MFN clause with respect to the conditions for recourse to an
international arbitration, including the 18-month local judicial recourse prerequisite to
that international arbitration under Article 8.

60. Finally, Article 3(1) requires host States to accord “a treatment that is no less
favorable than that accorded to its own investors or investors from third-party
countries”. Even if the Tribunal were to apply the MFN clause to Article 8 (which it
should not), in order to make use of the dispute resolution provisions of the
Argentina-US BIT, Impregilo has the burden of establishing that it provides “more
favorable” treatment than the Argentina-Italy BIT. However, Impregilo has not done
so, nor will it be able to do so.

61. Impregilo was not prevented by any obstacle from filing judicial claims. Impregilo
does not — nor could it — maintain that it was deprived of the right of access to the
courts or of the guarantees of due process. This is evidenced by the various deci
rendered by the Argentine courts in less than 18 months, many of which are final.

   

ions

-18-

Measures such as the ones at issue in this case may be, and have been, analyzed by
the Argentine courts and, in many cases, decisions on the merits have been issued
within less than a year. This proves that there are resources in the Argentine Republic
for the judiciary to pass decisions swiftly.

 

62. Article 8 of the Argentina-Italy BIT articulates a multi-layered, sequential dispute
settlement mechanism ultimately leading, if still needed, to a limited consent to
arbitration by both sovereigns. The Parties designed and negotiated this process as a
whole, and obviously thought the provisions had a meaning. Impregilo should not be
allowed to re-assemble the negotiated “package” by picking and choosing bits and
pieces from the dozens of BITs that Argentina has entered into.

 

63. The purpose of such 18-month clauses is to give States the possibility of settling
the dispute through their courts and potentially solving any violation of international
law. This is the reason why this requirement has been specially negotiated by
Argentina with certain States and why capital-exporting States even have similar
clauses with longer terms.

64. Impregilo may not avoid the provisions of Article 8(2) of the Argentina-Italy BIT
by invoking the MFN clause, given that the 18-month clause was specially negotiated,
not only with Italy, but also with all other States in whose BITs such clauses were
included. This clause is not present in all BITs entered into by Argentina, which
evidences that the States negotiating the treaty intended to include it as a special,
binding provision just as the rest of the provisions in those instruments. The fact that,
after entering into treaties not including an 18-month clause, Argentina in certain
cases continued to sign treaties with 18-month clauses is proof of this.

 

65. Reference may also be made to the analysis in the Vladimir Berschader v. Russian
Federation® case regarding the phrase “all matters relating to” contained in many
BITs and similar to the phrase “all other matters regulated by this Agreement”
contained in Article 3(1) of the Argentina-Italy Treaty. The awards in the ICSID cases
Salini,? Plama,’ Telenor * and Wintershall also support the Argentine Republic’s
position on this issue.

Impregilo:

66. Article 8(2) of the BIT provides that the dispute may be submitted to competent
judicial or administrative courts of the State of investment. Unlike some other BITs, it
does not provide that it shall be submitted to the domestic courts or authorities. It can

* Vladimir Berschader and Moise Berschader v. Russian Federation, SCC Case No. 080/2004
(“Berschader”), Award, April 21, 2006, paras. 183-208.

° Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, CSID Case No.
ARB/02/13 (“Salini”), Decision on Jurisdiction, Nov. 9, 2004, paras. 116-19.

7 Plama Consortium Limited v. The Republic of Bulgaria, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/24 (“Plama”),
Decision on Jurisdiction, Feb. 8, 2005, paras. 183-227.

® Telenor Mobile Communications AS v. Republic of Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/15
(“Telenor”), Award, Sept. 13, 2006, paras, 83-101.

° Wintershall, supra n. 3, paras. 161-68.

-19-

therefore be concluded that the submission of the dispute to the domestic courts is an
option and not a mandatory requirement.

67. For several years Impregilo tried in good faith to settle the dispute with Argentina,
but the dispute only worsened and culminated in the Province’s unlawful termination
of the Concession Contract in mid-2006.

68. In addition, AGBA consistently resorted to local administrative and judicial courts
in the hope that they would undo the Province’s decisions, but this never occurred.
The Argentine courts have had, and still have, the opportunity to decide on the facts
that have led to this arbitration, but have either failed to do so or supported the
Executive Branch’s position.

69. In the present proceedings, the Argentine Republic — more than eight years after
the first facts giving rise to this dispute occurred — alleges that the Tribunal lacks
jurisdiction. Argentina argues (i) that Impregilo failed to comply with the “amicable
consultations” period, (ii) that Impregilo failed to comply with the 18-month period of
submission of the dispute before local courts, and (iii) that Impregilo’s interpretation
of the scope of the MFN clause is flawed.

 

 

70. The Argentine Republic’s objection disregards the fact that Argentine
administrative and judicial courts have had the opportunity to decide on the facts
involved in the present case. Nonetheless, they have either failed to render a decision
or supported the measures. These claims were based exclusively on contractual i:
— although they had the same factual background as the BIT claims in the present case
— and Argentine tribunals have had much more than 18 months to decide on this
factual background.

  

sues

71. The tribunal in TSA v. Argentina understood that the aim of periods before local
administrative or judicial courts was to have “a fair chance of obtaining satisfaction at
the national level within the said time frame”.'° The ICJ held in the Interhandel case —
with respect to the requirement of exhaustion of local remedies under customary
international law — that “the respondent State must first have an opportunity to redress
by its own means within the framework of its own domestic legal system the wrong
alleged to have been done to the individual”.'' Argentine courts have had plenty of
time and have failed to redress the situation. The fact that AGBA — and not Impregilo
— was the claimant in those cases is irrelevant for the purposes of the submission of
the dispute before local courts.

 

 

72. Thus, Argentina’s argument that the 18-month period was not observed disregards
that the main purpose of the 18-month period — that Argentine courts shall have the
opportunity to undo the measures giving rise to this dispute — has been satisfied and
would even meet the requirements under customary international law requiring the
exhaustion of local remedies.

 

73. Impregilo emphasizes the futility of pursuing relief in the Argentine legal system.
Argentine administrative and judicial courts have had the opportunity to undo the

10 TSA, supra n. 4, para. 110.
"" Interhandel Case (Switzerland v. U.S.), Judgment of Mar. 21, 1959, 1959 ICJ Rep. 5, 27.

- 20 -

Argentine Government measures that resulted in this BIT arbitration. The mere act of
Impregilo submitting its dispute to this Tribunal is evidence of that fact. But the
futility of the submission of this dispute for 18 mont supported by the fact
that it could not lead to a decision on the merits within that period. In other words,
resorting for 18 months to local courts would be ineffective and would involve
disproportionate expenses for Impregilo.

 

74. If the provision establishing the 18-month submission before local courts was
construed as a mandatory requirement — which it is not — Impregilo invokes in the
alternative the MFN clause in Article 3(1) of the BIT. The scope of this provision is
extremely broad, since it actually sets forth that the MFN treatment shall be extended
to all of the matters regulated by the BIT. Such a broad scope clearly includes the
dispute settlement provision of the BIT. Impregilo therefore requests the application
of the dispute resolution clause of the Argentina-US BIT. This possibility has been
unanimously approved by various tribunals, in cases in which Argentina was a party,
and in disputes also involving concession contracts similar to the one at issue.
Reference is made to the cases of Maffezini v. Spain,'* Ambatielos,'* Siemens v.
Argentina,'* Gas Natural v. Argentina,'> Suez v. Argentina,'® National Grid v.
Argentina” and Camuzzi v. Argentina.'®

  

75. The cases invoked by the Respondent, i.e. Salini, Plama, Berschader, Telenor and
Wintershall, are easily distinguished from the present case.

 

76. On the basis of the MEN clause, Impregilo invokes the dispute resolution clause in
the Argentina-US BIT, which does not foresee the procedure of waiting for 18 months
for local courts to decide on the dispute before the investor may resort to international
arbitration. The Argentina-US BIT only provides for a six-month period of
consultations to try to amicably resolve the dispute. The six-month period provided
for by the dispute resolution clause in the Argentina-US BIT constitutes a more
favorable treatment, since it would allow Impregilo to bypass a formalistic, futile and
excessively onerous step provided by the BIT.

77. Impregilo has submitted this dispute neither to the courts nor to the administrative
tribunals of the Argentine Republic, nor to any other applicable, previously agreed

° Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7 (“‘Maffezini”), Decision on
Jurisdiction, Jan. 25, 2000.

' The Ambatielos Claim (Greece v. United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland), Award,
Mar. 6, 1956, UNRIAA, Vol. XII, 83.

\ Siemens AG v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8 (“Siemens”), Decision on Jurisdiction, Aug. 3,
2004.

'S Gas Natural SDG, S.A. v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/10 (“Gas Natural”), Decision of the
Tribunal on Preliminary Questions on Jurisdiction, June 17, 2005.

'© Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A., and InterAguas Servicios Integrales del Agua
S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No ARB/03/17 (“Suez”), Decision on Jurisdiction, May 16,
2006.

"' National Grid Ple v. Argentina, UNCITRAL (“National Grid”), Decision on Jurisdiction, June 20,
2006.

'S Camuzzi Int'l S.A. v. Argentina. ICSID Case No. ARB/03/7 (“Camuzzi II”), Decision on
Jurisdiction, June 10, 2005.

-21-

dispute settlement procedure. Therefore, the first requirement of the Argentina-US
BIT has been met.

78. On January 24, 2006, Impregilo delivered a letter to the Federal Government of
Argentina formally notifying it of the dispute in question, seeking to resolve the
matter by consultation and negotiation, and notifying the Argentine Republic that
Impregilo would seek international arbitration under the terms of the BIT, if the matter
could not be resolved by consultation and negotiation. The six month period since this
letter was delivered ended on July 24, 2006, and the dispute remains unresolved.
Therefore, the second requirement of the Argentina-US BIT has also been met.

The Arbitral Tribunal:
(i) Article 8(2) and (3) of the BIT

79. Article 8(2) of the Argentina-Italy BIT provides that, if a dispute cannot be settled
amicably, it may be submitted to the competent judicial or administrative courts of the
Party in whose territory the investment is located. It does not provide that the party
“shall” or “must” submit the case to a local court.

80. However, there is a close connection between Article 8(2) and Article 8(3) which
provides that international arbitration may be initiated where, after eighteen months
from the date of notice of commencement of proceedings before the courts mentioned
in Article 8(2), the dispute between the investor and the Contracting Party has not
been resolved.

 

81. There is thus, on the one hand, a clause providing that domestic court proceedings
may be instituted and, on the other hand, another provision providing, as a condition
for arbitration, that there have been such proceedings and that these proceedings have
been going on for 18 months.

82. There could thus appear to be a certain ambiguity in the text of the BIT, and the
following two interpretations of the two paragraphs, when read together, would seem
to be arguable:

(a) The first interpretation (A/ternative 1) would place the emphasis on the word
“may” (“podra”, “potra”’) and thus on the optional character of Article 8(2) and lead
to the conclusion that, as Article 8(2) provides that the investor may submit the
dispute to the domestic courts, Article 8(3) should be understood to mean that the
condition of previous domestic proceedings in Article 8(3) only applies if the investor
has used the option and actually brought proceedings before the domestic courts,
whereas, if he has not done so, he would be free to proceed at once to international
arbitration.

(b) The second interpretation (Alternative 2) would be that, although Article 8(2)
provides that the investor may submit the dispute to the domestic courts, it follows
from Article 8(3) that, if the investor wishes to submit a dispute to international
arbitration, he must first bring proceedings before the domestic courts and observe the
waiting period of 18 months.

-22-

83. The Arbitral Tribunal notes that, whatever interpretation is chosen, the term
“may” in Article 8(2) is justified in the sense that the investor is not obliged to bring
the dispute to the domestic courts. The only question that arises in regard to the
wording in Article 8(2) is what legal consequences, if any, follow from the investor’s
failure to bring the dispute before these courts.

 

84. It may be observed that the word “may” is also used in Article 8(3) in regard to
the initiation of arbitral proceedings. Here too, there is of course no obligation to
submit the dispute to international arbitration.

85. On the other hand, it should also be noted that there are other BITs which provide
that the investor shall bring a dispute before the domestic courts or authorities.

86. In the Arbitral Tribunal’s opinion, the terminological differences between BITs do
not necessarily mean that any substantive difference was intended. The ambiguity to
which they may give rise must be resolved by reading the provisions not only
according to their wording but also in their context (cf. Article 31 of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties). The immediate context of Article 8(2) is Article
8(3), and these two provisions, when read together, have to be given a reasonable
meaning.

 

87. Alternative 1 above would mean that, if the investor does not bring the dispute
before the domestic courts, the condition in Article 8(3) of the BIT is not applicable.
In other words, the investor would always have a free choice between immediate
international arbitration and such arbitration preceded by domestic proceedings during
a period of at least 18 months.

88. The Arbitral Tribunal finds it unlikely that this is what the parties to the BIT had
in mind. For the Argentine Government, it must have been desirable to give its courts
a first opportunity to resolve disputes with foreign investors. This benefit would of
course not materialize if Article 8(3) were interpreted according to Alternative 1.

89. Moreover, the wording of Article 8(3) indicates that it contains a general
condition for international arbitration, and there is no exception for the situation
where there had been no domestic proceedings. If the intention had been to provide
for such an exception, the wording would most probably have been different. An
appropriate wording would then have been, for instance: “If the dispute has not been
submitted to the competent judicial or administrative courts in accordance with
paragraph 2 above, or if the dispute, after having been submitted to these courts, has
remained unresolved eighteen months after the commencement of proceedings before
them, it may be submitted to international arbitration - - -”.

90. As the text now reads, the Tribunal considers that Article 8(3) should be
interpreted according to Alternative 2, or, in order words, that it should be considered
to set out a general condition that must be complied with by the investor who wishes
to submit the dispute to international arbitration. The condition to be complied with is
a double one: first bringing the dispute before the domestic courts and then waiting
for 18 months before proceeding to international arbitration. This condition has not
been complied with by Impregilo.

-23-

91. This conclusion, according to which Article 8(3) provides a mandatory — but
limited in time — jurisdictional requirement before a right to bring a case to ICSID can
be exercised, is further supported by other decisions arriving at the same conclusion in
regard to similarly worded clauses.

 

92. The Maffezini tribunal held that going first to the local courts was a jurisdictional
requirement that had to be respected:

“35. ... the Contracting Parties to the BIT—Argentina and Spain—wanted to give their
respective courts the opportunity, within the specified period of eighteen months, to resolve the
dispute before it could be taken. Had this been the Claimant’s sole argument on the issue, the
Tribunal would have had to conclude that because the Claimant failed to submit the instant case
to Spanish courts as required by Article X(2) of the BIT, the Centre lacked jurisdiction and the
Tribunal lacked competence to hear the case.”"

93. Wintershall stands for the same approach:

“155. Undoubtedly, the promotion and protection of investment is an object or purpose of the
BIT but that promotion and protection in the Argentina-Germany BIT is to be “on the basis of
an agreement” (i.e. on the basis of the terms of the Treaty — the BIT): which could not possibly
exclude the provisions of Article 10(2). If the object and purpose had been to have an immediate
unrestricted direct access to ICSID arbitration, then inclusion of Article 10(2) would have been
otiose and superfluous. Therefore, the assumption and assertion made in this proceeding (and in
some decisions of ICSID Tribunals as well), that since the object and purpose of a BIT is to
protect and promote investments, unrestricted direct access to ICSID must be presumed, is
contrary to the text (and context) of this BIT, ie., the Argentina-Germany BIT.”

4. Conclusion on the first aspect of Argentina’s first Preliminary Objection to Jurisdiction

156. To conclude — for the reasons mentioned above, the Tribunal’s decision on this first part of
Argentina’s first Preliminary Objection to Jurisdiction is that Wintershall (the Claimant) could
not avoid prior compliance with Article 10(2) of the Argentina-Germany BIT before initiating
arbitration proceedings. Not having so complied with Article 10(2), the Tribunal has no
competence to entertain the claim and to proceed with it on merits.”

94. In sum, Article 8(3) contains a jurisdictional requirement that has to be fulfilled
before an ICSID tribunal can assert jurisdiction. This decision is in accordance with
the decision in Wintershall, where it was found for a very similar clause in the
Argentina-Germany BIT, that “Article 10(2) contains a time-bound prior-recourse-to-
local-courts-clause, which mandates (not merely permits) litigation by the investor
(for a definite period) in the domestic forum’”, before the right to ICSID can even
materialize. Impregilo not having fulfilled this requirement, the Tribunal cannot find
jurisdiction on the basis of Article 8(3) of the Argentina-Italy BIT.

 

(b) The MFN clause

95. However, Impregilo has also invoked the MFN clause in Article 3(1) of the
Argentina-Italy BIT and has argued that, via that clause, the more generous rules in
the Argentine-US BIT should be applied to the dispute. According to the dispute
settlement clause in Article VII of that BIT, the investor may choose to submit the

® Maffezini, supra n.12, para. 35.

>” Wintershall, supra n. 3para. 118.

-24-

dispute for resolution to the domestic courts or administrative tribunals, or to deal
with it in accordance with previously agreed dispute settlement procedures, or, after
six months from the date on which the dispute arose, to submit it to international
arbitration.

96. Article 3(1) of the Argentina-Italy BIT provides that “[e]ach Contracting Party
shall, within its own territory, accord to investments made by investors of the other
Contracting Party, to the income and activities related to such investments and to all
other matters regulated by this Agreement, a treatment that is no less favorable than
that accorded to its own investors or investors from third-party countries”.

97. In support of its contention that the MFN clause cannot be applied, the Argentine
Republic has invoked:

(a) that Impregilo’s interpretation does not give proper effect to the terms of the
MEN clause,

(b) that the MEN clause refers to treatment by the Contracting Party “within its
own territory”, whereas arbitration takes place outside Argentina and beyond its
sovereign powers,

(c) that resorting to domestic courts cannot be deemed as something unfavorable
for investors, and

(d) that the 18-month clause is an essential clause of the BIT and, therefore,
cannot be set aside by the MFN clause.

98. On point (a) the Argentine Republic relies on the wording of the MFN clause in
Article 3(1) which applies to “treatment” and which, before referring to “all other
matters”, enumerates “investments” and “income and activities related to such
investments”.

99. The Arbitral Tribunal is of the opinion that the term “treatment” is in itself wide
enough to be applicable also to procedural matters such as dispute settlement.
Moreover, the wording “all other matters regulated by this Agreement” is certainly
also wide enough to cover the dispute settlement rules. The argument that the ejusdem
generis principle would limit its application to matters similar to “investments” and
“income and activities related to such investments” is not convincing, since the
wording does not allow “all other matters” to be read as “all similar matters” or “all
other matters of the same kind”. Nor is the argument that an all-embracing concept
like “all other matters” would make the previously mentioned terms “investments”
and “income and activities related to such investments” superfluous, since it is indeed
not unusual in legal drafting to indicate typical examples even in provisions which are
intended to be of general application.

 

 

  

 

100. As regards point (b), the Arbitral Tribunal accepts that the words “within its own
territory” limit the scope of the MFN clause. In the present case, however, the
question as to what legal protection Argentina shall give to foreign investors is in no
way an issue over which Argentina has no power to decide, nor is it tied to any

-25-

particular territory. The Tribunal therefore considers that the wording “within its own
territory” does not exclude the application of the MFN clause to dispute settlement.

101. As regards point (c), the Arbitral Tribunal finds that the relevant question is not
whether resorting to domestic courts is more or less favorable to investors than
international arbitration. Instead, what should be considered is whether a choice
between domestic proceedings and international arbitration, as in the Argentina-US
BIT, is more favorable to the investor than compulsory domestic proceedings before
access is opened to arbitration. The answer to this question is in general, and certainly
in this case, evident: a system that gives a choice is more favorable to the investor
than a system that gives no choice.

 

102. Finally, point (d) presents a more difficult issue. In this respect, the Argentine
Republic has pointed out, inter alia, that Argentina has included in several of its BITs,
even those concluded after the Argentina-US BIT, a clause about domestic
proceedings and an 18-month waiting period. This could be seen as an indication that
Argentina did not intend these clauses to be replaced, via MFN clauses in the same
BITs, by the rules of the Argentina-US BIT as being more favorable to the investor.
However, the argument becomes less persuasive in the present case, because the Italy-
Argentina BIT (signed on 22 May 1990) preceded the Argentina-US BIT (signed on
14 November 1991).

   

 

103. The Arbitral Tribunal must also attach special weight to the wording of the MFN
clause, which extends its scope to “all other matters regulated by this Agreement”.
Given the breadth of the this language, the clause must be considered to encompass
dispute settlement provisions.

  

104. The Arbitral Tribunal further notes that there is a massive volume of case-law
which indicates that, at least when there is an MEN clause applying to “all matters”
regulated in the BIT, more favorable dispute settlement clauses in other BITs will be
incorporated. Relevant cases are Maffezini,”' Gas Natural,” Suez? Suez* and
Camuzzi.°

   

105. Even in some — but not all — cases where the MFN clauses were less
comprehensive and only provided for MFN treatment of investors and investments,
the tribunals found this to be sufficient to cover dispute settlement. Cases in point are
Siemens,° National Grid”’ and RosInvest.>

 

>! Maffezini, supra n. 12, paras. 38-64.
» Gas Natural, supra n. 15, paras. 41-49.
> Suez, supra n. 16 , paras. 52-66.

* Suez Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A., and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentina, ICSID
Case No. ARB/03/19 (“Suez 11”), Decision on Jurisdiction, Aug. 3, 2006, paras. 52-68.

°° Camuzzi International S.A. v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/2 (‘‘Camuzzi I”),
Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, May 11, 2005, paras, 120-21.

© Siemens, supra n. 14, paras. 87-90.
”" National Grid, supra n. 17, paras. 79-94.

*8 RosInvest v. Russian Federation, SCC Case No. V079/2005 (‘“‘RosInvest”), Award on Jurisdiction,
Oct. 2007, paras. 124-39.

 

- 26 -

106. However, the case law is not fully consistent in so far as there is at least one case
in which the tribunal, despite the fact that the MFN clause covered “all matters”,
found this insufficient to make the clause applicable to dispute settlement. The case is
Berschader, but it should be noted that one of the arbitrators strongly dissented on this
point and that there were also some special elements which contributed to the
outcome.”

107. In other cases where dispute settlement rules in other BITs were not considered
to have been incorporated as a result of MFN clauses, these clauses were not,
according to their wording, applicable to “all matters”, but provided for MFN
treatment of investors or investments. The Arbitral Tribunal refers in this respect to
the cases of Salini,° Plama,;! Telenor* and Wintershall.> It appears from these
awards that some tribunals have had rather strong reservations about the general
development of the case law in this area. It is therefore clear that these issues remain
controversial and that the predominating jurisprudence which has developed is in no
way universally accepted.

 

108. Nevertheless, the Arbitral Tribunal finds it unfortunate if the assessment of these
i s would in each case be dependent on the personal opinions of individual
arbitrators. The best way to avoid such a result is to make the determination on the
basis of case law whenever a clear case law can be discerned. It is true that, as stated
above, the jurisprudence regarding the application of MFN clauses to settlement of
disputes provisions is not fully consistent. Nevertheless, in cases where the MFN
clause has referred to “all matters” or “any matter” regulated in the BIT, there has
been near-unanimity in finding that the clause covered the dispute settlement rules
On this basis, the majority of the Tribunal reaches the conclusion that Impregilo i:
entitled to rely, in this respect, on the dispute settlement rules in the Argentina-US
BIT and that the case cannot be dismissed for non-observance of the requirements in
Article 8(2) and (3) of the Argentina-Italy BIT.

 

 

 

 

   

  

 

 Berschader, Separate Opinion of Prof. Todd Weiler, paras. 15-25; Berschader, Award on
Jurisdiction, paras. 185 — 208. Notably, the MFN clause at issue in Berschader stated that it would
apply “particularly to Articles 4, 5 and 6”, ie., fair and equitable treatment, non-expropriation and
free transfer of funds, but did not include within this list Article 10 of the BIT, which addressed
dispute resolution, and accordingly, the tribunal concluded that the ordinary meaning of “all matters
covered by the present Treaty” was not really that the MEN provision extends to all matters covered
by the Treaty. /d. para. 194. In addition, the tribunal noted that there had been no clarity in the
jurisprudence at the time the BIT had been concluded as to whether arbitration clauses could be
encompassed by MEFN clauses, and thus, the Parties simply may not have contemplated this
outcome. /d. para. 202. Finally, the tribunal considered evidence of BIT practice from the Soviet
Union which demonstrated that it pursued a policy of never consenting to arbitration in BITs
concerning questions whether an act of expropriation had occurred, which stemmed from that State’s
particular views on sovereignty. In the tribunal’s view, this “strongly suggest{ed]” that the Soviet
Union did not intend for the MEN clause to extend to dispute resolution issues. /d. para. 204.

% Salini, supra n. 6, paras. 116-19.
*! Plama, supra n. 7, paras. 183-227.
* Telenor, supra n. 8, paras. 83-101.

°3 Wintershall, supra n. 3, paras. 161-68.

-27-

109. Arbitrator Stern disagrees with the application of the MFN clause to dispute
settlement. Her views are elaborated in the appended dissenting opinion.

B. Second objection: ICSID lacks the jurisdiction and the Tribunal lacks the
competence to hear indirect and derivative claims filed by shareholders

 

The Argentine Republic:

110. Impregilo argues that it directly and indirectly holds 42.58% of AGBA’s shares
of stock and invokes that shareholding and a capital contribution made in its capacity
as shareholder of AGBA as its investment in Argentina. Impregilo’s case is based
upon the alleged harm caused by Argentina’s measures to certain guarantees and
protections provided by both the Regulatory Framework and the Concession Contract,
which harm in turn allegedly resulted from Argentina’s failure to comply with the
Treaty.

 
  

111. Impregilo does not allege any harm to its rights as a shareholder but bases all its
claims on measures exclusively affecting the Concession Contract and the Regulatory
Framework, under which instruments Impregilo does not have or invoke any right
whatsoever. It is, then, a typical indirect or derivative claim — where a shareholder
claims damages due to measures taken in relation to the corporation in which it holds
shares — in respect of which ICSID has no jurisdiction and the Tribunal has no
competence.

112. There is no doubt that a corporation is a legal entity separate from its
shareholders, with rights and liabilities entirely distinct from theirs. Likewise, it is
well established that a shareholder does not have an individual cause of action against
third parties for wrongs or injuries to the corporation in which he or she holds stock,
even if he or she suffers harm from the damage to the corporation, such as a reduction
in the value of his or her stock. The BIT does not modify the rule that shareholders are
not entitled to bring claims for damages suffered by the company in which they have
shares. Reference is made in this regard to the Barcelona Traction case.” A central
question in that case was how to transplant the domestic legal institution of
shareholders in a corporation into the realm of international law. The answer given by
the International Court of Justice was that the essential features of this institution must
be preserved when it is the object of an international claim. Precisely the same answer
must be given by investment treaty tribunals.

 

 

113. Claims related to investment disputes may be subject to the jurisdiction of ICSID
provided that the requirements set forth in the ICSID Convention and the BIT are met.
The jurisdictional boundaries of an ICSID tribunal are defined by the objective
criteria set out in Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. At the time of drafting of the
ICSID Convention, the drafters considered the possibility of allowing controlling
shareholders of local corporations to file direct actions. The reason was simple: many
investors operate through a local company (either because it is required by the host
State or because it is the company’s own choice), and the local company itself would
be excluded from the coverage of the ICSID Convention, since it would be a national

 

“ Case Concerning the Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Company, Limited (Belgium v. Spain),
Judgment, Feb. 5, 1970, 1970 ICJ Rep. 3 (“Barcelona Traction”).

- 28 -

of the State receiving the investment. However, the possibility of granting controlling
shareholders of local corporations direct access to the ICSID system in respect of
rights of the local corporation was entirely rejected. The possibility prescribed by
Article 25(2)(b) in fine of the ICSID Convention was included instead: the possibility
that a local company, controlled by a foreign owner, be given the right to sue its own
State, provided that the parties had agreed that the local company should be treated as
a national of the host State due to its foreign control. This Article was inserted by the
drafters precisely to avoid the problems associated with indirect claims by foreign
shareholders in locally incorporated investment companies.

 

 

114. However, following CMS v. Argentina, a number of tribunals have adopted the
same approach as in that case, allowing shareholders to bring indirect claims in
respect of the reduction in the value of their shares. They have done so by completely
ignoring the basic contours of the rights attaching to shares in all domestic legal
systems and by turning a blind eye to the ramifications of a “solution” that allows any
shareholder to bring any claim in respect of any prejudice caused to the company.
This solution is perverse as a matter of legal principle.

 

 

115. The CMS tribunal and its followers have failed to address the ramifications of a
blanket rule that would allow any type of derivative claim by the shareholders. The
decision of jurisdiction in Pan American Energy v. Argentina’ is typical in its
ambivalence in regard to these issues.

116. In contrast, it was precisely these types of factors that led the tribunal in GAMI v.
Mexico to dismiss GAMI’s claims.*” There are signs that some tribunals are beginning
to recognize that the CMS approach to derivative claims is unsustainable. At least
some tribunals now raise the problem of potentially unlimited claims in relation to the
same injury. For instance, in Enron v. Argentina,* the tribunal proposed that the test
of an “invitation” be adopted, inquiring whether the investor was “invited” to invest in
the host State. This test only needs to be stated to demonstrate that it is wholly
subjective and patently unworkable.

   

 

117. Other tribunals faced up to the problem but failed to provide a solution.”

118. Indeed, the admission of derivative claims poses several problems, one of the
most acute being double (or even multiple) recovery. Many tribunals in cases

%5 CMS v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/OI/8 (“CMS”), Decision on Jurisdiction, July 17, 2003,
paras. 36-65.

° Pan American Energy LLC, BP Argentina Exploration Company, BP America Production Company,
Pan American Sur S.R.L. and Pan American Continental, S.R.L. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Cases
No. ARB/03/13 and ARB/04/8 (“Pan American/BP”), Decision on Preliminary Objections, July 27,
2006, paras, 209-22.

5 Gami Investments, Inc. v. United Mexican States, UNCITRAL, Award, Nov. 15, 2004, paras. 26-43.

88 Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/3,
Decision on Jurisdiction (“Enron”), Jan. 14, 2004, paras. 54-57.

 

* Camuzzi I, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, para. 37, and Noble Energy Inc. and
MachalaPower Cia Ltda. v. Repiiblica del Ecuador and Consejo Nacional de Electricidad, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/05/12 (“Noble”), Decision on Jurisdiction of Mar. 5, 2008, paras. 77-83.

-29 -

involving Argentina have recognized this danger,"’ but none has advanced a solution
for it. The Sempra tribunal specifically addressed the possible double recovery
“resulting from, on the one hand, the compensation which the investor would receive
as a result of arbitration and, on the other hand, the compensation which the company
would receive in the context of a renegotiated adjustment of tariffs or some other
mechanism”.*! In the tribunal’s view, double recovery was not likely. However,
double recovery has to be avoided through legal considerations (such as who is the
holder of the affected rights who is entitled to compensation, etc.), and by means of
proper interpretation of the applicable instruments.

119. In the present case, AGBA has filed legal actions against the measures which
Impregilo also challenges in this arbitration. Thus, it is clear that there is a very
concrete risk of double recovery in this case. No tribunal acting according to law and
justice can accept an action that not only is inadmissible, but opens the door to the
actual possibility of the respondent having to pay twice for the same damage, or even
more.

 

 

 

120. Summing up, the Centre has no jurisdiction and the Tribunal has no competence
to hear derivative claims as those presented by Impregilo in the current proceeding.

Impregilo:

121. Impregilo is not pursuing the rights of AGBA but is bringing claims on its own
behalf as an Italian investor with qualifying investments under the Argentina-Italy
BIT. International law and investment arbitration tribunals have recognized claims by
shareholders in the position of Impregilo.

122. Impregilo submits this dispute before the Tribunal because Argentina:

(a) directly nationalized Impregilo’s investment in AGBA without any compensation;
(b) failed to treat Impregilo’s investment in AGBA fairly and equitably;

(c) impaired by unjustified and discriminatory measures the management, operation,
maintenance, use, enjoyment, acquisition, expansion or disposal of Impregilo’s

investment in AGBA;

(d) failed to provide full protection and security to Impregilo’s investment in AGB.
and

 

(e) violated specific obligations entered into with respect to Impregilo’s investment in
AGBA.

123. The inclusion of shareholders is confirmed by Article 1(1)(b) of the BIT, which

* See Enron, Decision on Jurisdiction, paras. 54-57; Sempra Energy International v. Argentine
Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16 (“Sempra”), Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, May 11,
2005, para. 102; Sempra, Award, Sept. 28, 2007, para. 395; Suez, Decision on Jurisdiction, para. 51;
Pan American/BP, Decision on Preliminary Objections, paras. 209-22.

“| Sempra, Award, para. 395.

-30-

defines investments as “any kind of asset invested or reinvested by an individual or a
legal entity of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other Party”, such as
“shares of stock, interests or any other form of participation, including minority or
indirect interest, in a company incorporated in the territory of either Contracting
Party”. Thus, Impregilo’s shareholding in AGBA is a covered investment and
Impregilo is entitled to bring a claim in respect of it.

124. The protection of shareholders is further confirmed by the Preamble of the BIT,
which provides that the BIT shall contribute to the encouragement of business
initiatives conducive to the prosperity of both Contracting Parties. Italian investors
who create or own shares in Argentine companies contribute “to the prosperity of”
Argentina. Thus, the very object and purpose of the BIT encompasses shareholders. It
makes no distinction between shareholders and other types of investors.

125. Moreover, claims by shareholders are well recognized in international law and in
investment arbitration in particular. This is a natural consequence of the fact that the
objective of BITs is to encourage foreign investors to acquire shares in a local
company in the host State, often because the host State requires it. In the present case,
the Government of Argentina required the consortium which won the bid for the water
concession in the Province of Buenos Aires to incorporate a local company. If the BIT
did not protect investors in Impregilo’s position, it would become irrelevant and
meaningless.

   

  

 

126. Impregilo is not pursuing claims that can only be submitted by AGBA, and its
claims are therefore not indirect. Impregilo filed these BIT claims in its own capacity
as an Italian investor in Argentina and its claims arise directly from its rights under the
BIT. That the characterization of an action as one arising under a BIT is independent
of whether it also raises local issues or causes of action finds abundant support in
investment arbitration case-law. The Vivendi v. Argentina case is particularly relevant
to the present case. The claims in that e mainly involved acts of Argentine
authorities interfering with the operation of a concession contract. The Annulment
Committee had no doubt that the foreign shareholder could bring its own claims under
the Argentina-France BIT.’ Accordingly, Impregilo is entitled to claim that
Argentina’s conduct was in breach of the BIT, even if that conduct may also amount
to a breach of AGBA’s rights. Impregilo’s claims are BIT claims, and cannot in any
way be regarded as a purported exercise of contractual legal rights.

   

 

 

 

127. The Argentine Government has consistently raised the same objection which has
been repeatedly rejected in numerous decisions. In light of the decisions in CMS,
Azurix, both Enron cases, LG&E, AES, Suez, BG, El Paso, PanAmerican/BP, both
cases filed by Camuzzi, Continental Casualty, Gas Natural, Siemens and Noble
Energy, Argentina’s objection on alleged “indirect” or “derivative” claims is
groundless."* In addition, shareholders’ claims have also been affirmed by the

  

2

 

* Compaiiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case
No. ARB/97/3 (“Vivendi”), Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002, para. 73.

* See generally, CMS v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction; Azurix Corp. v. Argentina. ICSID Case
No. ARB/OI/12 (““Azurix”), Decision on Jurisdiction, Dec. 8, 2003; Enron, Decision on Jurisdiction;
LG&E Energy Corp., LG&E Capital Corp., and LG&E International, Inc. v. Argentina. (CSD Case
No. ARB/02/1 (“LG&E”), Decision on Jurisdiction, Apr. 30, 2004; AES Corp. v. Argentina. ICSID
Case No. ARB/02/17 (“AES”), Decision on Jurisdiction, Apr. 26, 2005; see also Suez supra n. 16,

-31-

Annulment Committee in CMS.4

128. Claims by shareholders are well recognized in ICSID case-law, even before CMS
v. Argentina. Reference is made to AAPL v. Sri Lanka*, AMT vy. Zaire’, Goetz v.
Burundi"’, Maffezini v. Spain"® and Genin v. Estonia. The Annulment Committee in
the Vivendi case was ed with the question of whether the French investor, CGE,
could have brought the claim on behalf of the local company, CAA, in its capacity as
a controlling shareholder of CAA. The Committee considered the question irrelevant
because in any event CGE could have brought the claim for its shareholding in CAA,
which was an investment protected under the Treaty.°°

 

 

129. Impregilo owns shares in a local company — AGBA ~ and, thus, owns protected
investments in AGBA’s contractual rights and other rights. As decided by many
previous tribunals, there is a direct right of action for shareholders like Impregilo in
such circumstances.

 

 

130. The Barcelona Traction case does not support Argentina’s position. In that case,
the issue before the International Court of Justice was whether, under customary
international law, Belgium could exercise diplomatic protection with respect to losses
incurred by Belgian shareholders in a Canadian company as a result of the of
Spanish authorities affecting the company. The Court held that Belgium had no jus
standi and did not examine whether international law provided an independent source
of rights and protections for shareholders. Moreover, the Court in Barcelona Traction
explicitly recognized the direct protection of shareholders in BITs.”!

 

   

131. Impregilo refers to another decision by the International Court of Justice, i.e. the
ELSI case. In that case, the US brought an action against Italy under the Treaty of
Friendship, Commerce and Navigation between the two countries for damage caused

 

Decision on Jurisdiction; BG Group Ple v. Argentina, Final Award, Dec. 24, 2007; El Paso v.
Argentina. ICSID Case No. ARB/03/15, Decision on Jurisdiction, Apr. 27, 2006; Pan American/BP.
Decision on Preliminary Objections, July 27, 2006; Camuzzi II, Decision on Jurisdiction, June 10,
2005; Continental Casualty Company v. Argentina. ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9 (“Continental
Casualty”), Decision on Jurisdiction, Feb. 22, 2006; Gas Natural, Decision of the Tribunal on
Preliminary Questions on Jurisdiction; Siemens, Decision on Jurisdiction; Noble, Decision on
Jurisdiction.

“ CMS, Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Application for Annulment of the Argentine
Republic, Sep. 1, 2006, paras. 75-76.

+ Asian Agric. Prods., Ltd. (AAPL) v. Sri Lanka, ICSID Case No. ARB/87/3, Award, June 27, 1990,
paras. 20-21.

46 American Manufacturing & Trading, Inc. v. Republic of Zaire, 1CSID Case No. ARB/93/1, Award,
Feb. 21, 1997, para. 5.15. The applicable BIT defined investments as inter alia “a company or shares
of stock or other interests in a company or interests in the assets thereof”.

47 Antoine Goetz et consorts v. République du Burundi, ICSID Case No. ARB/95/3, Sentence, Feb. 10,
1999, para. 35.

“8 Maffezini, supra n.12, para. 68.

* Alex Genin and others v. Republic of Estonia, 1CSID Case No. ARB/99/2, Award, June 25, 2001,
paras. 324-25,

°° Vivendi, supra n. 42, paras. 112-13.

5! Barcelona Traction, supra n. 34, para. 90.

-32-

to US shareholders in an Italian company.” In its judgment, the Court did not even
address the question of whether the substantive provisions of the treaty (inter alia, the
guarantees of full protection and security and no expropriation of property belonging
to US nationals without compensation) granted protection to the US shareholders in
relation to acts of the Italian authorities aimed at the company. By examining the
merits of the claims, the Court clearly considered that the treaty protected the
shareholders.

 

 

132. The ELSI case is a much more relevant precedent for this arbitration than
Barcelona Traction. The proliferation of shareholders’ protection in BITs and other
investment treaties means that international law now recognizes that corporate
personality does not preclude the international protection of shareholders affected by
host-state measures injuring both the company and the shareholders.

133. Coursing through Argentina’s objection is a policy argument implying an
atomization of interests, which could theoretically result in a multitude of BIT claims
against Argentina.

134. First, this hypothetical argument is irrelevant. Argentina’s apparent displeasure
with the potential ramifications of its conduct in violation of the BIT does not
authorize ICSID tribunals to ignore or re-write the treaty to assuage Argentina’s
belated objection to the very instrument that it signed and ratified specifically to
induce foreign investment.

 

 

135. Moreover, the Argentine Republic’s argument regarding a potential double
recovery by both the shareholders and the local company is an issue that concerns the
merits. But in addition, and perhaps more importantly, Argentina goes as far as to
allege that the Tribunal should not find jurisdiction because there is a potential risk of
double recovery when Argentina has taken measures to the detriment of Impregilo’s
investment since the early years of AGBA’s concession and unlawfully nationalized
the concession without granting any compensation. Furthermore, local courts have
had plenty of time and opportunities to grant compensation but have not done so.

136. Argentina also misinterprets Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. In part,
Article 25(2)(b) allows consenting parties to agree that a company incorporated in the
host State and controlled by the foreign investor will be regarded as a foreign investor
for purposes of the ICSID Convention and thereby be permitted to pursue a claim
before ICSID in its own name. But Article 25(2)(b) is irrelevant to the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction over Impregilo’s claims. Article 25(2)(b) merely provides an option and
does not have any effect on claims that separately qualify under Article 25(1). It does
not affect a foreign investor’s right to stand before ICSID in its own name.

 

The Arbitral Tribunal:
137. The Arbitral Tribunal notes that Impregilo was one of the parties in the

consortium that was granted the concession for water and sewage services for a
certain area within the Province of Buenos Aires. In accordance with the applicable

° Case concerning the Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI) (United States v. Italy), Judgment, July 20,
1989, 1989 ICJ Rep. 15.

-33-

requirements, the consortium formed an Argentine company, AGBA, with which the
Concession Contract was concluded.

138. It follows from Article 1(1)(b) of the Argentina-Italy BIT that Impregilo’s
in AGBA were protected under the BIT. If AGBA was subjected to expropriation or
unfair treatment with respect to its concession — an issue to be determined on the
merits of the case — such action must also be considered to have affected Impregilo’s
rights as an investor, rights that were protected under the BIT.

 

ares

139. The question of double compensation being granted would seem to the Arbitral
Tribunal to be a theoretical rather than a real practical problem. It seems obvious that
if compensation were granted to AGBA at domestic level, this would affect the claims
that Impregilo could make under the BIT, and conversely, any compensation granted
to Impregilo at international level would affect the claims that could be presented by
AGBA before Argentine courts.

140. In any case, there is, as the Argentine Republic itself admits, a substantial case-
law showing that claims such as those presented by Impregilo enjoy protection under
the applicable BITs. The Arbitral Tribunal finds no reason to depart from that case-
law.

C. Third objection: The claims address contractual matters over which the
Tribunal has no jurisdiction

The Argentine Republic:

141. All the claims made by Impregilo are contract claims over which the Tribunal
has no jurisdiction. As the Annulment Committee expressed in the Vivendi case,
“where ‘the fundamental basis of the claim’” is the contract it will be a contract claim
and not a treaty claim.

 

142. In the case Impregilo v. Pakistan, the tribunal, following the analysis of the
Annulment Committee of the Vivendi case, made a distinction between a breach of
contract and a violation of the treaty, and recalled that the threshold to establish a
breach of the treaty was a high one.”

 

143. The claims made by Impregilo in the present case relate to decisions made in the
implementation and development of the AGBA concession. They are related to the
interpretation and application of the Regulatory Framework and the Concession
Contract. All the claims are contract claims that, paraphrasing the tribunal of the TSA
v. Argentina case, have no relation with the “rights and obligations of a different and
more fundamental nature” provided for in the BIT.*°

144. Although Impregilo presents a controversy with multiple issues, wishing to give
the impression that there is a behavioral pattern that will tie together the different

 

vendi, supra n. 42, para. 101.

* Impregilo S.p.A.v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/3, Decision on
Jurisdiction of Apr. 22, 2005, paras. 260 and 267.

°S TSA, supra n. 4, para. 60.

-34-

measures that have been challenged, this does not change the fact that all the issues
are eminently contractual and require an interpretation of very specific and detailed
contractual clauses.

145. Impregilo’s claims essentially relate to the following issues: (i) the failure to
build three sewage treatment plants (the UNIREC plants) in the concession area, (ii)
the failure to update the database of AGBA’s users, the non-application of the
ion extra charges”, “works costs” and “sewage coefficient”, the non-
application of contractual provisions on tax stabilization, the promotion of client
payment delay, the obligation to install meters at clients’ request and the delay in
responding to clients by AGBA, (iii) the modification twice of the Regulatory
Framework, (iv) the lack of support to AGBA in its attempts to obtain funding, (v) the
alleged discrimination against AGBA, and (vi) the termination of the Concession
Contract.

 

146. In none of these claims does the alleged violation resulting from the BIT stand
on its own, but Impregilo brings forth a contractual breach as the fundamental element
or premise of the claims.

147. In January 1999, the Province approved the concession’s bidding conditions. The
consortium formed by Impregilo decided to participate in this process. The
consortium was made aware of the scope of these conditions before making its offer,
in spite of which it continued to be interested in the bidding process and made its
offer. Having presented its offer, the consortium accepted the scope of the bidding
conditions and their clarifying circulars. The fact that Impregilo waived all other
jurisdictions prior to the filing of this claim makes the consent to the arbitration
invalid.

 

148. On October 18, 1999, the concession over the relevant area was awarded to the
consortium formed by Impregilo. On December 7, 1999, the Province and AGBA
signed the Concession Contract. The AGBA Concession Contract expressly provided
that disputes should be submitted to the competent contentious administrative forum
in the City of La Plata, with express waiver of any other forum or jurisdiction that
may be applicable for any reason whatsoever.

149. In spite of the clarity of the above-mentioned clauses, Impregilo attempts to
frame its claims within the Argentina-Italy BIT, when it is clear that those claims are
exclusively contractual in nature and, therefore, the clau: of those contractual
documents are the clauses that should be taken into account to analyze the
jurisdictional issue.

 

150. The clauses are totally clear as to the fact that if the parties considered there to be
a controversy, all claims in that regard should be made through the forum therein
established, to the exclusion of any other forum. The validity of such clause is
corroborated by the proceedings initiated by AGBA before the local courts.

151. It is true that many of the same clauses were addressed by the tribunal in the
Azurix v. Argentine Republic case and that the tribunal in that case considered that the
waiver did not cover the respondent’s claim because “the State is not a party to any of
the Contract Documents, and there was no waiver commitment made by the Claimant

 

-35-

in favour of Argentina”.°° Argentina respectfully considers that the opinion of the
tribunal was wrong and that the reasons outlined in its decision were not convincing.

152. In addition to the fact that all claims filed by Impregilo are contract-based claims
and that, therefore, the Tribunal is not competent as the Treaty only upholds the
Tribunal’s competence “with regard to matters governed by the [Treaty]”, AGBA, of
which Impregilo is a shareholder, brought an action before the courts of the Province
of Buenos Aires with respect to the same claims being asserted by Impregilo in the
instant proceeding. AGBA challenged not only administrative acts related to the
concession, but also the main decisions of the authorities in the Province of Buenos
Aires on which Impregilo bases its claims.

 

153. It follows that the Tribunal should dismiss Impregilo’s claims as they deal
wholly with matters on which ICSID does not have jurisdiction. For these same
claims, AGBA has resorted to the courts in the Province of Buenos Aires. Allowing
Impregilo’s claims would entail running the risk that Impregilo may obtain
compensation in this forum and through the instant proceeding, with the consequent
danger that, if these same claims are analyzed by an international tribunal, there
would be contradictory decisions and possibly even situations involving “double
compensation”.

154. Moreover, the Tribunal cannot base its competence on an umbrella clause in
Article II(2)(c) of the BIT between Argentina and the US. Article 8 of the Argentina-
Italy BIT is limited to “matters regulated by this Agreement”. The umbrella clause in
the Argentina-US BIT is not a matter that is governed by the Argentina-Italy BIT,
which contains no umbrella clause whatsoever. Consequently, an umbrella clause
cannot be incorporated via the MFN clause. In fact, Article 3(1) of the Argentina-Italy
BIT does not include any express reference to jurisdiction. The wording of Article
3(1) does not cover clearly and unequivocally the scope of Argentina’s agreement to
the arbitration under Article 8 of the Argentina-Italy BIT. Moreover, the reference to
“all other matters” does not expressly refer to the scope of the agreement from the
host country to submit an issue to arbitration. Argentina argues that the Tribunal lacks
any competence with respect to the claims based on the MFN clause in Article 3(1) of
the BIT Argentina-Italy regarding the umbrella clause under Article II(2)(c) of the
Argentina-US BIT. The latter is not a protection standard governed by the Argentina-
Italy BIT.

 

155. In any case, notwithstanding the purely jurisdictional issue, the MFN clause in
the Argentina-Italy BIT does not incorporate the umbrella clause of the Argentina-US
BIT. The umbrella clause is not within the purpose covered by the MFN clause or
within the territorial scope of the latter and any attempt to extend it would be against
the express purposes of the Parties to the Argentina-Italy BIT.

 

156. Moreover, compliance with Argentina’s obligations is not treatment “within
[Argentine] territory” under the terms of Article 3(1) of the Argentina-Italy BIT. Also,
the MFN clause in the Argentina-Italy BIT may not prevail on core issues which,
owing to their significance and importance, should be negotiated by the parties
specifically. An umbrella clause concerns such a core issue. General international law

56 Azurix, supra n. 43, para. 85.

- 36 -

does not guarantee compliance with contractual commitments or local law. The
umbrella clause introduces an exception to the general separation of obligations under
domestic law and international public law. Although the parties may agree to depart
from this general international law basic principle, such departure is a core issue that
must be specifically negotiated.

  

Impregilo:

157. Regardless of whether Impregilo’s claims could also raise questions relating to
the Concession Contract, Impregilo is asserting a cause of action under the BIT. From
the mere fact that Impregilo’s claims relate in some manner to the Concession
Contract, Argentina reaches the conclusion that all claims are contract claims over
which the Tribunal has no jurisdiction. Although Argentina certainly breached and
then abrogated the Concession Contract in multiple respects, that is not the dispute
that Impregilo has put before the Tribunal. Instead, Impregilo claims that Argentina
violated the BIT when it (i) confiscated Impregilo’s investment; (ii) failed to treat
Impregilo’s investment fairly and equitably; (iii) impaired by unjustified and
discriminatory measures Impregilo’s investment; (iv) failed to observe the obligations
entered into with regard to Impregilo’s investment; and (v) failed to provide full
protection and security to Impregilo’s investment.

 

158. Significant arbitral decisions establish that the mere fact that certain elements of
an investment dispute also involve (or can be characterized as) breaches of contract
does not suffice to transform a BIT dispute into a non-international contract claim or
to divest ICSID of jurisdiction. In Vivendi, the Annulment Committee clarified that
BIT claims often involve taking into account the terms of a contract in determining
whether there has been a breach of the BIT. This does not prevent the claims from
being treaty claims for which arbitration under the BIT is available. The Annulment
Committee found that the tribunal was wrong in holding that it could not consider any
allegation of breach of treaty that required it to interpret or apply the Concession
Contract.*”

159. Under comparable circumstances, ICSID decisions on jurisdiction have
uniformly rejected the argument that the existence of claims based on an underlying
concession, contract or license divests a BIT tribunal of jurisdiction. For example, the
Azurix tribunal rejected Argentina’s objection that Azurix’s claim was a contractual
claim arising out of its concession agreement with the Province of Buenos Aires.”
Reference is also made to LG&E,? Total v. Argentina” and JBM y. Ecuador.®!

160. Argentina seems to overlook the fact that this dispute involves some of the most
flagrant sovereign acts of a State: the imposition of new regulatory rules, the

57 Vivendi, supra n. 42, paras. 112-13.
°8 Azurix, supra n. 43, para. 76.
* LG&E, supra n. , para. 62.

© Total S.A. v. Argentina. ICSID Case No. ARB/04/1, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, Aug. 25,
2006.

°! IBM World Trade Corporation v. Ecuador. \CSID Case No. ARB/02/10, Decision on Jurisdiction,
Dec. 22, 2003.

-37-

unilateral alteration of the conditions under which a business was to operate and, most
importantly, the actual nationalization of Impregilo’s investment without
compensation.

161. Moreover, even if Impregilo’s claims were exclusively contractual, that would
not necessarily divest ICSID of jurisdiction, for “[i]t is clear from the general
language of Article 25(1) that ICSID jurisdiction may extend to disputes which are
purely contractual in character”.© At the jurisdictional stage, the question is only
whether the “essential basis” of the factual allegations about the host state’s actions,
however they are characterized, could constitute violations of obligations incumbent
on that State by virtue of a BIT or other relevant international law instrument.
Therefore, even if reference must be made to the underlying contracts, this does not
convert the BIT claims into mere breach of contract claims.

 

162. Impregilo claims for specific violations of the BIT relative to the investments
made by it in Argentina. Assuming the truth of the factual allegations made by
Impregilo in this case, it is quite clear that those allegations could establish violations
of the BIT. It is inst this test that the Tribunal must consider the jurisdictional
merit of Impregilo’s claims.

  

163. Impregilo’s right of action under the BIT is not precluded by the forum-selection
clauses in the bidding terms or the Concession Contract, because, regardless of
whether Impregilo’s claims raise questions relating to the Concession Contract,
Impregilo is asserting a cause of action under the BIT. In addition, the forum-
selection clauses mentioned by the Argentine Government have no effect on the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal. The same objection based on virtually the same clauses
was rejected by the Azurix tribunal.

 

 

164. In so far as the Argentine Republic refers to the bidding terms, it should be noted
that there is a lack of mutuality between the claims contemplated in the bidding terms
and claims arising out of the BIT. In addition, as noted by the express language of the
choice-of-forum provision found in the bidding terms, the nature and scope of the
parties’ agreement to submit to the jurisdiction of the courts of the Province is limited
to “bidding disputes”.

 

 

  

165. The Argentine Republic also misinterprets the scope of the Concession Contract.
Using the same line of argumentation as that applied to the bidding terms, Argentina
makes note of the choice-of-forum provision found in the Concession Contract, as it
has previously done unsuccessfully in a myriad of cases before ICSID tribunals. This
proposition, however, fails for the same reas the corresponding proposition
regarding the bidding terms. Principally, the scope of the choice-of-forum provision is
not applicable to claims arising out of the BIT. The language found in the choice-of-
forum provision makes it clear that its scope of application is limited to any dispute
regarding the construction and execution of the Concession Contract. This, of course,
limits the types of claims that are required to be submitted to the courts of the
Province to disputes concerning the Concession Contract.

  

 

© SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Philippines, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/6, Decision on
Jurisdiction, Jan. 29, 2004.

8 Acurix, supra n. 43, para. 77.

- 38 -

166. A waiver of investment rights such as those provided under a treaty must be
express and unequivocal and made by the parties involved in the dispute. In the
present case, Impregilo has not in any manner waived its right to protection under the
Argentina-Italy BIT.

 

167. Argentina provided its consent to ICSID jurisdiction in this case through the
open invitation made to Italian investors in the BIT. In so doing, Argentina did not
express any reservation concerning the applicability of the ICSID Convention in its
territory and did not denounce the Convention. Even if it had done so, such an act
would not affect the Tribunal’s jurisdiction due to the consent to ICSID’s jurisdiction
provided before such notice. As Argentina is the Contracting State to the ICSID
Convention, any participation of its constituent subdivisions or agencies before the
Centre or its tribunals requires a decision of the Contracting State and its previous
notice to the Centre.

 

168. Under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, a constituent subdivision of a
Contracting State may have standing before an ICSID tribunal if it has been
designated to the Centre by that State. Under Article 25(3), consent by such a
constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State requires the approval of the
State unless that State notifies the Centre that no such approval is required.

169. Argentina has not made such a designation and given such approval. Since the
Province was never designated to ICSID, the Province has no authority to act before
it, much less to rescind Argentina’s consent to ICSID jurisdiction provided through
the BIT or to issue any provision in relation to ICSID jurisdiction in Impregilo’s
proceedings against Argentina.

 

170. Argentina suggests that Impregilo has waived an ICSID venue in favor of the
Provincial contentious administrative courts of the city of La Plata. The adoption of
this proposition would constitute a denial of justice to Impregilo, as well as a de facto
repeal of Argentina’s obligations to Impregilo under the BIT, since Impregilo would
be left without a proper forum to enforce its BIT rights.

 

171. A long-standing principle of Argentine law states that only federal courts have
the power to hear cases in which the Argentine Republic is a party or which concern
federal matters such as international treaties. Consequently, the Provincial courts lack
competence to examine Impregilo’s BIT claims.

172. Impregilo also invokes — through the operation of the MFN clause of the BIT —
the more favorable treatment granted to US investors in the Argentina-US BIT. This
BIT contains an “umbrella clause” in its Article II(2)(c) which provides that each
Party shall observe any obligation it may have entered into with regard to
investments.

The Arbitral Tribunal:
173. According to Article 8 of the Argentina-Italy BIT, a dispute between an investor
of one of the Contracting Parties and the other Contracting Party may, on certain

conditions, be submitted to arbitration, provided that the dispute arises out of, or

- 39 -

relates to, the BIT. Impregilo alleges in this case that its rights under the BIT have
been violated in several respects. Argentina objects that all the claims made by
Impregilo are contract claims over which the Tribunal has no jurisdiction.

174. The Arbitral Tribunal thus has to consider whether Impregilo’s claims are treaty
claims rather than contractual claims, or in addition to being contractual claims, and,
if they are treaty claims, whether Impregilo, according to the terms of the Concession
Contract, can be considered to have waived its right to dispute settlement in the form
provided for in the BIT. The Tribunal also has to examine whether even contractual
claims may fall under the Tribunal’s jurisdiction as a consequence of the MFN clause
of the BIT.

 

175. Although the distinction between contractual claims and treaty claims is not
always clear, the Arbitral Tribunal notes in this case that the Concession Contract
deals with specific contractual rights and obligations, whereas the BIT concerns rights
and obligations of a different nature. Consequently, on the one hand, not all breaches
of the Province’s obligations in the Concession Contract would qualify as breaches of
the BIT. On the other hand, some acts may involve questions of the implementation of
the Concession Contract as well as the observance of Argentina’s obligations under
the BIT.

176. The distinction between treaty claims and contractual claims has frequently been
at issue in ICSID cases. In Vivendi, it was pointed out that a particular investment
dispute may at the same time involve both issues of the interpretation and application
of a treaty and questions of contract. In such cases, the questions as to whether there
has been a breach of the treaty and whether there has been a breach of the contract are
different questions, and each of them is to be examined separately.“ This statement
was relied on by the tribunal in TSA Spectrum de Argentina S.A. v. Argentina, which
added that, if the contract contains a specific clause on dispute settlement, this does
not exclude recourse to the settlement procedure in the treaty, unless there is a clear
indication in the contract itself or elsewhere that the parties to the contract intended in
such manner to limit the application of the treaty.

 

 

 

177. In any case, as a general rule, a violation of a contract is not a violation of
international law. In Hamester v. Ghana, the tribunal stated that “[t]he starting
premise is that only the State as a sovereign can be in violation of its international
obligations”.°° This principle has been re-stated by many ICSID tribunals. The
following citations are examples:

Waste Management v. Mexico:

“In the Tribunal’s view, an enterprise is not expropriated just because its debts are not paid or
other contractual obligations towards it are breached. There was no outright repudiation of the
transaction in the present case, and if the City entered into the Concession Agreement on the

Vivendi, supra n. 42, para. 101.

® TSA supra nA, para. 58. See also SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Pakistan, ICSID Case
No. ARB/01/13, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, Aug. 6, 2003, paras. 146-47; Eureko B.V. v.
Poland, UNCITRAL (“Eureko”), Partial Award, Aug. 19, 2005, paras. 112-13.

°° Gustav F W Hamester GmbH & Co KG v. Republic of Ghana, 1CSID Case No. ARB/07/24, Award,
18 June 2010, para. 328.

-40-

178.

basis of an over-optimistic assessment of the possibilities, so did Acaverde. It is not the function
of Article 1110 to compensate for failed business ventures, absent arbitrary intervention by the
State amounting to a virtual taking or sterilising of the enterprise.”

Joy Machinery Limited v. Egypt:

“A basic general distinction can be made between commercial aspects of a dispute and other
aspects involving the existence of some forms of State interference with the operation of the
contract involved.”

Impregilo v. Pakistan:

“Only the State in the exercise of its sovereign authority (“puissance publique”), and not as a
contracting party, may breach the obligations assumed under the BIT. In other words, the
investment protection treaty only provides a remedy to the investor where the investor proves
that the alleged damages were a consequence of the behaviour of the Host State acting in breach
of the obligations it had assumed under the treaty.”

Noble Ventures v. Romania:

“The Tribunal recalls the well established rule of general international law that in normal
circumstances per se a breach of a contract by the State does not give rise to direct international
responsibility on the part of the State. This derives from the clear distinction between municipal
law on the one hand and international law on the other, two separate legal systems.”””

Azurix v. Argentina:

“The Tribunal agrees that contractual breaches by a State party or one of its instrumentalities
would not normally constitute expropriation. Whether one or series of such breaches can be
considered to be measures tantamount to expropriation will depend on whether the State or its
instrumentality has breached the contract in the exercise of its sovereign authority, or as a party
toa contract.””!

The Concession Contract provides in Article 16.7 that any dispute arising

between the Granting Authority and the Concessionaire related to the interpretation

® Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States (Number 2), ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3,
Final Award, April 30, 2004, para. 160.

Joy Mining Machinery Limited v. Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/11, Award on Jurisdiction, August
6, 2004, para. 72.

® Impregilo S.p.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/3 (ItalyPakistan BIT),
Decision on Jurisdiction, para.. 260, citing, inter alia, the review of jurisprudence in Stephen M.
Schwebel, “Justice in International Law” (Grotius / CUP), Chapter 26 : “On Whether the Breach by
a State of a Contract with an Alien is a Breach of International Law”: “ there is more than doctrinal
authority in support of the conclusion that, while mere breach by a State of a contract with an alien
(whose proper law is not international law) is not a violation of international law, a ‘non-
commercial’ act of a State contrary to such a contract may be. That is to say, the breach of such a
contract by a State in ordinary commercial intercourse is not, in the predominant view, a violation of
international law, but the use of the sovereign authority of a State, contrary to the expectations of the
parties, to abrogate or violate a contract with an alien, is a violation of international law. - - - - when
the State employs its legislative or administrative or executive authority as only a State can employ
governmental authority to undo the fundamental expectation on the basis of which parties
characteristically contract — performance, not non-performance — then it engages its international
responsibility.”

” Noble Ventures, Inc. v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/11, Award, October 12, 2005, para. 53.

7! Azurix v. Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/O1/12, Award, July 14, 2006, para, 315 (Azurix
Award),

-41-

and performance of the Contract shall be resolved by the administrative courts of
competent jurisdiction in and for the city of La Plata and that the parties waive any
other applicable jurisdiction or venue.

 

 

179. It should then be immediately observed that it was AGBA, and not Impregilo,
that concluded the Concession Contract and made this undertaking in regard to
dispute resolution.

180. The Arbitral Tribunal considers that the wording of Article 16.7 of the
Concession Contract cannot be considered to exclude recourse to a remedy under the
BIT in cases where a dispute arises about acts which might constitute breaches of both
the Concession Contract and the BIT.

   

 

181. The suggestion that AGBA’s undertaking in the Concession Contract should be
considered as a waiver by Impregilo of its right to initiate proceedings based on the
BIT seems to be far-fetched and unconvincing.

 

182. It should also be observed that Impregilo’s main claims in this arbitration
concern acts that are alleged to constitute expropriation, unfair treatment and
discrimination, which are all claims that go beyond mere contractual breaches even if
the factual basis of the two types of claims may to a large extent coincide.

183. The Arbitral Tribunal accepts, however, that some of Impregilo’s allegations
concern mere contractual issues. Even so, the question arises as to whether these
claims, by application of the MFN clause in Article 3(1) of the Argentina-Italy BIT
and the umbrella clause in the Argentina-US BIT, may fall under the Arbitral
Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

 
 

 

184. The substantive protection of the MFN clause is very wide in so far as it relates
to all matters regulated by the BIT. Nevertheless, the reference to matters regulated by
the BIT sets an outer limit, and it is debatable whether contractual breaches are
matters regulated by the BIT.

185. It must be observed, however, that all alleged contractual breaches in the present
case concern the Concession Contract between AGBA and the Province of Buenos
Aires. Consequently, even if the MFN clause could be used to include contractual
matters, there would not in this case be any such matter involving Impregilo as a party
to a contract, and there would clearly be no basis in the BIT for examining whether
the Province had violated its contractual obligations vis-a-vis AGBA, since AGBA is
not an investor protected under the BIT.

186. It follows that the question of whether the MFN clause in combination with the
umbrella clause could entitle the Tribunal to examine contractual issues is in this case
an entirely theoretical question since there would be no contractual issues to be
considered between Argentina and Impregilo.

187. The Arbitral Tribunal therefore finds it unnecessary to express an opinion on
whether an extension to contractual issues on the basis of a combination of the MFN
clause and the umbrella clause would be justified in other circumstances.

    

-42-

188. At the same time, the Arbitral Tribunal cannot accept Argentina’s argument that
all the claims made by Impregilo are contract claims over which the Tribunal has no
jurisdiction. In fact, Impregilo argues that its investment was expropriated and was
subject to unfair treatment, these being clearly issues under the BIT and not
exclusively contractual claims.

189. Consequently, Argentina’s third jurisdictional objection shall be upheld but only
to the extent that contractual breaches, which do not at the same time involve

violations of Argentina’s obligations to investors under the BIT, are concerned.

V. MERITS OF THE CASE
A. Requests for relief

190. Impregilo requests:

(a) a declaration that Argentina has violated the Argentina-Italy BIT and
international law with respect to Impregilo’s investments,

(b) an order that Argentina pay compensation to Impregilo for all damages it has
suffered plus compound interest until the day of full payment, and

(c) an order that Argentina pay the costs for the proceedings, including the
Tribunal’s fees and expenses and the costs of Impregilo’s representation, subject
to compound interest until the day of full payment.

 

191. The Argentine Republic requests that Impregilo’s claim against the Argentine
Republic be dismissed and Impregilo be ordered to pay for all the expenses and costs
arising out of the arbitral proceeding.

B. The Parties’ positions

192. Impregilo argues that the Argentine Government:

(a) directly expropriated or nationalized its investment in AGBA without any
compensation,

(b) failed to treat Impregilo’s investment in AGBA fairly and equitably,

 

(c) impaired by unjustified and discriminatory measures the management,
operation, maintenance, use, enjoyment, acquisition, expansion or disposal of
Impregilo’s investment in AGBA,

(d) failed to provide full protection and security to Impregilo’s investments in
AGBA, and

(e) violated specific obligations entered into with respect to Impregilo’s
investments in AGBA.

-43-

193. The Argentine Republic contests all these allegations.
194. The Parties have presented the following main arguments.
Impregilo:

195. The Concession Contract and the Regulatory Framework provided strong
protection and guarantees to the investment. The four principal guarantees were: (i)
protection against devaluation and inflation, addressed by having tariffs in US
dollars; (ii) guarantees against unilateral changes to the tariff regime; (iii)
agreements that the tariffs would cover costs, plus a reasonable rate of return; and
(iv) assurances that the economic equation of the contract would not be unilaterally
changed without full and integral compensation.

 

   

196. Shortly after AGBA took over the Concession Contract, the Province began to
repudiate its commitments and obligations, preventing AGBA from generating the
revenues it had expected to allow implementation of the work program required
under the Concession Contract.

197. During the 1999 bidding process, the Province committed to deliver three
waste treatment plants (the “UNJREC plants”’) for the handling of effluents in what
would be AGBA’s concession area. It promised that the UNIREC plants would be
operational by 2001. AGBA relied on the timely entry into operation of these
treatment plants. Without them, AGBA could not expand the sewage network to
new areas, nor connect additional customers in areas already served. However, the
Province completed the plants only after it had nationalized AGBA’s concession in
2006.

198. The Province and ORAB purposely delayed or refused AGBA’s requests to
update the categorizations of AGBA’s customers. Soon after taking over the
concession, AGBA sought to recategorize non-metered customers who had made
improvements to their properties. Although AGBA had received the official updated
customers database during the bidding process, ORAB prevented the
recategorization of customers until it could verify each customer’s property
valuation, which it never did. In addition, the customer database provided by the
Province contained severe inconsistencies and errors.

 

on Contract and the Regulatory Framework provided
that prices for non-metered customers would be based on the Province’s 1958
Valuation methodology. The 1958 valuation had assessed values for the real estate
in the concession area, and therefore, it was crucial for calculating the price to be
paid by non-metered customers. However, the Valuation methodology was not
compatible with the AGOSBA customers’ database provided to the bidders during
the tender. At the same time, after AGBA took over the Concession Contract, the
Province tried to increase its real estate tax collection, updating the 1958 Valuation
methodology to the so-called 2000 Valuation methodology. The 2000 Valuation
methodology improved the compatibility issues with AGOSBA’s customer
database. AGBA sought to use this more up-to-date and compatible Valuation
methodology to assess the non-metered property for new parcels of real estate or
those with new construction. In preventing AGBA from using the more updated and

199. Furthermore, the Conces

  

 

 

  

-44-

compatible Valuation methodology, ORAB hampered AGBA’s expected revenues.

200. ORAB and the Province also unilaterally altered the Regulatory Framework by
(i) denying AGBA’s right to collect “work charges” for some new connections, and
(ii) preventing AGBA from applying the 2001 coefficient for water and sewage
services. ORAB delayed and eventually prohibited AGBA from applying the
incremental sewage charge coefficient beyond the first year.

201. The Province’s conduct was motivated by a political and populist desire to
prevent any increases in water and sewage bills. Elected provincial officials were
not willing to accept any increase in customers’ water and sewage bills and made no
effort to accommodate AGBA’s contractual rights to effect increases, even though
its conduct was detrimental to AGBA’s investment and work plans under the
Concession Contract. The Province’s action damaged AGBA and its shareholders’
ability to obtain the financing needed to comply with its own commitments under
the works and investment plan.

202. The Province’s regulatory behavior went from bad to worse in early 2002. In
January 2002, the Federal Government and the Province enacted emergency
legislation depriving AGBA of fundamental contract and legal rights. First, on
January 6, 2002, the Federal Government enacted the Federal Emergency Law No.
25,561 (the “Federal Emergency Law”). The most destructive part of this Law was
the elimination from public utilities concessions agreements of the right to calculate
tariffs in US dollars. Instead, the peso was devalued at an artificial rate, which was
later worsened when the Government let the peso float. Six days after the Federal
Congress passed the Federal Emergency Law, ORAB followed the Federal
Government and issued Resolution 4/2002 “pesifyng” and freezing AGBA’s tariffs.
This Resolution was later confirmed by the Province’s Law No. 12,858 (the
“Provincial Emergency Law”). Thus, like the Federal Government, the Province
eliminated the Concession Contract’s right to calculate tariffs in US dollars and
express them in pesos at the current exchange rate on the billing date. This had the
effect of reducing AGBA’s revenues by two-thirds.

 

 

203. At the same time, the Province required AGBA to observe all their contractual
and regulatory obligations and forced AGBA to participate in a renegotiation
process that was supposed to bring the Concession Contract’s economics back into
balance. This, however, was the beginning of the end for AGBA, and for
Impregilo’s investment.

204. First, the Provincial Emergency Law brought any potential investment and
financing in AGBA to a halt, and the Concession Contract was literally finished.
Second, the Province’s mandated renegotiation process was a failure.

205. By 2002, the majority of the Province’s water and sewerage sector was back
under the Province’s control. Some concession areas had been taken over by the
recently created state-owned company ABSA, and the Province favored its own
company ABSA, in prejudice to the small and privately-owned AGBA.

206. While the Province funded ABSA with millions of dollars in fresh cash in
2003, including a promise to raise its tariffs by 30%, that was to become effective in

-45-

2005, it ignored AGBA’s request to re-introduce balance to the Concession
Contract’s economic equation. The Province also started launching work plans in
ABSA’s concession area, all financed with the support of the Province. This was not
just clear discriminatory behavior against AGBA, but it showed that the Province
was unwilling to keep a private operator in its water and sewerage sector.

  

   

 

207. In mid 2003, the Province made clear its decision to wipe out Impregilo’s
investment in AGBA by dismantling the Concession Contract and the Regulatory
Framework. By means of an Executive Decree of June 9, 2003, the Provincial
Governor repealed the law that in 1996 had approved the Regulatory Framework,
dismantling the main protections and guarantees offered by the Province during the
privatization in 1999. The Governor’s decree created new rules that radically
departed from the guarantees of the Concession Contract and the Regulatory
Framework approved in 1996.

208. First, while the Concession Contract specified that tariffs would be calculated
in accordance with the economic cost of providing the service, the new regulatory
regime based tariffs on customers’ creditworthiness. Second, AGBA would no
longer be the exclusive provider in its concession area. Third, the investments in the
concession area would be chosen and implemented by the Province, not AGBA.
Fourth, AGBA would not be entitled to charge a connection or work fee for new
customers or connections. AGBA would also lose its right to cut off service to
delinquent customers.

 

 

 

209. Finally, in July 2006, the Province terminated the Concession Contract, leaving
no private operator in the Province and City of Buenos Aires. As motivation, the
Province alleged that AGBA had failed to comply with its obligations under the
Concession Contract. This allegation was without merit. In fact, any failure of
AGBA to comply with the investment plan was the result of the Province’s various
breaches of its commitments in the Regulatory Framework and the Concession
Contract. The Province, not AGBA, broke the rules of the concession by abrogating
fundamental guarantees under the contract, and particularly by undermining the
possibility of the investment’s success by its actions in January 2002. The
termination of AGBA’s Concession Contract was nothing more than the
culmination of the Province’s and Federal Government’s political desire to retake
control of the water and sewerage sector.

 

The Argentine Republic:

210. The measures challenged by Impregilo in this arbitration are general measures
adopted by the Argentine Republic and the Province of Buenos Aires in the context of
a systematic and serious crisis. These measures violate neither the Argentina-Italy
BIT nor international law. They had to be adopted within the context of the collapse
caused by the worst economic, political and social crisis ever experienced by the
Argentine Republic. They affected all the inhabitants of the Argentine Republic in the
same way, whether nationals or foreigners, and were aimed at making it possible for
the economy to be restructured, thus preventing all economic activities from
becoming unfeasible.

- 46 -

211. Impregilo seeks to hide behind the emergency measures adopted by Argentina
and by the Province in order to explain the failure of AGBA’s conc:
failure was the result of the high risks assumed by Impregilo, the bad busin
it made and its poor performance throughout the term of the concession.

 
   

212. Impregilo, through AGBA, voluntarily invested in one of the most impecunious
regions in the Province, with a high poverty rate and a low number of inhabitants with
access to the water network (an average of 35.4%) and to the sewer network (an
average of 13.4%) as well as a high uncollectability rate (37% of the users failed to
pay their bills in 1999). The consortium of which Impregilo was a part knew (or
should have known) about the characteristics of the region.

213. An example of how unattractive this area was for investors is the fact that the
bidding process for the region was cancelled because no bids were submitted in the
first call and, during the second call for bids, the only party to submit a bid was the
consortium of which Impregilo is a part, which was awarded the concession in
exchange for the payment of a USD 1.26 million fee.

214. AGBA undertook to implement a strong investment and works program during
the first five years, by means of a POES which it presented and which was approved
by the Province.

215. AGBA had undertaken to invest USD 230 million during the first five years as
well as to achieve the aim that, by the year 2004, 74% of the people would be
connected to the water network and 55% would be connected to the sewer network.
The concessionaire had further undertaken to build two sewer treatment plants and to
restore five existing treatment plants.

216. In spite of AGBA’s commitments, soon after the beginning of the concession
there were clear signs that AGBA would not fulfill its obligations. In May 2001, prior
to the emergency measures, AGBA requested that the Concession Contract be
renegotiated and its obligations be suspended, claiming as a reason the high
uncollectability rate and its difficulties in obtaining financing. These were two risks
that had been voluntarily assumed by AGBA as concessionaire.

 

217. Two months thereafter, AGBA reiterated its request for renegotiation and
suspension of the POES, but this time it claimed as a reason the economic crisis that
had already begun to strike the Argentine Republic. Through this second request,
AGBA intended to hide its actual management problems related to collectability and
financing.

218. Furthermore, AGBA sought to justify its breaches in the implementation of the
POES by claiming the failure of the Provincial Executing Unit (“UNJREC”) to build
two treatment plants and to expand and restore another existing plant. However, the
sewer connections that poured water into such plants amounted to merely 34.7% of all
the connections to be made by AGBA during the first five years and they only applied
to certain districts and not to the rest of the area subject to the concession.

219. Between December 2001 and January 2002, the Argentine crisis reached its
peak. In January 2002, the Argentine Federal Government enacted the Argentine

-47-

Emergency Law and, little thereafter, the Province enacted a similar law for the
provincial context. One of the first measures to be applied to public utility contracts
both at a national and at a provincial level was the removal of the systems for
calculating rates in US dollars because those systems were tied to the existence of the
convertibility regime that had been applied in Argentina between 1991 and 2001.

220. In the case of AGBA, this measure became especially important due to the fact
that, because of the characteristics of the area in which the company provided the
service, an increase in rates of at least 200% would have been impossible to pay. In
addition, due to the serious collectability problems derived from AGBA’s
inefficiency, such an increase would only have worsened its situation.

221. In this context, in a spirit of goodwill for the purpose of securing the continuance
of AGBA’s concession, the Province declared that the goals of the POES for the first
year of the concession, i.e. 2000, had been attained, although AGBA had not reached
the expansion goals set forth for that year. In yet another display of goodwill, the
Province suspended the company’s obligations with respect to the second year of the
concession, i.e. 2001, when there were already signs that the company would not be
able to achieve the goals set forth for that period. As from that moment, and in order
to make the process for renegotiating the contract with AGBA easier, the Province
refrained from taking measures against the company in spite of its continuous
breaches.

 

222. In response to the existing situation, the Province enacted a New Regulatory
Framework and made room for an opportunity to improve the contract with AGBA by
maintaining the principles of the previous framework and including essential tools for
making the renegotiation easier. Such framework was invoked on several occasions
by AGBA in order to benefit from its application.

223. The renegotiation process failed through the exclusive fault of AGBA which
demanded, among other things, an excessive 93% rate increase as well as being
exempted from any investment in the area subject to the concession.

 

 

224. AGBA threatened the Province with terminating the Concession Contract
through the fault of the Province if it did not satisfy its demands within 45 days. It
invoked as proof of AGBA’s fulfillment of its obligations that no measures had been
taken against AGBA, although this was not due to the fact that there were no breaches
but to the Province’s will not to affect the provision of the public service. This
situation left the Province with no choice but to terminate the Conc: m Contract
due to AGBA’s flagrant breaches in the six years of duration of the concession. In
order to terminate the Concession Contract, the Province followed the procedures and
applied the grounds provided for therein. AGBA filed a complaint against the
termination decree before the administrative courts for the city of La Plata and
reserved the right to claim damages.

 

 

 

225. The Argentine Republic cannot be held liable for the risks assumed by Impregilo
and for AGBA’s poor management. In any case, even if these circumstances were not
present in the case, the measures taken by the Argentine Republic and by the Province
were not contrary to the BIT, to customary international law or to Argentine law.

  

- 48 -

226. Impregilo’s claim for damages rests upon a calculation of the income it would
have obtained if it had made investments it never actually made, funded with loans it
was never granted, because of a wrong business ment based on optimistic and
incorrect financial projections, due to bi that the company did not take
into account in evaluating the business opportunity. In any case, the measures
challenged by Impregilo did not cause any damage to its investment, since the net
value of such investment was extremely negative when the measures were adopted.

 
  
  

‘iness ris

 

 

227. The Argentine Republic has accorded fair and equitable treatment to Impregilo’s
investment at all times in accordance with the BIT and international law. The
measures challenged by Impregilo are general in nature and bear no discriminatory
feature at all. In fact, the domestic and foreign investors who were in similar
situations received exactly the same treatment.

228. The measures adopted did not amount to expropriatory acts in violation of the
BIT or of international law, and there was no significant deprivation of property. In
addition, the regulatory actions taken by the Province and Argentina were lawful and
proportionate. In this case, the regulatory powers of the State were particularly
important in order to guarantee its inhabitants the human right to water.

 

229. The rules adopted by the Argentine Republic were not arbitrary. In the face of
the acute crisis, the Argentine Republic and the Province took a series of measures
that were fully justified by the need to reduce as much as possible its effects on the
country in general and on investments in particular.

 

 

230. On the other hand, the obligations assumed by the Argentine Republic as regards
investments do not prevail over the obligations assumed in treaties on human rights.
Therefore, the obligations arising from the BIT must not be construed separately but
in accordance with the rules on protection of human rights. Treaties on human rights
providing for the human right to water must be especially taken into account in this
case.

231. Notwithstanding the fact that the Argentine Republic did not breach any treaty
provision, the measures challenged are protected under Article 4 of the BIT and under
the concept of the state of necessity provided for in international law. The adoption of
such measures was the only viable alternative to prevent the disappearance of the
Argentine State.

C. The Arbitral Tribunal’s reasoning
(i) The Concession Contract

232. The Concession Contract was concluded on December 7, 1999. It conferred on
AGBA as concessionaire a number of rights and obligations which were set out in the
Regulatory Framework as well as in the Contract itself. Article 3.2 of the Contract
provided that AGBA should, in particular, “perform all tasks related to service
provision required under the applicable laws to guarantee effective supply to Users,
the protection of public health and the rational use of resources”.

 

- 49 -

233. According to Article 3.3, the drinking water supply and the sewerage service
should be expanded according to the POES and Five-Year Plans which were to be
part of the Contract and binding on AGBA.

234. The POES (Annex F to the Contract) provided that AGBA should expand the
drinking water and sewerage services and accomplish for each region certain
specified goals. The drinking water and sewerage networks should be expanded
during the first two years with a certain number of new connections, specified per
district, and the expansion should continue with a substantial further increase as from
the third year. In Article 1.8 of the Concession Contract, AGBA undertook to make
all the investments required to implement the POES.

235. In return, AGBA was given various rights and guarantees in the Concession
Contract. According to Article 1.6 of the Concession Contract, AGBA should enjoy
an exclusive right to provide the Service within the Concession Area, subject to the
Regulatory Framework and certain provisions in the Contract itself. According to
Article 3.5, property owners would be under a duty to connect to the water network
by paying the applicable fee for connection to the mains to AGBA. They would also
be under a duty to pay for the Service pursuant to the applicable tariff regime even if
the property had no connection to external Service networks. Nonetheless, this
provision should not apply to vacant properties if there had been a request for non-
connection or Service disconnection, which should be subject to the charges
established in the Tariff Regime for those special cases.

236. The tariff system was dealt with in Annex N to the Concession Contract. It
provided for the prices to be paid by the Users to AGBA, for work fees and
connection fees that users should pay when being connected to drinking water and
sewerage services and also allowed AGBA to interrupt its services on certain
conditions where users were late in paying their bills.

237. The term of the concession was 30 years and the first year of operation was
2000.

(ii) Impregilo’s Investment

238. Impregilo owns 42.58 percent of AGBA’s stock and made a USD 21.3 million
equity investment in AGBA. In the present proceedings, Impregilo has, to a large
extent, claimed violation of rights belonging to AGBA and can therefore be
considered to have implicitly considered AGBA’s rights as protected investments.

239. It should be pointed out that AGBA is an Argentine company, as it is
incorporated under the laws of Argentina and registered in Argentina.

240. In its Article 25(2), the ICSID Convention gives a definition of the companies
that can be considered as nationals of a given State:

“(2) ‘National of another Contracting State’ means:

(b) any juridical person which had the nationality of a Contracting State other than the State
party to the dispute on the date on which the parties consented to submit such dispute to
conciliation or arbitration and any juridical person which had the nationality of the Contracting

-50-

State party to the dispute on that date and which, because of foreign control, the parties have
agreed should be treated as a national of another Contracting State for the purposes of this
Convention.”

241. In the BIT, Article 1 gives the following definition of the expression “legal
entity”:

“legal entity’ means, in respect of each one of the Contracting Parties, any entity established
and recognized under the laws of a Contracting Party, having its seat in the territory of that
Party, such as a public entity engaged in economic activities, partnerships or corporations,
foundations and associations, whether with limited or unlimited liability.”

  

242. It follows that AGBA is not a protected investor under the BIT. Nor is AGBA a
legal entity which, because of foreign control, the Contracting States have agreed
should be treated as an Italian national whose rights should be protected investments
for the purposes of the ICSID Convention and this arbitration.

 

243. A similar situation existed in CMS v. Argentina in which the tribunal stated as
follows:

“In [the Tribunal’s] view, while the acquisition of shares qualifies as an investment under the
Treaty, neither TGN, as an Argentine corporation, nor the License qualify as an investment
under the BIT. TCN, the argument follows, has its own assets, including the License; because
these assets do not constitute an investment under the Treaty, CMS’s claims, based on the
alleged breach of TGN’s rights under the License cannot be considered to arise directly from an

investment.” ”

 

244. The CMS tribunal accepted jurisdiction, not on the basis of any rights of the
Argentine company TGN or any rights relating to the License, which were not
protected investments, but on account of the existence of the shareholding of CMS in
the Argentine company:

“The Tribunal [...] finds no bar in current international law to the concept of allowing claims to
shareholders independently from those of the corporation concerned, not even if those
shareholders are minority or non-controlling shareholders.

Because - - - the rights of the Claimant can be asserted independently from the rights of TGN
and those relating to the License, and because the Claimant has a separate cause of action under
the Treaty in connection with the protected investment, the Tribunal concludes that the present
dispute arises directly from the investment made and that therefore there is no bar to the
exercise of jurisdiction on this count.”

a

245. Similarly, AGBA does not qualify as a protected investor under the ICSID
Convention and the BIT, and its contractual rights cannot be considered protected
investments. On the other hand, Impregilo’s shares in AGBA were an investment
protected under the BIT. Reference may be made here to the Swez cases and the
following quotation from one of these cases:

“The Claimants, as shareholders in ASA, had an indirect interest in the Concession to operate
the water and sewage system of Buenos Aires for a period of thirty years. - - - AASA as holder

CMS, supra n.35, July 17, 2003, para. 66.
* Id, paras, 48 and 68.

-51-

of the Concession had only a legal right to receive a stream of revenue from the operation of the
system for a period of time. - - - As shareholders in AASA, the Claimants had an indirect
interest in those same rights. Company shares are considered “investments” under the
Argentina-France BIT (Article 1 (b)), the Argentina-Spain BIT (Article 1(b)(2), and the
Argentina-U.K. BIT (Article 1(a)(ii) ). The economic value of such shares would be directly
affected by any action taken against the assets of AASA. Thus, the Claimants had investments
capable of protection from expropriation.”

 

246. Consequently, the protected investment in this case is Impregilo’s shareholding
in AGBA. This does not exclude that measures primarily taken in regard to AGBA
may also affect Impregilo’s investment.

(iii) AGBA’s performance and the termination of the Concession Contract

247. In a letter of May 17, 2001, AGBA told the Minister of Public Works and
Services of the Province of Buenos Aires that it had experienced considerable
difficulties in receiving payment from users for its Services and that this had affected
its capacity to make the investments required under the expansion program. As
AGBA had not obtained bank loans, it had also been impossible to achieve the goals
of the Five-Year Plan. AGBA therefore made the following request:

 

“During the 16 months it has been providing the service, AGBA has clearly shown its capacity
to perform the Concession Contract in an efficient manner as regards all matters within its
reasonable control. The abovementioned problems exceed such scope and therefore make it
necessary to implement corrective mechanisms to restore the Contract’s equilibrium in order to
fulfill its purpose.

 

In view of the foregoing and in order to proceed in the shortest time possible, as required by the
circumstances, we hereby request that a work commission be created in order to jointly analyze
the solutions and alternatives most appropriate for that purpose.

In addition, we also request, as a provisional measure, that the expansion goals be temporarily
suspended until the above commission makes a decision.

Finally, we require that the Granting Authority actively cooperate in the negotiations currently
being held with the [Inter-American Development Bank] for funding, in such aspects as may be
within the scope of its powers.”

248. Soon thereafter, in letters of July 17 and August 15, 2001, AGBA asked ORAB
to suspend temporarily the execution of the POES. In these letters, AGBA invoked
the serious economic situation. In a letter of September 2001, AGBA referred to “the
serious issues that preclude the normal development of the Concession” and asked for
the Governor’s personal intervention in the matter. In a further letter of December 27,
2001, AGBA requested modifications of the Concession Contract in order to restore
the original equilibrium of the Contract. AGBA referred to the unforeseeable and
unusual impossibility to collect fees for services in the concession area and to the
supervening, exceptional and unforeseeable distortion of financial market conditions
that restrained s to credit and prevented compliance with investment plans.
AGBA also raised a number of specific issues, such as an abrupt transition to a

 

 

 

4 Suez II, Decision on Liability, July 30, 2010, para. 130.

-52-

metered tariff system which violated AGBA’s right to obtain a fair market price for its
services, deficiencies in the list of customers and incorrect users’ categorization, the
failure of the authorities to provide the UNIREC treatment plants.

 

249. It thus appears that since the end of the first half of 2001 AGBA considered the
situation to be such that it could not fulfill its obligations under the Concession
Contract and that the Contract therefore had to be amended in AGBA’s favor or other
measures had to be taken which would again make the concession a viable enterprise
for AGBA. Although AGBA, in the letter of December 27, 2001, complains of the
action or inaction of the authorities on specific matters, it would seem that AGBA, at
this stage, attributed its difficulties to the economic situation in general and to the
difficulties in obtaining payment from customers for AGBA’s services.

   

250. However, AGBA also referred to a specific reason for some of the collectability
difficulties, i.e. that there were large numbers of unregistered customers connected to
the water network who had not previously paid for the services. In its letter of May
17, 2001, AGBA stated that the difficulties in collecting fees for the services had been
seriously aggravated by the incorporation of 80,000 users who had not been included
in AGOSBA’s list of customers and who had a non-collection rate of 70% or even
80% in some neighborhoods. These users had never before been charged for the
investment or the services which explained their reluctance to pay.

 
 

 

251. It is unclear whether the existence of this large group of users who had not been
billed for the services provided for them had been brought to AGBA’s attention
before the Concession Contract was concluded. In any case, the Argentine Republic
has not adduced any convincing evidence showing that AGBA had been duly
informed, and the Arbitral Tribunal therefore accepts that in this regard the Argentine
Republic was to some extent responsible for the unexpected problems that arose for
AGBA and made it considerably more difficult for AGBA to attain the collectability
goals it had set up.

252. However, this does not wholly explain AGBA’s inability to fulfill its obligations
according to the POES and the first Five-Year plan as regards investments and
expansion of water and sewage services.

 

253. Nevertheless, during the first period of the concession, the Argentine authorities
showed a considerable degree of indulgence and tolerance towards any deficiencies
that existed in AGBA’s performance. On August 27, 2001, ORAB’s Technical
Department declared that AGBA’s performance during the first year of the concession
had shown an acceptable degree of compliance with the POES. The Technical
Department also supported the request for a suspension of the POES in view of the
economic hardship facing the Province and the country. Subsequently, a favorable
opinion was also given by ORAB’s Economic Regulation Department on November
23, 2001 and by ORAB’s Law and Resolution Department on December 3, 2001.
Even one year later, on December 2, 2002, the Technical Department of ORAB, in a
Report to the President of ORAB, declared that AGBA had essentially satisfied the
goals established for the first concession year 2000.

  

 

254. Finally, in Resolution No. 69/02 of December 5, 2002, the Board of Directors of
ORAB, representing the Province, found as follows:

-53-

“It may be inferred from the analysis performed that the Concessionaire met the service
expansion and quality goals undertaken for the first year of the concession, as described in
‘Annex F to the Concession Contract - - -.

With respect to the expansion goals set in connection with the drinking water and wastewater
services, it must be noted that the minimum number of connections for region B indicated in
Articles 2.1.1 and 2.1.2 of Annex F to the Concession Contract has been met.

 

In this respect, the Concessionaire made 46,588 new drinking water connections, in excess of
the 26,500 connections scheduled for year one of the concession (Article 2.1 of Annex F). The
Concessionaire also made 15,380 wastewater connections.

 

Although an expansion goal of the Concession Contract consisted in putting 26,000 new
wastewater connections in operation throughout the region, it should be noted that the
wastewater treatment plants were not available during that period to treat the wastewater
flowing from those connections, which prevented the Concessionaire from connecting new
users to the service and from putting those connections in operation.

Nevertheless, it should be highlighted that the purpose behind the expansion goals set forth in
the Contract is to release the service for its use and therefore increase the number of users
served, from whom the Concessionaire may recover the investment made in the expansion.

The fact that the Concessionaire was prevented from operating the treatment plants was the
reason why not all wastewater connections provided for in Annex F were made, given that it is
not possible to release the wastewater service for its use without previously treating the effluents
collected, a situation which could pose a threat to the health of the population and the
environment which must be protected by the Regulatory Agency.

It was determined that in order to replace and recondition the drinking water connections, the
Concessionaire made connections along 13,200 meters, which represents 3.2% of the total
length, and renewed and/or reconditioned 17,200 meters of wastewater piping, which represents
2.7% of the total length.

Pursuant to Article 2.3 of Annex F to the Concession Contract, on the basis of the percentages
undertaken with respect to the annual renewal and/or reconditioning of drinking water and
wastewater piping, the foregoing implies that the Concessionaire has met the annual percentage
undertaken in Annex F to the Concession Contract - - -.

In addition, the Concessionaire has fulfilled the service quality goals, as evidenced by the report
issued by the Service Quality Division and recorded on page 431 of the case-file, which
expressly provides that ‘It is hereby informed that, during the first year of the concession, the
quality of the water provided for consumption in concession area No. 2 and the discharge of
wastewater effluents from the treatment plants related to the concession services meet the
parameters set forth in the Contract (Annexes C and D).'”

 

 

 

 

255. The Board of Directors of ORAB therefore resolved:

“SECTION 1: That the Annual Report on the Progress of the POES and Service Levels
submitted by [AGBA] for year one of the concession, i.e. year 2000, be approved on the basis of
the foregoing clauses;

SECTION 2: That [AGBA] has met the service expansion and quality goals of the first year of
the concession (year 2000), as provided in Annex F to the Concession Contract, which was
incorporated into the First Five-Year Plan which is an integral part of the POES approved by
Resolution No. 07/01;

256. As regards the second year of the concession, i.e. 2001, AGBA, in a letter of
September 13, 2001 to the Governor of the Province of Buenos Aires, referred to the

  

-54-

serious situation that had arisen in regard to the implementation of the Concession
Contract and asked for a meeting to di: s it. On December 27, 2001, AGBA asked
the Governor to arrange immediately bilateral negotiations in order to decide on the
most suitable mechanisms to restore the equilibrium of the economic and financial
equation of the concession, which had been disrupted by various events.

 

257. The Arbitral Tribunal also notes AGBA’s repeated requests in 2001 for a
temporary suspension of the execution of the POES. On December 30, 2002, in
Resolution No. 77/02, the Board of Directors of ORAB granted AGBA’s request for a
suspension (called “neutralization”) of the POES obligations in the second concession
year with the effect that measures which had not been accomplished during that year
should not lead to penalties according to Article 13.2.5.5 of the Concession Contract.

258. At that time, the implementation of the Concession Contract had been
dramatically affected by the emergency legislation enacted in Argentina at the
beginning of 2002. On January 6, 2002, the Federal Argentine Government enacted
Law No. 25,561 on Public Emergency and Exchange Regime Reform in which
utilities contracts were “pesified” at parity level and tariffs were frozen. The
Government was authorized to renegotiate public utilities contracts. On January 11,
2002, ORAB “‘pesified” AGBA’s tariffs at parity rate. On February 28, 2002, the
Province of Buenos Aires adopted certain sections of the Emergency Law as
Provincial Law No. 12,858. On August 27, 2002, ORAB, in Resolution No. 56/02,
suspended AGBA’s right to interrupt water service to customers who had not paid
their bills. On June 9, 2003, by Decree No. 878/03, a New Regulatory Framework for
drinking water and wastewater public services in the Province of Buenos Aires was
enacted. A request by AGBA to be allowed to make tariff increases was rejected in a
letter from the Undersecretary of Public Services on August 25, 2005.

 

259. AGBA made various attempts to have the Concession Contract renegotiated and
asked for the balance between the parties to be re-established in the new
circumstances. However, the position of the authorities seems to have been initially
that AGBA had assumed obligations and risks and that there was no reason to change
the balance in AGBA’s favor. After the Emergency Law had been enacted, the
Province appeared to be prepared in principle to discuss modifications of the
Contract. However, it is not clear whether any serious negotiations were conducted,
and the Argentine Republic explains the negative result by referring to AGBA’s
allegedly excessive demands.

260. There was apparently an increasing tension between AGBA and the Province
which culminated in 2006 when the new control agency OCABA, created in 2003,
issued a report in which it concluded that AGBA had violated in several ways its
obli ions under the Concession Contract and the POES. In the same year, OCABA
also fined AGBA for having failed to handle certain complaints in a timely fashion.

 

   

261. It may be noted that, in a letter of June 14, 2005 to the Minister and the
Undersecretary of Public Services and also to the President of ORAB, AGBA accused
the Province of violating its obligations under the Concession Contract and declared
that, unless this was corrected within 45 days, AGBA would exercise its rights of
termination under the Concession Contract. Finally, on July 11, 2006, the Province
Governor, by Decree No. 1666/06, terminated the Concession Contract due to

-55-

AGBA’s fault pursuant to Article 14.1.3 (a), (b), (h), (i) and (k) of the Concession
Contract. In connection therewith, the Governor, by Decree No. 1677/06 of July 13,
2006, transferred AGBA’s water and sewage service concession to the state-owned
ABSA which had been created in 2002 and had already taken over the concessions
from the concessionaire Azurix in other parts of the Province.

262. As reasons for the termination of the Concession Contract, the Province
Governor stated in Decree No. 1666/06 (in translation):

 

“Whereas, in accordance with Resolution No. 84/06 and within the scope of the Regulatory
Framework in force and the Concession Contract, Article 14.1.3 last part, [OCABA] prepared
the required report, dated April 11, 2006, indicating the contractual obligations breached by the
Concessionaire that fall within the reasons for termination due to the Concessionaire’s fault set
forth in Article 14.1.3 of the Concession Contract;

Whereas pursuant to said Article [AGBA] is responsible for the following:

 

1) “serious iance with legal, or regulatory provisions applicable to the
service” (Article 14.1.3(a));

2) “repeated and unjustified delays in fulfilling the coverage goals set forth in the POES”
(Article 14.1.3 (b));

3) “repeated violation of the user regulations provided for in Article 13-II of the Regulatory
Framework” (Article 14.1.3 (h));

4) “repeatedly withholding or concealing information from the Regulatory Agency” (Article
14.1.3 (i));

5) “failure to furnish, renew or refurnish the Contract guaranty as provided for in Article 11.2”
(Article 14.1.3 (k));

Whereas [AGBA’s] failure to comply with the POES in a timely manner has been verified, as
indicated in the report by OCABA’s Board of Directors issued on the aforementioned date,
which unreasonable delays undermine compliance with the proposed service coverage goals and
which have occurred at an alarming rate. Thus, such non-compliance has had so negative an
impact on service quality and management indicators as to warrant termination due to the
Concessionaire’s fault under Article 14.1.3 (b) of the Concession Contract;

Whereas Resolution No. 69/02 approved the compliance with goals and milestones of the first
year of implementation of the first Five-Year Plan, and Resolution No. 77/02 provided that, in
relation to the coverage goals for the second year of the concession, i.e. those set for the year
2001, the required annulment of the implementation period of the works and expansion program
should be granted, and that the percentages that had not been complied with should be adjusted
together with the Granting Authority;

Whereas the aforesaid annulment of the POES implementation period for the second year of the
concession did not imply setting aside the goals undertaken by the Concessionaire for that year;
rather it meant that they should be readjusted in accordance with and under the procedure
established by Emergency Law No. 12,858 with the Granting Authority;

Whereas the Chairman of the Board of [ORAB], by means of a communication dated September
11, 2001, submitted for consideration of the Undersecretary of Public Services, pointed out that
the request for annulment did in no way imply an exemption from the POES. Thus, he indicated
that “- - - the Regulatory Agency believes that the determination of the deferral of the Five-Year
Plan should only be limited to the coverage goals (expansion works), that the circumstances

- 56 -

warrant such deferral and that a period not exceeding 6 months from that required under the
Five-Year Plan should be granted to resume the execution of works”. In other words, all
coverage goals specified in the aforesaid plan had to be attained by the end of the Five-Year
Plan. The Economic Regulation Area of ORAB shared the same opinion;

Whereas when the Board of Directors of ORAB issued the resolution authorizing the annulment
of the terms of the POES approved by Resolution 7/01, it expressly pointed out that the
expansion and service quality goals for the second year of the First Five-Year Plan should be
adjusted together with the Granting Authority within the framework of the utility contract
adjustment procedure established by Law No. 12,858 and Decree No. 1175/02 - - -;

Whereas it follows that the annulment of the POES implementation period authorized by ORAB
did not exempt AGBA from the goals undertaken which had not been attained during the second
year of the concession given that they had to be attained in the following years of the Five-Year
Plan;

Whereas, regarding specific details of the issues in question, it should be noted that in
accordance with Appendix I of Resolution No. 7/01, the Concessionaire undertook to make
investments in the amount of eighty-six million six hundred sixty and three thousand seven
hundred US dollars for the expansion of the drinking water network, in the districts that
comprise the concession area, thereby failing to comply with its obligations, as evidenced by the
report prepared by the Regulatory Agency;

Whereas, in the city of Belén de Escobar, even though the company met the percent of
population served as specified in the POES, i.e. 78.5%, it did not implement the drinking water
network in the following areas: Paravi, where 2,740 m. of water pipe and 165 connections to the
mains were to be carried out; b) Philips, with 6,300 m. of water pipe and 312 connections to the
mains; and c) Ruta 9, with a 4,440-meter water pipe and 311 connections to the mains;

Whereas, in General Rodriguez District, [AGBA] did not meet the goals specified in the POES
insofar as it supplies drinking water to 47.34% of the population even though the company
undertook to serve 55.3% of the population;

Whereas failure to meet the specified goals in the aforesaid District was due to non-performance
of the following works in the following localities: a) Distribution network in Portefio, where
18,750 m. of water pipe of different diameters and 428 connections to the mains were to be
completed; b) Distribution network in Irigoyen, where 13,700 m. of water pipe of different
diameters and 944 connections to the mains were to be completed; c) Distribution network in
Los Viveros, where 13,250 m. of water pipe of different diameters and 447 connections to the
mains were to be completed; d) Distribution network in San Martin, where 23,700 m. of water
pipe of different diameters and 853 connections to the mains were to be completed: e)
Distribution network in Orence, where 9,900 m. of water pipe of different diameters and 262
connections to the mains were to be completed; and f) Distribution network in Ruta 24, where
9,200 m. of water pipe of different diameters and 157 connections to the mains were to be
completed;

Whereas, in the District of José C. Paz, failure to achieve the goals is notorious given that from
58.2% of the population that [AGBA] was to serve with drinking water, the company only
attained 8.82%;

Whereas failure to meet the specified goals in said District was due to non-performance of the
following works: a) Catchment works from a battery of twenty-one wells to be located in a
catchment area in Moreno District, where a holding tank, the relevant water system of 36,250 m.
of water pipe and a 10,000 m3 cistern were to be installed; b) The distribution networks amount
to 209,000 m. of water pipe of different diameters, with 23,900 connections to the mains;

-57-

Whereas, in Malvinas Argentinas District, service provision to new users has practically not
been complied with given that only 5.29% of the population has been served with water even
though the obligation of [AGBA] under the POES was to serve 67.2% of the population;

Whereas in said District the following works have not been carried out: a) Basic Works and
activation of Grand Bourg Sur, which included eleven bores near the Acceso Norte, 16.300 m.
of discharge pipe, one holding tank, two treatment tanks, two cisterns, two pumping systems for
network distribution; and b) A distribution network of 41,710 m. of water pipe, with 6,000
connections to the mains;

Whereas, in Merlo District, the goals of the Concessionaire under the POES were to serve
83.1% of the population; however, the Concessionaire only served 46.44% of the population;

Whereas failure to meet the goals in said District was due to non-performance of the following
works: a) Basis catchment works in Libertad, which include twenty-six bores to be located in
the rural area, west of the District and near Marcos Paz, where, in addition, a holding tank, a
water line extending up to Libertad and a 10,000 m3 cistern were to be built. The discharge pipe
will be 27,600 m. long; b) With respect to the distribution network which should have been built
by the end of the first five-year period, 2386,300 m. of water pipe and 34,269 connections to the
mains were to be installed for the first two stages; c) Merlo Norte distribution network,
including 52,100 m. of water pipe and 7,150 connections to the mains;

Whereas, in Moreno District, the report by the Water Regulatory Agency expressly states that
[AGBA] did not comply with the goals undertaken under the POES, insofar as from 81.1% of
the population to be served, it only covered 42.73%;

Whereas in that District the following works were not carried out: a) Basic and distributions
works in La Reja, La Reja Grande and Francisco Alvarez, including a battery of eight wells to
be located in a catchment area, southwest of the District, near Ingeniero Roggero dam, 3,600 m.
of discharge pipe and a 1,000 m3 tank; b) Distribution networks and connections to the mains:
La Reja: 54,200 m. and 3,058 connections to the mains, La Reja Grande: 14,450 m. of water
pipe and 3,136 connections to the mains; Expansion of the distribution network in Trujuy,
including a battery of twelve wells west of the area to be served, near Mariano Morneo airdrome
and a 10,150 m. discharge pipe; the distribution was projected from the tank of Trujuy, with a
86,200 m. long water pipe and 9,913 connection to the mains; and c) Works in Lomas de Marilé
which share the production from the aforementioned battery and the distribution network to be
executed included 60,700 m. of water pipe and 5,502 connections to the mains;

Whereas, in San Miguel District, according to the report provided by the Water Regulatory
Agency, the goals set in the POES were not complied with given that only 45.11% out of the
74.5% of the population to be served with drinking water, was provided with water;

Whereas failure to meet the goals in said District was due to non-performance of the following
works: a) Basic and distribution works for Bella Vista and Mufiiz, including thirteen bores in a
catchment area near the west of Bella Vista, construction of a 1,000 m3 tank, 7,865 m. of
discharge pipe, 164,000 m. of distribution pipe of different diameters and 15,638 connections to
the mains; b) Basic and distribution works for expansion in Santa Brigida, including two bores,
150 m. of discharge pipe, 18,650 m, of distribution pipe and 2,395 connections to the mains;

 

Based on the foregoing, it is clear that [AGBA] only complied with the drinking water supply
expansion goals in Escobar District, even though it did not fully perform the works it had
undertaken to carry out, and, with respect to the other Districts mentioned above, failure to
comply with the POES is apparent insofar as none of the drinking water supply service
expansion goals have been met;

Whereas Annex F of the Concession Contract also establishes that, at the end of the fifth year of
the concession, the coverage percentage of users with micro-measurement was to be 40%;
however, the Concessionaire, according to the report of the Water Regulatory Agency, has

- 58 -

completely failed to comply with such goals as it did not install almost any water consumption
meter;

Whereas the Concessionaire did not comply with Resolution No. 21/04 either, issued in
proceedings No. 2430-506/04, whereby the company is ordered to install a specific number of
micrometers;

Whereas, consequently, it has been shown that the Concessionaire has not complied with the
micro-measurement goals insofar as it has failed to install meters so that at the end of the fifth
year of the concession the service billing system could be 40% based on consumption
measurement, thus maintaining the flat rate billing system or non-metered system;

Whereas, in accordance with Resolution No. 7/01, the Concessionaire undertook to make
investments in the amount of one hundred forty-four million two hundred fifty-three thousand
and six hundred US dollars for the expansion of the sewer network in different districts within
the concession area, for which purposes the Concessionaire was to carry out the works described
in the Annex to said administrative action;

 

Whereas, in the city of Belén de Escobar, the Concessionaire met the goals set in the POES but
failed to expand the sewer network in the area located east of the sewage treatment plant, which
involves around three hundred connections to the mains;

Where, furthermore, [AGBA] had to build a new module for the sewage treatment plant to
service fifteen thousand residents, which work was never carried out and, therefore, at the end
of the first five-year period, the percentage of served population reached 56%;

Whereas, in General Rodriguez District, in order to comply with the goals set in the POES, i.e.
to serve 43.4% of the population with sewerage, the sewer network should have been expanded
in the following localities: los Viveros, La Armonfa, Solidaridad I, Rafa and Casco Chico, with
six hundred connections to the mains;

Whereas, in addition, a new module for the sewage treatment plant to service fifteen thousand
residents was to be constructed, which work was never carried out by the Concessionaire and,
therefore, at the end of the first five-year period, the percentage of served population was
42.01%;

Whereas, in José C. Paz District, the supplier did not perform any of the works undertaken,
thereby failing to comply with all its investment obligation

 

 

Whereas the Concessionaire should have built a sewage treatment plant on Pinazo stream with
an initial capacity to serve one hundred thousand residents, to receive sewage effluents from
José C. Paz Sur, conducted through a main sewage collector which would receive the effluents
from the sewage main networks to be installed;

Whereas, in José C. Paz Norte, the Concessionaire did not build the network that was to connect
with the sewerage system of Malvinas Argentinas District either;

Whereas, because the Concessionaire did not perform any of the works undertaken, the
percentage of served population in this locality equals 0%, which entails a complete and utter
failure to comply with the POES;

Whereas, in Malvinas Argentinas District, [AGBA] did not perform any of the works it was
required to carry out according to the goals established in the POES regarding the provision of
sewerage service to 40.9% of the population in said District;

Whereas, in the aforementioned District, the Concessionaire was required to build the first

module of the sewage treatment plant on Claro stream with a treatment capacity to serve one
hundred sixty-five thousand residents; a network of connections to the mains and main sewage

- 59 -

collectors in order to comply with the stipulated served area percentage and the works designed
to conduct sewage effluents from José C. Paz Norte;

Whereas, as a result of such non-performance, the percentage of served population is the
District equals 0%, which entails a complete failure to meet the expansion goals set out in the
POES;

Whereas, in Merlo District, the Concessionaire undertook to extend the sewerage supply service
to 58.8% of the population, for which purposes it was required to perform the following works:
a) Network of connections to the sewage mains in San Martin and main sewage collectors; b)
Expansion of the network of connection pipes to the sewage mains in Libertad and main sewage
collectors;

Whereas, in relation to connections to the mains, in order to meet the goals established in the
POES the Concessionaire had to install seventy-eight thousand five hundred connections, of
which forty-six thousand connections were not installed;

Whereas, with respect to sewage liquid treatment in Libertad, the treatment capacity of the
sewage treatment plant had to be expanded in order to serve ninety thousand residents;

Whereas, even though the POES required a service coverage of 58.8% of the residents of said
District, at the end of the first five-year period the service was provided to only 23.77% of the
population;

Whereas, in Moreno District, the Concessionaire did not perform the following works: a)
Expansion of the networks of connection pipes to the sewage mains in La Perlita, Villa Anita
and Moreno 2000 with 148,400 m., the relevant main sewage collector and 14,900 connections
to the mains; b) Expansion of the network in Trujuy and Paso del Rey, with 130,000 m. of
connection pipes to the sewage mains, 12,800 connections to the mains and a pump station to
serve 13,000 residents;

Whereas the percentage of served population by the end of the first five-year period was 20.96%
even though the Concessionaire was required under the contract to serve 57.8% of the residents
of said District;

Whereas, in San Miguel District, [AGBA] should have performed expansion works in relation
to network connections, main sewage collectors and nineteen thousand two hundred connections
to the mains in order to complete the thirty-three thousand three hundred and ninety-three
stipulated in the Expansion Work Five-Year Plan, and it failed to comply with the goals
established in the POES as well;

Whereas, based on the foregoing, [AGBA] also failed to comply with the expansion goals
regarding the sewage service:”

263. After a further account of matters in regard to which AGBA had not fulfilled its
obligations, the Resolution stated:

“Whereas the foregoing entails a serious, repeated and systematic breach of contract, given that
AGBA has failed to comply with most of the expansion works in connection with the drinking
water and sewerage supply service, as stipulated in Annex F to the Concession Contract;

Whereas, in particular, the Concessionaire’s failure to perform any of the sewage works
undertaken constitutes a gross and flagrant violation, as a result of which the percentage of
served population is 0%, which implies a complete and utter non-compliance with the POES in
this regard;

Whereas, with respect to service quality standards, the drinking water samples show that the
level of nitrate ion exceeds the parameters established in the Concession Contract;

- 60 -

Whereas, in relation to sewage, the same method was used and the results indicate that treatment
plants exceed quality standard parameters in connection with nitrogen, total coliforms and other
compounds;

Whereas, according to the report of the Regulatory Agency, the sewage treatment plant of
Escobar does not meet standards for nearly all parameters and the one in San Miguel is almost
out of service given that all parameters exceed the applicable standards;

Whereas, with respect to the quality of service provision, the technical report points out that
[AGBA] did not comply with its obligation to maintain drinking water storage tanks in good
conditions, which were, for the most part, out of service because of their condition;

Whereas the tanks that are out of service due to poor condition and maintenance are: a) Escobar:
Escobar Centro; b) General Rodriguez: Reinforced concrete Tank out of service; c) Malvinas
Argentinas: Primavera; d) Merlo: Merlo Centro and Parque San Martin; e) Moreno: Moreno
Centro, La Perlita, Trujuy (in service but with large unrepaired cracks); f) San Miguel: San
Miguel Centro and General Sarmiento;

Whereas, with respect to service provision, Annex F to the contract establishes that at the end of
the first five-year period and/or within five years, drinking water pressure should be 10 meters
of water column (10 mWC) and throughout the concession area the measurement of water
supply pressure does not meet the established goals, as evidenced by users’ constant and
successive complaints;

Whereas [AGBA] has failed to comply with drinking water and sewerage service quality levels,
according to the parameters set out in Articles 3.6 and 3.12 of the Concession Contract, thus
posing a constant threat to the life and health of the population, with no corrective measures
being adopted in order to rectify the situation as soon as possible;

Whereas, by means of Resolution No. 52, dated July 24, 2002, [ORAB], taking into account the
complaints from the residents of Alem, local authorities and the results of the inspection
conducted by the Technical Department of the Agency regarding the fact that the treatment
plant located in said neighborhood was abandoned, without proper maintenance, as required
from the concessionaire for the provision of the sanitation service called upon [AGBA] to
comply with the obligation undertaken under Article 7.4 of the Concession Contract, by
ensuring proper operation of the facilities;

Whereas the concessionaire considered that, as it was not part of the service area at the time of
takeover, it was not under an obligation to maintain the plant in good working condition, let
alone to operate the plant;

Whereas, however, Chapter X of Law No. 11,820 and Chapter 7 of the Concession Contract
determine the system applicable to the concession of the public sanitary service, specifying that
the assets comprise those transferred to the concessionaire by virtue of the contract, including
the assets acquired or built by the concessionaire to fulfill the obligations arising out of the
contract; therefore, it is the concessionaire’s duty to manage and maintain the assets allocated to
the service in the condition required by the aforesaid chapter of the Law and the contract;

Whereas ORAB, by means of Resolution No. 32/03, determined that the Treatment Plant of
Bella Vista, San Miguel District, was part of the assets allocated to the public service, as
provided by Section 43-II of Law No. 11,820, as it was owned by the former AGOSBA;

-61-

Whereas, as a result, [AGBA] should have operated the plant in a manner such that it would
guarantee maintenance of sewage effluents within the quality standards specified in Annex D to
the Concession Contract, as provided by Article 3.13 of the Concession Contract;

Whereas the report prepared by the Technical Department concluded that the Treatment Plant of
Bella Vista was in a general state of dereliction, which shows that it was out of service and as a
result of its condition, lack of maintenance and operation, effluents do not receive any sort of
treatment, thus being discharged raw into the receiving water body;

Whereas [AGBA’s] failure to comply with the provisions set forth in Article 3.13 of the
Concession Contract regarding the effluents from the Treatment Plant of Bella Vista, San
Miguel District, as well as the provisions contained in Articles 7.4, 3.2, 3.3. 3.4 and related
provisions of the aforesaid Contract resulted in the imposition of the fine provided for in Article
13.2.5.2 (e) thereof and an order to cure such default, which has not been cured to this day;”

264. The Province went on to point out that AGBA had failed to comply with its
contractual obligation under the Concession Contract to maintain a contract guaranty
and an operations bond. On this matter, the Province made the following remark:

 

“Whereas the effect that this breach of contract has on the concession as a matter of public
interest is very serious, to the point that if the Province decides to terminate the contract due to
the concessionaire’s default, it does not have a guaranty to enforce against such breach, as
provided by Article 14.2.2;

Whereas the nature of the breach is objective and it constitutes by itself sufficient ground for
termination of the concession due to concessionaire’s fault:

Whereas it may be concluded that all the breaches described herein fall within the grounds for
termination due to the concessionaire’s fault provided for in Article 14.1.3, given that the
concessionaire was under the obligation to make investments to perform the works undertaken
so as to attain the expansion and optimization goals set forth in the POES, and that neither the
Emergency Law No. 25,561 enacted by the Argentine Government, nor its provincial
counterpart, Law No. 12,858, exempted the concessionaire from complying with its obligations
under the Concession Contract;

  

Whereas, on the contrary, Section 10 of Law No. 25,561, adhered to by the Province of Buenos
Aires by means of Section 3 of Law No. 12,858, expressly provides that the elimination of
indexation provisions from contracts or the pesification of public service tariffs, or the
renegotiation of concession contracts will under no circumstances authorize the public service
supplier to suspend or alter the performance of its obligation;

Whereas it should be noted that the breach is at present fully materialized, and in accordance
with the provisions contained in Article 14.1.3, last paragraph, cannot be cured, overcome or
reversed, as the damage to the population has already been done;”

265. The Province pointed out that AGBA’s breaches of its obligations could not be
cured and added:

“Whereas it is important to highlight the lack of conditioning of the sewage liquid treatment
plants, which has a negative impact on the environment and public health, as well as the lack of
minimum investments necessary to guarantee the operation of the plants in the localities
mentioned above;

Whereas the non-compliance amounts to 84% in relation to installation of water networks and
practically 100% in connection with the laying of sewer networks, which has deprived
approximately 100,000 potential new users of drinking water and 150,000 potential new users of
sewerage in the concession area;

- 62 -

Whereas damage to the public interest derived from such breach is irreparable, given that the
main purpose of the Provincial Government in deciding the privatization of the sanitary services
was to improve existing service provision and its expansion in order to serve the population that
at the time did not have water supply or sewerage system;

Whereas, after six years of the execution of the contract [AGBA] has failed to comply with
nearly all the goals undertaken, having made practically no investment whatsoever in service
infrastructure, except for water and sewerage works in Escobar and General Rodriguez Districts;

Whereas it should be noted that the concessionaire has repeatedly and systematically violated
the User Rules insofar as it has not duly addressed users’ complaints regarding service provision
or billing nor has it provided a response within the specified time frames or given an answer to
the communication sent by [ORAB] in a timely and proper manner, in order to resolve the
complaints received by said Agency;”

266. The Province concluded:

“Whereas, based on the foregoing, the grounds for termination specified in Article 14.1.3 (h)
and (i) of the Concession Contract have also been met, giving rise to termination due to the
Concessionaire’s fault as a result of the repeated violation of the User Rules and constant
withholding or concealment of information from which, in brief, it may be concluded that
[AGBA] has materially breached the Contract which entitles the Granting Authority to
terminate the Concession Contract due to the Concessionaire’s fault, as set forth in Article
14.1.3 (a), (b), (h), (i) and (k) of the Concession Contract;”

267. The operative part of the Resolution reads in its initial part as follows:
“The Governor of the Province of Buenos Aires resolves:

SECTION 1. To terminate, from the date of notice of this Decree, the Concession Contract
entered into with [AGBA] due to the Concessionaire’s fault on the grounds for termination
provided for in Article 14.1.3 (a), (b), (h), (i), (Kk) and related provisions of the aforesaid
contract.

SECTION 2. [OCABA], upon notice of this Decree, shall adopt any such measures as may be
necessary to ensure the receipt and continuance of the public service provision, the assets
allocated thereto and the relevant personnel, as set forth in Article 14.4.3 of the Concession
Contract.”

(iv) Expropriation

268. The first question that arises is whether Impregilo’s investment, as claimed by
Impregilo, was expropriated or nationalized. Impregilo refers to a number of measures
taken by the Argentine authorities throughout the concession period and leading up to
the termination of the concession by Decree No. 1666/06.

 

269. Expropriation is not defined in Article 5 of the Argentina-Italy BIT which
however mentions expropriation at the same level as nationalization, seizure and other
appropriation and sets out the conditions to be fulfilled if such acts are not be
ent with the BIT. These conditions are that the measures (i) are taken for a
public purpose, of national interest or security, (ii) are taken in accordance with due
process of law, (iii) are non-discriminatory and not contrary to the commitments
undertaken, and (iv) are accompanied by provisions for the payment of prompt,
adequate and effective compensation. Expropriation and nationalization are jointly
referred to hereinafter as “expropriation”.

 

- 63 -

270. As in most other BITs, expropriation in the Argentina-Italy BIT may be
considered to be an act taken by a State in the exercise of its sovereignty by which an
investor is involuntarily deprived of property. Moreover, property should in this
connection be given a broad meaning and cover any material and immaterial assets
having an economic value, including concessions and contractual rights belonging to
the investor. Expropriation is to be distinguished from less far-reaching measures
which regulate or restrict the right to use property. Such measures may also have
serious economic effects for the investor but do not constitute expropriation.
However, there are borderline cases where restrictions on the use of property go so far
as to leave the investor with only a nominal property right. This could in appropriate
cases be regarded as indirect expropriation. There are other situations in which
successive measures are taken to deprive the investor of his rights to administer his
property and where at some point the investor may be considered, as a combined
effect of several acts, to have been deprived of the property (so-called creeping
expropriation).

 

271. The holder of the concession in this case was AGBA, and Impregilo was the
main shareholder in AGBA. Impregilo was at no time deprived of its shareholding in
AGBA. Nevertheless, Impregilo is protected under the BIT as shareholder which
means that if AGBA is exposed to treatment which is not in conformity with the BIT,
Impregilo may rely on its rights as shareholder. The Tribunal also refers in this
connection to the case of Azurix which deals with a similar concession in other parts
of the same Province.”

 

 

 

272. During the concession period, a number of measures were taken which affected
AGBA’s rights. However, none of these measures amounted to a loss of the
ssion. Nor could the joint effect of these measures be considered to be a loss of
property rights. A loss only occurred when the Province terminated the concession by
Decree No. 1666/06. However, the termination of the concession is not nece: ily
equal to expropriation. In fact, the Concession Contract provided for termination in
various defined circumstances, and if the Contract is terminated in conformity with
these provisions, this is not an act of expropriation by the State but an act performed
by the public authorities in their capacity as a party to the Contract.

 

   

 

273. Article 14.1.3 of the Concession Contract provided, inter alia:

 

“The Granting Authority may terminate the Contract due to the Concessionaire’s fault on the
following grounds:

 

a) Serious with legal, or regulatory provisi licable to the
Service.

b) Repeated and unjustified delays in fulfilling the coverage goals set forth in the POES.

h) Repeated violation of the User regulations provided for in Article 13-II of the Regulatory
Framework.

%8 Azurix Award, supra n. 71.

-64-

i) Repeatedly withholding or concealing information from the Regulatory Agency.

k) Failure to furnish, renew or refurnish the Contract guaranty as provided for in Article 11.1,
and the Operator guaranty provided for in Article 11.2.

If any non-compliance or violation can be cured, the Regulatory Agency shall demand that the
Concessionaire correct its actions, cure the breach in any suitable way and submit the relevant
response, in the period fixed according to the circumstances of the situation, the nature of the
violation and in view of the public interest, which shall never be shorter than thirty (30) days.
Upon expiration of the period accorded to the Concessionaire, the Regulatory Agency shall give
notice to the Granting Authority of the subsistence of the non-compliance or breach if it has
been duly proved, and the Granting Authority may terminate the Contract due to the
Concessionaire’s fault.”

274. In its Decision of July 11, 2006 to terminate the Contract, the Province of
Buenos Aires referred to numerous breaches by AGBA of its obligations under the
Contract and based the termination on Article 14.1.3 (a), (b), (h), (i) and (k) of the
Contract.

275. Impregilo argues that the decision to terminate the concession was in reality a
political decision based on the policy of the regime that public facilities like water and
sewage services should not be provided by private companies but by entities owned
by the State or the Provinces. From such a perspective, the termination was in fact an
expropriation, and the reasons given for it were only a pretext for transferring the
services to public bodies.

     

276. In support of this view, Impregilo has referred to President Kirchner’s policy on
these matters and to statements made by the Province’s Governor, Mr. Felipe Sold,
and the Minister of Public Works of the Province, Mr. Eduardo Sicaro.

277. The Arbitral Tribunal accepts that the Argentine administration may have set up
as a political goal to transfer water and sewerage services to public entities. However,
this does not necessarily lead to the conclusion that the termination of the Concession
Contract with AGBA was an act of expropriation. The Tribunal refers in this
connection to the case of AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erémii Kft
v. Hungary in which the tribunal stated:

   

“10.3.23 However, the fact that an issue becomes a political matter, - - - does not mean that the
existence of a rational policy is erased.”"°

278. What is decisive is whether the reasons given for the termination constituted a

legally valid ground for termination according to the provisions of the Concession
Contract.

™ AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erémii Kft v. The Republic of
Hungary, \CSID Case No. ARB/07/22 (ECT), para. 10.3.23.

- 65 -

279. The Arbitral Tribunal notes that the reasons given by the Province for its
decision to terminate the Concession Contract were very extensive and specific. They
include a detailed account of AGBA’s performance in each separate , Le. the City
of Belén de Escobar and the Districts of General Rodriguez, José C. Paz, Malvinas
Argentinas, Merlo, Moreno, San Miguel and Escobar, and they indicate, in precise
figures, that AGBA, during the first five-year period, failed significantly to carry out
its undertakings in regard to investments and the expansion of water and sewage
services. The Tribunal finds no reason to doubt that the figures contained in the
Decree are mainly accurate, and the conclusion must be that AGBA did not attain the
figures of investments and expansion of services set up as undertakings in the POES
and the Five-Year Plan.

 

 

  

280. However, failures in AGBA’s performance were, to some extent, connected with
failures by the Province. In particular, the Province did not deliver on time the
UNIREC plants which it had undertaken to deliver in 2001. This affected AGBA’s
ability to expand sewage connections in certain areas, at least during the latter part of
the five-year period, but it cannot account for all deficiencies in its performance.
There were other treatment plants which should have been established by AGBA
itself but which could not be completed due to insufficient funds. Also the fact,
mentioned above, of an unexpected incorporation of a large number of additional
users with a particularly low collectability rate made it more difficult for AGBA to
live up to some of its undertakings.

 

    

281. The question also arises whether or to what extent AGBA’s obligations were
restricted by ORAB’s Resolutions according to which, first, AGBA had met the
service expansion and quality goals of the first year of the concession (year 2000)
and, secondly, the POES obligations in the second concession year (year 2001) were
suspended with the effect that measures which had not been accomplished during that
year should not lead to penalties according to Article 13.2.5.5 of the Concession
Contract.

 

282. In ORAB’s Resolution No. 77/02, nothing is stated, at least not explicitly, about
any effects of the suspension for 2001 on AGBA’s obligations during the third, fourth
and fifth years of the concession (2002, 2003 and 2004). Nor is it specified for how
long AGBA’s obligations during the second year would be suspended. The Argentine
Republic’s position is that, while AGBA’s obligations did not have to be fulfilled in
2001, they would have to be fulfilled later during the first five-year period and thus
before the end of 2004. This view is supported by the terms of Decree No. 1666/06
terminating the concession. It could be argued, however, that the suspension would
be effective as long as negotiations about a revision of the contractual conditions were
going on between the Province and AGBA.

 

283. The Arbitral Tribunal considers that, in the examination of whether the
termination of AGBA’s concession constitutes expropriation, it is not decisive
whether or not the Province had a correct understanding of AGBA’s obligations under
the Concession Contract. What is relevant is rather that the Province, with some
just ion, considered that AGBA had grossly failed in fulfilling its contractual
obligations and terminated the Concession Contract on this basis. This is sufficient, in
the Arbitral Tribunal’s opinion, to exclude that the termination could be regarded as
an act of — direct or indirect — expropriation or other appropriation of AGBA’s

 

  

 

 

- 66 -

property or Impregilo’s investment. It has also in no way been proven that the
termination of the Concession Contract was the last step in a successive series of
measures taken by the Province with a view to depriving AGBA of the concession, or,
in other words, that AGBA was exposed to “creeping expropriation”.

(v) Fair and equitable treatment

284. According to Article 2 para. 2 of the BIT, investments shall at all times be
accorded fair and equitable treatment. It is added that neither State shall impair by
arbitrary or discriminatory measures the management, maintenance, enjoyment,
transformation, cessation or disposal of investments made in its territory by the other
State’s investors.

 

285. The term “fair and equitable treatment” appears in many BITs. It cannot be
easily defined, and it is generally believed to require at least respect for the
international minimum standard of protection which, according to international
customary law, any State is obliged to afford to foreign property in its territory. The
Tribunal considers that the term “fair and equitable treatment”, as it appears in the
present BIT and in other similar BITs, is intended to give adequate protection to the
investor’s legitimate expectations.

286. As far as the precise relation between “fair and equitable treatment” and the
minimum standard of international law is concerned, there are two main approaches
adopted by ICSID tribunals.

287. The first approach is that “fair and equitable treatment” has to be equated with
the minimum standard of treatment provided for by general international law. This
has been, for example, the position adopted by the CMS tribunal:

“In fact, the Treaty standard of fair and equitable treatment and its connection with the required
stability and predictability of the business environment, founded on solemn legal and
contractual commitments, is not different from the international law minimum standard and its
evolution under customary law.”

 

288. The second approach deals with ’fair and equitable treatment” as an autonomous
standard, considered in general as more demanding and more protective of the
investors’ rights than the minimum standard of treatment provided for by general
international law. The Azurix tribunal, for example, adopted this position:
“The clause, as drafted, permits to interpret fair and equitable treatment and full protection and
security as higher standards than required by international law. The purpose of the third

sentence is to set a floor, not a ceiling in order to avoid a possible interpretation of these
standards below what is required by international law.”

289. However, the distinction between the two interpretations is not decisive in the
consideration of the present case, for the reasons stated below.

7 CMS, Award, May 12, 2005, para.284.

78 Azurix, supra n. 71, para. 361.

-67-

290. If fair and equitable treatment is indeed linked to the legitimate expectations of
the investors, these have to be evaluated considering all circumstances. In the
Tribunal’s understanding, fair and equitable treatment cannot be_designed to ensure
the immutability of the legal order, the economic world and the social universe and
play the role assumed by stabilization clauses specifically granted to foreign investors
with whom the State has signed investment agreements. The same approach was
followed by the ICSID tribunal in Parkerings-Compagniet AS v. Lithuania:

 

“It is each State’s undeniable right and privilege to exercise its sovereign legislative power. A
State has the right to enact, modify or cancel a law at its own discretion. Save for the existence
of an agreement, in the form of a stabilisation clause or otherwise, there is nothing objectionable
about the amendment brought to the regulatory framework existing at the time an investor made
its investment.””

291. The legitimate expectations of foreign investors cannot be that the State will
never modify the legal framework, especially in times of crisis, but certainly investors
must be protected from unreasonable modifications of that legal framework.

292. In this context, the Arbitral Tribunal observes that the existence of legitimate
expectations and the existence of contractual rights are two separate issues. This has
been highlighted by the Parkerings-Compagniet tribunal, which made a clear
distinction between contractual obligations under national law and _ legitimate
expectations under international law:

“Tt is evident that not every hope amounts to an expectation under international law. The
expectation a party to an agreement may have of the regular fulfilment of the obligation by the
other party is not necessarily an expectation protected by international law. In other words,
contracts involve intrinsic expectations from each party that do not amount to expectations as
understood in international law.”

293. Christoph Schreuer also explains that contractual rights are not to be equated
with legitimate expectations:

 

“Taken to its logical conclusion this argument would put all agreements between the investor
and the host State under the protection of the FET standard. If this position were to be accepted,
the FET standard would be nothing less than a broadly interpreted umbrella clause.”*'

294. Thus, in so far as the Province’s acts are exclusively contractual, they cannot
amount to a violation of the fair and equitable treatment standard based on a theory of
legitimate expectations. In Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic
Republic of Pakistan,’ the tribunal stated: “For the sake of completeness, the
Tribunal adds that a breach of fair and equitable treatment requires conduct in the
exercise of sovereign powers.”

”Parkerings-Compagniet AS v. Republic of Lithuania [hereinafter Parkerings-Compagniet| (ICSID
Case No. ARB/05/8), Award, September 11, 2007, para. 332.

"Td, para. 344.

*!'C. Schreuer, “Fair and Equitable Treatment: Interactions with other Standards”, Transnational
Dispute Management, Vol. 4, Issue 5 at 18 (September 2007).

® Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No.
‘ARB/03/29, Award, August 27, 2009, para. 377.

- 68 -

295. Since Impregilo’s right as shareholder in AGBA is protected by the BIT, the
Arbitral Tribunal finds it relevant to examine the treatment afforded to AGBA, the
company of which it was a shareholder, as such action must be considered to have
affected Impregilo’s rights as an investor, rights that were protected under the BIT.

 

296. In the context of BITs, contractual rights and obligations must in principle be
distinguished from treaty rights, the relevant criterion being whether the State or its
entities act as holder of sovereign power or as parties to a contract.

297. However, there may be cases where a state entity which has concluded a contract
with an investor performs which do not only constitute a breach of the contract
but are at the same time a misuse of its status as part of the State organization to the
detriment of the investor and thereby involve the State’s responsibility as party to a

 

298. In the present case, many of the acts complained of by Impregilo concern the
contractual relationship between AGBA and the Province. Such acts are, for instance,
those which relate to AGBA’s entitlement to work charges and connection fees and to
an increased sewage coefficient as well as other matters relating to specific clauses in
the contractual provisions agreed between AGBA and the Province. Other contractual
problems have concerned the application of tax stabilization provisions, the
suspension of the right to interrupt services to non-paying customers and the
installation of meters at customers’ requests. Other measures that should be
mentioned in this context are the Province’s failure to deliver the UNIREC plants in
time and the fact that a large number of users of water and sewage services with
particularly low payment capacity were added to AGBA’s circle of customers which
made it more difficult for AGBA to comply with its contractual obligations and reach
the envisaged expansion goals.

 

 

299. The Arbitral Tribunal therefore finds it appropriate to examine whether the
alleged contractual breaches, or any of them, could affect Argentina’s responsibility
under the BIT because they were a misuse of public power or reveal a pattern directed
at damaging AGBA and, indirectly, Impregilo, as one of its shareholders.

300. In this respect, the Arbitral Tribunal makes the following observations on the
following alleged contractual breaches.

301. Impregilo has complained of inaccuracies in the data bases handed over to
jonaire. The Argentine Republic has responded that the Province
analyzed each claim raised by AGBA regarding the update of databases and allowed
corrections to be made, where appropriate. The Arbitral Tribunal cannot find that this
was a misuse of public power.

   
 

 

 

302. In so far as Impregilo alleges that AGBA was prohibited from receiving
connection charges, the Arbitral Tribunal notes that, according to Article 11 of Annex
N, AGBA was allowed to charge and collect a connection fee, once a user had been
provided with a connection to the mai However, there was an area in which
AGOSBA had already installed connections which had been improved by AGBA, and
the question arose whether AGBA was entitled to bill connection charges for the
improved installations. In Resolution 44/00, ORAB stated that the area was already

 

- 69 -

served by AGOSBA (“area servida”’), that this had been made clear to all interested
parties during the bidding process, and that AGBA therefore only had the right in this
area to bill charges for the use of services. The Arbitral Tribunal cannot find that this
was an unreasonable application of the Concession Contract or that it involved in any
way the State as a sovereign power.

303. In so far as Impregilo complains that work charges were not paid to AGBA, the
Arbitral Tribunal notes that, according to Article 10 of Annex N, a work fee was to be
paid by customers at the time the public service was connected for the drinking water
supply and sewage services. In Resolution 14/02, ORAB stated that it had repeatedly
asked AGBA to provide information about the justification of these charges in some
areas and that AGBA had failed to do so. ORAB therefore decided in the Resolution
that AGBA must refrain, in these areas, from imposing work charges until ORAB, on
the basis of information provided by AGBA, had analyzed the situation further. While
the Argentine Republic argues that AGBA had not sufficiently demonstrated that it
had carried out building work for which it was entitled to impose work charges,
Impregilo alleges that the information requested by ORAB was excessive and
unnecessary. This appears as a typical contractual dispute which cannot involve
responsibility under the BIT.

 

304. As regards AGBA’s entitlement to an increased sewage coefficient, the Arbitral
Tribunal notes that Article 4 of Annex N to the Concession Contract provided as a
condition for the application of the coefficient that all the expansion goals in the
POES for the preceding year had been satisfied. As regards the first year (2000), it
seems that AGBA was granted the coefficient increase once the resolution approving
AGBA’s performance had been issued. However, AGBA was not granted retroactive
payment, since the authorities considered that the delay in the approval of the
performance was due to AGBA’s own delay in providing relevant information. The
Arbitral Tribunal has no basis for concluding that this assessment was unjustified or
that it was in any way a misuse of State power. As regards the second year (2001), the
Argentine Republic points out that AGBA did not attain its POES goals but was
granted a suspension of their fulfillment. In such circumstances the condition in
Article 4 of Annex N had not been satisfied.

   

  

 

 
 

 

305. In regard to Impregilo’s complaint that ORAB failed to apply the tax
stabilization provisions in the Concession Contract, the Argentine Republic replies
that AGBA never requested an extraordinary review which it should have done
according to the Concession Contract. On the other hand, the Argentine Republic
points out that tax changes formed part of the elements that were discussed during the
renegotiation process. No element is present which would elevate this matter to a
treaty dispute.

 

306. As concerns Impregilo’s complaint of the suspension of AGBA’s right to
interrupt services to customers who did not pay for the services, the Argentine
Republic argues that ORAB’s decision ordering AGBA to suspend the use of the cut
off mechanism for certain users was a temporary measure for the duration of the
economic emergency. The Arbitral Tribunal notes that Article 29 of Annex N
provides that the Concessionaire may not interrupt the service in some special cases,
one of them being that the Regulatory Agency directs the Concessionaire to suspend
temporarily the interruption, in anticipated and extraordinary circumstances, and

   

 

-70-

pursuant to a grounded decision. Impregilo has not demonstrated that ORAB misused
public power by insisting on the application of the said exception in this case.

307. As regards Impregilo’s complaint of ORAB’s decision to impose on AGBA an
obligation to install meters at the Customer’s request, the Arbitral Tribunal finds that,
while this increased the demands on AGBA, it was not inconsistent with any rule in
the Concession Contract. It also appears from Article 1.9 of the Contract that AGBA,
in regard to the performance of the Contract, was subject to the control and regulation
of ORAB as Regulatory Agency. There is no appearance of any misuse of public
power in this respect.

 

308. As regards the Province’s failure to deliver the UNIREC plants on time, the
Arbitral Tribunal accepts that the absence of these plants may have made it
significantly more difficult for AGBA to fulfill some of its contractual obligations.
However, the reasons for the Province’s failure seems to have been of a financial
character, and even if this could be seen as a serious contractual breach, it does not
appear that, standing alone, it would have the character required for attributing
responsibility to the State as holder of public power.

  

   

 

309. Also in regard to the remaining alleged contractual breaches, the Arbitral
Tribunal finds no element that could involve Argentina’s responsibility under the BIT.
Nor can the Tribunal find any evidence of a pattern of acts by State entities aimed at
causing damage to Impregilo as investor.

 

310. The question whether Impregilo was subjected to unfair or inequitable treatment
must therefore be answered on the basis of State acts other than those performed by
the Province as a party to the Concession Contract.

 

311. As general background, it should first be noted that AGBA, already in the
beginning of the concession period, had difficulties complying with its obligations in
the Concession Contract. On May 17, 2001, AGBA therefore wrote to the Province
and referred to the high non-collection rates in the concession area. AGBA pointed
out that this affected AGBA’s capacity to make the necessary investments and was an
unforeseeable and substantial change in the conditions on which AGBA had entered
into the concession. AGBA had also experienced difficulties in obtaining loans.
AGBA therefore made the following request:

 

 

“During the 16 months it has been providing the service, AGBA has clearly shown its capacity
to perform the Concession Contract in an efficient manner as regards all matters within its
reasonable control. The abovementioned problems exceed such scope and therefore make it
necessary to implement corrective mechanisms to restore the Contract’s equilibrium in order to
fulfill its purpose.

In view of the foregoing and in order to proceed in the shortest time possible, as required by the
circumstances, we hereby request that a work commission be created in order to jointly analyze
the solutions and alternatives most appropriate for that purpose.

 

 

In addition, we also request, as a provisional measure, that the expansion goals be temporarily
suspended until the above commission makes a decision.

Finally, we require that the Granting Authority actively cooperate in the negotiations currently
being held with the [Inter-American Development Bank] for funding, in such aspects as may be
within the scope of its powers.”

-71-

312. A second request for relief in its obligations was made by AGBA on July 17,
2001. This time AGBA referred to the serious market conditions and the difficulties to
obtain loans and requested a “temporary neutralization” of the time schedule in the
first Five-Year Plan.

313. On both these two requi
Province, although only after r:
reacted favorably.

 
  

sts for exemptions from AGBA’s obligations, the
ng objections and after a long period of reflection,

314. In Resolution No. 69/02 of December 5, 2002, ORAB resolved that AGBA had
met the service expansion and quality goals of the first year of the concession (year
2000), as provided in Annex F to the Concession Contract and incorporated into the
first Five-Year Plan which was an integral part of the POES. On December 30, 2002,
in Resolution No. 77/02, ORAB also granted AGBA’s second request for a
suspension of the POES obligations. It did so for the second concession year 2001
with the effect that measures which had not been accomplished during that year
should not lead to penalties according to Article 13.2.5.5 of the Concession Contract.

 

 

315. However, AGBA’s problems were not resolved but were further aggravated by
the emergency measures imposed in connection with the economic crisis in Argentina
and by the failure to restore an equilibrium by way of a negotiated adaptation of
AGBA’s contractual commitments.

316. The Arbitral Tribunal considers that, in the assessment of whether AGBA was
given fair and equitable treatment, the crucial events are those which began in 2002,
when emergency legislation was enacted. It is clear that AGBA’s activities were to a
large extent affected by the emergency measures that were taken to meet the
economic ind which had remaining effects for AGBA even after the crisis had
subsided a few years later.

 

 

317. On January 6, 2002, the Argentine Congress adopted the Emergency Law
declaring the existence of a public emergency with regard to social, economic,
administrative, financial and exchange rate matters. Under this law, the State adopted
general measures aimed at renegotiating public service contracts. The law was
promulgated as Law No. 25,561 on Public Emergency and Exchange Regime Reform.
Utilities contracts were “pesified” at parity level and tariffs were frozen. On January
11, 2002, ORAB “pesified” AGBA’s tariffs at parity rate. On February 28, 2002, the
Province of Buenos Aires adopted certain sections of the Emergency Law as
Provincial Law No. 12,858.

318. For AGBA, this had a dramatic negative impact on the economic prospects of the
concession. As before, the fees for water and sewerage service were to be billed in
pesos, but while AGBA, before the Emergency Law, had been able to rely on the
legal exchange rate of 1 peso = 1 dollar, AGBA could now only change pesos
according to the current exchange rate on the market, and the value of the peso on the
market in relation to the dollar was considerably lower than before.

-72-

319. The question arises whether the “pesification” was a breach of Argentina’s
obligation under Article 2 para. 2 of the BIT to give fair and equitable treatment to
Impregilo’s investment.

320. As regards the Concession Contract, the relevant provision is to be found in
Article 20 of Annex N which provides that tariffs are stated in US Dollars but that
users shall receive their bills stated in pesos. The Article further states:

“The applicable conversion shall be performed on the basis of the 1 Dollar = 1 Peso parity
established in the Convertibility Law or any other exchange rate from time to time established
by law to replace such parity in force at bill cutoff date.”

321. It appears from this provision that the Parties considered the possibility that the
parity rate of | peso = | dollar might change during the concession period but only
envisaged the case that the rate would be replaced by a different exchange rate also
determined by law. This means, for instance, that, if a new exchange rate of 2 pesos =
1 dollar had been fixed by law, that new rate would automatically have become
applicable to the Concession Contract. In other words, AGBA had no guarantee that
the exchange rate would remain the same and had accepted to stand the risk if
changes were made by law.

322. Article 20 of Annex N does not specifically deal with the case that a new
exchange rate is created by market forces and not by legislation. On the one hand, it is
not obvious that the Parties would have intended this situation to be treated differently
from a changed exchange rate imposed by legislation. On the other hand, the situation
is undoubtedly not covered by the wording of Article 20.

323. The Arbitral Tribunal does not find it clear how the Concession Contract should
be interpreted and applied in regard to this particular situation. Consequently,
different views may be held on whether the “pesification” was as such a violation of
the Province’s obligations under Article 20 of Annex N to the Concession Contract.

    

 

324. There is, however, also another provision in the Concession Contract which
should be taken into account, i.e. Article 12.1.1, which provides that “[t]he calculation
of applicable tariffs pursuant to Article 28 II of Law 11,820 shall be based on the
general principle that tariffs shall cover all operating expenses, maintenance expenses
and service amortization and provide a reasonable return on Concessionaire’s
investment subject to efficient management and operation by the Concessionaire and
strict compliance with the applicable service quality and expansion goals”. This may
be regarded as an essential basis for the concession which would have to be upheld
even in a changing economic climate.

 

325. The Arbitral Tribunal considers that, once the value of the peso was determined
by market conditions, the balance provided for in Article 12.1.1 no longer existed and
that, according to Article 12.1.1, it was then incumbent on the Province, in order to
treat AGBA in a fair and equitable manner, to find appropriate solutions to restore the
envisaged balance. In other words, since the new exchange rate caused by the
abolition of the fixed legal rate had highly detrimental effects on AGBA, the Province
should have offered AGBA a reasonable adjustment of its obligations under the
Concession Contract.

-73-

326. Indeed, it appears that the Emergency Law also envisaged a renegotiation of
public utilities agreements to adapt them to the new exchange system. This would
have been a b; for finding a new equilibrium between the Parties to the Concession
Agreement and for ensuring that Impregilo, as shareholder in AGBA, was granted fair
and equitable treatment.

 

327. In this respect, the available documentation shows that AGBA repeatedly asked
for negotiations about a revision of the Concession Contract. Reference is made in
this respect to AGBA’s letters to various authorities dated February 19, April 17, June
11, June 28, August 14, October 8 and October 30, 2002 as well as August 27,
September 22 and December 2, 2003 and January 13, 2004. Moreover, the Province,
on May 13, 2002, by Decree 1175/02, set up a Special Commission for the Evaluation
of the Impact of the Crisis on Tariffs and Contracts regarding Public Services.

328. It is also important to note that the New Regulatory Framework for the Provision
of the Drinking Water and Wastewater Public Services, enacted in Decree No.
878/03, contained certain new elements which were unfavorable to AGBA. It
provided for State intervention in corporate decisions (Section 47) and shifted the
balance in favor of the users by introducing, for instance, a social tariff for low-
income residential owners (Section 55). Although Decree No. 878/03 also provided
for renegotiation of concession contr: , it was clear that the existence of the Decree
would significantly affect the character of the renegotiations by making it in practice
necessary for AGBA to accept the rules and principles already laid down in the
Decree. The New Regulatory Framework therefore changed the balance between the
Province and the concessionaire in a manner which was clearly disadvantageous to
the concessionaire.

    

 

329. Moreover, it appears that the Province was reluctant to renegotiate the
Concession Contract. The position of the Province is reflected in a letter of July 23,
2002 to ORAB in which the Undersecretary of Public Services of the Province
indicated that adjustments in favor of AGBA should not be made, as this would have
negative effects for the customers whose economic interests required protection.

330. Since the disturbance of the equilibrium between rights and obligations in the
concession was essentially due to measures taken by the Argentine legislator, it must
have been incumbent on Argentina to act to effectively restore an equilibrium on a
new or modified basis. Although Argentina has attributed the failure of the
negotiations to what it regarded as AGBA’s unreasonable demands, it does not appear
that Argentina took any measures to create for AGBA a reasonable basis for pursuing
its tasks as concessionaire which had been negatively affected by the emergency
legislation, including the New Regulatory Framework.

 

331. In these circumstances, the Arbitral Tribunal considers that Argentina, by failing
to restore a reasonable equilibrium in the concession, aggravated its situation to such
extent as to constitute a breach of its duty under the BIT to afford a fair and equitable
treatment to Impregilo’s investment.

(vi) Further allegations

332. Impregilo has also alleged that Argentina:

-74-

(a) impaired by unjustified and discriminatory measures the management,
operation, maintenance, use, enjoyment, acquisition, expansion or disposal of
Impregilo’s investment,

(b) failed to provide full protection and security to these investments, and

(c) violated specific obligations entered into with respect to Impregilo’s
investments in AGBA.

333. As regards the allegation under (a), the Arbitral Tribunal notes Article 2 para. 2
of the BIT which provides in a first sentence that “[i]Jnvestments made by investors of
each Contracting Party shall at all times be accorded fair and equitable treatment” and
in a second sentence that “[nJeither Party shall impair by arbitrary or discriminatory
measures the management, maintenance, enjoyment, transformation, cessation or
disposal of investments made in its territory by the other Contracting Party’s
investors”. The Tribunal regards the second sentence as a specification of the general
requirement of fair and equitable treatment dealt with in the first sentence.
Consequently, the Tribunal considers that, once a breach of the obligations in the first
sentence has been found, a further examination based on the second sentence is not
required.

 

 

334. As regards the allegation under (b), which relates to the requirement of “full
protection and security” in the Argentina-US BIT, which is claimed to be applicable
in this case through the MFN clause in the Argentina-Italy BIT, the Arbitral Tribunal
considers that where, as in the present case, there has been a failure to give an
investment fair and equitable treatment, it is not necessary to examine whether there
has also been a failure to ensure full protection and security.

335. As regards the allegation under (c), the Arbitral Tribunal, with reference to its
views on the distinction between contractual claims and treaty claims, finds that the
obligations referred to are contractual obligations between AGBA and the Province
which fall outside the Tribunal’s jurisdiction (see paras. 183-185 above).

(vii) State of necessity

336. The emergency legislation in the Argentine Republic was enacted in reaction to a
very serious economic crisis in the country. The Arbitral Tribunal has no doubt that
drastic measures were required in order to safeguard economic and political stability.

 

  

337. As regards the Argentine-Italy BIT, the Parties have discussed the possible
impact of Article 4 of the BIT and the rules on state of necessity in international law.

338. Article 4 of the BIT provides that investors of one Contracting Party whose
investments suffer losses in the territory of the other Party owing to war or other
armed conflict, a state of national emergency or other similar political-economic
events shall be accorded by such other Party in whose territory the investment was
made treatment no less favorable that that accorded to its own nationals or legal
entities or to investors of any third country as regards damages.

-75-

 

339. The Arbitral Tribunal is satisfied that the economic crisis in Argentina in 2002
could be regarded as a political-economic occurrence similar to a national emergency
and that Article 4 of the BIT is therefore applicable to the situation. It notes, however,
that Article 4 provides for no exception from the obligations of the State in whose
territory an investment was made but merely gives the investor a right to national
treatment and most-favored-nation treatment in respect of damages.

340. The Arbitral Tribunal thus notes that the Contracting Parties, when concluding
the BIT, had national emergencies and similar occurrences in mind but considered
that no special regulations were necessary apart from a rule that an investor protected
under the BIT would not be treated less favorably than other national or international
investors. Consequently, the Parties did not find it necessary to provide in the BIT for
any exception from each Contracting Party’s obligations under the BIT.

 

 

341. The Tribunal thus cannot accept the Respondent’s interpretation, which goes
against the plain meaning of the text, and agrees with Impregilo that Article 4 applies
to measures adopted in response to a loss, not to measures that cause a loss. The plain
meaning of the provision is that the standards of treatment of the BIT — national and
most-favored-nation treatment — have to be applied when a State tries to mitigate the
consequences of a situation of war or other emergency. This is in line with the
analysis of the same provision made by the tribunal in CMS when it stated that:

“The plain meaning of the Article is to provide a floor treatment for the investor in the context
of the measures adopted in respect of the losses suffered in the emergency, not different from
that applied to nationals or other foreigners. The Article - - - ensures that any measures directed
at offsetting or minimizing losses will be applied in a non-discriminatory manner.”*?

342. The same analysis is made in the Suez c:

 

“270. - - - The clear meaning of those provisions is to impose on Contracting Parties an
obligation of equality of treatment of investments for losses resulting from war, civil
disturbance, and national emergencies. The provision contains no reference whatsoever to other
obligations imposed by the BITs on Contracting Parties, let alone to provide for an exemption
from such obligations.”

343. It is therefore the conclusion of the Tribunal that any violations committed by
Argentina cannot be excused by Article 4. However, Article 4 cannot be read so as to
exclude the application of customary international law to an emergency situation.

 

344. The Arbitral Tribunal therefore must evaluate Argentina's nec
the standard set by customary international law, which the Parties agree has been
codified in Article 25 of the International Law Commission's Articles on
Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts. That standard by
definition is stringent and difficult to satisfy. According to the ILC, necess
where there is an irreconcilable conflict between an essential interest on the one hand
and an [international] obligation of the State invoking necessity on the other. These
special features mean that necessity will only rarely be available to excuse non-

 

 

   

8 CMS, supra n. 77, para. 375.
“4 Suez II, supra n. 74, Decision on Liability, ICSID Case No ARB/03/19, para. 203.

- 76 -

performance of an obligation and that it is subject to strict limitations to safeguard
against possible abuse.

345. As the Party pleading the defense, Argentina must meet the significant burden of
proving that it should be allowed to justify its failure to perform its valid international
obligations under the BIT on grounds of necessity.*°

346. At the outset, the Arbitral Tribunal must define several terms in para. 1(a) of
Draft Article 25. Regarding the meaning of the term “essential interest,” the ILC has
observed that “the extent to which a given interest is ‘essential’ depends on all the
circumstances, and cannot be prejudged” and that “[i]t extends to particular interests
of the State and its people, as well as of the international community whole”. In
the Arbitral Tribunal’s view, the term “essential interest” can encompass not only the
existence and independence of a State itself, but also other subsidiary but nonetheless
“essential” inter such as the preservation of the State’s broader social, economic
and environmental s ability,” and its ability to provide for the fundamental needs of
its population. It follows that, in addition to Argentina's overall stability, the need to
provide the population with water and sewage facilities represented an “essential
interest” which, in regard to thousands of people, was to be served by AGBA’s
concession and which would allegedly be “imperiled” for them but for the acts of the
Argentine authorities.

 

 

   

   

   

347. The Arbitral Tribunal must consider whether the economic situation in Argentina
leading up to its implementation of the emergency legislation (Federal Law No.
25,561 of 6 January 2002 and Provincial Law No. 12,858 of 28 February 2002)
constituted a “grave and imminent peril” to the State’s essential interest. In this
respect, the ILC Commentary explains that “the peril has to be objectively established
and not merely apprehended as possible”, and that “[iJn addition to being grave, the
peril has to be imminent in the sense of proximate”.** According to the Commentary,
the International Court of Justice explained in the Gabcikovo-Nagymaros Project case
that “the invoking State could not be the sole judge of the necessity, but a measure of
uncertainty about the future does not necessarily disqualify a State from invoking

 

 

SS See The International Law Commission, Articles On State Responsibility, reprinted in THE
INTERNATIONAL LAW COMMISSION’S ARTICLES ON STATE RESPONSIBILITY: INTRODUCTION, TEXT
AND COMMENTARIES, at 61 (James Crawford ed., Cambridge Univ. Press 2002) (2001); see also
U.N. GAOR, Int'l L. Comm’n., Fourth Report on State Responsibility, U.N. Doc. A/CN.4/517 (Apr.
2, 2001). The ILC Articles (and other State respot 'y documents) are available online at
www.stateresponsibility.com ILC Commentary to Article 25, at para. 2; see also ILC Commentary
to Article 25, at 14,

 

 

ILC Commentary to Chapter V (“Circumstances Precluding Wrongfulness”), at para. 8 (“Where
conduct in conflict with an international obligation is attributable to a State and that State seeks to
avoid its responsibility by relying on a circumstance under chapter V - - - [including necessity] - - -
the onus lies on that State to justify or excuse its conduct.”).

57 See ILC Commentary to Article 25, at paras 5-9 (discussing cases where the “essential interest” at

stake ranged from economic stability to the natural environment).

*S TLC Commentary to Article 25, at para. 15. Nevertheless, the Commentary notes the ICJ’s decision
in the Gabéikovo-Nagymaros Project case, which points out that a far-off “peril” could be held to be
“imminent” as soon as such peril is recognized, and just because that peril is “far off,” it is no less
“certain” or “inevitable.”

-71-

necessity, if the peril is clearly established on the basis of the evidence reasonably
available at the time”.

348. The Arbitral Tribunal notes the following facts which are of public knowledge.
At the end of 2001, savings were massively withdrawn from the banks. In order to
control the situation, the Government issued Decree No. 1570/01, known as
“Corralito”, on December 1, 2001, restricting bank withdrawals and prohibiting any
transfer of currency abroad. The situation led to demonstrations and tens of deaths in
December 2001, and these, in turn, brought about the resignation of President de la
Rua, on December 20, 2001. It can be noted that, within a term of less than 10 days,
Argentina had a succession of five presidents, who resigned one after the other. The
situation was indeed critical, and at the end of that month, Argentina partly defaulted
on her international obligations and abandoned the convertibility regime.

349. Argentina’s crisis of 2001-2002 resulted in a massive default on the public debt,
on the domestic as well as the international level. So alarming was the situation that
the United Nations General Assembly resolved to suspend the payment of Argentina’s
membership dues on account of the crisis, which was the first case in history where
this was done.

 

350. On the basis of the extensive reports on the economic situation in Argentina
before the emergency legislation was introduced,” the Arbitral Tribunal accepts that
there was a grave and imminent peril to the “essential interest” of Argentina’s
economic and social stability within the meaning of para. | (a).

 

351. The further question arises as to whether Argentina’s measures were “the only
way” for it “to safeguard its essential interests against a grave and imminent peril”.

352. According to the ILC Commentary, the plea of necessity “is excluded if there are
other (otherwise lawful) means available, even if they may be more costly or less
convenient”.”!

   

353. The question whether Argentina’s overall management of its public finances and
resulting social unrest could have been conducted more successfully, and if so in what
way, has been the subject of numerous studies by renowned experts, but the answer
remains inconclusive. However, as explained below, the Arbitral Tribunal considers
that another criterion for the application of the state of defense exception, i.e. the
requirement that the State concerned has not contributed to the crisis, has not been
satisfied in the present . The difficult question of whether Argentina’s measures
were the only way to safeguard its essential interests will therefore not have to be
answered, since whatever the answer would be, the application of the necessity
defense will be excluded for another reason in this case.

 

  

 

  

® Td., at para. 16.

* See, e.g., Expert Report of Dr. Liliana de Riz (Aug. 13, 2007) (discussing the dire socioeconomic
conditions caused by the crisis in Argentina generally and in the area covered by AGBA in
particular).

°' TLC Commentary to Article 25, at para. 15 (citations omitted).

-78 -

354. Regarding the criterion under para. 1 (b), the Arbitral Tribunal finds that no
essential interest of any other State or the international community as a whole could
have been seriously impaired by the measures taken by Argentina. The ILC
Commentary notes that “the interest relied on must outweigh all other considerations,
not merely from the point of view of the acting State but on a reasonable assessment
of the competing interests, whether these are individual or collective”. Given this
clarification and the nature of Impregilo’s “essential interests”, the Arbitral Tribunal
cannot agree with Impregilo that its own interests as an Italian legal entity must be
taken into account in the balancing required under paragraph 1(b). The interests of a
small number of a Contracting State’s nationals or legal entities are not consistent
with or qualify as an “essential interest” of that State. It follows that any impairment
of those interests is irrelevant for purposes of the paragraph. Accordingly, the
condition codified under para. | (b) has been satisfied.

 

355. With respect to para. 2 (a), the Arbitral Tribunal holds that the “international
obligation” in question refers to Argentina’s obligations to Italian investors as
contained in the BIT. The Arbitral Tribunal already has found that the /ex specialis of
Article 4 does not preclude Argentina from invoking the necessity plea, nor do any of
its other obligations contained within the BIT. Thus, this criterion is also satisfied.

356. Finally, it remains for the Arbitral Tribunal to decide, in accordance with para. 2
ity plea because it has

 

“contributed” should be defined, including whether the conduct be deliberate (i.e.
intended to bring about the state of necessity) or reckless or negligent, or even caused
by a lesser degree of fault.” In the opinion of the Arbitral Tribunal, a State’s
contribution to its necessity situation need not be specifically intended or planned — it
can be the consequence, inter alia, of well-intended but ill-conceived policies. This
result comports with common sense, because a contrary interpretation always would
have to ascribe underhanded motives to the government or, more frequently, to the
several governments that control the State successively prior to a situation of
necessity.”

 

357. Moreover,, the Arbitral Tribunal must consider what level of contribution by the
State seeking to invoke the necessity plea should be considered as sufficient to defeat
the necessity plea. According to the ILC Commentary, “contribution to the situation
of necessity must be sufficiently substantial and not merely incidental or
peripheral”.”> The Commentary notes further that the threshold for finding that a State

 

 

 

° TLC Commentary to Article 25, at para. 17. The Commentary also notes that “[a]s a matter of
terminology, it is sufficient to use the phrase ‘international community as a whole’ rather than
‘international community of States as a whole’ - - -.” Id., at para. 18.

° In apparent response to this question, the ILC Commentary relies on the ICJ’s decision in
Gabéikovo-Nagymaros Project case, where the ICJ considered that “because Hungary had ‘helped,
by act or omission to bring about’ the situation of alleged necessity, it could not then rely on that
situation as a circumstance precluding wrongfulness.” ILC Commentary to Article 25, at para. 20.

** This conclusion does not purport to characterize the intent behind the measures sought to be justified
through the necessity defense, because those measures by definition are meant as a response to a
crisis, not as a contribution to its generation.

° ILC Commentary to Article 25, at para. 20.

-79 -

contributed to the “situation of necessity” under para. 2 (b) is lower than that for an
equivalent finding for purposes of force majeure (Draft Article 23, para. 2 (a)) and
distress (Draft Article 24, para. 2 (a)), because “necessity needs to be more narrowly
confined”.”°

 

 

358. Applying these principles, the Arbitral Tribunal recognizes that international
market forces and events taking place in, inter alia, Mexico, Southeast Asia, and
Russia affected adversely the economy of Argentina, culminating in the crisis of the
early 2000s. Yet, the Arbitral Tribunal has been persuaded by substantial evidence
proffered by Impregilo that Argentina’s own economic policies over several years
prior to the crisis rendered the economy of the country vulnerable to exogenous
shocks and pressures, and impacted adversely the sustainability of its economic model
on the national and local levels.°” The Arbitral Tribunal notes, by way of example,
Argentina’s long-term failure to exercise fiscal discipline, including control of
provincial spending and of the subsidization of the Provinces by the central
Government; and its inability to adopt labor and trade policies consistent with the
country’s currency board. The resulting high public indebtedness and inflexibility in
Argentina’s markets hampered substantially the country’s ability to cope with external
shocks, leading to the 2001 crisis. It follows that Argentina contributed significantly
to the “situation of necessity” within the meaning of para. 2 (b) and therefore failed to
meet the criterion under that paragraph.

 

 

 

 

359. The majority of the Arbitral Tribunal therefore concludes that Argentina has not
satisfied all of the conditions under Article 25 and, accordingly, may not invoke the
necessity plea as a ground for precluding the wrongfulness of the acts already
identified as violations of its obligations under the BIT.

 

360. Arbitrator Stern considers as a matter of principle that the State’s contribution to
a situation of economic crisis should not be lightly assumed and, on the concrete
level, is not convinced that a substantial contribution of the Argentine authorities to
the crisis has been satisfactorily proven by strong and convincing evidence. However,
as the violation of the fair and equitable treatment, as found by the Tribunal,
continued after the crisis, she concurs with the decision on the merits.

 

     

 

(viii) Compensation

361. As regards compensation, the basic principle to be applied is that derived from
the judgment of the Permanent Court of International Justice in the Chorzow Factory
case.°* According to this principle, reparation should as far as possible eliminate the
consequences of the illegal act and re-establish the situation which would, in all
probability, have existed if that act had not been committed. In other words, Impregilo
should in principle be placed in the same position as it would have been, had
Argentina’s unfair and inequitable treatment of Impregilo’s investment not occurred.

  

° Td., at para. 20.

°" The Arbitral Tribunal notes, in this regard, the Expert Opinion of Prof. Dr. Sebastian Edwards (Oct.
29, 2009) paras. 78-125 and its associated evidence (discussing the manner in which Argentina’s
policies throughout the 1990s contributed to its 2001 crisis).

° The Chorzow Factory case, PCI, Series A, p. 1382.

- 80 -

362. The Arbitral Tribunal first notes that the price of USD 1.26 million paid by
AGBA for the concession was, in relation to the number of inhabitants, very low as
compared with the price per inhabitant paid by Azurix for its concession for other
parts of the Province of Buenos Aires. The reason was apparently that AGBA’s
concession concerned a poor area in which AGBA, in order to reach the goals of the
POES with regard to coverage of water and sewerage connections, would have to
make very substantial investments. These investments would amount to USD 16.74
million in the first year (2000), USD 87.77 million in the second year (2001), USD
173.79 million in the third year (2002), 211.82 million in the fourth year (2003) and
USD 230.92 million in the fifth year (2004).

 

363. The investments were necessary in order to extend the system of water and
sewerage connections in the area. The number of such connections was exceptionally
low and covered only 35.4% (water) and 13.5% (sewerage) of the population.
According to the POES, AGBA was to increase these figures, as regards water, to
63.19% in the third year, 67.93% in the fourth year and 70.68% in the fifth year, and,
as regards sewerage, to 41.63% in the third year, 51.34% in the fourth year and
55.80% in the fifth year.

 

364. It appears from the background documents of the concession (the Schroder
reports) that the rate of collectability of tariff payments was low in the area — initially
about 63% — but according to AGBA’s Business Plan the rate would be gradually
increased to 80% in the third year, 83% in the fourth year and 85% in the fifth year.

365. As the Arbitral Tribunal understands it, the concession was connected with
considerable risks, and its success would depend on whether sufficient funds could be
found and whether the payment capacity of the population could be increased quickly.
It would also depend on good co-operation with the Province authorities and on the
fulfillment of the Province’s obligations under the Concession Contract and the
POES. It may be assumed, however, that for Impregilo, as a construction company,
another attractive aspect would be that the concession could pave the way to
construction contracts in Argentina.

  
 

 

366. It soon appeared that the poor collectability rate was a more serious problem than
AGBA had expected. This also made it difficult for AGBA to obtain the financing
needed for its investments. Negotiations about a loan from the Inter-American
Development Bank were not fruitful, and the Banco de la Provincia de Buenos Aires
refused a bridge loan. To some extent, the difficulties in obtaining financing were
probably due to the general economic situation, but delays in the construction
program of treatment plants, some of which (the UNIREC plants) were to be
constructed by the Province and others by AGBA, may also have been a relevant
factor affecting the position of the loan institutions.

 

367. In its letter of May 17, 2001, AGBA explained to the Province that the non-
collection rates were high and affected the possibilities for AGBA to find financing.
As a result, it had also become impossible to achieve the goals of the Five-Year Plan.
AGBA requested that a work commission be created to assess the situation and that,
in the meantime, the expansion goals be temporarily suspended. The Province replied,
on May 30, 2001, by pointing out that the issue of non-collection rates was AGBA’s
business risk but nevertheless agreed to set up a working commission. On July 17 and

 

    

-81-

August 15, 2001, AGBA again asked for a temporary suspension of the execution of
the POES and this time, as reasons, referred to the economic situation.

368. The position subsequently adopted by the authorities appears to the Arbitral
Tribunal to be somewhat ambiguous. While, on August 27, 2001, ORAB’s Technical
Department found that AGBA’s performance during the first year of the concession
had shown an acceptable degree of compliance with the POES, the same Department,
in an internal letter of October 10, 2001, stated that neither the goals set forth in the
Concession Contract nor those specified in the POES had been attained. Nevertheless,
in Resolution No. 69/02 of December 5, 2002, ORAB resolved that AGBA had met
the service expansion and quality goals of the first year of the concession (2000), as
provided in Annex F to the Concession Contract and incorporated into the first Five-
Year Plan which was an integral part of the POES.

 

369. In any case, it is clear to the Arbitral Tribunal that the situation changed in early
2002 with the enactment of emergency legislation which had dramatic effects on
AGBA’s contractual rights and obligations. As from that time, there were no
possibilities for AGBA to obtain credits and to reach the goals in the POES. In fact, in
Resolution No. 77/02 of December 30, 2002, ORAB agreed to suspend the
obligations under the POES for the second concession year (2002). No similar
decision was taken for the following years 2003, 2004 and 2005, and AGBA may
have regarded its undertakings for these years also to have been suspended. The
Argentine Republic ha ited, however, that the intention was that all obligations for
the first five-year period should be complied with before the end of that period.
Impregilo seems to consider that AGBA’s obligations continued to be suspended as
long as possible adjustments of the Concession Contract had not been agreed between
the parties.

 

 

370. The Tribunal has found that the Argentine Republic exposed AGBA to treatment
which was not fair and equitable, thus violating Article 2 para. 2 of the Argentina-
Italy BIT. In particular, the Argentine Republic had failed to take appropriate
measures to restore the equilibrium which had been disturbed by the pesification and
other measures provoked by the financial crisis. Consequently, in so far as this failure
caused damage to Impregilo, Argentina should be under an obligation to compensate
Impregilo for the loss it sustained as a result of unfair and inequitable treatment.

371. In principle, it is incumbent on Impregilo to prove that it suffered the damage for
which it asks to be compensated. However, it cannot be established with certainty in
what situation AGBA — and thus Impregilo — would have been, had the Argentine
Republic’s breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard not occurred.
Consequently, it would be unreasonable to require precise proof of the extent of the
damage sustained by Impregilo. Instead, reasonable probabilities and estimates have
to suffice as a basis for claims for compensation.

 

372. In support of its claims for damages, Impregilo relies, in particular, on expert
reports by Richard E. Walck and Leonardo Giacchino, whereas the Argentine
Republic invokes other expert reports, including those of José Pablo Dapena and
German Coloma. In the latter reports, MM. Dapena and Coloma argue that the
concession had no economic value and that no compensation can therefore be
justified. MM. Walck and Giacchino disagree and consider that the concession would

- 82-

have produced substantial gains for AGBA. They as: AGBA’s loss by applying a
combination of two methods, i.e., on the one hand, a cost or asset based method and,
on the other hand, an income method. They consider both methods to be relevant to
the assessment of damages in this case but attach more weight (two thirds) to the
income method than to the asset based method (one third). They add compound
interest to their calculation and arrive at the result that the total value of Impregilo’s
investment was, as of July 2006, USD 87,156,098 and, as of October 2008 (including
interest at the rate of 15%), USD 119,362,503.

 

 

373. The Arbitral Tribunal notes that, according to AGBA’s Business Plan, the
concession would be highly profitable. However, there are elements which, in the
Tribunal’s opinion, make it doubtful whether the forecasts in the Business Plan were
realistic. First, it is clear that the concession covered a risk area with a poor
population whose ability — and willingness — to pay for services was very limited.
This is demonstrated not only by statistical figures but also by the fact that the fee that
AGBA paid to obtain the concession was very low, almost symbolic, and that the
emphasis in the concession was on the large investments that AGBA was required to
make in order to fulfill its obligations under the Concession Contract, including the
POES and the first Five-Year Plan.

 

 

 

374. However, in reality only a minor part of the envisaged investments were made by
AGBA. It appears clearly from the facts of the case that AGBA was unable, already at
an early stage of the concession period and a considerable time before the financial
crisis reached its peak, to obtain credits necessary for the investments. Moreover, it
appears that AGBA was unpleasantly surprised by the low collectability rate in the
concession area which must have significantly hampered the expectations of profits
from the concession. Even taking into account that the collectability rate was to some
degree affected by the fact that there were, as an heritage from AGOSBA, a large
number of unregistered users of the water and sewage network, it was AGBA that, in
principle, bore the risk of unsatisfactory results as to investments and collectability.

    

 

 

375. When assessing the situation as a whole, the Arbitral Tribunal cannot find it
established with a sufficient degree of probability that the concession, even in the
absence of acts violating the standard of fair and equitable treatment, would have been
profitable for AGBA.

 

376. It is clear, however, that the Province contributed to some extent to the negative
development of the concession by not taking appropriate action to restore the
equilibrium that had been eliminated by the pesification and by imposing on AGBA a
New Regulatory Framework which had a negative effect on AGBA’s contractual
rights. These measures which were connected with the economic crisis were the
elements that definitely made it impossible for AGBA to implement the concession on
an economically sound basis.

 

 

377. The failure of the concession can therefore be ascribed partly to events for which
AGBA stood the risk and partly to acts or failures by the Province.

378. The fact that AGBA and the Province have a shared responsibility for the failure
of the concession makes it inappropriate to calculate damages on the basis of

customary economic parameters such as a cost or asset based method or an income

- 83 -

method. Instead, the damages to be paid by the Argentine Republic to compensate for
unfair and inequitable treatment should be determined on the basis of a reasonable
estimate of the loss that may have been caused to Impregilo.

 

379. The Arbitral Tribunal notes that capital contributions were made by the
shareholders of AGBA, mainly during 2000 and 2001. These contributions constituted
a capital injection that was to be used for the benefit of the concession. It is true that
Impregilo assumed a risk when providing capital to AGBA. On the other hand, if
AGBA’s concession had been successful, this capital would have produced benefits
for Impregilo shareholder. The Tribunal does not find it possible to evaluate
potential losses or gains in precise figures but considers that Argentina should in
principle be obliged to restitute the investment to Impregilo as compensation for its
failure to ensure fair and equitable treatment to the concession.

 

380. As regards the question whether Impregilo, in addition to compensation for the
investment, should also be entitled to compensation for its share of AGBA’s potential
gains from the concession, the answer must depend on whether there is sufficient
reason to believe that such gains would have been obtained, had Argentina treated
AGBA in a fair and equitable manner. This would have depended on various
circumstances but primarily on whether AGBA would have been able to find
sufficient financing and to solve the collectability problems characterizing this
particular concession area. Having regard to the character of the concession area and
the difficulties experienced by AGBA at the beginning of the concession period,
before any emergency laws affected the situation, the Arbitral Tribunal has
considerable doubt in this respect. Impregilo has not shown that the concession was
likely to have been profitable, if there had been no interference by the Argentine
legislator and the Argentine public authorities.

 

 

381. It follows that the compensation to be awarded to Impregilo should be based
only on the capital contribution made by Impregilo. As regards the amount of this
contribution, the Arbitral Tribunal finds no reason to doubt the figures presented in
MM. Walck’s and Giacchino’s reports. The Tribunal also considers that these figures
are not affected by internal changes of shareholdings within the consortium of AGBA
shareholders, i.e. the transfers of shares from Sideco to Impregilo which took place in
March 2000 and April 2002. According to the figures in MM. Walck’s and
Giacchino’s reports, the capital contributions of the shareholders to AGBA, mainly in
2000 and 2001, amounted to USD 45,000,000 and Impregilo’s share was USD
21,294,000. Consequently, the amount to be compensated is USD 21,294,000.

 

(ix) Interest

382. The Parties disagree on whether the interest on any damages should be simple or
compound interest. The Arbitral Tribunal notes that there is no uniform case-law on
this matter but considers that compound interest is in the present case to be preferred
in order to eliminate the consequences of the conduct which the Tribunal has found to

give rise to an obligation to pay damages.

 

° Cf Azurix supra n. 71, para. 440. Also, Metalclad Corp. v. Mexico, Award, (NAFTA Ch. 11 Arb.
Trib., Aug. 30, 2000, para. 128.

-84-

383. On the other hand, the rate of interest of 15% requested by Impregilo appears to
the Arbitral Tribunal to be excessive to restore Impregilo to the position in which it
would have been if the breach of the BIT had not taken place. The Tribunal considers
arate of 6% to be adequate and reasonable in the circumstances of this case.

 

384. Since the violation found in the present case is not one of expropriation but
consisted in a breach of Argentina’s obligation to afford Impregilo’s investment a fair
and equitable treatment, it is not evident from which date interest should be
calculated. There is no precise point in time when the unfair treatment took place, but
there were a series of successive events — actions as well as omissions — which
cumulatively were unfair to AGBA and thus also to Impregilo. However, there can be
no doubt that, by July 11, 2006, when the Province terminated the concession, its
breaches of the BIT had culminated. The Arbitral Tribunal therefore finds it
appropriate to choose that date as starting-point for Argentina’s duty to pay interest.'°°

 

(x) Costs and expenses

385. The Arbitral Tribunal notes that the present case has given rise to a number of
important and complex legal issues and that both Parties have raised weighty
arguments in support of their respective positions. The Argentine Republic’s
jurisdictional objections have been almost entirely rejected, and both Parties have
been only partly successful in regard to the merits of the case. In view of the is
the case as a whole, the Arbitral Tribunal finds it reasonable to order that each Party
shall bear its own costs and expenses and shall pay half of the costs for ICSID’s and
the Arbitral Tribunal’s work.

 

ues in

© Cf Id. Azurix. Also, Siemens AG v, Argentina, ICSID Case No ARB/02/8, Award, February 6, 2007,
paras. 349-350.

-85-

VI. THE AWARD

The Arbitral Tribunal:

A. Declares that the dispute is within the jurisdiction of ICSID and within the
competence of the Arbitral Tribunal, and dismisses Argentina’s objections to the
jurisdiction of ICSID and the competence of the Tribunal except as regards alleged
contractual breaches which fall outside the Tribunal’s competence, unless they
involve at the same time violations of Argentina’s obligations to investors under the
Argentina-Italy BIT,

B. Declares that the Argentine Republic did not violate the Argentina-Italy BIT by
expropriating or nationalizing Impregilo’s investment in AGBA,

C. Declares that the Argentine Republic violated the Argentina-Italy BIT by failing to
treat Impregilo’s investment in a fair and equitable manner,

D. Declares that, in view of the finding under C, it is not necessary to establish
whether the Argentine Republic impaired Impregilo’s investment by unjustified and
discriminatory measures or failed to grant full protection and security to the
investment,

   

 

E. Decides that the Argentine Republic shall pay compensation to Impregilo for
damages it has suffered in the amount of USD 21,294,000 and interest on that
amount, compounded annually at the rate of 6% as from July 11, 2006 until the date
of payment, and

F. Decides that each Party shall bear its own costs for the proceedings and pay half of
ICSID’s and the Tribunal’s fees and expenses.

Items A, B and E of the Award were adopted by a majority of votes. Items C, D and F
of the Award were adopted unanimously.

Done in English and Spanish, both versions being equally authoritative.

- 86 -

 

t me | ¢ Wein

 

a.
Professor Brigitte Stern Judge Charles N. Brower
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Date: “4y 5, 2011
Subject to the attached concurring and

dissenting opinion

Date: /9 AY 2.0/, ]
Subject to the attached concurring and
dissenting opinion

AIT alg

Judge Hans Danelius
President of the Tribunal

Date: iF May x01]

 

 

