INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDINGS BETWEEN

IMPREGILO S.p.A.

(Claimant)

ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN
(Respondent)

ICSID CASE No. ARB/03/3

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

Members of the Tribunal
Judge Gilbert Guillaume
Mr. Bernardo M. Cremades
Mr. Toby T. Landau

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Martina Polasek
Acting Secretary of the Tribunal

Ms. Aurélia Antonietti

Representing the Claimant

Mr. Daniel M. Price

Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov

Sidley Austin Brown & Wood, LLP
1501 K Street, N.W.

Washington, D.C. 20005, U.S.A.

and

Judge Stephen M. Schwebel
1501 K Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20005, U.S.A.

and

Prof. Antonio Crivellaro
Bonelli Erede Pappalardo
Via Barozzi, 1

20122 Milano, Italy

Representing the Respondent

Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan
Attorney General for Pakistan
Supreme Court Building
Islamabad, Pakistan

and

Mr. V.V. Veeder, Q.C.
Essex Court Chambers
24 Lincoln’s Inn Fields
London WC2A 3EG, U.K.

and

Prof. Alain Pellet
16, avenue Alphonse de Neuville
92380 Garches, France

and

Prof. Christopher Greenwood CMG, Q.C.
Essex Court Chambers

24 Lincoln’s Inn Fields,

London WC2A 3EG, U.K.

and

Mr. Umar Atta Bandial

Umar Bandial & Associates,
Lower Ground Floor, LDA Plaza,
Egerton Road,

Lahore, Pakistan

and

Mr. Samuel Wordsworth
Essex Court Chambers,
24 Lincoln’s Inn Fields,
London WC2A 3EG, U.K.

and

Mr. Rodman Bundy
Eversheds

8, Place d’Iéna
75116 Paris, France

Ill.

-3-

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS

A.

B.

The Claimant’s Request

The Claimant’s Limited Memorial

The Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction

The Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction
The Hearing on 23 and 24 May 2004

(i) The Respondent’s Case
(ii) | The Claimant’s Case

THE BILATERAL INVESTMENT TREATY

A.

B.

The Basis for this Tribunal’s Jurisdiction

Relevant Provisions of the BIT

JURISDICTION RATIONE PERSONAE

A.

B.

Issues in Dispute

Impregilo’s Standing to Bring a Claim on Behalf of GBC or
the Other Joint Venture Partners .. ”

(i) The Nature of GBC..

(ii) | The Relief Claimed by Impregilo .

(iii) Claims in Respect of GBC.. .

(iv) Claims in Respect of the Other Joint Venture Partners...
(v) Conclusions ..

Impregilo’s Standing to Bring a Claim for its Own Share of any Losses
(i) Pakistan’s Objections

(ii) Impregilo’s Case .
(iii) Analysis and Conclusions ..

Paragraph

36
60
71
91
92
99
106
106

109

111

111

114

115
125
128
140
153

156
158

163
165

VI.

VIL.

Impregilo’s Authority to Bring the Arbitration,
and its Compliance with Institutional Rule 2(1)(f)

(i) Pakistan’s Objections
(ii) Impregilo’s Case .
(iii) Analysis and Conclusions ..

Conclusions on Objections Ratione Personae ..

JURISDICTION RATIONE MATERIAE

A.

Cc.

Contract Claims

(i) Impregilo’s Case

(ii) Pakistan’s Objections

(iii) Issues in Dispute

(iv) The Scope of Article 9 of the BIT. .

(v) | The ‘MFN’ Provision in Article 3 of the BIT

(vi) The Effect of the Contractual Dispute Resolution Clauses

Treaty Claims

(i) Impregilo’s Case
(ii) Pakistan’s Objections
(iii) Issues in Dispute
(iv) Qualification as a Treaty Claim
(v) Analysis of Treaty Claims and
the Interrelationship Between Contract and Treaty Claims
(vi) The Effect of the Contractual Dispute Resolution Clauses

Conclusions on Objections Ratione Materiae

JURISDICTION RATIONE TEMPORIS

A.

B.

Pakistan’s Objections
Impregilo’s Case
Relevant Principles ..
Analysis of the Disputes

Conclusions on Objections Ratione Temporis

THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION

175
176
180
181

184

185
186
186
193
196
198
220
224
226
226
230
235
237

255
286

291

292

292

297

299

305

314

316

-5-

I. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 21 January 2003, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(“ICSID” or “the Centre”) received a request for arbitration dated 17 January 2003 (the
“Request”) from Impregilo S.p.A. (“Impregilo” or “the Claimant”), a company
organized under the laws of Italy, against the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (“Pakistan”
or “the Respondent”). The Request invoked the provisions of the Agreement between
the Government of the Italian Republic and the Government of the Islamic Republic of
Pakistan on the Promotion and Protection of Investments signed on 19 July 1997 (the
“BIT” or “Treaty”), and those of the Washington Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (the “ICSID

Convention”).

On 3 March 2003, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request
pursuant to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention and, on the same date, notified the
Parties of the registration of the Request and invited them to proceed to constitute an
Arbitral Tribunal as soon as possible. The Parties agreed that the Tribunal was to
consist of three arbitrators, one arbitrator appointed by each party and the third, the
President of the Tribunal, to be appointed by agreement of the Parties. The Parties
further agreed that, in the event they were unable to agree on the President, the presiding

arbitrator was to be appointed by the Secretary-General of ICSID.

On 30 April 2003, the Claimant appointed Mr. Bernardo M.Cremades and on
5 May 2003, the Respondent appointed Mr. Toby T. Landau. The Parties were
subsequently unable to agree on the President of the Tribunal within the time limit
agreed upon and, therefore, on 12 June 2003, the Claimant requested the Secretary-
General of ICSID to appoint the President. Having consulted the Parties regarding the
appointment of the presiding arbitrator, on 15 August 2003 the Centre announced the
appointment of Judge Gilbert Guillaume. The Parties were also notified on
15 August 2003 that the Tribunal was constituted and that the proceedings had begun on
that date in accordance with Article 6(1) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration

Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”).

With the agreement of the Parties, the first session of the Tribunal was held in Paris on
7 November 2003. On that occasion, the Parties expressed their agreement that the
Tribunal had been properly constituted and also agreed on a number of procedural
matters reflected in the minutes signed by the President and the Secretary of the
Tribunal. Among other items, it was agreed that the procedural language would be
English and that the legal place of proceedings would be Washington D.C. but that, in

principle, the Tribunal would hold hearings in Paris.

The Parties were unable to agree at the first session on the number and sequence of
pleadings and the time limits for their submission. The Respondent stated that it needed
additional information from the Claimant, beyond that contained in the Request, in order
to consider its position with respect to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. To this end, the
Tribunal ordered that the Respondent submit a document specifying the information it
wished to have in order to be able to formulate any possible objections to jurisdiction.
The Tribunal further decided on the procedural calendar to be followed in the event that

the Respondent decided to raise any such objections.

In accordance with the Tribunal’s directions at the first session, on 15 December 2003
the Respondent filed a submission entitled “Information on the Request for Arbitration:
Information Sought by the Respondent in Relation to the Formulation of Potential
Objections to Jurisdiction.” On 17 December 2003, the Claimant raised a number of
objections with respect to the nature and scope of the Respondent’s request for
information of 15 December 2003. By Procedural Order No. 1 of 22 December 2003,
the Tribunal directed that the Claimant submit a Limited Memorial on the merits,
articulating the precise legal basis for each of its claims, instead of a response to the
Respondent’s request for information. The Tribunal further confirmed the timetable for

the filing of pleadings as agreed during the first session.

7.

A.

-7-

In accordance with Procedural Order No. 1, the Claimant filed its Limited Memorial on
the Merits on 17 February 2004; the Respondent filed its Memorial on Jurisdiction on
18 March 2004; and the Claimant filed its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction on

19 April 2004. A hearing on jurisdiction was held in Paris on 23 and 24 May 2004.

II. SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS

The Claimant’s Request

GBC: According to the Claimant’s Request, on 27 April 1995 a joint venture called
Ghazi-Barotha Contractors (“GBC” or the “Joint Venture”) was formed under the laws
of Switzerland, in order to prepare and submit tenders for, and if successful to construct,
hydroelectric power facilities in Pakistan known as the Ghazi-Barotha Hydropower

Project (the “Project”).

The Project is located immediately downstream of the Tarbela Dam on the Indus River
in Northern Pakistan and, on completion, is expected to increase power generation in

Pakistan by 15%.

GBC was established pursuant to a “Joint Venture Agreement” (“JVA”) concluded
between five joint venture participants (comprising both Pakistani and non-Pakistani

entities), as follows:

(a) Impregilo;

(b) Ed. Ziiblin AG (a German company);

(c) Campenon Bernard SGE (a French company);

(d) Saadullah Khan & Brothers (“SKB”) (a Pakistani company); and

(e) Nazir & Company (Private) Limited (a Pakistani company).

-8-

Impregilo was selected as the Leader of the Joint Venture.

Campenon Bernard SGE withdrew from the Joint Venture in 1998.

The Contracts: On 19 December 1995, two Contracts (the ‘Contracts”) were
concluded between Impregilo (acting on behalf of GBC) and the Pakistan Water and
Power Development Authority (“WAPDA” or the “Employer”’). Contract C-01 called
for the construction of a barrage downstream of the Tarbela Dam that would control the
flow of the Indus River. Contract C-02 called for the construction of a 52 km channel
that would convey the water from the barrage to a powerhouse, as well as the
construction of 47 bridge structures, a railway bridge, and 30 drainage structures. The

two Contracts together were initially valued at approximately US$ 500 million.

The performance of the Contracts was to be controlled by an Engineer acting as an agent
for the Employer. Pakistan Hydro Consultants (““PHC” or the “Engineer”) was selected
by WAPDA to fulfill this task.

Relevant Facts: Construction under the Contracts began in early 1996 with original
completion dates foreseen in March 2000. In the event, the performance of the work
was delayed, according to the Claimant, due to obstacles created by the Respondent and
to unforeseen conditions discovered over the course of the work. The Engineer and
WAPDA denied GBC’s requests for adequate time extensions and reimbursement of

costs. The denial of GBC’s claims led to a series of disputes.

In particular, the Claimant contends that the timely performance of the preliminary tasks
under Contract C-01 was impeded by delay in the Engineer’s issuance of detailed
instructions. In addition, the Engineer increased the amount of foundation work to be
carried out, and the preliminary work led to the discovery of unforeseen geological
conditions. The construction of the main barrage was also delayed by the Engineer’s
failure to give timely approvals and issue instructions for the work. Furthermore, the

instructions were inadequate in detail and required work more complex than had been

20.

21.

-9-

shown in the tender drawings. In addition, WAPDA failed to deliver to GBC items of

equipment it had to supply, or delivered them many months later than scheduled.

Further, the Claimant contends that the implementation of Contract C-02 was hampered
by WAPDA’s failure to turn over the land necessary to carry out the work in a proper
manner. Moreover, acts and omissions of WAPDA and the Engineer significantly
impeded GBC’s ability to proceed according to schedule. Sections of the concrete lining
for the channel, when completed, were damaged due to the Engineer’s design defects.
Design details for the construction of bridges and other ancillary structures were issued
late. Moreover, GBC was required to build 50 % more concrete structures than required

by the tender documents.

The Engineer rejected most of GBC’s claims for extensions of time, as well as its claims
for payment of additional costs. As a result, WAPDA refused to compensate GBC for

most of those costs.

Beginning in March 2001, GBC attempted an amicable settlement of its disputes with
WAPDA. Negotiations continued for some months thereafter, but eventually broke

down.

The Contracts contain detailed dispute settlement clauses. Under those provisions,
disputes have first to be submitted to the Engineer, which is to render its decision within
28 days. If either party is dissatisfied with the Engineer’s decision, it may refer the
matter to a Disputes Review Board (“DRB” or “Board”) within 14 days. This Board is
composed of three Members, one selected by GBC, one by the Employer, and the third,
who chairs the Board, by the first two Members with the approval of both Parties. If
either party is dissatisfied with the Board’s recommendation, it may commence

arbitration in Lahore within 14 days.

Impregilo submits that the Engineer did not act impartially or independently. In this

respect, it stresses that the majority partner of PHC is National Engineer Services

22.

23.

24.

-10-

Pakistan (“NESPAK’”’), an enterprise wholly-owned by the Pakistan Ministry of Water
and Power, and that NESPAK’s managers were recruited from the ranks of WAPDA

officials.

Moreover, according to GBC, the DRB’s functioning was frustrated and the review of
the Engineer’s decisions was blocked. At every stage of the process, WAPDA blocked
the replacement of each member of the Board by delaying, objecting to and frustrating
the appointment of replacements. Thus, there was no properly appointed WAPDA
representative on the DRB from early 2000 until April 2002. In March 2002, WAPDA
objected to the appointment by GBC of a new member of the DRB for unfounded
reasons. WAPDA also frustrated the efforts to appoint a new chairman of the DRB in
2001 and 2002. In April 2002, Impregilo and the Respondent agreed to reconstitute the
DRB. The reconstituted DRB met in November 2002, and, in early December 2002, it
issued one determination which was favourable to GBC. WAPDA immediately
challenged the chairman of the DRB and again blocked the proper functioning of the
Board. On Impregilo’s case, resort to the DRB was a precondition to arbitration, and
hence in the absence of a functioning DRB, arbitration under the Contracts became
impossible. Arbitration, in any event, did not provide an adequate substitute to the

contemplated DRB process.

The events of 11 September 2001 in the United States altered the political, practical and
security considerations for all work in the region near the Pakistan-Afghan border.
Orders were given by the Italian Authorities to repatriate all Italian personnel of GBC.
British, American, Canadian and German personnel also had to leave the site for security
reasons. GBC approached WAPDA in order to seek a suspension of the work. The
Engineer and the Employer refused. In December 2001, WAPDA required that GBC

pay liquidated damages because of its alleged failure to complete the work on schedule.

In April 2002, the security situation improved and the Italian Authorities granted
authorization for the Italian staff to work in Pakistan. The Italian and German personnel

of GBC resumed work on the site.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

-ll-

In the meantime, in January 2002, Impregilo had filed a request for arbitration before
ICSID (ICSID Case No ARB/02/2). After the registration of the request, Impregilo and
the Respondent engaged in discussions in an effort to settle the dispute and, in May
2002, Impregilo withdrew its request. Unfortunately, according to the Claimant,
attempts to settle the dispute failed and Impregilo therefore filed a new request for

arbitration.

Jurisdiction: | According to Impregilo’s Request, jurisdiction over this dispute is
established by Article 25 (1) of the ICSID Convention and by Article 9 of the BIT
between Italy and Pakistan signed on 19 July 1997, which entered into force on

22 June 2001.

With respect to jurisdiction ratione personae, Impregilo adds that it is an investor of
Italy for the purposes of the BIT. It is also “a national of another Contracting State” for
the purposes of the ICSID Convention. As Leader of the Joint Venture, Impregilo is

entitled to represent GBC in all matters relating to the Contracts.

On Impregilo’s case, WAPDA is an instrumentality of the Government of Pakistan and

exercises governmental authority. It is therefore part of the Government of Pakistan.

The Islamic Republic of Pakistan is both a Contracting Party to the BIT and a
Contracting State under Article 25 (1) of the ICSID Convention. It is thus a proper

Respondent in this case.

With respect to jurisdiction ratione materiae, Impregilo submits that the present dispute
is “a legal dispute arising directly out of an investment”. Impregilo’s rights and assets in
Pakistan are investments within the meaning of Article 25 (1) of the ICSID Convention
and of Article 1 (1) of the BIT. The Respondent has breached and continues to breach
both the Contracts and various rights conferred on Impregilo by the BIT with respect to

its investment.

31.

-12-

Concerning jurisdiction ratione temporis, the Claimant contends that the breaches

occurred after the entry into force of the BIT, and are ongoing. It adds that:

“..while some of the acts and omissions took place before the date of the
entry into force of the BIT, the situation that they have created has not
ceased to exist as of the date of entry into force. In addition, acts and
omissions subsequent to that date have aggravated the situation and, as a
whole, constitute a serious breach of the protections granted to Impregilo by

the BIT and its rights under the Contracts”.

1

32. Finally, all procedural conditions precedent to the submission of the dispute to ICSID

have been fulfilled. As required by Article 9(1) of the BIT, Impregilo has repeatedly

sought a resolution of the dispute through consultation and negotiation. More than six

months have elapsed from the time Impregilo submitted a “written application” to reach

an amicable settlement as required by Article 9(2) of the BIT.

33. Breaches of Contract and Treaty: In conclusion, the Claimant submits, first, that the

Respondent failed to honour its commitments under the Contracts:

“\..by causing delays in the performance of the Contracts, denying
Impregilo’s rights to extensions of time and additional costs, frustrating the
dispute settlement mechanism under the Contracts, requiring Impregilo to
continue the work in spite of the serious security risks, and threatening to

impose liquidated damages.

092

34. Second, the Claimant asserts that the alleged acts and omissions of the Respondent also

constitute violations of several provisions of the BIT, as follows:

“1,

Respondent is in breach of its obligation under Article 2(2) of the BIT
to ‘at all times ensure fair and equitable treatment or the investments of
investors of the other Contracting Party.’

Respondent is in breach of its obligation under Article 2(2) not to
subject investors and investments to unjustified measures.

' Request, para. 53.

 [bid., para. 56.

35.

B.

36.

-13-

 

3.  Respondent’s acts and omissions constitute ‘measure[s] which might
limit permanently or temporarily the right of ownership, possession,
control or enjoyment’ by Impregilo of its investment in Pakistan
measures that are prohibited by Article 5(1) of the BIT.

4. Respondent’s acts and omissions constitute measures that have an

effect similar to expropriation under Article 5(2). Respondent’s failure
to honor the Contracts has destroyed the value of Impregilo’s
investment. The Contracts are the principal asset of Impregilo. The
continuous failure to observe their terms is tantamount to an
expropriation of Impregilo’s investment under Article 5(2) of the BIT
for which compensation is due.”

As a result of these alleged breaches of the Contracts and the BIT (referred to below as

the “Contract Claims” and the “Treaty Claims” respectively), Impregilo submits that the

Respondent has caused damages of approximately US$ 450 million.

In its Request,

Impregilo seeks the following relief:

“1,

Impregilo seeks compensation for the entirety of the damages,
including interest and the costs of the arbitration proceedings.
Impregilo is entitled to claim the entirety of the damages suffered by
GBC because of its role in the Joint Venture with its partners. Under
Swiss law, the law governing the Joint Venture Agreement, and under
the Joint Venture Agreement itself, Impregilo’s rights, duties and
liabilities are such as to entitle, if not oblige, it to assert a claim for the
full amount of the damages suffered by GBC.

In any event, if the Tribunal finds that it cannot award Impregilo
damages in excess of its proportionate interest in GBC, Impregilo
claims, in the alternative, 57.80 % of the total damages.”

The Claimant’s Limited Memorial

On 17 February 2004, pursuant to Procedural Order No. 1, Impregilo filed a Limited

Memorial on the Merits (the “Memorial’”), in which it expanded upon and explained its

case as summarized in the Request.

$ [bid., para. 57.
4 Tbid., para. 58.

37.

38.

39.

40.

-14-

Relevant Facts - Contractual Dispute Resolution Provisions: In this Memorial, the
Claimant first presented a statement of facts in which it describes the Project, and each
of the entities involved, i.e., Impregilo, GBC, WAPDA and the Engineer. Many of the

points set out in its Request (and summarized above) were restated and elaborated upon.

According to Impregilo’s Memorial, Pakistan has consistently thwarted and undermined

the dispute resolution mechanism of the Contracts. It stresses that:

“[t]hrough its influence over the determinations of the Engineer ... and
through its outright obstruction of the Disputes Review Board ... WAPDA
has prevented GBC from obtaining a fair hearing and equitable resolution of
claims worth US$550 million.”*

Impregilo adds that “GBC has submitted to the Engineer a total of over 140 events that
gave rise to claims for extensions of time and additional costs”.° However, the Engineer
“has consistently refused to allow GBC reasonable” claims.” Moreover, in the
proceedings before the DRB, the Engineer has actively supported WAPDA’s interests.
It “failed utterly to act in an impartial and independent manner, contrary to his

contractual role.”*

The Claimant also states that the DRB heard 12 disputes between January 1997 and
September 2000, but that subsequently WAPDA obstructed the functioning of the
Board. It did so after the resignation of WAPDA’s member of the Board,
Mr. Zahid Hamid, on 13 November 2000; as a consequence, from that date to
April 2002, there was no properly appointed WAPDA representative on the DRB. After
the resignation of Mr. Harald Peipers (GBC’s member of the Board) on
15 January 2001, WAPDA objected in an unjustified manner to the appointment of his
successor by GBC, and prevented such an appointment until April 2002. In April 2001,

GBC drafted a memorandum of understanding, the purpose of which was to reconstitute

> Memorial, para. 36.
© Tbid., para. 41.
 [bid., para. 39.

* bid.

Al.

42.

43.

44.

-15-

the DRB under a new chairman. WAPDA verbally agreed with this proposal, but
communicated it privately to the existing chairman of the DRB, thus exacerbating the

situation.

From March 2001, GBC began to try to settle disputes related to time extensions and
additional costs directly with WAPDA and other Pakistani officials. No agreement was

reached.

The events of 11 September 2001 caused a precipitous deterioration of the security
situation in the area of the Project. On 25 September 2001, the Italian Ministry of Labor
and Social Services revoked its authorization for the Italian staff employed under the
Contracts to work in Pakistan. At the time, GBC was employing approximately
65 expatriates on the site, including 48 Italians who occupied most of the senior-level

positions. They had to be repatriated.

Thereafter, GBC approached WAPDA and the Engineer seeking a suspension of the
works pursuant to Clause 40 of the Contracts. This was refused and, on
4 December 2001, WAPDA notified GBC that it considered GBC in breach of the
Contracts and intended to invoke liquidated damages in the amount of US$36 million

against it.

In February 2002, immediately after the registration of Impregilo’s first request for
arbitration by ICSID, negotiations took place between the Parties on the initiative of the
Pakistan Minister of Finance. As a result of these negotiations, on 14 April 2002, GBC
entered into a supplementary agreement with WAPDA (“Supplementary Agreement”).
This agreement established the conditions for the resumption of work on the site and
extended the time for the completion of the work to 31 July 2003. It was agreed that this
would not prejudice any of GBC’s claims for events that occurred prior to
11 September 2001, but GBC relinquished its rights to compensation on a number of
other issues covered in the Supplementary Agreement. The DRB was also to be

reconstituted.

4S.

46.

47.

48.

-16-

After the reconstitution of the DRB, in September 2002, a program of eight hearings was
approved by the Board, to take place between November 2002 and February 2004. Two
hearings were organized to examine the claims relating to the unforeseeable geological
conditions and the hand over of land. Recommendations were made by the DRB largely
in favour of GBC. But, in December 2002, WAPDA unjustifiably challenged the
independence of the chairman of the Board and, in April 2003, WAPDA’s member of
the Board decided not to participate in any future DRB meetings or hearing until this
challenge was resolved. WAPDA refused to allow resolution of that challenge as
provided in the Supplementary Agreement and the functioning of the DRB was once

again halted.

Then, in November 2002, WAPDA notified GBC of its intention to commence
arbitration in Lahore on the issue of the unforeseen ground conditions covered by DRB
Recommendation Number 14. An arbitral tribunal was duly constituted according to the

Contracts.

Relevant Facts - Performance of the Works: Impregilo also contends that Pakistan

consistently obstructed and disrupted GBC’s performance of the works:

“The commencement of this project ... coincided with the collapse of
WAPDA to a barely functioning, grossly mismanaged, overstaffed
organization”.°

On Impregilo’s case, WAPDA failed to make the Advance Payments on the due date,
and failed to make payment of approximately US$75 million until May 1996. It did not
pay the interest to which GBC was entitled. Moreover, the Pakistani authorities
significantly delayed the importation of the initial shipments of plant and equipment
necessary to begin work. It took WAPDA and other relevant Pakistani Government

agencies four months to sort out the issue. GBC sought reimbursement for these

° Ibid., para. 85.

49.

50.

51.

52.

-17-

additional costs and delays. The DRB agreed, but WAPDA has to date paid only a

minor portion of these costs.

In the performance of Contract C-01, GBC encountered substantial delays: 77 were
memorialised and gave rise to claims. At the barrage site, GBC discovered unforeseen
ground conditions. WAPDA and the Engineer did not issue necessary instructions in a
timely manner. The Engineer issued instructions increasing the amount of the
foundation work. Moreover, WAPDA failed to meet each and every one of the twelve
dates set out in the Contracts for delivery of mechanical and electrical equipment to

GBC.

With respect to Contract C-02, WAPDA was scheduled to hand over the Power Channel
site in six sections, each on a different date. WAPDA, however, missed each one of
these deadlines. It did not hand over to GBC the land for the last portion of the main
channel until July 2002 (28 months delay). Rather than handing over the land as
scheduled in the Contract, it made 43 handovers of smaller and non-contiguous strips of
land. GBC’s schedule of work on the Kamra Aeronautical Complex and Air Force Base
site was disrupted as a result of delays in the handing over of the land. Additional
delays and costs resulted from the delay in the construction of a railway bridge by the
Pakistan Railways Authority; changes in the design of bridges and other superstructures;
lack of instruction relating to the method for compaction of a filter layer of soil; and

incidents of rioting, commotion and disorder on the site.

The Claimant contends further that WAPDA violated the April 2002 Supplementary
Agreement in failing to make timely payments as provided for in this Agreement.
WAPDA also refused to implement properly the procedures for calculating price

adjustments.

In spite of all these problems, GBC substantially completed the whole of the works for
Contract C-01 by January 2003. However, the Engineer has not yet issued a formal

Taking-Over Certificate that covers the entire works under that Contract. A similar

53.

54.

55.

-18-

pattern was repeated with Contract C-02. According to Impregilo, these refusals were
“simply a pretext to deprive GBC of the early completion bonus” provided for in the
Contracts." Moreover, in September 2003, WAPDA began withholding monthly
payments due to GBC. It also required GBC to maintain bank guarantees to secure the
full amount of the advance payments, even though WAPDA claimed it was using the

withheld monthly payments to offset the Advanced Payments.

Jurisdiction: The Claimant submits that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over the dispute
under Article 9 of the BIT and Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. In this regard, its
Memorial confirms and develops the arguments already presented in the Request, and

summarized above.

Breaches of Treaty: On the merits, Impregilo claims that Pakistan has violated
Article 2(2) of the BIT under which it is required to “at all times ensure fair and
equitable treatment of the investments of investors of the other Contracting Party” and
not to subject investors and investments “to unjustified or discriminatory measures”. It

is said that ““Pakistan’s conduct was clearly unfair, arbitrary, and capricious”.'!

It was
also unjustified. It “failed to make funds, land, equipment and drawings available” and
“to compensate Impregilo for any reasonable delays and disruptions incurred for which
Pakistan was responsible under the Contracts.”!? Further, it thwarted the operation of

the dispute settlement mechanisms.

Impregilo also claims that Pakistan has violated Article 5(1) of the BIT under which
Pakistan may not take “measure[s] which might limit permanently or temporarily the
right of ownership, possession, control or enjoyment” by Impregilo of its investment in

Pakistan, and Article 5(2), under which Pakistan may not either expropriate Impregilo’s

10 Tbid., para. 118.
"" Tbid., para. 142.
!? Tbid., para. 148.

56.

57.

58.

-19-

investment, or take measures that have an effect similar to expropriation on the

: 3
investment.

The Claimant recalls that:

“\..the concept of expropriation has been defined in ICSID jurisprudence
broadly to include any unjustified interference with an investor’s property
that deprives the investor of the use or value of that property.”'*

It argues that Pakistan’s conduct throughout the duration of the Project as already
described constitutes such an expropriation in violation of Article 5(2) and must also be

regarded as a violation of Article 5(1) of the BIT.

Breaches of Contract: Aside from alleged breaches of the Treaty, Impregilo also
complains of breaches of the Contracts. It submits that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to
consider such claims under Article 9 of the BIT which covers “any disputes” without

exception, between the Parties. It states that:

“[m]any of these breaches consist of actions or omissions by WAPDA.
Others relate to acts or omissions of the Engineer that have given rise to
claims by GBC against WAPDA that remain unresolved to this date. Still
others relate to acts of other governmental authorities such as the Customs
and military authorities. WAPDA is responsible for these actions and
omissions of the Engineer.”'*

In its Memorial, Impregilo lists the specific clauses of the Contracts and of the
Supplementary Agreement which, in its opinion, have been breached by Pakistan, i.e., in
the Contracts: clauses 1.5; 2.6; 6.4; 12.2; 20.4; 31.2; 40.1 and 40.2; 42.1; 42.2; 44.1 and
44.3; 47.5; 48.1; 51 and 52; 54.3; 60.7; 60.8; 67.1; 67.2 and annex A; 70.1; 70.8; clauses
3.10 and 15 of the Special Conditions (Contract C-01); in the Supplementary
Agreement: clauses 2 (d) and 3 (d).

'3 Tbid., para. 139.
'4 Tbid., para. 156.

59.

c.

60.

61.

-20-

Relief Sought: According to Impregilo, as a result of these alleged breaches of the BIT
and the Contracts, the Respondent has caused damages of approximately US$

450 million. Impregilo’s Memorial articulates the relief sought as follows:

“1. Impregilo seeks compensation for the entirety of the damages,
including interest. Impregilo is entitled to claim the entirety of the
damages suffered by GBC because of its role in the Joint Venture with
its partners. Under Swiss law, the law governing the Joint Venture
Agreement, and under the Joint Venture Agreement itself, Impregilo’s
rights, duties and liabilities are such as to entitle, and indeed oblige, it
to assert a claim for the full amount of the damages suffered by GBC.

2. In any event, if the Tribunal finds that it cannot award Impregilo
damages in excess of its proportionate interest in GBC, Impregilo
claims, in the alternative, 57.80 % of the total damages plus interest.

Impregilo also respectfully requests an Award of its legal fees and
other costs incurred in connection with this proceeding.”'®

The Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction

On 18 March 2004, the Islamic Republic of Pakistan submitted a Memorial containing

its objections to jurisdiction (“Memorial on Jurisdiction”).

Initial Observations and Relevant Facts: In its introductory observations, the
Respondent emphasises that this dispute is in substance a contractual dispute - as
evidenced by the Supplementary Agreement of 14 April 2002 and the initial Request. It
then “addresses some of the incorrect assertions made by the Claimant in its Limited
Memorial.”!” In this respect, and related to its case on the proper characterisation of the
dispute, it stresses “the implausible nature of Impregilo’s claims of expropriation and

a8

denial of fair and equitable treatment. It contends that Impregilo’s claim revolves

around a series of contractual complaints relating to extensions of time, additional costs

'S Tbid., para. 169.
'© Tbid., paras. 200 and 201.
" Memorial on Jurisdiction, Preface, para. (i)

'8 Tbid., Chapter 2, Section A.

62.

63.

64.

-21-

or technical issues. Moreover, these claims are grounded in events and allegations

which arose well before the BIT ever came into existence.

Pakistan adds that WAPDA is not responsible for any frustration of the contractual
dispute resolution mechanisms. It submits that Impregilo’s assertions relating to the
Engineer’s lack of impartiality are wholly unjustified, and emphasises that most of the
Engineer’s decisions have been confirmed by the DRB. It argues that “PHC [the
Engineer] was not WAPDA’s agent”; it was not controlled by NESPAK, which did not
even have a majority stake in PHC; and moreover NESPAK is not a State owned
company, but rather a private one, receiving no budget allocation from the government.
In addition, GBC “was fully aware before the Contracts were signed that NESPAK
would form part of the Engineer” and did not raise “the slightest concern” in this

2
respect.”°

The Respondent further submits that it is GBC, and not WAPDA, which attempted to
undermine the dispute resolution process. It tried to side-step the Engineer and, later,
attempted to “impede the Engineer’s consideration of claims in submitting

unsubstantiated claims.”?!

The Respondent adds that GBC formulated unwarranted
accusations against the DRB member appointed by WAPDA, Mr. Zahid Hamid who, as
a result of those accusations, had to resign. This forced WAPDA to replace him and led
to subsequent difficulties in reconstituting the DRB. Then the chairman of the DRB,
Mr. Bowcock, was compelled by GBC to step down. A new chairman was appointed in
2002, but he recused himself to avoid any appearance of possible conflict of interest.

However, GBC has steadfastly refused to agree to his replacement.

The Contractual Arbitration Agreements: Pakistan focuses upon the Arbitration
Agreements that were concluded by GBC and WAPDA in the Contracts, and the Lahore

Arbitration that has been initiated under those agreements. It analyses the continued

9 Tbid., para. 2.24.
°° Thid., para. 2.34.
*! Tbid., para. 2.50.

-22-

validity and efficacy of these arbitration agreements by reference to their applicable law
(the law of Pakistan), which includes the 1923 Geneva Protocol on Arbitration Clauses

that remains in effect as between Italy and Pakistan. On Pakistan’s case:

“(a) The Arbitration Agreements were always and remain legally effective
and binding on Employer and Contractor, providing to the Contractor a
consensual jurisdiction for the final adjudication of contractual
disputes with the Employer by an independent and impartial arbitration
tribunal under a long-established lex arbitri;

(b) The Contractor was thereby not only entitled but also legally obliged to
refer its contractual disputes to arbitration under the Arbitration
Agreements as the exclusive jurisdiction for the final settlement of
those disputes, in accordance with the terms of the two Contracts;

(c) The subsequent invalidity (if any) or alleged “frustration” or other
alleged misconduct of the Employer in regard to procedures relating to
the Engineer and/or DRB is legally irrelevant to the submissions
above, by virtue of the separability of the Arbitration Agreements and
the express terms of the Contracts;

(d) The Lahore arbitration tribunal, validly appointed under the Arbitration
Agreements, is already seized with part of the dispute between the
Employer and the Contractor; the Lahore tribunal’s mandate requires
each arbitrator to discharge his functions as required by the Arbitration
Agreements and the /ex arbitri; and subject to its own decision on the
Contractor’s jurisdictional challenge in the Lahore arbitration, the
Lahore arbitration tribunal is obliged to proceed to an award on the
merits, regardless of all other extraneous factors;

(e) By virtue of the 1923 Geneva Protocol on Arbitration Clauses, both
Italy and Pakistan have assumed obligations under public international
law to recognise the validity of the Arbitration Agreements and the
arbitral procedure applicable to contractual disputes between Employer
and Contractor (including the extensive jurisdiction of an arbitration
tribunal validly appointed there under, such as the Lahore arbitration
tribunal); and

(f) This is not a case of a ‘refusal of arbitration as a denial of justice’; nor
does Impregilo so specifically allege. Moreover, Impregilo nowhere
explains why the Arbitration Agreements cannot be invoked or a
counterclaim brought before the Lahore arbitration tribunal. Where a
State has itself refused to arbitrate pursuant to a valid arbitration clause
in a Contract between that State and an alien, or otherwise frustrated
the agreed arbitral procedure, the State may attract responsibility for
denial of justice — but that is very, very far from the facts of the present

65.

66.

67.

68.

-23-

case where it is the alien which seeks willfully both to thwart the
consensual obligations to arbitrate and to negate the 1923 Geneva
Protocol’s legal obligations long assumed by Italy and Pakistan.””?

Jurisdictional Objections: — Each of Pakistan’s jurisdictional objections is considered

in detail in Sections III, IV and V of this Decision. The following is a brief outline only.

Objections “Ratione Materiae”: Pakistan contends that this Tribunal lacks jurisdiction
ratione materiae and that the claim is inadmissible. In this respect, the Respondent first
submits that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction with respect to the Contract Claims. It
states that WAPDA, and not Pakistan, is party to the Contracts and that, under the law of
Pakistan, WAPDA possesses a legal personality distinct from the State of Pakistan. The
Tribunal cannot exercise jurisdiction over Pakistan for breaches of a contract to which it
is not a party. Further, it cannot exercise such jurisdiction over WAPDA in the absence

of designation under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.

Moreover, even if Pakistan had been party to the Contracts, the Tribunal should respect
the Arbitration Agreements incorporated in those Contracts. The dispute settlement
mechanism selected in the Contracts must have priority over the more general
jurisdiction clause incorporated in the BIT, as recognised by the ICSID decisions
rendered in SGS v. Pakistan and SGS v. Philippines. The result is that either the

Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over the Contract Claims, or those claims are inadmissible.

Finally, the Respondent submits that, in the present case, there are no Treaty Claims that
can be separated from Contract Claims. Impregilo’s Treaty Claims, based on violation
of Article 2(2) and Article 5 of the BIT, “are in fact Contract claims dressed up in other

language.””*

On Pakistan’s case, “[t]he reason why it is said that the measures of which
complaint is made were ‘unjustified’” under Article 2(1) of the BIT is in fact “that they

were supposedly contrary to the contractual obligations of WAPDA.”™ Furthermore,

» Tbid., para. 3.18.
3 Thid., para. 4.44.
*4 Thid., para. 4.47.

69.

70.

71.

-24-

there could be no question of expropriation under Article 5 of the BIT, the contractual

rights of the Claimant under a Contract in force remaining what they were. But:

“even if there were a Treaty claim entirely distinct from the Contract claims,

. it would ... be wholly inappropriate, and indeed, impractical for this
Tribunal to hear such a claim until the Contract claims had been resolved by
the contractual mechanisms.””

Objections “Ratione Personae”: Pakistan also submits that Impregilo has no locus
standi before this Tribunal. In this respect, it first contends that Impregilo has no
standing to claim on behalf of GBC. It stresses that GBC has no legal personality under
Swiss law or Pakistani law. It is not “a juridical person” within the meaning of
Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. Moreover, even if GBC had such a personality,
Impregilo, although Leader of the Joint Venture, would have no authority to act on its
behalf. Impregilo is no more entitled to claim on behalf of the other partners in the Joint
Venture, those partners of German or Pakistani nationality having no right to benefit

from the protection conferred upon Italian investors by the BIT.

Any claim by Impregilo is thus limited to the losses it has itself suffered:

“Upholding the claim in its entirety would be ... prejudicial both to
Impregilo’s non represented joint venture partners, whose own claims for
damages would be compromised and whose recovery from Impregilo could
not be guaranteed, and to Pakistan which could face the risk of multiple
claims for the same alleged damages.””°

The Respondent also contends that the Claimant cannot even assert an alternative claim
for a 57,8 % share of the losses said to have been incurred by GBC. It submits that the
Partners within GBC “have consistently acted collectively in asserting their rights under

the contractual mechanism and in proceedings in Pakistan.”?” It adds that “this approach

9928

accords with the prevailing practice in international law”*” and that, in particular, there

°5 Thid., para. 4.56.
°6 Thid., para. 5.36.
°7 Tbid., para. 5.38.
°8 Thid., para. 5.43.

72.

723.

74.

75.

~25-

are in the present case no special circumstances which could justify Impregilo bringing a

separate claim.

Finally, Pakistan contends that “Impregilo has not been properly authorized to bring the

arbitration and has not complied with Institutional Rule 2C1y(f).”?

Impregilo has
produced Minutes of a meeting of an Executive Committee of 22 January 2002, but
these minutes concern the initial request of Impregilo which was withdrawn in May
2002 and not the present Request. Moreover, Impregilo does not provide any document
showing that it had obtained the required authorization of the Board of Representatives

of the Joint Venture itself.

Objections “Ratione Temporis”: With respect to jurisdiction ratione temporis,
Pakistan recalls that the BIT between Italy and Pakistan entered into force on
22 June 2001. It has no retroactive effect. It can have no application in respect of

conduct relied upon by Impregilo that took place before that date. Pakistan adds that:

“Impregilo has sought to avoid the basic rule on non-retroactivity of treaties
by (i) failing to plead the specific dates of alleged breaches, and (ii) asserting
that the breaches it alleges are continuing in character.”

On the first point, Pakistan invites the Tribunal:

“...to infer that, save where Impregilo complains of acts that are expressly
alleged to have occurred subsequent to the entry into force of the 1997
Treaty, all other specific acts complained of by Impregilo substantially took
place before the entry into force of the 1997 Treaty.”*!

On the second point, the Respondent states that to be truly continuing in character a

breach must be (i) continuing and (ii) uninterrupted.*” It argues that this is not the case

> Tbid., para. 5.54.
* Tbid., para. 6.5.
+! Tbid., para. 6.9.
* Tbid., para. 6.12.

76.

D.

77.

~ 26 -

here. It adds that even where it is established that a breach is of a continuing character,

this does not negate the rule on the non retroactivity of treaties.**

Relief Sought: In the light of the foregoing, Pakistan invites the Tribunal to declare
that it has no jurisdiction in respect of the totality of Impregilo’s claims, and that these
claims are accordingly to be dismissed. In the alternative, insofar as the Tribunal
considers that the claims are not to be dismissed in their entirety for lack of jurisdiction,
Pakistan invites the Tribunal to make alternative declarations to reflect restrictions on its

jurisdiction and/or on the admissibility of Impregilo’s claims, namely:

“(a) That it has no jurisdiction in respect of Impregilo’s allegations of
breach of the Contracts, alternatively that such claims are inadmissible
before this Tribunal.

(b) That, insofar as the Tribunal has jurisdiction to determine Impregilo’s
claims characterised as breaches of the 1997 Treaty, such claims
should not be heard pending resolution of the disputes pursuant to the
Arbitration Agreements in the Contracts.

(c) That it has no jurisdiction save in respect of specific acts that are
expressly alleged by Impregilo to have occurred subsequent to the
entry into force of the 1997 Treaty, alternatively that the provisions of
the 1997 Treaty do not in any event bind Pakistan in relation to any act
or fact which took place or any situation which ceased to exist before
22 June 2001, and that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is limited
accordingly.

(d) That Impregilo has no standing to claim on behalf of GBC or other
joint venturers, and that its standing is limited, at most, to claiming in
respect of a pro rata share of the total alleged loss.”

The Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction

On 19 April 2004, the Claimant submitted its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction.

% Tbid., para. 6.13.
* Thid., para. 7.2.

78.

79.

80.

81.

-27-

Initial Observations: In this Counter-Memorial, Impregilo first notes that the
Respondent does not contest that the Claimant is an “investor” of Italy as defined under
the BIT and a “national of another Contracting State” for the purposes of the ICSID
Convention. It does not dispute either that it is a Contracting Party to the BIT and a
Contracting State under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. Finally, it does not
contest that Impregilo’s investment in Pakistan falls under the definition of “investment”
under the BIT. The Respondent recognises that a “dispute” clearly exists between the
Parties within the meaning of Article 9(1) of the BIT. Moreover, according to the
Claimant, Pakistan has consented in writing to the submission of the dispute to ICSID
arbitration. Finally, all procedural conditions precedent to the submission of the dispute

have been fulfilled.

Impregilo adds that it has satisfied the burden of proof required at the jurisdictional
phase and “has made the prima facie showing of Treaty breaches” required by ICSID

Tribunals.*°

Objections “Ratione Materiae”: The Claimant submits that the Tribunal has
jurisdiction ratione materiae. In this respect, it first contends that WAPDA is an
instrumentality of Pakistan whose actions and omissions are attributable to the
Respondent under international law. Pakistan is also responsible for the acts and
omissions of the Engineer (PHC) for two reasons. First PHC was effectively controlled
by NESPAK, a State owned and State controlled entity. Second, WAPDA, an organ of
the State, maintained ultimate control over PHC which acted on behalf of WAPDA with

respect to Impregilo and GBC.*°

Breaches of Treaty: The Claimant then submits that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over
Impregilo’s claims for breaches of the BIT. It recalls that it has asserted such claims in

its Request and in its Limited Memorial on the basis both of Article 2(2) and Article 5 of

*5 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 26.

°° Thid., paras 43-62.

82.

83.

84.

~ 28 -

the BIT. It adds that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over those claims, even when they

arise from breaches of the Contracts:

“The assertion that Impregilo’s Treaty and Contract claims may be
‘inextricably linked’ merely describes the fact that the two sets of claims are
based on similar or identical facts.”*”

On Impregilo’s case, this overlap does not impair the distinct legal bases of those claims.
In any event, Impregilo’s claims for breaches of the BIT go beyond breaches that also

constitute breaches of Contract:

“These claims are based on conduct by Governmental authorities not directly
involved in the Contracts, including Pakistan’s Ministry of Commerce, its
Customs authorities, and its military authorities.”**

Breaches of the Contracts: According to Impregilo, the Tribunal also has jurisdiction
over Impregilo’s claims for breaches of the Contracts. In this respect, the Claimant
relies on Article 9(1) of the BIT which covers “any disputes arising between a
Contracting Party and the investors of the other.” The Claimant states that WAPDA is
the Government of Pakistan and concludes that there is a contractual dispute between the
Government and Impregilo. Consequently, the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is not
subordinated to the designation of WAPDA under Article 25(1) of the ICSID

Convention.

Moreover, contrary to Pakistan’s case, the existence of a forum selection clause in the
Contracts does not deprive the Tribunal of its jurisdiction over the Contract Claims. This
is all the more so given that “the contractual dispute settlement mechanism has been

rendered wholly inoperative by Respondent’s own conduct”.*?

The Claimant adds that the BIT contains a most-favoured nation clause. It observes that

several of the other BITs concluded by Pakistan include an “observance of

*” Tbid., para. 77.
%8 Tbid., para. 86.

85.

86.

~ 29 -

commitments” provision (sometimes termed an “Umbrella Clause”). On Impregilo’s
case, by the operation of the MFN clause and, in turn, the application of “observance of
commitments” provisions in other BITs, a breach of the Contracts constitutes in any

event a breach of the Italian-Pakistan BIT.

Impregilo further states that the contractual dispute resolution mechanism provided for
by the Contracts is unavailable to Impregilo as a result of the Respondent’s conduct. It
contends that the Engineer has failed to act in an impartial manner and that Respondent
has thus abused the first tier of the settlement mechanism. It also has frustrated the
second tier in blocking the appointment of replacement DRB members, and in having
recourse to other delaying tactics. It has also since blocked the functioning of the re-
constituted DRB. Contrary to Pakistan’s analysis, the Claimant contends that the
contractual dispute settlement mechanism is comprised of a process consisting of three
interrelated tiers and not three alternative forums. The so-called “Arbitration
Agreements” are not separable from the other terms of the Contracts (such as the DRB
provisions) and GBC does not have the right to submit its claims to arbitration when
there is no functioning DRB. Neither Clause 67 of the Contracts, nor the doctrine of
separability may lead to another solution. On Impregilo’s case, “[b]ecause Respondent
has effectively blocked the dispute settlement mechanism, Impregilo has been refused

arbitration and denied justice” and a “grievous wrong has ensued”.*°

Objections “Ratione Personae”: With respect to jurisdiction ratione personae,
Impregilo submits that it can assert its claim on behalf of the Joint Venture, in its
capacity as project leader and majority stakeholder. The partners of GBC have
confirmed the propriety of this approach by bestowing on Impregilo a specific power of
attorney to represent GBC. Moreover, the only way for Impregilo to obtain its 57.8 %
stake in the Joint Venture is for the Tribunal to permit Impregilo to proceed on behalf of

GBC, then to distribute to its partners their part of the monetary judgment awarded to it.

* Tbid., para. 106.
+ Thid., paras. 163 and 164.

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

-30-

Finally, Impregilo submits that, in the alternative, it is clearly a proper Claimant in its
own right, without having to prove “individual damages” or “‘special circumstances”. In
any event, the issue of Impregilo’s capacity only affects the quantum of damages and not

the jurisdiction ratione personae.

Objections “Ratione Temporis”: With respect to jurisdiction ratione temporis,
Impregilo submits that it has asserted a single existing dispute arising from continuing
breaches of the BIT and of the Contracts. According to Impregilo, its claims arise

directly from the same subject matter, and the dispute:

“deals with a systematic and continuous pattern of conduct that has resulted,
subsequent to the BIT’s entry into force, in the current and continuing breach
of the BIT and of the Contracts.”

According to Impregilo, the conduct of both WAPDA and the Engineer throughout the
course of the Project constitute “composite acts” for which the Respondent is liable.”
Furthermore, the application of the BIT to the present dispute is consistent with the
principle of non-retroactivity in Article 28 of the Vienna Convention as interpreted in

the official Commentary.

Relief Sought: In conclusion, Impregilo “requests that the Tribunal decide that the
dispute between the Parties is within its jurisdiction and proceed to decide the dispute on

the merits.”

The Hearing on 23 and 24 May 2004

At the oral hearing on 23 and 24 May 2004, both Parties reiterated and developed their
submissions on the jurisdiction of the Tribunal in some detail. The following account
distills some of the key issues, again by way of brief summary only, rather than

presenting a full account of each of the Parties’ respective submissions.

4" Thid., para. 183.
® Tbid., para. 189.
4 Thid., para. 199.

92.

93.

94.

-31-

(i) The Respondent’s Case

Objections “Ratione Materiae”: The Respondent again emphasised that this is a
dispute concerning a breach of contract on which the Claimant has artificially
superimposed the charge of denial of fair and equitable treatment. Further, it cautioned
that the Tribunal should not exercise its jurisdiction over a contractual claim when the
Parties have already agreed on how such a claim is to be resolved and have done so

exclusively. To this end, Pakistan stressed:

the existence and continuing efficacy of the parties’ Arbitration
Agreements, as a matter of their chosen contractual language, as a matter of
the chosen law of Pakistan and as a matter of international law.”**

Contract Claims: Pakistan contended that under clause 67 of the conditions of the
Contracts (conditions of particular application), at any time the Engineer and the
Chairman of the DRB could be seized of any claim, and if the DRB remained silent
during 56 days, the aggrieved party could give notice to commence arbitration. It
submitted that under Pakistani law:

“... the pre-arbitral procedures, both the Engineer and the DRB are separable

from the substantive Contracts and from the arbitration agreements”.

so that:

. the invalidity, the frustration, the repudiation of whatever breakdown
occurs under clause 67.1 and 2 relating both to the Engineer and the DRB
cannot invalidate the Arbitration Agreements in Clause 67.3."°

On Pakistan’s case, Impregilo has never been refused arbitration and denied justice

under the Contracts.

* Transcript of hearing on May 23, 2004, p. 24, para. 16.
4 Thid., p. 55, para. 16.
+ Thid., p. 60, para. 12.

95.

96.

97.

-32-

Pakistan further submits that the dispute arose out of two Contracts concluded not by the
Government of Pakistan, but by WAPDA, which under Pakistani law is a separate legal
entity. Therefore, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to consider any contractual claims
directed against Pakistan. But, even if Pakistan were a party to the Contracts, the
Tribunal could not exercise jurisdiction over the Contract Claims put forward by
Impregilo: those claims are to be submitted to the contractual disputes mechanisms

agreed between the Parties. It was noted that:

“Of course there remains the possibility that, should that contractual
mechanism somehow be deliberately frustrated in a way amounting to a
denial of justice, then of course it would be the expertise of the ICSID
Tribunal that would be appropriate.”“’

However this, according to Pakistan, is not the present situation.

Treaty Claims: Treaty claims must also be rejected. They are in fact dependant upon
the existence of a breach of contract. Thus, if the Tribunal has no jurisdiction or is not
able to exercise a jurisdiction over contract based claims, it is no more able to do so with
respect to treaty claims. Moreover, the Claimant is not entitled to rely upon the “Most
Favoured Nation” provision of the Italy-Pakistan BIT, and in turn the “umbrella clause”
of the Swiss-Pakistan BIT, since this would be to import into the Italy-Pakistan BIT far
more than can reasonably be construed from the language of that Treaty. Even if such a
submission was sustainable, the decision in SGS v. Pakistan demonstrated the limits of

the “umbrella clause” in question.

Objections “Ratione Temporis”: Furthermore, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction ratione
temporis. The Italy-Pakistan BIT entered into force on 22 June 2001 and could not have
any retroactive effect. The dispute before this Tribunal dates back to 1996. Moreover

“facts and situations which have arisen prior to the entering into force of the BIT do not

47 Thid., p. 106, para. 4.

98.

99.

100.

-33-

348

and cannot constitute breaches of that Treaty””” ... “whether considered in isolation or

as part of a conduct.”

Objections “Ratione Personae”: Finally, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction ratione
personae. First, Impregilo cannot represent a joint venture, GBC itself, “which is devoid
of any legal personality.” Second, “the joint venturers can only bring a claim jointly.”
Third, in the present case, “neither all the joint venturers can bring a claim, nor
Impregilo can represent” them “because they are not Italian investors.” Fourth,
Impregilo “cannot claim for its own right, which cannot be individualized”. Fifth, in any
case, and alternatively, “Impregilo could certainly not claim more damages than its pro

wth ia: ay 5
rata shares with joint ventures”. °

(ii) The Claimant’s Case

Objections “Ratione Materiae”: In its oral submissions, Impregilo emphasised that:

“... the acts of WAPDA and those under its control went beyond the normal
range of behaviour typically encountered in large construction and
infrastructure projects.”*!

Moreover, the Claimant suffered from acts of Pakistan’s military, customs and political
authorities. In those circumstances, it was argued, the Tribunal has jurisdiction to

consider both Treaty Claims and Contract Claims.

Treaty Claims: In this respect, the Claimant first contended that WAPDA is an organ
of the government of Pakistan as recognized both under international law and Pakistani
law. It added that the Engineer is under State control and ownership, and that WAPDA

is responsible for the Engineer’s action. As a consequence, the acts of WAPDA and

48 Thid., p. 121, para. 24.
* Tbid., p. 128, para. 4.
* Thid., p. 130.

*! Tbid., p. 141, para. 14.

10

102.

1.

v

-34-

those of the Engineer are attributable to Pakistan. It follows that the Tribunal has

jurisdiction to consider them.

The Claimant submitted further that “the task of the Tribunal at this stage is not to

determine definitively whether or not there has been a breach of the Treaty.”

Tt is only
to satisfy itself “that prima facie, the claim ... is within the jurisdictional mandate of
ICSID arbitration.” It stressed that, under ICSID case law, “this Tribunal cannot avoid
jurisdiction or forego deciding claims on the merits merely because the BIT claims relate

Sd

to a contract or to allege breaches of that contract. It added that a number of its

Treaty Claims are based on conduct of governmental authorities other that WAPDA.

Contract Claims: Impregilo also submitted that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over its
Contract Claims. In this respect, it invoked Article 9 of the BIT and the fact that, in the
present case, “the dispute settlement mechanism provided for in the Contract has been
frustrated.”** It contended that WAPDA is the Government of Pakistan and that the
Respondent cannot escape international responsibility for WAPDA’s actions. It stated
that WAPDA is not the named Respondent in this case, and that no designation of
WAPDA as an eligible Respondent is needed under Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.
It added that it is not obliged to submit contractual disputes to the contractual dispute
settlement mechanism rather than to ICSID arbitration. In this respect, it invoked
previous ICSID decisions, and stressed that the entire dispute mechanism has been
frustrated by the Respondent’s own conduct: the Engineer failed to act in an impartial
manner and WAPDA engaged in a series of efforts to block the appointment of DRB
members. As a consequence, the DRB could not function and is still not functioning.

The integrated dispute settlement mechanism was not and is not available.

* Tbid., p. 154, para. 6.
% Thid., para. 12.

™ Tbid., p. 161, para. 13.
% Tbid., p. 164, para. 25.

103.

104.

105.

A.

106.

~35-

Objections “Ratione Temporis”: The Claimant also submitted that the Tribunal has
jurisdiction ratione temporis. It stated that “‘a tribunal’s exercise of jurisdiction over a
current dispute that arose before the Treaty’s entry into force is consistent with the non-

retroactivity principle”*

, and asserted that Pakistan is wrong in alleging that Impregilo
did not provide relevant dates at issue in the dispute. It recalled that Impregilo had
asserted the reality of a single, ongoing dispute arising out of the continuing conduct by

the Respondent and constituting “a composite act”.

Objections “Ratione Personae”: Finally, in the Claimant’s submission, the Tribunal
has jurisdiction ratione personae. It can assert claims on behalf of the entire Joint
Venture as “leader” of this venture. It has been authorized to do so. It can also act on its

own behalf.

Answering a question put by the Tribunal, both Parties gave further information on the

present situation of the DRB and the pending proceedings in the Lahore Arbitration.

Ill. THE BILATERAL INVESTMENT TREATY

The Basis for This Tribunal’s Jurisdiction

This Tribunal’s jurisdiction depends in the first instance upon the requirements of the

ICSID Convention. Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention provides that:

“The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising
directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State (or any
constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State designated to the
Centre by that State) and a national of another Contracting State which the
parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre. When the
parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent
unilaterally.”

*© Thid., p. 198, para. 7.

107.

108.

109.

- 36-

It is to be noted that the Claimant’s submissions are only directed against Pakistan as a
Contracting State to the ICSID Convention. They are not directed against WAPDA. It
follows that the provisions of Article 25 concerning jurisdiction over constituent
subdivisions or agencies of a Contracting State have no application in the present case,

and need not be addressed in this Decision.

In order to meet the requirements of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, and to
establish the jurisdiction of this Tribunal, the Claimant does not invoke any provisions
of the Contracts it has concluded with WAPDA. Rather, it relies exclusively upon (1)
the consent of Pakistan to arbitration as contained in the BIT between the Government
of the Italian Republic and the Government of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan dated
19 July 1997, combined with (2) its own consent as contained in the Request for
arbitration. Following what is now a well-established practice”, it is clear that the
coincidence of these two forms of consent can constitute “consent in writing” within the
meaning of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. However, this will only be so if the

dispute falls within the scope of the BIT. This remains the critical enquiry here.
Relevant Provisions of the BIT

For ease of reference, the relevant provisions of the BIT are as follows:

ARTICLE 1
DEFINITIONS

For the purposes of this Agreement:

1. The term “investment”, irrespective of the legal form adopted or the legal
system having jurisdiction, shall be construed to mean any kind of property
invested after 1 September 1954 by a natural or legal person being a
national of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other, in conformity
with the laws and regulations of the latter. ...

57 See e.g. Christoph H. Schreuer The ICSID Convention : A Commentary (CUP, 2001) (hereafter

“Schreuer”), at pages 210-221 (“Consent through BITs has become accepted practice... ”).

-37-

2. The term “investor” shall be construed to mean any natural or legal person
being a national of a Contracting Party who effected, is effecting or
intending to effect, investments in the territory of the other Contracting
Party.

4. The term “legal person”, in reference to either Contracting Party, shall be
construed to mean any entity established in the territory of one of the
Contracting Parties, and recognized as legal person in accordance with the
respective national legislation such as public establishments, joint-stock
corporations or partnerships, foundations, or associations, regardless of
whether their liability is limited or otherwise.

ARTICLE 2
PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS

1. Both Contracting Parties shall encourage investors of the other
Contracting Party to invest in their territory, and shall authorize these
investments in accordance with their legislation.

2. Both Contracting Parties shall at all times ensure fair and equitable
treatment of the investments or investors of the other Contracting Party.
Both Contracting Parties shall ensure that the management, maintenance,
enjoyment, transformation, cessation and liquidation of investments effected
in their territory by investors of the other Contracting Party, as well as the
companies and firms in which these investments have been made, shall in no
way be subject to unjustified or discriminatory measures.

ARTICLE 3
NATIONAL TREATMENT AND THE MOST FAVOURED NATION CLAUSE

1. Both Contracting Parties, within the bounds of their own territory, shall
offer investments effected by, and the income accruing to, investors of the
other Contracting Party no less favorable treatment than that accorded to
investments effected by, and income accruing to, its own national or
investors of third States.

2. The treatment accorded to the activities connected with the investment of
investors of either Contracting Party shall not be less favourable than that
accorded to similar activities connected with investments made by their own
investors or by investors of any Third country.

~ 38 -

3. The provisions of paragraphs | and 2 of this Article do not apply to any
advantages or privileges which one Contracting Party grants or may grant at
some future time to Third States by virtue of its membership in Custom or
Economic Unions, Common Market associations, Free Trade Areas regional
or sub-regional Agreements, international multilateral economic
Agreements, or economic Agreements entered into in order to prevent
double taxation or to facilitate cross-border trade.

ARTICLE 4
COMPENSATION FOR DAMAGES OR LOSSES

1. Should investors of one of the two Contracting Parties incur damages or
losses in their investments in the territory of the other Contracting Party, due
to war or other forms of armed conflict, states of emergency or other similar
events, the Contracting Party in which the affected investment has been
made shall offer adequate compensation. Compensation payments shall be
freely transferable in convertible currency without undue delay.

2. The investors concerned shall receive the same treatment as the nationals
of the Contracting Party having liability and, at all events, shall be treated no
less favorably than investors of Third States.

ARTICLE 5
NATIONALIZATION OR EXPROPRIATION

1. The investments to which this Agreement relates shall not be subject to
any measure which might limit permanently or temporarily the right of
ownership, possession, control or enjoyment, save where specifically
provided by law and by judgments or orders issued by Courts or Tribunals
having jurisdiction.

2. Investments of investors of one of the Contracting Parties shall not be
directly or indirectly nationalized, expropriated, requisitioned or subjected to
any measures having similar effects in the territory of the other Contracting
Party, except for public purposes, or national interest, against immediate full
and effective compensation and on condition that these measures are taken
on a non-discriminatory basis and in conformity with all legal provisions and
procedures.

~39-

ARTICLE 9
SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES BETWEEN INVESTORS AND THE CONTRACTING PARTY

1. Any disputes arising between a Contracting Party and the investors of the
other, including disputes relating to compensation for expropriation,
nationalization, requisition or similar measures, and disputes relating to the
amount of the relevant payments, shall be settled amicably, as far as
possible.

2. In the case that such a dispute cannot be settled amicably within six
months of the date of a written application, the investor in question may
submit the dispute, at his discretion, for settlement to:

(a) the Contracting Party’s Court, at all instances, having territorial
jurisdiction;

(b) an ad hoc Arbitration Tribunal in accordance with the Arbitration
Rules of the “UN Commission on International Trade Law” (UNCITRAL).

(c) the “International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes”,
for the application of the arbitration procedures provided by the Washington
Convention of 18"° March 1965 on the “settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of other States”, whenever, or as soon as both
Contracting Parties have validly acceded to it.

ARTICLE 10
SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES BETWEEN THE CONTRACTING PARTIES

1. Any disputes which may arise between the Contracting Parties relating
to the interpretation and application of this Agreement shall, as far as
possible, be settled amicably through diplomatic channels.

2. Inthe event that the dispute cannot be settled within three months from
the date on which one of the Contracting Parties notifies, in writing, the
other Contracting Party, the dispute shall, at the request of one of them, be
laid before an ad hoc Arbitration Tribunal as provided in this Article.”

110. Each of the Respondent’s objections to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction (i.e. ratione personae,

ratione materiae and ratione temporis) is addressed in turn below.

- 40 -

IV. JURISDICTION RATIONE PERSONAE

A. Issues in Dispute

111. As far as Impregilo’s locus standi is concerned, there is no dispute that:

(a) Impregilo has made an “investment” in Pakistan within the meaning of Article

1a)°8 of the BIT, and Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention;

(b) Impregilo is an “investor” within the meaning of (inter alia) Articles 1(2), 1(4)°
and 9°! of the BIT, being a joint-stock company organised and recognised under

Italian law, with its registered office in Milan;

(c) Impregilo is “a national of [a] Contracting State” for the purposes of Article 25(1)
of the ICSID Convention, Italy having become a party to the ICSID Convention on
28 April 1971, and Impregilo being a “juridical person which ha[s] the nationality
of a Contracting State other than the State party to the dispute”, as required by

Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention.

112. Notwithstanding this common ground, Pakistan has raised three separate objections

ratione personae to this Tribunal’s jurisdiction, as follows:

°8 Article 1(1), which is set out above, provides a broad definition of “investment”. Articles 1(1)(a) to (e)
of the BIT (which have not been set out) provide a non-exhaustive list of types of investment within this
definition.

* Set out above.

© Set out above.

°! Article 9, which is set out above, concerns the settlement of disputes and applies to matters as between
“a Contracting Party and the investors of the other ...”.

113.

114.

115.

-41-

(a) That Impregilo has no standing to bring a claim on behalf of (i) GBC or (ii) the

other partners that comprise the Joint Venture;

(b) That Impregilo cannot bring a claim for its own share of any losses; and

(c) That Impregilo has not been properly authorised to bring this arbitration and has
not complied with Rule 2(1)(f) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution

of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (“Institution Rules”).

Each of these objections is addressed in turn.

Impregilo’s Standing to Bring a Claim on Behalf of (i) GBC or (ii) the Other Joint

Venture Partners

In analysing each of Pakistan’s objections to Impregilo’s standing, it is necessary to
consider first (i) the nature of GBC itself, and (ii) the precise nature of the claims that

Impregilo seeks to pursue.

(@) The Nature of GBC

GBC is designated as the Contractor in Contracts C-01 and C-02. As stated earlier,
GBC is an unincorporated Joint Venture formed on 27 April 1995 under the laws of
Switzerland. Its genesis was the JVA concluded between the following five joint

venture participants:

i. Impregilo;

ii. Ed. Ziiblin AG (a German company);

iii. Campenon Bernard SGE (a French company);

iv. Saadullah Khan & Brothers (a Pakistani company); and

v. Nazir & Company (Private) Limited (a Pakistani company).

116.

117.

118.

oo

119.

120.

121.

-42-

As matters currently stand, following the withdrawal of Campenon Bernard SGE in
1998, the participation shares or ownership interests in GBC are divided among the

partners as follows:

Impregilo: 57.80 %
Ed. Ziiblin AG: 35.20 %
Saadullah Khan & Brothers: 4.60 %
Nazir & Company (Private) Limited: 2.40 %

The JVA sets out detailed arrangements for GBC’s structure and internal organisation.

Clause 32.1 (“Legal Relationship Amongst the Parties”) provides that:

“This Agreement does not constitute a partnership or other form of
permanent company or organization between the Parties under any
applicable law.”

Clause 25(1) of the JVA provides that:

“This Agreement and the relationship between the Parties hereunder shall

be governed by and construed in accordance with the law of Switzerland.”
Swiss law does not provide for a specific legal regime for joint ventures. Such joint
ventures must therefore follow the rules applicable to corporations (“sociétés’”).
According to Article 530(2) of the Swiss “Code des Obligations”, GBC is classified as a
“société simple”. As such, it is common ground that GBC has no legal personality under
Swiss law. It does not constitute a partnership or other form of permanent or corporate

body, and it has no capacity to act in legal proceedings in its own right.

Equally, in so far as relevant, GBC is not vested with legal personality by the law of

Pakistan (being the law applicable to the Contracts).

It follows, as stated by Pakistan, that GBC “is no more than a contractual relationship

between the original five, and now four, corporations which entered into the [JVA].”

122.

123.

124.

125.

-43-

GBC’s Structure under the JVA: The JVA sets out a detailed structure for this
contractual relationship. By Clause 32.1 of the JVA, each of the joint venture partners
acts “as an independent business entity in the ordinary course of business”. By Clause
5.2 of the JVA, each of the partners shares (inter alia) the “rights and obligations, costs
and expenses, losses and benefits arising out of or in any way connected with the
Contract(s) and the performance of the Works” in proportion to its respective

participation.

By Clauses 6.1 to 6.2 of the JVA, the entities comprising GBC are jointly and severally
liable to the Employer (WAPDA) “for the obligations deriving from and in any way
connected with the present Agreement and the Contract(s)”, as well as being liable to

each other.

Since the Joint Venture cannot act on its own behalf, this organisational form requires —
and the JVA provides in Clause 10.1 — that one company (Impregilo) act as “Leader”.
In this capacity, by Clause 10.1 of the JVA Impregilo is responsible for directing and
controlling the execution of the Contracts, as well as a wide range of matters as set out
in Clauses 10.1 i) to xv) (such as “representing [GBC] in all matters connected to the
performance of the Contract(s)”). Impregilo, through its then Vice President, signed the
Contracts for and on behalf of GBC. It also signed the Supplementary Agreement for
and on behalf of GBC.

(ii) The Relief Claimed by Impregilo

In paragraph 58.1 of its Request for Arbitration, Impregilo claims in respect of all losses

suffered by the Joint Venture as a whole. This is articulated as follows:

“Impregilo seeks compensation for the entirety of the damages, including
interest and the costs of the arbitration proceedings. Impregilo is entitled to
claim the entirety of the damages suffered by GBC because of its role in the
Joint Venture with its partners. Under Swiss law, the law governing the
Joint Venture Agreement, and under the Joint Venture Agreement itself,
Impregilo’s rights, duties and liabilities are such as to entitle, if not oblige,
it to assert a claim for the full amount of the damages suffered by GBC.”

126.

127.

128.

129.

A claim in substantially similar terms appears at paragraph 200.1 of Impregilo’s Limited
Memorial, the only change being an added emphasis on Impregilo’s alleged obligation

to claim for the full amount of GBC’s damages (see paragraph 59 above).

This is a claim, therefore, which is advanced in respect of, and on behalf of, GBC itself,
as well as the three other joint venture partners (Ed. Ziiblin AG, Saadullah Khan &

Brothers, and Nazir & Company (Private) Limited).

(iii) Claims in Respect of GBC

Pakistan’s Objection: It is Pakistan’s case that, as a matter of jurisdiction, Impregilo
cannot act on behalf of GBC (i.e. the entire Joint Venture), and cannot claim in respect
of losses allegedly incurred by GBC as a whole. This is so, given the restrictions in
Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, and in particular the fact that GBC is neither a

party to the BIT nor a “juridical person” within the meaning of the Convention.

Impregilo’s Case: By way of response, Impregilo argues that it is entitled to assert a
claim on behalf of the Joint Venture, given its status as “Leader” of GBC. It points to its
contractual right and duty to represent GBC in all matters relating to the Contracts. For
example, in accordance with provisions of the Contracts and JVA, it is responsible for
directing and controlling the execution of the Contracts; it selects and pays the
compensation of GBC’s Project Manager, recruits GBC’s expatriate staff, and
supervises GBC’s Site Management. It manages GBC’s finances and has complete
control over GBC’s bank account. As noted above, Impregilo was the only signatory to
the Contracts on behalf of GBC and is the guarantor of the performance of the other
members of the consortium. On Impregilo’s case, it is therefore the proper party to
bring claims on the Joint Venture’s behalf. Further, the propriety of this approach has
been confirmed by the conferral of a specific Power of Attorney on Impregilo (dated 31

January 2003) by the other joint venture participants for this purpose.

-45-

130. Impregilo also contends that arbitral tribunals have “long recognized” the right of a joint
venture partner to bring claims before an international arbitral tribunal on behalf of its

partners in the Joint Venture. Impregilo relies on the following decisions in this regard:

(a) Preliminary Award in ICC Arbitration Case No. 4983", in which Impregilo
sought to assert claims on behalf of a joint venture. The Tribunal had to decide
“[w]hether ... the arbitrators have jurisdiction to continue with the reference to
this arbitration [with only Impregilo as the Claimant]” in the event that the
other joint venture partner had to withdraw from the proceeding. It concluded
that “the arbitrators are of the opinion that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to
continue to hear the reference to arbitration with Impregilo S.p.A. [Claimant] as
the only Claimant, because in their view, each member of a joint venture has a
several right to go to arbitration.” The tribunal reasoned that in an
unincorporated joint venture of co-liable partners, each joint venture partner is
liable for the entirety, and therefore each partner also has the right to act as a

creditor for the entirety.

(b) Interim Award in ICC Arbitration Case No 5029°°, in which the tribunal found
“that company A [the leader of a joint venture] could validly submit the
Contractor’s claims against defendant in this arbitration in its own behalf and
on behalf of the parties forming joint venture X...”. The tribunal relied on the
fact that the successive joint venture agreements between the partners gave the
Leader the authority to represent the joint venture in all matters pertaining to
the Contract. According to the tribunal, “[s]uch an agreement creates an
agency relationship and not an undertaking to exercise any rights arising under

the Contract against defendant only jointly.”

© ICC Case no. 4983, Impresit-Girola-Lodigiani (Impregilo) S.p.A. & Impregilo Iran Construction
Company v. Tehran Regional Water Board (Iran), Preliminary Award of 6 February 1986.

Interim Award of 16 July 1986 in Case No 5029, XII Y.B.Com.Arb.113, 122, at para 35 (1987).

- 46 -

(c) McHarg, Roberts, Wallace, Todd v. Tran™, in which the Iran-U.S. Claims
Tribunal found that some members of a partnership could assert a claim on
behalf of the whole partnership, provided that (i) “the ownership interests of
such [partners], collectively, were sufficient ... to control the [partnership];”
and (ii) the partnership “is not itself entitled to bring a claim under the terms”

of the agreement on which the jurisdiction of the tribunal is founded.

 

131. Analy. The Tribunal agrees with part of Pakistan’s analysis, and considers that

Impregilo may not pursue claims in these proceedings on behalf of GBC.

132. By Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, the jurisdiction ratione personae of the
Centre extends to legal disputes between a Contracting State and a national of another
Contracting State. By Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention, “national of another

Contracting State” is defined as follows:

“any juridical person which had the nationality of a Contracting State other
than the State party to the dispute on the date on which the parties
consented to submit such dispute to conciliation or arbitration and any
juridical person which had the nationality of the Contracting State party to
the dispute on that date and which, because of foreign control, the parties
have agreed should be treated as a national of another Contracting State for
the purposes of this Convention.”

133. Schreuer” notes as follows (by reference to the Convention’s drafting history):

“This indicates that legal personality is a requirement for the application of
Art. 25(2)(b) and that a mere association of individuals or of juridical
persons would not qualify. In such a case, the individuals might be brought
under Art. 25(2)(a) or the juridical persons forming the association would
have to be brought separately under Article 25(2)(b).

“ McHarg, Roberts, Wallace, Todd v. Iran, Award 282-10853-1 of 17 December 1986, para 54, 13 Iran-
US. CT.R. 286.

° Set out above.

°° Op.Cit., at pp.276-7, (9457-9.

-47-

“... for the purposes of the Convention the quality of legal personality is
inherent in the concept of ‘juridical person’ and is part of the objective
requirement for jurisdiction.”

134. It follows that the consent to arbitration contained in the BIT here does not cover claims
by GBC, since GBC is not a “juridical person” for the purposes of the ICSID

Convention.

135. The Tribunal considers that the position is no different if Impregilo pursues a claim “on
behalf of GBC”®’. The claim remains that of GBC, albeit advanced by Impregilo in
some form of representative capacity. If this were permissible, it would constitute a
simple and effective means of evading the limitations in Article 25 of the Convention,
and expanding the scope of the BIT. Indeed, on this basis, any party could bring itself
within the ambit of the Convention and the BIT by simply appointing a representative.
This cannot have been intended by the careful delimitation of both the Convention’s and

the BIT’s scope.

136. In the Tribunal’s view, the fact that Impregilo is empowered to represent GBC by virtue
of the provisions of the JVA does not change this analysis. This must be so, since it
remains a fundamental proposition that the scope of the BIT cannot be expanded by a
municipal law contract to which Pakistan is not a party. To this end, none of the arbitral

awards relied upon by Impregilo appears to address this situation.

137. In so far as this is a claim in respect of GBC’s alleged losses, it remains a claim by an
unincorporated grouping that fails to meet the requirements of the BIT and the ICSID
Convention, and lies beyond the scope of Pakistan’s consent to arbitration. Indeed, each

° i.e. as distinct from a claim on its own behalf, which is considered below.

 

8 The Tribunal notes the slightly different analysis of this issue by C.F. Amerasinghe in Jurisdiction of
International Tribunals, Kluwer 2003, pp.667-8, where it is suggested that there is no definition of juridical
person in the ICSID Convention; that it is therefore within the competence of a Tribunal to decide whether or not
an entity is a juridical person to which the nationality requirements of Article 25(2)(b) apply; and that special
circumstances may exist in which an association or group of entities which does not have the status of a juridical
person under the law of either the host state or the other Contracting state, ought nevertheless to be treated as
within the scope of the Convention. Even if this analysis were to be applied, the Tribunal considers that no such
special circumstances exist here.

 
   

138.

139.

140.

141.

- 48 -

of the contractual factors upon which Impregilo relies simply reinforces the
representative nature of its position in these proceedings. As “Leader” of GBC,
Impregilo is entrusted with a wide range of duties that are to be performed on behalf of
the joint venture, including matters of management. However, these are internal GBC
management issues. Ultimately, GBC cannot be identified exclusively with Impregilo,

nor characterised as “Impregilo’s joint venture” (as Impregilo has at times sought to do).

This conclusion is confirmed by a careful review of the JVA, and in particular the fact
that the role of “Leader” forms only one element in an intricate internal management

structure comprising a Board of Representatives as well as an Executive Committee.

The fact that GBC has no separate legal personality may lead to the conclusion that this
cannot be “GBC’s claim” in any event, since GBC is nothing more than a contractual
relationship between different entities. This, however, does not convert the claim into
Impregilo’s own claim. Rather, any claim advanced by Impregilo in respect of GBC’s
losses is tantamount to a claim on behalf of the other joint venture partners. This in turn

raises other difficulties that are considered next.

(iv) Claims in Respect of the Other Joint Venture Partners

Tf not a claim “on behalf of GBC”, then Impregilo’s claim for “the entirety of the
damages suffered by GBC” is in reality a claim on behalf of its joint venture partners,
ie. Ed. Ziiblin AG of Germany, Saadullah Khan & Brothers of Pakistan, and Nazir &

Company (Private) Limited of Pakistan.

Pakistan’s Objection: It is Pakistan’s case that Impregilo cannot advance claims in
these arbitral proceedings in respect of losses incurred by these three entities. This is so
for the simple reason that none of the other three entities is an Italian company, or within

the scope of the BIT.

142.

143.

144.

145.

146.

- 49 -

Impregilo’s Case: By way of response, Impregilo relies upon the same points as above:
the terms of the JVA and Contracts; Impregilo’s contractual position as “Leader” of the
Joint Venture, and the cited instances in which previous arbitral tribunals have allowed

such claims.

Impregilo also argues that it can only be made whole for the losses it alleges it has
suffered if it is allowed to proceed on behalf of the Joint Venture as a whole (i.e. in
respect of each participant’s alleged losses). This is so, since Clause 5.2 of the JVA
expressly provides that the joint venture partners must “share the rights and obligations,
risks, costs and expenses, losses and benefits arising out of or in any way connected with
the Contract(s) and the performance of the Works ... in the above proportions ...”.
Impregilo is therefore under a contractual obligation to distribute any monetary Award.
Thus, the only way for Impregilo to obtain its 57.8% stake is for the Tribunal to permit

Impregilo to proceed on behalf of all participants.

 

Analy. In the Tribunal’s view, Impregilo cannot advance claims in these proceedings

on behalf of the other participants in GBC.

Of the three joint venture partners:

(a) None is a protected “investor”, within the ambit of the BIT; and

(b) Two of the three are not nationals “of another Contracting State” for the

purposes of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.

Again the question is raised whether a party who does fall within the ambit of a BIT and
the Convention may act in arbitration proceedings in a representative capacity, in order
to advance claims on behalf of other entities who do not so qualify. In the Tribunal’s

view, this issue turns upon the precise scope of the parties’ respective consent to the

-50-

jurisdiction of ICSID. It is now well-accepted that “consent of the parties is the

cornerstone of the jurisdiction of the Centre.”

147. In this case, Pakistan’s consent is delineated by the BIT. In concluding the Treaty with
Italy, Pakistan has conferred certain rights on Italian nationals in connection with the
protection of investments in Pakistan. It has not conferred any rights on nationals of any

other state, nor on nationals of Pakistan itself.

148.

oo

It must follow that the scope of Pakistan’s consent to ICSID is correspondingly limited.
On a proper construction, Pakistan has consented to the resolution by ICSID of disputes
arising out of investments made by Italian nationals in Pakistan. There is nothing in the
BIT to extend this to claims of nationals of any other state, even if advanced on their
behalf by Italian nationals.”” Any other interpretation would obviously expose Pakistan

to claims by nationals of any state worldwide.

149. To this end, investors of German nationality (Ed. Ziiblin AG) and Pakistani nationality
(Saadullah Khan & Brothers of Pakistan and Nazir & Company (Private) Limited)
cannot benefit from the protection conferred upon Italian investors by the 1997 BIT.
Indeed, it might be noted as far as Ed. Ziiblin AG is concerned that there exists a BIT
between Germany and Pakistan (Treaty for the Promotion and protection of Investments
of 25" November 1959). This Treaty, however, does not provide for any dispute
resolution mechanism between the States parties and investors. It would be a curious
result indeed if investors from Germany could secure additional rights under a different

BIT.

© Report of the Executive Directors of the IBRD on the ICSID Convention, / ICSID Reports 28, para 23.
We are reminded, in this regard, of the cautionary observation of the arbitral Tribunal in Mihaly International
Corporation v. Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, \CSID Case No. ARB/00/02, Award of 15 March
2002, 6 ICSID Reports 310, at paras 55-56.

“... the question of jurisdiction of an international instance involving consent of a sovereign State
deserves a special attention at the outset of any proceeding against a State Party to an international
Convention creating the jurisdiction. As a preliminary matter, the question of the existence of
jurisdiction based on consent must be examined proprio motu, i.e. without objection being raised by the
Party. A fortiori, since the Respondent has raised preliminary objections to the jurisdiction, the
existence of consent to the jurisdiction must be closely examined.”

 

150.

151.

152.

-51-

As to Impregilo’s reliance on the terms of the JVA, and its own contractual rights and
obligations as “Leader”, the Tribunal’s jurisdiction remains circumscribed by the 1997
BIT and the ICSID Convention. As noted above, that jurisdiction cannot be expanded
either by municipal law (i.e. Swiss law) or a municipal law contract to which only the

Claimant is a party.

The fact that Impregilo may be empowered to advance claims on behalf of its partners is
an internal contractual matter between the participants of the Joint Venture. It cannot, of
itself, impact upon the scope of Pakistan’s consent as expressed in the BIT. Equally, the
fact that Impregilo may be obliged to account to its partners in respect of any damages
obtained in these proceedings is also an internal GBC matter, which has no bearing on
Pakistan’s agreed exposure under the BIT. If this were not so, any party would be at
liberty to conclude a variety of private contracts with third parties, and thereby

unilaterally expand the ambit of a BIT.

Indeed, there is a further counter to Impregilo’s argument that it requires recovery in
respect of GBC’s total losses in order to be left with compensation in respect of its own
57.8% stake (because its own contractual arrangements with its partners oblige it to
share out any proceeds in any event). As pointed out in the decision of the Iran-U.S.
Claims Tribunal in Blount Brothers Corporation v. Tran", a tribunal has no means of
compelling a successful Claimant to pass on the appropriate share of damages to other

shareholders or participants:

7 Tt is to be noted that, by Article 34 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treati

 

: “A Treaty does not

create either obligations or rights for a third State ... without the consent of that State ...”.

7 Award No.215-52-1, 28 February 1986 Blount Brothers Corporation v. The Government of the Islamic

Republic of Iran, et al, 10 Iran-U.8. C.T.R., p.64. Similar points have been made in a number of other awards,
such as Award No, 232-97-2, 2 May 1986 Richard D. Harza, et al v. The Islamic Republic of Iran, et al, 11 Iran-
U.S. C.T.R., p.86; Award No 244-68-2, 8 August 1986, Howard, Needles, Tammen & Bergendorff v. The
Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran, 11 Iran-U.S. C.T.R., p.314; Award No. 282-10853 to6-1, 17
December 1986, lan L. McHarg v. The Islamic Republic of Iran, 13 Iran-U.S. C.T.R., p.302.

-52-

once the Tribunal has rendered an Award on an indirect claim,
including the portion owned by the minority shareholders, those minority
shareholders would be left without independent recourse, except insofar as
the applicable corporate law might permit them to recover against the
majority. The Tribunal has no means of compelling a successful Claimant
to distribute the proceeds of its claim, were it to receive 100%.

Furthermore, to grant 100% in such an indirect claim would still not fully
exclude the admitted risk that the corporation itself might at some point
bring an action based on the same facts against the same Respondent in
another forum.”

(v) Conclusions

153. It follows that this Tribunal has no jurisdiction in respect of claims on behalf of, or

losses incurred by, either GBC itself, or any of Impregilo’s joint venture partners.

154. As Pakistan has pointed out, this conclusion is in line with a number of decisions of
ICSID tribunals, as well as other international courts and arbitral tribunals. Indeed, there
is an established principle of international law that a shareholder of a company, or one
member of a partnership or joint venture, may not claim for the entire loss suffered by

the corporate entity or group.

155. By way of example, the Tribunal was referred to American Manufacturing & Trading
Inc. v. Democratic Republic of the Congo, in which an ICSID tribunal determined that a
U.S. Claimant could not claim for the total damages caused to the Zairian company
SINZA, in which it had a minority interest.’” Similarly, awards in the Iran-US Claims
Tribunal have frequently limited claims of shareholders and partners to the extent of
their respective shares or participation in the entity or partnership that has suffered

3
loss.”*

® American Manufacturing & Trading, Inc. v. Democratic Republic of the Congo, ICSID Case No.
ARB/93/1, Award of 21 February 1997, 5 ICSID Reports, pp.14-36, as referred to by the Tribunal in the Mihaly
case, 6 ICSID Reports 310, para 25.

™ Unusually, the Algiers Declarations provide that a controlling shareholder is entitled to claim for
damage caused to the company in which it has shares - | Iran-U.S. C.T.R., p.9.

-53-

As one example, the Chamber in Housing and Urban Services International v. Iran held

that:

“... international law seems to accept that as a rule a partner may not sue in
his own name alone on a cause of action accruing to the partnership.”

and that

“\.. there is a widespread agreement that, where claims of individual
partners for their personal interest are allowed, those claims are limited to

the extent of such interest.””*

Cc. Impregilo’s Standing to Bring a Claim for its Own Share of any Losses

156. In paragraph 58.2 of its Request, Impregilo claims (in the alternative) as follows:

“In any event, if the Tribunal finds that it cannot award Impregilo damages
in excess of its proportionate interest in GBC, Impregilo claims, in the
alternative, 57.80% of the total damages.”

157. A claim in substantially similar terms appears at paragraph 200.2 of Impregilo’s Limited

Memorial.

(@) Pakistan’s Objections

158. Aside from the objections discussed above in respect of GBC and the other joint venture
partners, it is Pakistan’s case that Impregilo has no standing to claim its own share of

alleged losses. This is put on two bases, as follows:

™ Award No. 201-174-1, 22 Nov 1985 Housing and Urban Services International, Inc v. The Government
of the Islamic Republic of Iran et al., 9 Iran-U.S. C.T.R., p.330-3. The principle has been recognised for some
time. The Tribunal was referred to the Decision of 20 February 1870, in Ruden & Co (synopsis in J.B. Moore,
International Arbitration, Vol. 2 (1898), pp.1654-1655, where an American national and partner of a citizen of
New Granada brought a claim for the entire damage caused to the business. The Umpire held that only Ruden’s
claims for his pro rata share were properly before the Commission, and awarded him his one-half interest only.
Other examples were referred to in Scribner K. Fauver, “Partnership Claims Before the Iran-United States Claims
Tribunal”, Virginia Journal of International Law, 1987, Vol 27, p.328).

  

159.

(b)

-54-

That the partners in GBC have, as a matter of fact, consistently acted collectively
in asserting their rights under the contractual mechanism and in court proceedings

in Pakistan; and

That this approach accords with the prevailing practice in international law.

As for the practice of GBC’s participants, Pakistan argues that Impregilo and its partners

in the Joint Venture have constantly and consistently acted jointly in all matters relating

to the implementation of the Contracts with WAPDA, and moreover that the Contracts

clearly envisage that the joint venture partners will act collectively. Pakistan relies, in

this regard, upon the Contracts themselves, as well as a number of clauses in the JVA

that refer to joint activity on the part of the members of GBC, including:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Second recital of the JVA, which recalls that the Parties have been “jointly
prequalified” and that they “intend to jointly submit the Tender(s)” and, in case

of Award, “jointly execute” the Contracts.

Clause 2.1 of the JVA, by which the Parties undertook not to have “any
separate dealings with any other company, consortium or joint venture in
connection with the submission of the Tender(s) or for the carrying out of any

work relative to the Contract(s).”

Clause 3.2 of the JVA, which provides that “Decisions shall be taken

unanimously”.

Clauses 7.1, 8.1 and 8.5 of the JVA, which set out the management structure of
the Joint Venture, including a Board of Representatives and an Executive
Committee comprising representatives of each of the parties. By Clause 8.5(v),
the Board of Representatives has responsibility (inter alia) for “recourse to
arbitration or to litigation of any claims against the Employer or third parties on

the basis of the Contract(s)”.

Clause 17.1 of the JVA, which refers to joint performance of the Contracts.

160.

161.

162.

-55-

Further, Pakistan relies upon the numerous references in Impregilo’s own Limited
Memorial to the joint activity of the four members of the Joint Venture. For example, in
its “Statement of Facts” (Section III of its Limited Memorial), Impregilo has consistently
referred to the rights and obligations of, and the activities of, GBC (rather than any of
the individual participants in the Joint Venture). The same may be said of Impregilo’s
Request. It is Pakistan’s conclusion that “according to [Impregilo] itself, the parties in
the Joint Venture have exclusively acted jointly in the implementation of the Contracts
as well as in relation to any claims arising from the Contracts. On no occasion has

Impregilo acted in isolation. ...”.

Similarly, Pakistan observes that in the extensive litigation in the courts of Pakistan
regarding the affairs of the Joint Venture, it has never been the case that one party has
claimed on behalf of all. On the contrary, claims have always been made in the name of
GBC, used as a term to describe all the partners collectively. All requests for DRB

Recommendations have also been made in GBC’s name.

In terms of legal principle, Pakistan contends that the concept that the partners in a joint
venture should act collectively accords with the prevailing practice in international law,
as reflected in the jurisprudence of international tribunals. In this regard, Pakistan relies

upon:

(a) The Kléckner case, which involved a claim based on different contracts signed,
on the one hand, by a number of partners, and on the other hand, by the
Government of Cameroon. In that case, the request for arbitration was brought
by “Kléckner Industrie-Anlagen GmbH, a German company whose principal
office is in Duisburg, acting on its own behalf as well as on the behalf of
Kléckner Belge SA, a Belgian company whose principal office is in Brussels,
and Kléckner Handelsmattschappij BV, a Netherlands company whose

principal office is in The Hague, (hereafter ‘Claimant’).””°

™ Kléckner Industrie-Anlagen GmbH and others vy. United Republic of Cameroon and Société

Camerounaise des Engrais, \CSID Case No. ARB/81/2, Award of 21 October 1983, 2 ICSID Reports 9.

-56-

(b) The Salini case, which concerned a major highway construction contract which
had been awarded jointly to the Italian companies Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and
Italstrade S.p.A., who together had “created the Groupement d’Entreprises
Salini-Italstrade ... for the performance of the contract.” Pakistan notes that
the tribunal in that case “underlined” that the “Group is not a legal entity. As a
result, the Italian companies take part in the present arbitration as joint

Claimants.””°

(c) A number of awards of the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal, such as Housing and
Urban Services International”, Phillips Petroleum™, and United Painting
Company 7 which are said to recognise a general rule of international law that
a partner may not sue in his own name alone on a cause of action accruing to

the partnership.
(ii) Impregilo’s Case

163. Impregilo argues that this Tribunal possesses jurisdiction ratione personae over
Impregilo with respect to claims in its own right, even if Impregilo’s role as the Leader
of the GBC Joint Venture, and its express legal authority to file actions for GBC, do not
permit it to pursue claims on GBC’s behalf. This is so, since Impregilo is a properly
incorporated Italian juridical person with investments in Pakistan within the meaning of

the BIT.

% Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Kingdom of Morocco, CSID Case No. ARB/00/4,

Decision on Jurisdiction of 23 July 2001, French original in 129 Journal du droit international 196 (2002);
English translations in 6 ICSID Reports 400, para 3.

 

 

7 Award No. 201-174-1, 22 Nov 1985 Housing and Urban Services International, Inc v. The Government
of the Islamic Republic of Iran et al., 9 Iran-U.S. C-T.R.

78 Award No. 425-39-2, 29 June 1989, Phillips Petroleum Co. Iran v. The Islamic Republic of Iran and
NIOC, 21 Iran-U.S. C.T.R.

” Award No. 458-11286-3, 20 December 1989, United Painting Company, Inc. v. The Islamic Republic of
Tran, 23 Iran-U.S. C.T.R.

-57-

164. Further, previous ICSID decisions make clear that an investor who is a stakeholder in an

enterprise may bring claims under most BITs for injury to that enterprise and its assets in

violation of the investor’s Treaty rights. No rule requiring “special circumstances” has

been established. Impregilo cites in this regard:

(a)

(b)

(c)

Asian Agricultural Products Ltd. v. Sri Lanka®’, in which the tribunal awarded
damages to a shareholder in a corporation established pursuant to a joint

venture agreement for injury suffered by that corporation.

American Manufacturing & Trading Inc. v. Democratic Republic of the
Congo*', in which the tribunal acknowledged that a 94% shareholder in a
company whose properties were harmed by the respondent government “acts in
its own name and in its own capacity as an American enterprise having

invested in Zaire,” and rejected objections to jurisdiction.

A number of recent cases in which tribunals have confirmed the rights of
minority stakeholders to advance such claims, such as Lanco v. Argentine
Republic ®2 (18.3% stakeholder) and CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentine
Republic 83 (29.42% stakeholder), and the rights of indirect stakeholders, as in

Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic."

® Asian Agricultural Products Ltd v. Republic of Sri Lanka, (CSID Case No ARB/87/3, Award of 27 June
1990, 4 ICSID Reports 246.

8! American Manufacturing & Trading, Inc. v. Democratic Republic of the Congo, ICSID Case No
ARB/93/1, Award of 21 February 1997, 5 ICSID Reports 14.

® Lanco International Inc. v. Argentine Republic, CSID Case No ARB/97/6, Decision on Jurisdiction of
8 December 1998, 40 ILM 457 (2001).

8} CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No ARB/O1/8, Decision on
Jurisdiction of 17 July 2003, 42 ILM 788 (2003).

- 58 -

(iii) Analysis and Conclusions

165. The Tribunal is unpersuaded by Pakistan’s objections on this issue.

166. The Tribunal accepts Pakistan’s description of the way in which the partners in this Joint
Venture have conducted themselves to date. The fact that the individual participants
have acted jointly in the past, however, does not of itself give rise to any principle of law
that they must do so in the future, or that this Tribunal has no jurisdiction to consider the

claims of one of the entities pursued on its own behalf.

167. Equally, none of the provisions of the Contracts or the JVA upon which Pakistan relies
in this context appears to limit (or indeed could limit) the scope of Pakistan’s consent to
arbitration as expressed in the BIT. Whether or not Impregilo’s action in commencing
this ICSID proceeding gives rise, for example, to a claim by the other joint venture
participants for breach of the JVA (a municipal law agreement to which Pakistan is not a
party) is a different matter, analytically distinct from the question whether or not
Impregilo has standing to pursue its claims against Pakistan as a matter of the BIT, the

ICSID Convention, and the law applicable to these instruments.*°

168. As for the legal authorities relied upon by Pakistan:

(a) The fact that the Claimants in the Kléckner case chose to pursue their claims
collectively does not reflect any particular legal requirement that this be done.
Indeed, as Pakistan itself points out, the question of the identity or standing of
the Claimants was not addressed by the tribunal in that case, since Cameroon

had accepted its jurisdiction.

“ Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No ARB/O1/12, Decision on Jurisdiction of 8
December 2003, 43 ILM 262 (2004).

§5 Similarly, it is to be noted that a number of decisions of the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal support the
proposition that the characterisation of a relationship either under municipal law or by the parties to a Contract is
not determinative of a “partner’s” right to bring a claim before that Tribunal. See e.g. Phillips Petroleum
Company Iran, 21 Ian-U.S. C.T.R. at 103-4.

-59-

(b) Similarly, the fact that the Claimants in the Salini v. Morocco case took part in
that arbitration as joint Claimants does not appear to reflect any mandatory
principle that both partners pursue their claims jointly, or, put another way, any

restriction upon one partner pursuing its own claims separately.

(c) In so far as the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal recognised such a restriction, as
Pakistan itself notes, it was not seen as an absolute rule. Rather, as was stated
by Chamber One in Housing and Urban Services International, in reviewing

the decisions of other international tribunals:

“While international law seems to accept that as a rule a partner may
not sue in his own name alone on a cause of action accruing to the
partnership, where special reasons or circumstances required it,
‘international tribunals have had little difficulty in disaggregating the
interests of partners and in permitting’ partners to recover their pro
rata share of partnership claims. The most relevant ‘special
circumstance’ in this sense exists when a partner’s claim is for its
own interest, which is independent and readily distinguishable from a
claim of the partnership as such.”*°

169. Here, as follows from the analysis later in this Decision, the relevant causes of action in
these proceedings are alleged breaches of Treaty. As will be clear from the following
Section, no consideration need be given for present purposes to Impregilo’s allegations
of breach of the Contracts. Given the nature of the BIT, the alleged breaches of Treaty
could only be causes of action accruing to Impregilo alone, and not to the Joint Venture
itself or any of its other participants. It follows that this is not a case in which one
member of a partnership is seeking to pursue in its own name a cause of action accruing

to the partnership.

86 9 Iran-U.S. C.T.R 313, p.330. It might be noted that this decision has been criticised as misstating the
general rule. See Note, Partnership Claims before the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal, 27 Va.J.Int'| L. 307,
340 (1987), asserting that pro rata recovery is the general rule, not the exception.

- 60-

170. If particular “circumstances” are required to allow such a claim, which the Tribunal
doubts, then in the words of the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal in Housing and Urban
Services International, Impregilo’s claim is properly characterised as one for its own
interest, which is readily distinguishable from a claim of the partnership as such. To this
end, the Tribunal is satisfied that adequate circumstances exist such as to allow
Impregilo to pursue these proceedings on its own, albeit only in respect of its own

alleged loss (being proportionate to its pro rata share of the Joint Venture).*”

171. Lastly, Pakistan points out that nowhere has Impregilo specified any damage it might
have suffered individually. Rather, any loss could only be that of the Joint Venture
overall. To this end, Pakistan contends that Impregilo has not shown any right
“independent and readily distinguishable” from a claim of the other parties to the Joint

Venture.

172. The Tribunal disagrees. As stated, the relevant causes of action for present purposes
(breaches of Treaty) are distinguishable from the claims that may be available to the
other joint venture partners (breaches of the Contracts). Whether or not Impregilo can
actually establish any actionable loss is a question to be resolved at the substantive

hearing of this dispute. It does not, of itself, impact on the question of jurisdiction.

173. The Tribunal therefore concludes that Impregilo is not prevented from pursuing its

claims for breach of the BIT on the basis that it is acting alone.

174. This conclusion accords with the previous ICSID decisions which Impregilo has cited,

as set out above, and to which may be added further decisions such as Enron

*? Pakistan further objects to Impregilo acting alone in these proceedings on the basis that “... this would
not only frustrate the purpose of having an exclusive Contractual dispute settlement mechanism, but it would also
mean that the same issue was being pursued in two separate sets of proceedings simultaneously. In effect, to
allow Impregilo to bring ICSID proceedings even for a pro rata share would enable it to steal a march on its
partners in the joint venture.” This ignores the fundamental distinction between claims for breach of the
Contracts, and claims for breach of the BIT — a distinction that is addressed later in this Decision. The
circumstance here that warrants Impregilo pursuing these proceedings alone is precisely the fact that the cause of
action in question is exclusive to this participant, and is fundamentally different from the causes of action that
might be referred to the Contractual dispute settlement mechanism.

 

 

 

 

175.

176.

-61-

Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic.** The Tribunal in that
case again confirmed the analogous right of minority and non-controlling shareholders
to claim independently of a separate corporate entity for the measures that affect their
investment. As stated there: “[t]his right has been upheld both under international law

and the ICSID Convention.”

Impregilo’s Authority to Bring the Arbitration, and its Compliance with
Institutional Rule 2(1)(f)

The third of Pakistan’s objections ratione personae concerns the question of Impregilo’s
authority to commence this arbitration, and its compliance with the ICSID Institution
Rules. Rule 2 of the Institution Rules sets out requirements for the contents of a request

for arbitration. Rule 2(1)(f) provides as follows:

“The request shall:

(f) state, if the requesting party is a juridical person, that it has taken all
necessary internal actions to authorize the request.”

Rule 2(2) provides as follows:

“The information required by subparagraphs (1)(c), (1)(d)(iii) and (1)(f)
shall be supported by documentation.”

(i) Pakistan’s Objections

It is Pakistan’s case that Impregilo has provided no document showing that such
authorisation has been given, and that such documentation as has been provided is
inadequate for these purposes. In particular, Pakistan points to Exhibit 5 to Impregilo’s

Request of 17 January 2003, which comprises “Minutes of the Meetings of the

88 Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No ARB/O1/3,

Decision on Jurisdiction of 14 January 2004, an electronic text is provided by International Law in Brief at
http://www.asil.org/ilib/Enron.pdf.

-62-

Executive Committee [of Impregilo] of January 22, 2002”, held in Milan. In the English

translation provided by Impregilo, this provides in relevant part as follows:

“After due discussion, the Executive Committee unanimously resolved that
Impregilo institute and maintain appropriate legal proceedings before the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes under the
Bilateral Investment Treaty in force between Italy and Pakistan.

The Committee resolved further that Impregilo, as leader and majority
shareholder of the Ghazi-Barotha Joint Venture, sole signatory of the two
Contracts and principal interlocutor with WAPDA and other authorities of
the Government of Pakistan, institute and maintain such legal proceedings
on behalf of the Joint Venture in order to recover costs, damages and losses
suffered by the Joint Venture as a whole.”

177. According to Pakistan, this authorisation is inadequate for the purposes of the Institution

Rules, for two reasons:

(a)

(b)

The authorisation was made with respect to the initial Request (of 28 January
2002) to which the same document was attached. That Request was formally
withdrawn in May 2002 in conformity with Clause 5 of the Supplementary
Agreement. Rule 2(1)(f) of the Institution Rules, on Pakistan’s case, requires

that “the request”, not “any request” be duly authorised.

The authorisation appears to be that of a purely internal organ of Impregilo,
which has authorised Impregilo to bring the dispute before an ICSID tribunal
under the BIT, on behalf of the Joint Venture. This runs counter to Clause 8.5
of the JVA, by which recourse to arbitration falls exclusively within the
competence of the Board of Representatives of the Joint Venture. Clause

8.5(v) provides as follows:

“The Board of Representatives shall decide and be responsible
for the general policy of the Joint Venture, and in particular shall
deal with matters of primary importance, such as:

v) The general policy of submission of claims to the
Engineer and/or the Employer and the recourse to arbitration or

-63-

to litigation of any claims against the Employer or third parties
on the basis of the Contract(s)”

178. As for the two subsequent documents filed by Impregilo, dated 31 January 2003,

179.

180.

Pakistan maintains that these are “general in nature”, “do not formally authorise the

Request for Arbitration lodged with the ICSID Secretariat on 13 January 2003”, and are

subsequent to the date of the Request in any event.

Pakistan therefore concludes that Impregilo lacks proper authorisation to bring this

claim, and the Tribunal accordingly lacks jurisdiction ratione personae.

(ii)

Impregilo’s Case

It is Impregilo’s case that it is properly authorised to bring these proceedings, on the

following basis:

(a)

(b)

(c)

That it is axiomatic that Impregilo requires no authorisation from any third

party to bring a claim on its own behalf; and

That at most, a corporate Claimant might include with its Request for
Arbitration “some indication of internal authorization, consistent with its
corporate structure, for the decision to proceed with an ICSID claim”, and that
the Minutes of 22 January 2002 referred to by Pakistan adequately serve this

purpose; and

That GBC’s Board of Representatives and Executive Committee jointly
authorised Impregilo to “represent GBC and all GBC Partners and appoint law
firms in any arbitration, judicial and extra-judicial proceedings” as evidenced
by Combined Minutes of Board of Representatives Meeting No 12 and
Executive Committee Meeting No 15, para 5, dated 31 January 2003. A Power

of Attorney of the same date (31 January 2003) signed by the other members of

181.

182.

183.

-64-

GBC in that capacity authorises Impregilo to “file any claim or legal action”
and “to represent the Joint Venture in any arbitration ... directly or indirectly
related to the Joint Venture.” Further, on 18 August 2003, GBC’s Board of
Representatives reaffirmed its decision to have Impregilo “continue with ICSID
arbitration”, as evidenced by Minutes of Board of Representatives Meeting No

13, at Section 2.

(iii) Analysis and Conclusions

In the Tribunal’s view, Impregilo is properly authorised to commence and pursue these
arbitration proceedings, and has satisfied the requirements of Rule 2(1) and (2) of the

Institution Rules.

This is a claim by Impregilo which, properly analysed, is limited to alleged breaches of
the BIT®, and Impregilo’s own alleged loss. As such, it is Impregilo, and neither GBC
nor the other joint venture participants, that constitutes the “juridical person” for the
purposes of Rule 2(1)(f) of the Institution Rules. Contrary to Pakistan’s case, it follows
that the “internal actions” referred to in Rule 2 are those internal to Impregilo. As far as
the requirements of the ICSID Convention and Rules and the BIT are concerned, there is
no need for authorisation by GBC or any other joint venture partners for arbitration to be

commenced pursuant to Article 9 of the BIT.

On this basis, the Tribunal considers that the authorisation granted in the Minutes of the
Meeting of the Executive Committee of Impregilo on 22 January 2002 is sufficient for

these proceedings.

* As follows from the analysis in Section V of this Decision.

184.

185.

186.

187.

-65-

Conclusions on Objections Ratione Personae

It follows that this Tribunal has jurisdiction ratione personae over Impregilo’s claims,
only in so far as such claims concern Impregilo’s own alleged loss, being (at most)

proportionate to its pro rata participation in the Joint Venture.

V. JURISDICTION RATIONE MATERIAE

As set out above, Impregilo advances claims before this Tribunal in respect of alleged
breaches by Pakistan of the Contracts, as well as of the BIT. Impregilo contends that the
Tribunal has jurisdiction under the terms of the BIT with respect to both types of claim.

Each is addressed in turn.

Contract Claims

(i) _ Impregilo’s Case

In its Limited Memorial, Impregilo articulated a number of specific allegations of breach
of the two Contracts. These have been summarised earlier in this Decision, and have

been referred to as the “Contract Claims.”

Unlike other BITs to which Pakistan is a party, the BIT between Italy and Pakistan does
not contain an “observance of commitments” or “umbrella clause”. The focus of
Impregilo’s case as to the jurisdiction of this Tribunal over the Contract Claims was

therefore Articles 9 and 3 of the BIT.

188.

189.

190.

- 66 -

Article 9: Article 9 of the BIT contains Pakistan’s consent to ICSID arbitration.

Article 9(1) is cast in broad terms, as follows:

. any disputes arising between a Contracting Party and the investors of
the other, including disputes relating to compensation for expropriation,
nationalization, requisition or similar measures, and disputes relating to the
amount of the relevant payment shall be settled amicably, as far as
possible.”

Article 9(2) provides as follows:

. in the case that such a dispute cannot be settled amicably within six
months of the date of a written application, the investor in question may
submit the dispute at his discretion for settlement to [various fora, including
ICSID].”

Impregilo contends that Article 9(1) is drafted in such general terms (e.g. “any
disputes”) that it covers not only disputes relating to alleged violations of a provision of
the BIT, but any dispute which may arise between a State Party and an investor of the

other Party, including disputes concerning alleged violations of contracts.

The Contracting Party: Impregilo’s complaints concern alleged acts and omissions by
WAPDA itself, as well as by the Engineer and other governmental authorities (such as
the Customs and military authorities) that have given rise to complaints against WAPDA
under the Contracts. These complaints are brought against the State of Pakistan in these

proceedings, on the basis that:

“WAPDA is an instrumentality or organ of the Government of Pakistan ...

whose actions and omissions are attributable to Respondent in international

law.”
Therefore, on Impregilo’s case, it is irrelevant that WAPDA, and not the State of
Pakistan, is Party to the Contracts, and it follows that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to

entertain its Contract Claims directed against Pakistan.

191.

192.

193.

194.

195.

-67-

The Arbitration Agreements: Impregilo further submits that the forum selection clauses
contained in the Contracts do not deprive the Tribunal of its jurisdiction over the
Contract Claims. As set out earlier, it emphasises that (on its case) these contractual
dispute resolution mechanisms are unavailable to it in any event, having been frustrated
as a result of the Respondent’s conduct. Again as set out above, Impregilo takes issue
with the Respondent’s analysis of Pakistan law as to the continued viability of the two

arbitration agreements, and the relevance of the 1923 Geneva Protocol.

Article 3: As a further ground, Impregilo contends that this Tribunal also has
jurisdiction over Impregilo’s Contract Claims by operation of the Most Favoured Nation
clause in Article 3 of the BIT, and in turn by operation of the “umbrella clauses”
contained in other BITs that exist as between Pakistan and other countries (e.g. the

Swiss-Pakistan BIT).

(ii) Pakistan’s Objections

As recorded in Section II of this Decision, Pakistan has advanced a number of detailed
arguments on this issue. For the reasons set out below, the Tribunal considers that many

of these arguments need not be addressed in this Decision.

The Contracting Party: It is the Respondent’s principal case that this Tribunal lacks
jurisdiction over the Contract Claims because it is WAPDA - and not Pakistan - which is
a Party to the Contracts. It stresses that WAPDA is a corporate body distinct from the
State of Pakistan and that Pakistan cannot be held responsible for breaches of the

Contracts concluded by WAPDA.

The Arbitration Agreements: Pakistan adds that even if it had been a Party to the
Contracts, the Tribunal should respect the exclusive forum selection clauses contained
therein. In accordance with ICSID jurisprudence, the Tribunal should conclude either
that it lacks jurisdiction over the Contract Claims (following the approach, for example,

that was taken in SGS v. Pakistan) or that those claims are inadmissible, and that these

196.

197.

198.

- 68 -

proceedings should be stayed (following the approach that was taken in SGS v.

Philippines).

(iii) Issues in Dispute

In the Tribunal’s view, whether or not the Contract Claims advanced by Impregilo fall

within this Tribunal’s jurisdiction depends upon three distinct issues, as follows:

(a) Whether Article 9 of the BIT covers disputes between Impregilo and Pakistan
arising out of the implementation of Contracts concluded between GBC and

WAPDA.

(b) Tf Article 9 does not extend to such disputes, whether the Tribunal nevertheless
has jurisdiction by virtue of the Most Favoured Nation clause in Article 3 of the

BIT.

(c) Tf the Tribunal has jurisdiction over Impregilo’s Contract Claims by virtue of
Article 9 or Article 3 of the BIT, whether the existence of dispute resolution
provisions in the Contracts deprives the Tribunal of such jurisdiction, or

renders the Contract Claims inadmissible.

To the extent necessary, each issue is addressed in turn below.

(iv) The Scope of Article 9 of the BIT

Both Contracts were concluded with WAPDA and not with the State of Pakistan.
Whether or not Article 9 of the BIT extends to disputes between Impregilo and Pakistan
arising out of contracts concluded with WAPDA therefore turns upon the precise status

of this authority, and the legal consequences to be drawn from this status.

199.

200.

201.

202.

203.

- 69 -

The Status of WAPDA: The status of WAPDA as a party to the Contracts is a matter for
the law of Pakistan, being both the law by which WAPDA was established and exists,

and also the law governing the Contracts.

WAPDA was established by the Pakistan Water and Power Development Authority Act
of 1958 (“the 1958 Act”). Under Section 3(2) of the 1958 Act, WAPDA (referred to

as the “Authority”) is a corporate body that is:

“entitled to acquire, hold property, shall have perpetual succession and a
common seal and shall by the said name sue and be sued”.

WAPDA consists of a Chairman, and not more than three Members appointed by the
Government (Section 4). They “receive such salary and allowances” and are “subject to
such conditions of service as may be prescribed by the Government” (Section 5). Under
Section 6 of the 1958 Act, the Government may remove the Chairman and any Member
of the Board for various reasons, in particular if they become, in the opinion of the
Government, incapable of discharging their responsibilities under the 1958 Act or if they
have been declared to be disqualified for employment in, or have been dismissed from,

the service of Pakistan.

The 1958 Act contains detailed provisions relating to the employees of WAPDA. It
states in particular that “the Authority shall prescribe the procedure for appointment and
terms and conditions of service of its officers and servants, and shall be competent to

take disciplinary action against the officers and servants” (Section 18).

“Service under the Authority” is considered “to be service of Pakistan and every person
holding a post under the Authority, not being a person who is on deputation to the
authority from any Province, shall be deemed to be a civil servant for the purposes of the
Service Tribunals Act, 1973” (Section 17 (1-D)) and within the meaning of Section 21
of the Pakistan Penal Code (Section 19(1)).

204.

205.

206.

207.

208.

-70-

The power and duties of the Authority are defined in Sections 8 to 16 of the Act. Under
Section 8, the Authority “shall prepare, for the approval of the Government a
comprehensive plan for the development and utilization of the Water and Power
resources of Pakistan ...”. It also may frame schemes for a province or any part thereof,

subject here again to approval by the Government.

Once a scheme is sanctioned by the Government, the authority may take action for its
implementation, as specified in Section 8(5), and in particular “enter into any contract or
agreement with any company or companies” having the required object. Moreover, in
order to carry out the purposes of the Act, WAPDA may “undertake any works, incur
any expenditure, procure plant, machinery and materials required for its use and enter
into and perform all such contracts as it may consider necessary or expedient”. It may
also “acquire by purchase, lease, exchange or otherwise and dispose of by sale, lease,
exchange or otherwise any land or interest in land”. More generally, it “may take such
measures and exercise such power as it considers necessary or expedient for carrying out

of the purposes of this Act” (Section 13).

By Section 26 of the 1958 Act, “The liability of the Government to the creditors of the
Authority shall be limited to the extent of grant made by the Government and the loans

passed by the Authority with the sanction of the Government”.

The accounts of the Authority are audited by the Auditor General of Pakistan. The
Auditor Report with the comments of the Authority are sent to the Government and the
Authority “shall carry out any directive issued by the Government for rectification of an
audit objection”. Each year, the Authority submits to the Government for approval a
statement of the estimated receipts and expenditures in respect of the next financial year

(Section 27).

The Authority may, with the approval of the Government, frame regulations for the

implementation of the 1958 Act (Section 29).

°° Pakistan Act No. XXX1 of 1958, as subsequently amended.

209.

210.

211.

-71-

Although the Government of Pakistan exercises a strict control on WAPDA, in light of
the terms of the 1958 Act that established it, the Tribunal considers that WAPDA is
properly characterised as an autonomous corporate body, legally and financially distinct

from Pakistan.

Much of Impregilo’s argument on this issue rested upon international law principles of
state responsibility and attribution. However, a clear distinction exists between the
responsibility of a State for the conduct of an entity that violates international law (e.g. a
breach of Treaty), and the responsibility of a State for the conduct of an entity that
breaches a municipal law contract (i.e. Impregilo’s Contract Claims). As noted by the
ad hoc Committee in its decision on annulment in Compaftia de Aguas del Aconquija
and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic, the international law rules on State

responsibility and attribution apply to the former, but not the latter:

“*... whether there has been a breach of the BIT and whether there has been
a breach of contract are different questions. Each of these claims will be
determined by reference to its own applicable law — in the case of the BIT,
by international law; in the case of the Concession Contract, by the proper
law of the contract ... For example, in the case of a claim based on a
treaty, international law rules of attribution apply, with the result that the
State ... is internationally responsible for the acts of its provincial
authorities. By contrast, the State ... is not liable for the performance of
contracts entered into by [a provincial authority], which possesses a
separate legal personality under its own law and is responsible for the
performance of its own contracts.”?!

Separate Entities and Article 9: Article 9 of the BIT covers only “disputes arising
between a Contracting Party and the investors of the other”. As is clear from its own
terms, the scope of application of this provision is limited to disputes between the

entities or persons concerned.

°! Compaiiia de Aguas del Aconquija SA and Vivendi Universal (formerly Compagnie Générale des Eaux)

v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment of 3 July 2002, 6 ICSID Reports 340,
para.96.

212.

213.

Decision on Jurisdiction of 23 July 2001, op. cit., p

-72-

As was stated in Salini Costruttori SpA v. Kingdom of Morocco, where a State has
organised a sector of activity through a distinct legal entity, whether or not a State entity,
it does not follow a priori that the State has extended its jurisdiction offer in a BIT to

contractual breaches committed by such other entity or its agents.

Salini Costruttori SpA v. Kingdom of Morocco” concerned claims for the alleged breach
of a contract between Salini (an Italian corporation) and Société Nationale des

Autoroutes du Maroc (“ADM”). The tribunal held that ADM was “une entité contrélée

et dirigée par l’Etat marocain, a travers le Ministre de l’Equipement et divers

93

organismes publics’ whose main object was “la réalisation de taches de nature

étatique (construction, gestion et exploitation de biens relevant du service public
répondant aux besoins structurels du Royaume du Maroc en matiére d’infrastructures et
de réseaux de communications).”** The tribunal nonetheless concluded that it did not
have jurisdiction over mere breaches of the contract concluded between Salini and

ADM, in so far as such breaches did not simultaneously constitute breaches of treaty:

“Dans Uhypothése oi lVEtat a organisé un secteur d’activité par
Vintermédiaire d’une personne morale distincte, fit-elle une émanation de
celui-ci, il n’en découle pas pour autant qu’il a accepté a priori que l’offre
de compétence de l’article 8 [de l’accord bilatéral d’investissement entre
V’Italie et le Maroc] le lie a raison des manquements contractuels de cette

entité.”*

® Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Kingdom of Morocco, \CSID Case No. ARB/00/4,
s. 59 to 61

 

° “an entity controlled and managed by the Moroccan State through the medium of the Minister of

Infrastructure and various public organs”.

** “to accomplish tasks that are under State control (building, managing and operating of assets falling

under the province of the public utilities responding to the structural needs of the Kingdom of Morocco with
regard to infrastructure and communication networks).”

-73-

“En d’autres termes, l’article 8 oblige l’Etat a respecter l’offre de

compétence a raisons des violations de l’Accord bilatéral et de tout
manquement a un contrat qui le lierait directement. L’offre de compétence
de l’article 8 ne s’étend pas par contre aux violations d’un contrat auquel
une entité autre que |’ Etat est nommément partie.”°°

214. This analysis applies in terms to Article 9 of the BIT between Italy and Pakistan. In the
Tribunal’s view, the jurisdiction offer in this BIT does not extend to breaches of a
contract to which an entity other than the State is a named Party. Indeed, had the
intention been to extend each Contracting Party’s jurisdiction offer in this way, the

language of Article 9 would have been so crafted.

215. The Tribunal notes that this conclusion is also consistent with a number of other

decisions of ICSID tribunals in comparable cases”,

216. Conclusions: Given that the Contracts at issue were concluded between the Claimant
and WAPDA, and not between the Claimant and Pakistan; that under the law of
Pakistan, which governs both the Contracts and the status and capacity of WAPDA for
the purposes of the Contracts, WAPDA is a legal entity distinct from the State of
Pakistan; and given that Article9 of the BIT does not cover breaches of contracts
concluded by such an entity, it must follow that this Tribunal has no jurisdiction under

the BIT to entertain Impregilo’s claims based on alleged breaches of the Contracts.

°5 In the case where the State has organised a sector of activity through a distinct legal entity, be it a State
entity, it does not necessarily follow that the State has accepted a priori that the jurisdiction offer contained in
Article 8 [of the Italy-Morocco BIT] should bind it with respect to contractual breaches committed by this
entity.” (para.61).

 

°© « Tn other words, Article 8 compels the State to respect the jurisdiction offer in relation to violations of
the Bilateral Treaty and any breach of a contract that binds the State directly. The jurisdiction offer contained in
Article 8 does not, however, extend to breaches of a contract to which an entity other than the State is a named
party.” (para. 61).

°*7 E.g. Consortium RFCC v. Kingdom of Morocco, \CSID Case No. ARB/O0/6, Decision on
Jurisdiction of 16 July 2001, para. 68, French original available at http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases.htm;
see also Cable Television of Nevis. v. Federation of St. Kitts and Nevis, \CSID Case No. ARB/95/2, Award of 13
January 1997, 5 ICSID Reports 106, para. 2.22.

217.

218.

219.

220.

221.

-74-

This is a short but, in the Tribunal’s view, complete answer to the question of
contractual jurisdiction in this case, which renders most of the many other arguments

under this heading unnecessary to decide.

Interrelationship with Treaty Claims: However, as stated by the ad hoc Committee in
its decision on annulment in Compafiia de Aguas del Aconquija and Vivendi Universal

v. Argentine Republic:

“\.. itis one thing to exercise contractual jurisdiction ... and another to take
into account the terms of a contract in determining whether there has been a
breach of a distinct standard of international law such as that reflected in ...
the BIT”’’.

The fact that Article 9 of the BIT does not endow the Tribunal with jurisdiction to
consider Impregilo’s Contract Claims does not imply that the Tribunal has no
jurisdiction to consider Treaty Claims against Pakistan which at the same time could
constitute breaches of the Contracts. This question is examined later under the heading

“Treaty Claims”.

(v) The ‘MEN’ Provision in Article 3 of the BIT

Aside from Article 9, Impregilo also relies upon Article 3(2) of the BIT, which contains
a most-favoured nation (“MFN”) clause. Impregilo observes that several of the BITs
concluded by Pakistan include an “observance of commitments” or “umbrella clause”.
More specifically, under Article 11 of the Swiss-Pakistani BIT, each Party is required to
“constantly guarantee the observance of the commitments it has entered into with

respect to the investments of the investors of the other Contracting Party”.

According to Impregilo, by operation of the MEN clause inserted in the Italian-Pakistani
BIT, Pakistan is obliged to extend this same Treaty protection of contractual

commitments to Italian investors. To this end, so the argument goes, the Tribunal would

-75-

have jurisdiction to pronounce itself on the commitments thereby incorporated in the

BIT.

222. Pakistan stresses that this new claim has been introduced at a late stage, in Impregilo’s
Counter-Memorial, and is therefore inadmissible. It adds that “if there is no breach of

the Contracts, there cannot be a violation of the umbrella clause” thus invoked.”

223. In the Tribunal’s view, given that the Contracts were concluded by Impregilo with
WAPDA, and not with Pakistan. Impregilo’s reliance upon Article 3 of the BIT takes the
matter no further. Even assuming arguendo that Pakistan, through the MFN clause and
the Swiss-Pakistan BIT, has guaranteed the observance of the contractual commitments
into which it has entered together with Italian investors'°, such a guarantee would not
cover the present Contracts — since these are agreements into which it has not entered.

On the contrary, the Contracts were concluded by a separate and distinct entity.

(vi) The Effect of the Contractual Dispute Resolution Clauses

224. Much of the focus of each side’s argument has been the impact on this Tribunal’s
jurisdiction of the dispute resolution provisions that are contained in the Contracts,
particularly in light of the different approaches that have been taken in recent ICSID

decisions.

225. However, since the Tribunal has determined that it has no jurisdiction over the Contract
Claims, the impact (if any) of competing arbitration agreements, including all questions

as to the viability of such provisions, does not arise.

°8 Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija SA and Vivendi Universal (formerly Compagnie Générale des Eaux)
v. Argentine Republic, op.cit., para. 105.

°° Hearings, vol. I, p. 72 and 73.

10 je. putting aside, for the sake of argument, the restrictive analysis of the umbrella clause in the Swiss-
Pakistan BIT that was adopted by the tribunal in SGS v. Pakistan.

221

227.

228.

22!

230.

6.

x

oo

9.

So

-76-

Treaty Claims

(i) _ Impregilo’s Case

Aside from the Contract Claims, Impregilo also advances a number of allegations of
breach of the Treaty, which have been summarised earlier in this decision, and which

have been referred to as the “Treaty Claims”.

Separate Treaty Claims: Some of the Treaty Claims are quite distinct from, and do not
coincide with, any of the Contract Claims. Such claims are “based on conduct by
Governmental authorities not directly involved in the Contracts, including Pakistan’s

Ministry of Commerce, its Customs Authorities and its military authorities” !°!

, as well
as the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Water and Power. Impregilo contends

that the Tribunal self-evidently has jurisdiction over such Treaty Claims.

Interrelationship with Contract Claims: Some of the Treaty Claims, Impregilo admits,
do coincide with the Contract Claims. However, on its case the Tribunal also has
jurisdiction over these Treaty Claims, and the “overlap” with Contract Claims is of no

relevance thereto.

According to Impregilo, “frustration or repudiation of an investor’s contractual rights
can amount to a violation of Treaty”. Thus, “the Tribunal is bound to exercise
jurisdiction over Impregilo’s Treaty based claims notwithstanding the fact that it may be
required to construe the Contracts or analyse Respondent’s behaviour under the

Contracts to determine whether there has been a breach of the Treaty”.

(ii) Pakistan’s Objections

Qualification as a Treaty Claim: By reference to the jurisprudence of the International

Court of Justice as well as a number of decisions taken by other ICSID tribunals,

231.

232.

233.

234.

-77-

Pakistan argues that the fact that the Claimant raises an issue under one or more

 

provisions of the BIT is insufficient, of itself, to establish the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal. The Tribunal must ascertain whether the alleged violations of the BIT fall
within the provisions of the Treaty and whether, as a consequence, the dispute is one

which the Tribunal has jurisdiction ratione materiae to entertain.

Interrelationship with Contract Claims: Again as summarised earlier, Pakistan submits
that the Treaty Claims here cannot be separated from the Contract Claims and that,
consequently, such claims fall outside the scope of the BIT and this Tribunal has no

jurisdiction over them.

As for the allegations of unfair and inequitable treatment and unjustified measures,
contrary to Article 2(2) of the BIT, it is observed that the treatment and measures
complained of consist only of breaches of the contractual obligations of WAPDA. It

concludes that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to consider them.

Moreover, Pakistan stresses that “the only other Treaty claim is for expropriation”, or
“measures having similar effects” under Article 5 of the BIT. Here again, this would be
“a contract claim clothed as a claim for breach of treaty”. Moreover, a refusal to pay is
not an expropriation when there is an unresolved dispute as to the performance of a

contract.

Impact of the Contractual Dispute Resolution Provisions: _ Finally, Pakistan maintains
that “even if there were a Treaty claim entirely distinct from the Contract claims in the
present case (which is denied), it would be wholly inappropriate and indeed impractical,
for this Tribunal to hear such a claim until the Contract claims had been resolved by the
contractual mechanism”. To this end, drawing upon the approach that was adopted in
SGS v. Philippines, Pakistan submits that this Tribunal should stay these proceedings, in

order to allow the contractual dispute resolution mechanisms to take their course.

‘© Counter-Memorial, p. 34.

-78 -

(iii) Issues in Dispute

235. In the Tribunal’s view, whether or not the Treaty Claims advanced by Impregilo fall

within this Tribunal’s jurisdiction depends upon the following issues:

(a) The initial threshold that Impregilo’s claims must meet at this stage of the

proceedings in order to qualify as Treaty Claims.

(b) Whether or not the Treaty Claims, if established, fall within the scope of the
BIT, and in particular the interrelationship between Contract and Treaty

Claims.

(c) The impact (if any) of the dispute resolution provisions that are contained in the

Contracts, and the risk of multiple fora.

236. To the extent necessary, each issue is addressed in turn below.

(iv) Qualification as a Treaty Claim

237. When considering its jurisdiction to entertain the Treaty Claims, the Tribunal considers
that it must not make findings on the merits of those claims, which have yet to be
argued, but rather must satisfy itself that it has jurisdiction over the dispute, as presented
by the Claimant. This has been recognised both by the ICJ and by arbitral tribunals in

many cases.

238. The ICJ, in the Ambatielos Case in 1953, stated:

“In order to decide, in these proceedings, that the Hellenic Government’s
claim on behalf of Mr. Ambatielos is ‘based on’ the Treaty of 1886 within
the meaning of the Declaration of 1926, it is not necessary for the Court to
find and indeed the Court is without jurisdiction to do so — that the Hellenic
Government’s interpretation of the Treaty is the correct one. The Court

-79-

must determine, however, whether the arguments advanced by the Hellenic
Government in respect of the treaty provisions on which the Ambatielos
claim is said to be based, are of a sufficiently plausible character to warrant
a conclusion that the claim is based on the Treaty. It is not enough for the
claimant Government to establish a remote connection between the facts of
the claim and the Treaty of 1886.7!

239. More recently, in comparable cases, the ICJ has used more objective criteria. Rather
than referring to the “plausibility” of the claims, in the Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic

of Iran v. United States of America), the Court stated that:

“the Parties differ on the question whether the dispute between the two
States with respect to the lawfulness of the actions carried out by the
United States against the Iranian oil platforms is a dispute ‘as to the
interpretation or application of the Treaty of 1955’. In order to answer that
question, the Court cannot limit itself to noting that one of the Parties
maintains that such a dispute exists, and the other denies it. It must
ascertain whether the violations of the Treaty of 1955 pleaded by Iran do or
do not fall within the provisions of the Treaty and whether, as a
consequence, the dispute is one which the Court has jurisdiction ratione
materiae to entertain, pursuant to Article XXI, paragraph 2.

17. The objection to jurisdiction raised by the United States comprises two
facets. One concerns the applicability of the Treaty of 1955 in the event of
the use of force; the other relates to the scope of various Articles of that
Treaty.”!%

240. In the cases concerning the Legality of Use of Force in Yugoslavia, the ICJ adopted a

similar approach. It stated that:

“in order to determine, even prima facie, whether a dispute within the
meaning of Article IX of the Genocide Convention exists, the Court cannot
limit itself to noting that one of the Parties maintains that the Convention
applies, while the other denies it; ... [It] must ascertain whether the
breaches of the Convention alleged by Yugoslavia are capable of falling

1. Ambatielos, Merits Judgment, 1.C.J. Reports 1953, p. 18.

1 L.CJ. Reports 1996, II, p. 810, para. 16-17. In her separate Opinion, Judge Higgins proposed the
following approach: “The only way in which, in the present case, it can be determined whether the claims of
[Claimant] are sufficiently plausibly based upon the 1955 Treaty is to accept pro tem the facts as alleged by
[Claimant] to be true and in that light to interpret Articles I, IV and X for jurisdictional purposes, that is to say, to
see if on the basis of Iran’s claims of fact there could occur a violation of one or more of them” (para 32 of the
separate Opinion).

 

 

-80-

within the provisions of the instrument and whether, as a consequence, the
dispute is one which the Court has jurisdiction ratione materiae to entertain
pursuant to Article 1x.7!04

241. Arbitral tribunals have adopted a similar approach. Thus, in SGS v. Philippines’, the
ICSID tribunal stated that:

“The Tribunal’s jurisdiction, if it exists, must arise by virtue of the ICSID
Convention associated with the BIT... It is not enough that the Claimant
raises an issue under one or more provisions of the BIT which Respondent
disputes. To adopt the words of the International Court in the Oil Platforms
Case, the Tribunal ‘must ascertain whether the violations of the [BIT]
pleaded by [SGS] do or do not fall within the’ provisions of the Treaty and
whether, as a consequence, the dispute is one which the [Tribunal] has
jurisdiction ratione materiae to entertain” (para. 26).

242. In another passage of this decision, the arbitral tribunal stated that:

“In accordance with the basic principle formulated in the Oil Platforms
Case (above, para. 26), it is not enough for the Claimant to assert the
existence of a dispute as to fair treatment and expropriation” (para. 157).

243. The test for jurisdiction is an objective one, and its resolution may require the definitive
interpretation of the treaty provision which is relied on. On the other hand, as the

tribunal in SGS v. Pakistan stressed:

. it is for the Claimant to formulate its case. Provided that the facts
alleged by the Claimant and as appearing from the initial pleadings fairly
raise questions of breach of one or more provisions of the BIT, the Tribunal
has jurisdiction to determine the claim” (para 157). 106

' Legality of Use of Force (Yugoslavia v.. Italy), 1.C.J. Reports 1999 — I, p. 490, para. 25.

105 Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/6,
Decision on Jurisdiction of 29 January 2004, available at http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/pending.htm.

'6 Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/OI/1,
Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction of 6 August 2003, 18 ICSID Rev.—FILJ 301 (2003). See similarly Salini
Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, \CSID Case No ARB/02/13,
Award of 29 November 2004, available at http://www.worldbank.org /icsid/cases/pending.htm,

244.

245.

246.

247.

248.

-81-

On this approach, the ICJ and individual arbitral tribunals have arrived at decisions on

jurisdiction that vary from one case to another.

In the Ambatielos Case, the ICJ, after having considered the possible interpretations of
the Anglo-Greek commercial treaty of 1886 concluded that “the difference between the
Parties is the kind of difference which, according to the Declaration of 1926, should be

submitted to arbitration” (p. 22).

In the Oil Platforms Case, the ICJ determined the scope of various Articles of the 1955
Treaty of Friendship and Commerce between Iran and the United States of America and
decided that it had jurisdiction to entertain the Iranian claims only on the basis of
Article XXI, paragraph 2, of the Treaty relating to freedom of commerce and navigation

and not on the basis of the other provisions invoked by Iran.

In the cases concerning the Legality of Use of Force in Yugoslavia, the ICJ stated that “it
does not appear at the present stage of the proceedings that the bombings which form the

subject of the Yugoslav Application ‘indeed entail the element of intent’ ” which is
necessary to characterise conduct as genocide. As a consequence, the Court was
“therefore not in a position to find, at [that] stage of the proceedings, that the acts
imputed by Yugoslavia to the Respondent [were] capable of coming within the
provisions of the Genocide Convention.” Accordingly, it decided that it had no

jurisdiction prima facie. tor

In SGS v. Pakistan, the arbitral tribunal concluded that: “if the facts asserted by the
Claimants are capable of being regarded as alleged breaches of the BIT consistently with
the practice of ICSID tribunals, the Claimant should be able to have them considered on
their merits...”. “We do not exclude the possibility that there may arise a situation
where the Tribunal may find it necessary at the very beginning to look to the Claimant’s

factual claims but this is not such a case” (para 144), 108

107 Legality of Use of Force (Yugoslavia v. Italy), LC.J. Reports 1999-I, p. 491, paras. 27 and 28.

8 Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/OI/1,

Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction of 6 August 2003, op. cit.

~82-

249. Similarly, in Wena Hotels Ltd v. Arab Republic of Egypt, the arbitral tribunal stated that:

“Wena raised allegations against Egypt ... which if proven, clearly satisfy

the requirements of a legal dispute under Article 25(1) of the ICSID

Convention. In addition, Wena has presented at least some evidence that
; . aye 55109

suggests Egypt’s possible culpability.

250. The tribunal concluded that it had jurisdiction and reserved its decision on the merits.

251. The arbitral tribunal, in SGS v. Philippines arrived at a different conclusion in respect of

part of the claim in that case. It stated that:

“... the present dispute is on its face a dispute about the amount of money
owed under a contract. SGS accepts that the provision of services under the
CISS Agreement came to an end by the effluxion of time. No question of a
breach of the BIT independent of breach of contract is raised (as, arguably,
in SGS v. Pakistan); there is no allegation of a conspiracy by local officials
to frustrate the investment (as in Vivendi). As presented to the Tribunal by
the Claimant, the unresolved issues between the Parties concern the
determination of the amount still payable” (para. 159).'1°

252. The tribunal then recalled that, in its request for arbitration, SGS had invoked Articles
IV, VI and X(2) of the BIT. The tribunal commented that:

.. an unjustified refusal to pay sums admittedly payable under an award
or a contract at least raises arguable issues under Article IV” (fair and
equitable treatment) (para. 162). u

However, it added that “on the material presented by the Claimant, no case of
expropriation has been raised... A refusal to pay is not an expropriation when there is
an unresolved dispute as to the amount payable” (para. 161). As a consequence, the
tribunal dismissed the claim “so far as it is based on Article VI of the BIT”

(expropriation).

1 Wena Hotels Ltd. V. Arab Republic of Egypt, CSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Decision on Jurisdiction of
29 June 1999, 6 ICSID Reports 74, page 86.

2 Op, cit

"! Op. cit.

253.

254.

255.

256.

~83-

Similarly, in UPS v. Canada, the arbitral tribunal established under the NAFTA decided
in its decision on jurisdiction that the customary rule of international law, on which the
applicant based part of its claims, did not exist and, consequently, that the claim based

on such a rule was not within the jurisdiction of the tribunal.

The present Tribunal is in full agreement with the approach evident in this
jurisprudence. It reflects two complementary concerns: to ensure that courts and
tribunals are not flooded with claims which have no chance of success, or may even be
of an abusive nature; and equally to ensure that, in considering issues of jurisdiction,
courts and tribunals do not go into the merits of cases without sufficient prior debate. In
conformity with this jurisprudence, the Tribunal has considered whether the facts as
alleged by the Claimant in this case, if established, are capable of coming within those

provisions of the BIT which have been invoked (see paragraph 263 below).

(v) Analysis of Treaty Claims and the Interrelationship Between Contract and

Treaty Claims

Treaty Claims which coincide with Contract Claims: As noted above, the principal
jurisdiction objection to the Treaty Claims raised by Pakistan concerns their coincidence

with the Contract Claims.

In the decision of the ad hoc Committee in Compania de Aguas del Aconquija SA and
Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic, a number of pertinent observations were made
as to the interrelationship between treaty claims and contract claims. In particular, it

was noted that:

“A particular investment dispute may at the same time involve issues of the
interpretation and application of the BIT’s standards and questions of

contract.

"2 Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija SA and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic, Decision

of Annulment, 3 July 2002, op. cit., para. 60.

-84-

“A State may breach a treaty without breaching a contract, and vice-
so l13
versa.

“Whether there has been a breach of the BIT and whether there has been a
breach of contract are different questions. Each of these claims will be
determined by reference to its own proper or applicable law — in the case
of the BIT, by international law, in the case of the Concession Contract, by
the proper law of the contract.”!!4

257. Applying these criteria, the ad hoc Committee in the Vivendi Case, went on to state that

the Vivendi claim:

. Was not simply reducible to so many civil or administrative claims
concerning so many individual acts alleged to violate the concession
Contract or the administrative law of Argentina. It was open to Claimants
to claim, as they did, that these acts taken together, or some of them,
amounted to a breach of ... the BIT.”!5

The Committee added that:

“A Treaty cause of action is not the same as a contractual cause of action; it
requires a clear showing of conduct which is in the circumstances contrary
to the relevant treaty standards”. Thus, in choosing to commence an ICSID
arbitration, the Claimant takes “the risk of a Tribunal holding that the acts
complained of neither individually nor collectively rose to the level of a
breach of the BIT.”!"°

258. Hence, contrary to Pakistan’s approach in this case, the fact that a breach may give rise
to a contract claim does not mean that it cannot also — and separately — give rise to a
treaty claim. Even if the two perfectly coincide, they remain analytically distinct, and

necessarily require different enquiries.

259. Thus, not every breach of an investment contract can be regarded as a breach of a BIT.

In the words of the arbitral tribunal in Consortium RFCC v. Kingdom of Morocco:

'S Tbid., para. 95.
‘4 Tbid., para. 96.
'S Tbid., para. 112.
"6 Thid., para. 113.

-~85-

“Une telle violation peut certes résulter d’une violation du contrat, mais

sans qu’une éventuelle violation du contrat ne constitue, ipso jure et en

elle-méme, une violation du Traité, comme le Tribunal l’a rappelé ci-
vol

dessus.

260. In fact, the State or its emanation, may have behaved as an ordinary contracting party
having a difference of approach, in fact or in law, with the investor. In order that the
alleged breach of contract may constitute a violation of the BIT, it must be the result of
behaviour going beyond that which an ordinary contracting party could adopt.'!8 Only
the State in the exercise of its sovereign authority (“puissance publique”), and not as a
contracting party, may breach the obligations assumed under the BIT. In other words,
the investment protection treaty only provides a remedy to the investor where the
investor proves that the alleged damages were a consequence of the behaviour of the

Host State acting in breach of the obligations it had assumed under the treaty.

261. Similarly, in the case of Joy Machinery Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt,' '9 an ICSID

tribunal stated that:

“A basic general distinction can be made between commercial aspects of a
dispute and other aspects involving the existence of some forms of State
interference with the operation of the contract involved”.

The tribunal concluded in that case that:

''7 “A breach of the substantive provisions of a bilateral investment treaty can certainly result from a

breach of Contract, without a possible breach of the Contract constituting, ipso jure and by itself, a breach of the
Treaty” - Consortium RFCC v. Kingdom of Morocco, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/6, Award of 22 December 2003,
para. 48, French original available at http://www.worldbank.org/ icsid/ cases.htm.

  

 

 

"8 See e.g. the review of juri in Stephen M. Schwebel “Justice in ional Law” (Grotius /
CUP), Chapter 26 : “On Whether the Breach by a State of a Contract with an Alien is a Breach of International
Law”: “... there is more than doctrinal authority in support of the conclusion that, while mere breach by a State

of a contract with an alien (whose proper law is not international law) is not a violation of international law, a
‘non-commercial’ act of a State contrary to such a contract may be. That is to say, the breach of such a contract
by a State in ordinary commercial intercourse is not, in the predominant view, a violation of international law, but
the use of the sovereign authority of a State, contrary to the expectations of the parties, to abrogate or violate a

i i legislative or
administrative or executive authority as only a State can employ governmental authority to undo the fundamental
ion on the basis of which parties characteristically contract — performance, not non-performance — then it
engages its international responsibility.”

 

  

   

262.

263.

264.

- 86 -

. the absence of a Treaty-based claim, and the evidence that, on the
contrary, all claims are contractual, justifies the finding that the Tribunal
lacks jurisdiction. Neither has it been credibly alleged that there was
Egyptian State interference with the Company’s contract rights.”!?°

This approach to the issue of overlapping Treaty and Contract Claims — i.e. to recognise
that even if the two coincide, they remain analytically distinct - is all the more apposite
because of the different rules of attribution that govern responsibility for the
performance of BIT obligations, as opposed to responsibility for breaches of municipal
law contracts. In this respect, the Tribunal has noted in Section IV.A above that the
legal personality of WAPDA is distinct from that of the State of Pakistan, and that the
Contracts were concluded by that authority rather than the State itself. As a
consequence, the Tribunal has declined to exercise jurisdiction over the Contract Claims
presented by Impregilo. In contrast, under public international law (i.e. as will apply to
an alleged breach of treaty), a State may be held responsible for the acts of local public
authorities or public institutions under its authority. The different rules evidence the fact
that the overlap or coincidence of treaty and contract claims does not mean that the

exercise of determining each will also be the same.

Analysis of the Treaty Claims here: Having decided that the fact that some Treaty
Claims here may coincide with Contract Claims does not deprive this Tribunal of
jurisdiction, the question remains whether, applying the approach set out above,
Impregilo’s Treaty Claims fall within the scope of the BIT, assuming pro tem that they

may be sustained on the facts.

Article 2(2): Impregilo first asserts that Pakistan failed to comply with the provisions of
Article 2(2) of the BIT, which provides that it “‘shall at all times ensure fair and equitable

treatment of the investment or investors of the other Contracting Party” and protect them

"9 Joy Machinery Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/11, Decision on

Jurisdiction of 6 August 2004, an electronic text is provided by International Law in Brief at
http://www.asil.org/ilib/JoyMining_Egypt.pdf.

120 Thid., at paras. 72 and 82.

265.

266.

-87-

against “unjustified or discriminatory measures.” It is alleged that Pakistan failed to
make funds, land, equipments and drawings available over the entire duration of the
project. Pakistan persistently failed to compensate Impregilo for any reasonable delays
and disruption incurred for which Pakistan was responsible under the Contracts.
Moreover, Pakistan thwarted the operation of the mechanism to resolve disputes
contained in the Contracts. As a result of these alleged failures, it is said that Impregilo
has been forced to commit extensive - and very expensive - resources over a seven-year
period (whereas the project was intended to be completed in just over four years) 2H
More specifically, Impregilo refers to “Pakistan’s failure (through both Custom officials
and WAPDA) to facilitate importation of equipment through the port of Karachi”; to
unforeseen geological conditions; to the failure to procure the design drawings for the E
and M equipment and the equipment itself; to the breach of its obligation to transfer land
required for the power channel; and to the failure by the Pakistani military authorities

and WAPDA to ensure access to the Kamra Military base.

The Tribunal observes that Impregilo bases its Treaty Claims both on (1) the way the
Contract was implemented, and the frustration of the dispute resolution provisions, by
the Engineer and by WAPDA, and (2) the attitude and conduct of Pakistan itself.
According to Impregilo, in both cases, Article 2(2) of the BIT has been violated by

Pakistan.
In the Tribunal’s view, if it is assumed pro tem that Impregilo can establish the facts
upon which it relies, it is possible, at least in theory, that Impregilo might establish

breaches of the BIT in this regard. Whether or not this is so will depend upon:

(a) Whether Impregilo is able to establish “attribution” to Pakistan in so far as the acts

of other entities are concerned, and

(b) Whether Impregilo is able to meet the threshold for treaty claims outlined above,

i.e. activity beyond that of an ordinary contracting party (“puissance publique’).

2! Claimant's Limited Memorial on the merits, para. 148.

267.

268.

269.

270.

~ 88 -

The threshold to establish that a breach of the Contracts constitutes a breach of the
Treaty is a high one. This may be illustrated by the Tribunal’s conclusion, set out
below, that certain matters that are the subject of a current reference to the Lahore
arbitration do not so qualify — even assuming, pro tem, that Impregilo is able to establish

the facts upon which it relies.

Claims in Respect of Unforeseen Geological Conditions: Applying the approach
outlined above, the Tribunal considers that Impregilo’s claims in respect of unforeseen
geological conditions, which were the subject of DRB Recommendation 14, and which
have since been referred to the Lahore arbitration pursuant to the dispute resolution
provisions of the Contracts, are not capable of constituting “unfair or inequitable
treatment” or “unjustified or discriminatory measures” for the purposes of Article 2 of
the BIT. These are matters that concern the implementation of the Contracts, and do not
involve any issue beyond the application of a contract, and the conduct of contracting
parties. In particular, the matter does not concern any exercise of “puissance publique”

by the State.

Accordingly, these claims do not enter within the purview of Article 2(2) of the BIT, and

the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to consider them in this regard.

Other Treaty Claims under Article 2(2): With respect to the other alleged breaches of
the Contracts, in the absence of detailed factual information, the Tribunal is not
presently in a position to decide whether or not these could be considered as breaches of
Article 2(2) of the BIT. Only after a careful examination of those alleged breaches will
the Tribunal be able to determine whether the behaviour of Pakistan went beyond that
which an ordinary Contracting party could have adopted, and constituted “unfair and
inequitable treatment” or “unjustified or discriminatory measures” as contemplated in

the BIT.

271.

272.

273.

274.

275.

~ 89 -

The Tribunal therefore has no choice but to decide upon its jurisdiction with respect to
these alleged breaches when considering the merits, as contemplated by Rule 41(4) of

the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

Article 5: Impregilo also submits that the “Respondent’s conduct is tantamount to an
expropriation under Article 5(2) of the BIT.”'? In support of this submission, it invokes

decisions rendered both within ICSID and by the Iran-United States Claim Tribunal.'??

The Respondent, here again, stresses that “this is a contractual claim clothed as a claim
for breach of Treaty”. It adds that the authorities cited by Impregilo are far removed
from the facts of the present case and it also invokes a number of ICSID decisions in

es as 124
support of its position.

The Tribunal recognises that the taking of contractual rights could, potentially, constitute
an expropriation or a measure having an equivalent effect.'?° It notes that the present
case does not concern a situation of nationalisation or expropriation in the traditional
sense of those terms, but behaviour that could, at least in theory, constitute an indirect

expropriation or a measure having an effect equivalent to expropriation.

Usually, expropriation or nationalisation are effected:

par le biais d’actes législatifs ou réglementaires, qu’ils soient
individuels ou de portée générale”. 126

'22 Counter-Memorial on jurisdiction, para. 72.
'31 imited Memorial on the merits, para. 158 and following paragraphs.
4 Objections to jurisdiction, para. 4.49.

5 Norwegian shipowner’s claims (Norway v. USA), R. International Arbitral Awards 307 (1922);

Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Ltd. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, (CSID Case No. ARB/84/3, Award of
20 May 1992, 3 ICSID Reports 189, paras. 42-46; Consortium RFCC v. Kingdom of Morocco, ICSID Case No.
ARB/00/6, Award of 22 December 2003; Philips Petroleum Company v. Islamic Republic, lran-United States
Claims Tribunal, Award 425-39-2, 29 June 1989, para. 76; SEACO v. Islamic Republic of Iran, Award 531-260-
2, 25 June 1992, para. 45.

26 “through legislative acts or regulations, whether specific or general”, Consortium RFCC v. Kingdom of

Morocco, ICSID Case No. ARB/O0/6, op. cit., para. 65.

-90-

276. “Measures of an equivalent effect” could for their part consist of State intervention even
in the absence of such acts. Thus, in Ethyl Corp. v. the Government of Canada, in a
NAFTA dispute, an arbitral tribunal considered whether the announcement made by the
Canadian government stating that it would soon pass a law limiting the import of a
chemical substance of which the Claimant, a US company, had engaged in importation
and distribution, could constitute a “measure” having an effect equivalent to
expropriation. In the course of its enquiry, it concluded that for the purposes of
NAFTA, “[c]learly something other than a ‘law’, even something in the nature of a
‘practice,’ which may not even amount to a legal stricture, may qualify” as such a

“measure”. '?7

277. An ICSID tribunal has taken a similar decision in a case of a refusal without justification
of a construction permit, where such refusal deprived an investor of part or whole of its

investment.'**

278. The Tribunal observes that in those two cases, the measures in question had a unilateral
character and were taken by a State or a Province acting in the exercise of its sovereign
authority (“puissance publique”) and not as a contracting party. Indeed, all the key
decisions relating to indirect expropriation mention the “interference” of the Host State
in the normal exercise, by the investor, of its economic rights. However, a Host State
acting as a contracting party does not “interfere” with a contract; it “performs” it. If it
performs the contract badly, this will not result in a breach of the provisions of the
Treaty relating to expropriation or nationalisation, unless it be proved that the State or its
emanation has gone beyond its role as a mere party to the contract, and has exercised the

specific functions of a sovereign authority. 129

"27 Arbitration NAFTA/UNCITRAL, Ethyl Corp. v. The Government of Canada, Award on Jurisdiction,
24 June 1998, 38 ILM 708 (1999), para. 66.

"8 Yetalclad Corporation v. Mexico, ICSID Case No. ARB (AF) 97/1.

° Consortium RFCC y. Kingdom of Morocco, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/6, Award of 22 December 2003,
para. 65, op. cit.

279.

280.

281.

282.

-91-

Moreover, the effect of the measures taken must be of such importance that those

measures can be considered as having an effect equivalent to expropriation. '*°

In the present case, Impregilo complains that Pakistan’s conduct throughout the duration
of the Project constituted an effective expropriation of its investment, including its rights
under the Contracts. It alleges that the actions of Pakistan and WAPDA frustrated its
ability to carry out and complete the work in a timely fashion, thereby preventing the
realisation of the benefit of the investment. Further, it alleges that WAPDA and
Pakistan frustrated the contractual dispute resolution mechanism and Impregilo’s right to
an impartial hearing and settlement of its claims, thereby again preventing the realisation
of the value of the investment. According to Impregilo, Article 5 of the BIT has

therefore been violated by Pakistan.

Following the analysis above, it is the Tribunal’s view that only measures taken by
Pakistan in the exercise of its sovereign power (‘puissance publique”), and not decisions
taken in the implementation or performance of the Contracts, may be considered as
measures having an effect equivalent to expropriation. Therefore, the Tribunal has
jurisdiction only to consider the former, and not the latter, for the purposes of Article 5

of the BIT.

Claims in Respect of Unforeseen Geological Conditions: As to Impregilo’s claims in
respect of unforeseen geological conditions, which were the subject of DRB
Recommendation 14, and which have since been referred to the Lahore arbitration, the
Tribunal is of the same view for the purposes of Article 5 of the BIT as set out above in
the context of Article 2(2) of the BIT. Even assuming, pro tem, that Impregilo will be
able to establish the facts upon which it relies, such claims are not capable of

constituting a breach of Article 5 of the BIT.

'8° Compaitia del desarrolo de Santa Ana SA (CDSE) v. Republic of Costa Rica, ICSID Case No.

ARB/96/1, Award of 17 February 2000, 5 ICSID Reports 157 ; Starrett Housing v. Islamic Republic of Iran,
Iran/USA Claims Tribunal 4 Iran US CTR 122; Consortium RFCC v. Kingdom of Morocco, \CSID Case
No. ARB/00/6, op. cit., paras. 67 - 68.

283.

284.

285.

286.

287.

288.

289.

-92-

Accordingly, these claims do not enter within the purview of Article 5 of the BIT, and

the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to consider them in this regard.

Other Treaty Claims under Article 5: With respect to the other alleged breaches of the
Contracts, in the absence of detailed factual information, the Tribunal is again not
presently in a position to decide whether or not these could be considered as breaches of
Article 5 of the BIT. As stated above, only after a careful examination of those alleged
breaches will the Tribunal be able to determine whether the behaviour of Pakistan went

beyond that which an ordinary Contracting party could have adopted.

The Tribunal therefore has no choice, once again, but to decide upon its jurisdiction with
respect to these alleged breaches when considering the merits, as contemplated by

Rule 41(4) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

(vi) The Effect of the Contractual Dispute Resolution Clauses

The above approach to treaty claims and contract claims has the consequence that a
treaty claim may be the subject of consideration alongside — and in a different forum
from — the consideration of an overlapping contract claim. This gives rise to an issue
that has been the subject of much debate, and much argument in this case: how might the

integrity of the contractual dispute resolution clauses be protected?

In the Tribunal’s view, this issue, of itself, does not deprive this Tribunal of jurisdiction

over the Treaty Claims, where such jurisdiction otherwise exists.

A variety of approaches have been taken by other ICSID tribunals, and were advanced
by Pakistan here, including the use of the doctrine of “admissibility” and the ordering of

a stay as in SGS v. Philippines.

The Tribunal considers that, whilst arguably justified in some situations, a stay of

proceedings would be inappropriate here, for a number of reasons. Firstly, such a stay,

290.

291.

-93-

if anything, would confuse the essential distinction between the Treaty Claims and the
Contract Claims as set out above. Since the two enquiries are fundamentally different
(albeit with some overlap), it is not obvious that the contractual dispute resolution
mechanisms in a case of this sort will be undermined in any substantial sense by the
determination of separate and distinct Treaty Claims. Indeed, this is all the more so in a
case such as the present, where (unlike SGS v. Philippines) the parties to these
proceedings (Impregilo and Pakistan) are different from the parties to the contract

arbitration proceedings (GBC and WAPDA).

Further, if a stay was ordered, as Pakistan has sought, it is unclear for how long this
should be maintained; what precise events might trigger its cessation; and what attitude
this Tribunal ought then to take on a resumed hearing to any proceedings or findings that

may have occurred in the interim in Lahore.

Conclusions on Objections Ratione Materiae

It follows that:

(a) This Tribunal has no jurisdiction ratione materiae over Impregilo’s Contract

Claims;

(b) The alleged breaches of the Contracts may constitute breaches of Articles 2(2) and

5 of the BIT if they meet the criteria defined in the present section; but

(c) This Tribunal has no jurisdiction ratione materiae to entertain the claims relating
to the unforeseen geological conditions encountered during the implementation of

the Contracts, which were the subject of DRB Recommendation 14; and

(d) With respect to the other Treaty Claims, including the Treaty Claims relating to
the frustration of the dispute resolution mechanism, the Tribunal will determine its

jurisdiction when considering the merits.

*

292.

293.

294.

295.

-94-

VI. JURISDICTION RATIONE TEMPORIS

Pakistan’s Objections

The BIT entered into force on 22 June 2001. Pakistan recalls the basic rule of non-
retroactivity of treaties incorporated into Article 28 of the 1969 Vienna Convention, and

contends that the BIT:

“... can have no application in respect of conduct relied upon by Impregilo
taking place before 22 June 2001, and similarly that the Tribunal can have
no jurisdiction in respect of alleged breaches concerning acts and omissions
occurring prior to that date.”"3!

According to Pakistan:

“Impregilo has sought to avoid the basic rule on non-retroactivity of
treaties by (I) failing to plead the specific dates of alleged breaches and (II)
asserting that the breaches it alleges are continuing in character.”

On the first point, the Tribunal is invited to infer that, save where Impregilo complains
of acts that are expressly alleged to have occurred subsequent to 22 June 2001, all other

specific acts complained of by Impregilo took place before that date.

On the second point, Pakistan stresses that “to be truly continuing in character the breach
must be (I) continuing and (II) uninterrupted” - which it states is not the case.
Moreover, “even where it is established that a breach is of a continuing character... a
Treaty breach can only be found from the date from which the State is bound by the
obligation in question and the jurisdiction of the Tribunal concerned is limited
accordingly”. Thus, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction save with respect to specific acts
that are expressly alleged by Impregilo to have occurred subsequent to the entry into

force of the BIT.

'5! Objections to jurisdiction, para. 6.3.

'? Objections to jurisdiction, para. 6.5.

296.

297.

298.

299.

-95-

In the alternative, Pakistan seeks:

“... a declaration in general terms ... that the provisions of [this] Treaty do
not bind Pakistan in relation to any act or fact which took place or any
situation which ceased to exist before 22 June 2001, and the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction is limited accordingly.”!*

Impregilo’s Case

Impregilo contends that all of its claims directly arise out of the same subject matter, and
therefore constitute a single continuing dispute. It submits that this dispute:

“deals with a systematic and continuous pattern of conduct that has resulted
subsequent to the BIT’s entry into force, in the current and continuing
breach of the BIT.”

The Tribunal has jurisdiction over such a dispute. Moreover, according to Impregilo,
the application of the BIT to the dispute is consistent with the principle of non-

retroactivity of treaties. 4

Relevant Principles

The Terms of the BIT: The BIT, which entered into force on 22 June 2001, applies to:
“... any dispute arising between a contracting Party and the investors of the
other” (Article 9, para. 1, English version)
or to
“... le controversie che dovessero insorgere tra una delle Parti contra enti et

gli investitori dell’altra parte contraente” (Article 9, para. 1, Italian
version).

'3 Objections to jurisdiction, para. 6.17.

'4 Counter-Memorial, paras. 180 to 198.

300.

301.

302.

303.

304.

-96-

Such language — and the absence of specific provision for retroactivity — infers that
disputes that may have arisen before the entry into force of the BIT are not covered (i.e.

disputes arising before 22 June 2001).

Jurisprudence: There is an abundant jurisprudence on the definition of “disputes” in

international law, and on the date on which such disputes are considered to arise.

The Permanent Court of International Justice and the ICJ have taken a position on these

questions on numerous occasions. They have defined a dispute as:

. a disagreement on a point of law or fact, a conflict of legal views or
interests between the Parties.”!*

In order to establish the existence of a dispute, “It must be shown that the Claim of one

99136

party is positively opposed by the other. Further, “Whether there exists an

international dispute is a matter for objective determination.” !*”

ICSID arbitral tribunals have also considered the matter on a number of occasions.'**

As was observed, for example, in Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain:

“... there tends to be a natural sequence of events that leads to a dispute. It
begins with the expression of a disagreement and the statement of a
difference of views. In time, those events acquire a precise legal meaning
through the formulation of legal claims, their discussion and eventual
rejection or lack of response by the other party. The conflict of legal views
and interests will only be present in the latter stage, even through the

185 See Mavrommatis Palestine Concessions, Judgment No. 2, 1924, P.C.J.L. Series A, No. 2, p.11;

Northern Cameroons, Judgment, 1.C.J. Reports 1963, p.27; and Applicability of the Obligation to Arbitrate
under Section 21 of the United Nations Headquarters Agreement of 26 June 1947, Advisory Opinion,
LC.J. Reports 1988, p. 27, para. 35.

86 South West Africa, Preliminary Objections, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1962, p. 328.

87 Interpretation of Peace Treaties with Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania, First Phase, Advisory Opinion,

LC.J. Reports 1950, p.74)” (Case concerning East Timor (Portugal v. Australia), Judgment, 30 June 1995,
LC.J. Reports 1995, p. 99, para. 22.

138 See e.g. AGIP. Congo, ICSID Case No. ARB/77/1, Award of 30 November 1979, 1 ICSID Reports

306; AALP vy. Sri Lanka, 1CSID Case No. ARB/87/3, Award of 27 June 1990, 4 ICSID Reports 25.

305.

an

306.

307.

-97-

underlying facts predate them ... this sequence of event has to be taken into
account in establishing the critical date.”'®”

Analysis of the Disputes

Contract Claims: In the present case, Impregilo pursues a number of Contract Claims
that were initially advanced between 1997 and 2003 (see Annexes 15 and 18 to the
Limited Memorial). However, as stated in Section III above, the Tribunal has no
jurisdiction ratione personae to consider these claims, and therefore the issue of

jurisdiction ratione temporis need not be addressed.

Treaty Claims: As for Impregilo’s Treaty Claims, the Tribunal notes that in a letter
dated 27 July 2001 to the Secretary of the Ministry of Water and Power, Impregilo
requested an “intervention” by Pakistan:

. in order to seat and agree on an amicable settlement of the disputes
that, in the light of WAPDA’s inactions and omissions, have been seriously
aggravated during the most recent period of time.” 140

In the months that followed, negotiations between GBC and WAPDA took place without
success. Then, on 28 January 2002, Impregilo filed a Request for Arbitration against
Pakistan before ICSID. After the registration of that Request, Impregilo and WAPDA
engaged in discussions in an effort to settle the dispute. As a result of those discussions,
and with the assistance of the Pakistani authorities, a supplementary Arrangement to the
Contract was signed on 14 April 2002 and Impregilo withdrew this First Request.
However, this attempt ultimately did not succeed, and on 17 January 2003, Impregilo

filed the Request presently under consideration.

8° Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, 1CSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Decision on Jurisdiction of

25 January 2000, para. 96, 5 ICSID Reports 396.

'49 Annex 6 to the Request.

308.

30!

310.

311.

312.

«

9.

o

N

- 98 -

At first sight, therefore, it appears that Impregilo presented its Treaty Claims to Pakistan
after 22 June 2001, such that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to consider the corresponding

dispute.

However, in the Tribunal’s view, care must be taken to distinguish between (1) the
jurisdiction ratione temporis of an ICSID tribunal and (2) the applicability ratione

temporis of the substantive obligations contained in a BIT.

In this respect, it is to be noted that Article 1(1) of the BIT does not give the substantive
provisions of the Treaty any retrospective effect. Thus, the normal principle stated in
Article 28 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties applies, and the provisions

of the BIT:

“... do not bind the Party in relation to any act of facts which took place or

any situation which ceased to exist before the date of entry into force of the

Treaty.”
Impregilo complains of a number of acts for which Pakistan is said to be responsible.
The legality of such acts must be determined, in each case, according to the law
applicable at the time of their performance. The BIT entered into force on 22 June 2001.

Accordingly, only the acts effected after that date had to conform to its provisions.

Article 14 of the Articles of the ILC on State Responsibility: | However, Impregilo
contends otherwise, by reference to Article 14 of the Articles of the International Law
Commission on State Responsibility (“Extension in time of the breach of an
international obligation”), which, in its opinion, reflects customary international law.
Whether or not this Article does in fact reflect customary international law need not be
addressed for present purposes. It suffices to observe that, in the Tribunal’s view, the
present case is not covered by Article 14. Acts attributed to Pakistan and perpetrated

before 22 June 2001 could without any doubt have consequences after that date.

4! See Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines, 1CSID Case No. ARB/02/6,

Decision on Jurisdiction of 29 January 2004, op. cit., paras. 165 and 166; see also Mondev International Ltd. V.
United States of America, 1CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2, 6 ICSID Reports 192, p. 208-9, paras. 68-70.

313.

314.

315.

- 99 -

However, the acts in question had no “continuing character” within the meaning of
Article 14; they occurred at a certain moment and their legality must be determined at

that moment, and not by reference to a Treaty which entered into force at a later date.

In this respect, the present case is completely different from that described in the SGS v.
Philippines award, which was relied upon by Impregilo. In that case, the Respondent
recognised its obligation to pay sums due under a contract, and disputed only the
quantum of the indemnity. In contrast, the current dispute is to be compared with cases
of expropriation as mentioned by the Rapporteur of the draft Articles in the International
Law Commission (see Report, Article 14, para. 6), in which the effects may be
prolonged, whereas the act itself occurred at a specific point in time, and must be

assessed by reference to the law applicable at that time:

“The prolongation of such effects will be relevant, for example, in
determining the amount of compensation payable. They do not, however,
entail that the breach itself is a continuing one.” 2

Conclusions on Objections Ratione Temporis

It follows that the provisions of the BIT do not bind Pakistan in relation to any act that
took place, or any situation that ceased to exist, before 22 June 2001 and the jurisdiction

of the Tribunal ratione temporis is limited accordingly.

Having articulated the relevant principles, the Tribunal is unable at this stage to make
any final determinations as to which (if any) of Impregilo’s Treaty Claims are thereby
excluded. This will have to await a full analysis of each of the claims, at the merits

stage of these proceedings.

' Crawford, Commentary on The International Law Commission's Articles on State Responsibility,

(CUP, 2002), Art 14, para 6.

- 100 -

VII. THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION

316. For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal unanimously decides:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

That it has jurisdiction ratione personae over Impregilo’s claims only in so far as
such claims concern Impregilo’s own alleged loss, being (at most) proportionate to

its pro rata participation in the Joint Venture.

That it has no jurisdiction ratione materiae over Impregilo’s claims based on the

alleged breaches of the Contracts.

That alleged breaches of the Contracts may however constitute breaches of
Articles 2(2) and/or 5 of the BIT if they meet the criteria defined in Section

V.B (v) above.

That it has no jurisdiction ratione materiae to entertain the claims relating to the
unforeseen geological conditions encountered during the implementation of the

Contracts, which were the subject of DRB Recommendation 14.

That with respect to the other Treaty Claims, including the Treaty Claims relating
to the frustration of the dispute resolution mechanism, the Tribunal will determine

its jurisdiction when considering the merits.

(f)

(g)

(h)

- 101 -

That the provisions of the BIT do not bind Pakistan in relation to any act that took
place, or any situation that ceased to exist, before 22 June 2001 and the jurisdiction

of the Tribunal ratione temporis is limited accordingly.

To make the necessary Order for the continuation of the procedure pursuant to

Arbitration Rule 41(4).

To reserve all questions concerning the costs and expenses of the Tribunal and the

costs of the Parties for subsequent determination.

Date: April 22, 2005

signed signed

 

Mr. Bernardo M. Cremades Mr. Toby T. Landau

signed

Judge Gilbert Guillaume

