English Translation of Award Rendered in Spanish

 

International Centre for Settl of I Disp

Washington, D.C.

AWARD

In the proceedings between

Inceysa Vallisoletana, S.L.

(Claimant)

v.

Republic of El Salvador

(Respondent)

ICSID Case No. ARB/03/26

Members of the Tribunal:

Rodrigo Oreamuno Blanco, President

Burton A. Landy, Arbitrator

Claus von Wobeser, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Claudia Frutos-Peterson

Representing the Claimant

Alfonso Lépez-Ibor Alifio,
Juan Concheiro Linares and
Monica Baselga Loring

Law Firm

Ventura Garcés & Lépez-Ibor
Madrid, Spain

Representing the Respondent

Whitney Debevoise, David Orta, Jean
Kalicki and Eduardo Guzman

Law Firm of Amold & Porter,
Washington, D.C.,

Belisario Artiga Artiga, Attorney
General of the Republic of El Salvador

Date: August 2, 2006

INDEX

I. PROCEDURE

Il. MAIN FACTS

III. POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES...

IV. CONSIDERATIONS OF THE ARBITRAL "TRIBUNAL IN CONNECTION

WITH THE POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES... ore
A. Financial Statements submitted by Inceysa with its tender ir in 1 the Bidding .
B. Existence of the supposed “strategic partner” of Inceysa......
C. Career and experience of Mr. Antonio Felipe Martinez Lavado
D. Connection between Inceysa and ICASUR... we
E. Falsity of the contracts supposedly signed by Inceysa with ‘the Municipality of Silay,
in the Philippines, and with the Municipality of Coclé (Amuco), in Panama. 39

V. PROVISIONAL MEASURES ......sssseeseees

VI. JURISDICTION OF ICSID AND. ‘COMPETENCE OF THE. ‘ARBITRAL

 

-
Noe

   
  

 

 

 

 

TRIBUNAL 40

A. Analysis of the Jurisdiction of the Centre under the ICSID Convention, the BIT

and the Law of El Salvad 40
i. Positions of the Parties 41

 

a) Position of Inceysa
b) Position of El Salvador
ii. Identification of the d issue
iii. Power of the Arbitral Tribunal to rule on its own competence
iv. General considerations of the Arbitral Tribunal about consent.
v. Guidelines to determine the scope of consent
a) Absence of p
b) Identification of the will of the Contracting States........cccsssesesseresseseeseeseeseeee
¢) Principle of good faith
vi. Types of limitations to consent
vii. The characteristics and scope of the consent given by Spain and El Salvador in
the BIT
viii. Analysis of Inceysa’s investment in light of the scope of the consent given by
Spain and El Salvador in the BIT
a) Violation of the principle of good faith.
b) Violation of the principle nemo auditur propiam turpitudinem allegans.
¢) Violation of international public policy.......ssessesseeseeee
d) Violation of the principle that prohibits unlawful enrichment
ix. Analysis of Inceysa’s investment in light of the Investment Law of El Salvador

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  
 

 

B. Analysis of the competence of the Arbitral Tribunal according to the Service
Contract d between El Salvador and Inceysa
i. Position of the Parties

a) Position of Inceysa
b) Position of El Salvador
ii) Additional arguments of the parties concerning the jurisdiction of the Centre.......
iii) Considerations of the Arbitral Tribunal about the jurisdiction of the Cent
a) Interpretation of the contract ..

   
   

 

 

b) Public Contracting and Acquisitions Law 95

 

 

 

 

 

c) Mediation, Conciliation and Arbitration Law.......csssssesssserscensseenssesesseseeseses 96
d) li Law 100
e) The BIT. 101
VI. COSTS 102
VII. DECISION 103

 

The Tribunal, with the composition indicated above, after considering the written and oral

submissions of the parties and deliberating, decides:

I. PROCEDURE

1. On July 21, 2003, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(“ICSID” or the “Centre”) received from Inceysa Vallisoletana, $.L. (“Inceysa” or the
“Claimant”), a company incorporated under the laws of the Kingdom of Spain, a request
for arbitration against the Republic of El Salvador (“El Salvador” or the “Respondent”).

2. On the same date, the Centre acknowledged receipt of the request and transmitted a
copy thereof to the Republic of El Salvador and to the Embassy of El Salvador in
Washington, D.C., pursuant to Rule 5 of the Rules of Procedure for the Institution of
Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings of ICSID (“Institution Rules”).

3. The dispute refers to a service contract for installation, management and operation of
mechanical inspection stations for vehicles and emission control of contaminating gases,
particles and noise, executed under the national and international public bid 05/2000
organized by the Ministry of the Environment and Natural Resources (hereinafter MARN)
of the Republic of El Salvador. The Claimant alleges contractual breach and
expropriation on the part of El Salvador. The Respondent alleges that Inceysa acted
fraudulently and therefore it cannot claim the protection of the Agreement for the
Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments signed between the Republic of El
Salvador and the Kingdom of Spain (hereinafter, without distinction, the Agreement, the
Treaty or BIT).

4. According to Article 36(3) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States

(“ICSID Convention”), on October 10, 2003, and pursuant to Rule 7 of the Institution
Rules, the Interim Secretary-General of the Centre registered the request and, on the same
date, notified the parties of the registration and invited them to proceed to constitute the
Arbitral Tribunal.

5. The parties did not reach an agreement concerning the method for the appointment of
the Arbitral Tribunal, so that, on December 10, 2003, the Claimant requested the
constitution of the Tribunal pursuant to Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. On
December 12, 2003, the Centre indicated that the Arbitral Tribunal would be constituted
according to the Article cited, i.e., by three arbitrators, one arbitrator appointed by each
party and the third, who shall be the President of the Tribunal, appointed by agreement of
the parties.

6. On December 27, 2003, the Claimant appointed as arbitrator Mr. Burton A. Landy, a
USS. national; on January 5, 2004, the Respondent appointed as arbitrator Mr. Claus von
Wobeser, a Mexican national. The parties did not reach an agreement concerning the
nomination of the third arbitrator. On January 15, 2005, the Claimant requested that the
third arbitrator be designated by the Chairman of the Administrative Council of ICSID,
pursuant to Article 38 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 4 of the Rules of Procedure for
Arbitration Proceedings of the Centre (“Arbitration Rules”).

7. After consulting the parties, on March 23, 2004, the Centre appointed Mr. Rodrigo
Oreamuno Blanco, a Costa Rican national, as third arbitrator and President of the
Tribunal. Pursuant to Rule 6(1) of the Arbitration Rules, on the same day, the Interim
Secretary-General notified the parties that the three arbitrators had accepted their
appointments and that the Tribunal was, therefore, deemed to have been constituted, and
the proceedings to have been initiated on that date. Under Rule 25 of the ICSID
Administrative and Financial Regulations, the parties were informed that Mrs. Claudia

Frutos-Peterson, a legal advisor of ICSID, would serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

8. The Tribunal held its first session in Washington, D.C., on May 21, 2004. Messrs.
David Miilchi Panico and Alessandro Liotta, from the law firm of David Miilchi &
Asociados, from Madrid, Spain, represented the Claimant. Messrs. Whitney Debevoise,
David Orta, Luis Parada and Eduardo Guzman, from the law firm of Arnold & Porter,
from Washington, D.C., as well as Messrs. Belisario Artiga Artiga, Attorney General of
the Republic of El Salvador, and Walter Jokisch, Minister of the Environment and
Natural Resources of said Republic, represented the Respondent.

9. During the first session, the parties expressed their agreement that the Tribunal had
been properly constituted in accordance with the ICSID Convention and the Arbitration
Rules and indicated that they had no objection to the members of the Tribunal.
Furthermore, it was agreed that the proceeding would be conducted according to the
Arbitration Rules in force since January 1, 2003.

10. In the first session, the parties also agreed on various procedural matters reflected in
the written minutes signed by the President and Secretary of the Tribunal. Concerning the
schedule of written submissions, the Tribunal, after consulting the parties, decided that
the Claimant would file its memorial on the merits within 90 days from the date of the
first session and that the Respondent also would file its counter-memorial on the merits
within 90 days from receipt of Claimant’s memorial. Afterwards, both the Claimant and
the Respondent would have a period of 45 days in which to file their respective reply
and rejoinder.

11. On June 8, 2004, the Claimant submitted a document and requested that it, along
with its Request for Arbitration, be considered as a Memorial on the Merits.

12. On September 15, 2004, the Respondent submitted a Memorial on Objections to the
Jurisdiction of the Centre and the Competence of the Tribunal and, on the same

date, it submitted another memorial asking the Tribunal to issue an order pursuant to Rule
28(1) of the Arbitration Rules and requesting provisional measures in connection with the

fees and expenses of the proceeding.

13. Given the objections to jurisdiction submitted by the Respondent, on September 21,
2004, the Tribunal, in accordance with Rule 41(3) of the Arbitration Rules, declared the
proceeding on the merits suspended. It also invited the Claimant to submit its
observations on the request for provisional measures made by the Respondent
conceming the fees and expenses of the proceeding, according to Rule 39(4) of the
Arbitration Rules. Subsequently, the Tribunal invited the parties to exchange a second

round of observations; they did so on the dates indicated by the Tribunal.

14. On September 23, 2004, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order number 1, and fixed
the schedule for written submissions of the parties on the subject of jurisdiction.
According to the schedule, on November 4, 2004, the Claimant submitted its Counter-
Memorial on Jurisdiction; on November 29, 2004, the Respondent submitted its Reply
on Jurisdiction and, on December 22, 2004, the Claimant submitted its Rejoinder on
Jurisdiction.

15. On December 9, 2004, the Tribunal scheduled a date for a hearing, in which the
parties would be heard with respect to the request of the Respondent concerning
provisional measures and the objections to jurisdiction. Afterwards, the parties exchanged
several communications on various matters related to arrangements for the hearing.
Consequently, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order number 2, dated January 19, 2005,
resolving that the hearing would be held from February 1 to 4, 2005, in Washington, D.C.

16. On January 27, 2005, counsel for the Claimant informed the Tribunal that, given
certain circumstances that had arisen, they were compelled to resign their representation.
Consequently, the Tribunal declared the hearing suspended. On

January 28, 2005, the Respondent asked the Tribunal, among other things, to schedule a
new date for the hearing as soon as possible and, in any case, at the latest within the next
60 days, and to order the Claimant to pay the expenses incurred by the Respondent as a

consequence of the cancellation of the hearing.

17. On February 17, 2005, the Claimant appointed Messrs. Alfonso Lépez-Ibor Alifio
and Juan Concheiro Linares from the law firm of Ventura Garcés & Lépez-Ibor

Abogados, from Madrid, Spain, as its legal counsel.

18. On March 1, 2005, the Tribunal notified the parties of Procedural Order number 3

concerning procedural arrangements for the hearing.

19. The Tribunal, after consulting the parties, decided to schedule the hearing on
jurisdiction and provisional measures concerning the fees and expenses of the
proceedings from April 25 to 28, 2005; subsequently, with the consent of the parties, the
hearing was postponed to May 2 to 5, 2005, due to the lack of space availability in the
facilities of the headquarters of the Centre of the World Bank in Washington, D.C., on the
dates initially indicated.

20. On March 9, 2005, the Tribunal resolved other procedural issues raised by the parties
in connection with the organization of the hearing. Furthermore, the Tribunal decided that
the request of the Respondent to order the Claimant to pay the expenses of the
Respondent, as a consequence of the cancellation of the hearing in February 2005, would
be decided by the Tribunal subsequently.

21. The hearing was held on the date and at the place indicated above. The Claimant was
represented by Messrs. Alfonso Lopez-Ibor Alifio and Juan Concheiro Linares and by
Mrs. Monica Baselga Loring from the law firm of Ventura Garcés & Lépez-Ibor
Abogados, from Madrid, Spain. The Respondent was represented, among others, by

Messrs.

Whitney Debevoise, David Orta and Eduardo Guzmén, and by Mrs. Jean Kalicki, from
the law firm of Amold & Porter, from Washington, D.C., as well as by Mr. Belisario
Artiga Artiga, Attorney General of the Republic of El Salvador, and by Mrs. Michelle
Gallardo de Gutiérrez, Vice Minister of Environment and Natural Resources of said
Republic. During the hearing, the parties examined several factual and expert witnesses,
whose statements and opinions had been enclosed by the parties in their written
submissions. Pursuant to Rules 32(3) and 35(1) of the Arbitration Rules of the Centre, the
Tribunal formulated questions to the parties and to the factual and expert witnesses
presented by them.

II. MAIN FACTS

22.In 1999, MARN organized a public bid for contracting mechanical inspection
services for vehicles in El Salvador. The participants were: Ingenieria, Construccién y
Arquitectura del Sur S.A. (ICASUR), Supervision y Control S.A., Capitales Murillos
S.A. de C.V. and Sertracen y Servipinturas S.A. de C.V. On April.5, 2000, MARN
declared the bid cancelled (Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, page 8). In this bid,
ICASUR was represented by Mr. Joaquin Alviz.

23. In June 2000, MARN once again organized a bidding process denominated
“NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC BID FOR CONTRACTING
SERVICES FOR THE INSTALLATION, MANAGEMENT AND OPERATION OF
MECHANICAL INSPECTION PLANTS FOR VEHICLES, INCLUDING EMISSION
CONTROL OF CONTAMINATING GASES, PARTICLES AND NOISE (MARN BID
No. 05/2000),” hereinafter the bid.

24, The participants in the bid were: Supervisién y Control S.A., Inceysa Vallisoletana
S.L., Ingenieria, Construccién y Arquitectura del Sur (ICASUR), Mustang de El Salvador
S.A. de C.V, Talsud S.A. and Servicios de Transito Centroamericanos S.A. de C.V.
(Request for Arbitration, pages 4 and 5, paragraphs 7 and 9).

25. The evaluation committee evaluated the offers and qualified the participants with the
following score: ICASUR: 86.8, Supervisi6n y Control: 78.3 and Inceysa: 85.5
(Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, page 15).

26. The factors evaluated were the following: a. financial position; b. financial capacity;
c. experience in managing vehicle inspection stations; d. experience with machinery and
construction of vehicle inspection stations; e. experience of the personnel; f. legal
documentation; g. work plan, methodology and performance of the services; h.
equipment and infrastructure, main machinery; i. additional equipment and work plan; j.

customer service plans (Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, page 15).

27. On October 24, 2000, the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources awarded
first place in the bid to Inceysa Vallisoletana S.L. and second place to Ingenieria,
Construccion y Arquitectura del Sur, S.A. (ICASUR) (Request for Arbitration, page 7,
paragraph 11).

28. One of the participants was excluded from the bid without having its tender opened,
Mustang del Salvador S.A., which later challenged two MARN resolutions; the first
referred to the return of the file of the company and the second to the bid award (Request
for Arbitration, page 8, paragraph 12). On May 28, 2002, the Administrative Litigation
Chamber of the Supreme Court of Justice of El Salvador decided these claims and
declared both resolutions valid (page 9, paragraph 14).

29. Subsequently, participant Supervision y Control S.A. challenged the MARN
resolution that awarded the bid, and the aforementioned Administrative Litigation
Chamber decided that said resolution was valid (Request for Arbitration, pages 10 and
11, paragraphs 16 and 17).

30. The negotiations prior to the execution of the contract between the two winning
bidders and MARN took place during the month of November 2000, and, then, MARN
signed an independent contract with each of them.

31. The contract between Inceysa and MARN (hereinafter the Contract) was signed on
November 17, 2000. On November 27 of the same year, Inceysa submitted the
performance guarantee provided for in the Contract (Request for Arbitration, pages 12
and 13, paragraphs 18 and 20).

32. On December 27, 2000, Inceysa acquired land at San Julian Hacienda San Jorge,
Municipality of Acajutla, Jurisdiction of Sonsonate; on February 7, 2001, it bought
another property in the Jurisdiction of San Juan Opico; on February 14, 2001, it acquired
land in the Cutumay Camones Canton, Jurisdiction and Department of Santa Ana and
another in the Jurisdiction of Tonacatepeque, Department of San Salvador (Request for
Arbitration, page 17, paragraphs 27, 28 and 29).

33. After several problems arose between the parties, on November 5, 2001, Inceysa sent
a letter to the Minister of MARN, in which it referred to the Agreement for the
Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments signed between the Kingdom of
Spain and El Salvador. On the 22" of that month, Inceysa and ICASUR jointly filed a
complaint before MARN in order to ascertain whether or not the project was going to
continue (Request for Arbitration, page 43, paragraph 91). On this same day, Inceysa
sent a letter to the President of the Republic of El Salvador requesting his intervention for
the continuation of the project, and otherwise requesting compensation for both
companies under the BIT (page 44, paragraph 92).

34. In July and August 2002, Inceysa complained to MARN about the violation of the
Contract caused by the fact that MARN hired other companies to provide the services
Inceysa had been hired to provide, thus denying the exclusivity given to it under the
Contract (Request for Arbitration, page 39, paragraph 85).

35. On July 29, 2002, MARN responded telling Inceysa that it would wait for the
decision of the Administrative Litigation Chamber in the case filed by Supervisién y
Control $.A. before deciding Inceysa’s claim (Request for Arbitration, page 51,
paragraph 98).

36. On October 29, 2002, Inceysa sent a letter to the President of the Republic, in which
it argued noncompliance with the Contract and violation of the BIT on the part of the
Government and requested compensation of US $50,845,251.34 (Request for Arbitration,
page 49, paragraph 96).

III. POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES
A. Position of Inceysa

i. Noncompliance of El Salvador and Expropriation

37. In its Request for Arbitration, Inceysa argues that the noncompliance of El Salvador
is equivalent to an unjustified unilateral termination of the Contract and an indirect
expropriation of the rights granted to it under the contract (Request for Arbitration, page
78, paragraph 168).

38. The Claimant indicates that it has the right to claim damages derived from the
unjustified unilateral termination of the Contract, and bases its claim on the Investment

Law (Request for Arbitration, page 83, paragraph 180).

39. Inceysa alleges the following noncompliance on the part of El Salvador in relation to
the Contract:
Failure to send the initiation order.
b. Failure to provide access to a database belonging to the Respondent.
c. El Salvador’s failure to issue the decrees and legal instruments necessary to
make the collection and payment system effective.
d. Failure to issue and prepare the legal instruments necessary to establish the
compulsory and exclusive nature of the service (Request for Arbitration, page 85,
paragraph 186).

40. The Claimant affirms that the Respondent awarded the services established in the
Contract to companies that had been excluded from the bidding process and had not
complied with legal procedures to prove their competence, and alleges therefore
“discriminatory, unjust and (sic) biased treatment that constitutes a clear violation of

national and international law and (sic) noncompliance with (sic) the BIT itself."

41. Inceysa indicates that the intervention of the National Assembly of El Salvador by
means of an investigation of the bidding process is a “manifest violation of separation of
powers [...] with the sole purpose of damaging the investment of Claimant and represents

a serious breach of international law and a serious violation of the BIT.””

42. Inceysa also maintains that the contractual noncompliance of El Salvador deprives
Inceysa’s rights under the Contract of all economic content, giving rise to expropriation
as described in the BIT (Request for Arbitration, page 91, paragraph 196).

ii. Termination of the contract

43. In its second document submitted on June 8, 2004, Inceysa declares that, after it filed
its Request for Arbitration, El Salvador filed an ordinary civil lawsuit before the fourth
Civil Court of the City of San Salvador, asking for a declaration of termination of the
Contract, and it contends that this lawsuit is “a persecution strategy that continues to
exist and that has been the only reason of this dispute” (paragraph 12).

iii. Request

44, Inceysa requests in its petition that El Salvador be ordered to pay:

' Request for Arbitration, page 89, paragraph 193.
? Request for Arbitration, page 89, paragraph 194,
13

“C.IL.1 An indemnity for damages, as agreed by the parties in the amount of
US$107,532,329, corresponding to 940,907,878.75 colones, plus annual interest
at the rate of 8.7% from November 10, 2002;

C.IL2 An indemnity for damages for the expropriation of the assets covered by
the investment in the amount of US$15,000,000, corresponding to (sic), plus
interest of 131,250,000 colones, plus interest at the rate of 8.7% from April 29,
2003;

C.IL3, The amount corresponding to the costs of arbitration including counsel
fees.”

B. Position of El Salvador

i. Protection of investments under BIT

45, El Salvador, in its Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction submitted on September
15, declared the following:

“{...] the Investment Treaty by its terms and intent extends protection only to
investments made in El Salvador in accordance with its laws. El Salvador never
consented to treaty protection of investments, such as those based on contracts to
provide services for the State, that were procured by fraud, forgery and
corruption” (page 2).

(L...] segun la intencién y las disposiciones del Tratado de Inversién, este protege
unicamente las inversiones hechas en El Salvador de acuerdo con sus leyes. El
Salvador nunca consintié a que el tratado protegiera inversiones tales como las
basadas en contratos para proveer servicios al Estado, que hubieran sido obtenidas
mediante fraude, falsificacién y corrupcién). (Free Translation by the Tribunal).

46. The Respondent affirms that the BIT protects only legitimate investments (Memorial
on Objections to Jurisdiction, page 2).

47. El Salvador indicates that in the travaux preparatoires of the Treaty signed between
Spain and El Salvador, the former has maintained that the necessary condition for an
investment to benefit from the Treaty is to be made in accordance with the domestic
legislation of each of the Contracting Parties (Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction,
page 68).

3 Request for Arbitration, page 98.

48. It concludes that: “The Investment Treaty was meant to protect only investments
made in accordance with the host State’s laws, and the parties consented to ICSID
jurisdiction only over disputes arising from such legal investments.’ (El Tratado de
Inversi6n tiene el propdsito de proteger unicamente las inversiones hechas de acuerdo

con las leyes del Estado anfitrién y las partes consintieron en la jurisdiccién del CIADI

 

solo en relacién con las dif ias originadas en esas inversi que se hubi hecho

legalmente). (Free Translation by the Tribunal).

ii. Consent to resort to ICSID

49. El Salvador affirms that it never consented to extend the jurisdiction of ICSID to
purely contractual claims and that in the Contract it was agreed that the disputes arising
between the parties would be resolved by arbitration in El Salvador. Further on, it claims
the principle of pacta sunt servanda to affirm that if the parties agreed on a different
forum, ICSID tribunals must honor said agreement (Memorial on Objections to
Jurisdiction, pages 3 and 81).

50. In addition, the Respondent affirms that in the negotiations prior to the execution of
the Contract, the parties did not discuss international arbitration before ICSID, the
Investment Law or the Mediation, Conciliation and Arbitration Law (Memorial on

Objections to Jurisdiction, page 21).

51. In cc ion with the I Law, the Respondent affirms that:

 

“£1 Salvador simply never consented in the Investment Law to ICSID jurisdiction
over claims seeking to enforce rights of status obtained by fraud upon the State.”
[...] because El Salvador never intended fraudulent investments to enjoy the
benefits of the Investment Law, it cannot be interpreted as having consented to
ICSID jurisdiction over claims alleging breach of the Investment Law with
respect to such fraudulent investments.”>

* Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, pages 69 and 70.
5 Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, pages 75 and 78.
15

(El Salvador simplemente nunca consintid en la Ley de Inversiones a que el
CIADI tuviera jurisdiccién para conocer de reclamos para exigir derechos de
status obtenidos por fraude cometido contra El Estado. “[...] Porque El Salvador
nunca tuvo la intencién de que las inversiones fraudulentas disfrutaran de los
beneficios de la Ley de Inversiones, no puede interpretarse que haya consentido a
que el CIADI tuviera jurisdiccién para conocer de reclamos que aleguen
incumplimientos de la Ley de Inversiones con respecto a esas inversiones
fraudulentas). (Free Translation by the Tribunal).

52. El Salvador alleges that the Public Contracting and Acquisitions Law (LACAP) does
not mention ICSID at all or any arbitration institution in particular (Memorial on
Objections to Jurisdiction, page 95), and that the Mediation, Conciliation and Arbitration
Law did not exist at the time the contract was executed (page 96). In addition, concerning
this law it states that:

“It certainly does not retroactively impose international arbitration for disputes

under contracts, like this one, for which the parties originally and expressly
negotiated local arbitration.”

([...] Ella ciertamente no impone en forma retroactiva el arbitraje internacional a
las disputas originadas en contratos, como esta, para la cual las partes,
originalmente y en forma expresa, negociaron un arbitraje local). (Free
Translation by the Tribunal).

iii. Fraud

53. El Salvador alleges in its Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction that it has

undeniable clear evidence on frauds committed by Inceysa in five areas:

“(1) the submission of false financial statements; (2) the submission of forged
documents to misrepresent the experience of Mr. Antonio Felipe Martinez
Lavado, Inceysa’s sole administrator at the time; (3) the misrepresentations and
deceit surrounding the evidence submitted of Inceysa’s experience in the field of
vehicle inspections and its relationship with its supposed strategic partner; (4) the
submission of forged documents to support the existence of multi-million dollar
contracts in the Philippines and in Panama; and (5) the obfuscation of the true
association between Inceysa and ICASUR.””

° Idem, page 97.
T Idem, pages 27 and 28.

((1)La presentacién de estados financieros falsos; (2) la presentacién de
documentos falsos para demostrar indebidamente la experiencia del sefior Antonio
Martinez Lavado, el administrador unico de Inceysa en ese tiempo; (3) las
representaciones falsas y el engafio que rodean la prueba presentada por Inceysa
para demostrar su experiencia en el campo de la inspeccién de vehiculos y su

 

 

relacién con su sup socio égico; (4) la pr ion de di Ys
falsos para respaldar la existencia de contratos multimillonarios en las Filipinas y
en Panama; y (5) el tami: de la dad iacié i entre

Inceysa e ICASUR). (Free Translation by the Tribunal).

54. In connection with the first issue, El Salvador argues that Inceysa altered its financial
statements for the fiscal years 1997, 1998 and 1999; that the financial statements
submitted with Inceysa’s tender are not those found in the Commercial Registry in Spain
and that they are not audited or certified by a public accountant, as the person who
certified them is not registered as an authorized auditor in Spain (Memorial on Objections
to Jurisdiction, pages 28 and 29).

55. Regarding the alleged experience of Mr. Martinez, El Salvador affirms that the letter
referring to his membership in the Official Association of Industrial Engineers of

Western Andalucia is false (Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, page 31).

56. Concerning the alleged relationship between Inceysa and its strategic partner, the
Respondent affirms that the Estacién ITV de Alcantarilla [Alcantarilla Inspection
Station] has never been a strategic partner of Inceysa in the RTV project in El Salvador
(Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, page 33). Further on, it states that “[...] Mr.
Martinez Lavado sent a letter on 9 January 2001 claiming that its partner (Inceysa’s) had
always been a company called “ITV Alcantarilla, $.L.”* ({...] el 9 de enero del 2001 el
sefior Martinez Lavado envié una carta en la que manifesté que el socio de Inceysa
siempre ha sido una compaiiia denominada “ITV Alcantarilla S.L.”). (Free Translation by
the Tribunal). However, said company was incorporated in December 2000, four months

after Inceysa had submitted its tender.

57. In connection with the contracts allegedly signed by Inceysa with the Municipality
of Silay in the Philippines and with the Municipality of Coclé (AMUCO) in Panama, the

8 Idem, page 36.

Respondent affirms that, according to the affidavit of a representative of the former
municipality, it did not enter into a contract with Inceysa (Memorial on Objections to
Jurisdiction, page 46). The representative of Coclé declared that he doubted the
authenticity of the signature on the contract and that, in addition, the existing contract
was concluded with ICASUR (page 47). El Salvador also alleges that on June 18, 2002,
the Supreme Court of Panama declared that on March 21, 2000, the resolution that had
approved the incorporation of AMUCO was declared null because it was illegal. As we
state below, this issue is irrelevant because Inceysa admitted afterwards that it had never

signed said contract.

58. Concerning the relationship between Inceysa and ICASUR, El Salvador affirms that
the bidding rules provided that the participation of entities or persons related or
associated to each other was prohibited because El Salvador was trying to avoid the
formation of a monopoly (Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, page 38). In the 1999
bid, ICASUR affirms that Mr. Martinez is one of its employees and that he has been its
head of projects since 1995. In the 2000 bid, Mr. Martinez appears as the administrator of
Inceysa and his relationship with ICASUR is not mentioned (page 39). When MARN,
through the Evaluation Committee, asked him about this matter, Mr. Martinez affirmed
that he had worked for ICASUR, but that in 2000 he no longer had any relationship with
the company. El Salvador sustains that there was a continuous association between
ICASUR and Inceysa when these companies submitted separate tenders in the second
bid for mechanical inspection for vehicles and that Mr. Alviz essentially controlled the
operations of both companies (page 40).

59. Concerning the relationship between ICASUR and Inceysa, El Salvador affirms that
there is evidence that a company controlled by Joaquin Alviz, named Orioles
Construction Corporation S.A. (ORIOLES), transferred $227,894.23 to Inceysa and that
in the ing di of that pany it is indicated that Inceysa is part of
“Grupo ICASUR.” In other documents of an Argentinean bank, Mr. Alviz is identified as
representative of ORIOLES and that company is identified as a subsidiary of ICASUR.
For El Salvador, it is clear that Mr. Alviz used ORIOLES to hide his contribution of

funds

to Inceysa, a company which he undoubtedly controlled (Memorial on Objections to
Jurisdiction, page 42).

60. In connection with the same issue of the link between ICASUR and Inceysa, El
Salvador argues that the declaration of Mr. José Mario Orellana Andrade, who was
General Manager of ANDA (an entity that renders water and sewer services in El
Salvador) is clear. In another public tender organized by ANDA, Mr. Alviz offered Mr.
Orellana money for ICASUR to win the bid and in May 2002 Mr. Martinez wrote Mr.
Orellana a check as payment of the agreement reached by them. Mr. Orellana also affirms
that during that negotiation in June 1999, he met Mr. Martinez as an employee of Mr.
Alviz. El Salvador concludes that ICASUR and Inceysa were companies controlled by
Mr. Alviz and that there was an association between them (Memorial on Objections to
Jurisdiction, pages 43 to 45).

61. El Salvador explains that two companies that also participated in the bid filed
separately two complaints before the courts against the award to Inceysa and, in
summary, they argued that it did not have the financial capacity, that it submitted false
documents in the bid and that it had violated the bidding rules, because it was linked to
ICASUR. Even though the decisions rendered in both cases dismissed the charges, the
court clarified that it did not rule on the alleged falsity of the documents submitted by
Inceysa in the bid (Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, page 24).

iv. Conclusion

62. El Salvador concludes its memorial by saying:

“El Salvador respectfully objects to the jurisdiction of this Tribunal over all
categories of Inceysa’s claims, and requests that the Tribunal find that the dispute
is not within the jurisdiction of ICSID nor within its own competence and render
an award to that effect pursuant to Rule 41 (5).”®

° Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, page 99.
19

(El Salvador respetuosamente objeta la jurisdiccion de este Tribunal para conocer

de los reclamos de Inceysa de toda clase y solicita que el Tribunal declare que la
disputa [no] esta sometida a la jurisdiccién del CIADI ni a su competencia y que
emita un laudo en ese sentido, segtin la Regla 41(5)). (Free Translation by the
Tribunal).

C. Position of Inceysa on the objections to jurisdiction

63. In its Counter-Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, Inceysa affirmed that El
Salvador did not present “rationae materiae” and “rationae personae” objections, and
affirmed that there are two decisions of the Supreme Court of El Salvador which
sustained the legality of the bidding and adjudication process. In addition, it affirmed that
“[...] the allegations of the Respondent in the present stage of the proceedings are
irrelevant and do not take into account the (sic) principle of isolation or autonomy of
the arbitration clause.” (Emphasis in original) (Counter-Memorial on Objections, page
3, paragraph 11).

64. Inceysa also affirms that the allegations made by the Respondent in the first chapter
of its memorial on jurisdiction must not be taken into consideration by the Tribunal in this
procedural stage, because they concern alleged defects of the legal transaction or of the
underlying investment (Counter-Memorial on Objections, page 6, paragraph 12).

i, About the fraud alleged by El Salvador

65. In connection with ITV Alcantarilla $.L., INCEYSA affirms that the sole owner of
that company has a contractual relation with the former [Inceysa] (Counter-Memorial on
Objections, page 13, paragraph 33).

66. Inceysa also sustains that the statements of Messrs. Calderén and Pineda (MARN
officials involved with the commission that evaluated the tenders submitted in the bid and
the negotiations prior to the conclusion of the Contract) indicate the explicit recognition
of the will of the parties to submit to arbitration proceedings and not to

20

the jurisdiction of the courts (Counter-Memorial on Objections, page 17, paragraph 45).

67. According to Inceysa, the decisions of the Supreme Court rendered in connection
with the bid award have the status of “res judicata,” including for the Arbitral Tribunal
(Counter-Memorial on Objections, page 21, paragraph 54).

68. Inceysa denies that it “fabricated” its financial statements in the tender submitted by
it in the bid and affirms that “[t]he annual accounts filed by Inceysa Vallisoletana S.L.
with the commercial registry differ from the accounts presented in the bid due to the mere
fact that the latter (sic) were prepared based upon the consolidation of the Group formed

by Inceysa Vallisoletana S.L. with the company Kira S.A. of the Dominican Republic.”"°

69. Further on, it maintains that “{...] it was not obligated to consolidate and (sic)
consequences to file the consolidated accounts before the commercial registry [...] the
Claimant had to submit in the bidding its consolidated accounts to demonstrate its real
financial condition in the framework of the MARN 05/2000 bid tender. The financial
statements submitted by the Claimant in the bidding are completely truthful.”"!

 

70. In connection with its strategic partner, Inceysa affirms that it “[...] was not and is not
a Public Law entity, but a private Spanish commercial company, both initially in its
incorporation and presently as an incorporated company, supported by the professional

experience of its members.”!”

71. Inceysa denies the existence of a connection between it and ICASUR and that they
belong to the same group of companies (Counter-Memorial on Objections, page 32,

paragraph 98).

"° Counter-Memorial on Objections, page 28, paragraph 77.
" Idem, pages 28 and 29, paragraphs 78 and 79.

” Tdem, page 31, paragraph 92.
21

72. Inceysa also denies having received $227,894.23 from ORIOLES, and affirms:

“The Claimant does not deny that it received the amount of USD 227,894.23 in its
account with Banco Salvadoreiio from Orioles Construction S.A. (Orioles) [...]
These funds were not, as the Respondent alleges without grounds, from Mr. Alviz
or from Orioles.”!

73. In connection with that said by Mr. Orellana on the handling of checks between
Inceysa and ICASUR, the Claimant calls that declaration into doubt because it was
made by a person who is facing criminal prosecution and who made such declaration
with a promise of leniency (Counter-Memorial on Objections, page 35, paragraphs 104
and 105).

74. Inceysa also denies having signed the contracts with the Municipality of Silay and
with AMUCO and denies having presented these contracts with its tender (Counter-
Memorial on Objections, page 12, paragraph 29). Concerning the contract with the
Municipality of Silay, Inceysa affirms that it never signed it and that it did not have a
copy of it because it was not a party to this contract (Counter-Memorial on Objections,
page 35, paragraph 106). In connection with the contract with AMUCO, Inceysa says
that it was signed by another company owned by Mr. Martinez, not by itself (page 36,
paragraph 110).

ii. Consent of El Salvador

75. Concerning the consent of El Salvador and the BIT, Inceysa states:

“Tf it were sufficient to allege that an investment protected by a BIT has not been
made in accordance with the law of the country receiving the investment in order
to deny the manifestation of consent necessary to support the Jurisdiction of
ICSID, so the Tribunal in order to decide on its own competence either would
have (sic) to enter into the merits (sic) of the matter in which it has no competence
or it would have to deny its competence based on a question (sic) of merits (sic) in
which it has not entered because it is not competent. In both cases, the situation
reached would be not only paradoxical but also illegal.”"*

76. In addition, Inceysa declares:

'S Idem, page 33, paragraph 102.
'* Idem, page 38, paragraph 120.
22

“The consent of El Salvador manifested in the BIT cannot (sic) be limited. In fact,
a limitation would be nothing but a unilateral withdrawal of the consent, contrary
to the express language of Art. 25 (1) (sic) Agreement.”®

77. According to Inceysa, the consent of El Salvador was expressed in Clause Twenty-
One of the Contract, when it refers to Salvadoran legislation. It also considers that,
because this was a contract for economic development, no other conclusion could have
been reached, but that, when signing the arbitration clause, the investor understood that it
referred to international arbitration (Counter-Memorial on Objections, pages 42 and 43,
paragraphs 134 and 135).

iii. Protection of investments under the BIT and the contractual clause

78. According to Inceysa, the correct interpretation of the expression “in accordance with
law” is “{...] that if there is a limitation based on the text “in accordance with law” it has
to refer to the approval of the investment (freedom to admit or not admit a certain

investment, procedure to be followed for approval).”"®

79. According to Inceysa, Clause Twenty-One of the Contract, when referring to
“Salvadoran legislation,” cannot limit itself exclusively to the legislation in force at the

time of the execution of the Contract; in this respect, it adds:

“Indeed, not only the contractual clause that makes explicit reference (sic) to
“Salvadoran legislation” cannot in good faith be limited exclusively to the
Salvadoran legislation in force at the time of the execution of the contract and to
the prejudice of the foreign investor, but it is recognized that the manifestation of
consent referred to in article (sic) 25 of the Convention must exist at the time of
the request for arbitration before ICSID, and not at the time when the investment
subject of the dispute started or was made,”"”

D. Reply of El Salvador:

i, Protection of investments under the BIT and the contractual clause
'S Tdem, page 38, paragraph 121.
16 Tdem, page 39, paragraph 122.

'” Idem, page 44, paragraph 137.
23

80. In its Reply, El Salvador affirms that:

“[...] the independence of the arbitration clause never has been interpreted to
obviate an inquiry into jurisdictional questions, or to mean ipso facto that a
Tribunal has jurisdiction over any or all claims that might be brought before it.”"*

([...] La independencia de la clausula arbitral nunca ha sido interpretada en el
sentido de que evita el cuestionamiento de asuntos jurisdiccionales 0 de que
significa ipso facto que un tribunal tiene jurisdiccién sobre uno o todos los
reclamos que se presenten a su consideracién). (Free Translation by the Tribunal).

81. In connection with the expression “in accordance with its law,” El Salvador adds:

“{...] if a State has the power under a treaty not to “admit” investments that are in
violation of its laws, surely the intent and implication is that such non-admitted
investments would not qualify for protection under that treaty. That a particular
investment may have been initially “admitted” as a result solely of the investor's
fraud on the State -- without fraud, the investment never would have been
admitted -- should not entitle that investment to protection under the treaty once
the fraud has been exposed.”!?

([...] Si un Estado tiene la facultad, segin un tratado, de no “admitir” inversiones
que se hubieren hecho en violacién de sus leyes, ciertamente la intencién y la
implicacién de esa facultad es la de que las inversiones no admitidas no
calificarian para la proteccién seguin ese tratado. El hecho de que una inversién
particular haya sido inicialmente “admitida”, unicamente como resultado del
fraude hecho por el inversionista al Estado -- sin fraude, la inversién nunca
hubiera sido permitida -- no le concederia a esa inversién la proteccién del
tratado, una vez que el fraude haya sido expuesto). (Free Translation by the
Tribunal).

82. In connection with the arbitration clause and the choice of forum, El Salvador
considers that even in State contracts this clause is freely chosen by the parties and the

forum can be national or international (Reply, page 9).
ii. Consent of El Salvador
83. El Salvador categorically affirms that it is not trying to withdraw the consent it

granted, but that it is affirming that this case is included in the limitations to consent that
have always existed in the Treaty (Reply, page 6).

"8 Reply, page 2.
* Tdem, page 4.

iii. Fraud

84. Concerning the discussion of possible fraud, El Salvador affirms:

“Inceysa’s fraud is relevant at this stage of the proceedings, because El Salvador
never consented to ICSID jurisdiction for claims about investments procured by
fraud, forgery, and corruption. If the Tribunal finds, as a matter of fact, that
Inceysa indeed committed fraud, Inceysa’s investment in El Salvador would fall
outside the scope of El Salvadors consent to ICSID jurisdiction, and this case
should end.””°

(El fraude de Inceysa es relevante en esta etapa del procedimiento porque El
Salvador nunca consintid a la jurisdiccién del CIADI para reclamos sobre
inversiones hechas por medio de fraude, falsificacién y corrupcién. Si el Tribunal
concluye, como una cuestion de hecho, que Inceysa ciertamente cometié fraude,
la inversién de Inceysa en El Salvador quedaria fuera del consentimiento otorgado
por El Salvador a la jurisdiccién del CIADI y este caso deberia darse por
terminado). (Free Translation by the Tribunal).

85. Concerning the financial information submitted by Inceysa in the bid, El Salvador
affirms that Inceysa misled MARN by not mentioning the existence of the alleged
“Grupo Inceysa” or Kira in its tender (Reply, page 18). It adds that the evidence received
and the declarations of Inceysa indicate that “Grupo Inceysa” did not exist from 1997 to
1999 (page 13). According to El Salvador, the delib 1 by Inceysa of the
fact that the financial statements presented by it with its tender were based on the assets
of Kira constitutes by itself fraud and makes its investment in El Salvador illegal (pages
13 and 19).

86. According to El Salvador, Inceysa’s admission that Mr. Angulo Lépez, who signed
the financial statements presented with its tender to MARN, was not an authorized

auditor represents an admission that it violated the rules of the bid (Reply, page 20).

87. In connection with Inceysa’s strategic partner, El Salvador affirms that Inceysa did
not have such a partner when it submitted its tender to MARN, and that it used the name
“Estacion ITV de Alcantarilla” to create the false impression that its partner was the
public station of ITV in Alcantarilla, Murcia. The private strategic partner was not
incorporated until December 27, 2000,

7° Idem, page 12.
25

and it certainly did not have 16 years of experience in the area of vehicle inspection

(Reply, pages 23 and 24).

88. Concerning the contract allegedly signed with AMUCO, EI Salvador indicates that
Inceysa admitted that it had never signed it, and adds that it has a copy of the contract
signed by Joaquin Alviz. In addition, Inceysa now argues that it never included that
contract or the contract signed with Silay in its tender, and that they were fabricated by El
Salvador (Reply, page 27).

89. El Salvador affirms that the letters from the Official Association of Industrial
Engineers of Andalucia and the Official Association of Technical Engineers of Badajoz,
which referred to Mr. Martinez, are false (Reply, pages 28 to 30).

90. In connection with the argument of res judicata, El Salvador states:

“When the “Sala de lo Contencioso Administrativo” rules that an administrative
act is lawful based on the evidence (or lack of evidence) presented, it does not
mean that the administrative act is conclusively and absolutely valid or legal [...]
In the Supervisién y Control case, the “Sala de lo Contencioso Administrativo”
ruled that the evidence presented was insufficient to prove that MARN had
violated the “bases de licitacién” [...] the court did not make a finding as to the
alleged falsity of the documents submitted by Inceysa [... J"

(Cuando la Sala de lo Contencioso Administrativo resuelve que un acto
administrativo es legal, basada en la prueba (0 en la falta de esta) presentada, eso
no significa que el acto administrativo sea concluyente y absolutamente valido o
legal” [...] “En el caso de Supervision y Control, la Sala de lo Contencioso
Administrativo resolvié que la prueba presentada era insuficiente para demostrar
que el MARN habia violado las “bases de licitacién”[...] pero el Tribunal no se
pronuncié sobre la alegada falsedad de los documentos presentados por Inceysa
[...]). (Free Translation by the Tribunal).

E. Rejoinder of Inceysa

i. Expropriation

2! Reply, pages 34 and 35.
26

91. Inceysa affirmed in its Rejoinder that El Salvador did not comply with its
obligations and that it did a “true expropriation” (page 2, paragraph 4).

ii. Competence of the Tribunal

92. According to Inceysa, the legal argument of El Salvador concerning the jurisdiction
of the Centre is based on the premise that the consent of the Republic of El Salvador,
expressed in the BIT and its Investment Law, does not include the cases in which the
investment is illegal or was made fraudulently. In the opinion of Inceysa, these merits

questions cannot be resolved in this procedural stage (Rejoinder, page 4, paragraph 10).

93. Inceysa argues that the jurisdictional issue “does not consist, as the Respondent
wants to allege, of whether or not there is a “fraudulent investment” that would limit the
manifestation of consent of the Republic (sic) of El Salvador for the submission of the
dispute to ICSID, but it must be limited to the validity of article 11 of BIT as an
arbitration clause autonomous and independent from the investments that are the subject

of the controversy.”

94. According to Inceysa, article I of the BIT contains objective elements to define the
concept of “investment” and, consequently, that definition must not be based “{...] on
judgments, which may be subjective, such as compliance of the investments with the

national law of the contracting parties.””>

95. By the nature of the Contract (economic and transnational development), it was
impossible for Inceysa [not] to have “[...] the possibility of accepting the offer of consent
so many times presented by the Republic (sic) of El Salvador concerning the jurisdiction
of ICSID. Likewise, the Republic (sic) of El Salvador could not

” Rejoinder, page 5, paragraph 14.
33 Idem, page 8, paragraph 22.
27

in good faith ignore the existence of these offers of consent in its legal system and in

special rules [...].”"*

iii. Investment protection under the BIT

oes

96. Inceysa affirms that the expression “‘in accordance with law’ refers to the reservation

by the Host State of the in of its sovereignty in the fr: k lation of the

 

d

cc for ad:

of an in originating from another contracting State, as
well as the regulation of its protection. Thus, a State may limit at its discretion the type of
investment admissible through its internal rules [...] without having to violate the BIT

[...J5

97. In the opinion of Inceysa, the allegations presented by El Salvador concern merits
questions and it has not alleged any relevant fact in connection with the objection to

jurisdiction (Rejoinder, page 10, paragraph 26).
iv. Fraud

98. Inceysa insists that the accounts presented with its tender are “[...] authentic (sic) and
in conformance with the requisites of the bidding rules.” According to it, the bidding
tules did not require itemizing the accounts or listing the participants or related
companies, so that the accusations of El Salvador regarding the lack of express mention

of Kira in the tender “[...] do not have any grounds and do not deserve consideration.””°

99. In connection with its financial capacity, Inceysa affirms that the evidence of its
capacity is the implementation of the project, the investments made and the bank
references and guarantees presented by it. (Rejoinder, page 21, paragraphs 54 and 55).

** Tdem, page 13, paragraph 33.
25 Idem, page 10, paragraph 25.
?6 Idem, page 17, paragraphs 42 and 44.
28

100. About the contract with AMUCO, Inceysa states that “{...] it did not submit the
contract signed by “Ingenieria and project of Residuos Hospitalarios $.A.”; concerning
the contract with Silay, it affirms that “{...] it never signed that contract and never had it
(sic) in its possession. Only the Respondent could have materially falsified the

document.”””

IV. CONSIDERATIONS OF THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL IN CONNECTION
WITH THE POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES

101. In chapter VI of this award, the Tribunal will analyze thoroughly
the legal issues presented by the parties and will reach the corresponding conclusions.
However, preliminarily, the Tribunal finds it indispensable to refer to the issue of the
alleged fraud committed by Inceysa to obtain the award of public bid number 05/2000
conducted by MARN, in order to contract mechanical inspection services for vehicles.
The Tribunal believes that the analysis of Inceysa’s allegedly fraudulent actions is
indispensable because El Salvador bases a good part of its questioning of the Centre’s

jurisdiction on this allegedly fraudulent conduct.

102. The arguments of El Salvador on the alleged fraud committed by Inceysa were
explained in the previous paragraphs. The following paragraphs will express the
conclusions of the Tribunal on each of these arguments.

A. Financial Statements submitted by Inceysa with its tender in the Bidding

103. The analysis of the arguments and evidence presented by the parties, in their
written and oral submissions, allows this Tribunal to decide that the financial statements
submitted by Inceysa with its tender in the Bid did not reflect the real financial condition
of the Claimant, as the information contained in them is not correct.

104. For this Tribunal, it is clear that, in its tender in the Bid, Inceysa did not present
its real financial condition and that during the Bidding process it made false statements

27 Tdem, pages 23 and 24, paragraphs 64 and 66.
29

concerning its true financial condition, which is one of the fundamental elements taken

into account to adjudicate any type of bid.

105. During the proceedings, both in the written and oral submissions, it was proven
that the financial statements for fiscal years 1997 to 1999 presented by Inceysa with its
tender in the Bid considerably differ from the financial statements filed by it with the
Commercial Registry in Spain, pursuant to Spanish legislation on the matter. The
differences between the two sets of financial statements are notable because the
statements for the fiscal years 1997 to 1999 filed with the Spanish Commercial Registry
show losses for the Claimant, while the financial statements for the same fiscal years

enclosed with Inceysa’s tender in the Bid show earnings.

106. To justify the foregoing, Inceysa indicated that the differences between the two
sets of financial statements are due to the fact that in the Bid it presented financial
statements consolidated with those of the company Kira, S.A., incorporated in the
Dominican Republic, and supposedly owned by Inceysa, while to the Commercial
Registry in Spain it did not present consolidated financial statements simply because it

was not obligated to do so under applicable legislation.

107. It is relevant to mention that Inceysa was unable to demonstrate that the financial
statements of the fiscal years 1997-1999 submitted by it in the Bid were correctly
consolidated with the statements of Kira, S.A., as it never proved to this Tribunal that

Kira was a company related to Inceysa during those periods.

108. In addition, even supposing that the financial statements presented by Inceysa in
the bid had been correctly consolidated with the financial statements of Kira, S.A., it was
fully demonstrated before this Tribunal that in the bid, Inceysa did not mention at all the
supposed consolidation of these financial

statements or the existence of Kira, S.A. It is difficult to understand how, in its tender,
Inceysa did not mention the existence of Kira, S.A. It is equally incomprehensible that
the financial statements presented in the Bid, supposedly consolidated with those of Kira,
S.A., do not mention this company and that they were also not mentioned in the “Audit
Report of Annual Accounts” prepared by Mr. José Angulo Lépez, who was the alleged
auditor of Inceysa’s financial statements, and presented by Inceysa in the bid. The above

omissions are clear and were duly proven in the case.

109. Along with the above, the financial statements presented by Inceysa in the Bid
were audited by Mr. José Angulo Lépez, who, in his supposed capacity as “Authorized
Auditor” of the “Instituto de Contabilidad and Auditoria de Cuentas,” certified that the
financial statements correctly reflected Inceysa’s financial condition. However, in the
proceeding, it was fully proven that Mr. José Angulo Lopez was never registered as an
“Authorized Auditor” of the “Instituto de Contabilidad and Auditoria de Cuentas” of
Spain. In other words, it was proven that the credentials of the person who audited the
financial statements presented by Inceysa in the Bid were false. In this sense, it is
relevant to transcribe the relevant part of the letter signed by Mr. Pedro Maria Martin,
Secretary General of the Instituto de Contabilidad and Auditoria de Cuentas of Spain:

 

“According to the d inp ion of this Instituto de Contabilidad and
Auditoria de Cuentas, Mr. JOSE ANGULO LOPEZ has not been registered at any
time with the Official Register of Auditors, so that, pursuant to article 6 of Law
19/1988 of July 12, of Auditoria de Cuentas, he is not authorized to audit
accounts,”**

 

110, The matters expressed in the previous paragraphs allow this Tribunal to conclude
that Inceysa submitted false and incorrect financial information during the Bidding
process. This behavior is extremely serious because financial condition is one of the main
elements taken into account to adjudicate a bid and

°8 Exhibit number 6 to the Witness Statement of Javier Villasante, submitted with the Memorial
on Objections to Jurisdiction.

31

particularly the one that gave rise to this arbitration. Consequently, the falsities and
imprecisions of the information submitted by Inceysa are a clear violation of one of the
pillars of the Bid itself.

B. Existence of the supposed “strategic partner” of Inceysa

111. In order to demonstrate that it had the necessary experience and relations to
properly achieve the purposes of the bid, Inceysa mentioned that its “strategic partner”
was “Estacion ITV de Alcantarilla,” and indicated that this strategic partner was one of
the most experienced entities in matters of vehicle inspection in Spain, with more than 16
years of experience. It added that its strategic partner had carried out vehicle inspections

on more than 500 thousand vehicles per year in that country.

112. During the proceedings, it was fully proven that Inceysa deliberately made
MARN believe that its strategic partner was the public entity named “Estacion ITV de
Alcantarilla.” However, further on, when questioned about the true identity of its strategic
partner, Inceysa corrected its version and indicated that its strategic partner was the
company named “ITV Alcantarilla S.L.”

113. The affirmation of Inceysa that its strategic partner was the company named “ITV
Alcantarilla S.L.” demonstrates the falsity it engaged in during the bid, as in this
proceeding it was demonstrated that that company was incorporated on December 27,
2000, four months after Inceysa had submitted its tender in the bid. Consequently, it is
obvious that Inceysa failed to tell the truth concerning the identity of its strategic partner
during the bidding process and also lied about the experience of its strategic partner, as it
is not at all possible for a company that did not exist (since it had not been incorporated)
to have 16 years of experience in vehicle inspections.

114, The lack of experience of Inceysa’s strategic partner was admitted by the witness

presented by the Claimant, Mr. Garcia Soler, who, as owner of ITV Alcantarilla S.L.,

testified during his examination by the counsel for El

32

Salvador, during the hearing of May 4, 2005, the statements transcribed below:

Question from El Salvador: “But you would have to accept that your company in
August 2000 by itself did not have 16 years of experience.”

Mr. Garcia’s answer: “My company obviously not.”

Question from El Salvador: “And you would also have to accept that in August
2000 your company was not one of the companies with the best capacity and
prestige in Spain”?

Mr. Garcia’s answer: “My company was not at all.”

Question from El Salvador: “The last topic about which I want to ask you is
about your company ITV Alcantarilla. Is it correct that that company so far has
never managed an RTV project?”

Mr. Garcia’s answer: “Manage means operate, yes?”

Question from El Salvador: “Yes.”

Mr. Garcia’s answer: “No, because the project we had was this one.”

Question from El Salvador: “Would it be correct to say that the only project the
company has had in connection with RTV is the project in El Salvador?”

Mr. Garcia’s answer: “Yes”.

Question from El Salvador: “You have never had another?”

Mr. Garcia’s answer: “No, in addition it was incorporated only for this.”

Question from El Salvador: “And is it correct to say that this company of yours
does not have any employees?”

Mr. Garcia’s answer: “Yes, quite correct.”

Question from El Salvador “And it has never had any earnings?”

Mr. Garcia’s answer: “Indeed. It did not get to operate.”°

115. The evidence and arguments presented by the parties in this proceeding, including
the very testimony of the owner of ITV Alcantarilla S.L., allows this Tribunal to consider
it demonstrated that Inceysa submitted false information concerning (i) the identity of its

strategic partner; and (ii) the capacity and experience of that alleged partner.

116. As explained earlier (paragraph 26), the capacity and experience of Inceysa’s
strategic partner was one of the main aspects El Salvador took into account to award the
bid to I , and tt the false of the Clai on this subject

constitute another serious violation of the fundamental pillars of the Bid.

2° Page 463 of the Transcript of the hearing, page 463.
*° Pages 470 and 471 of the Transcript of the hearing, pages 470 and 471.
33

117. It is also noteworthy that the falsity concerning the experience and capacity in
vehicle inspection was not limited to the strategic partner of the Claimant, but it
extended to the capacity and experience of Inceysa itself. Indeed, during the Bid it
affirmed that it had carried out various RTV projects, but during the proceedings it was
proven that the Claimant had never carried out a vehicle inspection project as up until a
few months before Inceysa participated in the Bid its main activity was selling women’s

underwear and shoes.

118. In addition to the above, during the two years prior to the Bid, Inceysa did not
have operations or employees. In the proceedings, it was fully proven that the Claimant
was not only not dedicated to operating vehicle inspection stations, but it also did not
have any operations or employees. Consequently, it is obvious that Inceysa also
presented false information concerning its own experience and capacity, thus violating,
once again, one of the essential pillars that led El Salvador to award the bid to it.

C. Career and experience of Mr. Antonio Felipe Martinez Lavado

119. It was also clearly proven in the record that Mr. Antonio Felipe Martinez Lavado,
on whose experience Inceysa based much of its alleged suitability to render vehicle
inspection services, did not have the professional degree or experience attributed to him
by Inceysa, and it was demonstrated beyond reasonable doubt that the letter referring to
his membership in the Official Association of Industrial Engineers of Western Andalucia
is false.

120. To prove Mr. Martinez’s professional capacity and experience, Inceysa included
in its tender in the Bid two letters by which it sought to accredit these facts. The first
piece of correspondence indicates the alleged membership of Mr. Martinez with the
Official Association of Industrial Engineers of Western Andalucia. During the

proceedings, both in the written and oral submissions, it was duly proven

34

that both the content and the signature of this letter are false, since its alleged signatory,
Mr. José Manuel Pérez Lopez, Secretary of said Association, declared in the certification
dated September 2, 2004, the following:

“Mr. A. Felipe Martinez Lavado has never appeared as a member either in the
database of this Delegation or in the database of the center of the Association with
any member number.

We never issue certificates that are not on the original letterhead of the
Association [...]”

[.... ] The signature on the document is not mine.”?!

121. The second letter by which Inceysa tried to demonstrate the capacity and
experience of Mr. Martinez is the certification of the Official Association of Technical
Engineers of Badajoz, according to which he had participated in various vehicle
inspection projects. By written and oral submissions introduced during the proceedings,
El Salvador demonstrated that the second piece of correspondence is also false. In fact,
the certification from the Secretary of the Official Association of Industrial Technical
Experts and Engineers of Badajoz, presented by El Salvador in the proceedings,
indicates that: (i) the letter presented by Inceysa in the Bid was not signed by an official
of said Association, as its signatory, Mr. Pérez Maldonado, had never been Secretary of
said association; and (ii) said association does not have any record of projects in which
Mr. Martinez would have participated.

122. Consequently, this Tribunal considers it demonstrated that Inceysa presented
false information on one of the crucial points of the Bid concerning the experience and
capacity of its sole Administrator, Mr. Martinez.

D. Connection between Inceysa and ICASUR

123. In the record, it was demonstrated that in the 1999 bid, Mr. Martinez appeared as
an important official of ICASUR and that in the 2000 bid he appeared as

3! Exhibit 22 to the Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction.
35

the general manager of Inceysa, without any mention at all of his prior connection with
ICASUR. The financial relationship, direct or through other corporations, between
Inceysa and ICASUR, amply proven in the record, leaves no doubt that, before tenders
were submitted in the public bid 05/2000, and afterwards, there was a clear connection
between Inceysa and ICASUR, and that the existence of this connection was not
disclosed to MARN. This constitutes a deceit on one of the central aspects of the bid.

124. Many pieces of evidence were submitted by El Salvador to prove the connection
of Inceysa with ICASUR, in clear violation of one of the most important provisions that
governed the bid.

125. Thus, it was fully proven that in the 1999 bid Mr. Martinez appeared as an
important ICASUR official and that in the 2000 bid he appeared as the general manager
of Inceysa, without indicating his connection with ICASUR in the 2000 bid. During the
1999 bid, ICASUR presented as part of its tender the curriculum vitae of Mr. Martinez,
which indicates that he worked as Project Manager of ICASUR since 1995. On the other
hand, in the 2000 bid, Inceysa presented another curriculum vitae of Mr. Martinez, not
mentioning his work as Project Manager of ICASUR, work performed by him since 1995

according to the curriculum vitae presented in 1999.

126. Additionally, the financial relationship, direct or through other corporations, that
existed between Inceysa and ICASUR was proven in this proceedings. Thus, various
financial records demonstrate that Inceysa used funds originating from the Panamanian
company named Orioles Construction Corporation S.A. to record USD$ 141,574.00 as
foreign investment in the Republic of El Salvador.” The foregoing is relevant because
during the proceeding, El Salvador

* See Exhibit “Q” to the document titled “Evidence in support of the Republic of El Salvador's
request for an order pursuant to Arbitration Rule 28(1) and for recommendation of security for
costs as a provisional measure,” dated September 15, 2004. See also pages 634 and 635 of the
stenographic version of the hearing of May 5, 2005.

36

presented evidence that confirms that ORIOLES is a corporation controlled by Mr.
Joaquin Alviz, who also controls ICASUR. In addition, various bank documents
presented in the record indicate Mr. Alviz as President, Founder and Manager of
ORIOLES and the latter as a subsidiary of ICASUR.®

127. The statement of Inceysa’s witness, Mr. Garcia Soler, owner of ITV Alcantarilla
S.L., supposed strategic partner of Inceysa, demonstrated that, before the tenders were
presented in the bid, there was a clear connection between Inceysa and ICASUR. It is

relevant to transcribe the following from this testimony:

Question from El Salvador: “I believe you did not understand the question.
Did you attend at any time a meeting on the RTV project on behalf of
Icasur? I am not saying that you were there on behalf of Inceysa, it was there
also or the representatives of ICASUR were there.”

Mr. Garcia’s answer: “I don’t remember in particular. That Icasur would
have referred to me? I don’t believe so.

Another thing is that, at best, when organizing publicity, logically there was
a common interest that we would take the same path. But the meeting was
not organized by ICASUR or Inceysa, but a company of your country that
said: I am going to present a project which logically will be done jointly —
because it is always necessary to look at the economic part, more interesting
than if we did it each on our own behalf.”

Question from El Salvador: “In any event, what you are saying is that you
attended meetings or perhaps there was somebody from ICASUR, this
happened during the time Inceysa was already involved as a company in the
RTV project. Is that right?

Mr. Garcia’s answer: “Obviously, 1 was always working for Inceysa. If it

was not involved, I could not be involved.”

53 See exhibits 81, 19 and 9 of the “Core Bundle” presented by the Republic of El Salvador during
the hearing of May 2 to 5, 2005. See also page 635 of the stenographic version of the hearing of
May 5, 2005.

37

Question from El Salvador: Is it not true that you attended a meeting in
March 2000, when we were still in the first bid and Inceysa was not
involved, on behalf of Icasur?”

Mr. Garcia’s answer: “It seems extremely strange, unless it was Inceysa
because I always went for Inceysa.”

Question from El Salvador: “I am going to refer to exhibit 21 of the file.
We have here two black folders and exhibit number 21.”

Mr. Garcia’s answer: “In this first folder?”

[...] Question from El Salvador: “Now you have it. This is a document that
refers to the national and international public bid number 0399, which is the
first bid for Mechanical Inspections of Vehicles in El Salvador, and which,
as can be seen, concern a meeting that was held on March 22, 2000. Do you
see it? [...]”.

“[...] Below where it says “List of participants,” there is a line that says:
“ICASUR.” True? And the first name that appears is Joaquin Alviz
Victorio,”

Mr. Garcia’s answer: “Yes.”

Question from El Salvador: “And afterwards, there is your name, Francisco
Javier Garcia Soler. That is your signature, right?”

Mr. Garcia’s answer: “Apparently, yes.”

Question from El Salvador: “If you could read the document, is it not true
that in this document where it refers to a meeting in March 2000, here the
name Inceysa does not appear?”

Mr. Garcia’s answer: “Yes.”

Question from El Salvador: “This meeting was attended only by
participants from ICASUR, of the Vice Ministry of Transportation and the
Ministry of the Environment and Natural Resources. True?”

Mr. Garcia’s answer: “That’s right.”

Question from El Salvador: “Consequently, you did attend the meeting for
ICASUR in the first RTV, true?”

38

Mr. Garcia’s answer: “Man, the only thing I can say is that in the beginning,
when I got interested in the project, I had a lot of meetings. Here indeed
appears the name Joaquin Alviz; I don’t know if it was the first or second
time that I saw it. What is clear is that I liked the embryo of the project, and
before formalizing it, I started to get interested in it. In fact, the exact point
where really -- because this is a topic that is not my field because I dealt
with the technical and logistic part, but I do not participate in the
bureaucratic part. This apparently is so, will be so, and I do not have the
slightest doubt about it.

Just like this meeting, there may have been another twenty, in which we
were at Ministry level and not at ICASUR level. I really understand that it
had to be a meeting with the Ministry or because I was interested in the
project. You have to realize one thing: not only am I defending Inceysa,
even though the project was not formalized, I am also defending my interest
and I had to know whether or not I was interested in continuing with the

project.”**

E. Falsity of the contracts supposedly signed by Inceysa with the Municipality of
Silay, in the Philippines, and with the Municipality of Coclé (Amuco), in Panama

128. Even though it was also a much questioned matter, the Arbitral Tribunal finds it
unnecessary to analyze in detail the matter of the contracts allegedly signed by Inceysa
with the Municipality of Silay, in the Philippines, and with the Municipality of Coclé
(Amuco), in Panama, because in the end, as indicated in paragraph 101 above, Inceysa
affirmed that it never signed the first and that it did not present the second in the bid.

V. PROVISIONAL MEASURES

129, Even though the issue of the provisional measures requested by El Salvador was
the subject of a heated discussion between the parties that took the attention of the
Tribunal for a long time, given the manner in which this matter will be resolved, the

Tribunal considers it

** Transcript of the hearing of May 4, 2005, pages 415 to 417.
39

unnecessary to refer to the various actions taken by the parties and their grounds.

VI. JURISDICTION OF ICSID AND COMPETENCE OF THE ARBITRAL
TRIBUNAL

130. The controversy on the competence of this Arbitral Tribunal and the jurisdiction
of the Centre has been raised by the parties based on different bodies of laws.

131. In this sense, basically jurisdiction has been alleged based on two types of laws,
some international and some of an internal nature. Consequently, the analysis to be made
by the Arbitral Tribunal on its own competence will be divided according to these two
legal systems. In this context, this Tribunal will first analyze the issue of its own
competence according to the ICSID Convention and the Agreement on the Reciprocal
Promotion and Protection of Investments signed between the Kingdom of Spain and the
Republic of El Salvador. Once this debate is resolved, it will analyze the issue of its
competence in light of the provisions of the internal legislation of El Salvador (which
includes the Public Contracting and Acquisitions Law, the Investment Law and the
Mediation, Conciliation and Arbitration Law, as well as the Contract executed between
El Salvador and Inceysa).

A. Analysis of the Jurisdiction of the Centre under the ICSID Convention, the BIT
and the Investment Law of El Salvador

132. In order to address specifically the issues debated about the competence of this
Tribunal, and without prejudice to a detailed analysis further on, it is necessary first to
present in a synthetic manner the positions of the parties concerning the competence of

the Arbitral Tribunal under the ICSID Convention and the Agreement.

40

i, Positions of the Parties

a) Position of Inceysa

133. The Claimant indicated in its Request for Arbitration that this Arbitral Tribunal is
competent to hear the dispute presented since the Agreement applies because “{...] the
Claimant is an “investor” and because it made in the “territory” of the Respondent an

“investment” according to the definitions contained in Article I of the Agreement.”®

134. Inceysa argues in favor of the jurisdiction of the Centre based as a function of the
parties to the proceedings (ratione personae), indicating that it is an investor under

Article I, paragraph 1 b) of the Agreement, which reads as follows:

“(...1. Investors shall mean:... b) legal entities, including companies, associations

of companies, commercial companies; branches and other organizations

incorporated or, in any case, duly organized under the law of such Contractin;

Party and that make investments in the territory of the other Contracting Party.”
135. In connection with jurisdiction related to the subject matter of the dispute
(rationae materiae), \nceysa indicated that this dispute is clearly a legal dispute which
arises directly from an investment made by it in the territory of El Salvador.

136. Additionally, the Claimant maintains in its Memorial that El Salvador consented
to the jurisdiction of the Centre in Article XI of the Agreement, which indicates that:

“1, Any dispute concerning investments arising between one of the Contracting
Parties and an investor of the other Contracting Party related to matters regulated
by this Agreement will be notified in writing, including

*§ Request for Arbitration, page 57, paragraph 115 (emphasis in original).

5 Agr for the Reciprocal Pr ion and P: ion of I between the Kingdom
of Spain and El Salvador, Article I.

 

41

137,

138.

detailed information by the investor to the Contracting Party receiving the
investment.

To the extent possible, the disputing parties will try to settle these differences by
amicable agreement.

2. If the dispute cannot be resolved in this manner within six months from the date
of the written notice mentioned in paragraph 1, it will be submitted at the choice
of the investor:

[...] to the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID)
created by the “Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of Other States,” open for signature in Washington on March
18, 1965, when each State party to this Agreement adhered to it”

In connection with the above, Inceysa declared that:

“ICSID arbitral jurisprudence affirms that the signature of an International
Agreement, such as the BIT, which contains an arbitration clause that expressly
tefers to the ICSID Convention for disputes that may arise, constitutes written
consent by the State [...].**

Moreover, Inceysa affirmed that the Respondent expressed its consent to the

Jurisdiction of the Centre by a written communication signed by the Ministry of Foreign

Relations addressed to the Technical Secretary of the Presidency, in which it affirmed:

“[...] I have to inform you that there is a Bilateral Agreement for the Promotion
and Protection of Investments in force in Spain, and that according to its
framework, Spain has the right to request the formation of an Arbitral Tribunal to
resolve this situation, which could have been avoided.”*?

139. Finally, the Claimant indicated in its Request for Arbitration that it exhausted all
available means to find an amicable solution to the dispute, and because it could not find

a solution, it decided to submit the dispute to the Jurisdiction of the Centre.

b) Position of El Salvador

* Idem, Article XI.
38 Request for Arbitration, page 58, paragraph 117.

* Idem, page 59, paragraph 118.

42

140, El Salvador did not make any objection in connection with the nationality of the
Claimant or the legal nature of the dispute that originated this proceeding. In other

words, it did not make an objection rationae personae or rationae materiae.

141. The arguments of the Respondent focus on expressing that its consent to the
Jurisdiction of the Centre is limited to the differences arising from investments actually
Pp d by the Agr According to El Salvador, the consent of the parties to the
Jurisdiction of the Centre, expressed in the Agreement, was given only for differences
related to the investments made in accordance with the laws of El Salvador. On this

particular issue, it indicated the following:

"Here, El Salvador's consent to ICSID jurisdiction in its Investment Treaty with
Spain was limited to disputes involving investments otherwise entitled to
protection under the Treaty, i.e., investments made in accordance with Salvadoran
law."

(Aqui el consentimiento de El Salvador a la jurisdiccién del CIADI otorgado en el
Tratado de Inversién con Espafia estaba limitado a las disputas que involucraran
inversiones que de todas maneras tendrian derecho a la proteccién del Tratado, es
decir, las inversiones hechas de acuerdo con la legislacién salvadorefia). (Free
Translation by the Tribunal).

ii. Identification of the Contested Issue

142. Analysis of the arguments raised by the parties in connection with the competence
of this Tribunal based on the ICSID Convention and the Agreement indicates that the
parties did not raise as grounds of the dispute: (i) the nationality of the Claimant; (ii) the
fact that El Salvador or Spain are not parties to the ICSID Convention; (iii) the legal
nature of the difference; or (iv) the nature of the investment made.

143. Consequently, the parties recognized the so-called jurisdiction rationae materiae

and rationae personae.

“© Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, page 57.
43

144. However, the competence of this Arbitral Tribunal was questioned on the grounds
of the existence of the consent of El Salvador for this dispute to be submitted to the
jurisdiction of the Centre. In other words, the dispute between the parties concerns the

so-called jurisdiction rationae voluntatis.

145. Indeed, the dispute on the competence of this Tribunal, based on the alleged
violations of the Agreement, has been focused on determining whether or not the
investment made by the Claimant in the territory of the Respondent is protected by the
Agreement, i.c., determining whether the consent given by El Salvador includes the
investment made by the Respondent, or, on the contrary, leaves it outside its scope and
therefore excludes it from the scope of application of the Agreement and, consequently,
from the jurisdiction of the Centre.

iii. Power of the Arbitral Tribunal to rule on its own Competence

146. Given that the competence of this Arbitral Tribunal has been questioned based on
the scope of the consent given by El Salvador, Inceysa argued that the objection
involves the resolution of substantive issues on the merits of the matter, for which the
Arbitral Tribunal could not rule when deciding on its own competence. In this sense,

Inceysa sustains that:

"If it were sufficient to allege that an investment protected by a BIT has not been
made in accordance with the law of the country receiving the investment in order
to deny the manifestation of consent necessary to support the Jurisdiction of
ICSID, so the Tribunal in order to decide on its own competence either would
have (sic) to enter into the merits (sic) of the matter in which it has no
competence or it would have to deny its competence based on a question (sic) of
merits (sic) in which it has not entered because it is not competent. In both cases,
the situation reached would be not only paradoxical but also illegal."*!

*! Counter-Memorial on Objections, page 38, paragraph 120.
44

147, In light of the arguments raised by the parties, before analyzing whether the
consent given by El Salvador may support the competence of this Tribunal according to
the ICSID Convention and the Agreement, it is necessary to examine the power of the

Tribunal to decide on its own competence.

148. Article 41 of the ICSID Convention is clear when it indicates that "The Tribunal
shall be the judge of its own competence." Consequently, the ICSID Convention
recognizes the "Kompetenz-Kompetenz" principle and imperatively obligates the Arbitral
Tribunal to decide the issues formulated on this subject.

149. It is obvious that because the ICSID Convention obligates the Arbitral Tribunal to
decide on its own competence, it implicitly gives the Tribunal the right to analyze all
factual and legal matters that may be relevant in order to fulfill this obligation.

150. In this context, it must be noted that, in general terms, competence means the
power or capacity of a Tribunal to hear and decide on a certain matter. In the case at
hand, the first issue on which this Arbitral Tribunal must pronounce itself is its own
competence; afterwards, it may decide the issues raised by Inceysa based on the
Agreement. In this vein, it is possible to affirm that the Arbitral Tribunal has an original
and unquestionable competence, which arises from its own constitution and the ICSID
Convention, and whose only object is to determine its competence to decide the
substantive dispute presented by the parties. Only after the Arbitral Tribunal determines

its own competence can it hear and decide the merits of the matter presented.

151. As an obvious consequence of the above, there are cases in which an Arbitral
Tribunal decides that it lacks competence to decide the merits of the matter brought
before it, without such decision implying that the Arbitral Tribunal exceeded its bounds
or acted illegally.

45

152. Such being the case, there is no paradox when an Arbitral Tribunal rules on its
own competence, as asserted by Inceysa, because the power to decide this issue stems
directly from the command of Article 41 of the ICSID Convention.

153. In light of the above, it is not true that if this Tribunal decides whether Inceysa’s
investment was made in accordance with the law of El Salvador or not it would be

deciding "merits issues," as explained below.

154, First, the reference to "merits issues" is imprecise. In the present case, and
depending on the subject matter of the competence, we can identify two distinct types of
competences of the Arbitral Tribunal: the competence to decide on the power of the
Arbitral Tribunal to decide on the litigious questions raised before it and the competence

to resolve on the merits of the requests and defenses raised by the parties.

155. When deciding on its own competence, the Arbitral Tribunal has the power to
analyze all of those issues that may have legal relevance to define it, regardless of
whether these are issues that may be qualified as substantive or of "merits" or procedural
issues. If, in order to rule on its own competence, the Arbitral Tribunal is obligated to
analyze facts and substantive normative provisions that constitute premises for the
definition of the scope of the Tribunal’s competence, then it has no alternative, but to deal
with them, under penalty of infringing its obligation under Article 41 of the ICSID

Convention.

156. In the case before the Arbitral Tribunal, the controversy concerning the
competence of the Tribunal focuses on determining whether the consent given by El
Salvador to submit to the jurisdiction of ICSID includes the investments not made in
accordance with its law. Consequently, to decide on its own competence, this Tribunal is
obligated to analyze, first, whether said

46

argument is admissible and, second, whether it is founded based on the facts of the case
brought before it.

157. Thus, even though it might be considered that the analysis the Arbitral Tribunal is
obligated to make involves the determination of issues of a substantive nature, such as the
conformity of Inceysa’s investment with the laws of El Salvador, it is obvious that these
issues constitute a premise that must necessarily be examined in order to decide the issue
of the competence of the Arbitral Tribunal.

158. Precisely because of the foregoing, and out of respect for the right of defense of
both parties, the Tribunal gave them ample opportunity to make allegations and prove
what they wished concerning the matter of competence raised, including by holding a

hearing for the sole purpose of discussing this subject.

159. Finally, it must be noted that the claims and defenses raised by the parties (other
than the issue of competence stated) neither invade nor coincide with the dispute on
competence. Inceysa’s claim is intended to obtain the protection of the Agreement and
the indemnity to which it believes it is entitled. In turn, the defense of El Salvador refers

to the absence of Inceysa’s right to bring such a claim.

160. Although the argument that Inceysa’s investment is not protected by the
Agreement because it is an investment that was not made in accordance with the laws of
E] Salvador can be identified as a substantive defense related to the merits of the matter,
this presumption is incorrect. Indeed, if it is determined that the investment is not
protected by the Agreement, it would imply recognizing that the necessary premise for
the Arbitral Tribunal to validly assume jurisdiction was not met. Consequently, in the
end, the Arbitral Tribunal would be deciding on its own competence and not on the
Claimant’s indemnity claims.

47

161. In synthesis, and as a conclusion of the above, this Arbitral Tribunal concludes
that its power to decide on its own competence authorizes it to rule validly on the
objection to jurisdiction rationae voluntatis raised by El Salvador, without implying a

resolution on the merits of the matter.

iv. General Considerations of the Arbitral Tribunal about consent

162. According to the peculiarities of the case brought before this Tribunal, the point

in controversy in connection with competence refers to jurisdiction rationae voluntatis.

163. Given the arguments of the parties, it is necessary first to examine the argument
raised by Inceysa, which maintains that the determination of the scope of consent given
by EI Salvador cannot be considered a jurisdictional matter, because such determination
is a substantive question, which falls within the scope of the competence of the Arbitral
Tribunal, according to article XI of the Agreement and according to the principle of
autonomy of the Arbitration Clause. Specifically, the Claimant affirms that:

"Any element incorporated in the Convention or in the national Law may, at
some point, be the subject of controversy and the Contracting Parties, in the case
of the Convention, as well as the legislator in the case of the National Law, have
expressed their will concerning the method to follow to resolve such disputes:
the arbitral proceeding and especially before the ICSID Centre and before a
Tribunal constituted according to its Regulation. Indeed, the arbitration clause of
the BIT (Article 11) expressly refers to "any dispute related to investments
arising between one of the Contracting Parties and an investor of the other
Contracting Party concerning matters regulated by this Agreement ..." It is
obvious that a restrictive interpretation of the manifestation of consent to ICSID
jurisdiction expressed in the BIT, as well as issues such as the very definition of

“investment” (article D, especially the reference to its qualification by the
R

 

 

 

P as "or for "pr ion” (article 3) in its
special refe to the "i made ding to its legislation," can only
be considered as issues regulated by the same agreement. In the event of dispute,
as in

48

casu, such issues have the consequence, by application of Article 11 of the BIT,
that they are subject to the jurisdiction chosen by the investor, in our case,
ICSID."”

"The "jurisdictional issue" does not consist, as alleged by the Respondent, of
whether or not there is a "fraudulent investment" that would limit the
manifestation of the consent of the Republic (sic) of El Salvador to submit the
dispute to ICSID, but must be limited to the validity of Article 11 of the BIT as an
arbitration clause and independent from the i concerned
by the dispute."*?

164. The argument raised by Imceysa is incorrect because Article XI of the
Agreement, considered as an autonomous arbitration clause, cannot be interpreted as a
manifestation of unrestricted consent by El Salvador to submit to arbitration any type of

dispute claimed to be based on the Agreement.

165. In order to support the foregoing, this Tribunal deems it relevant to analyze the

principles that regulate consent to the jurisdiction of the Centre.

166. In this regard, extreme relevance is given to the principle established in the first
paragraph of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, which establishes that the submission
of the parties to the jurisdiction of the Centre must consist of a written consent which
cannot be unilaterally withdrawn by either one of the parties that granted it. The relevant
part of this article provides as follows:

"Article 25 (1) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute
arising directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State (or any
constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State designated to the Centre
by that State) and a national of another Contracting State, which the parties to
the dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre. When the parties
have given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent unilaterally."
(Emphasis added).

 Rejoinder to the objections to jurisdiction, page 5, paragraph 13.
* Tdem, page 5, paragraph 14.
49

167. Confirming the above, which is a fundamental principle to determine the
competence of the Arbitral Tribunal, paragraph 23 of the Report of the Executive

Directors provides as follows:

"Consent of the parties is the cornerstone of the jurisdiction of the Centre.
Consent to jurisdiction must be in writing and once given cannot be
withdrawn unilaterally (Article 25 (1))."“ (Emphasis added)

168. In accordance with the precept transcribed above, the following affirmation made by
the tribunal in the award that resolved the Tokio Tokelés v. Ukraine case is highly

illustrative.

"The jurisdiction of the Centre depends first and foremost on the consent of the
Contracting Parties, who enjoy broad discretion to choose the disputes that they
will submit to ICSID. Tribunals shall exercise jurisdiction over all disputes that
fall within the scope of the Contracting Parties’ consent as long as the dispute
satisfies the objective requirements set forth in Article 25 of the Convention.

(La jurisdiccién del Centro depende primero y de manera primordial del
consentimiento de las Partes Contratantes, quienes tienen amplia discrecion para
escoger las disputas que someteran al CIADI. Los tribunales ejercerén su
jurisdiccién sobre todas las disputas que queden comprendidas dentro del
consentimiento de las Partes, siempre que la disputa satisfaga los requisitos
objetivos sefialados por el Articulo 25 del Convenio). (Free Translation by the
Tribunal).

169. Therefore, it is not enough that El Salvador signed and ratified the Agreement for
the Arbitral Tribunal to be able, per se, to recognize its competence. The verification by
an ICSID Tribunal of the signature and ratification of an agreement for reciprocal
protection of investments is not sufficient for this Tribunal to declare its competence

automatically. It is necessary for the

“ Report of the Executive Directors on the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between the States and Nationals of Other States of March 18, 1965, paragraph 23.

* Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18. Decision on Jurisdiction of April 29,
2004, paragraph 19.

50

Tribunal first to analyze whether the dispute submitted to its competence is included
within the consent given by the signatory States and, consequently, subject to the
jurisdiction of the Centre.

170. In light of the above, a fundamental task of the Arbitral Tribunal to define its
jurisdiction is to determine which disputes are included within the consent granted by the
parties, considering primarily the Agreement itself.

171. In this vein, the Arbitral Tribunal does not agree with the argument raised by the
Claimant, namely: (i) the consent of El Salvador to the jurisdiction of the Centre was
given by that country when signing and ratifying the Agreement, without possibility to
subject said consent to limitations, and (ii) any limitation claimed to be imposed on the
consent granted constitutes a unilateral withdrawal of the consent, which violates Article

25(1) of the Convention. Specifically, Inceysa argued that:

“(t]he consent necessary to support the jurisdiction of the centre (sic) in this
concrete case and, pursuant to article (sic) 25 of the Convention, was given by the
Republic (sic) of El Salvador when signing and ratifying the BIT with the
Kingdom of Spain [...] The consent of El Salvador manifested in the BIT cannot
(sic) be limited. A limitation would be in fact nothing but a unilateral withdrawal
of the consent, contrary to the express provision of Art. 25(1) of the
Convention."
172. The foregoing statement is incorrect because analysis of the content and scope of
the consent of the parties who sign an agreement for the reciprocal protection
of investments cannot be considered as an imposition of limitations on such consent. On
the contrary, it is a mandatory exercise that must be undertaken by any Arbitral Tribunal
in order to decide whether or not the dispute brought before it is subject to its

competence, according to the real content of the consent manifested by the parties.

 

46 Counter-M ‘ial on Objections to Jurisdiction, page 38, hs 117 and 121.
51

173. In light of the above, the Arbitral Tribunal affirms that for the formation of the
consent referred to in Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, it is not sufficient to prove that
the host State of an investment executed an agreement for reciprocal protection of

 

investments. It is also 'y for the di in ion to be included within the

Pp q

scope of the consent given by the parties who signed the agreement.

vy. Guidelines to Determine the Scope of Consent

174. As explained in the previous section, there is no doubt that the parties, by their
written consent, are the ones that decide what types of disputes they will submit to
arbitration; however, it is the Tribunal to which a dispute is submitted that must
determine what is the scope of the consent given by the parties, and therefore which
disputes they agreed to submit to the jurisdiction of the Centre.

175. In the aforementioned terms, the work of the Arbitral Tribunal cannot be arbitrary
or anarchic. In this regard, arbitral jurisprudence has developed three fundamental
principles that must guide its task:

a) Absence of presumptions in favor or against jurisdiction;
b) Identification of the will of the Contracting States; and
c) Interpretation according to the principle of good faith.

a) Absence of presumptions

176. To avoid engaging in a partial or subjective analysis, it has been established that
any analysis of jurisdiction must be made with meticulous care, without starting from
presumptions in favor or against the jurisdiction of the Centre. Any presumption would
corrupt the analysis and would unduly limit or expand the original consent given by the
parties. In this regard, the case of Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Limited v.
Arab Republic of Egypt established the following:

52

"Clearly, then, there is no presumption of jurisdiction -- particularly where a
sovereign State is involved -- and the Tribunal must examine Egypts
objections to the jurisdiction of the Centre with meticulous care, bearing in
mind that jurisdiction in the present case exists only insofar as consent
thereto has been given by the Parties. This is not to say, however, that there is a
presumption against the conferment of jurisdiction with respect to a sovereign
State or that instruments purporting to confer jurisdiction should be interpreted
restrictively. Judicial and arbitral bodies have repeatedly pronounced in favor
of their own competence where the force of the arguments militating in favor
of jurisdiction is preponderant. (E.g., Temple of Preach Vihear (Preliminary
Objections), ICJ Reports 1961, p. 34; Chorzow Factory, PCI, Series A, No. 9, p.
32 (1925); Affaire des foréts du Rhodope central (preliminary issue), RIAA, vol.
3, p. 3104 (1931)). Moreover, as the Permanent Court of International Justice
observed in the Chorzow Factory case:

The fact that weighty arguments can be advanced to support the contention that it
has no jurisdiction cannot of itself create a doubt calculated to upset its
jurisdiction. (PCJ. Series A. No. 9, p. 32 (1927)).

Thus, jurisdictional instruments are to be interpreted neither restrictively nor
expansively, but rather objectively and in good faith, and jurisdiction will be
found to exist if -- but only if -- the force of the arguments militating in favor of it
is preponderant."

(Cl no hay pr i6n de jurisdiccién -- particularmente
cuando un Estado soberano esta involucrado -- y el Tribunal debe examinar las
objeciones de Egipto a la jurisdiccién del Centro con cuidado meticuloso,
teniendo en mente que la jurisdiccién en el presente caso existe unicamente
en el tanto que el consentimiento haya sido dado por las partes. Esto no
significa, sin embargo, que haya una presuncién contraria al conferimiento de la
jurisdiccién con respecto a un Estado soberano o que los instrumentos creados
para conferir jurisdiccién deban ser interpretados restrictivamente. Los
organismos judiciales y arbitrales se han pronunciado repetidamente a favor
de su propia competencia cuando la fuerza de los argumentos que militan a
favor de la jurisdiccién es preponderante. (E.g., Temple of Preach Vihear
(Objeciones preliminares), ICJ Reports 1961, p. 34; Chorzow Factory, PCIJ,
Serie A, No. 9, p. 32 (1925); Affaire des foréts du Rhodope central (question
préalable), RIAA, vol. 3, p. 3104 (1931)). Mas aun, como la Corte International de
Justicia expresdé en el caso Chorzow Factory:

El hecho de que puedan ser esgrimidos argumentos de peso para respaldar la
posicién de que no tiene jurisdiccién, no puede, por si mismo, crear una duda
calculada para negar su jurisdiccién.

7 Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, CSID Case No.
ARB/84/3. Decision on Jurisdiction of November 27, 1985, paragraph 63.

53

De esta manera, los instrumentos jurisdiccionales no deben ser interpretados ni
restrictiva ni expansivamente sino, mds bien, objetivamente y de buena fe, de
tal forma que se determine que hay jurisdiccién unicamente si los argumentos que
militan en su favor son preponderantes). (Free Translation by the Tribunal).

b) Identification of the will of the Contracting States

177. Once the presumptions are eliminated, in order to determine the scope and
requisites of the consent of the parties, ICSID tribunals must try to specify what was the
will of the parties to determine the scope of their consent. Thus, for example, in the case

Amco Asia Corporation et. al v. Indonesia the Tribunal considered the following:

"L...] like any other conventions, a convention to arbitrate is not to be construed
restrictively, nor, as a matter of fact, broadly or liberally. It is to be construed in a
way which leads to find out and to respect the common will of the parties: such
method of interpretation is but the application of the fundamental principle pacta
sunt servanda, a principle common, indeed, to all systems of internal law and to
international law. Moreover -- and this is again a general principle of law -- any
convention, including conventions to arbitrate, should be construed in good faith,
that is to say by taking into account the consequences of their commitments the
parties may be considered as having reasonably and legitimately envisaged."**

([...] como toda otra convencién, una convencién para arbitrar no debe ser
interpretada restrictivamente ni, tampoco, amplia o liberalmente. Debe ser
interpretada de una manera tal que lleve a averiguar y a respetar la voluntad
comun de las partes: ese método de interpretacién consiste en la aplicacién del
principio fundamental de pacta sunt servanda, un principio comtn, ciertamente, a
todos los sistemas de legislaciones internas y a la legislacién internacional.
Ademas -- y este es, de nuevo, un principio general de derecho -- toda
convencién, incluyendo las convenciones para arbitrar, deben ser interpretadas de
buena fe esto es, tomando en cuenta las consecuencias de las obligaciones de las
partes que puede considerarse razonable y legitimamente, que ellas previeron).
(Free Translation by the Tribunal).

178. It is important to note that, to determine the will of the parties, it is possible to
follow all of the methods recognized by international practice, with

“8 Amco Asia Corporation et al. v. Republic of Indonesia, ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision
on Jurisdiction, September 25, 1983, paragraph 14.

54

particular importance given to the exchanges of notes between Contracting States, as well

as the various draft treaties prior to the final one.

c) Principle of Good Faith

179. In addition, the Arbitral Tribunal must consider the principle of "Good Faith"

when determining the jurisdiction of the Centre.

180. In the same Amco case transcribed above, the need to interpret in good faith the
relevant normative provisions in an objective manner is emphasized, in order to define

correctly whether or not a certain dispute is submitted to the jurisdiction of the Centre.

181. The principle of good faith in this determination manifests itself in a twofold way:
(i) in the good faith with which the Arbitral Tribunal must act when making its
jurisdictional analysis and (ii) said analysis must start from the premise that the consent
of the parties was manifested in writing and given in good faith and, therefore, at the time
they manifested their consent, the parties did so with the sincere intent for it to produce

all of its effects under the circumstances agreed upon by them.

182. Having specified the above guidelines, it is necessary to concretely examine the
arguments on which El Salvador bases its objection, maintaining that disputes arising
from an investment made illegally are not subject to the jurisdiction of the Centre because

they are not included within the premises for which the consent was given.

183. Such being the case, this Arbitral Tribunal will next analyze whether indeed the
consent of the States which signed the BIT is limited to disputes arising from investments
made according to the law of the host State. It will equally analyze the parameters to be
considered by this Tribunal to decide that Inceysa’s investment was not made in

accordance with the law of the host State

55

and therefore the disputes arising from it are not within the competence of this Arbitral
Tribunal; finally, it will analyze whether or not the investment made by Inceysa falls
within the scope of the consent expressed by the Kingdom of Spain and by El Salvador
in the BIT.

vi. Types of limitations to consent

184, As explained above, the States that sign an agreement for reciprocal protection of
investments have broad powers to limit their consent only to the disputes that meet the
characteristics indicated by them. Therefore, it is perfectly valid and common for States
to exclude from their consent to the jurisdiction of the Centre a certain type of dispute, to
impose certain requisites for the investments made in their territory by an investor from
the other State to benefit from the protection of the agreement in question and to limit

their consent only to those that are within the limits indicated in the agreement.

185. States use multiple mechanisms to limit the scope of application of the
agreements for the reciprocal protection of investments signed by them. One of the most
commonly used refers to the so-called “accordance with the laws of the host State
clause.” Various tribunals of the Centre have referred to this limitation. This is the case
of the arbitral tribunal in the Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine case, in which it was decided as
follows:

"The requirement in Article 1(1) of the Ukraine-Lithuania BIT that investments

be made in compliance with the laws and regulations of the host state is a
common requirement in modern BITs." ”

(El requisito del Articulo 1(1) del Tratado Bilateral de Inversiones Ucrania-
Lituania de que las inversiones se hagan cumpliendo con las leyes y reglamentos
del estado anfitrién es un requisito comin en los TBIs modernos). (Free
Translation by the Tribunal).

* Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Decision on Jurisdiction of April 29,
2004, paragraph 84.

56

186. There are various forms by which States establish the “accordance with the laws
of the host State clause.” Among the mechanisms used to include this limitation is to add
it into the definition of investment itself, making it clear that for the purposes of that
reciprocal protection agreement only those made in accordance with the laws of the host

State will be deemed investments.

187. Furthermore, the signatory States may validly exclude from the protection of a
BIT investments made illegally, precisely in the articles that indicate the scope of
protection of the BIT in question. In this context, particularly relevant are the indications
of the tribunal in the Salini Costruttori S.P.A. and Italstrade S.P.A v. the Kingdom of

Morocco case in which it was decided that:

“{...] In envisaging "the categories of invested assets [...] in accordance with the
laws and regulations of the said party," the provision in question refers to the
legality of the investment and not to its definition. It aims in particular to ensure
that the bilateral Agreement does not protect investments which it should not,
generally because they are illegal.”°°

([...] al visualizar “las categorias de bienes invertidos, de acuerdo con las leyes y
regulaciones de dicha parte”, la norma en cuestién se refiere a la legalidad de la
inversion y no a su definicién. Apunta, en particular, a asegurar que el Acuerdo
Bilateral no proteja inversiones que, en términos generales, no debe proteger, por
ser ilegales). (Free Translation by the Tribunal).

188. Consequently, the limitation of consent based on the “accordance with law
clause” may be contained not only in the definition of investment, but also in the precepts

related to “Protection” or even in the chapter related to “Promotion and Admission.”

189. To synthesize the above, it is useful to cite the arguments of the Respondent,

namely:

°° Salini Construttori S.p.A. v. Kingdom of Morocco, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/4, Decision on
Jurisdiction of July 23, 2001, paragraph 46.

57

"First, many investment treaties incorporate limitations into their definition of
investment [...] Alternatively or in addition, State Parties sometimes incorporate a
requirement of compliance with the host State's laws into provisions addressing
the applicability of the treaty [...] A common variation in applicability provisions
of investment treaties is to specify the prerequisite of investment legality for the
extension of treaty protections to investments made prior to the date the treaty
entered into force [...] Third, State Parties frequently incorporate "in accordance
with law" limitations into treaty provisions requiring host States to admit or
accept Joreign investments [...] Finally, State Parties frequently incorporate

with law" requi in the p pr ion and non-
impairment of qualifying investments, which is usually the first substantive
obligation section of the investment treaties."

 

(En primer lugar, muchos tratados de inversién incorporan limitaciones en su
definicién de “inversion” [...]. Alternativa o adicionalmente, los Estados Partes
algunas veces incorporan, en las disposiciones referentes a la aplicabilidad del
tratado, el requisito de que se cumpla con las leyes del estado anfitrién [...]. Una
variacién comin en lo que respecta a las disposiciones de aplicabilidad de los
tratados de inversién es la de especificar el prerrequisito de la legalidad de la
inversién para que las inversiones hechas antes de la fecha en la que el tratado
entré en vigencia gocen de la proteccién del tratado [...]. En tercer lugar, los
Estados Contratantes frecuentemente incorporan la limitacién de que las
inversiones se hagan conforme a la ley en las normas del tratado que exigen que
los estados anfitriones admitan o acepten las inversiones extranjeras [...].
Finalmente, los Estados Contratantes frecuentemente incorporan la exigencia de
que las inversiones se hagan conforme con la ley “en las normas que protegen y
garantizan la no afectacién de inversiones que califiquen como tales la cual es,
usualmente, la primera seccién de las obligaciones sustantivas de los tratados de
inversién). (Free Translation by the Tribunal).

vii. The characteristics and scope of the consent given by Spain and El
Salvador in the BIT

190. Having indicated that it is valid and common for States that sign an agreement for
reciprocal protection of investments to limit the protection of the agreement to
investments made in accordance with the laws of the host State, it is the task of this
Arbitral Tribunal to decide whether in the Agreement signed between Spain and El
Salvador these States limited the protection of the BIT only

>! Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, pages 59, 60 and 61.
58

to investments made in accordance with the laws of the host State and, consequently,

excluded from that protection those made illegally.

191. As indicated when analyzing the scope of consent, for this purpose it is necessary
to apply the principles of good faith, identification of the will of the parties and absence

of a presumption in favor or against consent.

192. In the identification of the will of the Contracting States of the Agreement, the
travaux preparatoires shed light on the intent of the Republic of El Salvador and the
Kingdom of Spain. In this regard, this Tribunal considers relevant the indications
contained in the communications exchanged between El Salvador and Spain days before
the entry into force of the Agreement. In one of these communications, El Salvador
made certain observations to Spain about the draft text of the Agreement. We transcribe

below from this letter the following:

"THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN RELATIONS OF EL SALVADOR sincerely
greets the Honorable Embassy of the Kingdom of Spain, in reference to the draft
Agr for the Reciprocal P: of i between the Government

of Spain and the Government of E] Salvador.

 

THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN RELATIONS most respectfully brings to the
attention of this Honorable Embassy the observations of the Government of El
Salvador in connection with said draft, which are listed below:

[...] I.- Add to the end of sub-paragraph 5 on the designation of “investments,” in
paragraph 2 of Article 1, the following language: “...in accordance with the laws
in force in each of the Contracting Parties” [...].°

193. The above quote clearly indicates that El Salvador had, from the beginning of the
negotiations, the intent to limit the protection of the Agreement it was about to sign only
to investments made in accordance with its laws. Furthermore, it is clear that, by said
communication, El Salvador tried to include this limitation to its consent in the

definition of "investment."

2 Correspondence of the Ministry of Foreign Relations of El Salvador, dated January 31, 1995,
attached as exhibit to the Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction of El Salvador.

59

194, Faced with the request of El Salvador, Spain informed El Salvador that it was not
necessary to include the limitation requested in the definition of “investment,” because it
was included in the text of the Agreement. Consequently, Spain answered the request of
the Government of El Salvador indicating the following:

“Paragraph 2: The purpose of Article 1 is to define the concepts that will appear
in the other articles of the Agreement, which will establish the conditions and
treatment to be given to Investments.

We consider that the reference to the requirement that Investments must be made
according to the internal legislation of each of the Contracting Parties is more
closely related to the process of admission of the Investment. Hence, Article II,
titled "Promotion and Admission," has a section expressly indicating that each
Contracting Party will admit Investments according to its legal provisions.
Thus, it is a necessary condition for an investment to benefit.”*? (Emphasis
added).

195. The above communication indicates, without any doubt, that the will of the parties
to the BIT was to exclude from the scope of application and protection of the Agreement
disputes originating from investments which were not made in accordance with the laws

of the host State.

196. Additionally, the communication of Spain confirms that, in the case of the BIT,
the limitation “in accordance with the laws” was not included in the article in which the
word “Investment” is defined because, as indicated by the Kingdom of Spain itself, this
Article is intended to define concepts that will appear in other provisions of the BIT,
which, in its words “establish the conditions and treatment to be given to investments.”
Finally, the possibility of limiting the scope of consent in other provisions of the
Agreement was reflected in absolute clarity in the final sentence of the communication

of the Kingdom of Spain, according to which making

53 Correspondence of the Embassy of Spain, dated February 2, 1995, in response to the
correspondence of the Ministry of Foreign Relations of El Salvador, dated January 31, 1995,
attached as exhibit to the Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction of El Salvador.

“Tdem.

60

an investment in accordance with the laws of the host State is a “necessary condition for

an investment to benefit.”

197. According to the foregoing, the Claimant is not right to indicate that in order to
determine whether its investment falls within the scope of the Agreement, it is necessary
to examine only the definition of the term investment, contained in Article 1(2) of the
Agreement, where there is no reference to the clause "in accordance with law," and that
it is not possible to examine other clauses of the Agreement to determine the type of

investments protected by it.

198. Indeed, if the Contracting States themselves agree that the limitation “in
accordance with laws” could be included (as it actually was) in parts of the BIT other
than the definition of investment, such as that referring to promotion and admission, it is
obvious that the restrictive interpretation sustained by Inceysa is incorrect. Consequently,
the following argumentation of Claimant is contrary to the evident intent of the
Contracting Parties:

"It is evident that the issues related to "Promotion and admission," as well as
"Protection" are specific issues regulated within the scope of an agreement with
global objectives. The jurisdictional issue cannot be treated through the
interpretation of specific and special clauses, but must be examined under the
general approach of the scope of application of the Agreement. In reference to
"investments" as the subject of the agreement, we must refer to the definition
contained in article 1 of the BIT, the only clause suitable to delimit the scope of
application of the BIT itself. The definition of "investment" contained in article 1
is open (in the sense that it is not exclusive) and not exclusive of (in the sense that
it does not contain a list of the types of investments expressly excluded from the
scope of application of the Agreement). In addition, the definition of "investment"
itself is focused on the identification of objective "types" of assets and not on
judgments that may be subjective, such as compliance with the national law of
Contracting Parties of the investments. In summary: whether an "investment" is
an investment that falls within the scope of application of the BIT or not, it will be
necessary to comply with the definition contained in article 1 and not in other
specific clauses of the BIT.”

°° Idem.
* Rejoinder on Objections to Jurisdiction, page 8, paragraph 22.
61

199. Likewise, there are no grounds for the assertions of Inceysa in its Rejoinder,

where it indicates:

"L...] the only logical and legal sense to support the literal and teleological
interpretation of the expression "in accordance with its legislation (legal
provisions)" is to refer to the reservation by the Host State of the investment of its
sovereignty, within the scope of the regulation of the conditions for admission of
an investment made by the other contracting State, as well as the regulation of its
protection. Thus, a State can limit at its discretion the type of investment
admissible through its internal laws (for example in the case of investments in
sectors subject to State poly), without violating the BIT, and establish freely
its own internal rules suitable to protect foreign investments (avoiding, for
example, extending such protection to investments not admitted). These are
measures of an economic nature, rather than clauses limiting the consent of the
Host State to the jurisdiction of ICSID."*”

 

200. So, after analyzing the intent of Spain and El Salvador obvious in the travaux

preparatoires of the Agreement, we must look at its own terms. Thus, consistent with

 

what Spain indicated, the conditions imposed on i are specifically blished

in other provisions of the BIT, specifically in two different articles that refer to the clause

of "in accordance with law."

201. Article III, titled "Protection," indicates that "Each Contracting Party shall

 

protect in its territory the i made, in de with its legislati 058 by
investors from the other Contracting Party, thus excluding from the protection of the BIT

investments made illegally.

202. On this topic, the Respondent is right when it asserts that:

“As a threshold matter, it seems clear that the placement of limiting language
directly in Article III -- “Cada Parte Contratante protegera en su territorio las
inversiones efectuadas, conforme a su legislacién... y no obstaculizard... tales
inversiones...” -- bars any claim for violation of Article III with respect to an

*7 Idem, page 10, paragraph 25.

°8 Agr for the Reci 1 P: ion and P i signed between the
Republic of El Salvador and the Kingdom of Spain, Article III oupboals added),

62

 

203.

investment made in significant contravention of Salvadoran law, such as through
gross misrepresentation or fraud in a government tender process. El Salvador's
consent to the imposition of Article III obligations -- and hence to ICSID's
jurisdiction to hear allegations of Article III violations -- is expressly limited to
investments made in accordance with law. Any other reading would render the
language "conforme a su legislacién" entirely without meaning,.”®?

(Como un asunto preliminar, parece claro que el ubicar lenguaje limitante
directamente en el Articulo III (“cada parte contratante protegera en su territorio
las inversiones efectuadas conforme a su legislacién... y no obstaculizara... tales
inversiones...”) prohibe cualquier reclamo de violacién del Articulo III con
respecto a una inversién hecha en significativa contravencién de la ley
salvadorefia tales como aquellas efectuadas por medio de claras simulaciones 0
fraudes en una licitacion gubernamental. El consentimiento de El Salvador a la
imposicién de las obligaciones del Articulo III y, consecuentemente, a la
jurisdiccién del CIADI para conocer de alegatos de la violacién de ese articulo,
esté expresamente limitado a las inversiones hechas de acuerdo con la ley.
Cualquier otra lectura de ese texto dejaria a la expresién “conforme a su
legislacién” enteramente sin sentido). (Free Translation by the Tribunal).

In synthesis, by interpreting in good faith Article III of the Agreement, and by

attributing to each of its words the meaning and scope the parties wanted to give them,
and according to the will of the contracting States manifested in the travaux

preparatoires, it is clear that the only correct interpretation of said article must be in the

sense that any investment made against the laws of El Salvador is outside the protection

of the Agreement and, therefore, from the competence of this Arbitral Tribunal.

204.

Moreover, and in the same sense, Article II is convincing. According to Article II,

the Agreement:

"[...] will also apply to investments made before its entry into force by the
investors of a Contracting Party in accordance with the laws of the other
Contracting Party in the territory of the latter [.. J (Emphasis added).

* Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, page 64.

© Agr

for the Reci 1 Pi ion and Pt of I signed between the

Republic of El Salvador and the Kingdom of Spain, Article II.

63

205. Reading the article transcribed above, it is evident that the Agreement will not
apply to investments made in the territory of any of the signatory parties before the
enactment of the BIT, when they were made illegally. In this vein, and according to an
interpretation, as a matter of reason, the Agreement will also not apply to investments
which, having been made after the execution of the Agreement, were not made in

accordance with the legislation of El Salvador.

206. The above affirmation is reinforced by a harmonious interpretation of the
Agreement, as the clause "in accordance with law" appears both in the article on
"Protection," and in the article that regulates "Promotion and Admission," indicating that
investments that do not comply with the requisite of having been made "in accordance
with the laws" of the signatory State will not be admitted (Article II, (1)). This clearly
indicates that the BIT leaves investments made illegally outside of its scope and benefits.

207. Based on the foregoing arguments, this Arbitral Tribunal considers that the
consent granted by Spain and El Salvador in the BIT is limited to investments made in
accordance with the laws of the host State of the investment. Consequently, this Tribunal
decides that the disputes that arise from an investment made illegally are outside the
consent granted by the parties and, consequently, are not subject to the jurisdiction of the
Centre, and that this Tribunal is not competent to resolve them, for failure to meet the
requirements of Article 25 of the Convention and those of the BIT.

viii. Analysis of Inceysa’s investment in light of the scope of the consent given
by Spain and E] Salvador in the BIT

208. The Tribunal having decided that the consent given by the Kingdom of Spain and
the Republic of El Salvador excludes investments not made in accordance with the laws
of the host State, it must

determine whether the investment that generated the dispute raised before it was made in
accordance with the laws of the host State, ie. in accordance with the laws: of El
Salvador, and in order to determine thereafter whether this Tribunal is competent or not

to hear the dispute submitted to it.

209. Before deciding whether the investment made by Inceysa is protected by the BIT,
considering that it was made in accordance with the laws of El Salvador, it is important
to repeat that, as the legality of the investment is a premise for this Tribunal’s jurisdiction,
the determination of such legality can only be made by the tribunal hearing the case, i.e.
by this Arbitral Tribunal.

210. Consequently, any resolutions or decisions made by the State parties to the
Agreement concerning the legality or illegality of the investment are not valid or
important for the determination of whether they meet the requirements of Article 25 of
the Convention and of the BIT, in order to decide whether or not the Arbitral Tribunal is
competent to hear the dispute brought before it.

211. Sustaining an opinion different than the one described above would imply giving
signatory States of agr for reciprocal p ion of i that include the
“in accordance with law” clause the power to withdraw their consent unilaterally (because
they would have the power to determine whether an investment was made in accordance

with their legislation), once a dispute arises in connection with an investment.

212. Such being the case, this Tribunal finds unfounded the argument of the Claimant
to the effect that the determination of the alleged illegal character of Inceysa’s investment
is a matter that has already been resolved to the contrary by the Supreme Court of Justice
of El Salvador on two occasions, and said decisions constitute res judicata and,

therefore, prevent this Arbitral Tribunal from ruling in any way.

65

213. Indeed, what this Arbitral Tribunal must do is to determine the legality of the
investment solely and exclusively for the purpose of deciding on its competence. This
decision cannot be left up to the Courts of the host State, because this would give the
State the possibility to redefine the scope and content of its own consent to the

jurisdiction of the Centre unilaterally and at its complete discretion.

214. Moreover, and from the viewpoint of strict procedural theory, this Tribunal does
not accept that the determination of the legality of the investment of the Claimant
has the status of res judicata, because it was resolved to the contrary by the Supreme
Court of Justice of El Salvador. In fact, as we shall see, in this case, the basic requisites of
res judicata are not met, namely (i) identity of parties and (ii) identity of claims.

215. It is clear that in the lawsuits invoked by the Claimant, the parties were different
from those who participate in this arbitration, as they were filed respectively by Mustang,
S.A. de C.V. and Supervisién y Control, S.A. against MARN resolution No. 351-2000,
which awarded to Inceysa and ICASUR the bid to operate the inspection stations for

vehicles, so that it is evident that there was no identity of claims either.

216. In addition, the issues decided by the Supreme Court of Justice had to do with the
legality of certain administrative acts, and the investment in itself was not examined in

any manner in those proceedings.

217. The above makes it obvious that in this case the necessary foundations for the

application of res judicata alleged by Inceysa do not exist.

218. Having clarified the foregoing matter, this Tribunal must determine whether or
not the investment that is the subject of the dispute was made in accordance with the
legislation of the host State, i.e. in accordance with the laws of El Salvador. This raises

an initial

66

need for this Tribunal to determine the laws and governing legal principles in El

Salvador applicable to the investment that gave rise the dispute at hand.

219. The dispute presented arises from alleged violations of the BIT. This Agreement
constitutes, according to Article 144 of the Political Constitution of El Salvador, a law of
the Republic, as indicated expressly in its text:

"Article 144.- International treaties concluded by El Salvador with other States or
international institutions are considered laws of the Republic upon their entry
into force, in accordance with the provisions of such treaties and of this
Constitution." (Emphasis added).

220. In light of the above, the BIT, as valid law in El Salvador, is the primary and
special legislation this Tribunal must analyze to determine whether Inceysa’s investment

was made in accordance with the legal system of that Nation.

221. This does not necessarily imply that the investment that is the subject of the
dispute brought here is protected by the BIT, but that, in order to determine whether the
investment benefits from that protection, it is necessary to analyze whether it was made in
accordance with the requisites imposed in the Agreement. In other words, asserting that
the BIT, as the valid law of El Salvador, applies to Inceysa’s investment is not the same

as asserting that the latter benefits from the protection of the agreement.

222. So, to determine the way to apply the provisions contained in the BIT to the
present dispute, the Tribunal will analyze paragraph 3 of Article XI, which establishes the
following:

"[...] 3. The arbitration will be based on:

- the provisions of this Agreement and those of other agreements executed
between the Contracting Parties;

67

- generally recognized rules and principles of International Law;

- the national law of the Contracting Parties in whose territory the investment was
made, including the rules regarding conflicts of laws [...]"

223. According to the foregoing, by applying the BIT as law of El Salvador, this
Tribunal is obligated to analyze the provisions of the Agreement to decide the issue
presented. Evidently, the Agreement does not contain substantive rules that permit a
determination whether Inceysa’s investment was made in accordance with the law of El
Salvador. Consequently, the Tribunal must analyze other legal instruments to decide this

issue.

224. The reference made in the Agreement to the generally recognized rules and
principles of International Law obliges this Tribunal, first of all and before analyzing the
legal provisions issued by the internal entities of the government of El Salvador, to
determine whether, according to said principles and rules, Inceysa’s investment can be
considered legally made.*!

225. To define the generally recognized principles and rules of International Law to
which the BIT refers, it is useful to consider the provisions set forth in Article 38 of the
Statute of the International Court of Justice, which reads as follows:

"Article 38

1, The Court, whose function is to decide in accordance with international law
such disputes as are submitted to it, shall apply:

a) international conventions, whether general or particular, establishing rules
expressly recognized by the contesting states;

b) international custom, as evidence of a general practice accepted as law;

°! 222 in fine.
68

c) the general principles of law recognized by civilized nations;

d) subject to the provisions of Article 59, judicial decisions and the teachings of
the most highly qualified publicists of the various nations, as subsidiary means
for the determination of rules of law. " (Emphasis added).

226. According to the precept transcribed above, the general principles of law are an
autonomous or direct source of International Law, along with international conventions

and custom.

227. Without attempting to define what the general principles of law are, the Tribunal
notes that, in general, they have been understood as general rules on which there is
international consensus to consider them as universal standards and rules of conduct that
must always be applied and which, in the opinion of important commentators, are rules of
law on which the legal systems of the States are based.

The international sources of international commercial arbitration law are
invariably of public origin. They largely consist of international conventions but
also include international custom, general principles of law and judicial decisions,
as listed in Article 38 of the Statute of the International Court of Justice.

In international commercial arbitration, however, only general principles of law
play an important role. They are frequently applied by arbitrators, particularly,
though not exclusively, when dealing with international state contracts."

(Las fuentes internacionales del derecho internacional de arbitraje comercial son
invariablemente de origen publico. En gran parte consisten en convenciones
internacionales, pero también incluyen a la bre internacional, los principios
generales del derecho y a la jurisprudencia, segun se enumera en el Articulo 38
del Estatuto de la Corte Internacional de Justicia.

Sin embargo, en el arbitraje comercial internacional, solamente los principios

generales del derecho tienen un papel importante. Son frecuentemente aplicados

por los arbitros, particularmente, aunque no exclusivamente, cuando se trata de
internacionales publicos). (Free Translation by the Tribunal).

© B, Gaillard and J. Savage, Chapter Il-Sources of Intemational Commercial Arbitration,
Fouchard Gaillard Goldman on International Commercial Arbitration (eds.) (1999), page 93.

69

228. Another commentator refers to this topic as follows:

"The general principles of Law are fundamental legal concepts, in other words,
their universal validity preserves them over time and space and, therefore, they
constitute a formal source as they serve as a basis for the creation of legal norms,
either general or individualized. These logical-legal postulates guide the creator
of the general rules (legislator or plenipotentiary authorized to conclude an
international treaty); the theoretician who speculates on these general norms or on
philosophical-legal problems related to them (jurisconsult); the creator of
individualized legal norms (judge or official representing the State); and any
person who claims to examine the intrinsic validity of a precept in force."

"The general principles of Law play a magnificent complementary mission to the
legal system, either national or international." 6

229. Based on the above, we analyze below Inceysa’s investment in light of the
general principles of law which the Arbitral Tribunal considers to be applicable to the

case.
a) Violation of the principle of good faith

230. Good faith is a supreme principle, which governs legal relations in all of their
aspects and content. Concerning the scope and content of the principle of good faith, it is
necessary to take into account the following comments:

"The Latin expression bona FIDE is used in the original or translated into various
languages, in Spanish “buena fe,” to indicate the spirit of loyalty, respect for the
law and fidelity, in other words, absence of dissimulation or fraud in relations
between two or several parties in a legal act."

231. In the contractual field, good faith means absence of deceit and artifice during the
negotiation and execution of instruments that gave rise to the investment, as well as
loyalty, truth and intent to maintain the equilibrium between the reciprocal performance
of the parties. In this regard, Master Diez Picazo noted that:

® Arellano Garcia Carlos. Derecho Internacional Privado, 4th Ed., Editorial Pornia, Mexico,
1980, page 87.

* Diccionario Juridico Mexicano, Universidad Nacional Auténoma de México, Editorial Porria,
Mexico, 1991, page 362.

70

"As we know, good faith is a standard of conduct regulated by the ethical
imperatives required under prevailing social conscience."

232. Any legal relation starts from an indispensable basic premise, namely the
confidence each party has in the other. If this confidence did not exist, the parties would
have never entered into the legal relation in question, because the breach of the
commitments assumed would become a certainty, whose only undetermined aspect would

be the question of time.

233. This implicit confidence that should exist in any legal relation is based on the
good faith with which the parties must act when entering into the legal relation, and
which is imposed as a generally accepted rule or standard. Asserting the contrary would
imply supposing that the commitment was assumed to be breached, which is an assertion
obviously contrary to the maxim Pacta Sunt Servanda, unanimously accepted in legal

systems.

234. It is clear to this Tribunal that the investment made by Inceysa in the territory of
El Salvador, which gave rise to the present dispute, was made in violation of the
principle of good faith.

235. During the proceedings conducted before this Tribunal, Inceysa’s violations of

the principle of good faith that must govern legal relations were proven.

236. Among Inceysa’s violations of the principle of good faith, as demonstrated in
chapter IV of this award, the Tribunal emphasizes the following: (i) Inceysa’s
presentation of false financial information as part of the tender made by it to participate in
the bid; (ii) false representations during the bidding process, in connection with the

experience and capacity necessary to

® Diez Picazo, Fundamentos del Derecho Civil Patrimonial, Editorial Civitas, Madrid, 5" Ed.,
page 398.

7

comply with the terms of the Contract, particularly concerning its alleged strategic
partner; (iii) falsity of the documents by which Inceysa sought to prove the
professionalism of Mr. Antonio Felipe Martinez Lavado, on whose career in large
measure it based its alleged aptness to perform the functions entrusted to it when winning
the bid; and (iv) the fact that it had hidden the existing relationship between Inceysa and
ICASUR, in clear violation of one of the fundamental pillars of the bidding rules.

237. The conduct mentioned above constitutes an obvious violation of the principle of
good faith that must prevail in any legal relationship. This Tribunal considers that these
transgressions of this principle committed by Inceysa represent violations of the
fundamental rules of the bid that made it possible for Inceysa to make the investment that
generated the present dispute. It is clear to this Tribunal that, had it known the
aforementioned violations of Inceysa, the host State, in this case El Salvador, would not

have allowed it to make its investment.

238. El Salvador gave its consent to the jurisdiction of the Centre, presupposing good
faith behavior on the part of future investors. El Salvador did not have any basis to
suppose that Inceysa would submit false information and would commit fraudulent acts
for the purpose of establishing a legal relationship with MARN, which was embodied in
the Contract that gives rise to this dispute.

239. By falsifying the facts, Inceysa violated the principle of good faith from the time
it made its investment and, therefore, it did not make it in accordance with Salvadoran
law. Faced with this situation, this Tribunal can only declare its incompetence to hear
Inceysa’s complaint, since its investment cannot benefit from the protection of the BIT,

as established by the parties during the negotiations and the execution of the agreement.

b) Violation of the principle nemo auditur propiam turpitudinem allegans

7n2

240. In addition, this Tribunal decides that the investment made by Inceysa violates the
principle Nemo Auditur Propiam Turpitudinem Allegans, which has been expressed in
Spanish as nadie puede beneficiarse de su propia torpeza o dolo. In connection with

this principle, there are various maxims that clearly apply to the present case:

a) "Ex dolo malo non oritur actio" (an action does not arise from fraud).

b) "Malitiis nos est indulgendum" (there must be no indulgence for malicious
conduct).

c) "Dolos suus neminem relevat" (no one is exonerated from his own fraud).

d) "In universum autum haec in ea re regula sequenda est, ut dolos omnimodo

puniatur" (in general, the rule must be that fraud shall be always punished).

e) "Unusquique doli sui poenam sufferat" (each person must bear the penalty for his
fraud).

f) "Nemini dolos suusprodesse debet" (nobody must profit from his own fraud).

241. All of the legal maxims indicated above are based on justice and have been

created on the basis of decisions in concrete cases.

242. Applying the first principle indicated above to the case at hand, we can affirm that
the foreign investor cannot seek to benefit from an investment effectuated by means of
one or several illegal acts and, consequently, enjoy the protection granted by the host
State, such as access to international arbitration to resolve disputes, because it is evident
that its act had a fraudulent origin and, as provided by the legal maxim, “nobody can
benefit from his own fraud.”

243. In the dispute brought to this Arbitral Tribunal, there are clear facts and reasons

that match the aforementioned supposition, since Inceysa acted

improperly in order to be awarded the bid that made its investment possible and,
therefore, it cannot be given the protection granted by the BIT. Sustaining the contrary
would be to violate the aforementioned general principles of law which, as indicated, are

part of Salvadoran law.

244. The clear and obvious evidence of the violations committed by Inceysa
during the bidding process lead this Tribunal to decide that Inceysa’s investment cannot,
under any circumstances, enjoy the protection of the BIT. Allowing Inceysa to benefit
from an investment made clearly in violation of the rules of the bid in which it originated
would be a serious failure of the justice that this Tribunal is obligated to render. No legal
system based on rational grounds allows the party that committed a chain of clearly
illegal acts to benefit from them.

¢) Violation of international public policy

245. International public policy consists of a series of fundamental principles that
constitute the very essence of the State, and its essential function is to preserve the

values of the international legal system against actions contrary to it.”

246. In line with the foregoing, the inclusion of the clause “in accordance with law” in
various BIT provisions is a clear manifestation of said international public policy, which
demonstrates the clear and obvious intent of the signatory States to exclude from its

protection investments made in violation of the internal laws of each of them.

% Monroy Cabra, Marco Gerardo. Tratado de Derecho Internacional Privado. Editorial Temis,
Fifth Edition, Colombia, 1999, page 249.

® Goldschmidt, Derecho Internacional Privado. Editorial Desalma, Eighth Edition, Buenos Aires,
page 163.

4

247. Therefore, the inclusion of the clause “in accordance with law” in the agreements
for reciprocal protection of investments follows international public policies designed to
sanction illegal acts and their resulting effects.

248. It is uncontroversial that respect for the law is a matter of public policy not only in
El Salvador, but in any civilized country. If this Tribunal declares itself competent to
hear the disputes between the parties, it would completely ignore the fact that, above any
claim of an investor, there is a meta-positive provision that prohibits attributing effects to

an act done illegally.

249. This Tribunal considers that assuming competence to resolve the dispute brought
before it would mean recognizing for the investor rights established in the BIT for
investments made in accordance with the law of host country. It is not possible to
recognize the existence of rights arising from illegal acts, because it would violate the
respect for the law which, as already indicated, is a principle of international public

policy.

250. The Tribunal agrees with El Salvador and notes that an interpretation of the
Agreement that would afford protection to investments made fraudulently would have
enormous repercussions for those States which signed agreements for reciprocal
protection of investments and included the clause “in accordance with law,” in order to
exclude from the protection of said treaties the investments not made in accordance with

the laws and other norms of the State that receives the investment.

251. In this vein, El Salvador correctly argued that:

"The interpretation of the El Salvador-Spain Investment Treaty raises broader
public policy issues than just the fate of Inceysa's damages claim. As discussed
above, there are countless other investment treaties involving dozens of other
countries that contain similar "in accordance with law" clauses. If one Investment

75

Treaty is read as protecting fraudulent or illegal investments, the others are open
to the same interpretation. But under the general principle of good faith
interpretation, treaties should be interpreted where possible to exclude fraud, not
encourage it. This is consistent with the public policy maxim ex dolo malo non
oritur actio, that "no right of action can have its origin in fraud": one obtaining
rights by fraud should not be able to further benefit by bringing legal action to
enforce those illegally obtained rights.

(La interpretacién del Tratado de Inversién E] Salvador-Espafia suscita cuestiones
més amplias de politica publica que el reclamo de dafios de Inceysa. Como se
discutié anteriormente, hay un sinnimero de tratados de inversién que
comprenden a docenas de otros paises los cuales contienen la clausula “conforme
a su legislacién”. Si se lee un tratado de inversion en el sentido de que protege
inversiones fraudulentas e ilegales, los demds estarian sujetos a la misma
interpretacién. Sin embargo, segiin el principio general de interpretacién de buena
fe, los tratados deben ser interpretados, cuando sea posible, en el sentido de
excluir y no de promover el fraude. Esto es congruente con la maxima de politica
publica de ex dolo malo non oritur actio de que ningun derecho a accionar puede
tener su origen en el fraude: quien obtenga derechos por medio de fraude no
puede beneficiarse adicionalmente, recurriendo a acciones legales para exigir los
derechos que obtuvo ilegalmente), (Free Translation by the Tribunal),

252. In light of the foregoing, not to exclude Inceysa’s investment from the protection of
the BIT would be a violation of international public policy, which this Tribunal cannot
allow. Consequently, this Arbitral Tribunal decides that Inceysa’s investment is not

protected by the BIT because it is contrary to international public policy.

d) Violation of the principle that prohibits unlawful enrichment

253. The acts committed by Inceysa during the bidding process are in violation of the
legal principle that prohibits unlawful enrichment.

254. The written legal systems of the nations governed by the Civil Law system
recognize that, when the cause of the increase in the assets of a certain person is illegal,

such enrichment must be sanctioned by preventing its consummation.

® Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, page 72.
16

255. Applying the principle discussed above to the case at hand, we note that Inceysa
resorted to fraud to obtain a benefit that it would not have otherwise obtained. Thus,
through actions that violate the legal principles stated above, Inceysa tried to enrich
itself, signing an administrative contract with MARN, which, without any doubt, would

produce considerable profit for it.

256. The clear evidence that proves the violations listed in chapter IV of this award
leads this Tribunal to decide that an interpretation that would grant BIT protection to
Inceysa’s illegal investment would favor its unlawful enrichment, which no tribunal

constituted according to the Agreement can do.

257. In conclusion, the Tribunal considers that, because Inceysa’s investment was
made in a manner that was clearly illegal, it is not included within the scope of consent
expressed by Spain and the Republic of El Salvador in the BIT and, consequently, the
disputes arising from it are not subject to the jurisdiction of the Centre. Therefore, this

Arbitral Tribunal declares itself incompetent to hear the dispute brought before it.

ix. Analysis of Inceysa’s investment in light of the Investment Law of El

Salvador

258. Starting from the considerations presented in the previous pages, this Tribunal can
only hold that Inceysa’s investment is also excluded from the unilateral offer to accept
the jurisdiction of the Centre made by the Salvadoran State in its Investment Law, as it
does not meet the requisite of legality necessary to satisfy the premises on which El
Salvador agreed to submit to the Centre,

77

259. In effect, just as is the case with the BIT, for Inceysa to access the jurisdiction of
the Centre, its investment must meet the premise of legality, as sustained by Mr. José

Roberto Tercero Zamora, in his expert opinion:

“Any consent to arbitration offered unilaterally by El Salvador in the Investment
Law would be in any case subject to the legality of the investment.”

260. This requirement of legality arises from the Constitution of El Salvador, which, in
its Article 96, establishes the following:

“Foreigners, from the moment they arrive in the territory of the Republic, will be
strictly obligated to respect the authorities and obey the laws and will acquire the
right to be protected by them” (the emphasis is not in original).””

261. To the same effect as the Constitution, the Foreigners Law of the Republic of El

Salvador indicates expressly that:

“Foreigners, from the moment they enter the national territory, are obligated to
respect the Constitution, the secondary laws and the authorities of the Republic;
acquiring the right to be protected by them” (emphasis added).”!

262. In accordance with the Constitution and the Foreigners Law, no person who
violated systematically the legal principles and foundations that made its investment
possible may claim the protection of that law. For a foreigner or foreign company to
benefit or be protected by Salvadoran legislation, it must comply with the condition of
respecting and obeying the laws whose protection it seeks. The foregoing principle is
expressed in the Investment Law itself, which

® Expert opinion of Mr. Tercero, para. 34.
” Constitution of the Republic of El Salvador, Art. 96.
au Foreigners Law, Art. 4

78

imposes on investors the obligation to comply with the laws of the Salvadoran State,
indicating:
“Every national or foreign investor shall comply with those obligations

established in the laws, specially regarding tax, labor, and social security
matters.”

263. Recognizing that the unilateral offer to accept the jurisdiction of the Centre made
by El Salvador in its L Law includes those di:

 

Pp arising from investments
that are openly and clearly contrary to the laws of El Salvador would be the same as
contradicting the text of the Salvadoran Constitution and of other laws of that country
concerning this matter. Likewise, a recognition in this sense would be a violation of
public policy, and would violate the principle that establishes that “no person may benefit
from his own fraud.” Therefore, the systematic interpretation of the Constitution, of the
Foreigners Law, of the Investment Law, and of the general principles of law deny
Inceysa the right to access the jurisdiction of the Centre.

264. In light of the foregoing, and considering the violations of Salvadoran law
committed by Inceysa when making its investment, as described in the previous pages,
this Tribunal decides that Inceysa cannot benefit from the rights granted by the
Investment Law because its “investment” does not meet the condition of legality
necessary to fall within the scope and protection of that law. Consequently, this Arbitral
Tribunal denies the jurisdiction of the Centre and its competence to decide the claim

arising from Inceysa’s investment.

B. Analysis of the competence of the Arbitral Tribunal according to the Service

Contract executed between El Salvador and Inceysa

i. Position of the Parties

” Investment Law, Art. 14.
719

265. The discussion concerning the competence of the Arbitral Tribunal based on the
Contract was raised by Inceysa and gave rise to a complex debate that involves not only
the Contract, but several normative texts of El Salvador. Given the amplitude and
complexity of the arguments of the parties, this Tribunal finds it pertinent to refer in

detail to the position of each of them.

a) Position of Inceysa

266. As indicated in its Request for Arbitration, Inceysa argues that the jurisdiction of
the Centre to resolve disputes arising from the Contract is based on the “renvoi” made
by Clause Twenty-one of the Contract to Salvadoran legislation, which indicates
arbitration as a mechanism for dispute resolution. (Request for Arbitration, pages 61 to

63). Said clause reads as follows:

“CLAUSE TWENTY-ONE. ARBITRATION. In cases of controversies,
disputes or differing interpretations of this contract, after exhausting direct

negotiations, both parties agree to submit to_an arbitration proceeding in
accordance with Salvadoran Law” (emphasis added).

267. Under this line of reasoning, although it is true that, as admitted by the Claimant
in its Request for Arbitration, the Contract does not grant “expressly direct competence

”7 in accordance with

to ICSID or to any other international Arbitration Institution,
Salvadoran law to which the Contract refers, the Centre has jurisdiction to hear this

dispute.

268. To sustain the foregoing, the Claimant considers that the following laws of El

Salvador apply to this case:

i) Article 25 of the Mediation, Conciliation and Arbitration Law, which establishes the
following:

® Request for Arbitration, page 61, paragraph 125.
80

“Disputes in which the State and public law entities are interested parties may be
submitted to arbitration, provided they concern disposable rights and arise from a
legal relationship involving property rights governed by private law or of a
contractual nature.

In disputes arising from contracts the Salvadoran State or public law entities
conclude with nationals or foreigners, special laws or international treaties or
conventions shall apply and, in their absence, the provisions of this law.

This type of dispute may be resolved by arbitration at the Centers established in
this law.

Private law companies with state capital or mixed economy companies may agree
freely and without prior authorization that the disputes arising from their contracts
with nationals or domiciled foreigners or that refer to their own assets will be
submitted to Arbitration.”

ii) Article 77 of the same Mediation, Conciliation and Arbitration Law, which provides:

“Disputes arising from contracts concluded by the Salvadoran State and public
entities with nationals or non-domiciled foreigners, or arising from a legal
relationship involving property rights governed by private law may be submitted
to International Arbitration, inside or outside the country, freely and without a
requirement of prior authorization, provided they concern disposable rights.

In all of these cases, the arbitration must be conducted by an Arbitration Center
with recognized prestige, and the State or its entities may submit to its regulations
and rules.”

iii) Article 15 of the Investment Law, which provides:

“In case controversies or differences arise between national or foreign investors
and the State regarding their investments carried out in E] Salvador, the parties
may resort to the competent courts of justice in accordance with the legal
procedures,

In the case of controversies arising between foreign investors and the State
regarding their investments in El Salvador, the investors may submit the
controversy to:

a) the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), with
the purpose of solving the controversy through conciliation and

81

arbitration, in accordance with the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of other States (ICSID Convention);

b) International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) with the
purpose of solving the controversy through conciliation and arbitration, in

d with the p di of the Additional Facility of ICSID; in those
cases in which the foreign investor involved in the controversy is a national of a
State that is not a contracting party to the ICSID Convention.”

 

iv) Article 165 of the Public Contracting and Acquisitions Law, which provides as
follows:

“After an attempt at direct settlement without finding a solution to any of the
disputes, it is possible to resort to arbitration by equitable arbitrators subject to the
applicable provisions of the pertinent laws, taking into account the modifications
established in this chapter.”

269. Finally, in order to justify the jurisdiction of the Centre to hear the disputes
arising from the Contract, Inceysa also affirms that the BIT concluded between Spain
and El Salvador applies to this case, because this international treaty is a substantial part
of Salvadoran legislation, as established in Article 144 of the Constitution of El
Salvador. Inceysa does not provide any explanation as to which of the provisions of the
treaty justify the competence of this Arbitral Tribunal to hear the disputes arising from
the Contract.

b) Position of El Salvador

270. In its Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, the Respondent argues that El
Salvador never consented to the jurisdiction of the Centre to hear contractual disputes,
and that, on the contrary, the mechanism established in the Contract to resolve this type
of dispute was local arbitration, as provided in the text of the Contract and by the
declaration of the negotiators of the Contract on behalf of MARN, Messrs. José Antonio
Calderén Martinez and Marcial Antonio Pineda Zamora. (Memorial on Objections to

Jurisdiction, page 78).

271. El Salvador argues that the intention of the parties when concluding Clause
Twenty-one of the Contract was to establish as a mechanism for dispute resolution ad
hoc \ocal arbitration, to be governed by the arbitration rules in force at the time in El
Salvador, provided in the Code of Civil Procedure, in the Commercial Code and in the
Code of Mercantile Procedure, rather than an international arbitration conducted by the
Centre. It adds that, even if the Salvadoran legislation to which Claimant refers were
applicable to the case, due to the alleged “renvoi” made by said Clause Twenty-one of the
Contract, the fact is that no rule in the legislation of El Salvador authorizes the
jurisdiction of the Centre for merely contractual violations, and there is no written consent
given by it to the jurisdiction of the Centre for these matters, as required by Article 25 of
the ICSID Convention.

272. To support this argument, El Salvador contends that the main commentators on
international arbitration maintain that, when the parties do not indicate in their arbitration
agr an institution to admini arbitration or a set of arbitration rules, it is
considered that they have established ad hoc arbitration as the mechanism for dispute
resolution. The commentators to which the Respondent refers are Gary B. Born and

Alan Redfern and Martin Hunter, who express, respectively, the following views:

“Ad hoc arbitrations are not conducted under the auspices or supervision of an
arbitral institution. Instead, parties simply agree to arbitrate, without designating
any institution to administer their arbitration.”

(Los arbitrajes ad hoc no se conducen bajo los auspicios o la supervision de una
institucién arbitral. Las partes simplemente convienen en un arbitraje, sin designar
ninguna institucién que lo administrara). (Free Translation by the Tribunal).

“An ad hoc arbitration usually takes place when the arbitration clause in the
original agreement between the parties provides for arbitration without
designating any arbitral institution and without referring to any particular set of
institutional rules.””°

74 G. BORN. International Commercial Arbitration, 2d ed., 2001, page 12.

75 A. Redfern & M. Hunter. Law and Practice of International Commercial Arbitration, 3d ed.,
1999, page I-82.

83

(Un arbitraje ad hoc usualmente tiene lugar cuando la clausula arbitral que
aparece en el contrato original celebrado por las partes prevé un arbitraje, sin
designar una institucién arbitral y sin referirse a un grupo particular de normas
institucionales). (Free Translation by the Tribunal).

273. Consistent with the foregoing, and following the expert opinion of Mr. Tercero
(Statement of José Roberto Tercero Zamora, September 13, 2004, page 5), El Salvador
considers that, pursuant to the second paragraph of Article 1437 of the Salvadoran Civil
Code, which governs the Contract, its Clause Twenty-one must be interpreted “against”
the claim of the Claimant and, therefore, it is necessary to consider that it refers to local

ad hoc arbitration.

274. Indeed, by applying the principles of interpretation of contracts contained in the
Civil Code, Mr. Tercero maintains in his expert opinion that the mechanism for dispute

resolution indicated in the Contract is local arbitration (Ibid, page 6).

275. To support this assertion, Mr. Tercero starts from the premise that it was at the
request of “the lawyers of the Spanish companies that won the bid” that said Clause
Twenty-one was included in the Contract. He reaches this conclusion starting from (i)
the witness statement of Atty. Pineda” and (ii) the fact that the rules of the bid did not
include any reference to arbitration and, therefore, if it was included in the Contract it

was at the request of Inceysa.

276. The second paragraph of Article 1437 of the Civil Code of El Salvador establishes
the following:

“Ambiguous clauses that have been extended or dictated by one of the parties,
being either the creditor or the debtor, will be interpreted against them, provided
the ambiguity results from the lack of an explanation that should have been given
by it.”

*© Witness Statement of Atty. Marcial Antonio Pineda Zamora of August 25, 2004, pages 3 and 4.
84

277. This being the case, according to El Salvador and Mr. Tercero, and in line with
the text of the aforementioned article, because the lawyers of the Spanish companies were
the ones who “extended” Clause Twenty-one (according to the statement of Atty.
Pineda), its alleged ambiguity is directly imputable to Inceysa, because if it wanted to
submit the disputes arising from the Contract to international arbitration under the
ICSID rules, Inceysa could have proposed clear and precise terms, which would not
leave doubt about the intent of the parties. The lack of clarity must, therefore, be

interpreted against Inceysa, according to the aforementioned article.

278. El Salvador argues that the will of the parties when they executed Clause
Twenty-one of the Contract was to provide for local arbitration governed by the
arbitration rules in force in that country at the time of the execution of the Contract, i.e.,
the rules established in the Code of Civil Procedure, in the Commercial Code and in the
Code of Mercantile Procedure, but in no way by the legislative provisions on which the

Claimant seeks to base the jurisdiction of the Centre.

279. Moreover, El Salvador argues that, even if the provisions on which Inceysa is
seeking to base the jurisdiction of the Centre were applicable to the case in question, none
of them implies the consent of El Salvador to the jurisdiction of the Centre to resolve

merely contractual disputes, as explained below.

280. BIT. EI Salvador contends that the “renvoi” made in Clause Twenty-one of the
Contract to Salvadoran legislation, including the BIT, cannot grant the Centre
jurisdiction to hear merely contractual disputes, simply because the BIT does not grant

this jurisdiction.
281. Indeed, according to El Salvador, Clause XI of the BIT grants jurisdiction to the

Centre to hear “matters regulated by this Agreement,” rather than merely contractual
matters, as claimed by Inceysa.

85

282. Investment Law. In line with its defense, El Salvador affirms that the protection
granted by the Investment Law is exclusively limited to investments made in accordance
with its laws and, therefore, Article 15 of its Investment Law cannot constitute grounds
for the jurisdiction of the Centre to hear a dispute related to an investment arising from a

contract.

283. In addition, El Salvador asserts that Inceysa cannot base the jurisdiction of the
Centre to hear contractual disputes on Article 15 of the Investment Law because, to do so,
its action would have to derive from a right granted by the law itself and not, as in this
case, from a right arising from a contract. In this regard, El Salvador stated the

following:

“{...] to invoke the particular alternate dispute provision set forth in the law --
arbitration before ICSID -- a foreign investors claim must have as its essential
cause of action a right or benefit conferred by that Law. Nothing in the text or the
legislative history of the Investment Law suggests an intent to override parties'
private agreements for resolution of contractual disputes. Certainly, nothing
suggests that the Investment Law was meant to allow foreign investors who had
expressly agreed to local arbitration of contractual disputes to invoke Article 15 to
escape that agreement.”””

({...] para invocar la particular disposicién sobre resoluci6n alternativa de disputas
establecida en la ley -arbitraje ante el CIADI- el reclamo de un inversionista
extranjero debe tener como su causa de accién esencial un derecho o beneficio
conferido por esa Ley. Ninguna norma del texto ni la historia legislativa de la Ley
de Inversiones sugieren que exista la intencién de dejar sin efecto los acuerdos
privados de las partes para la resolucién de disputas contractuales. Ciertamente,
nada sugiere que la Ley de Inversiones tuviera el propdésito de permitir a los
inversionistas extranjeros, que hubieran convenido expresamente, en un arbitraje
local para resolver sus disputas contractuales, invocar el Articulo 15 para escapar
de ese acuerdo), (Free Translation by the Tribunal).

284. Public Contracting and Acquisitions Law. El Salvador argues that neither
Article 165 of this Law, nor any other can serve as basis for the jurisdiction of the Centre
on contractual claims, because this law does not make any reference to international
arbitration much less to arbitration administered by the Centre, and therefore the requisite
of

7” Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, page 94.
86

consent required by Article 25 of the ICSID Convention is not fulfilled. In addition, El
Salvador asserts that this Law establishes its own procedural arbitration rules, so it
cannot be considered as referring to international arbitration administered by an

institution, such as the Centre, which has its own procedure.

285. Mediation, Conciliation and Arbitration Law. El Salvador maintains that it
was impossible for the parties to have agreed in Clause Twenty-one of the Contract to
refer to the Salvadoran Law of Mediation, Conciliation and Arbitration because, at the
time the Contract was executed, such law did not exist yet. In addition, El Salvador
maintains that the provisions of that law on which Inceysa seeks to base the jurisdiction
of the Centre (Articles 25 and 77) do not refer whatsoever to international arbitration
administered by the Centre and, therefore, do not meet the requisite of written consent
required by Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.

286. Finally, following Mr. Tercero’s opinion, El Salvador argues that Article 77 of
the Mediation, Conciliation and Arbitration Law, on which Inceysa seeks to base the
jurisdiction of the Centre, has a permissive nature, rather than a mandatory nature, and
therefore it cannot be understood as binding on the parties, nor can it prevail over the

arbitration agreements executed previously by them (page 97).

ii) Additional arguments of the Parties concerning the jurisdiction of the
Centre

287. After El Salvador raised the objection to the jurisdiction of the Centre in the
terms described above, Inceysa, in order to defend the competence of this Arbitral
Tribunal to hear the disputes arising from the Contract, presented in its memorial of

November 4, 2004, the following considerations.

87

288. In connection with the witness statements of the negotiators of the Contract on
behalf of MARN, Mr. Calderén and Atty. Pineda, with which El Salvador seeks to prove
that the intention of the parties when agreeing on Clause Twenty-one of the Contract was
to establish local arbitration as the dispute resolution mechanism, Inceysa contested the

impartiality of the witnesses in the following terms:

“And, in conclusion, the claimant alleges that the statements of Messrs. Calder6n
and Pineda are not admissible because the witnesses do not have the necessary
impartiality of the witnesses since they are economically and politically involved
in the dispute, and closely related to the respondent and therefore cannot have
evidentiary value in favor of those who propose them.””*

289. Inceysa also argues that because of the nature of the Contract, as a contract for
economic development, the reference in Clause Twenty-one to Salvadoran legislation
cannot be understood to refer to the Code of Civil Procedure, or to the Commercial Code
or to the Code of Mercantile Procedure because this “goes violently against the very
nature of the contract ... and particularly against its transnational transcendence” and, in
addition, “because the rules to which the “witnesses” refer do not contain specific clauses

related to an arbitration proceeding.”

290. The Claimant maintains that the nature of the Contract requires that the
reference to arbitration in its Clause Twenty-one be understood as a reference to

international arbitration and argues:

"In addition, by the very nature of the contract, an economic development contract
or “state contract,” pursuant to general principles of Law recognized by
International Law, such as the Principle of Good Faith or pacta sunt servanda,
cannot reach any other conclusion, but that the foreign investor, when signing the
arbitration clause in Art. 21, had to understand by “arbitration proceeding in
accordance with Salvadoran Law” that the parties were referring to international
arbitration and particularly within the scope of application of the Salvadoran Law
especially targeted at regulating and supporting foreign investments.

78 Reply on Objections to Jurisdiction, page 18, paragraph 50.
” Ibid, page 22, paragraph 59.
88

Nothing would have prevented the parties from stipulating an arbitration clause
referring to an arbitration proceeding "in El Salvador," or even better, excluding
expressly international arbitration. It is clear that the parties did not decide this
way because (sic) in this case the investor would have never made the
investment."*°

291. In addition, and concerning the Salvadoran legislation in force when the Contract
was signed, particularly the Mediation, Conciliation and Arbitration Law, the Claimant
argues that:

"[...] [it] cannot in good faith be limited exclusively to the Salvadoran legislation
in force at the time of execution of the contract and to the prejudice of the foreign
investor, but it is recognized that the manifestation of consent referred to in article
(sic) 25 of the Agreement must exist at the time of the request for arbitration
before ICSID, and not at the time when the investment that is the subject of the
dispute started or was made.”*!

292. Finally, the Claimant maintains that the special legislation, international
conventions and treaties to which the Mediation, Conciliation and Arbitration Law refers
are the BIT and the Investment Law, which, in its opinion, constitute an express and

unequivocal reference to the jurisdiction of the Centre.

293. Starting from the statements made by the Claimant in its counter-memorial on
objections to the jurisdiction of the Centre, in its Reply, El Salvador argued that,
although the Claimant maintains that, when entering into Clause Twenty-one of the
Contract it always understood that it referred to international arbitration, the reality is
that Inceysa did not submit any statement of a witness who negotiated the Contract to
support the fact, as El Salvador did.

294. Concerning the challenge to the reliability as witnesses of Messrs. Calderén
and Atty. Pineda raised by Inceysa, El Salvador maintains that these two persons had
direct knowledge of the facts that happened and that their testimony could have benefited
either one of the two parties.

® Ibid, page 43, paragraphs 135 and 136 (emphasis in original).
5! hid, page 44, paragraph 137.
89

295. Concerning Inceysa’s argument that “Nothing would have prevented the parties
from stipulating an arbitration clause referring to an arbitration proceeding “in El

Salvador”

or, even better, excluding expressly international arbitration;" El Salvador
sustains that, likewise, nothing would have prevented the parties from expressly referring
to international arbitration or arbitration administered by the Centre, as it has been done
in other contracts (Reply, page 9) and that the absence of specificity of Clause Twenty-
one of the Contract cannot be interpreted in favor of the jurisdiction of the Centre
because, by so doing, the principle that the acceptance of the jurisdiction of the Centre

must be express and in writing would be violated.

296. Concerning Inceysa’s argument that the nature of the Contract, as a contract for
economic development, requires Clause Twenty-one to be interpreted to refer to
international arbitration due to the principle of "national transcendence," El Salvador
contends that the parties to a contract of this nature are free to agree on any mechanism
for dispute resolution and not only an institutional international arbitration and, therefore,

the nature of the Contract cannot replace in any manner the agreement of the parties.

297. In the same vein, El Salvador argues that Inceysa never identified on which
Salvadoran law it wants to base the jurisdiction of the Centre to resolve contractual
claims, and adds that Inceysa does not refute its arguments concerning each of the laws
on which it wants to base this jurisdiction, but limits itself to “rehashing these arguments”
and simply asserting that the reference to the jurisdiction of the Centre in the Investment
Law and in the BIT is sufficient for this Arbitral Tribunal to be entitled to hear the claims
arising from the Contract.

298. Moreover, in its Rejoinder, Inceysa insists on challenging the witnesses presented

by El Salvador in the following terms:

® Ibid, page 43, paragraph 136 (emphasis in original).
90

299,

arising

"Concerning clause 21 of the contract, the Respondent blames the Claimant for
not having submitted witnesses to support its interpretation of the arbitration
clause and defends the reliability of the witnesses brought by it. In this regard, it
should be noted that the only “witnesses” available to clarify the intent or will not
explicitly manifested in writing in the arbitration clause are the very parties to this
proceeding. Indeed, the witnesses mentioned by the Respondent have acted on
behalf and representation of the Salvadoran executive and can only “testify” about
their representation [...] A witness statement of the parties and/or their
Tepresentatives in this regard cannot reasonably have better evidentiary value

[oJ

Likewise, in order to sustain the jurisdiction of the Centre to resolve the claims

from the Contract, Inceysa repeats that Clause Twenty-one refers to an offer of

consent to accept the jurisdiction of the Centre made by El Salvador through its

legislation. Supporting this argument, Inceysa insists that:

300.

"By the nature of the contract and its object (contract for economic development),
its transnational character, the existence of specific norms (sic) and special norms
in the Salvadoran legal system, such as the BIT and the Investment Law, which
expressly contain offers of consent to the jurisdiction of ICSID, the foreign
investor, in casu, the Claimant could not in good faith, at the time of manifesting
its will concerning the arbitration clause contained in the contract, not count on
the possibility of accepting the offer of consent offered so many times by the
Republic of El Salvador. Likewise, the Republic of El Salvador in good faith
could not ignore the existence of these offers of consent in its legal system and in
special norms, whose main object are the investments concerned in the contract it
was going to sign."

Finally, concerning its arguments to support the jurisdiction of the Centre, the

Claimant complains to this Arbitral Tribunal about what it considers to be bad faith,

inconsi:

stent procedural conduct consisting of the fact that El Salvador, in spite of

arguing in this arbitration proceedings that Clause Twenty-one of the Contract refers to

local arbitration, requested an ordinary civil court of its country to rule against objections

of arbitration and lis pendens raised

® Rejoinder, page 13, paragraph 33.

* Tdem.

91

by Inceysa. That court agreed with this thesis and ruled in favor of ordinary [local court]

 

jurisdiction. According to the Clai this fact d the seri of the
consequences that would be created by accepting the objection to the jurisdiction of

ICSID, because it would leave it in a state of complete defenselessness.

301. Having presented the arguments of the parties about the jurisdiction
of the Centre, the Arbitral Tribunal will now express its views about the admissibility of
the objection to jurisdiction raised by El Salvador.

iii) Considerations of the Arbitral Tribunal about the jurisdiction of the
Centre

302. Considering the arguments and proof presented by the parties in this proceedings,
the Arbitral Tribunal considers that the crucial point to determine whether or not the
Centre has jurisdiction to resolve disputes arising from the Contract consists of
determining whether said Contract, or the Salvadoran law to which it refers, contains an
arbitration agreement that meets the requisites established by the ICSID Convention, i.e.,
an arbitration agreement which refers to the jurisdiction of the Centre expressly and in

writing.

303. To address the foregoing, it is necessary to analyze first the several clauses of the
Contract that establish a forum selection for resolving differences arising from it, in
order to determine whether they contain an arbitration agreement that meets the requisites

mentioned in the previous paragraph.

a) Interpretation of the contract

304. A review of the Contract leads this Tribunal to conclude that it contains three
clauses that refer to hanisms for the lution of 1 di The first of

 

them is Clause Thirteen, which provides as follows:

92

"DISPUTES. The Ministry will decide in writing the petitions of the contractor
on technical and legal matters of the contract; if the contractor disagrees with the
decision, the matter must be submitted to arbitration before starting any legal
action.”

305. A mere reading of this Clause Thirteen clearly shows that it does not meet the
requisites established in Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. Indeed, this clause does not
contain any express reference to the jurisdiction of the Centre, and therefore, it is illogical
to try to base on it the competence of this Arbitral Tribunal to hear the disputes arising
from the Contract.

306. As stated by the Respondent (Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, page 84),
when an arbitration clause does not refer to an arbitration institution or to a set of rules
under which the arbitration proceeding must take place, it must be understood that the
agreement was for an arbitration ad hoc, which completely excludes the jurisdiction of
the Centre.

307. The other clause that refers to a mechanism for dispute resolution arising from the

Contract, is Seventeen, which provides as follows:

"JURISDICTION. For the legal purposes of this contract, the parties expressly
constitute as special domicile this city, submitting to Salvadoran law and to the
jurisdiction of the Courts of the City of San Salvador."

308. Regardless of the interpretation that might be given to the apparent contradiction
that may exist between clauses Thirteen and Seventeen, the fact is that it is not possible in
any way to base on them the jurisdiction of the Centre to hear disputes arising from the
Contract. On the contrary, the reference to the jurisdiction of the Courts of the City of
San Salvador, "for the legal purposes of this contract,” made in Clause Seventeen, is

clear.

93

309. Finally, we find in the Contract Clause Twenty-one, by which the Claimant,
based on the express reference it makes to Salvadoran law, is trying to justify the

jurisdiction of the Centre. This Clause reads as follows:

“ARBITRATION. In the event of controversies, disputes or differing
interpretations of this contract, after exhausting direct negotiation, both parties

agree to submit to an arbitration proceeding in accordance with Salvadoran
Law.” (Emphasis added).

310. It is obvious that it is not possible to extract from the language of this clause an
arbitration agreement that confers jurisdiction on the Centre. Consequently, it is necessary
to analyze the Salvadoran legislation to which the clause in question allegedly refers.

311. As appears from the arguments of the parties presented in the previous pages, El
Salvador considers that the legislation to which this Clause Twenty-one refers is the
Commercial Code, the Law of Mercantile Procedure and the Code of Civil Procedure;
Inceysa, on the contrary, is of the opinion that the legislation to which this provision
refers is the Public Contracting and Acquisitions Law, the Mediation, Conciliation and
Arbitration Law, the Investment Law and the BIT executed between El Salvador and
Spain.

312. The Tribunal finds it unnecessary, for the purpose of deciding on the jurisdiction
of the Centre, to study which is the legislation referred to in Clause Twenty-one of the
Contract and, consequently, ascertain what was the intent of the parties when
establishing the arbitration agreement in reference. Consequently, this Arbitral Tribunal
will limit itself to analyzing each of the laws on which Inceysa seeks to base the
jurisdiction of the Centre to determine whether it is possible to base on any of them the
competence of this Arbitral Tribunal to hear this dispute.

94

313. To analyze this topic, the Tribunal finds it appropriate to make a clear distinction
between the Salvadoran laws that do not contain an express written reference to the

Centre and those that do.

314. In the first group, we find the Public Contracting and Acquisitions Law and the
Mediation, Conciliation and Arbitration Law. For this purpose, the Tribunal will analyze
below whether the application of these laws can grant jurisdiction to the Centre.

b) Public Contracting and Acquisitions Law

315. The provision on which Inceysa seeks to base the jurisdiction of the Centre is

Article 165 of the Public Contracting and Acquisitions Law, which reads as follows:

"After an attempt at direct settlement without finding a solution to any of the
disputes, it is possible to resort to arbitration by equitable arbitrators subject to the
applicable provisions of pertinent laws, taking into account the modifications
established in this chapter."

316. A reading of the article quoted above and of Title VIII of that Law concerning
"Dispute Resolution," obviously shows that, by the application of these provisions, it is
not possible in any way to interpret them as granting jurisdiction to the Centre to hear the
contractual disputes arising between El Salvador and Inceysa. Sustaining the contrary
has absolutely no grounds because these provisions do not contain any express reference
to the Centre, and therefore do not meet the requirement established in Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention.

317. Moreover, the arbitration referred to in Article 165 of the Public Contracting and
Acquisitions Law is a process of "arbitration by equitable arbitrators," which, on the date
of execution of the Contract, was governed by the Code of Civil Procedure that
established a local arbitration process.

95

318. Finally, the "modifications established in this chapter," to which the last part of
the quoted article refers, are those contained in articles 166 to 169 of that law, which, as
sustained by Mr. Tercero, "[...] also establish certain rules and procedures to be followed
in arbitration proceedings, including those related to the designation of the arbitrators,

presentation of claims and compensation of arbitrators."*°

319. From the perspective of this Arbitral Tribunal, the existence of these rules makes
it clear that the Public Contracting and Acquisitions Law does not refer to the jurisdiction
of the Centre and that it is not plausible for a law that contains specific procedural rules

for arbitration to, at the same time, refer to institutional arbitration.

320. For the foregoing reasons, this Arbitral Tribunal considers that the Public
Contracting and Acquisitions Law does not contain the consent of the Salvadoran State to
the jurisdiction of the Centre, because (i) in none of its provisions is there a reference to
the Centre, and (ii) its rules refer to local arbitration which would take place according to
Salvadoran law in force at the time of contracting. In light of the above, this Arbitral
Tribunal is not competent to hear, based on the Public Contracting and Acquisitions Law,
the differences arising from the Contract.

c) Mediation, Conciliation and Arbitration Law

321. Other Salvadoran statutory provisions on which the Claimant seeks to base the
jurisdiction of the Centre are Articles 25 and 77 of the Mediation, Conciliation and
Arbitration Law, which provide the following, respectively:

"Article 25. Disputes in which the State and public law entities are interested
parties may be submitted to arbitration, provided they concern disposable rights
and arise from a legal relationship involving property rights governed by private
law or of a contractual nature.

In disputes arising from contracts the Salvadoran State or public law entities
conclude with nationals or foreigners, special laws or international treaties or
conventions shall apply and, in their absence, the provisions of this law.

This type of dispute may be resolved by arbitration at the Centers established in
this law.

85 Witness Statement of José Roberto Tercero Zamora of September 13, 2004, page 9.
96

Private law companies with state capital or mixed economy companies may agree
freely and without prior authorization that the disputes arising from their contracts
with nationals or domiciled foreigners or that refer to their own assets will be
submitted to Arbitration.”

Article 77. “Disputes arising from contracts concluded by the Salvadoran State
and public entities with nationals or non-domiciled foreigners, or arising from a
legal relationship involving property rights governed by private law may be
submitted to International Arbitration, inside or outside the country, freely and
without a requirement of prior authorization, provided they concern disposable

rights.

In all of these cases, the arbitration must be conducted by an Arbitration Center
with recognized prestige, and the State or its entities may submit to its
regulations and rules.” (Emphasis added).

322. Again, in spite of the fact that the articles quoted above refer to international
arbitration, their analysis clearly indicates that they do not mention expressly the
jurisdiction of the Centre and, therefore, do not meet the requisites of Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention, in order to attribute competence to this Arbitral Tribunal.

323. The reference made in the second paragraph of Article 77 to an "Arbitration Center
with recognized prestige," is insufficient to grant jurisdiction to the Centre because there
is no discussion that, in addition to the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes, there are in the world other "Arbitration Centers of recognized prestige" that
could hear the disputes arising from the Contract executed between El Salvador and
Inceysa.

97

324. Moreover, the Mediation, Conciliation and Arbitration Law of El Salvador was
not in force at the time of execution of the Contract and, therefore, the parties could not
have agreed in Clause Twenty-one on the application of a Law that they did not know
and which did not exist yet. The Contract was executed on November 17,
2000, and the Mediation, Conciliation and Arbitration Law was published in the Official
Gazzete of E] Salvador on August 21, 2002.

325. Inspite of the above, as already mentioned, the Claimant argues the following:

“{...] The Respondent cannot argue in good faith that the Mediation, Conciliation
and Arbitration Law was published after the signing of the contract. Indeed, not
only can the contractual clause that makes explicit reference (sic) to “Salvadoran
law” not in good faith be limited exclusively to the Salvadoran law in force at the
time of execution of the contract and to the prejudice of the foreign investor, but it
is recognized that the manifestation of consent referred to in article (sic) 25 of the
Agreement must exist at the time of the request for arbitration before ICSID, and
not at the time when the investment object of the dispute started or was made.”*°

326. This Arbitral Tribunal agrees with the Claimant that the consent to the
jurisdiction of the Centre must exist before submitting the request for arbitration to
ICSID. However, the Claimant forgets that the will of El Salvador had already been
manifested in Clause Twenty-one of the Contract and that its intent could not have

referred to the Mediation, Conciliation and Arbitration Law, which was not in force yet.

327. It would not be possible, based on the foregoing, to allege that, under the
provisions of this Law, El Salvador made an unilateral offer to accept the jurisdiction of
the Centre, which Inceysa accepted in writing and that, consequently, the dispute
resolution mechanism established in Clause Twenty-one was repealed by this "new pact."
It is obvious that the provisions of the law in question are simply an authorization for the
various agencies of the Salvadoran State to resolve by arbitration the disputes in which

they may be involved.

328. Even if it were accepted that the Mediation, Conciliation and Arbitration Law
applies in this case, this Arbitral Tribunal considers that the provisions of that law are

86 Counter-Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, page 43, paragraph 137.
98

simply permissive and not mandatory. In fact, an analysis of the language of Articles 25
and 77 of the law shows that they do not suggest a unilateral offer, but simply an
authorization to the public agencies of the Salvadoran State to agree on arbitration
clauses in which they indicate that they submit to arbitration their controversies with
private parties, provided they concern disposable rights. Consequently, since the parties
did not execute any arbitration clause or compromis giving express jurisdiction to the
Centre, this Arbitral Tribunal must deny its competence to hear the claims arising from
the Contract.

329. Under the same line of reasoning, and even if Articles 25 and 77 of the Mediation,
Conciliation and Arbitration Law implied a mandatory duty of the State agencies and,
therefore, a right of the private parties to submit their disputes to arbitration, in none of
the provisions indicated is there a reference to the Centre and, therefore, the requirement
established in Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention is not met.

330. In light of the foregoing, the Arbitral Tribunal considers that in this case it is not
possible to infer its competence from Articles 25 and 77 of the Mediation, Conciliation
and Arbitration Law of El Salvador, or from any other article of that Law, because (i)
there is no article in that Law that meets the requirements established in Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention to confer jurisdiction on the Centre, (ii) said Law did not exist at the
time of execution of the Contract and, therefore, the parties could not have consented to
its content, and (iii) said provisions represent only an authorization to enter into an
arbitration clause or compromis, and not an agreement to submit to the jurisdiction of the
Centre.

99

331.

Having decided the foregoing, the Tribunal will next analyze whether, based on

the legal texts in which there is an express reference to the jurisdiction of the Centre, it is

competent to hear the disputes arising from the Contract executed between El Salvador

and Inceysa.

332.

d) Investment Law

The Claimant seeks to base the jurisdiction of the Centre to hear the contractual
claims on Article 15 of the Investment Law, which reads as follows:

“In case controversies or differences arise between national or foreign investors
and the State regarding their investments carried out in El Salvador, the parties
may resort to the competent courts of justice in accordance with the legal
procedures.

In the case of controversies arising between foreign investors and the State
regarding their investments in El Salvador, the investors may submit the
controversy to:

a) the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), with
the purpose of solving the controversy through conciliation and arbitration, in
accordance with the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of other States (ICSID Convention);

b) International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) with the
purpose of solving the controversy through conciliation and arbitration, in
accordance with the procedures of the Additional Facility of ICSID; in those cases
in which the foreign investor involved in the controversy is a national of a State
that is not a contracting party to the ICSID Convention.”

The foregoing clearly indicates that the Salvadoran State, by Article 15 of the

Investment Law, made to the foreign investors a unilateral offer of consent to submit, if

the foreign investor so decides, to the jurisdiction of the Centre, to hear all “disputes

referring to investments” arising between El Salvador and the investor in question.

However, in the case at hand, as indicated in the previous paragraphs, Inceysa cannot

enjoy the rights granted by said Investment Law because its “investment” does not meet

the condition of legality

100

necessary to fall within the scope and protection of that law. Consequently, this Arbitral
Tribunal cannot do anything other than deny the jurisdiction of the Centre and its

competence to resolve the claims arising from the Contract.

333. Furthermore, this Arbitral Tribunal also agrees with the argument of El Salvador
to the effect that, in order to invoke the arbitration jurisdiction provided in the Investment
Law, there must be a claim with substantive grounds in said law, a situation which does
not exist in the case at hand. Indeed, Inceysa cannot claim the jurisdiction of the Centre
to hear the disputes arising from the Contract based on a legislative provision that grants
jurisdiction to the Centre only to hear disputes arising from the application of the Law

that excludes purely contractual disputes.

334. Based on the foregoing, this Arbitral Tribunal denies its competence to hear the
contractual disputes of the parties, based on Article 15 of the Investment Law, which
grants jurisdiction to the Centre only to hear disputes arising from the application of the

Law.

e) The BIT

335. Finally, the Claimant seeks to base on the BIT itself the jurisdiction of the Centre
to hear its contractual disputes with El Salvador. However, as indicated above, Inceysa
cannot benefit from the rights granted in the BIT, including access to the jurisdiction of
the Centre, because its investment does not meet the conditions of legality necessary to be
included within the scope of that investment protection.

336. Such being the case, for the reasons presented, the jurisdiction of the Centre to
hear the disputes arising from the Contract or any other dispute, of any origin, cannot be
recognized by this Arbitral Tribunal because Inceysa’s investment does not fall within
the scope of the BIT.

101

337. In summary, this Arbitral Tribunal concludes that in the present case the Centre
does not have jurisdiction to hear the dispute brought before it, arising from the
Contract executed between El Salvador and Inceysa, and the Arbitral Tribunal does not

have competence to resolve these disputes.

VI. COSTS

338. In this award, the Arbitral Tribunal has carefully analyzed the incorrect manner in
which the Claimant acted in connection with Public Bid number 05/2000, for
Contracting for Services for the Installation, Management and Operation of Mechanical
Inspection Plants for Vehicles, which is the source of the disputes it wanted to resolve in
this arbitration proceedings. By such undue conduct, it obtained the award of the bid,
which obviously would not have happened if MARN of El Salvador had known the
reality of the facts. Knowing that it had behaved improperly in the bidding process, it
initiated this arbitration, in which, again, it hid facts of enormous importance for the
resolution of this matter. It was necessary for its counterpart to make a great and costly
effort to prove Inceysa’s incorrect acts. Therefore, this Tribunal considers that it must
bear all of the fees and expenses of the arbitrators and the administrative fees for the use
of the Centre. In spite of the foregoing, the Tribunal considers that the circumstances
surrounding the negotiation that gave rise to this dispute, and another undertaken by
ANDA at the same time; the naive handling of bid number 05/2000 by MARN officials
and, in general, the way in which they and other public officials of El Salvador reacted to
the actions of Inceysa, mean that the conduct of El Salvador cannot be considered
beyond reproach. For this reason, the Respondent, like Inceysa, must pay the fees of the
counsel contracted by each of them to advise them.

102

VII. DECISION

339, For the reasons presented and pursuant to Rules 41(5) and 47(1)(j) of the
Arbitration Rules and Article 61(2) of the Convention, the Arbitral Tribunal unanimously

decides:

1. To accept the objection to the jurisdiction of the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes raised by the Republic of El Salvador.

2. Consequently, declare that the Centre does not have jurisdiction to hear this

matter and that this Arbitral Tribunal is not competent to resolve it;

3. Because it is unnecessary, it declines to rule on the Provisional Measures

requested by the Republic of El Salvador;

4. To impose on Inceysa Vallisoletana S.L. the payment of the entire fees and
expenses of the members of this Arbitral Tribunal and of the adminsitrative fees
for the use of the Centre. Each party must pay the fees of the counsel who
advised it.

5. The petitions of the parties that are not expressly granted shall be considered
denied.

signed signed
Burton A. Landy Claus von Wobeser
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: July 10, 2006 Date: July 13, 2006
signed
Rodrigo Oreamuno Blanco
President

Date: July 25, 2006

103

