INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

WASHINGTON D.C.

In the arbitration proceeding between

ANTIN INFRASTRUCTURE SERVICES LUXEMBOURG S. ar. 1. and
ANTIN ENERGIA TERMOSOLAR B.V.

THE KINGDOM OF SPAIN

ICSID CASE No. ARB/13/31

 

Decision on Rectification of the Award

 

Members of the Tribunal
Mr. J. Christopher Thomas QC, Arbitrator
Mr. Klaus Reichert, Arbitrator
Dr. Eduardo Zuleta, President
Secretary of the Tribunal:

Ms. Natali Sequeira

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 29 January 2019

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES,

Representing Antin Infrastructure Services Representing the Kingdom of Spain:
Luxembourg S.d.r.l. and
Antin Energia Termosolar B.V.:

Mr. Jeffrey Sullivan Mr. José Manuel Gutiérrez Delgado
Mr. Rahim Moloo Mr. Antolin Fernandez Antufia
Ms. Ceyda Knoebel Mr. Roberto Fernandez Castilla
Mr. Theo Tyrrell Ms. Patricia Froehlingsdorf Nicolas
Ms. Ankita Ritwik Ms. Monica Moraleda Saceda

Ms. Elena Ofioro Sainz
Gibson Dunn & Crutcher LLP Ms. Amaia Rivas Kortazar
Telephone House Ms. Maria José Ruiz Sanchez
2-4 Temple Avenue Mr. Diego Santacruz Descartin
London EC4Y 0HB
United Kingdom Abogacia General del Estado

Ministry of Justice of the Government of Spain
Calle Ayala 5

28001, Madrid

Spain

Til.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PROCEDURAL HISTORY.
RECTIFICATION

A. The Respondent’s Request
B. The Claimants’ Position

THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION ON RECTIFICATION...

Bw yNe

 

 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 15 June 2018, an Arbitral Tribunal comprising Mr. Eduardo Zuleta, Prof. Francisco
Orrego Vicufia and Mr. J. Christopher Thomas QC rendered the award in Antin
Infrastructure Services Luxembourg S. ar. 1. and Antin Energia Termosolar B.V. v. the
Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/13/31) (the “Award”).

For the reasons stated in the Award, the Tribunal found the Respondent responsible for
breaching its obligation under Article 10(1) of the ECT to accord the Claimants fair and
equitable treatment.' Thus, the Tribunal ordered the Respondent to pay the Claimants a
sum of EUR 112 million as compensation.”

On 24 July 2018, pursuant to Article 49(2) of the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (the “ICSID
Convention”) and Rule 49 of the Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“ICSID
Arbitration Rules”), the Kingdom of Spain submitted a Request for Rectification of the
Award, together with its Annex (“Respondent’s Request”) to the Secretary-General of
ICSID. The Request was accompanied by the lodging fee in accordance with ICSID
Arbitration Rule 49(1)(d).

On 25 July 2018, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Respondent’s Request and
notified the Parties and the Tribunal of its registration pursuant to Rule 49(2) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules.

On 27 July 2018, the Tribunal informed the Parties of the procedural calendar for the
Parties to submit their written observations on the Respondent’s Request. A revised
procedural calendar was sent to the Parties on 21 August 2018.

Pursuant to the revised calendar, on 3 September 2018, the Claimants filed their Response
to the Respondent’s Request (““Claimants’ Response”).

On 14 September 2018, the Respondent filed a Reply to the Claimants’ Response
(“Respondent’s Reply”).

On 24 September 2018, the Claimants filed their Rejoinder to the Respondent’s Reply
(“Claimants’ Rejoinder”).

' Award, para. 630.
2 Ibid., para. 748(c).

On 2 October 2018, the Centre notified the Parties of the passing of Prof. Orrego Vicufia.
In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 10(2), the proceeding was suspended.

Pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 11(1) on 14 November 2018, the Claimants appointed
Mr. Klaus Reichert, a national of Germany and Ireland, as an arbitrator. On 18 November
2018, Mr. Reichert accepted his appointment as arbitrator.

The Tribunal was reconstituted on 19 November 2018, in accordance with ICSID
Arbitration Rule 12. Its Members are: Mr. Eduardo Zuleta, Mr. Klaus Reichert and Mr. J.
Christopher Thomas QC.

RECTIFICATION
A. THE RESPONDENT’S REQUEST

Pursuant to Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention, the Respondent requests the Tribunal
to rectify a clerical error of the Award in the amount of EUR 28 million and therefore, to
deduct the aforesaid sum from the damages awarded to the Claimants and amend the
Tribunal’s allocation on costs accordingly.*

The basis of the Respondent’s Request is an alleged clerical error made by the Tribunal
when using the data from Brattle’s II Report, Appendix A, Table 14.4 The Respondent
argues that when the Tribunal decided to apply Brattle’s calculations on damages (based
on a useful life of the plant of 25 years*) it confused the figure of “But for Value” in the
Table with the Damages because “Brattle[‘s] Table 14...states unequivocally...that
damages assuming 25 year useful life are EUR 84 million.”®

The Respondent further alleges that the Tribunal also confused 35 years (sensitivity) with
40 years (claim), resulting in another clerical error made in paragraph 725 of the Award.

Finally, the Respondent requests that the Tribunal correct the allocation of costs because
the Claimants asked for EUR 246 million and, after the rectification resulting from the
correction of the clerical errors, the amount awarded should be EUR 84 million, which is
25% of the primary claim and not approximately 50% as stated in the Award.’

3 Respondent’s Request, paras. 21 and 23. Respondent’s Reply, paras. 17 and 33(4).
* Respondent’s Reply, para. 27.

5 Ibid., paras. 28-29.

° Jbid., paras. 14 and 30 (emphasis omitted).

7 Respondent’s Request, para, 23; see also Respondent's Reply, para. 33(3).

16. For these reasons, the Respondent requests the Tribunal to:

“1.- Rectify paragraph 748(d)[sic] of the Antin Award (Decision), which now
reads “...[T]he Respondent shall pay, EUR 112 million as compensation”. It
must be rectified and instead read: “...[T]he Respondent shall pay, EUR 84
million as compensation”.

2.- Rectify accordingly paragraphs 640 and 725.

3.- Rectify the allocation of costs, reflecting the fact that the Claimants asked
for EUR 246 million (first Brattle quantum report, paragraph 23) and, when
rectifying the clerical error, it has been Awarded only EUR 84 million plus
interest (approx. 25% of the primary claim —and not aprox. 50%-).

4.- Consider the delay caused by Claimants’ futile Response which is contrary
to good faith when rectifying the costs in the Award and when allocating the
costs of this Rectification.

5.- Implement all the aforementioned as soon as possible, in order to avoid
further indirect damages in other parallel proceedings caused by the flawed
Antin Award.”

B. THE CLAIMANTS’ POSITION

17. The Claimants’ position coincides, in principle, with that of the Respondent in that the
Award contains a clerical error related to the calculation of the compensation. However, in
the Claimants’ view, the amount to be deducted should be EUR 11 million and not EUR
28 million.®

18. The Claimants allege that the clerical error resulted from the fact that the amount
corresponding to the historical losses was not deducted from the total amount of damages
awarded, despite the fact that the Tribunal found that the claim for historical losses must
fail. The historical losses value is EUR 11 million, in consequence, the Claimants should
have been awarded EUR 101 million in damages and not EUR 128 million as stated in
paragraph 725 of the Award.?

19. Concerning the Respondent’s claim on the alleged errors in the application of the Brattle
damages table and on the alleged confusion by the Tribunal between the “sensitivity” and
the claim, the Claimants claim that this was not an error (clerical or otherwise) committed
by the Tribunal. It was instead a reflection of the Tribunal’s own estimation of the
difference between future losses for the 25 year plant lifetime and the “estimate of 35 to
40-year service life”!” The Claimants allege that this type of decision falls “squarely within

8 Claimants’ Response, para. 4.
° Claimants’ Response, paras. 16-17, Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 4-5.
' Claimants’ Response, para. 24, citing Award, para. 725.

the Tribunal’s discretion and decision-making authority.”!!

rectification by the Respondent does not refer to a “clerical error” but rather amounts to a

As such, this request for

request that the Tribunal “change its methodological approach for the determination of the
deduction it made to reflect its liability finding regarding the plant’s lifetime,” which is not
an appropriate request under Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention.'?

20. As to the Respondent’s request that the Tribunal should rectify the allocation on costs, the
Claimants contend that this request must be rejected because Spain has failed to allege any
clerical, arithmetic or similar error. Therefore, it does not fall under the rectification
requirements of Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention.'?

21. For these reasons, the Claimants, in their Response and Rejoinder, request the Tribunal to:

lL. Reject Spain’s Rectification Request and the Petitum in Spain’s Reply, save
for the correction of the clerical error totaling EUR 11 million in the

compensation awarded;
2. Award such other relief as the Tribunal considers appropriate; and

3. Order Spain to pay all of the costs and expenses of the proceedings arising
from Spain’s Rectification Request, including Claimants’ legal fees, the fees

and expenses of the Tribunal, and ICSID’s other costs.

Til. THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION ON RECTIFICATION
22. Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention provides, in its relevant part, as follows:

The Tribunal upon the request of a party made within 45 days after the date on which the
award was rendered ... shall rectify any clerical, arithmetical or similar error in the
award.'*

" Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 18. See also Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 19-21 citing Adem Dogan v. Turkmenistan,
ICSID Case No. ARB/09/9 Annulment Proceeding, Decision on Annulment, 15 January 2016, para 158; Rumeli
Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri A.S. v. Republic of Kazakhstan, \CSID Case No.
ARB/05/16 Annulment Proceeding, Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee, 25 March 2010, para. 147, and Gemplus
S.A., SLP S.A. and Gemplus Industrial S.A. de C.V. v. The United Mexican States, CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/04/3,
Award, 16 June 2010, paras. 12-58

"2 Claimants’ Response, para. 25. Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 18 and 22.

'3 [bid., para. 5.

4 Both the English and Spanish versions are similar to one another in
similar error” and “errores materiales, aritméticos o similares del mismo”

 

eferring more to “clerical, arithmetical or
respectively,

   

 

23.

24,

25.

26.

27.

In turn, ICSID Arbitration Rule 49, which sets out the procedure to be followed for
rectification of an award refers in its paragraph (1), more generally, to “any error in the
award which the requesting party seeks to have rectified.”

Both provisions clearly refer to an ‘error’ and to the fact that the purpose of the procedure
is the ‘rectification’ of any such error. According to the aforementioned provisions, the
rectification procedure applies to an error, such error must be “in the award,” and it must
be clerical, or arithmetical, “or similar.”

Moreover, Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention provides, on the one hand, for the powers
of the Tribunal and on the other, for a limitation of such powers as regards rectification. A
power because it expressly authorizes the Tribunal to rectify errors, and a limitation
because the Tribunal’s powers in the rectification proceedings extends only to the
correction of errors that are clerical, arithmetical or similar. As correctly stated by the
tribunal in Pey Casado, “It follows that, as is already implicit in the notion of
‘rectification,’ the procedure does not encompass any alleged mistake of law by the
tribunal or any factual determination or discretionary assessment by it. The procedure is
not an appeal, and this in turn illuminates why Article 49 of the Convention makes the

rectification of any duly blished “ h

clerical, ari / or similar error” into a duty of

the tribunal.”'°

The Respondent places particular emphasis on what other tribunals dealing with renewable
energy claims against the Kingdom of Spain did to calculate the damages and on what
some such tribunals asked the experts to calculate. These are not, however, grounds for
rectification. Even though the cases may have features in common, particularly as some or
all of the measures issued by the Respondent were similar or even the same, a tribunal
cannot ignore the differences in the facts, ignore the evidence and the manner in which the
parties pleaded their case, and simply repeat what other tribunals decided or blindly follow
the same methodologies of other tribunals. The Tribunal decided the dispute and calculated
the damages based on the evidence on the record, the pleadings of the Parties and in
exercising its discretion to determine the form of calculation and the amount of damages
to be awarded. Departing from the methodologies employed by other tribunals does not
qualify as a “clerical, arithmetical or similar error in the award” as required by the ICSID
Convention, much less when the alleged departure is analysed with the benefit of hindsight.

The Parties do not seem to dispute the limited scope of the rectification procedure under
the ICSID Convention. Even though the Respondent alleges the existence of
inconsistencies in the Tribunal’s findings on quantum, including that “the Tribunal has not

'S Victor Pey Casado and The Foundation “Presidente Allende” v the Republic of Chile, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2,
Decision on Rectification of the Award, 6 October 2017, para. 49, footnotes omitted.

28.

29.

30.

31.

deducted correctly the damages caused by the measures that it has found as either lacking
jurisdiction or lawful according to the ECT”"* and alleges that tribunals in other renewable
energy arbitrations against the Respondent have calculated the stand-alone effects of the
measures, the Respondent concludes that it “will address all the flaws at due time and
process, according to ICSID rules”!”. This is clearly an acceptance by the Respondent of
the limited scope of the powers of the Tribunal in rectification proceedings, a point that the
Claimants understandably do not dispute.

The Respondent identifies as the object of its Request for Rectification of 24 July 2018 to
“rectify as soon as possible a very specific and obvious clerical error in the Antin Award
compensation determination, which has a huge impact both in absolute and proportionate
terms.”!* According to the Respondent the “key issue here is that the Tribunal made a
clerical error when reading Brattle’s reports and copy-pasting their calculations into the
Antin Award.”

The Tribunal therefore needs to determine whether that which the Respondent seeks to be
rectified is a clerical error according to the ICSID Convention and “a very specific and
obvious” clerical error, as pleaded by the Respondent.

The Respondent considers that that the Tribunal confused the but-for value in Table 14 of
Appendix A of the Brattle Quantum Report II with the value of the damages claimed and
characterizes such alleged error as a clerical error. According to the Respondent, EUR 148
million is not the amount of the claim of the Claimants, it is rather the but-for value for an
asset lifetime of 25 years as indicated in the said table.

The Tribunal disagrees. Even though there is an error, as will be analysed hereunder, it is
nota clerical error confusing the but-for value with damages as claimed by the Respondent.
The amount of EUR 148 million is the amount of the total claim of the Claimants for
historic and future lost cash flows, as indicated elsewhere in the Award.'? What the
Respondent attempts to do is to recharacterize the origin and nature of the clerical error in
order to revisit the debate on damages, which is not the purpose of the rectification
proceedings. The Respondent’s characterization of the clerical error requires the incorrect
assumption that the Tribunal considered the figure of EUR 148 million contained in a
particular Table provided by the Brattle Group as the only source for determining the total
amount claimed by the Claimants.

'© Respondent’s Reply, para. 4.

7 Respondent's Reply, para. 5.
'S Respondent’s Reply, para. 6.
'° Award, paras. 437, 586, 640, 725.

32.

33.

34,

35.

36.

The Tribunal finds that there is indeed an error in paragraph 725 of the Award that must
be rectified, but is not, as the Respondent claims, the result of a confusion between the but-
for value and damages. The said paragraph provides that “the value of the future cash flows
presented by Claimants is EUR 148 million”. This error is both an error in the citation on
the relevant figure and an arithmetical error resulting from the incorrect citation of such
relevant figure. The amount of EUR 148 million, as mentioned elsewhere in the Award, is
not the amount of future cash flows presented by the Claimants, but rather the total amount
of the claim for damages presented by the Claimants, which amount includes both
historical and future cash flows.” The Tribunal determined the amount of historical cash
flows to be EUR 11 million’! and found that the Claimants were not entitled to such

historical cash flows”

. Therefore, the correct amount of future cash flows to be mentioned
in paragraph 725 of the Award should be the difference between the total amount claimed
(EUR 148 million) less the historical cash flows (EUR 11 million), i-e., EUR 137 million.
Consequently, the amount of EUR 36 million referred to in paragraph 725 must be
deducted from the amount of EUR 137 million (not 148 million) for a total amount of EUR

101 million as opposed to EUR 112 million.

The foregoing rectification, of course, reduces the amount of compensation in paragraph
748.(c). The Award will be corrected accordingly.

The Respondent also claims that there is a clerical error consisting of a typographical error
in paragraph 725 of the Award regarding the estimate of the 35 to 40-year service of the
plants. The Respondent considers that the Tribunal made a copy-paste clerical error in the
reference to the Table prepared by the Brattle Group, cited in footnote 991 of the Award.

However, the Respondent, rather than indicating which is the error that it considers to be

the “obvious” clerical error, then proceeds to criticize the methodology of the calculation
of damages by the Tribunal in paragraph 725 and to characterize the citation of Table 14
of Brattle Quantum Report II in footnote 991 as the only source for the, in the
Respondent’s view, incorrect analysis of the amount of damages in connection with the
lifetime of the plants. The Respondent’s reading of the Award assumes that citing Table
14 of Brattle Quantum Report II means that the Tribunal’s only option was to select one of
the numbers contained in that table.

The Tribunal has discretion in determining the proper methodology and reaching its own
conclusions on the lifetime of the plants and the amounts resulting therefrom. Nothing
prevents tribunals from adopting their own calculations based on the valuations presented

2 Award, paras. 437, 586, 640, 725.
2! Award, para. 584,
> Award, para. 667.

37.

38.

39.

40.

by the parties. The Tribunal, based on the evidence in the record and the reports of the
experts, made its own estimation of the difference in value between the possible lifetime
scenarios. The Tribunal did not, as implied by the Respondent, simply select a number
from Table 14 of Brattle Quantum Report II. It was under no obligation to do so and it did
not do so. The Tribunal, in the exercise of its discretion and based on its own calculation
of the difference between the plant with a 35 to 40-year lifetime and a 25-year lifetime
arrived at what the Tribunal considers to be the fair measure of the Claimants’ damages.

There is no typographical or copy paste error in paragraph 725. It is the Tribunal’s own
calculation of the lifetime based on the evidence in the record and not simply the picking
of a number from Table 14 of Brattle Quantum Report II. What the Respondent now
expresses is a disagreement with the findings of the Tribunal. The Respondent may
disagree with the methodology of the Tribunal or the conclusions in paragraph 725, but
such disagreement does not give rise to rectification under the ICSID Convention. Article
49(2) does not allow the Respondent to seek a recalculation of the damages award based
on its disagreement with the Tribunal’s exercise of its discretion. The Tribunal therefore
rejects the Respondent’s request for rectification as regards the estimation of damages
related to the lifetime of the plants in paragraph 725 of the Award.

Based on the above conclusions, the Tribunal finds no reason to modify paragraph 640 of
the Award as requested by the Respondent.

With respect to the request for adjustment on costs, the Tribunal finds no reason for such
adjustment. On the one hand, the Respondent has not identified a clerical, arithmetical or
similar error in the calculation of costs that merits rectification under the strict standards
of Article 49(2). On the other, even if there was a clerical error with the scope proposed
by the Respondent, it has failed to identify why a clerical error in the amount of damages
would automatically give rise to an adjustment in costs, and if so, how the costs should be
readjusted considering the reasons that the Tribunal provided for assessing the costs in the
Award.

The Tribunal, based on the above reasoning, therefore decides as follows:

(a)

(b)

(c)
(d)
(e)

To rectify Paragraph 725 of the Award which shall read:

“725. The value of the future cash flows of Claimants is EUR 137 million to which
the Tribunal must deduct the amount of EUR 36 million corresponding to the
difference between the estimate of 35 to 40-year service of the plants, which the
Tribunal considered unsupported, and the 25-year lifetime that the Tribunal
considered acceptable.” This results in a balance of EUR 101 million that the
Tribunal finds to be a fair measure of the Claimants’ damages. Therefore, the
Claimants are entitled to an award of compensation in the amount of EUR 101

million.

* Brattle Quantum Report I, XII, Appendix A, Table 14”

To rectify paragraph 748.(c) of the Award, which shall read:

“(c) On account of the Respondent’s breach of the ECT, the Claimants are awarded,
and the Respondent shall pay, EUR 101 million as compensation”.

To reject all other requests for rectification.
To reject the adjustments on costs in the Award requested by the Respondent.

Each Party shall bear its own legal representation costs and expenses related to this
rectification proceeding. Each Party shall bear 50% of the costs of the rectification
proceeding (i.e. the fees and expenses of the Tribunal, ICSID’s administrative fees
and direct expenses) as determined by ICSID’s final financial statement.

£ Ab no

 

Mr& Christopher Thomas QC Mr. Klaus Reichert
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Date: 15 JANUARY 2019 Date: 9 JANUARY 2

Dr. Eduardo Zuleta
President of the Tribunal

Date: 16 JANUARY 2019

10

