 

 

PCA Case No. 2009-12

IN THE MATTER OF AN AD HOC ARBITRATION PURSUANT TO
THE TREATY BETWEEN THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY AND
THE CZECH AND SLOVAK: REPUBLIC CONCERNING THE PROMOTION AND
RECIPROCAL PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS

" between:
InterTrade Holding GmbH
(Germany)
Claimant
~and-
The Czech Republic
Respondent

 

FINAL AWARD “

Lhe Arbitral Tribunal:

L. Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C. (Chairman)
Henri Alvarez, Q.C.
Professor Brigitte Stern
Assistant to the Tribunal:
Alison G. FitzGerald.

Representing the. Claimant: Representing the Respondent:

y

HYTHON oe VETER

SqQuiru, SANDERS & Dempsey LLP

 

 

TT

 

 

i.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

INTRODUCTIC 6
PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 6
A. The Parties. 6
B. The Request for Arbitration...

C. The Arbitral Tribunal and Commencement of the Proceedings...

D. ‘The Issue of Bifurcation ..... aynsssen

E. The Written Procedure

Rr The Oral Pr 10
G. The Post-Hearing Procedure .....

H. The German-Czech BI

FACTUAL BACKGROUND w+

 

The Relief Requested

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

A. ‘The Czech Forestry Industry...

B. The Company CE Wood .,

Cc. The Tender P 1B

D. The Administrative Challenge to the Tender Proceedings...

i The EC Challenge to the Tender Proceedings .......000

BR The Sale of CE Wood... a

IssUES TO BE 22

ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION

A J 23
i The ’s Position 23

 

 

2 The Claimant’s Position «..

VIL.

 

 

 

 

 

 

4A Finding, 4d
BOA 44

L. The Claimant?s Position ..

2 The Ri dent’s Position 48

3 52

4. Finding. 61
Cc. Liability. 62

 

 

1 Fair and Equitable Treatment.

 

Arbitrary or Discriminatory Measures.

 

National Treatment...

 

 

Full Protection and Security.

A wow

 

5. Indirect Expropriation..

D, Causation

 

d. The Claimant’s Position...

 

 

 

 

 

2 The Resp ’s Position 7
E. Damages 79
1, The Claimant's Position sD
2 The R lent’s Position 80
COSTS 80
OPERATIVE PART 82

 

 

 

DRAMATIS PERSONAB
CORPORATE PERSONS
ALLWOOD, a.s.: A subsidiary of CE Wood trading in finished wood.
AWYN GmbH: Purchased 100% of the shares in CB Wood from InterTrade.

CAPLH: The Czech Forestry Association.

CE Wood: The Czech forestry company in which the Claimant purchased shares; formerly
known as EP Kapital Group, s.a.

EP Kapital Group, s.a.: A Czech forestry company wholly owned by Exportn{ Priimyslove, a.s.
until its purchase by InterTrade on 3 September 2000; a holding company for four different
regional investment companies: FORESTINVEST Pmha, as., FORESTINVEST Bro, as,
FORESTINVEST Frydek-Mistek, a.s., and FORESTINVEST Velké Karlovice, as.

Exportni Primyslova: The initial owner of the EP capital Group, s.a,, declared bankrupt on 25
July 2001
InterTrade Holding GmbH: The Claimant, a German company.

Lesy Beskydy, a.s: A Czech corporation, formerly Lesy Silherovica, a.s., established on 1 July
2004; won three forestry units (Lysa, Ostravice and Silherovice) in the tender proceedings.

Lesy Eeske Republiky, §.P.: The Czech State enterprise responsible for, inter alia, management
of State forests.

Lesy Hluboka: A Czech corporation that won five out of nine forestry units in the tender
proceedings,

Lesy Silherovicn, a.s.: Predecessor corporation to Lesy Beskydy, a.s., established on 26
February 2003.

NKKU: The Supreme Audit Office, responsible for auditing the management of State property,
among other tasks,

UOHS: Czech Office for the Protection of Competition.
INDIVIDUALS
Managing director of InterTrade and gon o1

: Member of the Board of Directors of EP Kapital Group from 2001 to
2004 and Chairman of the Supervisory Board from 2004 to 2006.

The Chief Executive Officer of CE Wood (and its predecessor companies)
since October 1995,

 

 

 

: Minister of Agriculture of the Czech Republic from 2007 to 2009,

Minister of Agriculture of the Czech Republic from 2002 to 2005.

 

 

 

 

THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

Composed as above,

After deliberation,

Makes the following Award:

lL
1,

INTRODUCTION

The present arbitration involves a dispute between a German investor and the Czech State
over the conduct of procurement proocedings held in 2005, the purpose of which was to
transform the Czech forestry sector from a cartel-like structure to a competitive market,
The investor complains that the proceedings were manipulated in breach of the Czech
Republic's treaty obligations, resulting in loss and damage to the investor. The Czech
State denies that the proceedings were manipulated and that there has been any treaty
breach, Moreover, the Czech State denies that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear the
dispute that is the subject of this arbitration or thal the acts complained of are attributable
to it under international law.

PROCEDURAL HIsTORY

A, The Parties

The Claimant, InterTrade Holding GmbH (‘nterTrade”), is a limited liability company
incorporated under the laws of Germany, Ils registered office is located at Am Hagen 37,

 

 

53783 Bitorf, Germany. The Claimant is represented in diese proceedings by Mr.
» Ms. and Mr. , Python & Peter, 9

tue Massot, 1206 Geneva, Switzerland,

The Respondent is the Czech Republic, The Respondent is represented in these
proceedings by Mr, . Néerr s.t.0., Na Porioi 1079/3a, 11000 Prague 1,
Czech Republic; Mr, , Squire, Sanders & Dempsey LLP, 2000
‘Huntington Center, 41 South High Street, Columbus, Ohio 43215, USA; Mr. 4

Squire, Sanders & Dempsey LLP, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, 23™ floor, New York,
NY 10112, USA; Mr. Squite Sanders & Dempsey LLP, 4900 Key
Tower, 127 Public Square, Cleveland, Ohio 44114, USA.

B The Request for Arbitration

The Claimant commenced these proceedings by way of a Request for Arbitration, dated
23 October 2008 (the “Request”). Prior to filing its Request, the Claimant sent a
Notification of Dispute to the Respondent, dated 28 August 2007,

In its Request, the Claimant invoked several provisions of the Treaty between the Federal
Republic of Germany and the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic Concerning the
Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments, signed in Prague on 2 October 1990
(the “German-Czech BIT”), which it alleged had been violated through the acts and
omissions of the Czech Republic,

C. The Arbitral Tribunal and Commencement of the Proceedings

The Arbitral Tribunal was constituted on 27 May 2009. It is composed .of Mr. L. Yves
Fortier, C.C., Q.C. (Canadian), appointed by agreement of the Parties as Chairman, and
Mr, Henri Alvarez, Q.C. (Canadian) and Professor Brigitte Stem (French), appointed
respectively by the Claimant and the Respondent as co-arbitrators (the “Tribunal”).

‘The Tribunal held a first meeting with the Parties in Geneva, Switzerland, on 26 August
2009, During this meeting, two alternative timetables for the conduct of the proceedings
were agreed by the Parties, one providing for a separate jurisdictional phase and one
contemplating a single phase. These alternative timetables were annexed to Procedural
Order No. 1, dated 14 September 2009 (“Procedural Order No. 1”),

The Parties also reached agreement on soveral other issues relating to the conduct of the
proceedings, which are recorded in the Terms of Appointment, executed on 26 August
2009, and Procedural Order No, 1, as well as in a subsequent exchange of letters between
the Parties on 31 August 2009 and 11 November 2009.

The Parties agreed that the seat of the arbitration shall be Paris, France.

The Parties agreed that these proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with the
Aabitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on Intemational Trade Law, 1976
(the “UNCITRAL Rules”) and that the International Bureau of the Permanent Court of

Axbitration (the “PCA”) shall act as Registry.

-7-

 

The Parties also agreed that the Tribunal may appoint an Assistant to the Tribunal.
Accordingly, during the first meeting, Ms. was appointed to serve
in this capacity, consistent with the provisions of the Terms of Appointment.

D. The Issue af Bifurcation

In Procedural Order No, 1, the Tribunal ordered the Respondent to submit, by 2 October
2009, a list of the issues on the basis of which it questioned the Tribunal’s jurisdiction,
together with a short summary of {ts arguinents on each of the points listed.

The Respondent submitted its list of questions on 2 October 2009, together with brief
arguments concerning the existence of an “investment”, tha Claimant’s status as an
“investor”, the arbitrability of the matter ratione matertae, and the “active Jegitimation”

of the Claimant,

By letter of 9 October 2009, the Claimant objected that the submissions provided by the
Respondent did not meet the requirements set out by the Tribunal in Procedural Order
No. 1, averring that the Respondent raised “doubts” as to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over

the dispute but no “legal arguments”.

Following the filing of the Respondent's Statement of Defence, the Claimant reiterated
its concerns, by letter of 23 April 2010, in connection with the jurisdictional objections

 

raised by the Respondent. In p: er, the Claimant alioged that the Respondent had
raised a new jurisdictional objection in its Statement of Defence, based on attribution, not

previously notified in its 2 October 2009 submission.

 

On 26 April 2010, the Tribunal directed the Claimant to provide written submissions in
connection with the “new” jurisdictional objection set out in the Respondent's Statement
of Defence,

By letter of 27 April 2010, the Respondent replied to the Claimant's 23 April 2010 letter,
averring that its 2 October 2009 submission was not intended to be exhaustive and that, in
any event, no prejudice would be suffered by the Claimant in connection with the “new”
objection set out in its Statement of Defence,

21.

22.

23,

8.

By letter of 28 April 2010, the Claimant submitted its response to the Respondent’s
“new” jurisdictional objection.

On 30 April 2010, the Tribunal held a telephone conference on the issue of bifurcation
during which counsel for both Parties provided extensive oral submissions. Following
the telephone conference on. bifurcation, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2,
dated 4 May 2010, in which it determined. that the proceedings would not be bifurcated,
and that the timetable set out in Annex A to Procedural Order No. 1 would govem the
remainder of the proceedings (“Procedural Order No. 2”). Accordingly, the Tribunal
confirmed that a single Hearing on jurisdiction and merits would take place from 8 to 17
December 2010,

On 8 September 2010, the Claimant advised the Tribunal by e-mail that the Parties had
reached an agreement that a period of four days, beginning on 14 December 2010, with
an additional day held in reserve, would be sufficient for the Hearing of this matter. The
Respondent confirmed the Parties’ agreement by e-mail on 13 September 2010.
Accordingly, the Tribunal confirmed that the Hearing would take place from 14: to 17
December 2010, with one reserve day. .

E The Written Procedure

The Claimant filed its Statement.of Claim, together with witness statements, documents
and legal authorities, on 18 December 2009.

The Respondent filed its Statement of Defence on 16 Apri] 2010. The Claimant brought
an application on 20 April 2010, requesting that the Tribunal direct the Respondent to,
inter alia, provide the Claimant with immediate access to electronic copies of all
documents filed with the Statement of Defence, including witness statements, expert
reports and exhibits. On 21 April 2010, the Respondent provided the Claimant with the

requested access to these documents.

The Parties exchanged requests for documents in the form of “Redfern Schedules” on 5
May 2010, responses fo these respective requests for documents on 19 May 2010, and

replies to those responses on 26 May 2010,

 

24,

25.

26.

28.

Further to these requests for documents, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3,
dated 11 June 2010, ordering the disclosure of certain documents and categories of
documents requested by each Party and denying certain other requests (“Procedural
Order Na. 3”).

On 12 August 2010, the Claimant wrote to the Tribunal advising that it was dissatisfied
with the Respondent’s production of doouments, In particular, the Claimant submitted
that the dent’s was “highly | eto”, The Respondent replied on
19 August 2010, further to the Tribunal's invitation, noting that no application had been
made and confirming that it had complied with its discovery obligations to the extent
documents ordered to be produced were within its possession.

The Claimant filed its Reply, together with witness statements, documents and legal
authorities, on 17 September 2010,

The Respondent filed its Rejoinder on 22 November 2010. On 23 November 2010, the
Claimant brought an urgent application requesting that the Tribunal order the Respondent
to immediately provide to the Claimant electronic copies of all witness statements and
expert reports, The Respondent confirmed in writing on the same day that hard copies of
the requested material would be available to the Claimant as of 24 November 2010. By
Procedural Order No. 4, dated 23 November 2010, the Tribunal ordered the Respondent
io provide ejectronic copies of all witness statements and expert reports accompanying
the Respondent's Statement of Rejoinder, noting the close proximity to the Hearing and
other procedural steps preparatory to the Hearing (“Procedural Order No. 4”).

BR The Oval Procedure

A Hearing on jurisdiction and merits was held in Paris, France, from 14 to 18 December
2010. The following persons appeared before the Tribunal:

(a) On behalf of the Claimant: Dr. Ms, and Mr.
and

(b) On behalf of the Respondent: Mr. , Mr. Mr.
and Mr.

-10+

 

om
Ca

29,

30,

31,

33.

During the Hearing, the following fact witnesses were called to testify: for the Claimant —

Mz Mr. Mr. © Mr. 4, Mr.
4,Mr > Mr, ° Mr, cand
Mr, “ for the Respondent — Mr. 4 Mr. r,s
Mr. .

The following expert witnesses were also called to testify: for the Claimant — Mr. Philip
Haberman and Mr. Richard Ramsaner; for the Respondent ~ Mr. Peter Clokey.

The Parties confirmed at the end of the Hearing that they were satisfied with the conduct
of the proceedings and were afforded a fair opportunity to present their respective cases
(see Tr. Day 5, pp. 123-124),

G, ‘The Post-Flearing Procedure

The Tribunal directed the Parties to file, simultaneously, post-hearing briefs on 25 March
2011, and reply post-hearing briefs on 6 May 2011. These briefs were duly filed by the
Parties in accordance with the Tribunal’s instructions as to form and length,

On 19 December 2011, the Tribunal directed the Parties to file, simultaneously, their
costs submissions. These submissions were also duly filed by both Parties on 9 January

2012.

HH. The German-Czech BIT
Article 10 of the German-Czech BIT contains the Parties’ arbitration agreement and

provides as follows:
“Article 10

(1) Disputes between either Contracting Party and an investor of the
other Contracting Party regarding investments shall, as far as possible, be
settled amicably between the parties to the dispute.

Q) If the dispute camnot be settled within six months from the date
on which it was officially raised by either party to the dispute, it shall at
the request of the investors of the other Contracting Party, be submitted
for arbitration. In the absence of any other arrangements between the
parties to the dispute, the provisions of article 9, paragraphs 3 and 5 shall
apply mutatis mutandis subject to the proviso that the members of the
arbitral tribunal shall be appointed by the parties to the dispute in
accordance with the provisions of article 9, patagraph 3, and that, if the
time-limits provided for in article 9, paragraph 3, are not observed, either

-j1-

 

 

party to the dispute may, in the absence of any other arrangements,
request the Chairman of the Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm
Chamber of Commerce to make the necessary appointments. The award
shall be recognized and enforced under the Convention of 10 June 1958
on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards.

The Contracting Party which is a party to the dispute shall not in
[sic: the] course of arbitration proocedings or the execution of the arbitral
award raise an objection on the grounds that the investor who is the other
party to the dispute has already received compensation for all or part of
his losses under an Insurance policy,”

35, The Claimant invokes several substantive provisions in the German-Czech BIT, the

relevant portions of which are reproduced below:
“Article 2

(1) Each Contracting Party shall in its territory promote as far as
possible investments by investors of the other Contracting Party,
permitting such investments in accordance with its Inws. It shall in all
cases afford investments just and equitable treatment.

(2) No Contracting Party shall in any way impede the management,
maintenance, use or enjoyment of investments in its territory by investors
of the other Contracting Party by means of arbitrary or discriminatory
meagures,

Article 3
Ld

(2) Laoh Contracting Party shall acoord in its territory, to investors of
the other Contracting Party, in respeot of their aotivities in connection
with such investments, treatment no less favourable than that accorded to
its own investors or to investors of third States.

fod
Article 4

(1) Investments by investors of either Contracting Party shall enjoy full
protection and fall security in the territory of the other Contracting Party.

(2) Investments by investors of either Contracting Party may be
expropriated, nationalized or subjected to other measures with effects
equivalent to expropriation or nationalization only in the public interest
and against compensation. Such compensation shall correspond to the
value of the investment expropriated immediately before the date on
which the actual or pending expropriation, nationelization or similar
measure was made public. Compensation shall be paid without delay and

~12-

 

 

36.

I

shall bear interest at-the normal rate of bank interest; it shal] be
effectively convertible and freely transferable. Provision for the
determination and payment of such compensation shall be made in an
appropriate manner no later than the date of the expropriation,
nationalization or similar measure. The legality of the expropriation,
nationalization or similar measure and the amount. of the compensation
may be subject to review in.a properly constituted legal proceeding.

Ler
The Relief Requested

The Claimant seeks both declaratory relief and damages for alleged violations by the
Respondent of the terms of the German-Czech BIT. In particular, the Claimant requests
the following relief from this Tribunal (see Cl. Reply PHB, para. 178):

@)

@)

(9)

()

DECLARE that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to decide the present dispute under
the German-Czech BIT;

DECLARE that the Respondent has breached Articles 2(1), 2(2), 3(2), 4(1) and
4(2) of the German-Czech BIT;

ORDER the Respondent to pay the Claimant damages in the amount of € 84.424
million; ,
ORDER the Respondent to pay the Claimant interest based on a return of 39.26%
generated from an investment into German Government bonds in total for the
period of 1 January 2005 until 29 April 2011, in the amount of € 33.14 million;

ORDER the Respondent to pay the Claimant interest, based upon the investment
into German Government bonds in an amount to be specified until the date of the
payment of the Award;

ORDER the Respondent to pay the costs of the arbitration, including all expenses
that the Claimant has incurred or will incur in respect of the fees and expenses of

the arbitrators, legal counsel] and experts;

ORDER the Respondent to pay the Claimant compound interest on the sum
awarded under (f), at the rate indicated in (e), from the date of the Award until the

date of full payment;

-13-

 

 

39.

(nh) ORDER such other and further relief as the arbitrators shall deem appropriate.

The Respondent, in tum, requests that the Tribunal grant the following relief (see

Rejoinder, para. 353):

(a) DECLARE that the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction over any claim based upon
Articles 2, 3 and 4 of the Gorman-Czech BIT’; or, in the alternative,

(bo) DECLARE that the Claimant has not made an investment within the meaning of
the German-Czech BIT;

(c) DISMISS the Claimant's petition to declare that the Respondent has breached
Articles 2(1), 2(2), 3(2), 4(1) and 4(2) of the Gorman-Czech BIT;

(d) DISMISS the Claimant’s petition to order the Respondent to pay the Claimant
compensation for damages and interests thereon;

(e) | DISMISS the Claimant's petition to order the Respondent to pay the costs of the
arbitration; and

() ORDER that the Claimant shall be liable for all costs of the proceeding, including
the Respondent’s legal costs and expert fees on a full indemnity basis.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

The Tribunal sets out a briof factual background in the form a chronology of events.
Where disputed by the Parties, the Tribunal has established these facts primarily from the
contemporaneous documentation adduced in evidence by the Parties, supplemented by
the testimony of their factual and expert witnesses (both oral and written) as provided to
the Tribunal in these arbitration proceedings.

A The Czech Forestry Industry

Since 1989, the Czech Republic has undergone an important transformation from a
centrally-planned and directed economy to a market economy. This transformation is

 

' The Tribunal notes that while not explicitly stated in the Respondent's request for relief, the Respondent seeks to
hhava the case dismissed on the ground that the acts or omissions complained of ate not attributable to the Czech
State (soe paragraphs 155 to 164 below).

-14-

40,
a
a)
41,
42.
co
Oo)
43,

mirrored in the forestry industry. In the Czech Republic, forested land covers
approximately 33,7% of Czech territory. Prior to 1989, over 95% of that land was state-
owned, Today, the Stale owns approximately 50-60% of all forested land (see Expert

Opinion of J. Vasicek, paras. 1 and 53; Expert Opinion of R. Ramsauer, para. 1.2).

The Czech forestry sector is comprised of both silvicultural activities and wood
processing, Silviculture is composed of both deforesting and afforesting activities,
Deforesting involves the felling of trees and transportation of the resulting timber in the
forn of logs, sawn wood or pulp. Afforesting involves the maintenance of tree nurseries
and the planting of young trees in areas designated by the owner of the forest. Both
deforesting and afforesting activities are labour-intensive activities which yield low profit
margins compared to wood processing. Wood processing involves the conversion of the
harvested wood into finished wood products, such as boards, doors, window frames,
floorboards and other products at sawmills and other specialized production facilities.

On 11 December 1991, pursuant to Protocol No. 6677/91-100, the Czech Ministry of
Agriculture, the entity responsible for managing and administering State forests,
established Lesy Ceske Republiky (“LOR”). LCR became responsible’for the day-to-day
management of State forests, while the Ministry of .Agriculture retained ultimate

responsibility for the deforesting and regeneration plan in respect of State forests.

At around the time when LCR was established, the regional State enterprises, which had
previously been responsible for the administration of Czech fotests (of which there were
seven), were dismantled and their assets transferred to newly established joint-stock

companies, These companies were subsequently privatised through a “coupon

privatisation” in March 1995,

However, the new forestry companies inberited the liabilities of their centrally-planned
predecessors, such as long-term obligations towards employees, loss-making housing
snanagement and redundant and unproductive property. In order to aid in this transition,
the companies were provided with a 10 year “framework guarantee”, that is, access to the
forest units in which their predecessors had operated. LCR entered into a two-year
contract with each forestry company at the end of which the performance of the forestry
company was assessed and prices re-negotiated. Contracts were only terminated by LCR

-15-

r———

 

44,

45,

46,

if price re-negotiations, based on an industry pricing formula (the so-called “KALK
formula”), were unsuccessful or a forestry company failed to fulfill its contractual
obligations, the result being that few competitive tender proceedings, if any, were held
(see Expert Opinion of J. Vasicek, para. 133).

In the 1990s, the price of timber in the Czech Republic was on a par with European
prices, however, Czech labour costs were much lower. Accordingly, during this period
forestry companies generally performed well financially, The KALK pricing formula,
which established a minimum price for the purchase of timber in the Czech Republic,
also regularly generated negative prices for lower quality timber, thereby requiring LCR
to pay forestry companies for the wood they were purchasing. As a result, as of 2003,
LGR’s income was close to zero (see Witness Statement of’ para. 9; Witness
Statement of ara. 2),

In 2005, LGR managed approximately 86% of State-owned forests, or approximately
51% of all forests in the Czech Republic (see Expert Opinion of J. Vasicek, para, 78).
Private companies had access to timber from the forests under LCR's management
through two means. First, a company could purchase timber directly from the trading
arm of LGR. Second, a company could contract with LGR to harvest wood and
subsequently buy a portion of the wood, to a maximum of two thirds of the wood
harvested, at prices agreed in advance, LOR offered two typas of silvicultural contracts:
Jong-term contracts (contracts of unlimited duration) and short-term contracts (contracts
limited to a duration of two-years with a possibility of extension) (see Exhs. C-28 and C-
29).

Following its accession to the EU in 2004, the Czech Republic was required to ensure the
transparency and liberalisation of its forestry sector, The Czech government therefore
adopted its first National Forest Programme (“NIP”) in 2003, followed by a second NFP
in 2008 (see Exhs. R-17 and R-18), The NEPs set out the Czech Republic's
commitments in the forestry sector, as well as guidelines for its forestry policy. The NFPs
also reflect the EU’s Action Plan for forests and forestry (see Expert Opinion of J,
Vasicek, paras, 29-31),

-16-

B. The Company CE Wood

 

47,
. 48.
“L.-J
.
.
~ )
OD
’
. 4d
'
49, -
\
\ \
500

 

-17-

 

 

Sl.

52,

54,

Cc The 2004/2005 Tender Proceedings

In 2003, the Czech Supreme Audit Office (“NKU”) undertook an investigation of the
performance of LCR for the purpose of verifying “the state enterprise’s management of
state assets and financial resources provided from the state budget, in particular from the
perspective of purposefulness and economy” (see Exh. R-49). The NKU’s report was
released in January 2004 (see ibid), Among its observations, the NKU noted that LER
had not carried oul any competitive tender proceedings to assign forestry units, which had
resuited in six companies dominating the field ,

The NKU also observed that LCR was disadvantaged by the price paid to it for
felled timber by forestry companies, becoming increasingly unprofitable by contrast to
the forestry companies, which were able to sell the samo felled timber at a higher price on
the open market.

On 15 December 2004, LER published a notice of tenders for the execution of logging
and re-planting activities in 87 forestry units which were previously serviced under short-
term. contracts, which were slated to end with effect on 31 December 2004 (see Exh. C-
1). LER assigned temporary contracts to new companies for a six month intermediate
period until the tenders had been awarded. CE Wood was offered an extension of its
short-term contracts, however, the parties could not agree on the ternis of the extension in

-18-

 

55.
56.
— 57,
Oo 7
58,
59.

 

respect of al) forestry units. Specifically, while the parties agreed on price in respect of
four or five forestry units, they failed to reach agreement on price in respect of all other
short-term contracts. In the case of the latter contracts, CE Wood insisted on maintaining
negative prices for these contracts while LCR proposed the price of one (1) Czech Crown
per m? of wood (see Tr. Day 4, pp. 61-62; 87). As a result, 19 forestry units previously
under contract with CE Wood were reassigned,

On 21 December 2004, LGR notified all forestry companies that it intended to terminate
all long-term contracts as well (see e.g., Exh, C-31), This notice triggered a one-year
notification period (previously two years) included in all of CE Wood’s long-term
contracts with LCR, However, LOR cancelled all long-term contracts with immediate
effect by letters of 12 January 2005, on the grounds that such contracts were contrary to
the Protection of Competition Act (see Exh. C-4), These contracts, too, were eventually
submitted to a tender process.
On 15 February 2005, CE Wood submitted a bid for short-term contracts in ,

for tender (see Exh. C-47). By this time, all but a handful of
CE Wood’s short-term contracts had been terminated, and all of its long-term contracts

were at an end.

On 21 March 2005, CE Wood asked LCR for information regarding the composition of
the tender evaluation committees (see Exh. C-38). Several days later, CE Wood wrote
again to LCR formally objecting to the tender process and complaining that the process
had violated the Public Procurement Act of 2004 (“PPA”) (see Exh, C-12),

LGR responded to CE Wood’s complaint on 6 April 2005, averring that the tender
proceedings were conducted in accordance with EU rules applicable to the award of
public contracts and not the standards of the PPA (see Exh. C-39). LER declined to
provide detailed information on the composition of the selection committees,

CE Wood pursued its request for further information on the composition of the evaluation,
committees on two other occasions, including through a Freedom of Information Petition

-19-

 

 

60,

61.

63.

64,

65.

to the Ministry of Agriculture (see Exhs, C-40 and C-42). In its response, the Ministry
explained the limited powers of control it has over LGR as a state enterprise and that,
because the exercise of commercial activities concerning state-owned assets by LCR was
not subordinate to the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry could not intervene in the
tender process (gee Exh, C-43),

LCR held a second round of tenders for the remaining contracts beginning on 24 June
2005, However, CB Wood declined to partlo{pate.

D The Administrative Challenge to the Tender Proceedings

Prior to initiating tender proceedings, LGR sought legal advice as to its status as a public
contracting authority for the purposes of new legislation on public tenders which was to
enter into effect on 1 May 2004 (Act No. 40/2004 Coll.). Based on a review of the
legislation, the Institute of the State and Law opined that LER was not required to abide
by the Act unless it organized a tender which was majority financed by the State (see
Exh. R-83), LCR followed this advice and did not comply with the Act in the conduct of
the tender proceedings.

On 9 December 2004, CE Wood filed a Petition for Protection against Unfair
Competition Conduct with the Regional Court in Hradec Krdlové (see Bxh, C-25). In this
Petition, CE Wood alleged that LCR’s conduct leading up to the tender proceedings, such
as the shortening of the notice period for CE Wood’s long-term contracts and price
negotiations under the short-term contracts, was contrary to the Protection of Competition
Act of 2001,

On 23 December 2004, CE Wood also submitted a petition to the Office for the
Protection of Competition (“UOHS”) requesting that it initlate an investigation into
LER’s compliance with the PPA in the tender proceedings (see Exh, C-5).

CE Wood wrote to Minister . Head of the Government Legislative
Council, on 6 January 2005, enclosing a copy of its petition to the UOHS (see Exh. C-9).

On 25 January 2005, UOHS informed LCR that it had determined it was a public
tendering authority and therefore subject to the PPA. UOHS directed LCR to make

~20-

>

appropriate changes to its tender process and documentation. CE Wood was advised of |
UOHS’s decision several days later, by letter (see Exh. C-6). |

66. However, on 1 Februaty 2005, UOHS advised CE Wood that its decision was
preliminary and still under consideration-(see Exh. C-7). UOHS subsequently wrote to |
CE Wood on 4 February 2005, advising it that, after further consideration, the tendered ‘
contracts did not meet the definition of a public contract, because no public funds were |
disbursed (UOHS considered that the mutual payments between the contracting parties
ultimately represented income for LCR as opposed to an expense), and therefore the

|

matter would not be pursued further (see Exh. C-8).

 

On 24 February 2005, CE Wood wrote to UOHS advising that LOR had taken the

position during the legal proceedings before the Court in Hradec Krdlové that it was a

public contracting authority and the provision of forestry services by a contractual partner

. could thus be considered a public contract, CE Wood reiterated its request that UOHS |

67.

initiate administrative proceedings against LCR (see Exh. C-10).

68, The CALPH, a Czech industry group, also wrote to Minister on 10 March 2005,

demanding, inter alia, the suspension of the February tender proceedings and a review of
LCR’s actions by the Ministry of Agriculture (see Exh. C-11). On 17 March 2005, the
Ministry advised, however, that it would not intervene as the matter was within the
competence of the UOHS (see Exh. C-37).

LJ
~ 69, On15 April 2005, CE Wood again filed a petition with the UOHS, seeking, inter alia, a
declaration that the tender proceedings were invalid (see Exh. C-13).

On 27 January 2006, following issuance of the European Commission’s (“EC”) decision

70.
in respect of the tender proceedings (see Section IIE below), UOHS again revised its
position that the tender proceedings had been conducted correctly, also declaring LCR to
be apublic contracting authority under Czech law.
q. The EC Challenge to the Tender Proceedings

71. On 11 February 2005, CE Wood filed a formal complaint in respect of the tender

proceedings with the EC on the grounds that the proceedings violated both the PPA and

EU Public Procurement Legislation (see Exh. C-14). CE Wood supplemented its

-21-

 

72,

23,

74.

75.

76.

complaint with further reasons on 23 and 24 February 2005 (see Exh. C-34 and C-35),
and again on 4 Maroh 2005 (see Exh. C-36), as the tender proceedings were ongoing,

On 18 April 2005, the BC advised CE Wood that its complaint had been registered (see
Exh, C-41), The EC rendered its decision on 13 December 2005, confirming that LOR
was a public contracting authority pursuant to Article 1(b) of Directive 92/50/BEC and
that its silvicultural contracts were public service contracts pursuant to Artiole 1(a) of the
Directive (gee Exh, C-15), The Czech Republic was given two months to respond.

On 23 Maroh 2007, the EC issued a Reasoned Opinion, confirming its above decision and
observing that neither the Czech Republic nor LOR had taken stops to remedy the
problems identified by the EC in its 2005 decision. Accordingly, the EC invited the
Czech Republic to adopt measures to remedy the problems (see Exh, C-17).

KR The Sale of CE Wood

InterTrade sold its shares in CE Wood to Awyn GmbH (“Awyn”) for
(see Exh, C-75; Exh, R-79), The exact date on which InterTrade sold its
whether the Tribunal has jurisdiction over the present

 

shares is disputed and f
dispute. It shall therefore be discussed in detail below.

IssUES TO BE DETERMINED

The issues before the Tribunal for determination may be briefly summarized as follows:
(a) Jurisdiction; Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction ratione materiae and ratione

temporis over the present dispute?

(b) Attribution: Are the acts and/or omissions of LGR attributable to the Czech
Republic?

(c) Liability: If the answer to the above two issues is affirmative, did the Respondent
breach Article 2(1), 2(2), 3(3), 4(1) and/or 4(2) of the German-Czech BIT?

 

77.

78.

Causation; If the answer to the above question is affirmative in respect of any of

@
the identified provisions of the German-Czech BIT, did the Claimant suffer Joss
or damage as a result of the Respondent’s treaty breach(es)?

© Damages: If the answer to the above question is affirmative, to what sum of
damages is the Claimant entitled?

() Interest: If the answer to the above question results in a positive value, to what
sum of interestis the Claimant entitled?

(g) Costs: Based on the foregoing disposition of the dispute, how should costs be

allocated as between the Parties?

ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION

The Tribunal shall now discuss and determine each of these issues in turn. Due to the
extensive nature of the Parties’ written and oral submissions, the Tribunal does not intend
to provide an exhaustive account of all arguments developed by the Parties in support of
their respective positions. Rather, the Tribunal canvasses below the Parties’ principal
arguments and evidence in support thereof, focusing on those points which have proved

materia! to-the Tribunal’s deliberations and conclusions.

A Jurisdiction

1 The Respondent’s Position
The Respondent submits as a preliminary point thal the Claimant bears the burden of
proof to establish the Tribunal’s jurisdiction (see Resp. PHB, para. 50, citing Phoenix
Action Lid, v, The Czech Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/5, Award of 15 April 2009,
para, 64 (“Phoenix Action”). In the Respondent’s view, the Claimant has failed to meet

its burden,

The Respondent’s position on jurisdiction has evolved over the course of these
proceedings, However, the Tribunal understands that the Respondent’s position rests on
three principal arguments: (1) the Claimant sold its alleged investment prior to the acts in

issue (i.¢., jurisdiction ratione femporis); (2) there is no “investment” within the meaning

-23-

 

 

80.

2

83.

of Article 1 of the German-Czech BIT (ie, jurisdiction ratione materiae); and (3) the
Claimant did not make a good faith investment.
a) Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis

The Respondent contends that the Claimant divested itself of any putative investment
prior to January 2005, when the alleged wrongful acts were to have occurred,
Specifically, the Respondent submits that the sale of shares in CE Wood toole place in
accordance with an SPA entered into prior to 30 June 2004 between InterTrade and
Awyn. This share purchase is recorded in the Claimant's financial statements for the
period 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004 and 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 (see Resp. PHB,
paras, 53-54; Exhs. R-40 / CB-132 and R-54/ CB-142),

Referring to the award in Cementownia “Nowa Huta" S.A. v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID
Case No, ARB(AF)/06/2, Award of 17 September 2009 (‘Cementownia”), the
Respondent observes that an ICSID arbitral tribunal recently faced a similar situation
when asked to delermine whether the claimant held the investment when the acts at issue
were performed, The Respondent submits that, in that case, the claimant's failure to
record the claimed transaction in its own financial statement for the year in which the
transaction allegedly occurred proved fatal to its claim (see Resp. PHB, para. 59, quoting

Cementownia al para. 129).

 
 

Motwithstani

ig thé Ciaimani’s position that the sale of shares in CE Wood was simply
back-dated, and did not ocour until March 2005 pursuant to a revised SPA, the
Respondent avers that the evidence contradicts this position, First, the Respondent notes
that coufirmed during his oral testimony that the share purchase followed
the payment structure set out in the 2004 SPA, not the 2005 contract (see Resp. PHB,

paras, 65-69; Tr. Day 2, pp. 73, 135),

Second, the Respondent claims that Recital D to the 2004 SPA, which provides a timeline
for the negotiation of collection of the receivable against the Claimant used to set-off the
Claimant’s payinent obligation for the shares, is commercially reasonable, whereas the
parallel recital in the March 2005 contraot is not, Specifically, Recital D to the 2004
agteement provided for negotiations to commence in January 2004, the same month in
which Awyn acquired the receivable, whereas Recital D to the 2005 contract provided for

~24-

85,

86.

negotiations to begin in March 2005, over a year after Awyn acquired the receivable (sce
Resp. PHB, paras. 70-73),

Third, the Respondent contends that the Claimant’s rationale for backdating the share
purchase transaction is a “fiction”, referring to the oral testimony of who
acknowledged during the Hearing that there were no tax teasons for such a step, nor was
there more than one creditor with whom CE Wood had an outstanding receivable (see
Resp. PHB, paras. 74-81; Tr, Day 2, pp, 30-37).
b) Jurisdiction Ratione Materiae

The Respondent contends that the Tribunal also Jacks jurisdiction because Article 1 of the
Gernman-Czech BIT requires that assets be “contributed” in order. for a protected
investment to exist. The Respondent takes issue with the English language translation of
the German-Czech BIT provided by the Claimant, which translates the operative
language in Article 1 as “invested”. The Respondent reasons that Article 2(3) of the BIT
expressly provides for the’ protection of “investments” and “returns”, therefore if Article
1(1) were to be interpreted to provide for a broad definition of assets invested in the sense

of “directly or indirectly owned or controlled by the investor”, returns would:be included

in the definition of “investments” and Article 2(3) would be redundant. Instead, the
Respondent. submits that Article 1(1) contains a narrower definition of investment, one
which requires the “contribution” of assets in the tesritory of the Contracting State (see
Resp. PHS, paras. 82-85).

‘The Respondent argues that the share sale transaction is best understood in two parts, the
net result of which is that the Claimant never paid “a single Crown” and did not,
therefore, contribute an asset in the territory of the Czech Republic. The first part is
described as the transfer of shares in CE Wood from EPAS to InterTyade and the set-off
of receivables acquired -by InterTrade from EPAS’s subsidiaries in payment for the
shares. The second part of the transaction is described as the “parking” of substitute
receivables against InterTrade in “non-transparent, off-shore structures” which were
ultimately cancelled in a second set-off when InterTrade sold the shares in CE Wood to
the same entity holding the substitute receivables (see Resp. PHB, paras, 86-87).

~25-

87.

89,

90.

The Respondent submits that the “state of the evidence” on whether the Claimant
“contributed” anything in the Czech Republic consists of the following, which it
describes as “fatal” to the Tribunal's jurisdiction:

(a) | A promissory note that the Claimant alleges to have destroyed;

(b) Two substitute promissory notes that were not produced; and

(c) An ion about an dethi 1d tion with no transfer

dooumenting the existence of the transaction,

The Respondent adds that, even assuming the transaction occurred as alleged, the
Claimant still did not “contribute” anything in the territory of the Czech Republic
because it paid for its alleged investment with a promissory note as opposed (o a capilal
infusion (see Resp. PHB, para. 113).
°) The Claimant did not make a good faith investment

The Respondent submits that an investment not performed in good faith cannot benefit
from investment protection, relying on the arbitral awards in Phoenix Action, Inceysa v.
EI Salvador, ICSID Case No, ARB/03/26, Award of 2 August 2006 (“Inceysa”), and
Gustav FW Hamester GmbH & Co. KA v, Republic of Ghana, ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/24, Award of 18 June 2010 (“Grstav Hamester”) in support of its proposition.

In this case, the Respondent contends that the structure by which the Claimant bought
and sold its alleged investment shows substantial indicia of an intent to conceal, referring
to the “labyrinthine structure” in which EPAS’s assets were transferred between
“business friends”, at less than fair market value and shortly before commencement of the
bankruptey proceeding. The Respondent thus submits that the Claimant’s alleged
investment is marked by several “badges of fraud”, In making this plea, the Respondent
urges the Tribunal to consider the circumstantial evidence surrounding the transaction,
averring that direct proof of actual fraud is rarely available (see Resp. PHB, paras. 117-
122).

-26-

91.

93,

2. The Claimant’s Position
a) Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis
The Claimant submits that the Respondents reliance on Cementownia is misplaced, for
several Teasons, In particular, the Claimani draws a distinction between the facts
underpinning the Cementownia award and the facts adduced in the present proceeding,
That is, the Cementownia claimant’s admitted inability to prove its acquisition of a
sharcholding in the Turkish companies at the relevant time (see Cl. PHB, para. 53),

The Claimant submits: that InterTrade sold its shares to Awyn: . The sum

actually transferred to InterTrade in payment of its shares amounted to
the difference between the purchase price agreed with Awyn and the monies still owed by
InterTrade in the context of the receivable Awyn had purchased, plus the interest
accumulated on this latter amount. It says that the shares were transferred to Awyn on 8

she

July 2005.

According to the Claimant, InterTrade and Awyn executed their SPA on 18 May 2005;
however, because recording this transaction in the financial year 2005 could have had
serious negative implications for InterTrade (i.¢. negative capital showing in its 2004
financial statements), the Claimant decided to account for the transaction in 2004 and
thus used an unexecuted version of the SPA concluded with Awyn on 18 May 2005, now
carrying the date of 1 March 2004, to present for accounting purposes. The Claimant
submits this was entirely legal pursuant to German law. Thus, while the annual reports of
InterTrade reflect a sale of the shares in the year 2004, this was merely an accounting
fiction, the real date of sale being 18 May 2005. The Claimant explains that the sale
transaction was thus “split” over two fiscal years, such that the sale was recorded in fiscal
year 2003/2004 and the receivable against Awyn was booked in this year, but payment of
the receivable from Awyn was recorded in fiscal year 2004/2005. The Claimant confirms
that this “split” was nonetheless initiated after the sale of CE Wood on 18 May 2005, and

finalized when Mr. _ InterTrade’s tax adviser, filed the company’s financial

statements on 30 June 2005 (see Cl. PHB, paras. 18-21).

«27+

 

94,

97,

b) Jurisdiction Ratione Materiae
The Claimant contends that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over its claim pursuant to
Article 1 of the German-Czech BIT, as InterTrade is an “investor”, as that term is defined
in Article 1(3) of the BIT (being a limited liability company incorporated under the laws
of Germany with its seat in Germany) with an “investment”, as that term is defined in
Articles 1(1)(b) and () of the BIT (ie “shares and other kinds of participation in
companies”, “claims to money that has been used to create economic value”, and “claims
to services that have economic value and are related to an investment”), The Claimant
rejects the proposition that any additional elements or oriteria are required in order to
satisfy the definition of an investment under the German-Czech BIT. Nonetheless, it
submits that it has made a substantial commitment of capital by investing more than
(gee Statement of Claim, para. 126).

As regards the Respondent’s interpretation of Article 1(1) of the German-Czech BIT, the
Claimant avers that the treaty in evidence is the official UN translation of the BIT, as
contained in the UN Treaty Series, and, in any event, the Respondent’s proposed
alternative interpretation of the treaty is either nonsensical or no more correct than that

translation (see Cl. PHB, paras. 31-39).

As regards the Respondents challenge concerning the validity of the share transaction for

a into an

  

ihe share purchase in CE Wood, the Claimant explaine that InterTrade oi
SPA with EPAS on 3 September 2000 for the purchase of shares in EP Kapital (see Exh,
C-12). The purchase was financed through a promissory note secured against the
personal assets of Mr, the owner and managing director of InterTrade.
As payment for the shares was not effected Immediately, InterTrade entered into a
custody agreement with Allwood, a.s. (“Allwood"), on the same date (see Bxh, C-61).
Thus, while the shares were legally transferred to the Claimant on 3 September 2000,
they were held in trust by Allwood pending payment.

The Claimant explains that the shares in EP Kapital were released fo InterTrade by
Allwood in January 2001, following 2 series of transactions the effect of which was to set
off payment against the full amount of the promissory note (see Statement of Reply, para.
15):

-28-

Cy)

98,

99,

100,

“On 31 January 2001, InterTrade purchased from Allwood a receivable
against EPAS worth CZK ' . At the same time, InterTrade
also purchased a receivable from EP Kapital against EPAS over the
amount of Both of these transactions were financed
through promissory notes. Consequently, the claim which ERAS had
against InterTrade for payment of the purchase price for the shares was
set off against the receivables against EPAS which InterTrade had
purchased. InterTrade no longer owed money to. EPAS, but to Allwood
and EP Kapital stemming from the purchase of the mentioned
receivables. Theréfore, also on 31 January 2001, InterTrade and EPAS
signed .an agreement stating that each party’s claim against the other
party shall be considered paid. Hence, InterTrade no longer owed money
to. EPAS for the purchase of the shares, Having thus fulfilled its payment
obligation, it received the shares, which it had purchased, out of
Allwood’s custody.” [footnotes omitted] - -
The Claimant rejects the proposition that the acquisition of assets under the German-
Czech BIT must be financed in a particular way, pointing to the tribunal’s analysis in
Saluka Investments Ltd. v, Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award (17 March 2006)
(“Saluka”) among other oases, where the inyestor’s share purchase in a Czech company
was financed through the exchange of promissory notes (see Statement of Reply, para.
72, quoting Saluka, paras. 205 and 211),
c) The Investment Was Made in Good Fatth

‘The Claimant contends that the Respondent’s “fraud theory” turns on the idea that EPAS
was deprived of its “most valuable asset” (i.e, EP Kapital), in a transaction among
“business friends”, for inadequate consideration, However, it alleges that the Resporident
has disingenuously withheld evidence of the due diligence conducted by InterTrade into
the EP Kapital’s financial results, produced by the Claimant during the document
discovery phase, as well as a portion of a valuation report commissioned by EPAS which
found CE Wood’s value to be substantially negative (see Cl, Reply PHB, paras, 42-45),
The Claimant submits that, in raising this argument, the Respondent itself is guilty of
severe procedural misconduct.

3. Discussion
‘As indicated above, the Respondent’s jurisdictional challenge evolved over the course of
these proceedings. The Tribunal addresses below those arguments in which the
Respondent has persisted, namely jurisdiction ratione temporis, jurisdiction ratione
materiae, and the existence of a “good faith” investment. Ii no longer appears to be

+29 =

 

101,

102.

103,

104,

disputed that the Claimant is an “investor” within the meaning of the German-Czech BIT.
For the avoidance of doubt, however, the Tribunal finds that the Claimant is and was at
all material times an investor of a Contracting State within the meaning of the BIT.
a) Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis

The central issue related to juriadiction ratione femporis is when the Claimant sold its
interest in CE Wood, The Respondent contends that the Claimant sold its shares in CE
Wood in June 2004, several months before the alleged wronglul acts occurred, The
Claimant submits that it did not sell its interest in the company until June 2005, several

months afer the tenders.

The Tribunal’s review of the evidence supports the finding that the Claimant sold its
shares in 2005, after the tender proceedings in respect of which the Claimant complains,
Beginning with the share transfer operation, the evidence of a Czech
entrepreneur, is that he negotiated the purchase of the CE Wood shares from InterTrade

on behalf of Awyn. There is undisputed evidence that first met at
the end of 2004 (see Second Witness Statement of para. 2; Tr., Day. 2, pp.
146:24 - 147:5, 151:4 - 14). and both testified that the SPA
‘was entered into on 18 May 2005 (see Second Witness Statement of » para,

4; Tr. 2, 163;18 ~ 20). The signed version of the SPA in evidence is dated 18 May 2005
@ tadiGaic thar
payment for tho shares was received on 29 June 2005 (see Exh, C-73) and the shares
wore transferred approximately one woek later, on 8 July 2005 (gee Exh. C-74).

 

‘This evidence alone is sufficient, in the Tribunal’s view, to establish jurisdiction ratione
temporis. However, there are other indicators which also suppor! this finding, For
example, on 10 November 2004, CE Wood's lawyer at the time wrote to LCR and
advised it that InterTrade was the sole shareholder of CE Wood (see CB-62, Exh. R-47).
There is also evidence that InterTrade, as shareholder, approved the CE Wood annual
report in May or June 2005 (see Second Witness Statement of . para. 3).

The only inconsistency in the evidence is the existence of the 2004 SPA and the
corresponding references to a sale in the InterTrade financial statements. The Parties
agree that the 2004 version of the SPA was used by _ InterTrade’s tax advisor,

-30-

 

105.

106.

in the preparation of InterTrade's financial statements for the 2003-2004 and 2004-2005
fiscal years. It is undisputed that the financial statements for InterTrade which indicate
that the sale of shares occurred in 2004 were prepared in 2005 and dated 30 June 2005
(sce CB-132). The financial statements are thus not contemporaneous evidence that the
sale took place in 2004, The alleged use of a backdated contract is consistent with the
Claimant's chronology of events and the booking of the sale in the 2004 financial year

does not necessarily mean that the sale took place that year. The Claimant bas provided

evidence as to why this inconsistency exists. testified that he did not want to

have the books display negative capital for the years in question, which would have
resulted. from the exchange rate variability (see Tr. Day 2, pp. 34-36).

explanation shows a lack of business experience or sophistication, but not, in the
Tribunal’s opinion, an intention to deceive either the tax authorities (as no negative tax

consequences flowed from the way the sale was booked) or the Tribunal.

What is disputed is whether the 2004 SPA was the operative sale agreement, ie. that it is
evidence that InterTrade sold the shares in 2004 and not 2005, The Respondent has
focused on two aspects of the 2004 SPA to reinforce its position that the shares were sold
in 2004: (1) the payment structure and (2) references to the so-called “Savino Report”,
The Respondent has also complained that the 2005 SPA in evidence does not attach the
appendices listed in that document, ie, the Receivable and the (first) Savino Report.
With respect to this last point, the Tribunal notes that there is a version of the Savino
Report in evidence, which the Claimant says is the report referenced in the SPA.

‘With respect to the payment structure in the 2004 SPA as compared to the 2005 SPA, this
issue was only raised on cross-examination with who confirmed that the
payments made by Awyn were consistent with the 2004 SPA payment structure. The
Respondent did not ask about the different versions of the agreement or why
he made the payment in two instalments and not three. Unfortunately, the Claimant did
not address this issue on re-direct examination with ' , However, the Claimant
states that backdated the agreement and made the payments consistent with the
actual payments, one of which had already been made and the other which was made at
about the same time that » + was given the 2004 SPA, in order “to harmonise the

would see when

1 March 2004 document with the two payments which

~31-

 

107.

108,

reviewing the financial statements for the financial year 2004/2005” (see Cl. Reply PHB,
para, 11; Resp, PHB, para. 66), Once again, this decision indicates a lack of business
sophistication, but the Tribunal finds © explanation consistent with the
Claimant's overall sequence of events and the other contemporaneous evidence.

In focusing on the payment structure in the agreements, the Respondent also disregards
the deadlines in Seotion 4,2, The Respondent would like the Tribunal to infor that
because the actual payment amount transferred in June 2005 corresponded to the
reoelvable amount fess a deposit of which was required only under the 2004
version of the SPA in evidence, the shares were sold in 2004, However, that same
version of the SPA requires that those payments be made no Jater than 31 December 2004
and 28 February 2005, respectively. Spevifioally, Section 4.2 of the 2004 SPA provides
(see CB-46);
“Terms of Payment

4.2 The Buyer shall procure and the Seller shall accept that the
Consideration to the conditions given in this agreement shall be paid to
the Seller.

42,1 The Payment of the first instalment of the Consideration by
assignment of the Receivable and the set-off shall be executed by the
Parties in agreed form not later than on 15 July 2004.

4.2.2 The Payment of the second instalment of the Consideration shall
be exeouted by the Buyer no Inter than on 3] December 2004,

4.2.3 The Payment of the third instalment of the Consideration shall be
executed after the olosing of Due Diligence of the Company by the
Buyer, however, no Jater than on 28 February 2005,

4.24 Should the Buyor withdraw from the Agreement (without being
entitled to do so according to the Agreement), then the amounts paid by
the Buyer as instalments under clause 4,1 here above shall not be paid
back to the Buyer but romain with the Seller as penalty for Buyers
withdrawal from the Contract,” (emphasis added)

Neither party has addressed this inconsistency. It begs the question: if the Claimant sold
its shares in 2004, why would it have waited until mid-2005 for payment? The timing of
the payments is consistent with the 2005 version of the SPA, which required payment
“not later than on 30 June 2005”, Specifically, Section 4.2 of the 2005 SPA provides as
follows (see CB-128):

“Terms of Payment

-32-

109,

110,

il,

4.2 The Buyer shell procure and the Seller shall nooept that
Consideration shall be paid to the Seller at terms as set oul hereunder,

4.2.1 The Payment of the first instalment of the Consideration by
assignment of the Receivable and the set-off shall be executed by the
Parties in agreed form not later than on 30 May 2005.

4.2.2 The Payment of the second instalment of te Consideration shall
be executed by the Buyer o1

42.4 Should the Buyer withdraw from the Agreement without being
entitled to do so according to this Agreement, then amounts paid by the
Buyer as instalments under olause 4.) here above shall not be paid back
to tle Buyer bul remain with the’Seller as penalty for Buyers withdrawal,
[sio]” (emphasis added)

As noted above, payment was made on 29 June 2005 and the shares were transferred on 8
July 2005.

The Respondent attempts to challenge the timing of the Savino Report referenced in the
SPA, an Italian language document prepared by.an Italian consulting firm. The Parties
agree that the version of the Savino Report in evidence was prepared in
August/September of 2004. The Respondent claims, however, that this version of the
Savino Report was not the first, but rather the second due diligence report contemplated
by the SPA. That is, the Savino Report in evidence was not the Savino Report referenced
in the SPA as having been provided to the buyer and attached as an appendix to that
document. If the report in evidence is the second due diligence report, this still does not

explain why the Claimant would sell its shares in CE Wood for instead of the

“maximum amount for the disposal value of the entire stake of the
company” recommended in the Savino Report, which the Claimant had seen (see CB-77
(Savino Report), p. 59). This valuation is consistent with the value of CE Wood before
the tender process and is consistent with it having been drafted in August/September of

2004. The recommended sale price is not consistent with a sale transaction that occurred

in 2004,

The Respondent also argues that the “Claimant's case is that —rather than Mr.

- was the potential purchaser of CE Wood in August 2004.” (see Resp. Reply

PHB, para, 36), However, this is clearly not the Claimant's case, In malcing this

argument, the Respondent appears to conflate the sale of the InterTrade receivable by Mr,

~33-

112,

113,

1 to with the sale of InterTrade's shares in CE Wood.
evidence, which was not challenged by the Respondent, was that he purchased the
receivable in January 2004 from ° , but did not meet « before
Devember 2004, and negotiated the purchase of the CE Wood shares on behalf of Awyn
in May 2005, was not, and was not alleged by the Claimant to be, the
potential purchaser of the CE Wood shares in August 2004, It is also illogical to think
that a due diligence report commissioned by or written for him would have
been done by un Italian firm and drafted in Italian. The evidence indionted that Mr.
had personal knowledge of CE Wood's operations ftom his affiliations with
Czech consultants, which would have been better placed to provide a due diligence report
on a Czech company to a Czech national. It is more likely, in the Tribunal’s view, that
an Italian businessman (now deceased) with commercial interests in the
Czech Republic, was responsible for commissioning the Savino Report.

The Respondent has sought to expose what it considers to be inconsistencies in the two
versions of the SPA in evidence to found its jurisdictional argument, However, it has not
provided a coherent alternate theory or timeline that would result in a finding that the
Claimant sold its shares in CE Wood before the bidding process in January 2005. The
totality of the evidence in the record, including the two versions of the SPA, written and
ora] witness testimony, and other contemporaneous documents support the Claimant's
version of the everiis, Moreover, the Claimant has provided a plausible explanation for
the one inconsistency in its version of events, 4.¢., the sale being booked in the financial
statements for 2003-2004. Acoordingly, the Tribunal dismisses the Respondent's
objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione temporis over the dispute.
b) Jurisdiction Ratione Maieriae

The crux of the Respondent’s second objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction appears to
be the structure of the share transaction in which the Claimant acquired its interest in CE
Wood and the absence of any capital infusion in the Czech Republic as a part of that
transaction. While the Respondent’s interpretation of what is required to qualify for
Investment protection under the terms of the Germany-Czech BIT has evolved over the
course of these proceedings, it has consistently sought to impugn the Claimant’s alleged

-34-

114.

115.

investment on the basis that no money nor any physical asset. was brought into the Czech
Republic by the Claimant.

The Respondent raised for ‘the first time in its post-hearing submissions questions
concerning the proper translation of the German-Czech BIT in evidence in these
proceedings. In its view, the definition of investment under the BIT turns on whether a
“contribution” was made in the territory of the Czech Republic, The UN Treaty Series
translation of the BIT has been on the record since October 2008 when the Respondent
was served with the Claimant’s Request for Arbitration. Article 10 of the BIT establishes
that disputes between “either Contracting Party and an investor of the other Contracting
Party regarding investments shall, as far as possible, be settled amicably between the
parties to the dispute”, failing which the dispute may be submitted to arbitration.

Article 1 of the BIT, which contains the relevant definition of an “investment”, states:

“For the purpose of this Treaty
(1) The term ‘investments’ comprises all kinds of assets that are invested
in accordance with domestic legislation, particularly:

(2) Movable and immovable property as well as any other rights
in rem such as mortgages and liens;
(b) Shares and any other kinds of participation in companies;
(c) Claims to money that has been used to create economic value
or claims to services that have economic value and are related to
an investment;
(@) Intellectual property rights, including, in particular,
copyright, patents, registered designs, industrial designs and
models, trademarks, trade names, technical processes, know-how
and goodwill;
(e) Concessions under public law, including concessions for
prospecting and exploitation,
(2) The term ‘returns’ refers to amounts yielded by an investment such
as profits, dividends, interest, royalties or other remuneration;

(3) The term ‘investor’ refers to an individual, having a permanent place
of residence in the area covered by this Agreement, or a body corporate
having its tegistered office therein, authorized to make investments.”

(emphasis added)

-35-

+

 

116,

117,

118.

119.

The Respondent suggests that “invested” ought to be replaced with “contributed”, It
argues that its interpretation is reinforced by the definition of “returns” in Article 1(2) of
the BIT, reasoning that if Article 1(1) were interpreted to provide for the “usual” broad
definition it would include returns and Article 2(3), which provides that both
‘Snvestments” and “returns” are ptotected under the terms of the BIT, would be
redundant,

Despite the Respondent’s argument that the Czech language version of the BIT would
more appropriately be translated by replaoing the term “invested” with “contributed”, it
has adduced no evidence to this effect. Nor has it adduced evidence that the German
language version of the BIT is open to two different interpretations, i.e. either “invested
or “contributed”, The Claimant acknowledges that the German language version of the
BIT is open to several possible interpretations, including the following: “the term
‘investments’ comprises all kinds of assets that are placed/made in accordance with
domestic legislation ...”; however, it avers that “contributed” is no more appropriate a
translation of Article 1 than “invested”,

The Tribunal is not p d that the term i best or better iles the
Czech and German texts of the BITs, nor does it see a redundancy in the terms of the
BIT, as they appear above, The BIT appears to embrace a broad range of economic
activities. The preamble to the BIT recogiiizes “that the promotion and reciprocal
protection of investments serve to strengthen all forms of economic initiative, particularly
in respect of private enterprise”. It does not follow from this and the definition of
“investments” in Article 1 that the Contracting Parties intended to restrict the protection
of investments in the manner suggested by the Respondent,

In any event, the Respondent's linguistic arguments appear to be dressing for a deeper
point that meaning must be given to the full definition of investment which would, in the
Respondent’s view, require more than a “mere holding of assets” to qualify for protection
(see Resp. Reply PHB, para. 41). This squares the circle in the Respondent's theory that
the Claimant must have invested or contributed an asset in the territory of the Czech
Republic and, by structuring the share transaction as it did (characterized by the

~36-

CO

120.

121,

122,

Respondent as a “dummy” transaction), the Claimant has foreclosed. recognition of its
transaction as a protected investment,

The Tribunal does not agree, for the reasons expressed above, that the German-Czech
BIT requires more than a holding of assets in order for an investment to benefit from the
treaty’s protection. However, the Claimant must demonstrate that it did, in fact, acquire
shares in a Czech company in order to ground the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the subject
matter of the dispute, and this requires detailed consideration of the share purchase
transaction. The Claimant submits that it acquired the shares in CE Wood, a Czech
company, from. EPAS on 3 September 2000 pursuant to an Agreement on Transfer of
Shares and a protocol thereto, which confirmed the transfer of the shares to a custodian
(Allwood) pending payment of the purchase price for the shares. The purchase price was
subsequently satisfied through the acquisition by the Claimant of two receivables from
EPAS. As far as the Claimant is concerned, this is the end of the story.

The Respondent, however, divides the share transaction into two parts for the purpose of
its jurisdictional analysis, the above transaction, in its view, constituting only one part of

the entire. transaction (see Resp. PHB, para. 86):

“The first part, in which Exportnf transferred the CE Wood shares to
Claimant, and Clajmant’s payment obligation to Exportn{ was set-off
against receivables that Claimant acquired from two of Exporm{’s
subsidiaries; and

The second part, in which two new substitute receivables against
Claimant were ‘parked’ in non-transparent, off-shore structures and
ultimately cancelled in a second set-off, when Claimant sold the shares to
the same entity that held the substitute receivables against Claimant,”

Beginning with the first part of the transaction, the Agreement on Transfer of Shares,

dated 3 September 2000, provides as follows (see JB-3):

“J, Exportnf primyslova, a.s., with the registered office at Prague
6, Slikova 18, Company ID No, 25136551, represented by the Chairman
of the Board of Directors, Ing, \ (hereinafter referred to
only as the “Transferor”)

2 InterTrade Im-& Export Beteiligungs-GmbH, with the

registered office at 53783 Eitorf, Am Hagen 37 b. The company is

registered in the Commercial Register at the District Court of Siegburg

under’ No. 51,68, represented by the company’s exeoulive* =”
. (hereinafter referred to only as the “Transferee”),

-37~

123,

In his written and oral evidence, .

The Transferor is the owner of of the EP Kapital Group, as,
company [eventually CE Wood], with the registered office at Zlfn,
Kyitkové 4703, Company ID Na,: 60745479, They are documentary
ordinary bearer shares having the nominal value of

a.

The Transferor transfers by this Agreoment the above dooumentary
s¢ouritios to fhe Transforee and the Transferee nccopts these
dooumentary securities,

mm.

The Parties hereby agree the purchase price for the transfer of the above
seouritics in the amount of ”

Vv.

The Parties hereby agree the right of the Trensferor to withdraw from
this Agreement, namely unilaterally, by 31 Nov. 2000 at the latest, The
Transferor hes reserved thie right due to the intention to perform the
valuation of the transferred shares based on an exper't opinion.

The Parties hereby agree the due date for the purchase price to be by 31
Jan, 2001. The payment of the purchase prico can be made also by
offsetting receivables, if the purchaser buys receivables in respect of the
seller of the companies ALLWOOD, as, EP Kapitél Group, a.s. and
potentially of other companies, Unless a physical payment of the

ng a bank transfer) is made, jt is necessary to
offset the purchase prloe, us the priority, against a receivable of the
ALLWOOD, a.s. company in respect of a repayment of loans in the
nominal value of over and only in case of the full
payment of ALLWOOD’s receivable, it is possible to make an offset
against receivables of other companies.

 

-38-

acknowledged that Exportni wished to
sell its interest in BP Kapital Group as a result of financial difficulties, effectively to
improve its balance sheet (see First Witness Statement of

Witness Statement of I. Doubrava, para, 1; Tr Day 3, p. 161),
during the Hearing that Exporin{ obtained a valuation opinion of the shares in EP Kapital
Group, consistent with Article TV of the Agreement, from a company called A~Consult,
which opined that EP Kapital had, at the time, a negative value of approximately 178

1, para, 12; Second

124,

125,

amillion Czech crowns, thereby reducing the value of its shares to zero (see Tr. Day 3, p.
156), also testified that, pethaps not surprisingly, EPAS was turned down
by several potential buyers of the shares before it eventually entered into the Agreement

with InterTrade (see Tr. Day 3, p. 161).

Mr. Clokey, the Respondent's quantum expert, who had questioned the arm’s length
quality of the transaction, agreed on cross-examination that the seeming incongruency of
: for an entity with a negative value may be explained where an

paying
investor has reason to believe that an opportunity to make money through the transaction

will materialize (see Tr, Day 5, pp. 86-87):
“Q. ... Respondent has repeatedly argued that the” ; would have
been a genuine price if they had been paid out in cash,to the seller, which
‘was BPAS, the parent company of EPKG at the time. But this is not what
happened, economically or factually or logally speaking, It wes an
assumption of debt by InterTrade vis-d-vis the company by a sories of
transactions, And therefore what respondent says is : this is in fact, if you
‘want, not a cash payment; it’s merely an assumption of debt.

And what J am trying to put to you is: if a company can invest in the
form of an assumption of.debt, and that debt is with the target company it
acquires, then would you Jook at it differently, that is if.it has to hand
Sut, as you said before, of-cash to the seller?

A, Yes. So if we are in a world of assumption of debt, if you’ve got
exposure to this situation, ] mean, there’s like a host of faots that lie
around the decision.

Okay, so if I can swap of debt into this entity, into control of.
this entity, I am left with a view of - yes, in a limited liability world, the
sort of hypothesis is not that you are buying a bucket with minus in
it, So it could be that if L swap a debt for control of the entity, well, I’ve
got the opportunity if something good happens, I might get some money
back, But if lam owed by someone that’s worth minus —_, J might
think: well, my’ isn’t worth very much”,

This appears indeed to have been one of the factors in the Claimant’s decision to

purchase EP Kapital’s shares, as explained by’ (see First Witness Statement of

vara, 5);
“T started to deal with BP Kapital Group in 2000. My father told me that
Exportul Primyslové is going to sell EP Kapital Group. He brought the
files of the group's results and asked me to analyse them. I analyzed the
results for 1997-1999 and the actual numbers for 2000, Based on the Du-
Pont analysis and benchmarking of companies within the group, we

-39-

 

 

126,

128.

could see easily that there are big differences in generating operating

profit and that the results are influenced by extraordinary expenses.

These models are used also by banks to understand where the profits are

coming from to see the potentials of a company and estimate the future

of the company. M onolusi as it the chano to
ifioa i over i

 

ate sig 8 Op
and 19 increase val ue, However, we ‘would need some time to finance
the deal. Because it was not possible and Bxportn{ Primyslova had to
sell, my father came up with the idea fo ask for a payment condition of
weeks to secure financing and secure the purobase thtough a promiasory
note, It was usual at that time in the Czech Republic, because this is
secured against all personal assets of the issucr.” (emphasis added)

The evidence indicates that the shate transfer was scoured by a promissory note from

(see ¢.2., Second Witness Statement of _ para, 1; see also Tr.
Day 2, p. 46 oy Tr. Day 3, p, 162 ). The Respondent makes issue of
the faot that the promissory note is not in evidence in these proceedings, In his written
evidence, axplained that the note was destroyed once the debt vis-a-vis EPAS

was settled (see Second Witness Statement of para, 1):

“In light of the doubts which have been raised by Respondent in these
proceedings in this regard, 1 herewith confirm that the purchase of the
shares of the company EP Kapital Group from EPAS was financed with
a promissory note over This promissory note made me
liable with all my personal assers m Germany for the payment of the
purchase price to EPAS. After the debt vis-d-vis EPAS had been settled,
the promissory note was destroyed. Neither the original nor any copies
are today in my possession.”

  

ring (soc

 

This was confirmed by Day 2, p. 46):

“A, Yes, the promissory note was used as a seourlty during the purchase.
And after the purchase was done, my father received this promissory
note in retum, and the promissory note was destroyed, because it was a
private document which had only been used as a seourity for this
operation,”
Following . s testimony, the Respondent elected not to call
who could have been examined on this first part of the share transaction, including
the use (and existence) of a promissory note to secure the share purchase (see Tr. Day 2,
p. 138). The Tribunal does not, in any event, consider it unusual for a promissory note to
be destroyed once its purpose has been achieved. The Tribunal therefore accepts the
explanation for why the promissory note was destroyed and does not consider its

absence in this proceeding to be fatal to the Claimant's claim.

-40-

* 129,

130,

131.

132.

133,

The Respondent also’ makes issue of the fact that the shares were acquired through the
mutual ‘seboff of recelvablés when InterTiade acquired debt owing to EPAS’s
subsidiaries, CE Wood and Allwood, rather than through the payment of cash (see CB-65
and'CB-66; Tr. Day 2, p, 79). 1 explained on cross-examination during the

Hearing that (see Tr. Day 3, p. 163):

*.,. we were looking for someone and we found someone who was
willing to buy, to buy a company that had a problematic value,-We had to
allow for the consideration for the payment to be done through getting
out of debt rather than through cash. For us, that had the very same
value, because we in that way were able to get rid of that debt.”

 

 

i also explained on cross-examination that InterTrade had initially considered
financing the acquisition of shares in order that it could pay cash, as this would ultimately
have assisted EP Kapital, but decided against this approach when it “became clear that
we could also operate EP Kapital without investing the money” (see ‘tr. Day 2, p. 82),

As with the.Claimant’s purchase of shares in EP Kapital, the acquisition of EPAS’s
teceivables with CE Wood and Allwood was secured. against two other promissory notes,
neither-of which has been produced in this proceeding, 's explanation for their
absence among the documentary materials onthe record is that they were immaterial
from a financial point of view, as it was “irrelevant whether the liability took the form of
apromissory note or not”. Moreover, he averred that he did not decide which documents

were placed on the record and which were not (see Tr. Day 2, p. 52).

While the absence of a “paper trail” is unfortunate insofar as understanding the chain of
events is concerned, the Tribunal does not consider it to be determinative of the existence
of an investment and therefore the question of jurisdiction. Moreover, the Respondent
has failed to establish that the evidence is inconsistent with the Claimant's version of

.events or that lacunae in certain documentary evidence is the result of a deception,

‘As noted above, the Respondent nevertheless alleges for the purpose of establishing a
protected investment that there are, in effect, two parts to the transaction, the second part
involving a “journey around the world” by the receivables that InterTrade acquired to set
off its payment obligation for the shares (see Resp. PHB, para. 100). The Respondent
notes that the assignment agreements provided for payment of the receivables by 31 July
2002, failing which the assignments would become null and void. The Respondent

-41-

 

134,

135,

contends that payment was not made until the end of 2003, and therefore the first part of
the share transaction was invalid because the Claimant set off its obligation to pay for the
shares with liabilities against EPAS that were null and void (see ibid., para. 102). The
Respondent reaches this conolusion “as a matter of logic”, reasoning that “otherwise the
liability of the Claimant towards Allwood could not have been transferred by Allwood to
Nauli AG in Nieu on 30 November 2003. Had the Claimant paid for its liability prior to
30 November 2003 it would have ceased to exist and could not have been assigned to
Nauli AG.” (see Statement of Rejoindor, para. 97).

The Claimant, in fact, acknowledged in Its Statement of Reply that InterTrade remained
indebted to Allwood until 30 November 2003, at which time Allwood sold its recoivable
against InterTrade to Nauli, a New Zonland company, and to CE Wood? until 18
Decomber 2003, at which time CE Wood sold its receivable against InterTrade to CCR
Iniziative Sagi, which sold the receivable on the same day to Nauli, Nauli subsequently
transferred both receivables to General European Consulting, a company incorporated in
the British Virgin Islands (“GEC”), on 12 January 2004. GEC then sold the receivables
to Awyn on 27 January 2004 — the same company to which InterTrade eventually sold its
interest in CE Wood (see Statement of Reply, paras. 16-17). This is, in effect, the
“journey around the world” that the receivables took following their acquisition by

InterTrade.

The question remains whether the lapse of the date for payment of the receivables with
Allwood and EP Kapital voided or invalidated the Claimant’s investment for the purpose
of its BIT claim, The Claimant has provided a copy of the Agreement on Mutual Set-Off
of Receivables, dated 31 January 200i, in which InterTrade and EPAS agreed ‘the
mutual set-off of receivables ... by which the receivables referred to .,, become void in
their entirety.” The receivables in question were, respectively, InterTrade's payment
obligation to EPAS for the shares it had received in EP Kapita] and EPAS’s re-payment
obligation to its subsidiaries Allwood and EP Kapital in respect of loans it had received
from them. There is no mention in the Mutual Sct-Off Agreement of the payment

1 It is recalled that EP Kapitul and CE Wood, a.5., merged on 9 December 2003, taking the name CE Wood.

-42-

136,

137.

138,

obligation in‘the assignment agreements, No evidence was adduced to the effect that
those receivables reverted to EPAS or formed part ofits eventual bankruptcy. Rather, the
conduct of all relevent parties to the acquisition and sale of the shares in CE Wood
collectively suggests that the Claimant did in fact acquire the shares in CE Wood at the
time it has alleged and, as discussed above, sold those shares at the time it alleged.

Thus, while the matter is not without some doubt, the Tribunal does not believe that the
absence of an explanation in respect of the date for payment of the assigned receivables
voided its investment for the purpose of its BIT claim, The Tribunal agrees that the
Claimant holds the burden of proving its claim, as well as establishing the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction over that claim. However, the standard of proof in investment treaty cases is
not a criminal standard, i.e. beyond a reasonable doubt. The Tribunal must be satisfied
that.an investment was made within the meaning of the German-Czech BIT. Based on
the totality of the evidence.put before the Tribunal, the Tribunal finds that the constituent
elements of an investment pursuant to Article 1(1)(b) of the BIT are present (ie,
evidence that shares in a Czech company were acquired by the Claimant pursuant to an
agreement for that purpose) and.the Respondent has not persuaded the Tribunal that any
apparent inconsistency in the date of payment of the assigned receivables and the date
provided for in the assignment agreements is sufficient, in this case, to nullify that

investment.
c) An Investment Made in “Good Faith”

The Respondent’s third objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction was made only in its post-
hearing submissions and is based on the premise that an investment must be made in
good faith in order to benefit from the protection of an investment treaty. The Tribunal
takes no issue with the general principle of international Jaw that,in order to benefit from
investment protection, an investment must be made in good faith, As the Tribunal in
Gustay Hamester observed, this is a general principle that exists independently of
specific language to this effect in the treaty (see Gustav Hamester, para. 124).

While the Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that proving fraud can be difficult, the
Respondent must marshal sufficient evidence of its so-called “badges of fraud” to
persuade the Tribunal that an existing investment should nevertheless be denied

-43-

 

[

 

139,

140.

141,

142.

protection under the BIT. In this case, the Tribunal is not satisfied on the evidence before
it that the Claimant's investment was fraudulent or otherwise not made in good faith.
Accordingly, this last objection is also dismissed.

4, Finding
Based on the foregoing, the Tribunal concludes that it has jurisdiction over the
Claimant's olaims made under the German-Czech BIT.

B. Atiribution

1, The Claimant's Position

The Claimant sets out both a domestic and international law basis on which to find the
acts and omissions of LCR attributable to the Czech State.

The Claiment notes that, pursuant to Article 49 of the Forestry Act, the Ministry of
Agriculture is the “central body of State forest administration” and, as a part of this
function, “manage(s) the exercise of State forest administration” and supervises
“compliance by State administration bodies, individuals and legal entities” with the
provisions of the Act. LCR was established as a special purpose public entity pursuant to
the Act on State-Owned Enterprises to meet the “societal, strategic or publicly beneficial
interests” of the Czech State as defined in its “Foundation Decree” issued by the Ministry
of Agriculture {gee Exhs. C-77 and C-78). On the basis of this legislative and regulatory
ftameworlc, the Claimant asserts that LCR was controlled at all relevant times by the
Ministry of Agriculture.

‘Turning to international law principles of State zesponsibility, the Claimant submits that
LGR’s acts and omissions are effectively those of the Ministry of Agriculture, and
therefore the Respondent is responsible by virtue of Articles 4, 5, 8 and/or 11 of the
International Law Commission’s (“LC”) Artioles on Responsibility of States for
Intemationally Wrongful Acts, 2001 (“Articles on State Responsibility”). The Claimant
avers that while it has acknowledged LCR is not an organ of the State for the purposes of
Article 4(2), the Czech Republic nonetheless incurred responsibility under this provision
with regard to the Ministry of Agriculture whose acts and omissions are attributable to
the Czech State as an organ of the State.

= 44-

o

 

143,

145,

The Claimant thus articulates the legal relationship for attribution purposes between LCR
and the Ministry of Agriculture as follows (see Statement of Reply, paras. 141-142);
“According to internal statements on this point within the Czech
Republic, the tender which was organized and conducted aimed at a
fundamental restructuring. of the way the Czech forests were handled.
1 the Minister of Agriculture made various statements in this
regard. According to Respondent’s own words, this was a “change of
paradigm” seeking to remedy a situation which was “unsatisfactory both
in the light of antiraonopoly legislation and economic effectiveness, and
in the light of European law”. The purpose of the tender was, as also
indicated in the Master Contract no. 122/04/2005 on the Supply of
Comprehensive Forestry Activities, to conclide with the successful
participant of the tender so that the activitios will be “ensuring the -
optimal performance of all functions of forests”, thereby complying with
the NPF which declared that one of the priorities must be “forest
management in accordance with principles of sustainable management —
a fundamental strategic priority”.

Hence, the Ministry of Agriculture was the state organ responsible for

the administration of the State forests and'thereby exercises the right, but

had also the duties as.the owner of the forest, ie. the Czech State, The

tender organized and conducted in 2004/2005 concerned the State forests

and their management and thus fell squarely into the responsibility of the

Ministry of Agriculture whose actions and omissions are those of the

Czech Republic, Consequently, the conduct of the tender conceming the

State forests falls into the ambit of responsibility of the Czech Republic.”
‘The fact that LCR was founded with the mandate to carry out the above tasks does not, in
the-Claimant’s view, absolve the Ministry of its responsibility for the tenders and their
conduct, The Claimant avers that it “is precisely the purpose and function of state-owned
enterprises such as LCR, which do not own any assets in their own right, nor decide
finally how to carry out their functions to relieve the Ministry from the burden of the day-

to-day performance of.these.tasks” (see Statement of Reply, para. 143),

The Claimant also relies on the NKU Report, in which the Supreme Audit Office
concluded. (see Cl. PHB, para, 131, quoting the NKU Report, Exh. R-49/ CB-78, p. 34):

‘Another reason for the deficiencies determined. in LCR was
failure to conscientiously meet the obligations which ensue to
Mag as the founder of LOR on the basis of the state onterprise

acti

insufficient inspection on the part of MAg conceming
whether the requirements of the stale safeguarded by
LCR through its activity were, being scoured
purposefully and economically:

-45 -

 

146,

147.

. upon handling of certain assets MAg did not verify whether LGR
was concluding contracts in accordance with the submitted

proposal,

. MAg did not conduct any inspection in the period from 2001 to
2003 focusing on the area of business contracts or LCR's
tiandling of temporarily free finanoial resources;

” Insufficient oo-operation of MAg and the supervisory board of

+ MAg did not evaluate how its appointed members of the SB
(Supervisory Board] were representing the interests of the state;
* the SB did not find any fundamental defiolenoies in the activity
of LER during the lnspeoted period."
Finally, the Claimant observes that the Czech Chamber of Deputies adopted a resolution
on 16 April 2010, in which it “calls on the government to, with regard to the tender for
the performanoe of forestry activities with the sale of standing timber: 1. Cancel this

tender of Lesy Ceske (RJepubliky [...]” (see Statement of Reply, para, 143).

As regards Article 5 of the Articles on State Responsibility, the Claimant submits that
attribution turns on a “structural” and “functional” test, In terms of the “structural test”,
or whether LCR was empowered to exercise elements of governmental authority, the
Claimant relies upon the Foundation Decree (see Exh. C-78), the Respondent’s expert's
assessment of LOR’s activities and its role in the NFP as evidence that LCR was
empowered to exercise elements of governmental authority, As regards the “functional
test”, or whether LOR exercised governmental authority when undertaking the acts
complained of, ihe Claimant underscores the findings of the EC as set out in its 2007
Reasoned Opinion (see Exh. C-17):

“LESY CR state entorprise was catablished to fulfil the state's interest in
maintenance, proteotion and recovery of the forests, It is true that LESY
CR state enterprise also performs planting and outting activities that
potentially lend to the sale of wood, These activitios are necessary for
fulfilling the tasks required by the state and therefore oannot be the
primary reason for which LESY CR state enterprise was established.”

The Claimant submits that the tender proceedings were organized and executed within
the context of LGR's purpose to “meet important societal, strategic or publicly beneficial
interests”, the forestry sector involving one of the State's most important resources and
the tenders for new forestry contracts directly implicating the public interest. The
Claimant thus describes the assignment of silvicultural contracts as an important part of
LCR’s responsibility under the NFP to properly and sustainably manage the State forests.

46 -

 

S

149,

150.

151.

The Claimant adds that any commercial contract concluded by LCR had td be approved
by the Ministry of Agriculture, Accordingly, it reasons that LOR’s business activities,
even when carried out by way of commercial relationships, “warrant the State’s interests”

(see Statement of Reply, para, 154),

The Claimant distinguishes the cases relied upon by the Respondent, referring the
Tribunal instead to RF.CC v. Morocco, ICSID Case No. ARB/OO/6 Award (22
December 2003) (“RCC”) and Salini Construttori Sp.A. et al. y. Morocco, ICSID
Case No. ARB/00/4, Award on Jurisdiction (23 July 2001) (‘Salini”), which it submits
deal with the parallel factual situation of tender proceedings. The Claimant also refers
the Tribunal to the following discussion in F-I7 Oil Interests, Inc, v. Republic of Trinidad

and Tobago (see Cl. PHB, para. 158, quoting F-I¥ Oil, para. 203):

“The Tribunal thus observes that, where the operation of a State
enterprise is at the core of an international dispute, it is theoretically
possible that the enterpiise’s conduct (acts and omissions) may engage
the responsibility of the State cither as an organ of the State; or as a body
exercising elements of the governmental authority of the State; or as a
body which is in fact acting on the instructions of the State, or under its
direction or contro (ILC draft Articles 4-8), There is in other words a
whole gamut of possibilities, whose application to particular situations
depends upon an amalgam: of questions. of-law and questions of ‘fact
which will vary from case to case according to the circumstances. ‘The
internal law of the State will be the starting point, but not the end point.
One obvious example may suffice, namely the question whether a State
enterprise is or is not exercising the elements of the governmental
authority; [...J. The Tribuna} notes that the draft Articles contain no
definition of the broad notion of ‘elements of the governmental
authority? (any more than does the BIT for the equivalent phrase ‘other
governmental authority delegated to it’). Indeed the [LC consciously
reftained from including in the draft even elements towards defining its
application in particular cases. Rather, the Commission took the view, as
expressed in paragraph (6) of the Commentary to draft Art. 5, that the
notion had to be judged in the round, in the light of the area of activity in
question, and in the light of the history and traditions of the country in
question. In shorl, the notion is intended to be a flexible one, not
amenable to general definition in advance; end the elements that would
go into its definition in particular cases would be « mixture of fact, Inw
and practice, Moreover ~and the point is of some importance — it is not
the case that the same answer would necessarily emerge on every
occasion; in, some of its activities.a State enterprise might fall on one side
of the line, in others on the other.”

Turning to Article 8 of the Articles on State Responsibility, the Claimant submits that
“attribution under Article 8 is without prejudice to the characterization of the conduct

-47-

Se

 

152,

153,

154.

155,

under consideration as either sovereign or commercial in nature, For the sake of
attribution under this rule, it does not matter that the acls are commercial, jure gestionis,
or contractual” (see Statement of Reply, para. 168, quoting Bayindir v, Pakistan, ICSID
Case No. ARB/03/29, Award (27 August 2009) (“Bayindir”), para. 129).

Although the level of contro! required to satisfy Article 8 is not set out in the ILC’s
Asticles, the Claimant refers to the tribunal’s consideration of this criterion in EDF
Services Ltd. v, Romania, ICSID Case No, ARB/05/13, Award (8 October 2009)
(‘ZD¥"), which in turn relled upon commentary to Article 8 (see Statement of Reply,

para. 170, quoting EDF, para, 201):

“Where there was evidence that the corporation was oxorolsing public
powers, or that the State was using {ts ownership interest in or control of
Q corporation specifivally in order to achieve a particular result, the
conduct in question has been attributed to the Stato.”

The Claimant concludes that the Ministry of Agriculture is the founder of LCR and, by
virtue of the State Enterprise Act, exercises considerable control over it and its
performance. Moreover, as the Ministry initiated the tender proceedings, and was
involved in all aspects of LCR's conduct at all relevant times, the Claimant contends this
last hallmark of State responsibility is satisfied.

Lastly, the Claimant submits that , the Czech Minister of Agriculture in
2007, adopted LOR’s conduct within the meaning of
Responsibility through the following statement (see Cl. PHB, para, 168, quoting Exh. C-
20/ CB-155);

“The blame for the unfortunate state of affairs after the illegal tender

proceedings is borne fully by my predecessors who reached a number of

incorreot decisions, [...] The company is fully entitled to make such a

claim.”

2 ‘The Respondent's Position

The Respondent contends that the acts of LGR are not attributable to the Respondent.
The Respondent reasons ‘hat although the State founded LGR, the State and LCR, an
enterprise, are two different legal entities. The Respondent analogizes this relationship to
a person founding a trade company under the Commercial Code, or the state founding a
joint-stock company. As such, the Respondent takes the position that the Czech State
cannot incur responsibility for the acts of LOR under Article 4 of the Articles on State

 

- 48 -

 

Cy

O

156.

157.

Responsibility. Indeed, according to the Respondent, it is common ground among the
Parties that LCR is not a State organ and Article 4 therefore has no application (see Resp.
PHB, para. 126). The Respondent notes that its expert, Professor Cerné, reached the
same conclusion and her evidence has not been challenged by the Claimant. :

Tuming to the criteria under Article 5 of the Articles on State Resporisibility, the
Respondent reasons that the second criterion (“acting in that capacity [ie exercising
governmental authority] in the particular instance”) is dispositive. Relying upon the
reasoning of the tribunal in Gustav Hamester, whereby the tribunal stated that it is “well
established that for an act of a separate entity exercising elements of govetnmental
authority fo be attributed to the State, it must be shown thet the precise act in question
was an exercise of such governmental authority and not merely an act that could be
performed by a commercial entity”, the Respondent invites the Tribunal to reach the
following conclusion in this case (see Statement of Rejoinder, paras. 28-29);

“In fact acts of the same nature are being performed by commercial
entities in the Czech Republic. As the Claimant has admitted in its
Statement of Claim, private companies own 22-23% parts of the forests
in.the Czech Republic. Those companies are subject to the same laws as
LCR regarding the forests (including the requirement to protect the
forests) and they, too, hold tenders for third-parties to obtain forestry
servioes contracts, As the tribunal in Jan de Nul v. Egypt held, “{ijn its
dealing with the Claimants during the tender process, the SCA acted like
any contractor trying to achieve the best price for the services it was
seeking, It did not act as a State entity.”

That is precisely what Lesy CR did here. It acted like any contractor
trying (to) achieve the bes! contract for the services it was seeking. It did
not act as a State entity.” (emphasis in the original; footnotes omitted}

As regards the influence that the State has on LGR, if any, the Respondent submits that,
pursuant to the Act on State Enterprises (see Exh. C-77), a state enterprise handles assets
without the direct interference of the State. The Respondent maintains that the State does
not have the power to “impose an obligation on a stale enterprise to act in a certain way,
to influence tender documentation or to influence in any other way the manner of
selection of contractual partners in the tender proceeding” (see Statement of Defence,
para. 246), Moreover, as LER is not tied to the State budget, the Respondent explains
that the State does not guarantee payment of any damages caused by the illegal behaviour

~49-

 

158,

159,

160.

161.

of LER (if any), nor of any mistakes that LGR may or may not have made in the tender
proceedings.

The Respondent notes that, according to Article 12,1 of the Act on State Enterprises, the
founder (.e., the Ministry of Agriculture), carmot act on behalf of LGR (see Resp. PHB,
para. 135, quoting the Cemd Expert Report, paras, 20-21):

“By means of an exhaustive list the law only determines the decisions,

which are in the foundor's scope of authority, Tha founder's scope of

authority does not include giving orders to the Direator an how to

proceed in particular cases as regards the state enterprise's regular

operation, Such an order is not binding for the Direator, The state (the

founder) may influence the conduot of the state onterpriao only by means

of determination of tha gonoral framework, ospeoially of fhe state

enterprise’s management rules, By means of rofusing conseut in the

determined cases (aee above) the founder may preolude the disposition of

the propetty, which the enterprise is entitled fo manage, However, the

Sounder may not cominand the Director of the stale enterprise to dispose

with the property in a certain way.” (Respondent's emphasis)
Thus, as Professor Cerné concluded in her expert report, “neither the State Enterprise Act
... uor special regulation on entering into contracts according to the Commercial Code or
the Public Contracts Act grants the founder of a state enterprise the authority to intervene
in the selection of a contractual partner or to determine terms and conditions of entering
into a specific contract” (see Resp. PHB, para. 136, quoting Cernd Expert Report, para.
56).

Tuming to LGR’s particular activities, the Respondent notes that the BC has, by a recent
decision, exempted certain financial services in the postal scctor in Italy from application
of the Directive 2004/17/BC coordinating the procurement of procedures of entities
operating in water, energy transport and postal services sectors, The Respondent reasons
that it would be contrary to EU regulations if LOR were not treated in line with the rulos
of equal treatment and its acts were attributable to the Czech Republic,

The Respondent argues that Jan de Nul N.V. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSTD Case No.
ARB/04/13, Award (6 Nov, 2008) (“Jan de Nuf") and CSOB v. Slovakia, ICSID Case
No. ARB/97/4, Final Award (29 December 2004) (“CSOB”), demonstrate that even when
a separate legal entity exercises certain governmental powers, its acts are not necessarily
attributable to the State if those acts were connected only to commercial activities and not

-50-

to the’ exercise of its governmental powers. The Respondent relies on the following
reasoning of the tribunal in Jan de Nil (see Statement of Defence, paras. 263-64, quoting

Jan de Nul, paras. 169-170):
“Consequently, the fact that the subject matter of the contract related to
thie core funotions of the SCA, j.c., fhe maintenance and improvément of
_ the Suez Canal, is irrelevant. The ‘Tribunal smust look to the actual acts
complained of. In its dealing with Claimants during the tender process,
the SCA acted like any contractor trying to achieve the best price for the
services it was seeking. It did not act as a State entity. The same applies
to the SCA’s conduct in the course of the performance of the Contract, ~

 

Itis true though thal the Contract was awarded through a bidding process

govemed by the laws on public procurement, This is not a sufficient

element, however, to establish that governmental authority was exercised
in the SCA’s relation to Claimants and more particularly i in relation to

‘the acts and omissions complained of. What matters is not the ‘service

public’ element, but:the use of “‘prérogatives de: puissance publique” .or

-governmental authority. In this sense, the refusal to grant an extension of

time at the time of the tender does not show either that govemmental

authority was used, ixrespective of the reasons for such refusal. Any
private contract partner could have acted in a similar manner.” [footnote
omitted) :

162, Turing to Article § of the Articles on State Responsibility, the Respondent argues that
the jurisprudence’s interpretation of this provision of the Arti¢les sets a demanding
threshold, requiring both general contro] over the entity and specific control over the act
in question (see Resp. PHB, para. 145), As in Jan de Nul, the Respondent submits there
is no evidence of the State having given any instructions to LCR in regard to the acts and

omissions complained of, emphasizing the following (see Statement of Rejoinder, para,

190):

“ LCR is an independent legal entity separate from the State;
‘The State has no direct control over LCR’s acts;
Non-commercial activities of the State are irrelevant in this case;
- ‘The nature of a State interest in a State enterprise is the same as
interest of any other shareholder in-a private business company;
- State representatives have been aware that only the direotor of a
State enterprise is responsible for running the enterprise and did not.
interfere with his rights of conducting LCR’s business activities.”

The Respondent submits that the evidence of both Parties’ experts is consistent with the

163.

view that LGR had “freedom of autonomy” in establishing the terms and conditions of
the tender (see Resp. PHB, paras. 146-147; see also Ramsauer Expert Report, p. 9 and
Cerna Expert Report, para. 21). This is buttressed by contemporary documents, such. as

-51-

  

164,

165,

166.

167.

the minutes of the LCR Supervisory Board meeting held on 23 September 2004, in which
the Ministry of Agriculture states that “how the tenders will take place is up to the State-
owned enterprise [i.c. LCR]” (see Resp. PHB, para. 149, quoting CB-86/CB-57, p. 3).

In any event, the Respondent avers on the basis of the tribunal’s reasoning in Duke
Energy, that even when the State itself is acting, there aan be no breach of a BIT if the
State is acting as a “normal contract partner” and not using its “tmpertun” (soe Resp.
PHB, para, 151, quoting Duke Energy Lleatroquil Partners and Electroguil S.A. v.
Republic of Bouador, ICSID Case No, ARB/04/19, Award of 18 August 2008, para. 354),

3, Disoussion

The Tribunal will now turn its attention to the issue of attribution. As noted earlier, the
Claimant argues that the acts and omissions of LOR are attributable to the Czech State by
virtue of Articles 4, 5, 8 and/or 11 of the Articles on State Responsibility, whereas the
Respondent contends that they are not attributable to it. The Tribunal notes that while
Czech law is relevant to its analysis of this issue, its inquiry in respect of attribution is
made under international Jaw and, in particular, the aforementioned Articles of State
Responsibility.

a) Article 4

 

The Tribunal recalls that, as set out in Article 2 of the Articlas on Sinte Resp: i
order to constitute a violation of the BIT, an act has to be both attributable to (he State
and a violation of an international obligation provided for in the BIT:

“Article 2. Elements of an internationally wrongful act of a State

There is an internationally wrongful act of a State when conduct
consisting of an action or omission;

. a) is atwributable to the State under international law; and

- (b) constitutes a breach of an intemational obligation of the
State.”

Therefore, the first question to be addressed is the attribution of certain acts to the State,
As States are juridical persons, the question necessarily arises whether acts committed by
natural persons or separate entities, which are allegedly in violation of international law,
are attributable to the State. Only after this question has been answered in the

- 52+

)

168,

169.

170.

(71.

affirmative, may the Tribunal ‘address the second question, which is the qualification of
the act attributed to the State as an illegal act. If the question is answered in the negative,
it is, of .course, unnecessary to analyae ‘the, auestion of logality/illegality of the acts

complained of

For the reasons which follow, the ‘Tribunal determines that the acts and omissions of
LGR, assuming they were found to be in breach of the Getman-Czech BIT, cannot be
attributed ‘to the Czech Republic whether under Articles 4,5, 8 or 11 of the Articles on

State Responsibility.

The Tribunal recalls that LGR, on 11 December 1991, pursuant to Protocol No. 6677/91-
100,:was established by the Czech Ministry of Agriculture as a specia) purpose public
entity pursuant to the Act on State-Owned Enterprises (the “Act”) to meet the “social,
strategic or publicly beneficial interests” of the Czech State as defined in its “Foundation
Decree”. LCR is thus a legal entity known as a state enterprise under Czech law.

With respect to the status and legal characteristics of a state enterprise in the Czech
Republic, the Tribunal"has been greatly assisted by the opinion of Prof. Stanislava Cemé,

one of the Respondent’s legal experts*,

The following excerpts from Prof, Gerd, in particular, have informed the Tribunal’s
conclusions on the issue of whether or not LCR’s acts and otnissions can be attributed to

the Czech State:
- “A state enterprise executes jts business activities with state

property on its own behalf and at its own lisbility”[ste) (Paras 4-6)

- “The Term “on its own behalf” implies the fact that the state

enterprise acts in legal relations as an independent entity detached from

the state” (Para, 6.1.)

- “.., the state enterprise disposes of independence in managing its

property with which it executes its business activities.” (Para. 6.2,

- “The slate enterprise's proprietary independence is inter alia

represented by the fact that such enterprise is an independent accounting

unit..,. and a taxpayer.” (Paras 7 and 8)

 

3 The Tribunal noles that Prof. Cern4 was not cross-examined by the Claimant, Her opinion thus stands

uncontradicted,

~53-

 

 

172,

173,

- [The Act] does not grant any rights to the founder to decide on
the state entorprise’s regular operations.” (Para, 20)

. the founder's interventions in the state enterprise’s operation
are tinisod to the exhaustive list of cases defined by law (Article 16
Section 7, 9, Article 17 ZSP), while all other decisions are in the scope of
authority of the state enterprise as a business entity or in the scope of
authority of its Direotor and other internal managing authorities. Thus,
the law doesn’t grant to the founder any legal tools to direotly influenoe
rogular commercial activity of the state enterpriso,” (Para, 21)

- “By law the state ontorpriso is an ontrepreneur. Its function is
generally formulated in Article 2 Section 1 ZSP, which explicitly defines
the state enterprise as an entity oreated for the exeoution of business
aoflvitles,” (Pura, 23)

- “,,, the legisintor does not graut to the state enterprise any
speoial rights or seigniorial authority but puts it in equal position with the
other participants in legal relations,” (Para. 26)

‘‘.,. the founder of a state enterprise may not give binding orders
to the Dison regarding the business management.” (Para, 29)

“We can therefore conclude that the business activity of a state
enterprise is driven by the achievement of profit.” (Para, 47)
Before turning to a review and analysis of the Parties’ specific arguments invoked in aid
of their respective thesis, the Tribunal also notes that, in answer to the specific question
put to her as to whether the Czech State, as the founder of. LGR, has the option of directly
intervening in the terms and conditions and course of tenders announced b°
enterprise, Prof. Cerné opined categorically that (see Gernd Expert Report, para, <6

“Neither the State Enterprise Act (see answer above) nor special
regulation on entering into contracts according to the Commerofal Code
or the Public Contracts Aot grants the founder of state enterprise the
authority to intervene in the selection of a contractual parmer or to
determine the terms and conditions of entering into a specific contract.”

 

Article 4 of the Articles reads as follows:
“Article 4, Conduct of organs of a State

1. The conduct of any State organ shall be considered an act of thal State
under intemational law, whether the organ exercises legislative,
exeoutive, judicial or any other finetions, whatever position it holds in
the organization of the State, and whatever its character as an organ of
the central government or of a territorial unit of the State,

2. An organ includes any person or entity whioh has that status in
accordance with the intemal law of the State.”

~54-

174, While the Claimant acknowledges that LER is not an organ of the Czech State for
purposes of Article 4%, it argues that the Ministry of Agriculture is an organ of the State
|

whose acts are attributable to the State. |

The Ministry of Agriculture is certainly an organ of the State. However, the Tribunal
fails to see, on its review of the facts and on the basis of the opinion of Prof, Cernf
traversed above, how the Ministry can be held responsible for the management and. the |

175,

conduct by LCR of the tenders,

‘The Claimant avers that since the Ministry of Agriculture'was the State organ responsible
for the administration of the State forests and the tender by LGR concerning the State
forests and their management, “the conduct of the tender concerning the State forests falls

within the ambit and responsibility of the Czech Republic ... and [because] the Ministry .
failed to ensure that it was carried out in a Jegal and transparent fashion ... [it] is thus |
directly responsible for the illegal conduct of this tender.” (see Statement of Reply, paras.

 

176.

 

 

141-153; see also Cl. PHB, para. 129).

The Tribunal cannot agree with the Claimant’s argument. On the one hand, the Claimant
failed to adduce any evidence of specific acts of the Ministry in the conduct of the tender
which engaged its responsibility. On the other hand, the Ministry’s alleged failure to
supervise how LCR actually conducted the tender demonstrates precisely that the
“founder” of LER respected the independence of the State enterprise in the management
of its regular business activity. The “founder” bears no responsibility for LCR’s
‘navagement of the tender process. If the Claimant’s analysis were be accepted, ie. that a
State is automatically responsible for all the acts ofits separate public entities, this would
completely blur the distinction between Article 4 and 5, and the provision of two distinct

177,

O

‘bases of responsibility,

178. The Claimant’s claim based on Article 4 therefore fails, :

 

* See Cl, PHB, para. 129: “Claimant has previously stated that it does not consider Lesy CR a State organ through
which the Czech State would incur any responsibility pursuant to Art. 4 of the Articles on State Responsibility.”

~55- |
|

 

179,

180,

181,

182.

183,

b) Article 5

Article 5 of the Articles reads as follows:
“Article 5, Conduct of persons or entities exercising elements of
governmental authority

The conduct of a person or entity which is not an organ of the State,
under article 4 but whioh is empowered by the law of that Stale to
exercise elements of the governmental authority (“a exercar des
prérogatives de puissance publique”, in the French vorsion] shall be
considered an act of the State undor international law, provided the
person or entity is acting in that onpacity In the particular instanos,”

In order for the Tribunal to find attribution under Artiole 5, it must determine that the acts
of LOR in the conduct of the tender involved the exercise by LGR of governmental
authority or, in French, “/‘exercice de prérogatives de puissance publique.” As the
Claimant itself recognized, this is “the relevant test.” (see Cl, PHIB, para. 157).

‘There is no doubt that LCR was empowered to exercise elements of governmental
authority, but what the Tribunal must determine is whether, in performing the actions
which the Claimant complains of in this particular instance, LCR in fact exercised those
elements of governmental authority.

The Tribunal notes the Claimant’s submission that “LCR’s task was not simply to exploit

the State Forests to its maximum financial advantage but that it had clearly the purpose of
rest and it is in this context that its actions, inoluding tho

  

benefiting wider pub!
tender, have to be viewed.” (see Cl. PHB, para. 147). The Tribunal cannot agree with
this submission, which is far too sweeping. State entities are always deemed to act in the
public interest, but this, in and by itself, is not sufficient under Article 5 to attribute all
their acts to the State. In some of its activities, a state enterprise might exercise elements
of governmental authority, in others it might not. The specific activities need to be
scrutinized, Accordingly, the Claimant’s reliance on the opinion of Prof, Cem, who
observes generally that the motivation to found a state enterprise is the public interest, is
misplaced (see Cl. PHB, para. 148),

It is well settled that, even when a separate legal entity exercises certain govemmental
powers, all its acts are not necessarily attributable to the State; in particular, they are not

~ 56 -

attributable if those acts were connected only to commercial activities and not to the
exercise of ‘its governmental powers,

184, The Tribunal finds most apposite and adopts the reasoning of the Jan de Nul tribunal
relied on by the Respondent, in a case where some of the facls were strikingly similar to

the present one (see Jan de Nul, paras, 169-170):
“Consequently, the fact that the subject matter of the contract related to
the core functions of the SCA, i,, the maintenance end improvement of
the Suez Canal, is irrelevant. The Tribunal must look to the actual acts
complained of. In its dealing with Claimants during the tender process,
the SCA acted like any, contractor trying to achieve the best price for the
services it was seeking. It did not act as a State entity. The same applies
to the SCA’s conduct in the course of the performance of the Contract.

It is tue though that the Contract was awarded through a bidding process
governed by the laws on public procurement, This {s not 2 sufficient
element, however, to establish that governmental authority was exercised
in the SCA’s relation to Claimants and more particulerly in relation to
the acts and omissions complained of. What matters is not the “service
public” element, but the use of “prérogatives de puissance publigue” or
governmental authority, In this sense, the refusal to grant an extension of
time at the time of the tender does not show either that governmental
authority was used, irrespective of the reasons for such refusal. Any
private contract partner could have acted in a. similar manner, ” (footnote

omitted)
Jn the opinion of the Tiibunal, in the particular instance of conducting the tender
operations in respect of which the Claimant complains, LOR engaged in commercial
activities “on its own behalf and at its own liability”, to quote Prof. Cer, and with a
view of being profitable (see Cl. PHB, para, 129) in the very same way as private owners
of forested land who, concurrently, were also performing tenders for forestry activities

185.

(see Resp, Reply PHB, para. 77),

The Tribunal notes that the Claimant itself, in trying to describe the main activities of
LCR which demonstrate that it was exercising governmental authority, actually described
commercial activities which could be performed by any economic actor engaged in
forestry activities. It stated in its First Post-Hearing Brief (see Cl. PHB, para, 200):

“Almost at the same time, , the Minister of Agriculture,
declared that Lesy CR's operations should be profitable and the
trading of thnber should be its major activity. Mr. issued clear
directions to Lesy CR's managentent that the situation had to be changed
and that the slate-enterprise bad to become a timber trader in its own

186.

name.

-57-

187,

188,

189,

Thus, in a market where Lesy CR was an absolute dominant force and
the major source of the raw material, the clear policy statement of the
government became that Lesy CR should develop into 2 major timber
trading firm, with the aim of making high profits.

However, Lesy CR and the Minister of Agrioulture had no desire to soll
wood to CB Wood, As previously shown, Lesy CR did not want to sell
the timber to CE Wood, and following the manipulated tenders did not
have to, With CE Wood out of the picture, Losy CR became 2 more
active trador of timber.”

The fact that the creation of LCR happened in the context of the transformation of a
centralized economy to a market economy does not change the Tribunal’s conclusion, on
the contrary, The tribunal in the CSOB oase was faced with a similar process and il found
the following (see Ceskoslovenska Obohodni Banka, as. v. The Slovak Republic, ICSID
Case No, ARB/97/4 (Czech Republic/Slovak Republic BIT), Decision of the Tribunal on

Objections to Jurisdiction, 29 May 1999, para, 23):
“It cannot be denied that a State’s decision to transform itself from a
command economy to a free market economy involves the exercise of
governmental functions. The same is no doubt tue of lepislative and
administrative measures adopted by the State that are designed to enable
or facilitate the privatization of State-owned onterprises. It does not
follow, however, that a State-owned enterprise is performing State
functions when tt takes advantage of these State policies and procseda to
‘sali, with or without governmental cooperation, in order to
be in a position to compete in a free market economy, Nor does il follow
that the measures taken by such an enterprise to achieve this objcotive
involve the performance of State or govemmental functions, In both
instances, the test as to whether or not the acts are governmental or
private turn on thelr nature.”

  

In other words, the fact that the Ministry of Agriculture had the overall responsibility for
the administration of the forests under the Forestry Aot, even though it delegated the
overseeing of the contracts to LCR, does not render the State responsible for all the acts
of LCR. The Claimant has pointed to no acts involving the use of governmental powers.
Its main complaints focused on what it alleged was an unfair commercial tender.

The Tribunal notes that the Claimant hes produced two opinions of the Commission of
the European Communities, in which the Commission finds that LCR is a “public
contracting entity” for the purposes of Article 1(b) of Directive 92/50/BEC, with the

~5B~

190.

191,

result that the Czech Republié is in breach of its obligations under EC Jaw in respect of
the conduct of the same tenders in issue in this arbitration (see Bxhs, C-15 and C-17).
Article 1(b) of Directive 92/50/BEC stipulates that “public contracting authorities” mean
the State, regional or local authorities, bodies governed by public law and associations
formed by one or more such authorities or bodies govemed by public law. “Body
governed by public law” for the purposes of the Directive means the following (see Exh.
C-I5, p. 8):

“ established for the specific purpose of meeting the needs of public

interest, not.having un industrial or commercial character, and

~ being a legal entity, and

- financed, for the most part, by-the State, or regional or loca) authorities,

or other bodies governed by public law; or subject to management

supervision by those bodies; or having an administrative, managerial or

supervisory board, more than half of whose members are appointed by

the State, regional or local authorities or ofhér bodies govemed by public
vw -

Jax
The Commission stated that this term, “body governed by public law”, must be
understood in a functional sense, focusing in particular on whether the entity bears the
“full risk connected with operations on the, market” (see ibid). The Commission
determined that LCR would likely be provided protection against possible market
sanctions and therefore did not face the full extent of risk relating to its activity on the
market, The Commission further rejected the proposition that LOR should only be
considered a public contracting authority in respect of that part of its activities which are
pursued in the public interest, referring to European Court of Justice case law which
provides that an entity which. partly pursues activities meeting the needs in public
interest, in addition to ordinary business activities, is considered a public contracting

authority in relation to all of its activities (ee Exh. C-15, p. 9; Exh. C-17, p. 17).

The Tribunal notes that the test for attribution of a State entity’s acts and omissions under
international law is different from the test under BC law. In particular, Article 5 of the
ILC Articles contemplates that acts and omissions will be attributed “provided the person
or entity is acting in that capacity in the particular instance”. In other words, contrary to
EC Jaw, international law recognizes that a State entity may engage the responsibility of
the State in connection with certain of its activities, but will not necessarily do so in

~59-

 

192,

193.

194,

195.

196.

197,

198,

connection with all of its aotivities, The decisions of the Commission do not, therefore,
persuade the Tribunal to alter its analysie or conclusions under intemational law.

The Claimant’s claim based on Article 5 therefore fails,
c) Artiole 8

Antiole 8 of the Articles reads as follows:
“Article 8 Conduct directed or controlled by a State

The conduct of a person or group of persons shal! be considered an aot of

a State under international Jaw if the person or group of persons ia in faet

acting on the instruction of, or under the dircolion or control of that

State in carrying out the conduot.”
In respeot of this Artiole, the Tribunal finds the opinion of Prof. Cernd to be dispositive
(see supra, para, 170). There is not a scintilla of evidence in the record pointing to
instructions or directions from the Ministry to LER or to the Ministry exercising any

control over that State enterprise; quite the opposite.

Indeed, at a meeting of the Supervisory Board of LCR, held on 23 September 2004, the
Minister of Agriculture, Mr. . Stated (see CE-86, CB-57):

“,.. how the tenders will take place is up to the State-owned enterprise.”
Furthermore, the Claimant’s own “independent forestry expert”, Mr. Richard Ramsauer,

ders, LER enjoyed

 

 

opined in his report that, in setting the terms and conditions of the 1
“absolute freedoin of autonomy.” (see Ratnsauer Expert Report, p. 9).
The Claimant's claim based on Article 8 therefore fails.

d Article 11

Article 11 of the Articles reads as follows:
“Article 11, Conduct acknowledged and adopted by a State as its
own

Conduet which: is not attributable to a State under the preceding articles
shall nevertheless be considered an act of that State under international
law if and to the extent that the State acknowledges and adopts the
conduct in question as its own.”

-60-

i

 

The Tribunal recognizes that a State may, subsequent to the conduct in question, by
words or actions, demonstrate that it endorses that conduct and adopts it as'its own. But

those words or actions must be clear and unambiguous.

Tn his commentary on Article 11, Professor Crawford writes:

“The phrase “acknowledges and adopts the conduct in question-as its

own” is intended to distinguish. cases of acknowledgement and.adoption

‘from cases of mere support or endorsement ... as a general matter,

conduct will not be attributable to a State‘under.article 11 where a State

merely acknowledges the factual existence of conduct or expresses its

verbal approval of it. In international controversies, States often take

positions which amount to “approval” or “endorsement” of conduct in

some general sense but do not involve any assumption of esponsibility,

The language of “adoption”, on the other hand, carries with it the idea

that the conduct is acknowledged by the State as, in effect, its own

conduct ... However such acceptance may be phrased in the particular

casé, the term: “acknowledges ‘aud adopts” ‘in‘article 11 makes it clear

thal what is required is something more than a general acknowledgement

of a factual] situation, but rather that the State identifies the conduét in

question and makes it-its.own.” (emphasis added)
There is no such language or action on the pert of the Minister in the present case. The
Tribunal has no hesitation in rejecting the Claimant’s submission that the statement by
the new Minister of Agriculture, apologizing for the acts of the former government,

constituted “acknowledgement and adoption” pursuant to Article 11,
The Claimant's claim based on Article 11 therefore fails.

4, Binding
‘In conclusion, the Tribunal finds by a majority that, even assuming that the Claimant
were able to prove to the satisfaction of the Tribunal that some of the acts of LCR
complained of could be analyzed as breaches of a provision of the German-Czech BIT
and that the loss or damage which it suffered was caused by such breach, the Claimant’s
claim is dismissed because, on the evidence before the Tribunal, none of LCR’s alleged
acts or omissions can be attributed to the Czech State by virtue of Article 4, 5, 8 or 11 of
the Articles on State Responsibility, nor can the Ministry of Agriculture be held

responsible for any act in relation to LCR’s management of the tender process,

As a majority of the Tribunal has found that the acts or omissions complained of are not
attributable to the Czech State under the German-Czech BIT, the Tribunal determines

-61-

 

205,

206.

207.

208.

that all claims for loss or damage by the Claimant caused by an alleged breach of the
German-Czech BIT must be dismissed.

Cc. Liability
Based on the Tribunal’s above findings, there is no need for the Tribunal to discuss the
metits of the Claimant’s olaim. For the sake of completeness, however, the Tribunal
finds it appropriate to reoord here the principal arguments advanced by the Parties in
respect of liability, causation and damages.

1 ‘air and Equitable Treatment
a) The Claimant's Position

Taking into consideration the statements of various investment treaty tribunals in
applying the Fair and Equitable Treatment (“IT”) standard found in many BITs, the
Claimant contends that the following concrete principles are implied by Article 2(1) of
the German-Czech BIT: (1) transparency, stability and the protection of the investor’s
legitimate expectations; (2) procedural propriety and due process; and (3) good faith (see
Statement of Claim, para, 169).

The Claimant submits that, as the Czech Republic became a full member of the EU on |
May 2004, it could legitimately expect that the tenders which are the subject of the

ordance with the Czech

   

presont arbitration proceedings would be conducted in
procurement law, as well as Buropean law. However, il points to the EC’s 2005 Notice
to the Czech Republic, its 2007 Reasoned Opinion, and, more recently, the appeal by the
Czech Parliament Deputy Chamber to the Czech government in April 2010 to cancel the
current tender proceedings and organize a new tender that will respect public
procurement law, as evidence of the Czech Republic’s continuing violation of Czech and
European procurement law. The Claimant adds that the conduct of the Czech authorities
was entirely non-transparent and inconsistent, pointing in particular te UOHS’ changing
view on the application of the Czech PPA,

With regard to the tender process itself, the Claimant identifies four principal factors
which, in its view, violated the FET standard contained in the BIT:

 

209.

@

(by

©

@®

“Ambiguity arising from the late changes ‘made by LER to the bid criteria,
including the striking through of the term “comparable” from the definition of

_average references;

The invention of criteria by the evaluation committees according to which. bidders
had to-show réferences from. corfesponding regional inspector from the given
region;

Ambiguity in the drafting of tender documentation such that bidders did not know
precisely what they were bidding for; and

Inconsistency and non-transparency of the evaluation process as compared to the

tender documentation,

With respect to this latter factor, the Claimant reasons as follows (see Statement of

Claim, para. 181):

“,., [I]t Was not the company with the most competitive price or the most
experience-which won. Neither was the case. With price and references
being equally important in the tender, one might think. that the fact that a
company which was far from offering the best price might have won
because its references were outstanding. However, at least in the units
Lysa, Silherovice and Ostravice this was not the case. There, with Lesy
Beshydy a.s.,.a.company won which barely oymed any equipment, had a
very limited ‘workforve and no a ior experience of working in the Czech
State forests administered by LCR. Another company, DuSan Panatek —
INTER PAN, ranked better than CE Wood although pursuant to the
Czech commercial register it did not officially exist at the time of the
2004/2005 [sic] so that Claimant wonders how it could have provided
any decent references. Other companies-won although they did not meet
the formal eriteria for participating.” [footnotes omitted)

210, In its Statement of Reply, the Claimant seized on three axes of argument in. support of its
various claims, including the Respondent’s alleged breach of the FET standard: (1) the
criteria used to evaluate the bids were not those which should have been used pursuant to

2iL,

the tender documentation; (2) even on the basis of the criteria actually used to evaluate
the bids, CE Wood should not have lost all but two units; and (3) the companies that won
did not have the best results (see Statement of Reply, Sec, C.),

Beginning with this first argument, the Claimant contends that the reference criterion in
the tender documentation did not envisage that the evaluation of bidders by regional

-63~

 

212,

213,

214,

inspectors for work done in units in previous years would be one of the decision-making
factors for the tender committees. From a practical perspective, the Claimant notes that
simply by relying on previous years’ evaluations of a company for the work performed
on a unit in order to assess the reference criteria in a bid for that same unit, it is more
probable that bidders would win their previous units back, which is contradictory to the
declared aim of the tender to open tho market to new entrants and broak up alleged
monopolies. The Claimant also points out that the use of previous years’ evaluations for
bidders lends itself to manipulation, as the regional director sitting on a tender committee
for a particular region would assess the companies’ bids on the basis of evaluations that
he or she made during preceding years in that same region, likely tending to favour the
companies with which the director had already established relations (see Statement of
Reply, paras. 184-187),

According to the Claimant, this is precisely what occurred in respect of at least four
companies: Lesy Hluboka, Lesostavby Frydek-Mistek, Opavska Lesni and LESS &
Forest, each of which won back all of their previously held “home” units in the February
2005 tender. By contrast, CE Wood submitted bids for 23 of its “home” units but did not
win a single one, despite being a market leader, having complied with the tender rules
and submitted numerous positive references with its tender, and having more equipment
and trained personnel than any other company in the market (see Statement of Reply,
para. 18%).

In addition, the Claimant notes that the contracts ultimately offered were not based on the
conditions stipulated for those contracts in the tender documentation, Referring to the
analysis conducted by CAPLH, a Czech industry association, the Claimant observes that
several ey terms changed relating to contracts for the eventual sale of timber and
transport conditions, among other's (see Statement of Reply, para. 190).

With respect to its second argument, the Claimant submits that even if the previous year’s
evaluations received from regional inspectors were relevant for the evaluation of the
references criterion, the reviews and evaluations of CE Wood were not worse than those
of its peer group companies (see Statement of Reply, paras. 194-202).

-64-

O

215,

216,

217.

218,

Finally, the Claimant argues that ‘the folir companies identified above were not’ better
positioned than CE Wood oif the basis of their respective evaluations, ‘yet they each
received contracts in their home units (ade Statéinenit of Reply, paras. 203-209),

The Claimant conoludes that the Czech Republic violated the FET standard through its
overall conduct, but :in particular the conduct of the tender jproceedings, helping
companies to win tenders for which they were clearly not qualified.
b) The Respondent s Position. :

‘The Respondent submits that while the term.“fair and equitable treatment” in Article 2(1)
of the German-Czech BIT is subject to-interpretation, it is.not open to the Tribunal to
make a decision ex aeguo et bono. The Respondent relies on several NAFTA awards,
including Mondev International Ltd. v, Uniled States of America, ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/99/2, Award (11 October 2002) (“Mondev"), Waste Management, Inc. v,
United Mexican States, ICSID Case No, ARB(AF)/00/3, Final Award (30 April 2004)
(“Waste Management”), and.S.D. Myers, Inc. v. Canada, UNCITRAL (NAFTA), First
Partial Award (13 November 2000).(“S.D. Myers”), as well.as the. award .in Saluka, for
an articulation of the FET standard, observing that the circumstances of the specific case
always play a key role in determining whether the standard has been violated.

The Respondent avers that alleged breaches of European. law are outside of the scope of
the BIT and cannot, in any event, form the basis of a breach of the BIT’s FET standard in
this case (see Statement of Defence, para. 275), The Respondent refers to the ICJ’s
reasoning in Case concerning Elettronica Sicula (ELSI), ICI, 20 July 1989, ICI Rep
(1989) 15 (“ELS?”’), among other arbitral authority, in. support of its position (see

Statement of Rejoinder, para, 228, quoting ELS/, para. 124);
“Yet it must be borne in mind that the fact that an act of a public
authority may have been unlawful in municipal Jaw does not necessarily
mean that that act was unlawful in international Jaw, as a breach of treaty
or otherwise, A finding of the local courts that an act was unlawful may
well be relevant to an argument that it was also arbitrary; but by itself,
and without more, unlawfulness cannot be said to amount to
arbitrariness, It would be absurd if measures later quashed by higher
authorily or a superior court could, for thal reason, be said to have been
arbitrary in the sense of international law, To identify arbitrariness with
mere unlawfulness would be to deprive it of any useful meaning in its

own right.”

-65~

 

 

219,

220,

221,

The Respondent argues that the Claimant has offered no authority or support for the
position that violations of domestic law, such as the PPA, or BU law, constitute ipso facto
violations of the FET standard, In any event, the Respondent notes that neither a Czech
Court nor the Buropean Court of Justice has held that LCR was in breach of the PPA or
EU law, explaining that a reasoned opinion of the BC is just that, an opinion, not a legally
enforceable decision (see Statement of Reply, para. 231).

With respect to the legitimate expectations clement of the Claimant’s FET olaim, the
Respondent submits that protected legitimate expectations are those expectations that the
investor takes into account when it makes the investment, Relying on the tribunal’s
reasoning in PSEG v. Turkay, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/5, Award (19 January 2007)
(“PSBO”), at Ih 241, the dent adds that legiti can only
be based on specific assurances given to the investor by the host State. As the Claimant
does not allege that it received any specific commitments from the Czech Republic when
it made its investment, the Respondent reasons that whatever the Claimant's alleged
expectations, they did not constitute protected “legitimate expectations” under the
German-Czech BIT (see Statement of Reply, paras. 238-240),

The Respondent submits that the recent decision in AES Summit Generation Ltd. et. al. v.
Republic of Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/22, Award (23 September 2010)

tender

 

(“ABS”), provides guidance as to the standard under international law gover
processes, In that case, the tribunal determined that not every alleged “process” failure
amounts to a failure to provide FET under international law (see Statement of Rejoinder,
para, 242, quoting ABS, paras, 9.3.37 and 9.3.40);

“J. [T]he Tribunal has concluded that there was nothing so irrational or

otherwise unreasonable in Hungary's polloy decision to reintroduce

administrative prices in 2006 as would constitute a breach of its Treaty

obligation to ensure that Claimants were treated fairly and equitably and

thal their investments were not impaired by unreasonable or

discriminatory measures,

bel

The Tribunal has approached this question on the basis that it is not
every process failing or imperfection that will amount to a failure to
provide fair and equitable treatment. The standard is not one of
perfection. It is only when a State’s acts or procedural omissions are, on
the facts and in the context before the adjudicator, manifestly unfair and

-66~

a

O

222.

223.

224,

unreasonable (such as would shock, or at least surprise a sense of

juridical propriety) ... that the standard can be said.to have been

infringed.”
The Respondent further explains that, in reaching its decision, the tribunal emphasized
that while a govermnent cannot forcé a private party to give up existing contractual
rights, parties cannot complain if, in the process of the government exercising its
authority, private contractual rights are affected (see Statement of Rejoinder, para, 244,
quoting AES, para. 10.3.13):

“{I)t cannot be considered a reasonable measure for a State to use its

governmental powers to, force a private party to change or give up its

contractual rights. If the State has the conviction that its contractual

Obligations to its:investors should no longer be observed (even if'it is a

commercial contract, which is the case), the State would have to end

such contracts ‘and assume contractual consequences of such early

termination, This does not mean that the State cannot exercise its

governmental powers, including its legislative function, with the

consequence that private interests — such as the investor’s contractual

tights — are affected,:But that effect would-have to be.a consequence of a

measure based on-public policy that was not aimed.only at those

contractual rights. Were it to be otherwise, a State could justify the

breach. of commercial. commitments by relying on.atguments that such

breach was occasioned by an act of the State performed in its public

character.”
Thus, in AES, the tribunal concluded that Hungary’s decision to reintroduce
administrative pricing was not intended to affect the Claimants’ contractual rights, but
was rather motivated by concems relating to excessive profits earned by generators and
the burden this placed on consumers. Applying these principles to the present case, the
Respotidenit argues that the “process” at issue did not appear to be “so flawed as to
amount to a breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard”, if it was flawed at all.

The Respondent concludes that the Claimant did not succeed in the tenders because its
bids were non-competitive, not because the tender proceedings were manipulated.
Indeed, the Respondent takes the position that.“CE Wood lost market share beoause it
failed to adjust its cartel-like business model to the newly-competitive Czech forestry

market” (see Statement of Rejoinder, para, 14).

-67-

 

 

226,

227.

2. rbitrary or Discriminatory Measu:
a) The Claimant's Position
Noting that Article 2(2) of the German-Czech Republic BIT does not define arbitrary or
discriminatory measures, the Claimant relies on the interpretation of arbitrariness offered
by the ICT in ELST (see Statement of Claim, para, 185, quoting ELSI, p. 76):

“Arbitrariness is not s0 much something opposed to a rule of law, as
something opposed to the rule of law. [...] It is a wilful disrogard of due
process of law, an aot which shools, or at least surprises, a sense of
judicial propriety.”

The Claimant further contends that arbitrariness is largely referable to
“unveasonableness”, turning to the tribunal's disoussion of this criterion in Saluka (see
Statement of Claim, para. 186, quoting Sa/uka, paras, 460-461):

“The standard of ‘reasonableness’ has no different menning In this
context than in the context of the ‘fair and equitable treatment’ with
which it is associated; and the same is true with regard to the standard of
‘non-discrimination’. The standard of ‘reasonableness’ therefore
requires, in this context as wall, a showing that the State's conduct bears
a reasonable relationship to some rational policy, whereas the standard of
‘non-discrimination’ requires a rational justification of any differential
treatment of a foreign investor.

Insofar as the standard of conduct is concerned, a violation of the non-
impairment requirement does not therefore differ substantially from a
violation of the ‘fair and equitabic treatment’ standard, The non-
impairment requirement ly identified more speaific effects of any

jolation, nami reyurd io ihe operation, management,
maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of the investment by the
investor.”

   

The Claimant submits that the preparation and conduct of the tender proceedings was
contrary to the rule of law and would shook any sense of judicial propriety, The
Claimant contends that its investment, CE Wood, was, at the time of the tenders, the most
successful forestry company in the Czech Republic, Yet, in a tender for approximately
60 forestry units, it won only two with a minor volume of wood, By contrast, newly
founded companies with little experience in forestry received better marks for their
references and companies which failed to fulfill the formal participation requirements for
the tender won important units. The Claimant takes the position that such conduct bears
no rational justification, but rather finds explanation only in the i i of
CE Wood.

- 68 -

228
Cy)
229,
230.
OQ
231,

b) The Respondent's Position

* The Respondent notes that, under Article 2(2) of the German-Czech BIT, the Czech

Republic has the obligation to avoid impairing the’ i use or
enjoyment of investments’ in its tercjtory by Germari investors. The Respondent relies on
the Sa/uka teibunal’s interpretation of “impairment” in’a similar treaty clause, quoting as
follows (see Statement of Defence, paras, 281-82, quoting Saluka, paras, 458 and 461):

“\mpairment means, according to its ordinary meaning .., any megative
impact caused by ‘measure’ taken by the Czech. Republic,

Insofar as the standard .of conduct is concerned, a violation of the non-
‘impairment requirement does not therefore differ substantially from a
vidlation of the ‘fair and equitable treatment’ standard.” The ‘non-
impairment requirement merely identifies more specific effects of any
such violation, namely with regard to the operation, maintenance, use,
enjoyment or disposal of the investment by the investor.”

The Respondent contends that the Claimant has failed to substantiate its claim with any
specific evidence. The Respondent also relies upon the standard for arbitrariness set out
by the ICJ in EZSY and, applying this standard to the present case, contends that the
tender process was conducted in good faith and-did.not shock the sense of juridical
propriety.

The Respondent further reasons that even if'a law was violated in the tender proceedings,
this could not establish a breach of Article 2(2) because the violation would have affected
all forestry companies participating in the tender and could not, therefore, be viewed as
arbitrary or discriminatory. The reference criterion about which the Claimant complains
only helped CE Wood, in the Respondent’s view, because CE Wood could not compete
on price alone.

While the Respondent acknowledges a degree of subjectivity to the reference criterion, it
avers that steps were taken to ensure due process by the evaluation committees (see
Statement of Defence, para. 208), Moreover, the Respondent notes that, prior to the
tender proceedings, a meeting was held with potential bidders, including CE Wood, in
which the evaluation criteria were discussed, The minutes of this meeting, produced by

-69-

 

 

232.

233,

234,

the Respondent, indicate that the application of the reference criterion in particular was
discussed and agreed (soe Statoment of Rejoinder, para, 266, n. 131, quoting Exh. R-51);
“,.. individual criteria for each contract (the entrepreneur's individual
contracts may be evaluated differently) whioh include: payments
discipline regarding the contract, performing of the contract with
subcontractors and assessment of the contract by the Forest Authority
and Regional Inspectorate, (Suoh evaluation of the entrepreneur's cach
contract shall refleot the general profile of the company as well as the
dotuiled behaviour of the entropreneur’s employees in respeot to the
contract)..."

As regards the Claimant's allegation that bidders in their home units had a clear
advantage over non-home unit bidders, the Respondent avers that approximately 30% of
the 87 units were acquired by bidders that previously held and operated those units.
Thus, the Respondent reasons as follows (see Statement of Rejoinder, para. 277):

aS that only one third of bidders whose bid was evaluated
succeeded in acquiring the unit they operated before initiation of the
tender;

- that many of the successful bidders in partioular units had to
transfer their equipment and labor to newly acquired units and were
happy to do so even when they acquired one unit only;

- The tender achieved its intended result of creating a fair and
open competition environment enabling ‘new players’ to effectively
enter the forestry market if they submitted a competitive bid.” [footnotes
omitted)

 

The Respondent concludes that, since its inception, the menageme
illegitimate expectation of preferential treatment” and that notwithstanding the
Claimant's allegation of discrimination and unfair treatment, {i was treated in exactly the
same manner as its competitors in the Czech forestry sector (see Statemont of Rejoinder,

para. 293).

 

3. fational Treatmer
a) The Claimant's Position
The Claimant submits that Artiole 3(1) of the German-Czech BIT and treaty clauses like
it require a host State to treat foreign investments or investors as well as similarly situated
national investors. Thus, the Claimant contends that the following two criteria are central
to the Tribunal’s analysis of whether a violation has occurred (se¢ Statement of Claim,

para. 192):

-70-

"235,
OX
236.
«
7
237.
fC)
C)
238,

“,., (1) whether the foreign investor and the domestic investor are placed
‘in a comparable setting or as often said ‘like circumstances’ and (2)
whether the conduct of the Stat results in a treatirent less favourable
than that accorded to the, domestic comparator, thereby precluding de
facto or de jure discrimination.”

As regards the first criterion, the Claimant states that CB Wood was engaged in the
forestry business like several other companies, all of which operated in the same
environment, i.¢. in the state-owned forests administered by LGR, the only difference
being that CB Wood was foreign-owned.

Secondly, the‘Claimant submits ‘that:conditions for:the tenders contained in the tender
documentation were the sarhe for all participants, however, the outcome of the tenders
clearly disfavoured CE Wood over other, less qualified Czech companies, Thus, the
Claimant concludes that the Respondent treated foreign and domestic investors in like
circumstances differently on a de facto basis, which treatment could not be justified
because, in certain cases, the winning bidders did not even meet the formal requirements
of the tenders,
b) The Respondent's Position

The Respondent submits that as LGR gave CB Wood only average scores in most of its
annual valuations, it is clear that the company was not a top performer even prior to the
tenders, Moreover, the Respondent contends that the outcome of the tenders did not
disfavour CE Wood in comparison to other companies, rather, “[iJt only reflects that

-other bidders in the respective contractual units submitted more competitive offers” (see

Statoment of Defence, para. 295),

‘The Respondent adds that there is no evidence that all of the companies who won units in
the tender were owned by Czech nationals, that national ownership was the reason any
successful bidder wou a unit, or that any differentiation in treatment was not based on a.
reasonable justification, Z¢. the winners bid better prices than CE Wood (see Resp. PHB,

para. 210),

-N-

>.

 

 

239,

241,

4. Full Proteotion and Securit
a) The Claimant's Position

The Claimant submits that the German-Czech BIT contains two separate provisions
requiring the Contracting Parties to provide full protection and security. The first, at
Article 4(1), requires each Contracting State to provide “full protection and full security”
to all investments made by the nationals of another Contracting Party in the territory of
the host State. The second, at Article 2(3), provides that “[iJnvestments and retums
thereon together with returns on any reinvestment shall enjoy full protection under the
Treaty.” The Claimant contends that this latter provision must be interpreted as

ding p ion to retums on i and rei , with the result that the
obligation in Article 4(1) must be intorpreted as a separate and independent obligation on
the part of the host State (see Statement of Claim, para, 211),

While the concept of “full protection and full security” is not defined in the German-
Czech BIT, the Claimant contends that it has generally been interpreted as placing a duty
of due diligence on a Contracting party to “take such measures protecting foreign
i as ble under the ci ” Gee of Claim, para. 197,
quoting R. Dolzer and C. Schreuer, Principles of International Investment Law (OUP,
2008), pp. 149-50).

Tho Claimant reasons that while this standard has traditionally been associated with the
obligation of a host State to ensure the physioal protection of an investor and its assets, it
has since been broadened to include “legal security”, The Claimant relies in this regard
upon the award in Vivendi, where the tribunal found that “[i]f the parties to the BIT had
intended to limit the obligation to ‘physical interferences,’ they could have done so by
including words to that effect”, the absence of any such limiting words meaning that acts
or measures which deprive an investor of protection and security so as to violate the
standard “need not threaten physical possession or the legally protected terms of
operation of the investments” (see Statement of Claim, para. 205, quoting Compania de
Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentina, ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/3, Award (20 August 2007) (“Vivendi”), para. 7.4.15).

-72-

243,

244,

245.

 

The Claimant ‘states that LCR “thwarted the legal security and directly haimed the
commercial and financial interests” of the Claimant by changing the existing legal

~ operating environment go as to ‘drastically reduce the position of CE Wood in the Czech

forestry sector. By way of example, thé Claiinant observes that the 2004 tenders were
announced two weeks before the expiration of the short term contracts. In this short
period of time, the Respondent undertook “a dramatic overhaul of an existing contractual
scheme that was the sole source of the raw material” of the Claimant, a scheme on which
the Claimant relied for almost five years prior to the overhaul. ‘This was, in the
Claimant's view, reckless at best, if not deliberately aimed at CE Wood (see Statement of
Claim, para, 214). :

The Claimant states that the Respondent failed to provide protection against the conduct
of LCR when it failed to rein in’its illegal aud abusive conduct, both at the level of the
UOHS::and..the Ministry of Agriculture. The Claimant recalls that the UOHS issued
conflicting decisions on the status of LER and the legality of the tender and, when it
finally determined that LGR was a public contracting authority, following issuance of the
BC’s 2005 decision, no actions were taken by LCR, the Ministry of Agriculture or the

" Ministry of Finance fo remedy the damage caused to CE Wood as a result of the

wrongfully conducted tenders,
b) The Respondent's Position

‘The Respondent submits that the standard of full protection and security is still invoked
almost exclusively in cases regarding physical protection, referring here to Saluka, PSEG,
Wena Hotels Lid y. Arab Republic Egypt, ICSYD Case No, ARB/93/1, Award (21
February 1997) (“Wena Hotels”), and Asian Agricultural Products Lid (AAPL) v.
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, ICSID Case No. ARB/87/3, Final Award (27
June 1990) (“AAPL”). In those cases where the standard has been considered, the
Respondent notes that it is always — of at least usually — limited to the context of physical

security, barring exceptional circumstances,

‘The Respondent avers that it is at a loss to understand why changes that were general and
affected every forestry company in the Czech Republic in the same way as CE Wood
could have been “deliberately aimed at CE Wood”, as the Claimant contends,

-73 -

 

246,

247,

248,

249,

‘The Respondent also submits that it is normal and in accordance with the rule of law that
specific judicial bodies deal with specific issues. Accordingly, the Claimant cannot
blame the Ministry of Agriculture for not taking up an issue at CE Wood's behest which
falls outside of the limits of its authority.
5. inect

a) The Claimant's Position
The Claimant submits that Article 4(2) of the German-Czech BIT covers not only direct
but indirect expropriations, relying on the definition of indirect expropriation articulated
by the tribunal in Metalclad Corp, v. Mexico, ICSID Case No, ARB(AF)/97/1, Award (30
August 2000) (“Metalclad™) (soe Statement of Claim, para. 223, quoting Melalclad, para,
103):

“expropriation [...] includes not only open, deliberate and acknowledged

takings of property, such as outright seizure or formal obligatory transfer

of title in favour of the host State, but also covert or incidental

interference with the use of property which has the effect of depriving

the owner, in whole or in significant part, of the use or reasonably-to-be-

expected economic benefit of property even if not necessarily to the
obvious benefit of the host State.”

The Claimant argues that the Respondent interfered with its business activities by way of
a de facto expropriation which deprived it in significant part of the reasonably-to-be-
expected benefit of its investment. and created a hostile business environment which
provented CE Wood from carrying out successful business dealings, ultimately leading to
the Claimant’s loss of investment and, as a mitigating measwre, the sale of its remaining
shares in CE Wood for ‘The Claimant states that the effects of the
Respondent’s acts are permanent, as CE Wood never recovered and is in bankruptcy

today.

In considering the nature of the property allegedly expropriated, the Claimant explains
that when it invested in CE Wood, EP Kapital held contractual tights for forestry services
which far outnumbered its competitors, two thirds of its contracts with LGR were
unlimited in duration, and those contracts conferred the right to purchase timber from
LCR up to 66% of the wood harvested. As a result, the Claimant contends that its assets
encompassed not only the shares purchased in CE Wood but CE Wood's contractual

-14-

O

&

 

251,

252.

253,

254,

 

rights, including access to raw material and the business potential which this entailed (see
Statement ofClaim, paras. 231 232),

The crux of the Cleimant’s expropriation: case; as with its other claims, lies in the conduct
of the:tender proceedings, which. it submits were manipulated so.as. to -privilege certain
parties over.others. The Claimant argues that companies which had . questionable
qualifications and references were. ranked higher than CE Wood and companies which
of tender: participation. or offered competitive

did not.meet.the formal
Whereas, CE Wood won only in two of the 58 units for

prices won in several units,
which it submitted a tender,

The Claimant takes the view that the Respondent's intention is irrelevant-to determining
whether an expropriation occurred, However, even should the Tribunal find that
intention is relevant, the Claimant contends that an expropriation has still occurred,
arguing that the tenders furthered the interests of a few rather than furthering the public
interest and the Minister of Agriculture announced publicly that it was ‘its intention to
destroy CE Wood (see Statement of Claim, para, 244),

As a final point, the Claimant argues with equal force that it is irrelevant whether the
Respondent seized the Claimant’s investment, to the obvious benefit of the host State,
referring again to tibunal’s approach in the Metalclad case. Thus, the Claimant
concludes that its investment was indirectly expropriated, averring that none of the
requirements for a lawful expropriation were satistied.
bd) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent submits that a claim for expropriation requires a State action that (i)
constitutes a “taking” of a claimant’s property rights; (ii) has a substantially severe
impact on the claimant’s investment as a whole, and (iii) does not fall into any of the
categories of permissible (non-compensable) expropriation, such as bona fide regulatory

action within the police powers exception. (see Statement of Rejoinder, para, 295).

The Respondent submits that the only measure that the Claimant specifically identifies as
expropriatory is the tender process. However, in the Respondent's view, the tender did
not take anything from the Claimant, nor did it substantially interfere with it in any way.

+756

 

 

255.

256.

Similarly, the tender did not interfere with the Claimant's ownership of the shares in CE
Wood, Relying on the reasoning of the tribunals in LG&E v. Argentina, ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/1, Decision on Liability (3 October 2006) (“LG&E”) and Pope and Talbot v.
Canada, UNCITRAL (NAFTA), Interim Award (26 June 2000) (“Pope and Talbot”), the
Respondent contends that the Claimant's indirect expropriation claim must fail because
the Claimant has not demonstrated that any taling interfered with the Claimant's
investment fo a sufficient degree so as to neutralize its ownersllp or enjoyment of the
investment or doprive it of its ability to use, enjoy or dispose of its property.

D Causation

1, The Claimant's Position
In determining whether an act caused damage to the Claimant, the Claimant observes that
the Tribunal must be satisfied that “the causal relationship is sufficiently close (i.e, not
too remote) to satisfy the applicable standard of causation” (see Statement of Reply, para.
250, quoting Mark Kantor, Valuation for Arbitration: Compensation Standard, Valuation
Method and Expert Evidence (2008), p. 106).

The Claimant highlights the testimony of who remarked as follows on the
devastating effect of the tender results on CE Wood (see Tr. Day 1, p, 151):

“PROFESSOR STERN: My second question is I was a little bit struck by
what you say in two different paragraphs. In paragraph 13 you say: ‘fem
convinced that in 2004 and before the bidding process the company was
in very good condition,’ And then before, in 11, you say: ‘Given the
liquidity situation in April 2005, CE Wood was close to insolvency...”

 

So does that mean that the situation has changed in four months, from a
very good condition to bankruptcy -

A. Well, not to bankruptoy,

PROFESSOR STERN: It was “olose to insolvency”,

A. Yes, it was close to if somebody filed bankruptoy -

PROFESSOR STERN; In four months?

A. Yes, Because from one day to the other one the tender proceedings
‘were published, we lost one-third of the company business, from one day
to the other, Because we’ve got so many employees, at the end of

2004, and we were, our outlook was that we have to reduce by one-third,
then the cashflow was dramatically influenced by that. And if somebody

-16-

ny

 

257.

~ 258 .

259.

260.

_ Will file bankruptey on CE Wood we will not be able to pay our payables
on time, So there as a’ tisk for that, And in 2004, presuming that the
condition will. stay the same, I think we were in a good condition,
The Claimant contends that if CE Wood ‘had secured eveti 4 modest number of units it
woiild ‘have ‘had a suffigiently” positive outlook for future cooperation with LOR and

 

would have been able to secure bank financing,

As rognrds the interim ; contracts, the Claimant -subnaits that LOR. set unreasonable

‘timelines for negotiating the agreements -and the contracts as, proposed were

. ‘demonstrably invalid”, The,Claimant therefore contends that it made a reasonable effort

to re-negotiate the contracts in good faith, and.it was.not simply a “business decision’

that Jed to the non-signing of the cotitracts.

Contrary to the Respondent’s assertion that there is no nexus between béing successful in

the tender and-gaining access to the.timber felled in a forestry unit successfully won in’

the tender, the Claimant avers that the right to purchase timber was a part of the Master
Contract, the only element left to negotiation. being the price to be paid for that timber.
Article:10:1-of the: Master-Contract.thus.provided.that.the.contractual-partner “shall have
the right.to conclude the Gontract on the Sale of Timber in-the scope of the maximum of
60% of the SUJ’s harvesting project in the current calendar year ...”. The Claimant also
‘notes that the purpose of the Master Contract is to establish the right of the contractual
partner to conclude the contract on:the sale of timber (see Cl. PHB, para. 354; Bxh, C-
46/CB-116).
2, The Respondent's Position

The Respondent asserts that the Claimant has failed to establish a causal link between the
alleged damage and the alleged wrongful conduct of the Respondent. The Respondent
submits that any loss of timber supply was more likely the result of a managerial failure
to adjust CE Wood’s business mode! to the newly-competitive Czech forestry sector than
any manipulation of the tender proceedings, The Respondent calls in aid the tribunal’s
discussion of this proposition in Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Lid. v. United Republic of
Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05S/22, Award (24 July 2008) (“Biwater”) (see
Statement of Rejoinder, para. 305, quoting Biwater, para. 786):

-77-

 

261,

262.

263.

“The key issue In this caso is the factual link between the wrongful acts

and the damage in. question, as opposed to any issues ag to remoteness or

inditect loss, The Arbitral Tribunal notes in this regard the approach of

the ICT in the KLSY case, In that case, the ICT held that the primary cause

of the Claimant's diffioulties lay in its own mismanagement over a

period of years, and not the act of requisition imposed by the

governmental authorities, In reaching this conclusion, the Court applied

an ‘underlying’ or ‘dominant’ cause analysis. ...”
‘The Respondent argues that the Claimant's oase blindly assumes that, but for the alleged
wrongful conduct, CE Wood would have won all 58 of the bids in which it participated
and that it would have won them at the high price it bid, However, the Respondent
observes that even if the referonce orlteria were removed from the tender and its
weighting wes assigned to the price criteria, the evidence indicates that CE Wood still
would have lost each of the tenders because it never had the lowest price (see Resp. PHB,

para, 218),

As regards the interim short-term contracts, the Respondent notes that while other
forestry companies accepted the terms of the interim contracts offered by LCR, CE Wood
did not. Thus, even if CE Wood had won every tender, it would not change the fact that
it did not have the contracts for the first six months of 2005. The Respondent reasons
that the economic impact of refusing to sign the interim contracts is » commercial
decision for which the management of CE Wood alone bears responsibility,

Accordingly, ifthere was 2 deorensa in the cach flow of CK Wood in the first half of 2005

 

due to a decrease in harvested wood, the Respondent argues that this was caused by the
management's decision not to sign the interim contracts offered to it on the same
conditions as they were offered to all other forestry companies (see Statement of
Rejoinder, para, 329; Resp. PHB, paras, 225-227).

The Respondent also submits that there is no nexus between being successful in the
tender and gaining access to the timber felled in the contraotual unit for which a forestry
company submitted a successful bid, as no contract of sale of lumber nor the sale of
lumber as such was the subject of the tender. Rather, the subject of the tender was the
signature of a master agreement which included a contract on foresting activities and a
contract on harvesting activities, In essence, the Respondent contends that the Master
Agreement does not convey a ditect right to sell lumber, but rather provides for a

-78-

a

264,

265.

266.

267.

negotiation between the forestry company and LCR which may ultimately result in no
agreement to sell the lumber harvested, In any event, had CE Wood wished to procure
timber to address shortfall in its Supply, the Respondent submits ‘that it could have done
so by purchasing wood from neighbouring Buropean countries (see Resp. PHB, paras.
237-240,

Finally, the Respondent submits that the Claimant was already in a critical financial
situation in 2004, as evidenced by the Savino Report, therefore it is incorrect to assume
that CE Wood’s cash flow problems are caused by LCR’s acts or omissions in the tender
proceedings.

rE Damages

1, be Claimant's Position

The Claimant notes that the relevant principles of compensation, save for compensation
for a lawful expropriation, are not spelled out in the German-Czech BIT, but are rather to
be found in the ILC’s Articles on State Responsibility. Among those provisions relied
upon, the Claimant highlights Articles 36 and 38 which establish the basic obligation of a
State to compensate an investor for damage caused by the State, and to pay interest on
such compensation. The Claimant relies upon these basic principles in connection with
its claim for compensation in respect of the violation of the FET provision, full protection
and full security provision, national treatment provision and prohibition of arbitrary and
discriminatory measures contained in the BIT (see Statement of Claim, paras, 251-253,

259).

As regards its expropriation claim, the Claimant notes that international law distinguishes
‘between a legal and an illegal expropriation, submitting that Article 4(2) of the BIT sets
the standard of compensation only for a lawful expropriation, As the Claimant's case is
based on an unlawful expropriation, the Claimant contends that the appropriate measure
of compensation is the same as that set out above (see Statement of Claim, paras. 254-
255).

Tuming to the valuation of its claims, the Claimant contends that the reparation standard
set out by the Permanent Court of Intemational Justice in the Chorzow Factory case

-79-

 

 

268.

269.

270.

27,

applies, requiring compensation for the fair market value of its investment,
Compensation is assessed by the Claimant’s expert, using the Discounted Cash Flow
(“DCF”) Method, as at 31 December 2004, the date when the Claimant's investment was
still largely unaffected by the steps taken by the Respondent, to be €87.304 million, plus
interest (see Statement of Claim, para, 256; Cl. Reply PHB, para. 177).

2. The Respondent's Position
The Respondent identifies through its quantum expert a number of flaws in the
Claimant's quantum calculations, not least of which is the Claimant’s use of the DCF
method, which the Respondent describes as “not consistent with common practice and
therefore not reliable” (see Statement of Defence, para. 301),

The Respondent contends rather that the “actual investment” method should be preferred
to quantify any damages, relying upon the approach taken by the tribunals in Béloune and
Marine Drive Complex Ltd. v. Ghana Investments Centre, 95 ILR 184 (UNCITRAL
Rules, 1990) (“Biloune”); Phelps Dodge Corp. vy. Iran, 10 lran-U.S, CTR 121 (1986)
(“Phelps”), and Metalclad. Taking this approach, the Respondent contends that the
Claimant is entitled to no damages (see Statement of Rejoinder, paras. 348-352).

The Tribunal has summarized the Parties’ submissions on liability, causation and
damages in order to reflect all of the issues placed before the Tribunal in this arbitration.
It is, however, recalled that the Tribunal has found, by a majority, that the acts and/or
omissions of LGR are not atirlbutable to the Czech Republic and that, on the evidence
presented, the Ministry of agrioulture is not responsible for any act in relation to LCR's
management of the tender proceedings (see paragraph 203 above), As the acts and/or
omissions complained of are not attributable to the Czeoh Republic under the German-
Czech BIT, all claims of loss or damage caused by an alleged breach of the BIT by the
Czech Republic must be dismissed (see paragraph 204 above).

cOsTs

The Claimant claims its costs of the arbitration totalling CHF1,781,511.15, €384,480.45
and £400,061.30, which include legal fees and disbursements, Tribunal fees, experts fees
and disbursements, translation and interpretation services, witness travel and

~80-

272.

273,

274,

. “accomodation expenses, court reporting and Icc hearing services ompenses (see Cl.

letter, dated 9 January 2012),

‘The: Respondent claims its costs of the arbitration totalling. €210,000.00 and

. (GZK95;671,235,09, which include legal foes and.disbursements, experts -fees, Tribunal
- fees, interpretation services, witness travel.and accommodation expenses, banking fees,
.. trayel expenses for party representatives and taxes (see Resp. letter, dated 9 January

2012).

Article 38 of the UNCITRAL Rules provides that the Tribunal. “shall fix the costs of

- .arbitration in its award”. Article 40 further provides as follows in respect. of the

apportionment of costs:

1, “Except as provided in paragraph 2, the costs of erbitration shall in
principle be ‘borne by the unsuccessful party, However, the arbitral
tribunal may apportion each of such costs between the parties if it
determines that apportionment is reasonable, taking into acoourit the
circumstances of the case,

. With respect to the costs of legal representation and assistance
referred to in article 38, paragraph (e)," thé’ arbitral tribunal, taking
into account the ciroumstances: of the case,'shall be free to-determine
which party shall bear such cosls or may apportion such costs
between the partiés if it determines that apportionment is reasonable.

v

‘When the arbitral tribunal issues an order for the termination of the
arbitral proceedings or makes an award on agreed terms, it shall fix
the costs of arbitration referred to in article 38 and article 39,
paragraph 1, in the text of that order or award.

. No additional fees may be charged by an arbitral tribunal for
interpretation or correction or completion of its award under articles
35 to 37.”

-

While, at the end of the day, the Respondent has been successful in having the Claimant’s
case dismissed on the ground that the acts and/or omissions of LGR complained of are
not attributable to the Czech State, the Tribunal notes that the Respondent’s jurisdictional
challenges based on jurisdiction ratione temporis, jurisdiction raitone materiae and the
existence of a “good faith” investment have all been dismissed by the Tribunal.

-81-

 

275.

276.

VIL.
277,

In addition, the Tribunal recalls that while the Respondent has prevailed in its
jurisdictional objection based on attribution, it only raised this objection in its Statement
of Defence, approximately six months after the date on which the Respondent was
directed to identify its jurisdictional objections and one week before the teleconference
scheduled between the Parties and the Tribunal to address the matter of bifurcation. The
Respondent has variably treated the issues of attribution as a merits issue (see Statement
of Defence, paras, 239-265) and an issue on par with jurisdiction (ge Statement of
Rejoinder, paras, 162-205), Its submissions in this respect, as with its arguments on
jurisdiction, also evolved over the course of the proceedings,

Talcing these and other circumstances of the oase into account, the Tribunal determines to
exercise its discretion undor Article 40 of the UNCITRAL Rules in respect of costs by
ordering that cach party bear its own costs of the arbitration, as well as its own costs of
legal representation, The Tribunal considers that this apportionment is reasonable.
OPERATIVE PART

For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal awards as follows:

(a) | The Tribunal dismisses the Respondent’s jurisdictional challenge and declares
that it has jurisdiction to decide on their merits all claims advanced by the

 

Claimant against the Respondent in this prooseding;

dof by
dof by

 

(b) The Tribunal finds and declares that the aote and/or omissi
the Claimant to constitute breaches of the Respondent's obligations under the
German-Czech BIT are not attributable to the Respondent,

 

(©) In view of the Tribunal’s finding in paragraph 277(b) above, the Tribunal hereby
dismisses all other claims made by the Claimant and the Respondent in these
arbitration proceedings, save as to costs;

(@) ‘The Tribunal orders that each Party shall bear its own costs.

-82-

 

C)

 

Place of Arbitration: Paris, France

[Dissenting Opinion attached]

‘Mr. Henri Alvarez, QC.
Co-Arbitrator

Date:

Prof. Brigitte Stern
Co-Arbitrator

Date:

  

~?

 
 

Date:_Z& Wt 201%

-83-

 

 

Place of Arbitration: Paris, France

Mr. Henri Alvarbz, Q.C, Prof, Brigitte Stem
Co-Arbitrator Co-Arbitrator

Date: AEMay 2 1e- Date:

L, Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C.
Chairman

    

Date:

-83-

 

 

—~

VY

 

Place of Arbitration: Paril, Prince *

ee
Mr, Henri Alvarez, Q.C. Prof’ Brigitte Stern
Co-Arbitrator

.Co-Arbitrator
Date: 28 Nagsbel2

~ [Dissenting Opinion attached]

 

Date:

 

L. Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C.

Chairman

 

Date:

-83-

en
oe r

 

 

 

