ARBITRAL AWARD

In the matter of a NAFTA arbitration under the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules
between:

International Thunderbird Gaming Corporation
Claimant

and

The United Mexican States
Respondent

Before the Arbitral Tribunal constituted under Chapter Eleven of
the North American Free Trade Agreement, and comprised of:
Lic. Agustin Portal Ariosa

Professor Thomas W. Wilde
Professor Dr. Albert Jan van den Berg (President)

Washington D.C., January 26, 2006

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS
L THE PARTIE! 3
Il. PROCEDURAL HISTORY 4
Ill. SUMMARY OF FACT: 10
Iv. ISSUES TO BE DETERMINED BY THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL ........c:cccseseeeeeeeeeeteee 21
Vv. ANALYSIS OF ISSUES FOR DECISION ......0.c:c:ccccseeseseseeeeeeseeesesesesteeeteeeeeneeneneieee 30
A. General 30
B. — Jurisdiction and/or Admissibility ......0..0.0.c.cccceccceeeteseeteseeeseeeetesesnenees 33
C. Merits — General 41
D. Merits — Articles 1102, 1105 and 1110 of the NAFTA..........ccccceeee 56
E. Merits —- Damage 68
VI. Costs 68
VII. DECISIONS 73

 

Page 2 of 74

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

I. THE PARTIES
1. Claimant:

INTERNATIONAL THUNDERBIRD GAMING CORPORATION
Thunderbird Greeley Inc.

11545 West Bernardo Court Suite 307

San Diego, CA 92127

United States of America

hereinafter: “Thunderbird” or “Claimant.”

2. Thunderbird is a publicly held Canadian Corporation, with its principal offices
in San Diego, California, U.S.A.

3. In these proceedings, Thunderbird is represented by its duly authorised attorney
James D. Crosby, California, U.S.A, and by Professor Todd Weiler, Ontario,
Canada.

4. Respondent:

THE UNITED MEXICAN STATES

General Directorate of Legal Consulting of Negotiations
Ministry of Economy

Mexico, DF, Mexico

hereinafter: “Mexico” or “Respondent.”
5. In these proceedings, the government of Mexico is represented by Mr. Hugo

Perezcano Diaz, Director General de Consultoria Juridica de Negociaciones,
Secretaria de Economia.

Page 3 of 74

IL.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 21 March 2002, Thunderbird submitted a “Notice of Intent to Submit a
Claim to Arbitration Under Section B of Chapter 11 of the North American Free
Trade Agreement,” alleging that Mexico had breached its obligations under the
North American Free Trade Agreement (“NAFTA”), more specifically under
Article 1102 (National Treatment), Article 1103 (Most-Favoured Nation
Treatment), Article 1105 (Minimum Standard of Treatment) and Article 1110
(Expropriation and Compensation) of the NAFTA.

On 1 August 2002 (and received by Mexico on 22 August 2002), Thunderbird
submitted a Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim against Mexico
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA and under the
UNCITRAL Rules of Arbitration (the “Notice of Arbitration’).

In the Notice of Arbitration at 34, Thunderbird sought the following relief: “i.
Damages of not less than USD$100,000,000; ii. Costs associated with these
proceedings, including all professional fees and disbursements; iii. Pre-award
and post-award interest at a rate to be fixed by the Tribunal; iv. Tax
consequences of the award to maintain the integrity of the award; v. Such other
and further relief that counsel may advise and that this Tribunal may deem
appropriate.”

By letter dated 4 September 2002, Mexico raised objections regarding the
language of the proceedings and alleged further that the Notice of Intent did not
fully satisfy the NAFTA requirements. Correspondence was subsequently
exchanged between the Parties regarding Mexico’s objections.

On 14 March 2003, the Arbitral Tribunal was constituted. The Tribunal is
composed of Professor Dr. Albert Jan van den Berg (appointed as President of
the Tribunal by the Secretary-General of ICSID), of Dutch nationality, residing
in Tervuren, Belgium; Professor Thomas W. Wilde (appointed by Thunderbird),
of German nationality, residing in Dundee, Scotland, United Kingdom and Mr.

Page 4 of 74

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

Agustin Portal Ariosa (appointed by Mexico), of Mexican nationality, residing
in Mexico DF, Mexico. Mr. Gonzalo Flores of ICSID was designated to serve as
Secretary of the Tribunal.

The first session of the Tribunal was held, with the Parties’ agreement, in
Washington D.C. on 29 April 2003. During that session, after having heard the
Parties’ arguments, the Tribunal informed the Parties that the arbitration would
be conducted in the English and Spanish language; that the place of arbitration
in the legal sense would be Washington, D.C.; and that Mexico was invited to
inform Thunderbird and the Tribunal whether it pursued objections based on
lack of jurisdiction and/or inadmissibility (the “Preliminary Question”),
following which the Tribunal would issue a ruling on the question of bifurcation
of the proceedings with respect to the Preliminary Question. It was agreed
further that the Secretariat of ICSID would render administrative services in
relation to the arbitral proceedings similar to those rendered in arbitrations under
the ICSID Additional Facility Rules.

Order No. 1 (by Consent) was issued by the Arbitral Tribunal on 27 June 2003,
in which the sequence of the proceedings and a number of procedural matters
were set out.

On 29 May 2003, Thunderbird submitted a Request for Production of
Documents; Mexico filed objections to said request on 27 June 2003. By Order
No. 2 dated 31 July 2003, the Tribunal ruled on the Request for Production of
Documents and offered Thunderbird the possibility to submit timely a renewed
request that comported with Order No. 2.

On 27 June 2003, Thunderbird filed a Motion to Obtain an Interim Measure
under Article 1134 of the NAFTA. Mexico filed observations on Thunderbird’s
motion on 17 July 2003. A telephone conference was held between the Tribunal
and the Parties on 15 August 2003 to discuss Thunderbird’s motion. During the
telephone conference, a number of practical aspects relating to Thunderbird’s
motion were agreed, and in particular that the Parties would carry out a joint

Page 5 of 74

20.

21.

22.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

visit of the sites. The joint visit took place on 5-7 November 2003. By letter of
26 November 2003, the Tribunal accordingly informed the Parties that it
considered Thunderbird’s motion to have become moot.

On 15 August 2003, Thunderbird filed a Particularized Statement of Claim.

On 27 August 2003, Thunderbird filed a Supplemental Request for Production
of Documents, pursuant to Order No. 2; Mexico filed observations in response
on 15 October 2003. By letter of 26 November 2003, the Tribunal informed the
Parties that, in the absence of any reaction from Thunderbird, it inferred that the
matter required no further action from the Tribunal.

On 29 August 2003, Mexico filed a Supplementary Request for Production of
Documents; Thunderbird responded thereto on 22 September 2003. Subsequent
correspondence was exchanged between the Parties. On 11 December 2003, the
Tribunal ruled on Mexico’s Supplementary Request (see Order No. 3).

On 18 December 2003, Mexico filed an “Escrito de Contestacién” (Statement of
Defence), including “Excepciones de Incompetencia y Admisibilidad
[Exceptions of Jurisdiction and Admissibility].”

On 22 December 2003, Thunderbird filed a Submission on Whether to Bifurcate

the Proceedings.

Pursuant to Order No. 4 dated 24 December 2003, the Tribunal ruled that the
Preliminary Question was joined to the merits and it invited the Parties to
address the Preliminary Question in their forthcoming submissions.

On 9 February 2004, Thunderbird filed a Statement of Reply.

On 24 February 2004, Mexico submitted a further Request for Production of

Documents. Thunderbird filed objections thereto on 3 March 2004. The Tribunal
ruled on Mexico’s Request in Order No. 5 dated 12 March 2004.

Page 6 of 74

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

On 7 April 2004, Mexico filed a Statement of Rejoinder.

On 9 April 2004, Thunderbird filed a Motion to Strike the Witness Statement of
Professor Nelson Rose (submitted by Mexico); Mexico objected thereto on 14
April 2004. Thunderbird’s Motion to Strike was denied pursuant to Order No. 6
dated 19 April 2004.

On 20 April 2004, a pre-hearing telephone conference was held between the
Parties and the President of the Tribunal to discuss procedural matters relating to
the Hearing; those matters were recorded in Order No. 7 dated 22 April 2004
(which was further supplemented by Order No. 8 dated 25 June 2004).

On 26 through 29 April 2004, a hearing for oral argument and witness testimony
took place at the offices of ICSID, Washington D.C. (the “Hearing”). For
Thunderbird appeared: Mr. James D. Crosby, Professor Todd Weiler, and Mr.
Carlos Gomez. For Mexico appeared: Mr. Hugo Perezcano Diaz, Ms. Alejandra
Trevifio and Mr. Luis Marin of Secretaria de Economia; Mr. Stephan E. Becker,
Mr. Sanjay Mullik, Ms. Suzanne Wilkinson and Ms. Zuraya Tapia Alfaro of
Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw Pittman LLP; and Mr. Christopher J. Thomas and Mr.
J. Cameron Mowatt of Thomas & Partners.

At the Hearing, testimony was heard from Mr. Jorge Montafio; Mr. Albert
Atallah; Mr. Jack Mitchell; Mr. Peter Watson; Mr. Kevin McDonald; Mr. Luis
Ruiz de Velasco; Mr. Steven M. Rittvo; and Mr. Carlos Gomez for Thunderbird.
Testimony was heard from Professor I. Nelson Rose; Mr. Alberto Alcantara

Martinez; and Mr. Luis Martinez for Mexico.
The Government of Canada was represented at the Hearing by Mr. Roland

Legault. The Government of the United States of America was represented at the
Hearing by Mr. Mark S. McNeill.

Page 7 of 74

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

During the Hearing, the Tribunal circulated a draft tentative list of issues, which
was subsequently revised pursuant to the Parties’ comments on the draft. The
Parties addressed the list of issues in their Post-Hearing Memorials.

On 28 April 2004, the Parties filed a Dramatis Personae.

On 21 May 2004, the Governments of the United States of America and Canada
each filed a Submission pursuant to Article 1128 of the NAFTA.

On 2 August 2004, the Parties filed Post-Hearing Briefs.

On 3 August 2004, the Parties filed a jointly prepared chronology of events.

By letter of 3 August 2004, Thunderbird applied to the Tribunal to consider and
admit new evidence regarding a complaint filed on 30 November 2001 with the
Office of Internal Control of the Secretary of State of Mexico, and the latter’s
response thereto on 20 July 2004. By letter of 6 August 2004, Mexico objected
to Thunderbird’s request. By letter of 10 August 2004, Thunderbird applied to
the Tribunal to consider and admit new evidence regarding the Bella Vista
Entertainment Centre in Monterrey and the Reflejos facilities in Rio Bravo and
Reynosa. By letter of 13 August 2004, further to its letter of 3 August 2004,
Thunderbird requested the Tribunal to admit into evidence a copy of the Office
of Internal Control file pertaining to the complaint. By letter of 17 August 2004,
Mexico objected to the requests made by Thunderbird in its letters of 3, 10, and
13 August 2004.

Mexico filed a cost submission on 12 August 2004. Thunderbird filed a cost
submission on 26 August 2004.

Pursuant to Order No. 9 dated 13 September 2004, the evidence submitted by
Thunderbird in its letters of 3, 10, and 13 August 2004 was admitted into the
record, without prejudice to the relevance, materiality and weight of the
evidence in question.

Page 8 of 74

37.

38.

39.

40.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

On 22 October 2004, Mexico filed further observations regarding the new
evidence submitted by Thunderbird. On 5 November 2004, Thunderbird filed
reply observations.

On 19 November 2004, Mexico submitted a “Duplica al escrito de réplica de la
demandante”; On 22 November 2004, Thunderbird filed a Motion to strike
Mexico’s submission. Pursuant to Order No. 10 dated 30 November 2004,
Thunderbird’s motion to strike was denied and Thunderbird was afforded the
possibility to submit a response to the “Duplica”; said response was filed by
Thunderbird on 8 December 2004.

The Tribunal deliberated on various occasions before issuing the Award.

In this Award, the Tribunal shall use the following method of citation:

e “Notice of Intent” refers to Thunderbird’s 21 March 2002 Notice of Intent to
Submit a Claim to Arbitration;

e “Notice of Arbitration” refers to Thunderbird’s 1 August 2002 Notice of
Arbitration and Statement of Claim;

e “PSoC” refers to Thunderbird’s 15 August 2003 Particularized Statement of

Claim;

e¢ “SoD” refers to Mexico’s 18 December 2003 Statement of Defence;

e “SoR” refers to Thunderbird’s 9 February 2004 Statement of Reply;

e “SoRej” refers to Mexico’s 7 April 2004 Statement of Rejoinder;

e “Tr.” refers to the Transcript made of the 26-29 April 2004 Hearing;

Page 9 of 74

Il.

Al.

42.

43.

44.

4S.

46.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

e “C-PHB” and “R-PHB” refer to the Post-Hearing Briefs filed by
Thunderbird and Mexico on 2 August 2004.

SUMMARY OF FACTS

Thunderbird is engaged in the business of operating gaming facilities.

In the period late 1999 to early 2000, according to Thunderbird, Mr. Jack
Mitchell, president and CEO of Thunderbird, with the assistance of Mr. Peter
Watson, an American attorney, initiated investigations concerning potential
“skill machine” opportunities in Mexico. Meetings were held with Messrs. Doug
Oien and Ivy Ong (of A-1 Financial Ltd), both involved in gaming activities,
and with Messrs. Julio Aspe and Oscar Arroyo, two Mexican attorneys who had
allegedly represented a Mexican national, Mr. Jose Guardia, with respect to his

gaming operations in Mexico.

In the period April through June 2000, according to Thunderbird, Mr. Luis Ruiz
de Velasco of Baker & McKenzie, Mexican counsel of Thunderbird, met with
Messrs. Aspe and Arroyo to discuss procedures utilized by Mr. Guardia to
defend his gaming operations against actions by the Mexican government, such
as “amparo” proceedings (temporary injunctive relief), but concluded that such
procedures would not provide Thunderbird with the certainty necessary to
proceed with its proposed operations in Mexico.

On 5 April 2000, Entertainmens de México S.A. de C.V. (“EDM”) was formed
by Messrs. Juan Jose Menendez Tlacatelpa and Alejandro Rodriguez Velazquez.

On 1 May 2000, EDM entered into a lease for a location in Matamoros (which
was revised and extended for 5 years on 20 July 2000).

On 26 May 2000, Thunderbird and Messrs. Oien and Ong entered into a “Letter
of Intent” regarding the operation of gaming facilities in Mexico.

Page 10 of 74

47.

48.

49.

50.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

On 22 June 2000, Juegos de México Inc. (“JDMI’) and A-1 Financial Ltd.
entered into a “Revenue Share and Consulting Agreement” regarding the
operation of gaming facilities in Mexico.

In July 2000, according to Thunderbird, following contacts between Messrs.
Aspe and Arroyo and the Mexican government, Thunderbird decided to request
an official opinion concerning the legality of its proposed gaming operations and
if the response were favourable, Thunderbird would proceed with the opening
and operation of its “skill machine” facilities in Mexico.

On 31 July 2000, EDM imported 50 Bestco Model MTL19U-8L video gaming
machines.

On 3 August 2000, EDM presented a written request to the Director General de
Gobierno de la Secretaria de Gobernacion (“SEGOB”) concerning its proposed
gaming operations in Mexico (the “Solicitud”). The full text of the Solicitud
(English Translation submitted by Thunderbird) provides as follows (numbering
between square brackets added):

JUAN JOSE MENENDEZ TLACATELPA, legal representative
of ENTERTAINMENS DE MEXICO, S.A DE C.V. which
accredits his personality by a certified copy of a notarized
document attached hereby, and who has as conventional
address, for receiving and hearing any type of communication
and documents, Plaza Inverlat piso 12, Blvd. M. Avila Camacho
n/ 1, C.P. 1 1009, Mexico D-F., authorizes, for this purpose, Mr.
Luis Ruiz de Velasco y P. and with all respects I appear before
you to say:

By the means of these writings, I come to request from you that
this Direccién General give an opinion about the activities that
the party I represent is carrying out and which consist in the
commercial exploitation of video game machines for games of
skills and ability in accordance with the following:

Page 11 of 74

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

1. - Entertainmens de México, S.A. de C.V., is a legal entity
incorporated in accordance with the Laws of the Republic of
Mexico with the public deed 38,765, which was issued and
granted by the Public Notary Number 53, Mr. Rodrigo Orozco
Perez, in Mexico D.F. as in proven by the attached notarial
affidavit; and which is also registered in the Federal Registry of
Taxpayers under the symbol EME-000405 -LQ7.

2. - The entity which I represent opened a business, at Av. de las
Rosas N° 70-A, Colonia Jardin in the city of Matamoros,
Tamaulipas, under the commercial name “La Mina de Oro”,
which operates video game machines for games of skills and
ability, and complies with all Municipal requirements.

3. - The video game machines for games of skills and ability,
which the entity I represent commercially exploits, are devices
for recreation which have been designed for the enjoyment and
entertainment of its users. In these games, chance and wagering
or betting is not involved, but the skills and abilities of the user
who has to align different symbols on the machine screen by
touching the screen or pushing buttons in order to stop the
wanted symbol from several other symbols which spin in a
sequential manner in each of the lanes or squares of each video
game. The user has to align symbols in an optimum combination
to receive a ticket with points which can be traded for goods or
services; as this is already done at different locations in the
country.

4.- The video game machines for games of skills and ability
which we operate, at this present time at the place indicated
above on this writings, are trademark Bestco, model MTL19U-
8L and S.C.I. model 17”UR; and the entity I represent is trying
to place about 2,000 (two thousand) more machines at other
locations in the Republic of Mexico and these machines are of
the same identical mechanical nature and functioning as those
described in point 3, above.

[5] For all I have declared above, I come to this Direccién
General requesting your opinion about the commercial activities
which hereby I have detailed, and, therefore, you can express
your opinion about the video game machines for games of skills
and ability, which we have referred hereby, in order to

Page 12 of 74

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

determine if these games are regulated by the Ley Federal de
Juegos y Sorteos.

[6] We are requesting an opinion from this Direccion General
so the entity I represent has the certainty that the commercial
exploitation of video game machines for games of skills and
ability is legal; after an analysis of the nature of our machines,
and the legal dispositions, we have concluded that our machines
are not bound by Ley Federal de Juegos y Sorteos and,
therefore, are not regulated by Secretaria de Gobernacién or
any other federal authority since the activity which this company
is engaged in is not found within the faculties foreseen in Article
73, of Constitution General de la Reptiblica and which in its
Fraction X clearly indicates that the Congress of the Union has
exclusive authority to legislate, in the whole of the Republic,
about games with bets, wagers and drawings, and that the
Executive Federal has the authority to regulate these activities;
but in entertainment where skills and ability is involved, it is
logical that these are not under federal authority since La
Constitucién General de la Repiiblica doesn’t indicate that the
Congress of the Union can exclusively legislate in such matters.
Consequently, the authority to regulate this type of
entertainment is not granted exclusively to the Federation, and,
therefore, this is excluded from la Ley Federal de Juegos y
Sorteos.

[7] The nature of video game machines for games of skills and
ability is not games of chance or games with bets, wagers or
drawings, since, in the operation of these machines, the player
seeks entertainment and is playing with our machines assuming
an active position where his intelligence, his willpower, his
experience and his skills to optimally answer to specific
stimulus with the object of finding a combination, effect or boast
on the machine, intervene; which can only be possible with
ability, experience and control over the machine, and all of this
is for the purpose of entertainment and enjoyment, and at the
time, the player can receive points that he can trade for a prize
as a reward for the skills achieved and in no way as the result of
chance.

Page 13 of 74

51.

52.

53.

54.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

[8] For this, it is clear to us, that is the skills and ability of the
person who produces the effect over the videogame machine,
and it is not the chance, the possibility, the fortune, or bet since
the determinant to get results is the skills and ability of players;
something very different from games of bets and wagers where
there is a previous pact or covenant between the company and
the user and, therefore, there is an agreement to handle an
amount of money or any other thing, and all of this depends on a
chance, on the unforeseen, or is not subject to the willpower or
control of the user.

[9] For that declared above, we have concluded that our
operation is not of the type prohibited by la Ley Federal de
Juegos y Sorteos since our video game machines do not use
chance, bets or wagers, and these video games are only for the
purpose of entertainment in which the users can obtain prizes for
their skills and abilities, and I’m requesting from this Direccién
General your opinion about this.

On 4 August 2000, EDM bought 30 SCI model 17" U R “mdquinas de video
para juegos de habilidad y destreza,” which were imported on 14 August 2000.

On 10/11 August 2000, JDMI acquired all EDM shares from Messrs. Tlacaltelpa
and Velasquez. Mr. Mitchell was designated president of EDM’s board of
directors.

On 10 August 2000, EDM filed an “Aviso de Apertura,” whereby it gave notice
to local authorities of its intended operations in its Matamoros facility, called
“La Mina de Oro.”

According to a draft letter dated 10 August 2000, Mr. Watson wrote to Messrs.
Aspe and Arroyo to confirm payment of a “success fee” of US$300,000 upon
delivery of a letter from SEGOB “which indicates that, according to the
applicable laws of Mexico, there is no opposition or limitation to operate our
skill machine venture in the Republic of Mexico.” Thunderbird confirmed
payment of US$300,000 in a signed letter dated 15 August 2000 to Messrs. Aspe
and Arroyo.

Page 14 of 74

55.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

By letter dated 15 August 2000, SEGOB issued a formal response to
Thunderbird’s Solicitud (the “Oficio”). The Oficio was signed by Rafael de
Antufiano Sandoval, Director de Juegos y Sorteos, in the name and on behalf of,
Mr. Sergio Orozco Aceves, Director General of Government of SEGOB. The
Oficio was copied to Messrs. Roberto Pedro Martinez Ortiz, Director General of
Legal Affairs of SEGOB, and Sergio Orozco Aceves, Director General of
Government of SEGOB. The full text of the Oficio (English translation provided
by Thunderbird) provides as follows (numbering between square brackets
added):

[1] Regarding your letter dated August 3, 2000, received on
August 8, 2000 by the Directorate of Games and Sweepstakes,
entity that depends from this Directorate, whereby you request
this entity to issue a response regarding your representative’s
exploitation of machines that operate under the concept of
ability and skilfulness of its users, please be advised as follows:

[2] As you may be aware, the Federal Law of Games and
Sweepstakes, establishes with precision diverse dispositions that
prohibit gambling and luck related games within the Mexican
territory. Article I of such law establishes that “... - All gambling
and luck related games are prohibited within the Mexican
territory, under the disposition of this law.”

[3] Likewise, Article 3 of such law establishes that, “The federal
executive branch, by means of the Ministry of State, shall
supervise the regulation, authorization, control and vigilance of
all games when such games contact gambling of any kind; as
well as the sweepstakes, with the exception of the National
Lottery, which shall be governed by its own law.”

[4] In the same light, Article 4 of such law establishes that “in
order to establish or operate any open or closed place, in which
gambling games or sweepstakes take place, the Ministry of State
shall authorize such establishments or operations, specifying the
corresponding requirements and conditions to be fulfilled in
every case.”

Page 15 of 74

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

[5] According to the above mentioned, the provisions
established under the Federal Law of Games and Sweepstakes
are enforceable legal dispositions that specifically prohibit
gambling and luck related games within the Mexican territory;
notwithstanding the above mentioned, according to your
statement, the machines that your representative operates are
recreational video game devices for purposes of enjoyment and
entertainment of its users, with the possibility of obtaining a
prize, without the intervention of luck or gambling, but rather
the user’s ability and skilfulness.

[6] In this light, it is important to clarify that, if the machines
that your representative exploits operate in the form and
conditions stated by you, this governmental entity is not able to
prohibit its use, in the understanding that the use of machines
known as “coins-swallowers”, “token-swallowers” or “slot
machines”, in which the principal factor of the operation is luck
or gambling and not the user’s ability of skilfulness as you
stated, could constitute any of the hypothesis described under
the Federal Law of Games and Sweepstakes, with the
corresponding legal consequences that may be derived
therefrom, under article 8 of such law.

[7] In that view, and based on articles 27, section XXI of the
Organic Law of the Federal Government; 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8 and
other articles related and applicable to the Federal Law of
Games and Sweepstakes; as well as articles 8 and 14, Section
XVII of the Interior Regulations of the Ministry of State, thus
Directorate, in accordance with the faculties previously
conferred for such effect; warns you that in the machines that
your representative operates there shall be no intervention of
luck or gambling; warning that will not be in effect if the
machines to be operated are video game devices that operate
under the concept of ability and skilfulness.

[8] Please be advised that, even though the machines of your
representative operate under the concept of the user’s ability and
skilfulness, it is necessary that the obligations and requirements
set by the laws and regulations of each state and/or municipality
be met.

Page 16 of 74

56.

57.

58.

59.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

On 16 August 2000, Thunderbird Greely, Inc., wired US$300,000 to an entity
called “Consultoria Internacional Casa de Cambio, S.A. de C.V.,” a Mexican
Currency Exchange entity, for further credit to Rafael Ramos Velasco.

On 17 August 2000, Thunderbird announced that it had entered into an
agreement with JDMI to operate a business of “mdquinas de destreza’” of games
and video in Matamoros.

On 18 August 2000, according to Thunderbird, EDM-Matamoros opened “La
Mina de Oro.”

On 25 August 2000, Mr. Ruiz de Velasco of Baker & McKenzie addressed a
legal opinion to Mr. Mitchell of Thunderbird with respect to the 15 August 2000
Oficio, which provides as follows:

As requested, we hereby give you our opinion with respect to
the official letter dated August 15, 2000, (the “Official Letter’)
issued by the Mexican Ministry of Interior (“Secretaria de
Gobernacion’’) in favour of Entertainmens de México, S.A. de
C.V. (“EDM”), and which refers to the operation in Mexico of
video game skill machines. Copy if the Official Letter and the
English translation thereof is attached hereto.

Based on the principal terms of the Official Letter, the Ministry
of Interior states that it does not have any jurisdiction over the
operation of said machines, since in accordance with the
representations made by EDM in its application, the video
games skill machines to be operated by EDM do not fall into the
classification of “slot machines”, which are forbidden in Mexico
pursuant to the applicable laws, in view of the fact that they are
considered to be gaming and/or betting machines.

Furthermore, under the Official Letter the Ministry of Interior
emphasizes that EDM can operate the video games skill
machines as long as they do not become, in any manner
whatsoever, as gaming or betting machines; provided; however,

Page 17 of 74

60.

61.

62.

63.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

that EDM complies with the states and/or municipal laws or
regulations in Mexico.

Based upon the foregoing, we are of the opinion that EDM is
allowed to operate in Mexico the video game skill machines as
long as EDM complies with the administrative requirements set
forth by the state or municipal laws and regulations in Mexico.

Evenmore, in the event the Ministry of Interior intends to close
down EDM’s operations, EDM will be able to appeal; in the
understanding, that EDM must comply at all times with each
and everyone of the requirements set forth by the competent
authorities where the machines are operating.

Should you have any questions, please do not hesitate to contact
us.

In October 2000, Thunderbird formed Entertainmens de Mexico-Monterrey S.
De R.L. de C.V. (“EDM-Monterrey”). Thunderbird’s intended Monterrey
gaming facility never opened.

In November 2000, JDMI and Thunderbird Brazil formed Entertainmens de
Mexico Laredo S. de R. L. de C.V. (“EDM-Laredo”).

In December 2000, Mr. Vicente Fox’s administration came into office in
Mexico. Mr. Jose Guadalupe Vargas Barrera was appointed the new “Director
de Juegos y Sorteos.”

On 21 December 2000, Mr. Albert Atallah wrote to Messrs. Oien and Ong “to
confirm that A-1 Financial and its principals are no longer authorized to
represent International Thunderbird Gaming Corporation, its affiliates and
subsidiaries (including Entertainmens de Mexico) with respect to the Mexico
Skill Game Operation” and stating, “Thunderbird does not believe that A-1
Financial met its obligations contemplated by the original agreement.”

Page 18 of 74

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

On 21 January 2001, EDM-Laredo opened a gaming facility in Nuevo Laredo.

On 25 February 2001, SEGOB proceeded to an official closure of the Nuevo
Laredo facility.

On 16 March 2001, because of administrative irregularities affecting SEGOB’s
order for official closure of Nuevo Laredo, SEGOB lifted the seals of the Nuevo
Laredo facility. Thunderbird reopened the facility on 20 March 2001.

On 12 April 2001, Thunderbird, Messrs. Oien, Ong and A-1 Financial entered
into a Termination Settlement and Release Agreement.

On 5 June 2001, JOMI & Thunderbird Brazil formed Entertainmens de Mexico-
Reynosa S. de R. L. de C.V. (“EDM-Reynosa”).

On 20 June 2001, Thunderbird formed Entertainmens de Mexico-Puebla S. de
R.L. de C.V. (“EDM-Puebla’”’). Thunderbird’s intended Puebla gaming facility
never opened.

On 10 July 2001, an administrative hearing was held at the offices of the
Director de Juegos y Sorteos in Mexico City (the “Administrative Hearing”).
Thunderbird was represented at the Administrative Hearing by Messrs. Watson,
Jorge Montafio, Mauricio Girault, Carlos Gomez and Mr. Ruiz de Velasco.
Thunderbird submitted documentary evidence and witness testimony, and Mr.
Kevin McDonald of SCI appeared and provided a briefcase-sized machine for
demonstration. On SEGOB’s side, Mr. Guadalupe Vargas and Mr. Alcantara
were present.

On 13 July 2001, Thunderbird formed Entertainmens de Mexico-Juarez S. de
R.L. de C.V. (“EDM-Juarez”). Thunderbird’s intended Juarez gaming facility

never opened.

In August 2001, EDM-Reynosa opened a gaming facility in Nuevo Laredo.

Page 19 of 74

723.

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

On 10 October 2001, SEGOB issued a “Resolucién Administrativa,” declaring
that the EDM machines were prohibited gambling equipment under the Ley
Federal de Juegos y Sorteos and ordering the official closure of the EDM-
Matamoros and EDM-Laredo facilities (the “Administrative Order’). The
Administrative Order was signed by Mr. Humberto Aguilar Coronado, Director
General of Government of SEGOB.

On 11 October 2001, SEGOB proceeded to an official closure of the EDM-
Matamoros and EDM-Laredo facilities.

On 15 October 2001, EDM filed a “juicio de amparo” before the “Juez de
Distrito en Turno” seeking injunctive relief with respect to the official closure of
the EDM-Laredo facility, which was denied by the court on 18 October 2001.

On 23 October 2001, EDM filed a “juicio de amparo” before the Mexican
District Court seeking injunctive relief with respect to the official closure of the
EDM-Matamoros facility, which was denied on 21 January 2002.

On 5 December 2001, EDM filed a ‘‘juicio de nulidad” for the annulment of the
Administrative Order before the “Tribunal Federal de Justicia Fiscal y
Administrativa.”

On 21 January 2002, SEGOB proceeded to the official closure of the Reynosa
facility. EDM-Reynosa filed a “juicio de amparo” for temporary injunctive
relief.

On 21 March 2002, Thunderbird initiated the present arbitration proceedings.

On 10 May 2002, EDM’s ‘“juicio de nulidad”’ was denied by the Tribunal
Federal de Justicia Fiscal y Administrativa.

Page 20 of 74

81.

82.

83.

84.

IV.

85.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

On 30 May 2002, a “Tribunal Colegiado” denied EDM’s “amparo” with respect
to the official closure of the EDM-Laredo facility. EDM-Laredo was
subsequently closed down.

On 10 June 2002, the judge ratified the decision denying EDM’s “amparo” for
Matamoros.

On 17 July 2002, EDM discontinued the “juicio de amparo” with respect to the
official closure of the EDM-Reynosa facility.

On 21 August 2002, EDM discontinued the “juicio de amparo” with respect to
the official closure of the EDM-Matamoros facility.

ISSUES TO BE DETERMINED BY THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

In resolving this dispute, the Tribunal shall determine the main issues by
reference to the draft Tentative List of Issues referred to in { 29 above:

A. General

1. What is the applicable law for resolving each of the Issues
mentioned below?

2. Which of the Parties has the burden of proof for each of the
Issues mentioned below?

B. Jurisdiction and/or admissibility

3. Does Thunderbird “own or control directly or indirectly” at
the relevant times any of the companies listed below (the “EDM
Companies”) that would entitle it to submit to arbitration a claim
on behalf of them under Article 1117 NAFTA? If not, what are
the consequences thereof?

Page 21 of 74

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

(a) Entertainmens de Mexico S. de R. L. de C.V.
(“EDM-Matamoros”’)

(b) Entertainmens de Mexico Laredo S. de R. L. de
C.V. (“EDM-Laredo”)

(c) Entertainmens de Mexico Reynosa S. de R. L. de
C.V. (“EDM-Reynosa’’)

(d) Entertainmens de Mexico Puebla S. de R. L. de
C.V. (“EDM-Puebla”)

(e) Entertainmens de Mexico Monterrey S. de R. L. de
C.V. (“EDM-Monterrey”)

(f) Entertainmens de Mexico Juarez S. de R. L. de C.V.
(“EDM-Juarez”).

4. Does the filing by Thunderbird of waivers on behalf of
EDM-Puebla, EDM-Monterrey and EDM-Juarez on 15 August
2003 comply with the requirements of Article 1121 NAFTA? If
not, what are the consequences thereof?

Subject to the answers to Issues 3 and 4, the Issues regarding the
merits are:

C. Merits - General

5. What is the role, if any, of Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA in
the present case? Specifically:

5.1 Does Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA recognize and protect
the right of a Contracting Party to regulate a certain conduct that
it considers illegal?

5.2 If so, does the Ley Federal de Juegos y Sorteos of 31
December 1947 form part of Mexico’s law to regulate a certain

Page 22 of 74

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

conduct that it considers illegal, and what are the consequences
thereof?

5.3. What is the role and jurisdiction of the Tribunal in relation
to the Mexican judicial system regarding the subject matter of
Thunderbird’s claims in the present case?

5.4 If and to what extent do administrative proceedings of
SEGOB form part of Issue 5.3?

6. Is the functionality of the machines, technically or
otherwise, operated by the EDM Companies relevant in the
present case?

6.1 If so, is that question to be determined under the Ley
Federal de Juegos y Sorteos of 31 December 1947 and/or on
some other basis?

6.2 If so, by whom should that question be determined? In
particular, is the Tribunal to defer to the determination by
SEGOB? And if so, was that opinion relevant for the dispute?

(a) before 15 August 2000;

(b) between 15 August 2000 and 10 October 2001;
and/or

(c) after 10 October 2001?

6.3 Assuming that the question is to be determined by the
Tribunal, what are the relevant criteria for such a determination?
Specifically:

(a) Were the machines in question skill machines or
slot machines?

Page 23 of 74

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

(b) Is there a “uniqueness for Mexico,” as is contended
by Thunderbird, and if so, is it relevant for such
determination?

6.4 Assuming that the question is to be determined by the
Tribunal and in light of the answer to Issue 6.3, did the
machines in question meet the applicable criteria?

7. Was a legitimate expectation created by SEGOB’s letter of
15 August 2000 to the effect that it brings Thunderbird’s claims
in the present case under Article 1102, 1105 and/or 1110
NAFTA? Specifically:

7.1 If and to what extent is a legitimate expectation legally
relevant under Article 1102, 1105 and/or 1110 NAFTA?

7.2. What are the standards for a legitimate expectation in that
respect?

7.3 What is the meaning and legal status of the SEGOB letter
of 15 August 2000, and what is the relevance thereof?

74 Did EDM fail to disclose relevant facts, in particular in its
solicitud of 3 August 2000, as it is alleged by Respondent, and if
so, what is the relevance thereof?

7.5 What are the consequences of the answers to the foregoing
Issues 7.1 -7.4?

D. Merits — Articles 1102, 1105 and 1110 NAFTA

8. Did Respondent breach the “National Treatment” standard
under Article 1102 NAFTA?

8.1 Which of the following tests as postulated by the disputing
parties is the test to be applied under Article 1102 NAFTA?
Specifically:

Page 24 of 74

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

(a) As it is contended by Thunderbird, is the Tribunal to
apply a three-part test, being:

(i) identification of the relevant subjects of the
national treatment comparison (the basis being the
likeliness of comparators);

(ii) consideration of the relative treatment
received by each comparator (the basis being the
best level of treatment available to any other
domestic investor operating in like circumstances);
and

(iii) | consideration whether factors exist which
could justify any difference in treatment so found
(to be construed narrowly and the burden of proof
shifting to Respondent)?

(b) Or, as it is contended by Respondent, is the Tribunal
to apply Article 1102 in the sense that it is directed only to
nationality-based discrimination and proscribes only
demonstrable and significant indications of bias and
prejudice on the basis on nationality, which are to be
proven by Thunderbird, “the like circumstances” of Article
1102 requiring an adequate comparison on the basis of the
facts, thereby taking into account, in particular, compliance
with local law relating to illegal conduct?

8.2 On the basis of the test to be applied, did Respondent
actually breach Article 1102? Specifically, and to the extent
relevant under the test to be applied:

(a) Does the fact that Guardia and de la Torre are
allegedly operating machines essentially identical to the
machines operated by the closed EDM Companies mean
that Respondent has not accorded to the EDM Companies
treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in the like
circumstances, to its own investors under Article 1102?

Page 25 of 74

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

(b) Are other “skill game” operators that have resorted
to local remedies and that have obtained injunctive relief
pending a final disposition of the legality of Gobernacion’s
closure order against them ‘in like circumstances’ to the
EDM companies, as contended by Thunderbird?

(c) Did SEGOB take action against facilities of the kind
of the EDM Companies, including those owned by Guardia
and de la Torre, as it is alleged by Respondent, and if so,
what is the relevance thereof?

(d) What is the relevance, if any, of the fact that EDM
abandoned judicial redress in Mexico against the closure of
its facilities?

9. Did Respondent breach the “Minimum Standard of
Treatment” under Article 1105 NAFTA?

9.1 What does the “Minimum Standard of Treatment” under
Article 1105 NAFTA mean and how is it to be applied by a
Nafta arbitral tribunal?

9.2 Subject to the answer to Issue 7 and 9.1 above, was there a
detrimental reliance by Thunderbird on SEGOB’s letter of 15
August 2000, also in light of Thunderbird’s solicitud of 3
August 2000, and if so, did it constitute a breach of Article 1105
NAFTA?

9.3 Subject to the answer to Issue 9.1 above, was there a failure
to provide due process, constituting an administrative denial of
justice, in the proceedings relating to the ruling of 10 October
2001, and if so, did it constitute a breach of Article 1105
NAFTA?

9.4 Subject to the answer to Issue 9.1 above, was there manifest
arbitrariness in administration, constituting proof of an abuse of
right, in the proceedings before SEGOB, and if so, did it
constitute a breach of Article 1105 NAFTA?

Page 26 of 74

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

10. Did Respondent engage in an expropriation in violation of
Article 1110 NAFTA?

10.1 Does the fact that Thunderbird did not submit to arbitration
a claim on its own behalf under Article 1116 NAFTA, but rather
on behalf of the EDM Companies under Article 1117 NAFTA,
preclude it from obtaining compensation under Article 1110?

(a) In this connection, should, as it is requested by
Thunderbird at pages 69-70 of its SoR, leave be granted to
Thunderbird to amend its PSoC to include, in the further
alternative, a claim for 100% of the damages caused to the
businesses of each EDM Company as a result of
Respondent’s alleged breach of Article 1110, using Article
1116 NAFTA?

(b) Does a breach of Article 1110 NAFTA also
constitute a breach of Article 1105 NAFTA, as it is
contended by Thunderbird?

(i) In this connection, what is the relevance, if
any, of Section B.3 of the Notes of Interpretation of
Certain Chapter 11 Provisions by the NAFTA Free
Trade Commission of 31 July 2001 (“A
determination that there has been a breach of
another provision of the NAFTA, or of a separate
international agreement, does not establish that
there has been a breach of Article 1105(1)”)?

(c) Does Article 1110 NAFTA impose an obligation of
Respondent vis-a-vis the EDM Companies?

10.2 Subject to the answer to Issue 10.1 above, and having also
regard to Issue 10.3 below, is it relevant to determine which is
or are the expropriation standard or standards to be applied
under Article 1110 NAFTA? If so, which is that standard or are
those standards?

Page 27 of 74

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

10.3 Subject to the answers to Issues 7, 10.1 and 10.2 above, did
any rights legitimately acquired by the EDM Companies exist in
the businesses conducted by them? Specifically:

(a) Did the EDM Companies operate on the basis of a
business undertaking that is unlawful under Mexican law?

(b) Did the EDM Companies operate on the basis of a
legitimate expectation, being similar to the detrimental
reliance as alleged by Thunderbird under Article 1105?

(c) Assuming that the answers to Issues (a) and (b) of
the present Issue 10 are in the affirmative, do the actions of
SEGOB amount to expropriation within the meaning of
Article 1110 NAFTA?

E. Merits - Damage

11. If the answer to Issues 8 and/or 9 and/or 10 above is in the
affirmative, is Thunderbird entitled to damages, and if so for
what amount?

11.1 What are the compensation principles to be applied to
damages in the present case?

(a) Are these principles different with respect to
breaches of Articles 1102, 1105 and 1110 NAFTA, and if so,
what are the differences?

(b) Does a distinction arise from whether the act
complained of is lawful or unlawful?

(c) At which date are the damages to be determined?

11.2 Is there a sufficient causal link between the breach and the
damages claimed by Thunderbird?

Page 28 of 74

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

11.3 Are the damages claimed by Thunderbird a reasonably
foreseeable consequence of the act that constituted the breach by
Respondent?

11.4 Subject to the answers to Issues 11.1 — 11.3 above, should
the damages be valued on the basis of a fair market value of the
EDM Companies calculated for anticipated future profits by a
discounted cash flow (“DCF”) method, as contended by
Thunderbird?

11.5 To the extent that it is not addressed under Issues 11.1 -
11.4 above, has Thunderbird proven the damages as claimed by
it?

11.6 Subject to the answers to the foregoing Issues 11.1-11.5,
what is the amount of damages?

11.7 As regards interest with respect to the damages:

(a) What is the rate of interest to be applied, and which
is the currency to be taken into account in that respect?

(b) Is interest to be compounded?
(c) For which period of time is interest to be applied?
F. Costs

12. What are the costs of the arbitration and which party shall
bear those costs or in which proportion shall those costs be
allocated between the parties?

Page 29 of 74

86.

87.

88.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

ANALYSIS OF ISSUES FOR DECISION

The Tribunal shall now proceed to evaluate the issues seriatim. In this regard,
the Tribunal has considered all arguments, documents, and testimony that form
part of the record in this case, and shall address the contentions made by the
Parties to the extent relevant to the Tribunal’s decisions. The Tribunal’s
decisions are based on the entire record in this case.

A. General

Issue 1. What is the applicable law for resolving each of the
Issues mentioned below?

(i) Thunderbird’s position

Thunderbird contends that the applicable law for resolving all issues presented
in this arbitration consists of the claimed provisions of Section A of Chapter
Eleven of the NAFTA and the applicable rules of international law. Further,
according to Thunderbird, the Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA provisions should
be interpreted in accordance with the customary international law rules of treaty
interpretation and in light of the objectives of the NAFTA and its governing
principles specified in Article 102.

(ii) Mexico’s position

Mexico refers to Article 1131(1) of the NAFTA and contends that the Tribunal
must decide the issues in dispute by reference to the relevant provisions of
Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA and the applicable rules of international law.
MEXICO adds that the jurisdiction of a NAFTA Tribunal is more limited in
contrast with other tribunals such as those constituted under ICSID rules since
NAFTA tribunals may not decide a dispute by reference to the internal law of a
Narva Party.

Page 30 of 74

89.

90.

91.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

(iii)The Tribunal’s findings

Pursuant to Article 1131(1) of the NAFTA (captioned “Governing Law’), the
Tribunal shall decide the issues in this arbitration “in accordance with this
Agreement and applicable rules of international law.”

In particular, the Tribunal has regard to the sources of law listed in Article 38(1)
of the Statute of the International Court of Justice, which provides as follows:

The Court, whose function is to decide in accordance with
international law such disputes as are submitted to it, shall
apply:

(a) international conventions, whether general or particular,
establishing rules expressly recognized by the contesting states;

(b) international custom, as evidence of a general practice
accepted as law;

(c) the general principles of law recognized by civilized nations;

(d) subject to the provisions of Article 59, judicial decisions and
the teachings of the most highly qualified publicists of the
various nations, as subsidiary means for the determination of
tules of law.

The Tribunal shall construe the terms of Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA “in
accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in
their context and in the light of its object and purpose” (see Article 31 of the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties; see also J 125-126 below).

Page 31 of 74

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

Issue 2. Which of the Parties has the burden of proof for
each of the Issues mentioned below?

(i) Thunderbird’s position

92. Thunderbird contends that it has the legal “burden of proof” upon its claims
under the applicable rules of international law and that, conversely, Mexico has
the legal burden of proof upon any affirmative defences raised. According to
Thunderbird, the “burden of producing evidence” shifts upon a sufficient
evidentiary showing. Thunderbird alleges further that it has made its prima facie
showing of the NAFTA violations and that Mexico has failed to meet its burden
of producing evidence to rebut such showing.

(ii) Mexico’s position
93. Mexico refers to Article 24 of the UNCITRAL Rules and international case law,
arguing that a party asserting a fact or a claim is responsible for providing proof

of all the elements thereof, and that the burden of proof may shift to the other
Party on the basis of prima facie evidence.

(iii)The Tribunal’s findings

94. The present arbitration is governed by the UNCITRAL Rules. Article 24(1) of the
UNCITRAL Rules provides:

Each party shall have the burden of proving the facts relied on to
support his claim or defence.

95. The Tribunal notes that the Parties do not seem to diverge on the principles

governing the burden of proof. The Tribunal shall apply the well-established
principle that the party alleging a violation of international law giving rise to

Page 32 of 74

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

international responsibility has the burden of proving its assertion’. If said Party
adduces evidence that prima facie supports its allegation, the burden of proof
may be shifted to the other Party, if the circumstances so justify.”

B. Jurisdiction and/or Admissibility

Issue 3. Does Thunderbird “own or control directly or
indirectly” at the relevant times the EDM Companies that
would entitle it to submit to arbitration a claim on behalf of
them under Article 1117 of the NAFTA? If not, what are the
consequences thereof?

96. Article 1117 of the NAFTA provides:

1. An investor of a Party, on behalf of an enterprise of another
Party that is a juridical person that the investor owns or controls
directly or indirectly, may submit to arbitration under this
Section a claim that the other Party has breached an obligation
under:

See Bin Cheng, GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LAW APPLIED BY INTERNATIONAL COURTS AND
TRIBUNALS, at p. 302 et seg. (1987)

2 See in this regard Feldman y. Mexico, Interim Decision on Preliminary Jurisdictional Issues, 6
December 2000, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/1,
http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/feldman_mexico_interim-en.PDF, which quotes United
States — Measures Affecting Imports of Woven Wool Shirts and Blouses from India, 23 May
1997, WT/DS33/ABIR p. 14, in which the Appellate Body of the WTO stated:

[...] various international tribunals, including the International Court of
Justice, have generally and consistently accepted and applied the rule that the
party who a fact, whether the claimant or respondent, is responsible
for providing proof thereof. Also, it is a generally accepted canon of evidence
in civil law, common law and, in fact, most jurisdictions, that the burden of
proof rests upon the party, whether complaining or defending, who
the affirmative of a claim or defence. If that party adduces evidence sufficient
to raise a presumption that what is claimed is true, the burden then shifts to
the other party, who will fail unless it adduces sufficient evidence to rebut the
presumption.

     

 

 

 

Page 33 of 74

97.

98.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

(a) Section A or Article 1503(2) (State Enterprises), or

(b) Article 1502(3)(a) (Monopolies and State Enterprises) where
the monopoly has acted in a manner inconsistent with the Party's
obligations under Section A, and that the enterprise has incurred
loss or damage by reason of, or arising out of, that breach.

2. An investor may not make a claim on behalf of an enterprise
described in paragraph 1 if more than three years have elapsed
from the date on which the enterprise first acquired, or should
have first acquired, knowledge of the alleged breach and
knowledge that the enterprise has incurred loss or damage.

3. Where an investor makes a claim under this Article and the
investor or a non-controlling investor in the enterprise makes a
claim under Article 1116 arising out of the same events that
gave rise to the claim under this Article, and two or more of the
claims are submitted to arbitration under Article 1120, the
claims should be heard together by a Tribunal established under
Article 1126, unless the Tribunal finds that the interests of a
disputing party would be prejudiced thereby.

4. An investment may not make a claim under this Section.

(i) Mexico’s position

Mexico objects to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to hear Thunderbird’s claim
under Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA. According to Mexico, Thunderbird did not
own or control any of the EDM companies that would entitle it to present a
claim on behalf of them under Article 1117 of the NAFTA, namely, Thunderbird
did not demonstrate that it owned Juegos de Mexico and Thunderbird Brazil;
that these companies acquired the EDM companies; or that Juegos de Mexico
and Thunderbird Brazil were the owners of the EDM companies.

As to control, Mexico maintains that the NAFTA requires that legal control be
demonstrated, and that Thunderbird did not have legal control of EDM-

Page 34 of 74

99.

100.

101.

102.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

Matamoros, EDM-Laredo or EDM-Reynosa. Mexico argues further that
Thunderbird has also not demonstrated that it had factual control of the
companies in question.

(ii) Thunderbird’s position

Thunderbird contends that it may properly proceed under Article 1117 of the
NAFTA because it “owns or controls” the EDM entities. According to
Thunderbird, it directly owned, and still owns, at all relevant times all
outstanding shares of EDM-Puebla, EDM-Monterrey, and EDM-Juarez.

As to EDM-Matamoros, EDM-Laredo, and EDM-Reynosa, Thunderbird argues
that, while it at all relevant times owned, and still owns, significant interests in
those EDMs, it has never claimed full ownership thereof. Rather, Thunderbird
maintains that it has at all times possessed, and still possesses, control of EDM-
Matamoros, EDM-Laredo and EDM-Reynosa, directly or indirectly, at all
relevant times, thus enabling Thunderbird to proceed under Article 1117 of the
NartA. Thunderbird refers to case law of the Iran-US Claims Tribunal and to
NAFTA case law (such as S.D. Myers Inc.) in support of its proposition that
factual control may suffice to bring a NAFTA claim, and argues that it has
brought a claim supported by substantial evidence that Thunderbird, as a matter
of fact, controlled all of the EDM investments involved in its claim.

(iii)The Tribunal’s findings

Mexico has objected to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to hear Thunderbird’s
claim under Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA, because of an alleged lack of
ownership or control by Thunderbird over the EDM Entities for the purposes of
Article 1117.

Article 1117 of the NAFTA requires that the investor bringing a claim on behalf

of an enterprise “own or control” the enterprise. Thunderbird must therefore
establish that it owned or controlled the EDM entities. The Tribunal is satisfied

Page 35 of 74

103.

104.

105.

106.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

that Thunderbird has met the requirements of Article 1117 of the NAFTA, for the
following reasons.

It is not disputed that Thunderbird owned the majority of the shares of EDM-
Puebla, EDM-Monterrey, and EDM-Juarez. None of these entities effectively
engaged in operations or business activities in Mexico.

On the other hand, Thunderbird had acknowledged that it had only a partial
ownership of EDM-Matamoros (36.67%), EDM-Laredo (33.3%), and EDM-
Reynosa (40.1%) (jointly the “Minority EDM Entities”).

Therefore, the present discussion turns on whether Thunderbird exercised
control over the Minority EDM Entities. The question arises whether “control”
must be established in the legal sense, or whether de facto control can suffice for
the purposes of Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA. According to Mexico, to
determine what constitutes “control” of a corporation, the Tribunal must turn to
the corporate law of the Party under whose laws the enterprise was incorporated,
and Article 1117 of the NAFTA therefore requires that legal control be
demonstrated under Mexican corporate law.

The Tribunal does not follow Mexico’s proposition that Article 1117 of the
NAFTA requires a showing of legal control. The term “control” is not defined in
the NAFTA. Interpreted in accordance with its ordinary meaning, control can be
exercised in various manners. Therefore, a showing of effective or “de facto”
control is, in the Tribunal’s view, sufficient for the purposes of Article 1117 of
the NAFTA?. In the absence of legal control however, the Tribunal is of the
opinion that de facto control must be established beyond any reasonable doubt.

See in this regard the definition of control provided in an “Understanding” with respect to Article
1(6) of the Energy Charter Treaty (which is virtually identical in language to Article 1117 NAFTA):
“For greater clarity as to whether an Investment made in the Area of one Contracting Party is
controlled, directly or indirectly, by an Investor of any other Contracting Party, control of an

Page 36 of 74

107.

108.

109.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

Despite Thunderbird having less than 50% ownership of the Minority EDM
Entities, the Tribunal has found sufficient evidence on the record establishing an
unquestionable pattern of de facto control exercised by Thunderbird over the
EDM entities. Thunderbird had the ability to exercise a significant influence on
the decision-making of EDM and was, through its actions, officers, resources,
and expertise, the consistent driving force behind EDM’s business endeavour in
Mexico.

It is quite common in the international corporate world to control a business
activity without owning the majority voting rights in shareholders meetings.
Control can also be achieved by the power to effectively decide and implement
the key decisions of the business activity of an enterprise and, under certain
circumstances, control can be achieved by the existence of one or more factors
such as technology, access to supplies, access to markets, access to capital, know
how, and authoritative reputation. Ownership and legal control may assure that
the owner or legally controlling party has the ultimate right to determine key
decisions. However, if in practice a person exercises that position with an
expectation to receive an economic return for its efforts and eventually be held
responsible for improper decisions, one can conceive the existence of a genuine
link yielding the control of the enterprise to that person.

In the present case, having regard to the record as a whole, the Tribunal finds
that without Thunderbird’s key involvement and decision-making during the
relevant time frame, i.e., during the planning of the business activities in
Mexico, the initial expenditures and capital, the hiring of the machine suppliers,
the consultations with SEGOB, and the official closure of the EDM facilities,

 

Investment means control in fact, determined after such an examination of the actual
circumstances in each situation. In any such examination, all relevant factors should be
considered, including the Investor’s (a) financial interest, including equity interest, in the
Investment; (b) ability to exercise substantial influence over the management and operation of the
Investment; and (c) ability to exerci
board of directors or any other managing body. [...]”

 

  

Page 37 of 74

110.

111.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

EDM’s business affairs in Mexico could not have been pursued. Namely, the
key officers of Thunderbird and the Minority EDM Entities were one and the
same (see Dramatis Personae of 26 April 2004: Mr. Jack Mitchell was President
and CEO of Thunderbird and the EDM entities; Mr. Peter Watson, counsel to
Thunderbird, was shareholder in Thunderbird and the EDM entities). The initial
expenditures, the know-how of the machines, the selection of the suppliers, and
the expected return on the investment were provided or determined by
Thunderbird. Likewise, legal advice regarding the operation of the EDM
machines in Mexico was addressed to Thunderbird (see Mr. de Ruiz de
Velasco’s legal opinion of 25 August 2000 at Exh. R-112).

In the Tribunal’s view, it is clear from the record that without the consistent and
significant initiative, driving force and decision-making of Thunderbird, the
investment in Mexico could not have materialized. Accordingly, the Tribunal
finds that Thunderbird exercised control over the Minority EDM Entities for the
purpose of Article 1117 of the NAFTA, in a manner sufficient to entitle it to bring
a claim on behalf of those entities under said provision.

Issue 4. Does the filing by Thunderbird of waivers on behalf
of EDM-Puebla, EDM-Monterrey and EDM-Juarez on 15
August 2003 comply with the requirements of Article 1121
of the NAFTA? If not, what are the consequences thereof?

Article 1121 of the NAFTA, captioned “Conditions Precedent to Submission of a
Claim to Arbitration”, provides:

2. A disputing investor may submit a claim under Article 1117
to arbitration only if both the investor and the enterprise:

(a) consent to arbitration in accordance with the procedures set
out in this Agreement; and

Page 38 of 74

112.

113.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

(b) waive their right to initiate or continue before any
administrative tribunal or court under the law of any Party, or
other dispute settlement procedures, any proceedings with
respect to the measure of the disputing Party that is alleged to be
a breach referred to in Article 1117, except for proceedings for
injunctive, declaratory or other extraordinary relief, not
involving the payment of damages, before an administrative
tribunal or court under the law of the disputing Party.

3. A consent and waiver required by this Article shall be in
writing, shall be delivered to the disputing Party and shall be
included in the submission of a claim to arbitration.

(i) Mexico’s position

Mexico submits that Thunderbird did not file waivers on behalf of EDM-Puebla,
EDM-Monterrey, and EDM-Juarez in accordance with the requirements under
the NAFTA. Specifically, Mexico contends that, pursuant to Article 1121 of the
NarFtA, Thunderbird should have presented written waivers of the right to
initiate or continue any actions in local courts or other fora at the time of
submitting the claim to arbitration, i.e., at the time of presenting the Notice of
Arbitration. As a result, Mexico argues, the claims of those three EDM entities
are not admissible under the NAFTA.

(ii) Thunderbird’s position

Thunderbird alleges that it satisfied all the requirements of Articles 1121(2) and
(3) of the NAFTA with its delivery on 15 August 2003 (concurrent with the
PSoC) of waivers for EDM-Puebla, EDM-Monterrey and EDM-Juarez, which
had been inadvertently missing from earlier filings. Thunderbird argues in any
event that even if it were assumed that the waiver letters were submitted after
delivery of the “claim to arbitration,” previous NAFTA tribunals have found that
such minor procedural defects cannot be used to defeat an otherwise meritorious

Page 39 of 74

114.

115.

116.

117.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

claim. Thunderbird adds that none of the EDM entities have commenced actions
in breach of the Article 1121 waiver.

(iii)The Tribunal’s findings

Mexico has argued that with respect to EDM-Puebla, EDM-Monterrey, and
EDM-Juarez, Thunderbird failed to submit a claim to arbitration in compliance
with the requirements of Article 1121 of the NAFTA.

Article 1121 of the NAFTA is concerned with conditions precedent to the
submission of a claim to arbitration. One cannot therefore treat lightly the failure
by a party to comply with those conditions. The Tribunal finds however that the
waivers filed for EDM-Puebla, EDM-Monterrey, and EDM-Juarez were valid
within the meaning of Article 1121 of the NAFTA, for the following reasons.

Thunderbird submitted a claim to arbitration by means of a Notice of Arbitration
dated 1 August 2002 (and received by Mexico on 22 August 2002). Pursuant to
Article 1121 of the NAFTA, Thunderbird would have been required to file the
appropriate waivers under Article 1121 of the NAFTA at the time of the
submission of its claim to arbitration, which was, pursuant to Article 1137(1) of
the NAFTA, at the time of receipt by Mexico of the Notice of Arbitration under
the UNCITRAL Rules. However, Thunderbird only filed written waivers for
EDM-Puebla, EDM-Monterrey, and EDM-Juarez with its Particularised
Statement of Claim of 15 August 2003. The issue at hand is therefore not an
actual failure to file waivers for EDM-Puebla, EDM-Monterrey, and EDM-
Juarez, but rather the (un-)timeliness of the filings in question.

Although Thunderbird failed to submit the relevant waivers with the Notice of
Arbitration, Thunderbird did proceed to remedy that failure by filing those
waivers with the PSoC. The Tribunal does not wish to disregard the subsequent
filing of those waivers, as to reason otherwise would amount, in the Tribunal’s
view, to an over-formalistic reading of Article 1121 of the NAFTA. The Tribunal
considers indeed that the requirement to include the waivers in the submission of

Page 40 of 74

118.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

the claim is purely formal,* and that a failure to meet such requirement cannot
suffice to invalidate the submission of a claim if the so-called failure is remedied
at a later stage of the proceedings. The Tribunal joins the view of other NAFTA
Tribunals that have found that Chapter Eleven provisions should not be
construed in an excessively technical manner®.

In construing Article 1121 of the NAFTA, one must also take into account the
rationale and purpose of that article. The consent and waiver requirements set
forth in Article 1121 serve a specific purpose, namely to prevent a party from
pursuing concurrent domestic and international remedies, which could either
give rise to conflicting outcomes (and thus legal uncertainty) or lead to double
redress for the same conduct or measure. In the present proceedings, the
Tribunal notes that the EDM entities did not initiate or continue any remedies in
Mexico while taking part in the present arbitral proceedings. Therefore, the
Tribunal considers that Thunderbird has effectively complied with the
requirements of Article 1121 of the NAFTA.

C. Merits - General

Issue 5. What is the role, if any, of Chapter Eleven of the
NAFTA in the present case?

(i) Thunderbird’s position

See in this regard the distinction made by the majority of the tribunal in Waste Management, Inc.
v. Mexico, Arbitral Award, 2 June 2000, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)98/2,
http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/waste_award.pdf, between “formal” and “material”
requirements under 1121 of the NAFTA.

See Mondev International Ltd. v. USA, Award, 11 October 2002, ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/99/2,_ http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/14442.pdf. “Chapter 11 should
not be construed in an excessively technical way, so as to require the commencement of multiple
proceedings in order to reach a dispute which is in substance within its scope.” (44)

 

Page 41 of 74

119.

120.

121.

122.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

Thunderbird accepts that Article 1114 NAFTA allows governments to label and
regulate conduct they choose as being “illegal” for domestic purposes. A NAFTA
tribunal may determine, Thunderbird contends, whether the NAFTA party has
carried out its regulatory activities in a manner that does not violate its Chapter
Eleven obligations. Thunderbird considers that the Ley Federal de Juegos y
Sorteos of 31 December 1947 constitutes a “measure” under Chapter Eleven of
the NAFTA, as do the various forms of enforcement activity arising from it.

Thunderbird accepts further that the Tribunal has no role in relation to the
Mexican judicial system regarding the subject matter of this case — it does not
stand as a domestic court of appeal or review — the Tribunal must simply
determine whether Mexico has developed and executed the measures in question
in a manner consistent with Mexico’s obligations under Chapter Eleven of the
Narva. In this regard, Thunderbird characterises the SEGOB administrative
proceedings as administrative fact-finding or quasi-judicial proceedings, to be
adjudged against the standards of due process and procedural fairness applicable
to administrative officials, rather than judicial officials.

(ii) Mexico’s position

Mexico contends that Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA recognises and protects the
right of a Contracting Party to regulate certain conduct that it considers illegal,
and that the Ley Federal de Juegos y Sorteos forms part of Mexico’s law to
regulate such conduct that it considers illegal.

With respect to the role and jurisdiction of the Tribunal in relation to the
Mexican judicial system regarding the subject matter of Thunderbird’s claims,
Mexico argues that the Tribunal may not act as a court of appeal with authority
to review the decisions of the domestic Mexican courts. According to Mexico,
the Tribunal may only assess whether the conduct of the Mexican administration
in enforcing domestic law was compatible with the three NAFTA provisions
relied upon by Thunderbird. As to the administrative proceedings of SEGOB,
Mexico points out that they were subject, at all stages, to Mexican judicial

Page 42 of 74

123.

124.

125.

126.

127.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

review, and that the Tribunal may not review those proceedings in the manner of
an appellate court.

(iii)The Tribunal’s findings

The Parties do not dispute that Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA recognizes in
principle the right of a Contracting Party to regulate conduct that it considers
illegal.

The Tribunal notes that under Mexican law, specifically the Ley Federal de
Juegos y Sorteos of 31 December 1947, gambling is an illegal activity.

The Tribunal’s role in this arbitration is not to determine whether the EDM
machines were prohibited gambling equipment under the Ley Federal de Juegos
y Sorteos, as acknowledged by both Parties. It is not the Tribunal’s function to
act as a court of appeal or review in relation to the Mexican judicial system
regarding the subject matter of the present claims, or in relation to the SEGOB
administrative proceedings for that matter.

Rather, the Tribunal shall examine whether the conduct of Mexico and the
measures employed by SEGOB in relation to the EDM entities were consistent
with Mexico’s obligations under Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA.

The role of Chapter Eleven in this case is therefore to measure the conduct of
Mexico towards Thunderbird against the international law standards set up by
Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA. Mexico has in this context a wide regulatory
“space” for regulation; in the regulation of the gambling industry, governments
have a particularly wide scope of regulation reflecting national views on public
morals. Mexico can permit or prohibit any forms of gambling as far as the
NAFTA is concerned. It can change its regulatory policy and it has a wide
discretion with respect to how it carries out such policies by regulation and
administrative conduct. The international law disciplines of Articles 1102, 1105
and 1110 in particular only assess whether Mexican regulatory and

Page 43 of 74

128.

129.

130.

131.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

administrative conduct breach these specific disciplines. The perspective is of an
international law obligation examining national conduct as a “fact.”

Issue 6. Is the functionality of the machines, technically or
otherwise, operated by the EDM Companies relevant in the
present case?

(i) Thunderbird’s position

Thunderbird contends that the functionality of the machines is relevant in
assessing Mexico’s justification (or lack thereof) for seizing Thunderbird’s
investment enterprises; to the issue of detrimental reliance under Article 1105 in
that use of similar equipment was already familiar to Mexican officials — prior to 15
August 2000 — due to their use in facilities already being regulated by Mexico (e.g.
the Guardia facilities); and for Article 1102 to the extent that similar equipment
has been, and remains, in use in other facilities while the EDMs remain closed.

Thunderbird contends further that the manner in which the functionality of the
machines is relevant in the present case does not involve a determination by the
Tribunal as to the legality of the EDM machines under Mexican law.

Thunderbird also argues that the determination of SEGOB concerning the
functionality of the machines, at any given time, is only relevant to the issue of
whether any actions taken on the basis of these determinations violates the relevant
NAFTA provisions.

According to Thunderbird, the only criteria relevant for the Tribunal to determine
the functionality of the machines is the standard set forth in the Oficio i.e., whether
“the principal factor of the operation is luck or gambling and not the user’s ability of
skilfulness.” Thunderbird contends that the machines in question met the
applicable criteria and were as a matter fact established by the evidence before the
Tribunal, to be “skill machines” operated in accordance with the Oficio. Thunderbird

Page 44 of 74

132.

133.

134.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

refers in this regard to the briefcase version demonstration carried out by Mr.
McDonald at the Hearing.

(ii) Mexico’s position

According to Mexico, the functionality of the machines is relevant to the issues
of whether SEGOB could be deemed to have acted arbitrarily at international
law in finding that such machines were prohibited equipment under Mexican
law; and whether Thunderbird could have had a reasonable expectation that
SEGOB would agree that the machines operated by EDM were not illegal
gaming machines.

Mexico recalls that the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to determine whether
the gaming operations of EDM were legal, or whether the machines in question
were prohibited under Mexican law. Mexico disputes however Thunderbird’s
characterisation of the machines as “skill” machines, arguing instead that the
evidence produced by Mexico establishes that the EDM machines are no more
than “video poker” or “slot” machines, similar or identical to machines that were
held to be gambling equipment in U.S. legal proceedings, and previously
described as gambling equipment by Thunderbird itself. Mexico refers in this
regard to the expert testimony of Prof. Rose and Mr. McDonald’s demonstration
at the Hearing.

(iii)The Tribunal’s findings

Both Parties have argued that the functionality of the EDM machines is relevant
to certain issues pending before the Tribunal. Thus, Thunderbird has submitted
evidence in support of its contention that the EDM machines are “skill”
machines, whereas Mexico has provided evidence establishing, according to
Mexico, that the machines in question are “tragamonedas” [slot machines]
prohibited under Mexican law.

Page 45 of 74

135.

136.

137.

138.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

The Tribunal agrees that the nature and functionality of the machines may be
relevant in considering certain issues in this arbitration. However, the Tribunal
does not need to enter into a detailed technical discussion as to the precise nature
and functionality of the machines, since both Parties acknowledge that it is not
up to the Tribunal to determine the legality of the machines under the Ley
Federal de Juegos y Sorteos.

The Tribunal notes that the machines operated by EDM are equipped with
computerised random number generators and that it is possible to set the level of
payouts, and thus the odds for winning. For example, the Bestco “Fantasy 5
Game Manual” that was found at the EDM-Laredo Facility provides that the
default base pay rate “is set to 75%. This can be changed to a value within the
range of 50%-95%.” (Ex. R-15, p. 13) The Tribunal notes further that the
machine’s percentage of payout is not visible or otherwise known to the player
(see McDonald at Tr. 498-502). The Tribunal infers that the operation of these
video game machines with a built-in and modifiable random number generator
involves a considerable degree of chance, and that by adjusting the payout rate,
the machine operator can manipulate the odds for winning regardless of the skill
of the player.

Issue 7. Was a legitimate expectation created by SEGOB’s
letter of 15 August 2000 to the effect that it brings
Thunderbird’s claims in the present case under Article 1102,
1105 and/or 1110 of the NAFTA?

(i) Thunderbird’s position

Thunderbird contends that this issue is relevant to the application of Articles
1105, 1110, and 1102 of the NAFTA.

As to the standard of protection for legitimate expectations, Thunderbird argues
that if an investor or investment reasonably relies on the representations of
government officials and suffers damages because of such reliance, the
responsibility of the State is engaged under international law. Thunderbird cites

Page 46 of 74

139.

140.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

a number of cases in this regard®, arguing that detrimental reliance arises from
the general international law principle of good faith and the customary
international standard of fair and equitable treatment. Through its ratification of
the NAFTA, Thunderbird contends, Mexico authored a set of legitimate
expectations upon which an investor or investment could reasonably rely.

Thunderbird contends that, seeking certainty as to the legality and propriety of
its intended operations in Mexico, Thunderbird and EDM solicited the Mexican
government for an official opinion. According to Thunderbird, SEGOB’s
response to the Solicitud provided the EDMs with written assurance or “negative
clearance” to operate the specific machines identified in the Solicitud; and
defined a standard in accordance with which Thunderbird could operate skill
machines without regulation by SEGOB, the standard being that the machines
had to be ones in which the “principal factor” of operation was the user’s skill
and ability. Thunderbird does not assert that it had thus obtained a government
permit or licence to operate. Rather, SEGOB generated, according to
Thunderbird, a legitimate expectation upon which the EDMs should have been
able to rely reasonably.

Thunderbird denies having failed to disclose relevant facts in the Solicitud.
According to Thunderbird, the SEGOB off
been familiar with the skill machines whose operation was proposed by the

  

ials who issued the letter must have

 

EDMs, since, amongst others, Mexico had been involved in litigation with
Guardia over similar machines and SEGOB did not request any additional
information in relation to the EDM machines.

In particular, Metalclad Corp. v. Mexico, Award, 30 August 2000, ICSID Case ARB(AF)/97/1,
http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/mm-award-e.pdf; ADF Group Inc. v. USA, Award, 9
January 2003, ICSID Case ARB(AF)/00/I, _http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/ADF-
award.pdf; Occidental Exploration and Production Company y. Ecuador, Final Award, 1 July
2004, = LCIA = Case No. ~——-UN3467, —_hittp://ita.Jaw.uvic.ca/documents/Oxy-
EcuadorFinalAward_001_pdf.

Page 47 of 74

141.

142.

143.

144.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

(ii) Mexico’s position

Mexico denies that the Oficio created a legitimate expectation for Thunderbird
with respect to its investments in Mexico. According to Mexico, the Oficio was
an advisory opinion, not an approval or permit, based on the information
provided by EDM in the Solicitud, stating that if the machines operated by EDM
were as described in the Solicitud, then they fell outside SEGOB’s jurisdiction.
Mexico asserts that it clearly and expressly made known to EDM the nature of
the machines that were prohibited by law and that the Oficio was a clear warning
that the operations EDM was conducting could be illegal.

However, Mexico argues, EDM did not operate the machines in the form or
manner described in the Solicitud, neither with respect to the element of “ability
and skill” nor with respect to “betting,” and EDM did not present any evidence
on the operation of the machines. Mexico adds that the Solicitud did not allude
to the fact that the EDM machines were similar or identical to those operated by
Guardia.

Further, Mexico contends, EDM did not treat the Oficio as a permit or
authorisation at the time it was issued by SEGOB, as evidenced by Mr. Ruiz de
Velasco’s legal opinion, which concurred with the Oficio (quoted at 59 above).

Mexico denies in any event that Thunderbird relied on the Oficio as the basis for
its investments in Mexico, arguing that Thunderbird undertook actions before
the Oficio’s issuance; that Thunderbird expressly advised investors in EDM that
the Oficio was no specific entitlement for EDM’s operations; that Thunderbird
reported to its shareholders that it relied on private sector advisors in making the
investment; and that it asserted in U.S. court proceedings that it was fraudulently
induced to enter this business by Messrs. Oien en Ong.

Page 48 of 74

145.

146.

147.

148.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

(iii)The Tribunal’s findings

EDM’s Solicitud dated 3 August 2000 is quoted at {50 above. SEGOB’s Oficio
dated 15 August 2000 is quoted at [55 above.

Thunderbird has argued that it reasonably relied, to its detriment, upon the
assurances provided by SEGOB in the Oficio. Mexico, on the other hand, denies
that the Oficio gave rise to any legitimate expectations for Thunderbird to
operate the EDM machines in Mexico.

Having considered recent investment case law and the good faith principle of
international customary law’, the concept of “legitimate expectations” relates,
within the context of the NAFTA framework, to a situation where a Contracting
Party’s conduct creates reasonable and justifiable expectations on the part of an
investor (or investment) to act in reliance on said conduct, such that a failure by
the NAFTA Party to honour those expectations could cause the investor (or
investment) to suffer damages.

The threshold for legitimate expectations may vary depending on the nature of
the violation alleged under the NAFTA and the circumstances of the case.
Whatever standard is applied in the present case however — be it the broadest or
the narrowest — the Tribunal does not find that the Oficio generated a legitimate
expectation upon which EDM could reasonably rely in operating its machines in
Mexico.

Bin Cheng, General Principles of Law applied by International Courts and Tribunals, at p. 123 et
seq. (1987); Joerg Mueller, Vertrauenssschutz im Voelkerrrecht (1971); E. Zoller, La bonne foi
en droit international public (1977); F. Orrego Vicuiia, Regulatory Authority and Legitimate
Expectations, 5 Intl Law Forum, 188m 193 (2003); Nuclear Test Case, ICJ Reports 1974, 253 at
p. 268.

Page 49 of 74

149.

150.

151.

152.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

The Tribunal considers that the point of departure in assessing whether
Thunderbird could reasonably rely to its detriment on SEGOB’s response to the
Solicitud is to ascertain what was requested by Thunderbird in the Solicitud.

Given the lack of contemporaneous evidence on the record regarding the
background of the Solicitud (such as witness evidence from Messrs. Aspe and
Arroyo or from SEGOB officials in office when the Solicitud was submitted),
the Tribunal cannot rely on presumptions or inferences, let alone speculation
concerning that background. For instance, the Tribunal has noted the existence
of a “success fee” arrangement between Thunderbird and Messrs. Aspe and
Arroyo (who, according to Thunderbird, had numerous contacts with SEGOB
officials in relation to Thunderbird’s proposed operations). Thunderbird offered
the two Mexican lawyers US$ 300,000 to secure a letter from SEGOB
authorising Thunderbird’s gaming operations in Mexico (see correspondence at
Exs. R-106, R-107, and R-121). According to Mr. Watson’s draft letter of 10
August 2000, Thunderbird was prepared to pay Messrs. Aspe and Arroyo an
additional US$ 700,000 if the letter was “granted exclusively for Thunderbird
[...] and that no other such permission would be granted to other potential
competing parties; otherwise, no additional fees would be owed.” (Ex. R-121) In
the absence of any evidence on the record in relation to the “success fee”
arrangement and the nature of the dealings between Messrs. Aspe and Arroyo
and SEGOB, these facts do not have a bearing on the Tribunal’s analysis below.
Under those circumstances, the Tribunal can only interpret the 3 August 2000
Solicitud on its face value.

In the Tribunal’s view, the information presented by EDM in the Solicitud is
incomplete and, in particular, inaccurate in two regards.

First, it is asserted in the Solicitud that the machines operated by EDM do not
involve luck or betting (see 3: “In these games, chance and wagering or betting
is not involved [...]”). The Tribunal notes in {7 the use of the explicit terms “in
no way”: “The nature of video game machines for games of skills and ability is
not games of chance or games with bets, wagers or drawings [...] the player can

Page 50 of 74

153.

154.

155.

156.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

receive points that he can trade for a prize as a reward for the skills achieved
and in no way as the result of chance” (“de ninguna manera” in the original
Spanish version). To represent that luck does not affect the outcome of the game
in any manner whatsoever contradicts the evidence on the record (see the
Tribunal’s findings at {136 above).

Second, it is asserted in the Solicitud that the machines in question are “devices
for recreation which have been designed for the enjoyment and entertainment of
its users” (J3), “only for the purpose of entertainment in which the users can
obtain prizes for their skills and abilities” (Solicitud at 9; see also {8 “[...] the
determinant to get results is the skills and ability of players; something very
different from games of bets and wagers where there is a previous pact or
covenant between the company and the user and, therefore, there is an
agreement to handle an amount of money or any other thing.”). It is thus
suggested that the machines operated by EDM do not involve any “agreement to
handle an amount of money,” attributing instead prizes to the players. Such a
representation is not accurate since the player must insert dollar bills to begin the
game and any winning ticket is redeemable for cash.

In this regard, Mr. Ruiz de Velasco testified that had he known when he
rendered his legal opinion on 20 August 2000 that the winning tickets were
redeemable for cash, he would have most likely revised his opinion “because it
probably could have bid in /sic] as gambling or betting.” (Ruiz de Velasco at Tr.
649-650)

The Tribunal is therefore of the opinion that the Solicitud is not a proper
disclosure and that it puts the reader on the wrong track. The Solicitud creates
the appearance that the machines described are video arcade games, designed
solely for entertainment purposes.

Thunderbird has argued that SEGOB was well aware of the nature of the EDM

machines since it had attempted to proceed with the closure of similar gaming
facilities of Mr. Guardia. The Tribunal notes, however, that there is no

Page 51 of 74

157.

158.

159.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

disclosure in the Solicitud that the machines operated by EDM were similar or
identical to those of Mr. Guardia.

Likewise, Thunderbird’s identification in the Solicitud of the trademark and
model number of the machines (“Bestco, model MTL19U-8L and S.C.I. model
17"UR”) cannot be deemed sufficient to establish the functionality of the
machines. According to the evidence, the model references used in the Solicitud
were not proper model numbers but rather a description of the size of the
computer monitor used to display the video game (see Tr. 125-126 and Exs. C-
36 and C-87; see also Tr. 1163-1165). The model numbers did not therefore
elucidate the nature of the machines and furthermore appeared to be inaccurate
or incomplete. For instance, in the Bestco invoice, the machines sold were
identified under the model reference “7100 Fantasy 5” (Ex. C-87; see also
operating manual captioned “Fantasy 5 Game Manual” at Ex. R-15), whereas in
the Solicitud a random combination of abbreviations and numbers was used to
identify the same machines (“MTL19U-8L”), without any reference to the name
“Fantasy 5.” In this respect, Mr. McDonald testified that he was not familiar
with the Bestco model numbers (Tr. 445-446). Mr. Ruiz de Velasco also
testified that he was not familiar with the meaning of the Bestco and SCI model
numbers (Tr. 583-585). No operating manuals, catalogues, or photos of the
machines were presented with the Solicitud.

The Tribunal finds no evidence on the record establishing that SEGOB was
indeed familiar with the nature and operation of the EDM machines.

Thunderbird has also argued that in the event of doubt, SEGOB should have
made a request for additional information regarding the operation of the
machines, or for an inspection of the machines. Yet Thunderbird was the moving
party presenting a “Solicitud” to the Mexican administration; one would
therefore expect that the moving party supply adequate information and make a
proper disclosure. In the Tribunal’s view, the Solicitud did not give the full
picture, even for an informed reader.

Page 52 of 74

160.

161.

162.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

The Tribunal turns to the contents of the Oficio. Again, in the absence of any
contemporaneous evidence surrounding the issuance of the Oficio (namely, the
lack of witness testimony from SEGOB officials involved in the issuance of the
Oficio, as well as that of Messrs Aspe and Arroyo; see also {150 above), the
Tribunal cannot rely on presumptions or inferences, let alone speculation,
regarding its issuance and can only analyse the letter on its face value. In
addition, it is not up to the Tribunal to determine how SEGOB should have
interpreted or responded to the Solicitud, as by doing so, the Tribunal would
interfere with issues of purely domestic law and the manner in which
governments should resolve administrative matters (which may vary from
country to country). Rather, the Tribunal can only assess whether the contents of
the Solicitud gave rise to legitimate expectations for Thunderbird within the
context of Mexico’s obligations under Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA.

SEGOB, in {| 2-4 of the Oficio, recalls the legal provisions applicable in
relation to “gambling and luck related games.” In 75, SEGOB states: “[...]
notwithstanding the above mentioned, according to your statement, the
machines that your representative operates are recreational video game devices
for purposes of enjoyment and entertainment of its users, with the possibility of
obtaining a prize, without the intervention of luck or gambling, but rather the
user’s ability and skilfulness”. In 6, SEGOB adds: “if the machines that your
representative exploits operate in the form and conditions stated by you, this
governmental entity is not able to prohibit its use, in the understanding that the
use of machines known as “coins-swallowers”, “token-swallowers” or “slot

machines,” in which the principal factor of the operation is luck or gambling
and not the user’s ability of skilfulness as you stated, could constitute any of the
hypothesis described under the Federal Law of Games and Sweepstake [...].”
The Tribunal understands the message conveyed by SEGOB in the Oficio to be
that if the machines operate in accordance with EDM’s representations in the

Solicitud, SEGOB does not have jurisdiction over said machines.

Thunderbird has argued that the Oficio defined a standard according to which
machines that involved as “principal factor” the user’s skill and ability do not

Page 53 of 74

163.

164.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

fall within SEGOB’s jurisdiction. The Tribunal does not follow Thunderbird’s
interpretation. In { 6, SEGOB refers to slot machines (or “coin-swallowers” or
“token-swallowers”). According to SEGOB, such machines are devices in which
the “principal factor” (“factor preponderante” in the original Spanish text) of the
operation is luck or gambling. SEGOB’s description of slot machines cannot be
interpreted a contrario as describing a standard for skill machines, according to
which machines in which skill is the “factor preponderante” cannot be treated as
gambling equipment. SEGOB’s use of the term “preponderante” in reference to
luck or gambling is not unusual. Prof. Rose testified, “gambling means that it is
predominantly chance. Probably the easiest way to understand that is that if
chance determines the outcome at any point, then it’s gambling. So skill has to
determine the outcome at every point in the game.” (Tr. 729) Furthermore,
Thunderbird was clearly cautioned in { 7 of the Oficio, “in the machines that
your representative operates there shall be no intervention of luck or gambling.”

As to Mr. Ruiz de Velasco’s legal opinion of 20 August 2004 (quoted at {| 59
above), the contents thereof reinforce the Tribunal’s view that Thunderbird
could not have reasonably relied to its detriment upon the Oficio to operate its
gaming facilities in Mexico. In his letter to Thunderbird, Mr. Ruiz de Velasco
made clear that (i) the Oficio was based upon the EDM’s representations in the
Solicitud (“[...] the Ministry of Interior states that it does not have any
jurisdiction over the operation of said machines, since in accordance with the
representations made by EDM in its application, the video games skill machines
to be operated by EDM do not fall into the classification of ‘slot machines’ [...]”
at R-112); and (ii) that EDM was prohibited from operating gaming or betting
machines (“[...] EDM can operate the video games skill machines as long as
they do not become, in any manner whatsoever, as gaming or betting machines”
at R-112 (emphasis added)).

It cannot be disputed that Thunderbird knew when it chose to invest in gaming
activities in Mexico that gambling was an illegal activity under Mexican law. By
Thunderbird’s own admission, it also knew that operators of similar machines
(Guardia) had encountered legal resistance from SEGOB. Hence, Thunderbird

Page 54 of 74

165.

166.

167.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

must be deemed to have been aware of the potential risk of closure of its own
gaming facilities and it should have exercised particular caution in pursuing its
business venture in Mexico. At the time EDM requested an official opinion from
SEGOB on the legality of its machines, EDM must also be deemed to have been
aware that its machines involved some degree of luck, and that dollar bill
acceptors coupled with winning tickets redeemable for cash could be reasonably
viewed as elements of betting. Yet EDM chose not to disclose those critical

aspects in the Solicitud.

Further, the fact that SEGOB took action against Thunderbird’s gaming facilities
in February 2001, i.e., approximately six months after the issuance of the Oficio,
is insufficient to establish that prior to that date, SEGOB had authorised (or was
intentionally tolerating) Thunderbird’s operations. Six months under the
circumstances is by any standard a reasonable period for a government to seek

enforcement of local gambling legislation.

Considering the foregoing, the Tribunal finds that there was no legitimate
expectation created by the Oficio to the effect of bringing Thunderbird’s claims
in the present case under Article 1102, 1105 and/or 1110 of the NAFTA.

Finally, the Tribunal questions to what extent Thunderbird invested in Mexico in
reliance on the Oficio, considering the non-negligible steps that Thunderbird had
completed for the operation of its gaming machines prior to the issuance of the
Oficio on 15 August 2000. The record shows that before 15 August 2000: EDM
had been incorporated; JDMI had entered into a detailed Revenue Sharing
Agreement with Messrs. Ong and Oien regarding the operation of the gaming
facilities in Mexico (Exh. R-98); EDM had opened bank accounts (C-6); EDM
had obtained land use permits (Ex. C-7); EDM had entered into a lease for a
gaming facility location in Matamoros (Exs. C-3 to C-5); EDM had imported 50
Bestco machines and 30 SCI machines (Exs. C-9, C-87 and C-15); EDM had
filed an “Aviso de Apertura” for the establishment of “La Mina de Oro” (Ex. C-
10); and by Thunderbird’s own admission in {2 of the Solicitud, EDM had
already “opened a business [...] in the city of Matamoros, Tamaulipas, under the

Page 55 of 74

168.

169.

170.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

commercial name ‘La Mina de Oro’, which operates video game machines for
games of skills and ability, and complies with all Municipal requirements.” (see
also the Solicitud at J4)

D. Merits - Articles 1102, 1105 and 1110 of the NAFTA

Issue 8. Did Respondent breach the “National Treatment”
standard under Article 1102 of the NAFTA?

Articles 1102 (1) and (2) of the NAFTA provide as follows:

1. Each Party shall accord to investors of another Party
treatment no less favorable than that it accords, in like
circumstances, to its own investors with respect to the
establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct,
operation, and sale or other disposition of investments.

2. Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of another
Party treatment no less favorable than that it accords, in like
circumstances, to investments of its own investors with respect
to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management,
conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of investments.

(i) Thunderbird’s position

Thunderbird contends that Mexico has breached Article 1102 of the NAFTA by
according different treatment to EDM and its investments than that what has
been provided to domestic investors and investments operating in like
circumstances.

According to Thunderbird, the Tribunal is to apply a three-part test under Article
1102 of the NAFTA, being identification of the relevant subjects of the national
treatment comparison (the basis being the likeliness of comparators);
consideration of the relative treatment received by each comparator (the basis
being the best level of treatment available to any other domestic investor

Page 56 of 74

171.

172.

173.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

operating in like circumstances); and consideration whether factors exist which
could justify any difference in treatment so found (to be construed narrowly and
the burden of proof shifting to Mexico). Thunderbird cites NAFTA and BIT case
law in support of this three-part test®,

Thunderbird’s EDM enterprises were seized and closed by Mexico because the
skill machines operated at those facilities were deemed illegal, Thunderbird
argues, whereas domestic investors, operating skill machines under essentially
identical circumstances, remain open and operating. Thunderbird cites Guardia’s
“Club 21,” de la Torres’s Reflejos facility, and the Bella Vista Entertainment
centre in Monterrey as appropriate comparators. Thunderbird disputes Mexico’s
argument that the EDM entities were not in “like circumstances,” arguing
instead that Mexico has not provided a sufficient evidentiary basis upon which
to make the argument.

Finally, Thunderbird maintains that its decision to abandon recourse to judicial
proceedings for relief in Mexico is irrelevant to the issue of whether Mexico
breached its NAFTA obligations under Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA.

(ii) Mexico’s position

Mexico denies having accorded less favourable treatment to EDM than that
accorded to Mexican companies in like circumstances. SEGOB has acted
consistently, Mexico argues, in enforcing the law against all operators (including

Pope & Talbot Inc. v. Canada, Award on the Merits of Phase 2, 10 April 2001, UNCITRAL
(NaFTA), http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/PopeandTalbot-Merit.pdf; S.D. Myers Inc. v. Canada,
First Partial Award, 13 November 2000, UNCITRAL (NAFTA),
http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/SDMeyers-1stPartialAward.pdf; ADF Group Inc. v. USA, Award,
9 January 2003, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/1, http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/ADF-
award.pdf; Feldman v. Mexico, Award, 16 December 2002, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/I,
http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/feldman_mexico-award-en.PDF; Occidental Exploration
and Production Company v. Ecuador, Final Award, 1 July 2004, LCIA Case No. UN3467,
http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Oxy-EcuadorFinalAward_001.pdf.

Page 57 of 74

174.

175.

176.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

Mexican nationals) who have attempted to operate facilities with so-called
“skill” machines, and it has proceeded with the closure of every similar facility
of which it became aware of and defended its actions in every court of appeal
initiated by the operators of machines similar or identical to those of EDM.

Mexico contends that Thunderbird has not succeeded in proving any
discrimination against EDM, whether based on nationality or otherwise. In this
regard, Mexico disputes Thunderbird’s three-part test Article 1102. According to
Mexico, Article 1102 is directed only to nationality-based discrimination and
proscribes only demonstrable and significant indications of bias and prejudice on
the basis on nationality, which are to be proven by Thunderbird, “the like
circumstances” of Article 1102 requiring an adequate comparison on the basis of
the facts, thereby taking into account, in particular, compliance with local law
relating to illegal conduct. Mexico adds that EDM is not “in like circumstances”
with the operators of facilities that have been able to continue operating under
temporary injunctive relief while their legal challenges were pending, as even if
EDM filed “juicio de amparo” proceedings, it was not granted injunctive relief
and moreover withdrew its appeals.

(iii)The Tribunal’s findings

In construing Article 1102 of the NAFTA, the Tribunal gives effect to the plain
wording of the text. The obligation of the host NAFTA Party under Article 1102
of the NAFTA is to accord non-discriminatory treatment towards the investment
or investor of other NAFTA Parties. It must therefore be established that
discriminatory treatment was accorded to the foreign investment or investor.

The burden of proof lies with Thunderbird, pursuant to Article 24(1) of the
UNCITRAL Rules. In this respect, Thunderbird must show that its investment
received treatment less favourable than Mexico has accorded, in like
circumstances, to investments of Mexican nationals.

Page 58 of 74

177.

178.

179.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

It is not expected from Thunderbird that it show separately that the less
favourable treatment was motivated because of nationality. The text of Article
1102 of the NAFTA does not require such showing. Rather, the text contemplates
the case where a foreign investor is treated less favourably than a national
investor. That case is to be proven by a foreign investor, and, additionally, the
reason why there was a less favourable treatment.’

In the Tribunal’s view, Thunderbird has not sufficiently established — not even
on a prima facie basis — that the EDM investments were treated, in like
circumstances, worse than those of Mexican nationals (or any other nationals for
that matter).

The record shows that SEGOB has sought to enforce Mexican legislation on
gambling by pursuing the closure of numerous gambling facilities (most of
which have been closed definitely), and that the official closure of Mexican
gambling facilities was in fact pursued at the very same time SEGOB proceeded
to the official closure of the EDM facilities in Nuevo Laredo and Matamoros
(see Exh. R-9). The Tribunal notes that SEGOB met resistance from the gaming
facilities in question, including those of EDM, before the Mexican courts. As a
result, it appears that some of the facilities closed by SEGOB were able to
continue to operate under temporary injunctive relief, but the record also shows
that SEGOB legally challenged the court decisions granting injunctive relief in
connection with SEGOB’s official closure orders and that appeals are pending.

See S.D. Myers Inc. v. Canada, First Partial Award, 13 November 2000, UNCITRAL (NAFTA),
http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/SDMeyers-|stPartialAward.pdf; Pope & Talbot Inc. v. Canada,
Award on the Merits of Phase 2, 10 April 2001, UNCITRAL (NAFTA), http://ita.law.uvic.ca/
documents/PopeandTalbot-Merit.pdf; Feldman v. Mexico, Award, 16 December 2002, ICSID
Case No. ARB(AF)/99/1, _ http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/feldman_mexico-award-
en.PDF, Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. Ecuador, Final Award, 1 July
2004, LCIA Case No. UN3467, http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Oxy-
EcuadorFinalAward_001.pdf.

Page 59 of 74

180.

181.

182.

183.

184.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

As to the gambling facilities that apparently continue to operate without having
obtained temporary injunctive relief, the Tribunal finds insufficient evidence on
the record establishing that Mexico had knowledge of the existence of those
facilities and deliberately allowed them to remain open. In this regard, it should
be noted that some of the gambling facilities appeared to operate in a clandestine
manner (see the videos submitted by Thunderbird).

With respect to the Guardia facilities, the Tribunal notes that this is a particular
case where SEGOB has experienced long-standing legal altercations with Mr.
Guardia. The Tribunal infers that even if any of the facilities operated by Mr.
Guardia remain open today, one cannot talk of discrimination towards EDM
since the record shows that SEGOB has repeatedly taken action to close Mr.
Guardia’s facilities, but has met fierce legal and other resistance in the process
(see Exs. R-97; R-114; R-31, R-32).

It thus appears from the facts of the case that SEGOB’s policy and actions in
enforcing the Ley Federal de Juegos y Sorteos were directed at both Mexican
and non-Mexican gambling operations and that they were overall consistent.
Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that Thunderbird has not established a breach
the “National Treatment” standard under Article 1102 of the NAFTA.

In any event, even if Thunderbird had established without doubt that Mexico’s
line of conduct with respect to gambling operations was not uniform and
consistent, one cannot overlook the fact that gambling is illegal in Mexico. In
the Tribunal’s view, it would be inappropriate for a NAFTA tribunal to allow a
party to rely on Article 1102 of the NAFTA to vindicate equality of non-
enforcement within the sphere of an activity that a Contracting Party deems
illicit.

Issue 9. Did Respondent breach the “Minimum Standard of
Treatment” under Article 1105 of the NAFTA?

Article 1105(1) of the NAFTA provides as follows:

Page 60 of 74

185.

186.

187.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of another
Party treatment in accordance with international law, including
fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security.

(i) Thunderbird’s position

With respect to the meaning of the “Minimum Standard of Treatment” under
Article 1105 of the NAFTA and its application by a NAFTA tribunal, Thunderbird
cites various NAFTA awards, alleging that the conduct of SEGOB officials in this
case reflects exactly the kind and level of arbitrariness that the Waste Management II
tribunal would conclude violates the minimum standard under Article 1105.

According to Thunderbird, three international law doctrines — detrimental
reliance, denial of justice, and abuse of rights — can be used to inform the
Tribunal’s interpretation of how “fair and equitable treatment” was not provided
to Thunderbird or its investments. Hence, Thunderbird contends that the
detrimental reliance by Thunderbird and the EDMs on the Oficio in pursuing their
investments in Mexico and Mexico’s subsequent actions against Thunderbird and its
EDM entities, in contravention to the content of the Oficio, establish a breach of
Article 1105 of the NAFTA, adding that the EDMs were not only entitled to rely
upon the SEGOB letter because of its contents, but also because of the
expectations generated by Mexico’s ratification of the NAFTA. Thunderbird
alleges further a failure by Mexico to provide due process, constituting an
administrative denial of justice, in the proceedings relating to the ruling of 10
October 2001, which constituted a breach of Article 1105 of the NAFTA; and manifest
arbitrariness in administration, constituting proof of an abuse of right, in the
proceedings before SEGOB, in breach of Article 1105 of the NAFTA.

(ii) Mexico’s position

Mexico denies having violated the “Minimum Standard of Treatment” of Article
1105 of the NAFTA.

Page 61 of 74

188.

189.

190.

191.

192.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

According to Mexico, Thunderbird’s complaints about the SEGOB
administrative proceedings are factually incorrect and in any event pertain to
issues of pure domestic law; and Thunderbird has not presented any evidence of
failures of the Mexican judicial system that it argues prejudiced it and
constituted the principal reason why it withdrew its judicial appeals.

Mexico contends that it has adopted a uniform and consistent line of conduct
with respect to illegal gaming operations. In particular, Mexico argues that it
has, to its knowledge, closed down all facilities where so-called slot machines
were operating and has legally challenged all court decisions granting injunctive
relief regarding SEGOB official closure orders.

With respect to any alleged detrimental reliance on the Oficio, Mexico contends
that SEGOB’s determination that it would consider the machines to be
prohibited games cannot be considered arbitrary, given that Thunderbird itself
knew the nature of the machines and knew of the existing risk that they would
be inspected by SEGOB and it would reach that conclusion.

As to the SEGOB administrative proceedings, Mexico denies that they were
illegal, arbitrary or unfair, arguing that the decision itself indicates that EDM’s
evidence was taken into account even when not in strict accordance with the
applicable domestic legal requirements and the decision set out a reasoned basis
for its conclusions; that the procedure was transparent and in compliance with
Mexican laws, validated by EDM’s lawyers who were experts in Mexican law;
and that if there had been a violation during the proceedings, there were
appropriate judicial remedies available to challenge it.

(iii)The Tribunal’s findings

The Tribunal shall interpret Article 1105(1) of the NAFTA in accordance with the
NAFTA Free Trade Commission’s Notes of Interpretation of certain Chapter

Page 62 of 74

193.

194.

10

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

Eleven Provisions (“Minimum Standard of Treatment in Accordance with

1!

International Law”) dated 31 July 2001", which provides as follows:

1. Article 1105(1) prescribes the customary international law
minimum standard of treatment of aliens as the minimum
standard of treatment to be afforded to investments of investors
of another Party.

2. The concepts of “fair and equitable treatment” and “full
protection and security” do not require treatment in addition to
or beyond that which is required by the customary international
law minimum standard of treatment of aliens.

3. A determination that there has been a breach of another
provision of the NAFTA, or of a separate international
agreement, does not establish that there has been a breach of
Article 1105(1).

The Tribunal shall accordingly measure the Article 1105(1) of the NAFTA
minimum standard of treatment against the customary international law
minimum standard, according to which foreign investors are entitled to a certain
level of treatment, failing which the host State’s international responsibility may

be engaged.

The content of the minimum standard should not be rigidly interpreted and it
should reflect evolving international customary law.!! Notwithstanding the

http://www.dfait-maeci.gc.ca/tna-nac/Nafta-interpr-en.asp.

See in particular Mondev International Ltd. v. USA, Award, 11 October 2002, ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/99/2,_http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/14442.pdf.; ADF Group Inc. v.
USA, Award, 9 January 2003, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/1,
http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/ADF-award.pdf; Waste Management Inc. v. Mexico,
Arbitral Award, 2 June 2002, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/2,
http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/waste_award.pdf,; Final Award, 30 April 2004, ICSID
Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3, http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/laudo_ingles.pdf.

Page 63 of 74

195.

196.

197.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

evolution of customary law since decisions such as Neer Claim in 1926", the
threshold for finding a violation of the minimum standard of treatment still
remains high, as illustrated by recent international jurisprudence’. For the
purposes of the present case, the Tribunal views acts that would give rise to a
breach of the minimum standard of treatment prescribed by the NAFTA and
customary international law as those that, weighed against the given factual
context, amount to a gross denial of justice or manifest arbitrariness falling
below acceptable international standards"

In the present case, the Tribunal is not convinced that Thunderbird has
demonstrated that Mexico’s conduct violated the minimum standard of
treatment, for the following reasons.

The Tribunal has already found that Thunderbird could not reasonably rely on
the Oficio to its detriment (see the Tribunal’s findings under Issue 7 above).

As to the alleged failure to provide due process (constituting an administrative
denial of justice) and the alleged manifest arbitrariness in administration
(constituting proof of an abuse of right) in the SEGOB proceedings, the Tribunal

USA (LF. Neer) v. Mexico (1926), 4 R.LA.A. 60 (Gen. Cl. Comm’n 1926).

See in this regard Alex Genin et al. v. Estonia, Award, 25 June 2001, ICSID Case No.
ARB/99/2), http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/genin.pdf; Waste Management Inc. v. Mexico,
Final Award, 30 April 2004, -«:ICSID.— Case. = No. ~— ARB(AF)/00/3,
http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/laudo_ingles.pdf.

See in this regard Alex Genin et al. v. Estonia, Award, 25 June 2001, ICSID Case No. ARB/99/2,
http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/genin.pdf; S.D. Myers Inc. v. Canada, First Partial Award,
13. November 2000, UNCITRAL (NAFTA), _ http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/SDMeyers-
1stPartialAward.pdf; Mondev International Ltd. v. USA, Award, 11 October 2002, ICSID Case
No. ARB(AF)/99/2, http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/14442.pdf.; ADF Group Inc.
v. USA, Award, 9 January 2003, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/1,
http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/ADF-award.pdf, Azinian v. Mexico, Arbitral Award, 1
November 1999; ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/2,
http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/robert_award.pdf, Loewen v. USA, Award, 26 June 2003,
ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/3, http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Loewen-Award-2.pdf; Case
concerning Elettronica Sicula SpA (ELSI) (United States v. Italy), 20 July 1989, 1989 L.C.J. 15.

  

Page 64 of 74

198.

199.

200.

201.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

cannot find sufficient evidence on the record establishing that the SEGOB
proceedings were arbitrary or unfair, let alone so manifestly arbitrary or unfair as
to violate the minimum standard of treatment.

In particular, the Tribunal notes that Thunderbird was given a full opportunity to
be heard and to present evidence at the Administrative Hearing, and that it made
use of this opportunity. The Tribunal does not find anything reproachable about
the Administrative Order. The 31-page document appears, in the Tribunal’s
view, to be adequately detailed and reasoned; it reviews the evidence presented
by Thunderbird at the hearing; and discusses at length the legal grounds on
which SEGOB based its determination that the EDM machines were prohibited
gambling equipment (see Exh. R-93).

As to the official closures of the EDM facilities, the Tribunal does not find that
the manner in which SEGOB proceeded for the official closure was arbitrary. In
fact, the record shows that on one occasion, SEGOB itself recognized that the
official closure order for Nuevo Laredo was irregular and accordingly rectified
its error by lifting the seals of the Nuevo Laredo facility.

The Tribunal does not exclude that the SEGOB proceedings may have been
affected by certain irregularities. Rather, the Tribunal cannot find on the record
any administrative irregularities that were grave enough to shock a sense of
judicial propriety and thus give rise to a breach of the minimum standard of
treatment. As acknowledged by Thunderbird, the SEGOB proceedings should be
tested against the standards of due process and procedural fairness applicable to
administrative officials. The administrative due process requirement is lower
than that of a judicial process. Hence, for instance, even if one views the absence
of Lic. Aguilar Coronado (who signed the Administrative Order) at the 10 July
hearing as an administrative irregularity, it does not attain the minimum level of
gravity required under Article 1105 of the NAFTA under the circumstances.

Finally, the SEGOB proceedings (including the Administrative Resolution) were
subject to judicial review before the Mexican courts. The Tribunal notes in this

Page 65 of 74

202.

203.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

regard that EDM filed a nullification (juicio de nulidad) of the 10 October
Ruling before the federal tax and administrative court (in which it did not raise
any complaint about Lic. Aguilar Coronado’s absence at the Administrative
Hearing). EDM went on to appeal the court’s decision on the nullification (juicio
de amparo), but subsequently withdrew from the proceedings, which decision
cannot be attributed to Mexico.

Issue 10. Did Respondent engage in an expropriation in
violation of Article 1110 of the NAFTA?

Article 1110 (1) of the NAFTA provides as follows:

No Party may directly or indirectly nationalize or expropriate an
investment of an investor of another Party in its territory or take
a measure tantamount to nationalization or expropriation of such
an investment ("expropriation"), except:

(a) for a public purpose;
(b) on a non-discriminatory basis;

(c) in accordance with due process of law and Article 1105(1);
and

(d) on payment of compensation in accordance with paragraphs
2 through 6.

(i) Thunderbird’s position

With respect to Mexico’s jurisdictional objections, Thunderbird contends that
the purposes of the NAFTA would be completely frustrated if investors were not
entitled to bring claims under Article 1110, on behalf of their investment enterprises
established in the territory of another NAFTA Party. Thunderbird requests that leave
be granted to Thunderbird to amend its PSoC to include, in the further alternative, a

Page 66 of 74

204.

205.

206.

207.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

claim for 100% of the damages caused to the businesses of each EDM Company as a
result of Respondent’s alleged breach of Article 1110, using Article 1116 of the NAFTA.

Thunderbird contends that Article 1110 of the NAFTA, which requires the payment
of full, prompt, and effective compensation for the taking of an “investment,”
imposes an obligation upon Mexico vis-a-vis the EDMs. The standard for determining
whether a taking has occurred is whether government action has resulted in substantial
interference with the investment.

According to Thunderbird, the EDM Companies had legitimately acquired rights
in the businesses they conducted. The actions of SEGOB amounted to expropriation
within the meaning of Article 1110 of the NAFTA, Thunderbird argues, because the
EDMs established their investments in Mexico on the general promise of fair and
equitable treatment and with the added security of the “negative clearance”
contained within the Oficio, and the official closure of these facilities destroyed
the EDMs’ businesses, requiring the payment of fair market value for these
investments so taken.

(ii) Mexico’s position

Mexico raises a jurisdictional objection to the effect that Thunderbird cannot
succeed in its claim of expropriation because it failed to bring a claim on its own
behalf as an investor of a Party under Article 1116 of the NAFTA. Thunderbird’s
request in the SoR to amend its claim should be denied according to Mexico.

Mexico contends that SEGOB determined that EDM was operating prohibited
gambling equipment and that, therefore, bona fide law enforcement actions by
SEGOB, such as the closure of illegal gambling operations, do not amount to an
expropriation. Further, Mexico argues, EDM filed appeals in the national courts
that it subsequently withdrew.

(iii)The Tribunal’s findings

Page 67 of 74

208.

209.

VI.

210.

211.

212.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

The Tribunal does not need to decide on Mexico’s jurisdictional objection
regarding Thunderbird’s failure to present its claim under Article 1116 of the
NAFTA, since the Tribunal has already found that the EDM Companies could not
have operated based on a legitimate expectation in Mexico. Accordingly, as
acknowledged by Thunderbird, compensation is not owed for regulatory takings
where it can be established that the investor or investment never enjoyed a
vested right in the business activity that was subsequently prohibited.

E. Merits - Damages

The Tribunal has found that Mexico did not violate any of the NAFTA provisions
relied upon by Thunderbird (see the Tribunal’s findings on Issues 8, 9 and 10
above). Accordingly, Thunderbird is not entitled to damages and the Tribunal
does not need to address Issue 11.

Costs

In Thunderbird’s Cost Submission of 26 August 2004, Thunderbird claimed
US$ 995,934.50 for its legal fees and expenses. In Thunderbird’s Supplementary
Statement of Costs of 31 March 2005, Thunderbird claims US$ 1,163,375.20
(including previous sums claimed).

In Mexico’s Cost Submission of 12 August 2004, Mexico claimed US$
1,310,943.78 for its legal fees and expenses. In Mexico’s Supplementary
Statement of Costs of 31 March 2005, Mexico claimed an additional US$
191,122.06.

Pursuant to Article 1135 of the NAFTA, a tribunal may “award costs in accordance
with the applicable Arbitral Rules,” i.e., the UNCITRAL Rules. Pursuant to Article 38
of the UNCITRAL Rules, the “arbitral tribunal shall fix the costs of arbitration in
its award.” Article 38 (e) includes within the scope of the definition of the “costs
of arbitration” the “costs for legal representation and assistance of the successful
party if such costs were claimed during the arbitral proceedings, and only to the

Page 68 of 74

213.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

extent that the arbitral tribunal determines that the amount of such costs is
reasonable”. Articles 40 (1) and (2) of the UNCITRAL Rules provide as follows:

1. Except as provided in paragraph 2, the costs of arbitration
shall in principle be borne by the unsuccessful party. However,
the arbitral tribunal may apportion each of such costs between
the parties if it determines that apportionment is reasonable,
taking into account the circumstances of the case.

2. With respect to the costs of legal representation and
assistance referred to in article 38, paragraph (e), the arbitral
tribunal, taking into account the circumstances of the case, shall
be free to determine which party shall bear such costs or may
apportion such costs between the parties if it determines that
apportionment is reasonable.

The majority view in S.D. Myers v. Canada believed that there is a “subtle
distinction” between these two paragraphs, the first emphasizing “success,” and
the second “the circumstances of the case.”'° The present Arbitral Tribunal does
not see the distinction between the two paragraphs in that way. The first
paragraph too refers to “the circumstances of the case” whilst the second, as
conceded by the majority view in S.D. Myers, also implies success. Rather, the
difference between the two paragraphs is that the first paragraph sets forth a rule
with an exception to that rule, whereas the second paragraph gives an arbitral
tribunal unfettered discretion. According to the first paragraph, the costs of the
arbitration “shall in principle be borne by the unsuccessful party,” whilst
according to the second paragraph, an arbitral tribunal “shall be free” to
determine which party bears the costs of legal representation (or may apportion
such costs). In the present case, the Arbitral Tribunal does not see a reason to
rely on that distinction, as the more objective benchmark for both types of costs
is the rate of success of a party.

SD. Myers vy. Canada, Final Award, 30 December 2002, UNCITRAL (NAFTA),
http://ita.law.uvic.ca/
documents/SDMyersFinal Award.pdf

Page 69 of 74

214.

215.

216.

217.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

It is also debated whether “the loser pays” (or “costs follow the event”) rule
should be applied in international investment arbitration. It is indeed true that in
many cases, notwithstanding the fact that the investor is not the prevailing party,
the investor is not condemned to pay the costs of the government. The Tribunal
fails to grasp the rationale of this view, except in the case of an investor with
limited financial resources where considerations of access to justice may play a
role. Barring that, it appears to the Tribunal that the same rules should apply to
international investment arbitration as apply in other international arbitration
proceedings.

It may be added that Article 1135 of the NAFTA explicitly contemplates the
possibility for a tribunal to award costs: “[a] tribunal may also award costs in
accordance with the applicable arbitration rules.” The treaty does not contain
any limitation in regard of the award of costs.

The parties to the present case have themselves each claimed an award of costs
(see Notice of Arbitration at (34 and SoD at 372). Although Thunderbird has
contended that it is rarely appropriate for costs to be awarded to an unsuccessful
NAFTA claimant, it has at the same time recognized: “[n]o Nafta provisions exist
which would modify the application of [Articles 38 and 40 of the UNCITRAL]
arbitration rules. Accordingly, it lies within the discretion of this Tribunal to
award costs in the manner it determines to be the most appropriate and
reasonable in the circumstances.” (see PSoC at p.121)

The Tribunal is mindful of other NAFTA awards such as the decision in Azinian

ve Mexico,'° in which the tribunal considered four factors for deciding that the
losing investor need not pay the costs of the respondent (state party):

Azinian v. Mexico, Arbitral Award, 1 November 1999; ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/2,
http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/robert_award.pdf

Page 70 of 74

218.

219.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

The claim has failed in its entirety. The Respondent has been put
to considerable inconvenience. In ordinary circumstances it is
common in international arbitral proceedings that a losing
claimant is ordered to bear the costs of the arbitration, as well as
to contribute to the prevailing respondent’s reasonable costs of
representation. This practice serves the dual function of
reparation and dissuasion.

In this case, however, four factors militate against an award of
costs. First, this is a new and novel mechanism for the resolution
of international investment disputes. Although the Claimants
have failed to make their case under the NAFTA, the Arbitral
Tribunal accepts, by way of limitation, that the legal constraints
on such causes of action were unfamiliar. Secondly, the
Claimants presented their case in an efficient and professional
manner. Thirdly, the Arbitral Tribunal considers that by raising
issues of defective performance (as opposed to voidness ab
initio) without regard to the notice provisions of the Concession
Contract, the Naucalpan Ayuntamiento may be said to some
extent to have invited litigation. Fourthly, it appears that the
persons most accountable for the Claimants’ wrongful behaviour
would be the least likely to be affected by an award of costs; Mr.
Goldenstein is beyond this Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction,
while Ms. Baca — who might as a practical matter be the most
solvent of the Claimants — had no active role at any stage.

With respect to the first factor, investment arbitration in general and NAFTA
arbitration in particular have become so well known and established as to
diminish their novelty as dispute resolution mechanisms. Thus, this factor is no
longer applicable when considering apportionment of costs in international
investment disputes. As for the second factor, although it may be said that the
Parties here presented their case in an efficient and professional manner, the
Tribunal does not find it a decisive factor for awarding costs in deviation of the
general principle. Finally, the third and fourth Azinian factors are not applicable
in the present case.

In the present case, the Tribunal has found that Mexico is the successful party,
except on issues of jurisdiction and/or admissibility.

Page 71 of 74

220.

221.

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that Mexico may in principle recover an
appropriate portion of the costs of its legal representation and assistance. In this
regard, the amount of US$ 1,502,065.84 claimed by Mexico appears to be
reasonable in light of the scope and length of the present arbitral proceedings.
Mexico did not however prevail on all issues. In consideration of this fact, the
Tribunal shall exercise its discretion and allocate the costs on a %4-% basis.
Accordingly, the Tribunal hereby determines that Thunderbird shall reimburse
Mexico in the amount of US$ 1,126,549.38 in respect of the costs of legal
representation for this arbitration.

As regards the fees of the arbitrators, the Arbitral Tribunal has determined the
fees of the Arbitrators to be US$405,620. The disbursements of the arbitration,
including rent of hearing rooms, travel, hotel accommodation and court reporters
amount to US$99,632.08. Consequently, the costs of the arbitration amount to
US$505,252.08 and will be paid out of the deposits made by the Parties. For the
same reasons as expressed in the preceding paragraph, the costs referred to in
this paragraph shall be allocated between Thunderbird and Mexico on a %4-4
basis. Accordingly, the Arbitral Tribunal hereby determines that Thunderbird
shall reimburse Mexico in the amount of US$126,313.02 in respect of the afore-
mentioned deposits made by Mexico.

Page 72 of 74

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

Vil. DECISIONS

222. FOR THE FOREGOING REASONS, the Arbitral Tribunal renders the following
decisions:

1) FINDS that Mexico did not breach Articles 1102, 1105 or 1110 of the
NAFTA or otherwise;

2

DISMISSES Thunderbird’s claims in their entirety;

3

DETERMINES the costs of the arbitration referred to in {| 221 above at
US$505,252.08, and further DETERMINES that these costs are to be shared
by the Thunderbird and Mexico on a 3/4-1/4 basis, and are to be paid out
of the deposits made by the Parties;

4

DETERMINES that Thunderbird shall reimburse Mexico in the amount of
US$ 1,126,549.38 in respect of the costs of legal representation and
US$126,313.02 in respect of the deposits made by Mexico for the fees
and disbursements of the Arbitral Tribunal.

Page 73 of 74

THUNDERBIRD V. MEXICO — AWARD

Made in Washington D.C., U.S.A., being the place of arbitration, on January 26, 2006,

Lic. Agustin Portal Ariosa, Professor Thomas W. Wiilde,
Arbitrator Arbitrator

(see separate opinion)

Professor Dr. Albert Jan van den Berg,
President

Page 74 of 74

