International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
Washington, D.C.

In the proceedings between

International Company for Railway Systems (ICRS)
(Claimant)

and

Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
(Respondent)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/09/13)

 

Procedural Order No. 3
To Withhold Decisions on Pending Applications and to Defer December
2010 hearing on Jurisdictional Objections

 

Members of the Tribunal
Judge Patrick L. Robinson (President)
Mr Stanimir A. Alexandrov (Co-Arbitrator)

Professor Bernard Audit (Co-Arbitrator)

Date of dispatch to the Parties
November 26, 2010

The Tribunal recalls from the record that there are pending proceedings between the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the Public Transportation Regulatory
Commission (a Jordanian entity) on the one hand and International Company for
Railway Systems on the other hand at the Court of Arbitration of the International
Chamber of Commerce, which concern the same facts and circumstances in the

dispute here (the “ICC Proceedings”).

On October 6, 2010 the Respondent, inter alia, notified the Tribunal of the
Claimant’s communications to the ICC Secretariat of its intention to withdraw
jurisdictional objections and to submit a counter-claim in the ICC proceedings.
Therefore, the Respondent requested that the Tribunal set “a prompt deadline to
confirm that, in light of its recent communications to the ICC, Claimant will agree to
seek the immediate discontinuance of the present ICSID proceedings with

prejudice.”

In response to a letter from the Tribunal on October 14, 2010, on October 21, 2010
the Claimant submitted its comments on the Respondent’s October 6, 2010 letter.
The Claimant said, inter alia, that its communications to the ICC “are not to the
effect that the Claimant has accepted the jurisdiction of ICC under the IA.” The
Claimant further stated, “Claimant, without conceding that ICSID is the tribunal of
first resort, has in the interest of an expeditious resolution of the dispute and not
having to be put through the financial strain of pursuing two arbitrations in the very
same matter, for the time being abstained from pursuing its remedy before ICSID, as
set out in the IA. The same cannot be seen to be an agreement by the Claimant that
ICSID does not have jurisdiction under the IA but merely suspension of the

ptoceedings of ICSID in favour of the ICC arbitration.”

In response to letter from the Tribunal on October 26, 2010, on October 29, 2010
the Respondent submitted its comments on the Claimant’s October 21, 2010 letter.
The Respondent said, infer alia, “for the time being it simply does not oppose
Claimant’s request to suspend the ICSID proceedings so that the dispute may be

heard before the ICC tribunal.” The Respondent further, stated its expectation that

ow

6.

the “Tribunal issue an order immediately suspending these ICSID proceedings in
favour of the ICC arbitration, including a cancellation of the jurisdictional hearing

scheduled for December 2010.”

However, on November 4, 2010 the Respondent, by letter to the Centre, asked that
the Tribunal be notified that it “now requests that ICSID take all appropriate steps
under Financial Regulation 14 to discontinue these proceedings due to the fact that
the Claimant has remained in default.” The Respondent further stated that under the
ptesent circumstances it “can no longer acquiesce to a suspension of the
ptoceedings” and it opposes the suspension unless and until Claimant funds it share
of the advance on cost. Respondent then requests that the “Tribunal not rule on the
Claimant’s pending Provisional Measures Request nor undertake any further activity

in connection with the pending jurisdictional objections.”

On November 9, 2010 the Centre informed the Parties, in accordance with
Administrative and Financial Regulations 14(3)(d), of the default of the Claimant and
invited either Party to pay the outstanding amount of [...] within 15 days of the date

of that letter.

Having notice of the Centre’s November 9, 2010 letter to the Parties, the Tribunal
on November 15, 2010 communicated to the Parties its intention to “withhold its
decisions on all pending applications for the present time and defer the jurisdictional
hearing set for December 2010 to a later date.” The Tribunal then invited the Parties
to “provide their comments in that regard, if any, by Friday, November 19, 2010.”
On November 19, 2010, by letter, the Respondent informed the Tribunal that it “is
in agreement with the intention expressed by the Tribunal in this regard.” The

Tribunal received no comments from the Claimant.

Taking note of the these developments and the Parties’ comments, the Tribunal
makes the following orders:

a. The Tribunal withholds its decisions on all pending applications, and

b. The jurisdictional hearing set for December 2010 is deferred to a date to be

determined later.

[Signed]

Judge Patrick L. Robinson
President of the Tribunal
Date: [November 26, 2010]

