Inversién y Gestién de Bienes, IGB, S.L. and IGB18 Las Rozas, S.L.
v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/17)

Excerpts of the Award dated August 14, 2015 made pursuant to Rule 48(4) of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules of 2006

Claimants

Inversién y Gestién de Bienes, IGB, S.L. and IGB18 Las Rozas, S.L. (Spanish corporations)
Respondent

Kingdom of Spain

Tribunal

Rodrigo Oreamuno Blanco (Sole Arbitrator; Costa Rican), appointed by agreement of the parties
Award

Award of August 14, 2015 (original in Spanish)

Instrument relied on for consent to ICSID arbitration

Agreement between the Kingdom of Spain and the Republic of Venezuela on the Reciprocal Promotion
and Protection of Investments signed on 2 November 1995, which entered into force on 10 September

1997 (“Spain- Venezuela BIT”)

Procedure

Applicable Arbitration Rules: CSID Arbitration Rules of 2006

Place of Proceedings: Washington, D.C., United States of America
Procedural Language: Spanish

Full procedural details: Available at

https://icsid.worldbank. ‘icsidweb/cases/Pages detail.aspx?C
aseNo=ARB/12/17&tab=PRD

Factual Background

This dispute arose out of the Government’s alleged breach of an urbanistic agreement requiring it to
requalify certain plots of land acquired by the Claimants to build a residential complex in Las Rozas, a
municipality of Madrid (the “Agreement”).

According to the Claimants, they had acquired certain property in 2005 (the “Property”), with the
expectation that pursuant to the Agreement, it would be requalified for multifamily residence use. The
Claimants further permitted the Ayuntamiento de Las Rozas to take part of the Property to build a public
road. Due to alleged further requirements for the requalification, the Claimants acquired an additional
adjoining property in 2006.

In Claimants’ view, the failure to requalify the Property by the Ayuntamiento de Las Rozas and the
Comunidad de Madrid, despite previous negotiations and allegedly complying with the applicable
requirements, breached a number of investment protection provisions under the Spain- Venezuela BIT.

The Claimants, two Spanish companies controlled by a Venezuelan national, filed a request for arbitration
with ICSID in 2012. Spain raised jurisdictional objections and the Sole Arbitrator bifurcated the
proceedings with the agreement of the parties. The Sole Arbitrator subsequently rendered a decision in
which it upheld jurisdiction over the dispute. On August 14, 2015, the Sole Arbitrator rendered an award
dismissing all of Claimants’ claims, inter alia, on the basis that the explicit language of the Agreement
determined that it was a preparatory document that only envisaged the possibility, but not a guarantee, to
requalify the Property.

