Case No: CL-2014-000251
Neutral Citation Number: [2017] EWHC 31 (Comm
THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE

QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION
COMMERCIAL COURT

 

IN THE MATTER OF THE ARBITRATION (INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT
DISPUTES) ACT 1966

Royal Courts of Justice, Rolls Building
Fetter Lane, London, EC4A_ 1NL

 

Date: 20/01/2017

Before:
MR JUSTICE BLAIR
Between:
(J) VIOREL MICULA Claimants/
(2) IOAN MICULA Respondents

(3) S.C. EUROPEAN FOOD S.A.
(4) S.C. STARMILL S.R.L.
(5) S.C. MULTIPACK S.R.L.

 

- and -
ROMANIA Defendant/
A
- and -
EUROPEAN COMMISSION Intervener

 

Sir Alan Dashwood QC, Patrick Green QC, and Matthieu Grégoire (instructed by
Shearman & Sterling (London) LLP) for the First Claimant
Marie Demetriou QC and Hugo Leith (instructed by White & Case LLP) for the Second to
Fifth Claimants
Robert O’Donoghue and Emily MacKenzie (instructed by Thrings LLP) for the Defendant

Nicholas Khan for the European Commission

Hearing dates: 1-3 November 2016

Judgment

Mr Justice Blair:

Introduction

1.

The 1° and 2" claimants are nationals of Sweden, and the 3™ to 5 claimants are
Romanian companies owned directly or indirectly by them. The defendant/applicant
is Romania, and the intervening party is the European Commission.

This application arises out of an ICSID arbitration award (Case No. ARB/05/20)
rendered against Romania in favour of the claimants on 11 December 2013 (the
“Award”). ICSID is the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
set up under the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States
and Nationals of Other States (the “ICSID Convention”). According to the claimants,
as at 31 August 2016 and including interest, the outstanding amount of the Award
converted into sterling is about £173m.

The Arbitral Tribunal that rendered the Award was established pursuant to the
bilateral investment treaty entered into between the Government of the Kingdom of
Sweden and the Government of Romania on the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection
of Investments on April 1, 2003 (the “Sweden/Romania BIT”).

On 17 October 2014, the Award was registered in the High Court by Order of Burton
J pursuant to the provisions of the Arbitration (International Investment Disputes) Act
1966, which implemented the ICSID Convention in the UK (the “Registration
Order”).

By this application, Romania (supported by the European Commission) applies to set
aside the Registration Order, alternatively to stay the Registration Order, alternatively
that the questions which arise should be submitted to the Court of Justice of the
European Union (CJEU) for a preliminary ruling.

In summary, the issue that arises is as follows. Reflecting the terms of the ICSID
Convention, registration of an ICSID award is an entitlement under the 1966 Act.
There is no equivalent in the 1966 Act of s. 103 of the Arbitration Act 1996 which
incorporates the grounds for the refusal of recognition or enforcement of a New York
Convention Award set out in Article V of the Convention. Accordingly, the claimants
argue that the court should dismiss the application and enforce the Award as a
judgment in the normal way.

The complication in the present case is most easily shown by decisions issued by the
European Commission. Following an injunction addressed to Romania dated 26 May
2014, a final d ion was issued by the European Commission on 30 March 2015
(Commission Decision (EU) 2015/1470 of 30 March 2015 on State aid SA.38517)
(the “Final Decision”). By the Final Decision, the Commission found that

  

implementation or execution of the Award by Romania (including payment) would
constitute new incompatible State aid. (In very broad terms, the European Union
rules on State aid are rules which prohibit state subsidies that distort competition.)

Supported by the European Commission, Romania argues that consequent on the
Final Decision, this court is duty-bound, as a matter of domestic constitutional law
which incorporates EU law, to refuse registration or execution of the Award, and
therefore to set aside any Order which has already purported to register or execute the
Award.

 

In summary, Romania’s case supported by the Commission (except as to paragraph
(1)(i) below in respect of which the Commission does not take a position) is that:

(1) The Registration Order be set aside because:
(i) | Romania has in fact paid the Award in full; and/or

(ii) This court is obliged to refuse recognition (and any further enforcement) of
the Award, given the terms of the Final Decision.

(2) Alternatively, that the court vary the Registration Order so as to stay proceedings
until:

(i) | The claimants’ applications to annul the Final Decision are determined by
the EU Courts; or

(ii) The CJEU issues a preliminary ruling pursuant to Art. 267 TFEU (assuming
that this court makes a preliminary reference, as Romania supported by the
Commission submits in the alternative that it should).

On their part, the claimants invite the court to assume for the purposes of this hearing
that the Commission’s Final Decision is valid (though they are challenging it in
annulment proceedings (equivalent to an appeal) in the General Court of the European
Union, the “GCEU”). They submit that, even on the premise of the decision’s
validity, the court is under a duty to recognise and enforce the Award. There is no
basis for setting aside the Registration Order, or for a stay, or for a reference to the
CJEU, the claimants submit, because:

    

(1) The Award is res judicata.
(2) The terms of the 1966 Act are clear and allow no derogation.

(3) Art.351 TFEU applies because the ICSID Convention imposes applicable prior
multilateral international obligations on the UK owed to non-EU Member States
which take precedence.

(4) The European Communities Act 1972 was not intended to put the UK in breach of
pre-accession international obligations nor confer primacy on EU law in the
relevant respect.

(5) Rejecting the application would not infringe the UK’s EU law obligations of
“sincere cooperation” under Art. 4(3) TEU (nor any other EU law duty).

(6) The Award has not been paid in full.

11. | The Commission further argues that upon Romania’s accession to the EU in 2007, at
which point both parties to the treaty were members of the EU, the Sweden-Romania
BIT became invalid. It submits that this issue should be included in a reference to the
CJEU. The claimants say that the question is irrelevant to this case.

12. In this regard, it is to be noted that the question of the validity of BITs entered into
between Member States of the EU (as in the present case between Sweden and
Romania) has a wider significance for the Commission, raising questions as to the
proper discharge of its duties in this situation. On 3 March 2016, in the case of
Achmea B.V. v Slovak Republic, the Bundesgerichtshof (the Federal Court of Justice
of Germany) requested a preliminary ruling from the CJEU on the compatibility of
investor-state arbitration clauses in investment treaties between EU Member States.
The Commission has recently issued a reasoned opinion under the infringement
procedure under Article 258 TFEU to a number of EU Member States to the effect
that they must terminate their intra-EU bilateral investment treaties.

13. The key issues that arise on the parties’ submissions have been agreed in a joint table
submitted by the parties after the close of the hearing.

14. If contrary to the claimants’ primary contention, the court finds that a stay should be
ordered, by application issued on 29 September 2016 the claimants ask the court to
make the grant of such stay conditional upon the grant of full or substantial security
for the Award.

The facts
15. The facts are largely not in dispute, though the parties interpret them differently.

16. The claimants maintain that they have made investments in Romania which were and
still are protected by the Sweden/Romania BIT, and that they have a valid arbitration
award in their favour which has been subject to an ex post attempt to nullify it. They
maintain further that in its dealings towards them Romania has not behaved in good
faith.

17. Romania denies bad faith on its part, and maintains that its actions are dictated by the
necessity to comply with the legal regime of the European Union of which the
claimants have at all times been aware.

18. The facts up to the date of the Award are set out fully and carefully in the ICSID
Award of 11 December 2013 which is available on the internet. What is set out below
is an outline. It is not for present purposes usually necessary to distinguish between
the claimants.

19. In 1975, the ICSID Convention came into force in Romania. This was during the
Communist period, which came to an end at the end of 1989.

20. Following Romania’s application for membership in 1993, in 1995 the Europe
Agreement between the European Community and Romania entered into force. This
required the eventual adoption of the European rules on State aid.

21.

22.

23.

24,

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

In 1997, Romania was urged by the Commission to pursue “rapid privatisation”,
secure foreign direct investment and restructure the industrial and agricultural sectors.
The Commission’s 1998 Annual Report also emphasised the importance of regional
development for Romania.

In 1998, Romania adopted an investment incentive scheme in the form of Emergency
Government Ordinance No. 24/1998 (“EGO 24”).

In 1999, the Stei-Nucet region of Romania was designated as a disfavoured region for
a 10-year period commencing 1 April 1999. It was later extended to include
Draganesti.

At the beginning of 2000, and in preparation for eventual accession to the EU,
Romanian Law no. 143/1999 on State aid entered into force.

During the early 2000s, and (as explained in the Award) in reliance on the investment
incentives, the claimants heavily invested in a large, highly integrated food production
operation in the Seti-Nucet-Draganesti region as part of a 10-year business plan.

In 2002, Romania and Sweden (which was an existing member of the EU) signed the
Sweden-Romania bilateral investment treaty which came into force in 2003. The BIT
provided reciprocal protections for investments, and consent to investor-state dispute
resolution under the ICSID Convention. The claimants say that Romania was being
encouraged by the Commission to enter into such agreements at this time.

In 2004, Romania passed a Government Ordinance repealing all but one of the tax
incentives provided under EGO 24, effective 22 February 2005. This was because it
was seen as State aid.

On 28 July 2005, the claimants filed a Request for Arbitration with ICSID under the
terms of the Sweden-Romania BIT. In due course, the European Commission
participated as amicus in the arbitration, making submissions on EU law. Both
Romania and the Commission argued that “any payment of compensation arising out
of this Award would constitute illegal State aid under EU law and render the Award
unenforceable in the EU”.

On 1 January 2007, Romania became a member of the EU.

On 11 December 2013, the ICSID Tribunal issued the Award in the claimants’ favour.
It found by a majority that Romania had violated the claimants’ legitimate
expectations and had failed to act transparently. It did not deal with the issue of
enforceability under the EU State aid rules, stating that it was “not desirable to
embark on predictions as to the possible conduct of various persons and authorities
after the Award has been rendered, especially but not exclusively when it comes to
enforcement matters”.

The Award orders Romania to pay RON 376,433,229 (the RON is the Romanian Leu)
as damages, together with interest of RON 424,159,150 and further interest accruing
until the defendant satisfies the Award in full. The court was told that this was the
equivalent of the assistance which it would have received but for the measures taken
by the State to withdraw the aid which had been extended.

  

40.

On 14 January 2014, Romania purported to set-off RON 337,492,864 in respect of the
third claimant’s unpaid taxes against the Award. The claimants subsequently
challenged the set-off in the Romanian courts in one of a number of court proceedings
in Romania, including in the Romanian Supreme Court. The set-off was the first of
various such steps which are relied on by Romania as constituting payment of the
Award, and which are further identified in the relevant section of this judgment.

On 9 April 2014, and in accordance with ICSID procedures, Romania filed an
application for the annulment of the Award to the ICSID “ad hoc Committee” and
requested a stay of enforcement of the Award, which was granted provisionally.

The position of the European Commission was that implementation of the Award
would constitute new State aid. On 26 May 2014, the Commission issued a
suspension injunction to restrain Romania from taking any action to execute or
implement the Award until it had taken a final decision on the compatibility of State
aid (the “Injunction Decision”).

On 7 August 2014, the ICSID ad hoc Committee agreed to a continuation of the stay
of enforcement of the Award, provided that Romania filed an assurance that it would
pay the Award in full and subject to no conditions whatsoever if the annulment
application was dismissed. Romania did not give this assurance, and the stay was
revoked.

On 2 September 2014, the claimants applied to the GCEU to annul the Commission’s
Injunction Decision.

Pursuant to an application made by the 1‘ claimant on 2 October 2014, (Claim No
2014-000251, which constitutes these proceedings), on 17 October 2014 the Award
was registered in the English High Court pursuant to the Order of Mr Justice Burton.
The Registration Order was made on the documents in the usual way, giving the
defendant (Romania) the right to apply to vary or set it aside.

On 30 March 2015, the Commission adopted Final Decision 2015/1470 in which it, in
summary: (i) declared that payment of the Award by Romania constituted new State
aid within the meaning of Article 107(1) of TFEU (the Treaty on the Functioning of
the European Union); (ii) prohibited Romania from making any payment under the
Award to the claimants; (iii) demanded that Romania recover any sums already paid
out under the Award; (iv) provided that the claimants, together with S.C. European
Drinks S.A., S.C. Rieni Drinks S.A., S.C. Scandic Distilleries S.A., , S.C.
Transilvania General Import Export S.R.L. and S.C. West Leasing International
S.R.L. (being entities owned directly or indirectly by the 1% and 2"4 claimants), shall
be jointly liable to repay any sums received by any one of them as part-payment of the
Award.

 

On 28 July 2015, the defendant filed its application to set aside or vary the
Registration Order. By consent, the 2™ to 5 claimants joined the proceedings.
Shortly afterwards, the Commission decided to intervene.

On 6 November 2015, the 3™ to 5‘ claimants commenced proceedings before the
GCEU seeking annulment of the Commission’s Final Decision (each of the parties

41.

42.

43.

44,

45.

46.

sometimes refer to this as the claimants’ “appeal” against the decision). The other
claimants commenced similar proceedings shortly afterwards.

On 26 February 2016, the ICSID ad hoc Committee rejected Romania’s Annulment
Application.

On 29 September 2016, the claimants filed a cross-application for security for
damages in these proceedings in the event of the court acceding to Romania’s
application.

To complete the picture, it should be noted that there are ongoing enforcement
proceedings by the claimants in the United States, France, Belgium, Luxembourg and
Sweden, though none has so far yielded any recovery.

The court was told that the Belgian court set aside the initial garnishment order
obtained on the Award, and that this is currently being appealed.

At the time of this judgment, an appeal to US Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit
is pending by Romania against certain decisions of the District Court for the Southern
District of New York recognising the Award.

Further ICSID proceedings were begun on 24 November 2014 by the 1* and 2"4

claimants and their companies, but the court was told that these proceedings are not
relevant for present purposes.

The ICSID Award of 11 December 2013

47.

The Tribunal decided (see para 1329) that:

i) The claimants’ claim that Romania violated Art. 2(4) of the Sweden/Romania
BIT by failing to observe obligations entered into with the claimants with
regard to their investments was dismissed by majority.

ii) The claimants’ claim that Romania had violated Art. 2(3) of the BIT by failing
to ensure fair and equitable treatment of the claimants’ investments was upheld
by majority.

iii) In view of its decision, the Tribunal did not need to determine whether
Romania had breached the BIT by impairing the claimants’ investments
through unreasonable or discriminatory measures (Art. 2(3) of the BIT) or by
expropriating the claimants’ investments without the payment of prompt,
adequate, and effective compensation (Art. 4(1) of the BIT).

iv) The Award ordered Romania to pay RON 376,433,229 as damages, together
with interest of RON 424,159,150 and further interest accruing until the
defendant satisfies the Award in full.

The principles as regards registration of ICSID awards

 

48.

The Arbitration (International Investment Disputes) Act 1966 implemented the ICSID
Convention in the UK.

49.

Section 1(2) of the 1966 Act provides that a person seeking recognition or
enforcement of a Convention award “shall be entitled to have the award registered in
the High Court”.

The award is not to be registered, however, if the pecuniary obligations it imposes
have been wholly satisfied (s. 1(5)). There is an issue between the parties on this
point.

Section 2(1) of the 1966 Act provides for the effects of registration in accordance with
Art. 54 of the ICSID Convention, effectively equating a registered Convention award
to a judgment of the High Court:

i) As respects the pecuniary obligations which it imposes, the award is “of the
same force and effect for the purposes of execution as if it had been a
judgment of the High Court given when the award was rendered pursuant to
the Convention and entered on the date of registration under this Act, ...”.

ii) So far as relates to such pecuniary obligations, “(a) proceedings may be taken
on the award, (b) the sum for which the award is registered shall carry interest,
[and] (c) the High Court shall have the same control over the execution of the
award, as if the award had been such a judgment of the High Court”.

There is no equivalent in the 1966 Act of s. 103 of the Arbitration Act 1996, which
contains grounds for the refusal of recognition or enforcement of a New York
Convention award, reflecting the grounds provided for in Article V of the 1958
Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (the
New York Convention).

The ICSID Convention operates so as to bind the State signatories, including the
United Kingdom, so that “unless an ICSID award is revised or annulled under
ICSID’s own internal procedures, each contracting state must recognise an ICSID
award as if it were a final judgment of its own national courts and enforce the
obligation imposed by that award...only an ICSID annulment committee may annul
the award. Setting aside or any other review of ICSID awards by domestic courts is
not available” (Nigel Blackaby, Constantine Partasides, et al. Redfern and Hunter on
International Arbitration (6th ed, 2015), §11.125-11.127; and see Rudolf Dolzer and
Christoph Schreuer, Principles of International Investment Law, (2nd ed., 2012),
p-310-311, and A/G Capital Partners Inc v Republic of Kazakhstan [2006] 1 W.L.R.
1420 at [71], Aikens J).

In the present case, the ICSID ad hoc Committee upheld the Award on 12 February
2016. It is common ground that there is no further recourse available to Romania
under the ICSID Convention. As a matter of English law, therefore, the claimants are
entitled to be in the same position as if there was a judgment of the High Court in
their favour. The term “judgment” in this context means “final judgment” (Art. 54(1)
of the ICSID Convention). This is an important part of the fulfilment of the UK’s
international obligations in respect of investment disputes decided under the
Convention.

  

The Final Decision of the European Commission of 30 March 2015

On 30 March 2015, the Commission issued a Final Decision (EU 2015/1470), in
which it found that payment under the Award would constitute new incompatible
State aid within the meaning of Art. 107(1) TFEU. The Final Decision is a lengthy
document in which the history (as the Commission sees it) is set out in recitals.

The Commission found that:

i) The implementation or execution of the Award “re-establishes the situation the
claimants would have, in all likelihood, found themselves in if the EGO 24
[investment incentive] scheme had never been repealed” and therefore it grants
the claimants an economic advantage not otherwise available on the market.

ii) This is a selective advantage because (i) it only awards compensation to the
claimants and the Sweden/Romania BIT only confers the right of
compensation to a certain group of investors (i.e., those from Sweden and
Romania), and (ii) the Award compensates the claimants for the repeal of
investment incentives “which themselves are selective in nature”.

iii) | Paying the Award would be imputable to Romania notwithstanding that it is an
automatic and involuntary consequence of Romania’s obligations under the
ICSID Convention.

iv) It would be a measure liable to distort competition and affect trade between
Member States because the claimants actively compete on a “liberalised

market” and the Award relieves them of their “ordinary operating expenses”.

The operative part of the Final Decision:

i) Prohibited Romania from making any payment under the Award to the
claimants.
ii) Required Romania to recover any incompatible aid already paid out.

iii) Provided that the claimants shall be jointly liable to repay the State aid
received by any one of them.

iv) Provided that recovery of the aid “shall be immediate and effective” and that
Romania shall ensure that the Decision is implemented within four months.

v) Required Romania to submit within two months information as to (i) the total
amount of aid received by each entity; (ii) a detailed description of the
measures already taken and planned to comply with the Decision; and
(iii) submit documents demonstrating that the beneficiaries have been ordered
to repay the aid.

The validity of the Commission’s Final Decision is the subject of annulment
proceedings before the GCEU (there are three sets of such proceedings), which (as
noted above) is sometimes referred to by the parties as the claimants’ appeal against
the Final Decision.

The claimants argue, among other things, that the Final Decision was ultra vires, since
the international wrongs for which the Award compensates were crystallised upon the

cancellation of the EGO 24 incentives in February 2005, some two years before
Romania acceded to the EU. By treating payment of the Award as the granting of
illegal ‘new’ State aid, the Final Decision effectively applies the EU State aid rules
retrospectively, to a time when the rules, and the Commission’s powers under them,
were not yet applicable in Romania — Romania was not a Member State and the EU
had no relevant competence under the Treaties, or the power to adopt the Final
Decision on which Romania and the Commission now rely. The claimants contend
that the decision represents an extravagant and unfounded assertion of a jurisdiction
which the Commission plainly does not have, designed to manufacture a competence
over events before Romania joined the EU, thereby protecting Romania against the
consequences of its wrongdoing.

 

60. | The Commission has filed defences asserting the validity of the Final Decision, the
claimants have filed replies, and the Commission has filed rejoinders in response to
the replies.

61. As stated elsewhere, the claimants invite the court to assume, for the purposes of this
hearing, that the Commission’s Final Decision is valid.

The relevant principles of EU la regards State licable in National courts

The principles

62. Supported by Romania, the Commission argues that this court cannot assist the

63.

64.

claimants by preventing or impeding Romania’s compliance with its EU law
obligations as regards State aid.

The principles are mainly not in dispute, and can be stated as follows. Art. 107(1)
TFEU provides that “State aid” is, in principle, incompatible with the internal market.
The Commission's role is to examine the compatibility of aid measures with the
internal market, based on the criteria laid down in Arts. 107(2) and (3) TFEU. This
compatibility assessment is the exclusive responsibility of the Commission, subject to
review by the EU Courts. National courts have a complementary role, and must not
disregard the limits of their own jurisdiction to prejudice the effectiveness of these
articles—see the recent decision of the CJEU in Case C-590/14 P, Dimosia
Epicheirisi Iektrismou AE (DEI), EU:C:2016:797.

This is based on the duty of sincere cooperation contained in Art. 4(3) TEU which
provides that:

“Pursuant to the principle of sincere cooperation, the Union and
the Member States shall, in full mutual respect, assist each
other in carrying out tasks which flow from the Treaties.

  

The Member States shall take any appropriate measure, general
or particular, to ensure fulfilment of the obligations arising out
of the Treaties or resulting from the acts of the institutions of
the Union.

65.

66.

67.

68.

The Member States shall facilitate the achievement of the
Union's tasks and refrain from any measure which could
jeopardise the attainment of the Union's objectives.”

As appears from Art. 4(3) TEU, the ambit of the “principle of sincere cooperation” is
broad; it implies both positive and negative duties and may be engaged irrespective of
to whom the relevant EU act is addressed. As the CJEU has held in Case C-344/98,
Masterfoods, EU:C:2000:689, paragraphs 45 to 60 (in the case of antitrust law), and
in Case C-284/12 Deutsche Lufthansa, EU:C:2013:755, paragraph 41 (in the case of
State aid law), that duty is as follows:

“The application of the European Union rules on State aid is
based on an obligation of sincere cooperation between the
national courts, on the one hand, and the Commission and the
Courts of the European Union, on the other, in the context of
which each acts on the basis of the role assigned to it by the
Treaty. In the context of that cooperation, national courts must
take all the necessary measures, whether general or specific, to
ensure fulfilment of the obligations under European Union law
and refrain from those which may jeopardise the attainment of
the objectives of the Treaty, as follows from Article 4(3) TEU.
Therefore, national courts must, in particular, refrain from
taking decisions which conflict with a decision of the
Commission.” (Deutsche Lufthansa para 41).

This was reiterated by the CJEU in Dimosia Epicheirisi Ilektrismou AE (DEI), ibid, (a
judgment of 26 October 2016) at paragraph 105 as follows:

“It must be borne in mind that the application of the EU State
aid rules is based on a duty of sincere cooperation between the
national courts, on the one hand, and the Commission and the
European Union courts, on the other, in the context of which
each acts on the basis of the role assigned to it by the FEU
Treaty. In the context of that cooperation, national courts must
take all the measures, whether general or specific, necessary to
ensure fulfilment of the obligations under EU law and must
refrain from those that may jeopardise the attainment of the
objectives of the Treaty, as follows from Article 4(3)
TEU. Accordingly, national courts must, in particular, refrain
from taking decisions that conflict with a decision of the
Commission (judgment of 21 November 2013, Deutsche
Lufthansa, C-284/12, EU:C:2013:755, paragraph 41).”

Article 288 TFEU provides that a decision “shall be binding in its entirety” and
Article 278 TFEU provides that the bringing of actions for annulment before the
GCEU (as the claimants have) does not suspend the obligations flowing from an act
of the EU.

The principle as regards State aid law as stated by the CJEU is, therefore, that national
courts must refrain from taking decisions which conflict with a decision of the
Commission.

 

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

In reliance on these and other authorities, the general principle has been stated in the
same terms by the Court of Appeal in Air Canada v Emerald Supplies [2015] EWCA
Civ 1024 at [70]:

“The duty under Article 4(3) TEU is binding on all authorities
of the Member States, including the courts: see Case C-344/98
Masterfoods Ltd v HB Ice Cream Ltd [2000] ECR I-11369
("Masterfoods") at [49]. The general principle of legal
certainty, which underpins the duty of sincere cooperation,
requires Member States to avoid making decisions that could
conflict with a decision contemplated by the Commission: see
Case C-234/89 Delimitis v Henniger Brau [1991] ECR 1-935 at
[47] ("Delimitis"); Masterfoods at [51] and National Grid
Electricity Transmission vy ABB Ltd [2009] EWHC 1326 at
[24.] It is only where, in the words of the Commission in
Delimitis at [50], there is "scarcely any risk" of a conflict
between decisions of domestic and EU institutions, that the
national authorities should proceed. Where the EU and
domestic authorities have overlapping jurisdictions i.e.
considering the same or similar matters, the risk of conflicting
decisions will be high.”

 

This is the jurisprudential basis for the case made by the Commission and Romania
that the court should set aside the registration of the Award since, they maintain, it
conflicts with a decision of the Commission.

Similar principles arise on their alternative case as to a stay. They submit that the
duty on national courts to refrain from taking steps which conflict with a decision of
the Commission may require a national court to stay proceedings pending the
resolution of a challenge to that decision in the European Court. This is so as to avoid
the risk of the national court coming to a different conclusion.

As noted earlier, in November 2015 the claimants commenced proceedings before the
GCEU seeking annulment of the Commission’s Final Decision, and a ruling by the
GCEU is awaited.

The position in such a case was analysed by the English court in Jberian U.K. Ltd. v
B.P.B. Industries Plc [1997] 1.C.R. 164 (a competition case), in which it was said at
p.186F:

“In my view these cases reinforce and support the following
propositions. (1) The courts here should take all reasonable
steps to avoid or reduce the risk of arriving at a conclusion
which is at variance with a decision of, or on appeal from, the
Commission in relation to competition law. (2) Except in the
clearest cases of breach or non-breach, it will be a proper
exercise of discretion to stay proceedings here to await the
outcome of the Community proceedings.”

 

The same approach applies in relation to State aid law (Kelyn Bacon, European
Union Law of State Aid (2nd edn. OUP, 2013), para 20.49).

74.

75.

76.

This is subject to a materiality threshold: in other words, the risk of a potential
conflict with a decision of the European Court must be a real one (see e.g. Crehan v
Inntrepreneur Pub Co [2007] 1 A.C. 333). This does not apply where there is
“scarcely any risk” of a conflict between decisions of domestic and EU institutions
(see the passage cited from Emerald Supplies above).

In summary and so far as relevant, as Romania and the Commission submit, in cases
concerning State aid (1) a national court must refrain from taking decisions which
conflict with a decision of the European Commission, and (2) where proceedings are
on foot in the European Court (i.e. the GCEU or CJEU) to annul such a decision, a
national court should stay domestic proceedings where there is a material risk of
conflict with the decision of the European Court pending its decision.

The question is as to the application of these principles in this case.

The parties’ submissions

77.

78.

79.

The claimants largely accept the above statements of principle, accepting that the UK.
courts bear duties under Art. 4(3) TEU not to take decisions in conflict with decisions
of the Commission. However, their submission is that no conflict arises by upholding
the registration of the Award with the prospect of the Award’s eventual execution
against commercial property held by Romania in the UK. This would not entail any
infringement of obligations binding the UK under EU law primarily because of the
principle of res judicata as upheld in the European case law, and because Art. 351
TFEU preserves the force of a Member States’ pre-accession international
obligations. So far as there is any conflict, their submission is that the UK court must
put its obligation under the ICSID Convention first.

 

Romania and the Commission on the other hand submit that court is obliged to refuse
recognition and any further enforcement of the Award because of the terms of the
Commission’s Final Decision. Applying the principles set out above, the court cannot
act in a way contrary to the decision, and the questions of law raised by the claimants
are already before the GCEU in the claimants’ appeal against the Final Decision, and
it is the European court that is the correct forum in which to resolve them, not this
court.

The claimants contest the applicability of the principles set out above based on Art.
4(3) TEU on two grounds:

(1) The UK’s duty of sincere cooperation is not engaged at all. Any satisfaction of
the Award, or part of it, achieved as a consequence of execution pursuant to
registration would not amount to an act imputable to Romania because it would
be involuntary, and not pursuant to an autonomous decision by Romania. It could
not, therefore, entail the granting of illegal State aid by Romania to the claimants.
It appeared at one point in the hearing that this argument would not be pursued by
the claimants, but it was later clarified that the argument stood, but would not be
developed beyond the claimants’ written submissions. It is dealt with further
below.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

(2) Invocation of the duty of sincere cooperation against the UK in the circumstances
of this case would constitute an unprecedented and exorbitant application of Art.
4(3) TEU.

As to (2), the claimants submit that there is no authority to support the proposition
that a court of Member State A can be prevented by that State’s duty of sincere
cooperation under Art. 4(3) from awarding or enforcing an award of damages because
the effect of such a decision would be to enable Member State B to circumvent the
EU rules on State aid, particularly where (as they submit) this would put State A in
violation of international obligations. All of the State aid cases cited by Romania and
the Commission were ones in which the courts obliged to refrain from determining a
certain matter belonged to the same Member State whose authorities were responsible
for the granting of the State aid in question.

 

 

However, as Romania and the Commission point out, the effect of the claimants’
submissions would be that a Commission decision on State aid would be observed
only in the country directly concerned, and in no other Member State. The court
agrees that this would run contrary to the underlying principles as to State aid, which
on this basis could be readily circumvented. Whilst, as the claimants say, the decided
cases involve the courts of the country whose authorities were responsible for
granting the State aid, this reflects the fact situation that arose in those ca: It may
well be, as Romania and the Commission put it, that the precise obligations of the
national courts would vary from country to country depending on the particular action
which is sought. But no EU national court can take measures which run contrary to a
final, binding Commission decision on unlawful State aid, and there is no reason to
apply a different approach where the issue arises as regards enforcement elsewhere in
the EU, which is the fact situation that arises in this case.

 

 

 

In oral argument, it was accepted on behalf of the claimants that Art. 4(3) applies both
vertically and horizontally, but submitted that when applied with the principle of
conferral, the constraint comes from the ancillary character of the duty of sincere
cooperation. The principle, it is submitted, always has to be read in context, and is
not an independent source of rights and duties.

Reliance is placed by the claimants on Koen Lenaerts and Piet van Nuffel, European
Union Law (3 ed, 2011), where it is stated at §7-042:

“Article 4 (3) does not have direct effect in itself, but it can be
used as an additional argument where the Member State in
question is alleged to have breached an unconditional and
sufficiently precise obligation. In such a case, the national
court, as an institution of the Member State, has to refrain from
applying the provisions of domestic law which prevent EU law
from having its full effect.”

However, in the present case breach of the Commission’s Final Decision by Romania
paying the Award would clearly be a breach of an unconditional and sufficiently
precise obligation set out in the decision. That is the context in which this court, as a
national court, albeit of a different Member State, has to consider and apply the duty
of sincere cooperation. The duty has been called the most important general principle
of Community law (Edward and Lane on European Union Law, para 2.24, p.45).

85.

86.

87.

89.

The claimants further submit that Romania and the Commission have failed to
demonstrate that rejection of the Application by the court would amount to a
“measure” within the meaning of Art. 4(3) TEU.

However, the Commission’s Final Decision establishes that (i) payment under the
Award would constitute new incompatible State aid; and (ii) that such State aid is
incompatible with Art. 108 TFEU. Romania emphasised, correctly in the court’s
view, that the relevant measure for these purposes is the satisfaction of the Award,
and not (as the claimants submitted) the ratification of the ICSID Convention by the

The claimants submit that Art. 4(2) which obliges the Union to respect “the equality
of Member States before the Treaties, as well as their national identities...” and also
“their essential state functions”, must be taken to include the good standing of
Member States as subjects of the international legal order. This raises the question
whether the application of the principles stated above would create a conflict between
the EU rules as to State aid and the obligations of the UK under the ICSID
Convention so far as relevant to this case. The question is considered below.

 

The key issues that arise on the parties’ submissions have been agreed in a joint table
submitted by the parties after the close of the hearing.

The issues do not seem to be ordered entirely logically in the table. For example, in
the 1‘ claimant’s skeleton argument the question, “Does the ECA 1972, properly
interpreted, mean that this Court should give priority to its obligations under the
Arbitration Act 1966 over its obligations under EU law?”, is treated as “necessarily
anterior”, whereas in the joint table, the issue comes in the middle of the list. But for
convenience, the issues are addressed below in the order in the table. Some of the
arguments raised under particular issues repeat or refer to the same points under
different issues: each has been considered under the relevant issue whether expressly
referred to or not. In the light of the court’s overall conclusion, the court has not
expressed a final view on the substance of the issues where to do so would risk
creating a possible conflict with the proceedings before the GCEU.

Issue 1: finality of decisions

90.

91.

92.

Issue 1 is formulated by the parties as follows. Does the Award have the status of res
judicata? If so, does EU law require this court to disregard national law rules as to
finality of decisions, or does the Klausner exception apply?

The essence of the issue is whether the Commission’s Final Decision of 30 March
2015 can affect the validity of the Award issued on 11 December 2013, since it
postdates it. (The Commission’s Injunction Decision of 26 May 2014 also postdates
it.)

 

The claimants contend that the Award has the status of res judicata and that the rule
in Case C-234/04 Kapferer [2006] ECR I-2605 applies. This case draws attention “to
the importance, both for the Community legal order and national legal systems, of the
principle of res judicata. In order to ensure both stability of the law and legal relations

93.

94,

95.

96.

97.

 

and the sound administration of justice, it is important that judicial decisions which
have become definitive after all rights of appeal have been exhausted or after the
expiry of time-limits provided for in that connection can no longer be called into
question” (paragraph 20).

The claimants submit that:

i) The content of the Award’s findings as to application of State aid law to
enforcement is irrelevant to the status of the Award as res judicata.

ii) The Award was binding and res judicata when rendered on 11 December 2013
(see ss. 1 and 2 of the 1966 Act, and CPR 40.7), which is when the obligation
on States to recognise it arose.

iii) The assertion of EU law rights was clearly possible in this case, meeting the
requirements of the principle of effectiveness. This is not a case of
circumvention of State aid law (as in the cases of Case C-505/14 Klausner
Holz Niedersachsen v Land Nordrhein- Westfalen, EU:C:2015:742 and Case C-
119/05 Lucchini [2007] ECR 1-6199 relied on by Romania and the
Commission).

Romania and the Commission submit that the Award does not have the status of res
judicata because:

i) There is no res judicata because the Award expressly refused to make any
findings on enforcement (see Award, para 330/ff).

ii) The Commission’s Injunction Decision of 26 May 2014 and Final Decision of
30 March 2015 pre-date the res judicata of the Award, which was 26 February
2016, so that the Kapferer principles do not apply.

iii) | The Klausner exception applies: in Lucchini, the CJEU ruled that EU law
precludes the application of a provision of national law which seeks to lay
down the principle of res judicata in so far as the application of that provision
prevents the recovery of State aid granted in breach of EU law which has been
found to be incompatible with the common market in a final Commission
decision.

The court’s view on these issues is as follows.

The claimants’ argument as to the applicability of the res judicata principle gains
weight from cases upholding the finality of arbitration awards generally (Case C-
126/97 Eco Swiss [1999] ECR 1-3079, and Case C-40/08 Asturcom [2012] 1 CMLR
34). (As to finality of awards under English law principles, see Emirates Trading
Agency LLC v Sociedade de Fomento Industrial Private Ltd [2015] EWHC 1452
(Comm)).

 

However, the immediate issue for the court is as to the effect of the Commission’s
Final Decision in this regard. The claimants’ submission is that the respect accorded
by EU law to the finality of decisions applies even if an EU institution makes a
directly inconsistent finding. So even where the Commission finds a measure to be a

98.

99.

100.

101.

102.

State aid, the status of a contrary prior final decision of a national court as res judicata
and thus enforceable is unaffected. Reliance is placed on Case C-507/08 Commission
v Slovak Republic [2010] ECR 1-13512.

The question is as to when the Award became res judicata, in the sense of acquiring
finality.

The claimants submit that this occurred on the date of the Award, which was 11
December 2013, before either of the Commission’s Decisions. This is supported by s.
2(1) of the Arbitration (International Investment Disputes) Act 1966, which provides
that:

“., an award registered under section 1 above shall, as respects
the pecuniary obligations which it imposes, be of the same
force and effect for the purposes of execution as if it had been a
judgment of the High Court given when the award was
rendered pursuant to the Convention and entered on the date of
registration under this Act, ...”.

 

Though nothing seems to turn on this, a judgment of the English High Court would
usually be considered as “given” when it is handed down, and “entered” on the date of
the formal order recording the court’s decision.

 

Romania and the Commission submit that finality did not occur until 26 February
2016 when the ICSID ad hoc Committee rejected Romania’s Annulment Application.
Reliance is placed on Christoph Schreuer et al, The ICSID Convention: A
Commentary (2nd edn, 2009), at p.1105, which states that:

“The exclusion of another remedy [that is, other than under the
ICSID Convention review procedures] means that a party to
ICSID proceedings that is dissatisfied with the Award may not
turn to another forum to seek relief for the same claim. Once
the ICSID tribunal has rendered its award and the review
procedures under the Convention have been exhausted, the case
is res judicata. The principle ne bis in idem precludes resort to
any national or international remedy.”

Romania points out that the review procedures under the Convention are not
exhausted until after the decision of the ICSID ad hoc Committee, which happened
on 26 February 2016.

The court begins by considering Commission v Slovak Republic (ibid), where the
issue was as to the recovery of a tax claim the writing off of which was confirmed by
the Slovak court in 2004 as part of an arrangement with creditors. On the expiry of the
period for an appeal, the decision of the Slovak court acquired the force of res
judicata (see para 7). By a decision issued in 2007, it was found by the Commission
to be State aid granted in breach of European Union law, and the Slovak Republic was
required to recover it.

The CJEU considered (at para 55) whether, where, as part of a procedure for
arrangement with creditors under court supervision, a national court judgment decides

103.

104.

on an arrangement which involves a debt to a public authority being partly written off,
and that write-off is thereafter categorised by the Commission as State aid, the finality
of that judgment can prevent the recovery of that aid.

In that regard, the Fourth Chamber stated as follows:

“56 In that regard, it must, first, be stated that the situation at
issue here is distinguishable from that in Lucchini, relied on by
the Commission, where the Court held that European Union
law precludes the application of a provision of national law
which seeks to lay down the principle of res judicata in so far
as the application of that provision prevents the recovery of
State aid granted in breach of European Union law which has
been found to be incompatible with the common market in a
decision of the Commission which has become final (see, to
that effect, paragraph 63 of Lucchini).

57 In the present case, the court judgment possessed of the
force of res judicata relied on by the Slovak Republic precedes
the decision whereby the Commission requires the recovery of
the aid at issue.

58 Consequently, as maintained by the Slovak Republic,
Lucchini cannot be of direct relevance to this case.

59 Secondly, attention should be drawn to the importance,
both in the European Union legal order and in the national legal
orders, of the principle of res judicata. In order to ensure
stability of the law and legal relations, as well as the sound
administration of justice, it is important that judicial decisions
which have become definitive after all rights of appeal have
been exhausted or after expiry of the time-limits provided to
exercise those rights can no longer be called into question
(Case C-224/01 Kébler [2003] ECR I-10239, paragraph 38;
Case C-234/04 Kapferer [2006] ECR I-2585, paragraph 20; and
Case C-2/08 Fallimento Olimpiclub [2009] ECR 1-7501,
paragraph 22).

60 Accordingly, European Union law does not in all
circumstances require a national court to disapply domestic
rules of procedure conferring the force of res judicata on a
judgment, even if to do so would make it possible to remedy an
infringement of European Union law by the judgment in
question (see, to that effect, Kapferer, paragraph 21, and
Fallimento Olimpiclub, paragraph 23).”

 

Turning to the present case, as explained above, the European Commission
participated as amicus in the ICSID arbitration, both Romania and the Commission
arguing that “any payment of compensation arising out of this Award would
constitute illegal state aid under EU law and render the Award unenforceable in the
EU”. As explained above, the Tribunal did not decide that question.

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

110.

111.

An asserted failure to decide whether Romania was prohibited from paying
compensation for the repeal of illegal State aid was one of Romania’s annulment
grounds. The Commission participated as amicus in the annulment proceedings as
well. The challenge was rejected by the ICSID ad hoc Committee, which decided that
“... it is clear that the Tribunal dealt with the issue posed by Romania. The Tribunal
gave reasons for its conclusion that it was not useful to determine whether the Award
would be unenforceable: it considered that this was not an issue before the Tribunal
because it was not its duty to address the potential non-enforceability of the Award
after it had been rendered” (para 230).

Drawing these points together, the court accepts that there is force in Romania’s
contentions that the issue of non-enforceability has never been decided in the ICSID
proceedings, and that the Award only achieved finality for ICSID purposes after the
Annulment Application was decided against Romania on 26 February 2016, so post-
dating the Commission’s Final Decision.

As a matter of English law, however, s. 2(1) of the 1966 Act provides that as respects
the pecuniary obligations which it imposes, the Award is “of the same force and effect
for the purposes of execution as if it had been a judgment of the High Court given
when the award was rendered pursuant to the Convention and entered on the date of
registration under this Act, ...”. A judgment or order takes effect from the day when
it is given (CPR 4.40.7). Read with Art. 54 of the ICSID Convention, this shows that
finality occurs at the time of the Award, because that is the time at which a final
judgment of the High Court is deemed to be given for enforcement purposes, and not
at the time of the resolution of annulment proceedings under the Convention.

 

 

It is true that the term “res judicata” may have several different meanings. But in the
court’s view the claimants are correct to submit that, as a matter of English law, the
Award became res judicata in the sense of acquiring finality on 11 December 2013,
not on 26 February 2016, and so pre-dated both the Commission’s Decisions.

The question is what follows from this conclusion. If the court proceeds to enforce
the Award against the assets of Romania as if it were a judgment of the court, as the
claimants invite it to do, it would be acting in direct contradiction with the
Commission’s Final Decision the effect of which is to prohibit payment by Romania.
In this regard, the case is different from Commission v Slovak Republic, where the
proceedings in the national court had closed, and the issue was as to recovery (see
para 10). In the present case, enforcement has not yet begun in the English court, and
court-sanctioned steps to enforce the Award would appear to engender a direct
conflict between the court and the Commission.

 

 

Further, account has to be taken of the claimants’ annulment proceedings in respect of
the Final Decision. The claimants’ position is that the res judicata principle is not
addressed in the Final Decision (this is not in dispute), and is not in issue in the
claimants’ proceedings in the GCEU to annul that decision. In that regard, the
claimants have two points, first that res judicata is not a ground that they advance for
annulment of the Final Decision, and second that it does not arise for consideration
before the GCEU.

 

 

The first point is not in dispute. However, the second point is in dispute. In its
defence in the annulment proceedings, the Commission relies on the K/ausner case,

contending that it shows that the courts will not accept an outcome that produces a
circumvention of the State aid rules by way of res judicata. Whilst the claimants do
not raise res judicata as a ground on annulment of the Commission’s Final Decision,
therefore, the issue of res judicata in the context of the decisions of national courts is
raised by the Commission. In the court’s view, Romania and the Commission are
correct to say that the meaning and scope of Klausner forms part of GCEU appeals,
and because it forms part of the argument in these proceedings, there would be a real
risk of inconsistent decisions if this court were now to decide as a matter of European
law that the Award can be enforced.

  

112. On this basis, applying the principles set out above, the court considers that the final
determination of the issue should be stayed pending the decision of the European
Court.

Issue 2: the effect of the Arbitration (International Investment Disputes) Act 1966

113. Issue 2 is formulated by the parties as follows. Leaving aside questions of EU law,
does this court have a duty under the 1966 Act to register/enforce the Award?

114. The claimants submit that the 1966 Act requires the court to enforce the Award.

i) The terms of the 1966 Arbitration Act (implementing Art. 54 of the ICSID
Convention) are clear and allow for no derogation—especially in not
providing a public policy exception.

ii) Romania’s argument flies in the face of the purpose of the 1966 Act, especially
as interpreted in light of the UK’s clear underlying international obligatio

 

iii) In any event, if the Award were a High Court judgment it would be enforced,
applying Kapferer (ibid).

115. The claimants submit that enforcement of the Award is therefore mandatory under the
1966 Act, and that EU law provides no ground for departing from this position, for
the reasons set out in the claimants’ submissions on issues | and 3-5. Romania’s
application should be dismissed.

116. Romania and the Commission submit that the 1966 Act only requires that the Award
be treated in the same way the court would treat a judgment of the High Court, and
that the obligation is one of non-discrimination, not result. The High Court would
also give priority to EU law and refuse to enforce a judgment in these circumstances,
so no conflict arises. The 1966 Act imposes no requirement on this court to
register/enforce the Award, and the Order of 17 October 2014 registering the Award
must be set aside, alternatively stayed.

117. In setting out the court’s reasons, it is convenient to consider these alternative
submissions as to setting aside registration and staying enforcement separately.

(i) The submission that the registration of the Award must be set aside

118. The primary case of Romania and the Commission is that the Order of the English
court made on 17 October 2014 registering the Award must be set aside.

119.

120.

121.

122.

123.

124.

125.

This submission, if correct, would (in the court’s view) conflict with the terms of s.
1(2) of the Arbitration (International Investment Disputes) Act 1966, which provides
for what has been called “automatic” registration of an ICSID award:

“A person seeking recognition or enforcement of such an award
shall be entitled to have the award registered in the High Court
subject to proof of the prescribed matters and to the other
provisions of this Act.”

Romania and the Commission have placed emphasis on the fact that at the time of
registration, the Commission had already issued its Injunction Decision of 26 May
2014 restraining Romania from taking any action in execution or implementation of
the Award until it had taken a final decision on the compatibility of State aid. At this
time, Romania itself had purported to satisfy the Award by a set-off against taxes.

 

However, in the court’s view, it is important to note the scope of the Injunction
Decision. It is addressed to Romania, the requirement in the operative part of the
decision being that “Romania shall immediately suspend any action which may lead
to the execution or implementation or execution of the Award of 11 December 2013

. as the execution of the award appears to constitute unlawful State aid, until the
Commission has taken a final decision on the compatibility of that State aid with the
internal market”.

In the usual way, the registration of the Award by the English court was on the
application of the claimants as the holders of the Award in their favour. The
application was submitted by the claimants to the judge ex parte on the documents,
and Romania took no action, and indeed played no part in the process at that time.
The Registration Order entitled Romania to apply to set aside or vary the Registration
Order, which it does in the present application.

Clearly therefore, the registration of the Award did not place Romania in breach of
the Injunction Decision, and the claimants were not in breach by registering the
Award. The operative part of the Injunction Decision (which consists of a single
article) is directed solely at Romania not the claimants (c.f. the operative part of the
Commission’s Final Decision set out above).

 

Of course, registration is a step that may lead to enforcement action in due course.
The claimants make clear (as one would expect) that leaving the Registration Order
intact carries with it “the prospect of the Award’s eventual execution against
commercial property held by Romania in the UK”.

However, in the court’s view, just as there is a distinction between the giving of a
judgment and the enforcement of it, so there is a distinction between registering an
award, and enforcing it. Registration is not necessarily a precursor to execution,
though it may lead to it. In commercial terms, there may be good reason to register an
award aside from imminent enforcement, for example for reasons of priority as
against other creditors, or as a precaution. So in this case, the claimants who have a
binding award in their favour could be prejudiced by setting aside the registration
whilst the State aid issue is resolved in the European courts. In the court’s view, care
should be taken not to derogate from the entitlement to have an award registered as a
judgment outside the confines of the 1966 Act (as to such confines, see for example

 

126.

127.

128.

129.

130.

the provisions as to proving authenticity (s.1(6)(b)), and where there has been prior
satisfaction of the award in part or in whole (s.1(5)).

The issue can be resolved on the facts of the present case. As both Romania and the
Commission have been at pains to emphasise, the prohibited State aid measure is
payment of the Award, whether by implementation or execution. Thus, the
Commission’s Final Decision stipulates that “Romania shall not pay any incompatible
aid ...” (italics added). Registration of the Award is not comprehended within the
Final Decision, and there is no reason to read it in. Registration in itself does not
create a risk of conflict between decisions of domestic and EU institutions in the sense
established in the case law. The court does not accept the submissions of Romania
and the Commission in this respect.

 

 

(ii) The submission that enforcement proceedings should be stayed

 

The alternative submission of Romania and the Commission is that enforcement
proceedings on the Registration Order should be stayed until the claimants’
applications to annul the Commission’s Final Decision are determined by the EU
Courts.

The court’s conclusion is as follows. It is correct, as the claimants say, that the 1966
Act is clear, and unlike the Arbitration Act 1996, it does not provide a public policy
exception. As explained above, subject to narrow exceptions, a party holding an
ICSID award is entitled to have it registered in England and Wales, and is thereafter
in the same position as regards enforcement of pecuniary obligations as if the award
was a final judgment of the High Court.

 

Enforcement is subject to the law applicable to enforcing such a judgment (see e.g.
AIG Capital Partners Inc v Republic of Kazakhstan, ibid, at [87], in which it was held
that enforcement of an ICSID award was subject to the restrictions in the State
Immunity Act 1978). In other words, by registration, the Award is equated to a final
domestic judgment for these purposes, but is not in a better (or worse) position. As is
recorded in Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, ibid, at p.1124, the
1965 Report of the Executive Directors on the Convention confirms in paragraph 42
that, “... Article 54 requires every Contracting State to recognize the award as binding
and to enforce the pecuniary obligations imposed by the award as if it were a final
decision of a domestic court”.

The constraint on enforcement inherent in sovereign immunity was specifically

recognised in the Report. In paragraph 43 it reads:
“The doctrine of sovereign immunity may prevent the forced
execution in a State of judgments obtained against foreign
States or against the State in which execution is sought. Article
54 requires Contracting States to equate an award rendered
pursuant to the Convention with a final judgment of its own
courts. It does not require them to go beyond that and to
undertake forced execution of awards rendered pursuant to the
Convention in cases in which final judgments could not be
executed. In order to leave no doubt on this point Article 55
provides that nothing in Article 54 shall be construed as
derogating from the law in force in any Contracting State

131.

132.

133.

134.

135.

relating to immunity of that State or of any foreign State from
execution.”

In the present case, a judgment of the High Court is subject to the EU rules as to State
aid as explained above. Applying the case law referred to above, the court must
refrain from taking a decision which conflicts with a decision of the Commission.
Whilst this case law may be consonant with what is seen as public policy, it is not
based on it. As the Court of Appeal put it in the passage from Emerald Supplies cited
above, “The general principle of legal certainty, which underpins the duty of sincere
cooperation, requires Member States to avoid making decisions that could conflict
with a decision contemplated by the Commission”. This applies to the court itself:
“., national courts must, in particular, refrain from taking decisions which conflict
with a decision of the Commission” (Deutsche Lufthansa, ibid, para 41).

 
  

 

 

 

This court cannot therefore proceed to enforce the judgment consequent on
registration of the Award in circumstances in which the Commission has prohibited
Romania from making any payment under the Award to the claimants because in
doing so, the court would, in effect, be acting unlawfully. This does not (in the
court’s view) create a conflict with the international obligations of the UK as
contained in the 1966 Arbitration Act implementing the ICSID Convention in UK
law, because a purely domestic judgment would be subject to the same limitation.

The court accepts the submission of Romania and the Commission in this respect.
Contrary to the claimants’ submissions, there is no question of this being “tantamount
to granting states a power of full review of an ICSID Award”. There is no such
review available on grounds of public policy or otherwise. The question is a very
limited and specific one of legality in enforcement.

This can be seen from the Award itself. The question of the effect of the State aid
tules on the claimants’ claim was an issue in the arbitration. Submissions were made
to the Tribunal by the European Commission as well as the parties. Understandably,
the Tribunal felt it right not to rule on them. In paragraph 340 of the Award, the
Tribunal left the position open, saying:

“The Tribunal finds that it is not desirable to embark on
predictions as to the possible conduct of various persons and
authorities after the Award has been rendered, especially but
not exclusively when it comes to enforcement matters. It is thus
inappropriate for the Tribunal to base its decisions in this case
on matters of EU law that may come to apply after the Award
has been rendered. It will thus not address the Parties’ and the
Commission’s arguments on enforceability of the Award.”

 

The position that the Tribunal foreshadowed as regards enforcement has in fact
happened.

Similarly, as set out above, where proceedings are on foot in the European Court (i.e.
the GCEU or CJEU) to annul a decision of the Commission, a national court may be
required to stay domestic proceedings where there is a material risk of conflict with
the decision of the European Court pending the resolution of the challenge: this is as

to avoid the risk of inconsistent conclusions. The principle is not in dispute. Again, a
purely domestic judgment is subject to this limitation.

Issue 3: Article 351 TFEU

136.

137.

138.

139.

140.

141,

Issue 3 is formulated by the parties as follows. Is the UK and this Court obliged to
enforce the Award under the ICSID Convention, and if so is that obligation unaffected
by EU law, by reason of Art. 351 TFEU?

The claimants’ case is that EU law contemplates the case of a conflict arising between
duties under EU law and an international agreement entered by a Member State
before its accession to the Union. Art. 351 TFEU provides for the Member State’s
obligations under a prior international agreement with a non-Member State to
continue despite its subsequent accession to the EU, and in the case of the UK, the
ICSID Convention is such a prior international agreement.

 

Art. 351 TFEU provides that:

“The rights and obligations arising from agreements concluded before 1
January 1958 or, for acceding States, before the date of their accession,
between one or more Member States on the one hand, and one or more third
countries on the other, shall not be affected by the provisions of the
Treaties.”

Art. 351 goes on to provide that, “To the extent that such agreements are not
compatible with the Treaties, the Member State ... concerned shall take all
appropriate steps to eliminate the incompatibilities established”.

The claimants’ case is that Art. 351 reflects the general principle of public
international law that an agreement between two states cannot affect the obligations
that those parties may have under prior agreements with third parties: Case C-205/06
Commission v Austria [2009] 2 CMLR 50, at para 33. Where Art. 351 applies, the
national courts of Member States may apply national legislation implementing
international obligations, even if this would otherwise be contrary to a provision of
EU law: see Case C-158/91 Levy [1993] ECR 1I-4300, at para 22. The ECJ has
repeatedly held that Art. 351 “is of general scope and applies to any international
agreement, irrespective of subject-matter, which is capable of affecting application of
the Treaty”: see Case C-466/98 Commission v UK [2002] ECR 1-9496, para 23.

The claimants’ case is that Art. 351 plainly applies in this case:

i) The UK signed the ICSID Convention in 1965, and enacted the 1966 Act to
implement the obligations contained in it. The ICSID Convention has more
than 150 State parties, most of which are not EU Member States, and which
were parties prior to the UK’s accession to the then European Economic
Community in 1973.

ii) Art. 54(1) of the ICSID Convention establishes obligations for all parties to
recognise and enforce awards: “Each Contracting State shall recognize an
award rendered pursuant to this Convention as binding and enforce the

142.

143.

iii)

iv)

9)

pecuniary obligations imposed by that award within its territories as if it were
a final judgment of a court in that State.”

The 1966 Act in turn implements this international obligation in domestic law
in the provisions set out above.

The UK’s membership of the ICSID Convention and the 1966 Act both took
effect in 1967, several years prior to the UK joining the EEC.

The UK accordingly bears obligations to non-Member States to recognise and
enforce any award rendered under the ICSID Convention, including the Award
here, and has created under national law parallel duties on this court to register
such awards. The existence of this obligation engages Art. 351.

The claimants’ case as summarised in the joint table is that enforcement is required
under the ICSID Convention and Art.351 applies:

i)

ii)

iii)

The ICSID Convention requires the court to enforce the Award as if it were a
final judgment of a UK court. Such a judgment would be enforced, applying
Kapferer (for the same reasons as contended for in Issues 1 and 2).
Enforcement of the Award is therefore mandatory under the ICSID
Convention.

Art. 351 applies because the ICSID Convention imposes applicable prior
multilateral international obligations on the UK owed to non-EU Member
States, and creates an enforcement system in which all ICSID parties have a
shared interest.

EU law imposes no requirement on this court to disregard the ICSID
Convention or the 1966 Act, which require enforcement here, even if
enforcement would otherwise be incompatible with EU law duties (as to which
see Issue 4 below).

Romania and the Commission submit in summary that Art. 351 TFEU does not apply
because:

i)

ii)

iii)

The UK’s ICSID obligations do not require enforcement for the same reasons
as contended for under Issue 2: that is, a final judgment of a UK court would
not be enforced, so that no conflict of the UK’s international obligations with
EU law arises.

Art. 351 does not apply because this is a case of “intra~-Community relations”
(i.e. no third country State is involved), and EU law does not require priority to
be given to the ICSID Convention in such a case (Case T-69/89, RTE v
Commission, EU:T:1991:39).

EU law requires this court to give priority to its duties under EU law, over
those under the 1966 Act, so that the Registration Order must be set aside or
stayed.

144.

145.

146.

147.

148.

149.

150.

151.

152.

So far as the parties’ reasoning refers to other issues, reference is made to the parts of
the judgment dealing with those other issues. Otherwise, the court’s conclusion is as
follows.

Romania and the Commission rely on the Final Decision, in which the Commission
determined that Art. 351 TFEU “is not relevant for this case”. The reasons given are
that (1) the BIT is a treaty concluded between two Member States of the Union
(Sweden and Romania), and is not a treaty “between one or more Member States on
the one hand, and one or more third countries on the other”, and (2) no third country
Contracting Party to the ICSID Convention is party to the BIT.

 

Romania and the Commission submit that the “short, but complete answer to the
claimants’ argument under this heading is that unless and until the Commission’s
Final Decision is annulled by the EU Courts, it is not open to a national court to find
that the Commission’s conclusions in this regard are wrong”.

The claimants’ response is that the issue before the court is different, because the
court is concerned solely with the UK’s obligations to enforce the Award under the
ICSID Convention.

However in the court’s view, much the same considerations arise in that regard as are
set out above. If the court enforces the Award, Romania will be required to pay the
Award, which is what the Commission’s Final Decision prohibits.

As Romania put it, although the claimants’ position is that they are not seeking to call
into question the validity of the Commission’s Final Decision, in substance that is
what they are doing. On their own appeal to the GCEU, this point, if they are correct,
is a complete answer to the validity of the decision. (And as Romania submitted,
these are not questions of fact, but are legal issues.)

 

Much the same considerations arise as regards possible conflict with the decision of
the GCEU in the annulment proceedings brought by the claimants. There is no
question in this regard that the claimants raise the Art. 351 issue: it is one of the
grounds on which they seek annulment of the Commission’s Final Decision.

 

The claimants argue that the Art. 351 issue in the GCEU is different, focusing on the
Sweden/Romania BIT which is not relevant in this court and involving only
Romania’s ICSID duties, not those of the UK. The GCEU will not make any ruling
on UK’s ICSID duties.

 

However, even accepting that there is a difference in how the Art. 351 issue arises in
the two proceedings, it is difficult to see how the risk of conflicting decisions could be
avoided if this court was now to rule on the issue. As Romania and the Commission
point out, at the minimum the GCEU will be considering the same cases and the same
principles decided under Art. 351 (including the RTE case) as this court is being asked
to consider. In the circumstances, applying the principles set out above, the case for a
stay of these proceedings while the annulment action goes forward is a strong one.

  

Issue 4: European Communities Act 1972

153.

154.

155.

156.

The European Communities Act 1972 (the “ECA 1972”) is the Act which legislated
for the accession of the United Kingdom to what is now the European Union.

Issue 4 is formulated by the parties as follows. Does the ECA 1972, properly
interpreted, mean that this Court should give priority to its obligations under the
Arbitration Act 1966 over its obligations under EU law?

The claimants’ submissions as to the ICSID Convention are set out above. They
submit further that the implicit premise of the case of Romania and the Commission is
that the UK and the court are subject to binding EU law obligations enjoying
supremacy over English law. However this, they submit, overlooks the necessarily
anterior question as to whether in the ECA 1972 Parliament is to be taken to have
intended to put the UK (and its courts) in breach of the UK’s pre-accession
international obligations.

The claimants submit that the first task for the court, as a matter of English law, is to
consider Parliament’s intention when enacting the ECA 1972 and the proper scope of
s. 2(1), which did not repeal the 1966 Act. In that regard, it is submitted that:

(1) The proper construction of s.2 is a question of domestic English law:
Schindler v Chancellor of The Duchy of Lancaster [2016] EWCA Civ 469;
and UKSC 2016/0105.

(2) On a proper construction of s.2, Parliament should not be taken to have
intended to override the implementation of prior international obligations of
the UK in the 1966 Act.

(3) Art. 5(1) TEU states, “The limits of Union competences are governed by
the principle of conferral”. Under that principle, Art. 5(2) TEU goes on to
provide, “the Union shall act only within the limits of the competences
conferred on it by the Member States in the Treaties to attain the objectives
set out therein”.

(4) Accession does not, therefore, entail a transfer of sovereignty to the EU but
voluntary limitation by the Member States of their respective sovereignties
(Opinion 1/91 ECLI:EU:C:1991:490, para 21, citing Case 26/62, Van Gend
en Loos ECLI:EU:C:1963:1). How such limitation may be achieved by a
given Member State is dependent on its particular constitutional
arrangements.

(5) Therefore, primary English law such as that contained in the 1966 Act may
fall to be disapplied on the ground that it conflicts with directly effective
EU law if, but only if, the matter to which it relates falls within the scope of
the authorisation given by Parliament under s.2(1) of the ECA 1972 (see
Shindler in the Court of Appeal at [58]). The crucial question is the
presumed intention of Parliament when passing the ECA 1972 (Pham v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] UKSC 19 at [82]).

(6) The question before the court is whether Parliament could have intended,
when enacting s.2(1) of the 1972 Act, that it should have the effect of

157.

158.

159.

160.

empowering the EU to put the UK in breach of pre-accession international
obligations. That could not have been Parliament’s intention for two
reasons.

(7) _ First, it is a settled principle of English law that a statute should, if possible,
be interpreted so as fully to respect international obligations of the UK
under treaties concluded on its behalf.

(8) Second, before Parliament was a Treaty that expressly provided, in what
has become Art. 351 TFEU, that it would not affect the pre-accession
international obligations of Member States. The effect of the ECA 1972
was to confer defined competences “within limited fields” (Case 6-64 Costa
v E.N.E.L.: ECLI: EU: C:1964:66, p.593), such limitation including the
preservation of the prior international obligations falling under Art. 351.

(9) As a matter of English law, therefore, no authority has been given by
Parliament for this Court to disapply the 1966 Act, even if the enforcement
of the Award were incompatible with directly effective EU law.

(10) Romania’s application should therefore be dismissed.

Romania accepts that whether or not a provision falls within or outside s. 2(1) ECA
1972 is a matter of construction. It submits that State aid rules plainly fall within s.2,
because Art. 3 TFEU provides that the Union shall have exclusive competence in
competition matters. It follows that the effect of State aid rules on the UK’s pre-
Accession obligations in the 1966 Act is within the scope of Art. 351 TFEU (which is
set out above) and the matter is one in which jurisdiction is conferred on the EU. In
any case, Romania submits that there is no analogy with the cases of Schindler and
Pham which raised (respectively) the question of a country leaving the EU altogether,
and citizenship matters, both of which (unlike State aid) are outside the competences
conferred on the EU. Romania accordingly submits that EU law has primacy in
respect of the 1966 Act and that the Registration Order must be set aside or stayed.

The court’s conclusion on this issue is as follows.

The issue as formulated assumes a conflict between the provisions of the ECA 1972
and the court’s obligations under the Arbitration (International Investment Disputes)
Act 1966, so that the question arises as to whether such obligations have primacy over
its obligations under EU law.

However, for reasons set out elsewhere, this conflict does not arise in the present case.
The claimants were entitled to register the Award by way of the Registration Order of
17 October 2014, and there are no grounds for setting aside the registration. As
regards enforcement, Art. 54 of the ICSID Convention requires Contracting States to
equate an award rendered pursuant to the Convention with a final judgment of its own
courts. The court cannot enforce the judgment consequent on registration of the
Award in circumstances in which the Commission has prohibited Romania from
making any payment under the Award to the claimants. However, a purely domestic
judgment would be subject to the same limitation, so that a stay would not put the UK
in breach of pre-accession international obligations.

  

Issue 5: EU duties, especially Art. 4(3)

161.

162.

163.

164.

165.

166.

167.

Issue 5 is formulated by the parties as follows. Subject to the answers to points (1) to
(4) above, do Art. 4(3) TEU (sincere cooperation), Art. 19 TEU (effective judicial
protection), and/or the principle of effectiveness require the court not to
recognise/enforce the Award?

The claimants say no: rejecting the application would not infringe the UK’s EU law
obligations under Art. 4(3) TEU (nor any other EU law duty) because:

i) The terms of the Commission’s Final Decision do not apply to execution
outside Romania;

ii) Compulsory execution of the Award in the UK is not imputable to Romania;

iii) | Romania’s arguments would lead to an unprecedented and exorbitant

application of Art. 4(3) TEU, read together with Art. 4(2), or any other
provision of EU law on which Romania or the European Commission rely.

 

Consequently, the claimants contend that there is no conflict between the
Commission’s Final Decision, Art. 4(3) TEU or any other EU law duty, and the UK.
court’s obligations under the 1966 Act, as those EU law duties would not be breached
by execution or enforcement. In any event, if the claimants succeed on any of (i)
Kapferer, (ii) Art.351 or (iii) the ECA 1972 (see above), Romania’s arguments on this
issue (5) will be insufficient, and its application must fail.

Romania and the Commission say yes: if the Registration Order is not set-
aside/stayed, the UK courts would render the Commission’s Final Decision
ineffective by forcing Romania to do the very thing prohibited. On imputability:

i) This is no need to show that payment pursuant to an order of the UK courts is
“imputable” to Romania because sincere cooperation and effectiveness are
standalone principles of EU law that can be breached independently by the UK
courts.

ii) Any requirement of “imputability” is in any event satisfied by Romania
entering into the BIT and creating the conditions for payment of compensation
(see the Commission’s Final Decision, para 118).

Consequently, Romania and the Commission submit that there is a conflict between
the court’s duties under EU law and its duties under the 1966 Act, and EU law must
take priority, so that the Registration Order must be set aside/stayed.

The court’s conclusion on this issue is as follows. There is no need to deal separately
with Art. 19 TEU, which does not add to Art. 4(3) in this context. For the points
raised by the claimants other than imputability, see elsewhere in this judgment.

The claimants’ case on imputability has been referred to above. It is not in dispute that
in order to constitute State aid, a measure must be imputable to the Member State
concerned. As the Court of Justice has said, the rules on State aid apply to “decisions
by Member States by which the latter, in pursuit of their own economic and social
objectives give, by unilateral and autonomous decisions, undertakings or other

  
 

168.

169.

170.

171.

172.

persons resources or procure for them advantages intended to encourage the
attainment of the economic or social objectives sought” (Case 61/79, Amministrazione
delle Finanze dello Stato v Denkavit Italia, EU:C:1980:100, para 31).

The claimants’ case is that any satisfaction of the Award, or part of it, achieved as a
consequence of execution pursuant to registration would not amount to an act
imputable to Romania because it would be involuntary, and not pursuant to an
autonomous decision by Romania. It could not, therefore, entail the granting of
illegal State aid by Romania to the claimants.

The Commission’s Final Decision deals with imputability in paras 117 ef seq,
concluding in para 121 that the measure, that is payment of the Award by Romania, is
imputable to Romania.

The claimants are seeking to annul the Final Decision in the GCEU, but they contend
that the issue of imputability in the GCEU is different, and the GCEU will not rule on
whether the decision or Art. 4(3) TEU apply to compulsory execution outside
Romania.

Romania and the Commission contend that the meaning and scope of the
Commission’s Final Decision, particularly para 118, forms part of GCEU appeals, the
point being that any requirement of “imputability” is satisfied by Romania entering
into the BIT with Sweden and creating the conditions for payment of compensation.

Whether this point is right or wrong, in the court’s view it is before the GCEU for
decision in the annulment proceedings, and a decision by this court as to imputability
would risk a conflict. In any case, if the court were now to enforce the Award,
Romania would be required to pay the Award, which is what the Commission’s Final
Decision prohibits. Reference is made to the principles set out above.

Issue 6: payment

173.

174.

175.

176.

Issue 6 is formulated by the parties as follows. Must the Registration Order be set
aside because the Award has been paid in full?

 

Romania contends that the Award has been paid in full, but it did no more than touch
on the point in its oral argument, and states it without elaboration in the joint table of
submissions on key issues.

The claimants contend that (i) s. 1(5) of the 1966 Act provides for registration of the
Award or balance outstanding at the date of application, and even on Romania’s case
there was no payment in full on that date, and (ii) in any event, there has been no
payment in full at any subsequent point (this is not elaborated either).

The court will deal with the payment issue equally briefly:

(1) In early 2015, the Romanian court executor seized sums amounting to
45,681,713 RON (approximately £9m) from the Romanian Ministry of
Public Finance’s account. Some of this was subsequently recovered by the
authorities. So far as the money went to the claimants, the Award was
satisfied pro rata: the parties can agree the figures.

(2) In January 2014, Romania offset a portion of the compensation awarded to
the claimants by the ICSID Tribunal against RON 337,492,864
(approximately £66m) of taxes owed by European Food S.A. (the 3%
claimant). However, on 11 May 2015 the Oradea Court of Appeal annulled
the set-off. Romania appealed this decision to the Romanian Supreme
Court on 18 June 2015, but no decision has yet been handed down.
Romania argues that that its pending appeal means that the claimants
continue to benefit from the set-off (e.g., they cannot be pursued for the tax
debt that would be outstanding were the set-off not operative), and so the
set-off remains effective. The court does not agree, because set-off does
not amount to payment unless the debt in question is extinguished, which is
not the case if the set-off has been annulled.

(3) A Special Treasury Account was set up in the name of both the claimants
and the Romanian court executor on 9 March 2015, and RON 472,788,675
(approximately £93m, which Romania says was the remaining balance of
the Award) was transferred into it by the Romanian Ministry of Finance.
This was a “blocked” account: neither party could withdraw funds from it
unless and until the European Commission gave its final decision. As has
been explained, this was forthcoming on 30 March 2015, whereupon the
sums paid in were withdrawn by the Romanian authorities. These
arrangements plainly do not constitute payment.

(4) It follows that most of the Award remains unpaid.

Issue 7: the Romania-Sweden BIT

177.

178.

179.

180.

Issue 7 is formulated by the parties as follows. Is the Romania-Sweden BIT invalid?

 

The Commission’s position is that the Sweden-Romania BIT impinges generally upon
the Union’s exclusive competence to regulate intra-EU cross-border investments. The
court’s understanding is that this position is taken as regards all extant intra-EU BITs.
It is further submitted by the Commission that the Sweden—Romania BIT became
invalid as a matter of international law as from the date of Romania’s accession to the
European Union. This (it is submitted) follows from the general principle of primacy
of Union law. The consequence is that no question of the application of Art. 351
TFEU arises, since the Award was given per incuriam and cannot be regarded as
valid.

 

The claimants submit that the argument is irrelevant to the matter for decision by the
court.

The court’s conclusion is as follows. The English court cannot rule on the validity of
a treaty between Sweden and Romania, though it perhaps could refer the question to
the CJEU (see below). However, the court agrees with the claimants that, reference
aside, validity of the Romania-Sweden BIT is not relevant to the issues to be decided
in this case.

 

Reference to the CJIEU

181.

An alternative to a stay, namely an Article 267 TFEU reference to the CJEU, is
supported by Romania and the Commission, but the claimants are strongly opposed to
this course. In fact, the questions to be referred on such a reference are not
straightforward to identify. The matter is already before the European court by way
of the current annulment proceedings brought by the claimants, and in the
circumstances, the court does not consider a reference to be appropriate, bearing in
mind that a reference by a first instance court is discretionary.

Security

182.

183.

184.

185.

186.

187.

If contrary to the claimants’ primary contention the court finds that a stay should be
ordered, by application issued on 29 September 2016 the claimants ask the court to
make the grant of such stay conditional upon the grant of full or substantial security
for the Award. Skeleton arguments were filed by the claimants on 27 October 2016
and by Romania on 28 October 2016.

As indicated above, the court does consider that a stay should be granted pending the
outcome of the claimants’ annulment proceedings in the European court, and so the
issue does arise.

There was insufficient time at the hearing to receive oral submissions on the issue of
security. However:

i) The Commission appeared to accept in oral argument that the court had power
to order security, but that acceptance may have been linked to the limitations
expressed by the CJEU in C-304/09 Commission v Italy EU:C:2010:812 in
connection with interim measures from a national court in the case of recovery
proceedings relating to State aid.

ii) The claimants appeared to submit in oral argument that security would not be
of assistance, since it would not be paid to them. However, in written
submissions they contend that security would assist them in securing credit
facilities for them to pursue their business operations and/or allow them to
continue enforce the Award, and would ensure that, should a stay be granted
but the European Court rule in their favour, they would be able promptly to
recover sums due to them.

On 14 November 2016, the court indicated to the parties that it would deal with the
security application in the judgment, and the parties indicated that they were content
for the court to deal with the matter on the documents. The court then received
further written submissions on 22 November and 25 November 2016 from Romania
and the claimants respectively, followed by letters dated 6 December 2016, 9
December 2016 and 10 January 2017 as regards other matters. No further
submissions have been lodged by the Commission.

Though it is the claimants’ application, Romania’s submissions came first, and it is
convenient to take them in that order.

In summary, Romania submits that:

188.

ii)

iii)

iv)

9)

vi)

vii)

There is no legal basis for imposing security. Requiring it to lodge security in
the amount of the ICSID Award before enforcement in circumstances where
the legality of recognition is in genuine dispute would circumvent the 1966
Act process.

Nothing practical would be achieved in lodging security, since the claimants
would not get the money. By contrast, there would be considerable prejudice
to Romania if it had to lodge a substantial security now.

Even on the claimants’ case, the EGO 24 incentives that alleviated certain of
their tax liabilities would have expired in 2009. So, there is no basis for
refusing to pay taxes due since 2009 — a period of 7 years — and the court
should be slow to “reward” the claimants for not paying their taxes since this
date.

There is a significant risk that imposing security would violate EU law,
because if the court were to order such a security to be paid, that might itself
fail to respect the Commission’s Final Decision in a way that violates EU law.

The court should not exercise any discretion it has in the claimants’ favour, in
particular because they could have sought interim relief from the GCEU under
Art. 278 TFEU.

The UK’s connection with the claim is tenuous at best. It appears to be a
purely speculative claim by the claimants that some relevant and unattached
and/or accessible Romanian assets may be located here.

The claimants have sought to make a series of prejudicial allegations about
“delay” by Romania. These are baseless, and the simple reality is that
Romania faces a quandary while the legal effects of the Award and
Commission’s Final Decision co-exist.

 

In summary, the claimants submit that:

i)

ii)

iii)

iv)

9)

The court has jurisdiction to grant security pursuant to the court’s inherent
jurisdiction, CPR 25.1 and/or CPR 3.1(3).

There is a contradiction in Romania’s argument that staying enforcement of an
ICSID Award would not circumvent the process of the 1966 Act, whereas the
granting of security would do so.

If, contrary to the claimants’ case, this court has power to grant a stay, then it
follows that it has power to grant security. The source of such a power would
inevitably be the same.

The claimants commenced the arbitration proceedings 11 years ago, and the
Award itself was issued nearly 3 years ago. They have yet to recover more
than a fraction of the sums due to them.

Romania continues to make persistent efforts to avoid its obligations under the
Award, pursuing its avowed strategy of delay. Romania has not committed

189.

190.

191.

unequivocally to pay the damages forthwith should the GCEU annul the
Commission’s Final Decision.

vi) Romania is attempting to recover from the claimants monies it alleges have
been paid under the Award (including interest on such amounts, notably
monies placed in the Special Treasury Account that were never actually paid to
the claimants).

vii) At the least, Romania is invited to confirm to the court that it does not
presently intend to take enforcement actions against any of the claimants in
furtherance of the Commission’s Final Decision, thereby further aggravating
the prejudice to claimants.

viii) There is no risk that imposing security would violate EU law.

ix) Romania has been the subject of a request to disclose its assets in this
jurisdiction. It has so far declined to do so, and so it is open to the claimants to
infer that there may well be assets in this jurisdiction against which the Award
may be enforced.

 

x) The UK’s connection to the claim is the same as that of any other party to the
ICSID Convention.

xi) As regards delay, it is Romania, not the claimants, that has been in breach of
its international obligations for over a decade now.

xii) Security should be ordered for the full amount of the Award outstanding less
what was paid by way of court-ordered execution (see above).

xiii) At 31 August 2016, the amount outstanding, including interest, was RON
918,631,643 which equates to roughly £173m at today’s rate of | RON =
0.189055 GBP. The claimants invite the court to set the amount of security at
no less than £150m.

A further matter arises from the exchange of letters of 6 and 9 December 2016. In
short, it seems that Romania is taking enforcement action to recover from the
claimants the sums they received by way of court-ordered execution (see above), and
also the amount they are said to have received by way of set off against tax liabilities
(see above). Romania says that it is obliged to do so because it is required to recover
payments under the Commission’s Final Decision. This is subject to a further letter of
explanation from Romania dated 10 January 2017.

As to the set-off, as explained above, in 2015 the Oradea Court of Appeal annulled
the set-off against taxes owed by the 3" claimant, and though Romania has appealed
this decision to the Supreme Court, no decision has yet been handed down. As held
earlier in this judgment, set-off does not amount to payment unless the debt in
question is extinguished, which is not the case if the set-off has been annulled.

The court recognises that there are discretionary arguments against, as well as in
favour of, the claimants’ application for an order requiring Romania to provide

192.

193.

194.

195.

196.

197.

198.

security as a term of the stay, on the assumption that there is power to make such an
order.

Nevertheless, having considered at this stage the parties’ written submissions only,
the court considers that the claimants have advanced a persuasive case for an order
requiring Romania to provide security as a term of the stay. This is subject to the
points identified below. It reflects the fact that (i) the proceedings relate to an ICSID
Award which pre-dates the decisions of the Commission, (ii) the Award is to be
treated as a final judgment of the English court given at the time of the Award, and
(iii) the Award has been unpaid for some years. More generally, although security is
not the same as enforcement or payment because the monies may never be paid to the
claimants, the grant of security is at least consonant with the obligation placed on the
UK under the ICSID Convention is to enforce awards. Finally, as the claimants say,
should the European Court rule in their favour, security would assist in enabling them
promptly to recover the sums due to them. This is particularly important given the
long duration of this dispute.

At the same time, all the parties recognise the exceptional nature of this case. There
are two points in particular which the court has not been able to resolve on the written
material the parties have provided.

First, the power to order security must be properly identified. In the case of a New
York Convention award, by statute security may be ordered in defined circumstances
where the court is not proceeding to immediate enforcement of the award (see s.
103(5) Arbitration Act 1996 discussed recently in Travis Coal Restructured Holdings
Lic v Essar Global Fund Ltd [2014] 2 Lloyd's Rep. 494). There is no equivalent in
the 1966 Act which, as pointed out above, provides in s. 1(2) for what has been called
“automatic” registration of an ICSID award.

 

There is a real question therefore as to the legal basis for imposing security in the
circumstances of this case. Both parties deal with the issue relatively briefly in their
pre- and post-hearing written submissions.

The claimants say that the application “is made pursuant to the Court’s inherent
jurisdiction, CPR 25.1 and/or CPR 3.1(3) and/or on such basis as may flow from the
Court’s decision that it has power to grant a stay and in its judgment should do so.
Put simply, if, contrary to the Cs’ case, this Court has power to grant a stay, then it
follows that it has power to grant security. The source of such a power would
inevitably be the same”.

Romania points out that security is not listed as an interim remedy available under
CPR 25.1, and contends that whilst the general power under CPR 3.1(3) is in broad
terms, there are difficulties in founding the grant of security on the court’s general
powers of case management. Its case is that there is no power to order security under
the court’s inherent jurisdiction or otherwise.

 

The court considers that further clarity is required as to whether there is power to
grant security and if so on what basis.

199.

200.

201.

202.

Second, Romania submits that if the court were to order such security to be paid, that
might itself fail to respect the Commission’s Final Decision in a way that violates EU
law.

For obvious reasons, this is a significant issue for the court. The parties have sought
to address it, but it raises a further question as to the practical consequences of making
an order for security. The court should have an understanding of the steps that it
would be asked to take in the event of non-compliance, and the implication of such
steps. This may affect the exercise of its discretion in deciding whether or not to
make the order.

 
 

It is to be hoped that the possibility of non-compliance is academic, but in the light of
the history of this dispute that cannot be taken for granted. The court needs to be
assured that the making of an order for security and such steps as may be consequent
on any non-compliance would not themselves be treated as a violation of EU law. The
Commission went some way to providing such assurance in the oral submissions
referred to above, and may be able to dispel the concerns altogether. As the
jurisprudence shows, the national court is entitled to look to the Commission for
assistance, and the Commission has assured the court that it will continue to provide
any assistance it can.

   

For these reasons, it is not appropriate for the court finally to decide the security
question on the post-hearing written submissions, though these have been useful in
narrowing the issues. The parties will have the opportunity to make further
submissions at the hearing of consequential matters subsequent to the handing down
of this judgment. The parties can argue all the points they have raised in writing, but
the court makes it clear that it will need to be satisfied in particular as to the matters
set out above. The court would wish the Commission to continue to be represented at
the hearing. It would also wish to explore the possible alternative suggested by the
claimants by way of confirmation that further action will not be taken by Romania in
relation to enforcement proceedings.

Conclusion

203.

In summary, the court has decided that:

(1) Other than the amounts already received by the claimants in Romania by
way of court-ordered execution, Romania has not made any payments under
the Award.

(2) The application of Romania and the Commission to set aside the court’s
Order of 17 October 2014 registering the ICSID Award is refused. This
because the registration of the Award did not place Romania in breach of
the Commission’s Injunction Decision of 26 May 2014, and the claimants
themselves were not in breach by registering the Award.

 

(3) Enforcement of the Award is stayed pending the resolution of the
claimants’ proceedings in the European court seeking the annulment of the
Commission’s Final Decision of 30 March 2015. This is because the
Commission’s Final Decision prohibits Romania from paying the Award,

   

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

and the “principle of sincere cooperation” in Art. 4(3) TEU as interpreted
both in European and in English case law precludes national courts from
taking decisions which conflict with a decision of the Commission.

This does not create a conflict with the duties of the UK under the ICSID
Convention, because by registration under the Arbitration (International
Investment Disputes) Act 1966 which implements the Convention, an
ICSID award is equated to a final domestic judgment for enforcement
purposes, and a purely domestic judgment would be subject to the same
principle.

Alternatively, applying the above case law, a stay is appropriate because the
issues raised in the present application substantially overlap with the
arguments raised in the annulment proceedings in respect of the
Commission’s Final Decision which are being brought by the claimants in
the European Court in Luxembourg, giving rise to the risk of inconsistent
decisions.

Bearing in mind that a reference by a first instance court is discretionary, an
Art. 267 TFEU reference to the CJEU will not be made. This is because the
questions to be referred on such a reference are not straightforward to
identify, and the dispute is already before the European court by way of the
current annulment proceedings.

  

As regards security, having considered at this stage the parties’ written
submissions only, the court considers that claimants have advanced a
persuasive case for an order requiring Romania to provide security as a
term of the stay. This is subject to (8) below. It reflects the fact that (i) the
proceedings relate to an ICSID Award which pre-dates the decisions of the
Commission, (ii) the Award is to be treated as a final judgment of the
English court given at the time of the Award, and (iii) the Award has been
unpaid for some years.

 

However, before reaching a decision, the court will require (i) to be
satisfied that there is legal power to make an order for security, and (ii) to
be assured that the making of an order for security and such steps as may be
consequent on any non-compliance would not themselves be treated as a
violation of EU law.

204. These and other consequential matters will be dealt with when this judgment is
handed down. The parties should agree a timetable. The court expresses its
appreciation to the parties for their assistance.

