INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDINGS BETWEEN

IOANNIS KARDASSOPOULOS
and RON FUCHS
(Claimants)
and
THE REPUBLIC OF GEORGIA
(Respondent)

(ICSID Case Nos. ARB/05/18 and ARB/07/15)

 

AWARD

 

Arbitral Tribunal
Mr. L. Yves Fortier, C.C., 0.Q., Q.C., President
Professor Francisco Orrego Vicufia
Professor Vaughan Lowe, Q.C.
Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Aissatou Diop

Assistant to the Tribunal
Ms. Alison G. FitzGerald

Representing the Claimant Representing the Respondent
Ms. Kary] Nairn Ms. Claudia T. Salomon

Mr. Timothy G. Nelson Mr. Matthew Saunders

Mr. David Herlihy Ms. Kate Knox

Ms. Jennifer M. Cabrera Ms. Kiera Gans

SKADDEN, ARPS, SLATE, MEAGHER AND FLOM Mr. Theodore C. Jonas
(UK) LLP/ SKADDEN, ARPS, SLATE, MEAGHER = Mr. Nick Gvinadze
AND FLOM LLP Mr. Avto Svanidze

DLA PIPER UK LLP/ DLA PIPER LLP (US) /
DLA PIPER GVINADZE & PARTNERS LLP

Date of dispatch to the parties: March 3, 2010

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

PARTI. PROCEDURE -1-
A. Overview -1-
B. Registration of the Req for Arbitrati -3-
Cc. Constitution of the Tribunal and Commencement of the Proceeding......... -3-
D. The Jurisdictional Phase ..........cssscsscsessessessessesneenessessseesceneenceneeneeneeneeneesesneenes -4-
E. The Liability and Q Phase -5-

1. The Written Procedure ..ccsccscssescsssssssssvesstesestesesteseseseeeseseseeneseeseseeesesnes -5-
a) Procedural Order No. | .......cccecesseceseseseeseseeeeeeseeeeeeseeeeeeaeneeeeeeeeee -5-
b) Request for Adjournment of the Hearing......0.0.0.0c cee -6-
c) Procedural Order No. 2 .......ccscecesssseseseeeeseseeeeseseeeeseseeeeeaeneeeeeeneeee -7-
d) Procedural Order No. 3 .......:.scecscssseseseeeeseseeeeseseeeeeeseneeseaeneeeeaeeeee -7-

e) Procedural Order No. 4

 

 

2. The Oral ProCedure ..ccccscscescsvescsvesteestesesteseseseseseeeseeesesieseeseseeseseeneseties -9-
3. The Post-Hearing Procedure ......cccccccccsccesese ees eeeeseneneneeesteeeeseseeeeees -Il-
F. The ECT and the BITS .......cccscsssssssssessessesnessessesseesecsneensencenceneeneeneeneeneenecsneenees -ll-
1. The Arbitration ClQUseS ....scccescccesccvesesvessevesievesieesieesieesiesesiesesiesesieness -12-
2. The Sub ive Clauses -16-
G. The Parties’ Respective Prayers for Relief...........sscssssssssssssssessssssssssssessssees -18-

PARTIL FACTUAL BACKGROUND...

 

 

 

 

A. Introducti -20-
B. The Joint Venture Agreement .........scsecsesessesneeseeseeesseneeneeseeneeneeneeneeneeneenees -23-
Cc. The Deed of C. i - 30-
D. Work Performed by GTI -35-
E. The Proposed Partnership between Tramex and Brown & Root ...........00 - 36-
KF. AIOC and Negotiation of the PCOA.......cssssssssesssessssessssessssessssessssesssseesseees - 46-

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

 

 

 

 

 

 

G. The Creation of GIOC -52-
H. The C ion of GTI’s Rights. -54-
L The C Cc ission Process - 56 -
PART III. SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS ........sssssssssssssssssssssseesssees -70-
A. The Clai ” Case -70-
B. The Respondent’s Case. -70-
PART IV. ISSUES TO BE DETERMINED........ccccssssssssssssssesssssssssesssssssssesssessssensssensesees -71-

PART V. ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS ..

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A. Preliminary Matters -72-
1. The Law Applicable to the Merits ......cccccccccecesesse sete teteeee ee eeeeeeeeees -73-
2. Burden of Proof. - 76 -
B. Jurisdiction & Equitable Prescription - 78 -
1. Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis under the Georgia / Greece BIT.
a) The Respondent’s Position ............ccccceeeeeeeeeeeeeteneeeeeeeees - 79 -
b) The Claimants’ Position...........ccccceseseceeeeeeseeeeeeseseeeeseeeeeeeeeeeee - 79 -
c) The Tribunal’s Determination..............:cccceceseeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeee - 80 -
2. Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis under the Georgia / Israel BIT............ - 81 -
a) The Respondent’s Position ............ccccceeeeeeeeeeeeeteneeeeeeeees -81-
b) The Claimants’ Position...........ccccceseseceeeeeeseeeeeeseseeeeseeeeeeeeeeeee -81-
c) The Tribunal’s Determination.
3. Time-Bar for Equitable Prescription .....c.ccccccece eset tess eeeeees - 82-
a) The Respondent’s Position ............ccccceeeeeeeeeeeeeteneeeeeeeees - 82-
b) The Claimants’ Position...........ccccceseseceeeeeeseeeeeeseseeeeseeeeeeeeeeeee - 83 -
c) The Tribunal’s Determination..............:cccceceseeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeee - 84-
Cc. Liability - 87-

 

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

 

 

 

 

 

1. Attribution of SakNavtobi and/or Transneft’s Acts/Omissions to Georgia . -
87 -
a) The Claimants’ Position..  87-
b) The Respondent’s Position ............ccccceeeeeeeeeeeeeteneeeeeeeees - 89 -
c) The Tribunal’s Determination..............:cccceceseeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeee - 89 -
2. The Scope of GTI’S Rights ...c.ccccccceccccccecesesee eee escseeeeseeeieieeeneeeeees -93-
a) The Respondent’s Position ............ccccceeeeeeeeeeeeeteneeeeeeeees - 93 -
b) The Claimants’ Position...........ccccceseseceeeeeeseeeeeeseseeeeseeeeeeeeeeeee - 99 -
c) The Tribunal’s Determination.......0....:cccecesceeseseeeeseeeeeeeeneeee - 103 -
3. Was Mr. Kardassopoulos’ Investment in GTI Expropriated?
a) The Claimant’s Position.........c.ccccceeesceeeseseeeeseeteeseeeeeeeeaeeeee -114-
b) The Respondent’s Position ...........cc ccc eeeeeeeeeeeeeneseeeeeees - 118 -
c) The Tribunal’s Determination.......0....:cccecesceeseseeeeseeeeeeeeneeee -124-
4, Was Mr. Fuchs Treated Unfairly and Inequitably ?.....c.ccccccceccee - 133 -
a) The Claimant’s Position.........c.ccccceeesceeeseseeeeseeteeseeeeeeeeaeeeee - 133 -
b) The Respondent’s Position ...........cc ccc eeeeeeeeeeeeeneseeeeeees - 135 -
c) The Tribunal’s Determination.......0....:cccecesceeseseeeeseeeeeeeeneeee - 139 -
Causation - 146 -
1. The Respondent’s Position - 146 -
2. The Claii ’ Position - 148 -
3. The Tribunal’s Determination .......cccccceccccsseccseevseetesce teste teseeteseeeseeies - 150 -
Q - 152 -
I The Effect of the Stabilization Clauses on DAMAGES .....c.csceeceeeecceees - 152 -
a) The Claimants’ Position..........cccceseeseeeeseseeeeseeteeseeeteeeeeeeeee - 152 -
b) The Respondent’s Position ...........cc ccc eeeeeeeeeeeeeneseeeeeees - 153 -
c) The Tribunal’s Determination.......0....:cccecesceeseseeeeseeeeeeeeneeee - 154 -

F.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

 

 

 

 

 

2. The Applicable Standard of Compensation for Expropriation

a) The Claimant’s Position.........c.ccccceeesceeeseseeeeseeteeseeeeeeeeaeeeee

b) The Respondent’s Position ...........cc ccc eeeeeeeeeeeeeneseeeeeees - 159 -

c) The Tribunal’s Determination.......0....:cccecesceeseseeeeseeeeeeeeneeee - 161 -
3. The Applicable Standard of Compensation for Fair and Equitable

Treatment - 166 -

a) The Claimant’s Position.........c.ccccceeesceeeseseeeeseeteeseeeeeeeeaeeeee - 166 -

b) The Respondent’s Position ...........cc ccc eeeeeeeeeeeeeneseeeeeees - 168 -

c) The Tribunal’s Determination.......0....:cccecesceeseseeeeseeeeeeeeneeee - 169 -
4, The Appropriate Methodology for Valuing the Claimants’ Claims....- 171 -

a) The Claimants’ Position..........cccceseeseeeeseseeeeseeteeseeeteeeeeeeeee -171-

(1) The Market/Income Approaches ....c.csceeeveseeveeevsseevens - 171 -
(2) The Cost APProdch v..cecececccecececsee esses tees eee eeeeeeeenes - 18] -
b) The Respondent’s Position ...........cc ccc eeeeeeeeeeeeeneseeeeeees - 182 -
(1) The Market/Income Approaches ....c.csceeeveseeveeevsseevens - 184 -
(2) The Cost APProdch v..cecececccecececsee esses tees eee eeeeeeeenes - 19] -

c) The Tribunal’s Determination...

(1) The Appropriate Valuation Method ........ccccccceeeees - 19] -
(2) Proposed Adjustments to Value .....c.ccccceceeesteeeteie - 194 -
5. The Amount of Compensation Owing to the Claimant.........0.000000 - 203 -

a) The Claimants’ Position..........cccceseeseeeeseseeeeseeteeseeeteeeeeeeeee - 203 -

b) The Respondent’s Position .

c) The Tribunal’s Determination.......0....:cccecesceeseseeeeseeeeeeeeneeee - 204 -
Interest - 205 -
1. Pre-Award Inte reStccececccecccescevessevssceveseesestesesiesessesessesesesseseessseenesieness - 205 -

a) The Claimants’ Position..........cccceseeseeeeseseeeeseeteeseeeteeeeeeeeee - 205 -

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

 

b) The Respondent’s Position .

 

 

 

 

c) The Tribunal’s Determination.......0....:cccecesceeseseeeeseeeeeeeeneeee - 207 -
2. Post-Award Interest.......
a) The Claimants’ Position..........cccceseeseeeeseseeeeseeteeseeeteeeeeeeeee -210-
b) The Respondent’s Position ...........cc ccc eeeeeeeeeeeeeneseeeeeees -211-
c) The Tribunal’s Determination.......0....:cccecesceeseseeeeseeeeeeeeneeee -212-
G. Costs -212-
1. The Claii ’ Position -212-
2. The Respondent’s Position - 213 -
3. The Tribunal’s Determination .......cccccceccccsseccseevseetesce teste teseeteseeeseeies -214-
PART VI. OPERATIVE PART -216-

 

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

DRAMATIS PERSONAE
Corporate Personae

Azerbaijan International Operating Company (“AIOC”): Cayman Islands-incorporated
consortium of oil companies including SOCAR (see below), Amoco, Pennzoil, Unocal, Exxon,
BP, Ramco, Lukoil, Statoil, TPAO, Itochu and Delta.!

Brown & Root Ltd. (“Brown & Root”): U.K. subsidiary of Halliburton Inc., a U.S.
engineering and construction firm, that entered into a Heads of Agreement with Tramex to
acquire one half of its 50% interest in GTI.

Georgian International Oil Corporation (“GIOC”): A Georgian state-owned oil company
created in 1995 and to which certain rights held by GTI were transferred.

Georgian Oil and Gas Corporation (“GOGC”): A Georgian state-owned entity formed in
2006 through an amalgamation of the GIOC, Georgian International Gas Corporation and
SakNavtobi.

GTI Ltd. (“GTI”): A Georgian-incorporated joint venture company in which Tramex and
SakNavtobi each owned a 50% interest.

Industrial Amalgamation of Georgian Oil-Main Pipelines (‘“Transneft” or
“TransNavtobi”): A Georgian state-owned entity holding rights over the oil transportation
network in Georgia (and formally merged into SakNavtobi in December 1992).

Kissinger Associates, Inc.: A geopolitical consulting firm based in New York called upon to
assist the Claimants during the compensation commission process.

Ludan Engineering Inc.: An Israeli engineering firm contracted by Tramex to provide design,
engineering and procurement work for the GTI project.

SakNavtobi (also known in Russian as “Gruzneft”, or in English as “Georgian Oil”): The

Georgian state-owned national oil company and formally made a Department within the Ministry
of Fuel and Energy in December 1992.

SOCAR: The State Oil Company of Azerbaijan.

Tramex International Inc. (“Tramex”): A Panamanian-incorporated investment vehicle,
owned in equal shares by the Claimants, Mr. Ioannis Kardassopoulos and Mr. Ron Fuchs.

' Participating interests in July 1996 [Hearing Bundle, Tab 185].

f

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Moral Personae
Terence (“Terry”) Adams: Founding President of AIOC from 1994 to 1998.

Valeri Asatiani: Minister of Culture of the Republic of Georgia from 1985 to 1990 (Georgian
SSR), and 1995 to 2000 (Republic of Georgia).

Alan Batkin: Vice-Chairman of Kissinger Associates, Inc. from 1990 to 2006, called upon to
assist the Claimants during the compensation commission process.

Giorgi Chanturia: Ambassador of the Republic of Georgia to Azerbaijan from 1994 to 1997,
and President of GIOC from 1996 to 2004.

Merab Chkhenkeli: Minister of Urbanization and Construction of the Republic of Georgia
from 1995 to 2002.

Grahame Cook: Commercial Manager of BP Exploration, seconded to AIOC, from 1995 to
1997.

Larry Farmer: President of Brown & Root from 1990 to 2000.

Edward (“Ted”) Ferguson: Director of Oil and Gas Development for Europe and Africa for
Brown & Root.

Ze’ev Frenkiel: Project Director overseeing the engineering and construction project in the
Republic of Georgia on behalf of the Claimants.

Rony Fuchs: The Claimant, an Israeli citizen and Co-Chief Executive Officer of Tramex
International Inc.

Gviad Gamsakhurdia: Chairman of Parliament of the Republic of Georgia from November
1990 to April 1991, and President of the Republic of Georgia from April 1991 to January 1992.

Vazha Gigolashvili: Chief Mechanic at Transneft from 1981 to 1996.

Yusuf Selcuk Guner: Responsible for Brown & Root Energy Services operations in Azerbaijan
from 1993 to 2007.

Ephraim Gur: Georgian-born businessman residing in Israel, formerly a Member of the Israeli
Parliament and Attaché to the Republic of Georgia in Israel.

Koba Gvenetadze: Deputy State Minister of the Republic of Georgia from 2001 to 2002.

Chee Jap: Financial advisor to Tramex, based in London, who acted as the principal liaison
with third parties, lenders and strategic partners, including Brown & Root Ltd.

Ioannis Kardassopoulos: The Claimant, a Greek citizen and Co-Chief Executive Officer of
Tramex International Inc.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Alexandre Khetaguri: Deputy Minister of Energy of the Republic of Georgia from 2004 to
2005, First Deputy Minister of Energy from 2005 to 2006, General Director of GOCG from 2006
to 2007, and Minister of Energy since 2007.

Nikoloz Lekishvili: State Minister of the Republic of Georgia from 1995 to 1998.

David Levy: Ludan’s Chief Engineer responsible for the design and implementation of works in
Republic of Georgia on behalf of the Claimants.

Faith MacDonald: In-house solicitor for Brown & Root from 1994 to 1999.

David Mirtskhulava: Deputy Minister of Fuel and Energy of the Republic of Georgia from
1995 to 1998, and Minister of Fuel and Energy from 1999 to 2003.

Abram Nanikashvili: Georgian-born businessman residing in Israel who acted as an interpreter
for the Claimants.

Tedo Ninidze: Minister of Justice of the Republic of Georgia from 1993 to 1998.
Otar Patsatsia: Prime Minister of the Republic of Georgia from 1993 to 1995.

Gia Sadzaglishvili: Head of Division of the Balance of Fuel and Energy of the Ministry of Fuel
and Energy of the Republic of Georgia from 1996 to 1998, and Director of Economic
Department of the Ministry of Fuel and Energy from 1998 to 1999.

Eduard Shevardnadze: Head of the State Council of the Republic of Georgia from March to
October 1992, when he was elected Chairman of Parliament. President of the Republic of
Georgia from November 1995 to November 2003.

Tengiz Sigua: Prime Minister of the Republic of Georgia from 1990 to 1991, and 1992 to 1993.

Avtantil Silagadze: Minister of State Property Management of the Republic of Georgia from
1995 to 1998.

Jack Smith: Attorney of the Claimants, involved in the drafting of the Joint Venture Agreement
between Tramex and SakNavtobi.

Revaz Tevzadze: Chairman of SakNavtobi from 1973 to 2004.

David Zubitashvili: Minister of Fuel and Energy of the Republic of Georgia from 1996 to
1998.

MAP OF GEORGIA
OIL TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES

 

  
  
   
   

   

7 c=
; { wu
Lad } WaveHiK®
“> ‘ Jivee wate Fe ee gf ES
{ THE REPUBLIC OF GEORGIA ew
f owas OIL TRANSPORTATION /
FACILITIES, T
, | :
‘ . ) snsandene >
Ne tee AD

see Chechen

 
   

sem “CaUOE ont PIPE LINE Be sromace tanns
—— _disritiares pire une @ wens sranon

     

   

 

 

ARMENIA
— RAIL ROAD ‘SUPSA PROJECT

 

A vnc came Fur mre une

THE TRIBUNAL
Composed as above,
After deliberation,

Makes the following Award:

PARTI. PROCEDURE
A. Overview

1. At the outset of its present Award, the Tribunal deems it helpful to set out certain facets
of the disputes between the parties to these arbitrations, which are brought under the
Energy Charter Treaty (“ECT”) and the bilateral investment treaties entered into between
the Republic of Georgia (“Georgia” or the “Respondent”) and Greece and Israel,

respectively.

2. The investment dispute between the parties in these arbitrations arose during the years
following Georgia’s emergence as a sovereign State. In essence, it concerns actions on
the part of Georgia in respect of the interests held by Mr. Ioannis Kardassopoulos and
Mr. Ron Fuchs (collectively the “Claimants” and together with Georgia the “Parties”)
in an investment vehicle devoted to the development of an oil pipeline for the transport of
oil from the Azeri oil fields on the Caspian Sea through Georgia to the Black Sea, known

as the “Western Route”.

3. Development of the Western Route was of significant national and strategic importance
for Georgia as a means of securing its sovereignty following the break up of the Soviet
Union and deepening its ties to the West. President Shevardnadze is recorded as having
stated that “/i]f Georgia the country could not establish itself as important to the West,
then Georgia will be treated as a province or district of Russia and lose the fruits of its

first independence since 1920...”.2. The shadow cast by the former Soviet Union over

> This statement is extracted from The Oil and The Glory, published by journalist Steve LeVine in 2008, which
recounts events surrounding the development and exploitation of the Caspian oil reserves. This extract, among
others, formed part of the discussion among industry experts in these proceedings [Tr. D10:135].

-1-

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Georgia is palpable even to this day, as evidenced by the onset of hostilities between

Russia and Georgia during the course of these proceedings.

4. The Claimants, two highly resourceful oil traders, were virtual pioneers at the time of
their investment in Georgia, with a relatively modest yet important proposal to trade oil
and rehabilitate and complete the existing pipeline infrastructure crossing Georgia from
Azerbaijan to the Black Sea, in order to secure a transit route for land-locked oil reserves.
Within a few years of the Claimants initial investment, the Azerbaijan International Oil
Company (“AIOC”), a consortium of multinational oil companies, also began operating

in the region as vast quantities of crude oil in the Caspian were confirmed.

5. Despite some dispute over the eventuality of the Western Route as an export solution for
Caspian oil, it is clear on the evidence in these proceedings that “happiness is multiple
pipelines” [Tr. D10:122]. As the Respondent’s expert Mr. Effimoff testified [Tr.
D10:166-67]:

“If you have one route, you’re a hostage. If you have two routes, then you can
make a choice. And this thinking evolved over time, because there were
proponents of the northern route, there were proponents of the western route, but
the correct answer in retrospect was both routes needed to be there in order to

make it a workable solution, where there were checks and balances on the entire
system.”

6. This is, in fact, what occurred and what remains today — multiple pipelines for the
transport of so-called “early oil” (originally the Gachiani-Supsa pipeline, now the Baku-
Supsa pipeline), future crude oil reserves (the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan or “BTC” pipeline’)
and natural gas (the South Caucasus Pipeline or “SCP”) — with the exception that the
Claimants, having proved far less attractive than AIOC as Western partners once the
potential scale of the Western Route (and the overall oil and gas export solution) became
apparent, are left with nothing to show for their foray into Georgia but the investment

claims brought in these proceedings.

* Prior to confirmation of the route, this pipeline was simply referred to as the Main Export Pipeline or “MEP”.

-2-

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

B. Registration of the Requests for Arbitration

Mr. Kardassopoulos submitted a Request for Arbitration to the International Centre for
the Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) on 2 August 2005 (the
“Kardassopoulos Request’), invoking the ICSID arbitration provisions of the
Agreement between the Government of the Hellenic Republic and the Republic of

Georgia on the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments (the “Georgia /
Greece BIT”) and the ECT. The Kardassopoulos Request was registered by the

Secretary General of the Centre on 3 October 2005.

One and a half years later, on 20 April 2007, Mr. Fuchs submitted a Request for
Arbitration (the “Fuchs Request”) invoking the ICSID arbitration provisions in the
Agreement between the State of Israel and the Republic of Georgia on the Promotion and
Reciprocal Protection of Investments (the “Georgia / Israel BIT”) in respect of claims
arising out of the same set of facts as the Kardassopoulos Request. The Fuchs Request

was registered by the Secretary General of the Centre on 16 July 2007.

Cc. Constitution of the Tribunal and Commencement of the Proceeding

The Arbitral Tribunal in the Kardassopoulos arbitration (the “Tribunal”) was constituted
on 27 February 2006. It was composed of Mr. L. Yves Fortier, C.C., O.C., Q.C.
(Canadian), appointed by agreement of the Parties as President, and Professor Francisco
Orrego Vicufia (Chilean) and Sir Arthur Watts, Q.C. (British), appointed respectively by

the Claimant and the Respondent, as arbitrators.

The Tribunal held its first session, which the Parties attended, on 4 May 2006, in London,
England. During this meeting, two alternative timetables for the written phase were
agreed by the Parties, one providing for a jurisdictional phase and one contemplating no

objection to jurisdiction (see Part I.D below).

On 12 September 2007, following registration of the Fuchs Request, the Parties jointly
wrote to the Secretary General of the Centre advising that, pursuant to Article 37 of the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of
other States (“ICSID Convention’) and Rule 2 of the Rules of Procedure for Arbitration

Proceedings (“ICSID Arbitration Rules”), they had agreed on a method for constituting

-3-

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

the Tribunal in the Fuchs arbitration and requesting that the same Tribunal already
constituted in the Kardassopoulos arbitration hear and decide the claims presented in the

Fuchs Request.

On 14 September 2007, the Centre confirmed in writing that the Kardassopoulos and
Fuchs arbitrations would run concurrently and would be heard together by the same

Tribunal constituted in the Kardassopoulos arbitration.

Two months later, on 16 November 2007, Sir Arthur passed away. On 19 November
2007, ICSID notified the parties of the vacancy on the Tribunal created by the passing of
Sir Arthur and of the suspension of the proceeding pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule
10(2). Professor Vaughan Lowe, Q.C. (British), was thus appointed by the Respondent

on 28 December 2007 to serve as its party-appointed arbitrator.

On 16 January 2008, the Tribunal was reconstituted with Professor Lowe replacing Sir

Arthur as the Respondent’s appointee.

On the final day of the Hearing in these arbitrations, counsel for both Parties recognized
with gratitude and respect the contribution that Sir Arthur has made to public
international law and to the ICSID system of arbitration. The Tribunal joined in this
expression of gratitude for Sir Arthur’s service on this Tribunal and to the international

arbitration community as a whole.

D. The Jurisdictional Phase

On 3 October 2006, the Respondent filed an objection to jurisdiction in the
Kardassopoulos arbitration, thereby triggering the first alternative timetable set forth in
the minutes of the first session. The Respondent objected to jurisdiction on the following

grounds:

(a) The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae over Mr. Kardassopoulos’ treaty
claims for two reasons: first, Mr. Kardassopoulos had not made an “investment”
in Georgia; and second, the Joint Venture Agreement and the Deed of
Concession, pursuant to which Mr. Kardassopoulos had purportedly made his
investment, were void ab initio as a matter of law; and

20.

21.

22.

23.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

(b) The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione temporis over Mr. Kardassopoulos’ treaty
claims because the acts which occasioned the alleged loss occurred prior to the
entry into force of either the Georgia / Greece BIT or the ECT.

Mr. Kardassopoulos filed a Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction on 7 November 2006; the
Respondent filed a Reply on Jurisdiction on 4 December 2006; and Mr. Kardassopoulos

filed a Rejoinder on Jurisdiction on 5 January 2007.
A hearing on jurisdiction was held on 15-16 January 2007 in London, England.

The Tribunal rendered its Decision on Jurisdiction on 6 July 2007, determining that it has
jurisdiction ratione materiae and ratione temporis over Mr. Kardassopoulos’ ECT claims
and jurisdiction ratione materiae over Mr. Kardassopoulos’ BIT claims. The Tribunal
joined the issue of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione temporis over Mr. Kardassopoulos’
BIT claims to the merits. The Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction is appended to the

present Award.

E. The Liability and Quantum Phase

1. The Written Procedure
On 13 July 2006, Mr. Kardassopoulos filed a Memorial on the merits pursuant to the
timetable agreed in the minutes of the first session of the Tribunal. However, before the
Parties filed any further written submissions on the merits, the Respondent objected to

jurisdiction and the procedure was suspended until completion of the jurisdictional phase.

The procedure for further written submissions on the merits was thereafter suspended

until completion of the jurisdictional phase.

a) Procedural Order No. 1

Following the release of the Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal invited the
parties to confer and propose time limits for the further procedures in the Kardassopoulos

arbitration.

On 26 September 2007, the Parties jointly wrote to the Tribunal proposing a new

timetable.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

On 9 October 2007, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1, fixing the time limits for

the further procedures of the arbitration in accordance with the Parties’ agreement.

On 5 November 2007, the Tribunal held its first session of the Parties in the Fuchs
arbitration, by telephone conference. The Parties, who attended the first session, agreed
to adopt, to the extent possible, the procedures already established in the Kardassopoulos

arbitration.

Shortly following the suspension of the proceedings necessitated by the passing of Sir
Arthur and the reconstitution of the Tribunal in mid-January 2008, Mr. Kardassopoulos
filed a Supplemental Memorial on the merits on 28 January 2008. On the same day, Mr.

Fuchs also filed a Memorial on the merits.

The Respondent filed a Counter-Memorial on the merits on 6 June 2008. The Claimants
filed their Reply on the merits on 31 July 2008. On 12 November 2008, the Respondent
filed its Rejoinder on the merits pursuant to a revised calendar of procedures necessitated

by developments in Georgia and opposing discovery applications (see Part I-E.(c) below).

b) Request for Adjournment of the Hearing

On 12 August 2008, the Tribunal was seized of an application by the Respondent for a
postponement of the deadline for filing and service of its Rejoinder and its response to
the Claimants’ August 8 cross-application for disclosure (see Part IE.(d) below), as well
as an adjournment of the hearing on the merits and quantum (the “Hearing”), which had
been scheduled to take place in London, England from 22 October to 5 November 2008.
The application was motivated by circumstances arising from the onset of hostilities

between Georgia and Russia.

On 15 August 2008, the Claimants filed written submissions with the Tribunal submitting
that postponement of the hearing was premature and requesting that the original Hearing
dates be maintained and a schedule be fixed for filing and service of the remaining
written evidence that would accommodate the Respondent’s concerns. The Claimants
averred that they had no objection to the Tribunal investigating other possible dates for

the Hearing purely on a contingency basis.

-6-

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

On 19 August 2008, the Tribunal determined to cancel the Hearing and vacate the
originally scheduled Hearing dates. A procedural meeting of the Parties and the President
of the Tribunal, on behalf of the Tribunal, was fixed for 26 August 2008 to consider a

new calendar for further procedures.

c) Procedural Order No. 2

On 26 August 2008, the President of the Tribunal held a procedural meeting of the Parties
by telephone conference during which extensive oral submissions were presented both

Parties.

During the telephonic meeting, the Claimants brought two additional applications
requesting that the Respondent file and serve all non-Georgian evidence in connection
with its Rejoinder by 25 September 2008, including its quantum and industry expert
reports, and file and serve the remainder of its evidence and pleadings in connection with

the Rejoinder by late October 2008.

The Respondent opposed each of the Claimants’ applications, arguing that it would be
inappropriate to divorce the factual evidence from the testimony of the quantum and
industry experts and that, in view of the situation in Georgia, obtaining instructions from
the Georgian Government in time for an October Hearing or to meet the proposed filing

dates would pose serious problems.

Two days later, on 28 August 2008, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2, fixing
peremptorily dates for the further procedures in these arbitrations, including new dates
for the Hearing, the filing of the Respondent’s Rejoinder and accompanying expert and
fact evidence, and the filing of further submissions on the disclosure applications before

the Tribunal.

d) Procedural Order No. 3

By letter dated 9 June 2008, the Respondent seized the Tribunal of a disclosure
application seeking an order that three documents produced by the Claimants in redacted
form, relating to legal advice sought by the Claimants in 1995 from the English firm

Paisner & Co. and over which privilege had been asserted, be produced in their entirety.

-7-

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

Al.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

On 14 June 2008, the Claimants filed a written response to the Respondent’s request for
the production of documents. On that same day, the Respondent replied in writing to the

Claimants’ response.

By letter dated 8 August 2008, the Claimants seized the Tribunal of a cross-application
for disclosure seeking an order that the Respondent produce: (a) a statement of transit
fees received by the Respondent in respect of certain pipelines for the period January 1,
2008 through July 31, 2008; and (b) all documents evidencing writs of arrest, criminal
charges, convictions or penal sanctions, levied against David Mirtskhulava and Giorgi
Chanturia, each a witness having provided written evidence in support of the
Respondent’s case, as well as all documents issued by the Respondent evidencing any

pardon in respect of said witnesses.

On 25 September 2008, the Respondent filed written submissions in response to the

Claimant’s August 8 request for the production of documents.

On 3 October 2008, the Claimants filed a written reply to the Respondent’s submissions

in respect of their August 8 request for the production of documents.

On 28 October 2008, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3, ordering, inter alia, the
disclosure in unredacted form of those parts of the three documents produced by the
Claimants that relate to advice received in respect of the International Chamber of
Commerce and/or English High Court proceedings contemplated by the Claimants
against AIOC and/or Transneft in respect of their investments in Georgia, and the
disclosure of documents issued by the Respondent since the commencement of the
arbitration proceedings in respect of Messrs. David Mirtskhulava and Giorgi Chanturia
relating explicitly or implicitly to the evidence which either one of them had given or
would give in the present arbitrations, including the fact of either individual providing a

witness statement on behalf of the Respondent.

e) Procedural Order No. 4

The President of the Tribunal held a telephone conference of the Parties at the request of

the Claimants on 25 November 2008 to address several matters, including written

evidence filed by the Respondent with its Rejoinder materials, compliance with
-8-

42.

43.

44.

4S.

46.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Procedural Order No. 3 and the conduct of the Hearing. The Tribunal issued written
directions to the Parties on 29 November 2008, rejecting the Claimants’ request to
exclude certain witness statements filed by the Respondent and, inter alia, directing the
Claimants to make any application for a follow-up order to Procedural Order No. 3 by 2

December 2008.

On 2 December 2008, the Claimants seized the Tribunal of three (3) applications,
seeking, inter alia, (i) a supplemental order requiring the Respondent to state what
specific measures it had taken to comply with Procedural Order No. 3; (ii) an order
requiring the production of certain supplemental documents; and (iii) an order requiring
the Respondent to request that AIOC conduct a search of its archives for the years 1995

and 1996 and produce to the Claimants certain documents identified by them.

On 9 December 2008, the Respondent submitted a written response to the Claimants’
request for relief objecting to all three applications. The Claimants replied in writing on
12 December 2008. In their reply letter, the Claimants requested that their third
application be held in abeyance pending a response from BP plc (“BP”) to a request they

had submitted for certain information.

On 15 December 2008, the Respondent submitted a sur-reply further clarifying its
position in regard to the Claimants’ first two applications. On the next day, 16 December
2008, the Claimants informed the Tribunal in writing that BP had declined to provide

them with the requested information and therefore revived their third application.

The Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4 on 19 December 2008. The Tribunal denied
the Claimants’ application for a supplemental order regarding Procedural Order No. 3
and its application for an order compelling the Respondent to request that AIOC conduct
a search of its archives and produce certain documents to the Claimants, but granted the

Claimants’ second application concerning a supplemental disclosure order.

2. The Oral Procedure

A Hearing on Liability and Quantum was held in two parts in London, England, on 10-19
January 2009 and 12-14 March 2009.

47.

48.

49.

50.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

During the first part of the Hearing, the following fact witnesses were called to testify: for
the Claimants — Ms. Chee Jap [Tr. D1:160-219]; Mr. Abram Nanikashvili [Tr. D2:5-58];
Mr. Ze’ev Frenkiel [Tr. D2:59-123]; Mr. Edward Ferguson [Tr. D3:1-124]; Mr. Ioannis
Kardassopoulos [Tr. D3:125-193; Tr. D4:1-50]; and Mr. Ron Fuchs [Tr. D4:51-163]; for
the Respondent — Mr. Gia Sadzaglishvili [Tr. D4:168-194]; Mr. Vazha Gigolashvili [Tr.
D4:194-202; Tr. D5:1-14]; Mr. Tedo Ninidze [Tr. D5:15-53]; Mr. Nikoloz Lekishvili [Tr.
DS5:54-91]; Mr. David Mirtskhulava [Tr. D6:1-58]; Mr. Giorgi Chanturia [Tr. D6:58-107;
137-152]; Mr. Larry Farmer [Tr. D6:108-136]; Mrs. Faith MacDonald [Tr. D7:1-56]; Mr.
Tengiz Sigua [Tr. D7:60-70]; Mr. David Zubitashvili [Tr. D7:71-96]; Dr. Revaz
Tevzadze [Tr. D8:4-65]; Mr. Grahame Cook [Tr. D9:1-64]; and Mr. Terry Adams [Tr.
D9:65-105].

Messrs. Ephraim Gur, Jack Smith,* Alan Batkin and David Levy submitted fact written
evidence in support of the Claimants’ case but were not called to testify at the Hearing.
Similarly, Messrs. Valeri Asatiani, Merab Chkhenkeli, Koba Gvenetadze, Alexandre
Khetaguri and Yusuf Selcuk Guner submitted fact written evidence and Mr. David
Eliashvili submitted an expert report in support of the Respondent’s case but were not

called to testify orally.

The Respondent submitted a fact witness statement prepared by former Georgian
President Eduard Shevardnadze in support of certain aspects of its case as developed in
its Rejoinder. However, on 5 January 2009, the Respondent notified the Tribunal that it

had become necessary to withdraw this evidence and submit a revised Rejoinder.

The Respondent filed its Amended Rejoinder, without reference to the former President’s
evidence, on 6 January 2009. The Tribunal has, accordingly, not taken into account in its
consideration of these cases any written evidence previously filed by Mr. Shevardnadze
on behalf of the Respondent, nor has it drawn any inference from the submission and

subsequent withdrawal of such evidence.

* During the Hearing the Claimants brought an application to introduce a second written statement from Mr. Smith.
However, this application was subsequently withdrawn and Mr. Smith did not appear before the Tribunal to give
oral evidence [Tr. D4:164].

-10-

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Ms. Josephine Bacon served as translator, translating between Hebrew and English for
certain of the Claimants’ witnesses, and Ms. Irina Moore and Ms. Nino Willsea served as
translators, translating between Georgian and English, for several of the Respondent’s

witnesses during this first part of the Hearing.

During the second part of the Hearing, the following expert witnesses were called to
testify: Industry Experts - Mr. Richard Beazley [Tr. D10:2-80] for the Claimants; Mr.
Igor Effimoff [Tr. D10:82-168] for the Respondent; Quantum Experts - Mr. Brent
Kaczmarek of Navigant Consulting, Inc. [Tr. D11:66-106] for the Claimants; and Mr.
Gerard John Lagerberg of PricewaterhouseCooper LLP [Tr. D11:107-143] for the

Respondent.

During the second part of the Hearing, the Tribunal conducted a witness conferencing
procedure of the quantum experts [Tr. D11:144-197], followed by a witness conferencing

of these experts by counsel to the Parties [Tr. D11:197-225].

3. The Post-Hearing Procedure

On 22 May 2009, the Parties filed post-hearing briefs with the Tribunal.

On 24 August 2009, the Tribunal requested further detailed costs submissions, which
were duly filed by the Parties on 30 September 2009. The Tribunal subsequently invited
the Parties to file a simultaneous round of reply submissions on costs by 19 October

2009, which were also duly filed.

On 8 February 2010, pursuant to Rule 38(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the Tribunal

declared the proceedings closed.

F. The ECT and the BITs

The treaties under which the Claimants respectively advance their claims are, in the case
of Mr. Kardassopoulos, the Georgia / Greece BIT, signed on 9 November 1994 and
which entered into force on 3 August 1996, and the ECT, signed by Georgia and Greece
on 17 December 1994 and which entered into force for both States on 16 April 1998; and
in the case of Mr. Fuchs, the Georgia / Israel BIT, signed on 19 June 1995 and which
entered into force on 18 February 1997.

-ll-

58.

59.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

1. The Arbitration Clauses

The Parties’ arbitration agreements are contained in the respective treaties. In respect of
the Kardassopoulos arbitration, Article 9 of the Georgia / Greece BIT provides as follows
in connection with the settlement of disputes arising under the treaty between a

Contracting State and an investor of a Contracting State:

“ARTICLE 9
Settlement of Disputes between an Investor and a Contracting Party

J. Disputes between an investor of a Contracting Party and the other
Contracting Party concerning an obligation of the latter under this Agreement,
in relation to an investment of the former, shall, if possible, be settled by the
disputing parties in an amicable way.

2. If such disputes cannot be settled within six months from the date either party
requested amicable settlement, the investor concerned may submit the dispute
either to the competent courts of the Contracting Party in the territory of which
the investment has been made or to international arbitration.

Each Contracting Party hereby consents to the submission of such dispute to
international arbitration.

3. Where the dispute is referred to international arbitration the Investor
concerned may submit the dispute either to:

a) the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes,

blished under the Ce ion on the Settl of Ii
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States, opened for
signature at Washington D.C. on 18 March 1965, for arbitration or
c[o]nciliation, or

b) an ad hoc arbitral tribunal to be established under the arbitration
rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
(U.N.C.L.T.RA.L.).

4. The arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute in accordance with the
provisions of this Agreement and the applicable rules and principles of
international law. The awards of arbitration shall be final and binding on both
parties to the dispute. Each Contracting Party shall carry out without delay any
such award and such award shall be enforced in accordance with domestic law.

5. During arbitration proceedings or the enforcement of the award, the
Contracting Party involved in the dispute shall not raise the objection that the
investor of the other Contracting Party has received compensation under an
Insurance contract in respect of all or part of the damage.”

Article 26 of the ECT similarly provides as follows:

-12-

()

(2)

(3)

(4)

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

“ARTICLE 26

SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES BETWEEN AN INVESTOR AND A
CONTRACTING PARTY

Disputes between a Contracting Party and an Investor of another
Contracting Party relating to an Investment of the later in the Area of
the former, which concern an alleged breach of an obligation of the
former under Part III shall, if possible, be settled amicably.

If such disputes cannot be settled according to the provisions of
paragraph (1) within a period of three months from the date on which
either party to the dispute requested amicable settlement, the Investor
party to the dispute may choose to submit it for resolution:

a) to the courts or administrative tribunals of the Contracting Party to
the dispute;

b) in accordance with any applicable, previously agreed dispute
settlement procedure; or

c) in accordance with the following paragraphs of this Article.

(a) Subject to subparagraphs (b) and (c), each Contracting Party
hereby gives its unconditional consent to the submission of the dispute to
international arbitration or conciliation in accordance with the
provisions of this Article.

(b) (i) The Contracting Parties listed in Annex ID do not give such
unconditional consent where the Investor has previously submitted the
dispute under subparagraph (2)(a) or (b).

(ii) For the sake of transparency, each Contracting Party that is
listed in Annex ID shall provide a written statement of its policies,
practices and conditions in this regard to the Secretariat no later than
the date of the deposit of its instrument of ratification, acceptance or
approval in accordance with Article 39 or the deposit of its instrument of
accession in accordance with Article 41.

(c) A Contracting Party listed in Annex IA does not give such
unconditional consent with respect to a dispute arising under the last
sentence of Article 10(1).

In the event that an Investor chooses to submit the dispute for resolution
under subparagraph (2)(c), the Investor shall further provide its consent
in writing for the dispute to be submitted to:

(a) (i) The International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes, established pursuant to the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States opened
for signature at Washington, 18 March 1965 (hereinafter referred to as
the “ICSID Convention”), if the Contracting Party of the Investor and

-13-

(5)

(6)

(7)

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

the Contracting Party to the dispute are both parties to the ICSID
Convention; or

(ii) The International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes, established pursuant to the Convention referred to in
subparagraph (a)(i), under the rules governing the Additional Facility

for the Administration of Proceedings by the Secretariat of the Centre

(hereinafter referred to as the “Additional Facility Rules”), if the
Contracting Party of the Investor or the Contracting Party to the
dispute, but not both, is a party to the ICSID Convention;

(b) a sole arbitrator or ad hoc arbitration tribunal established
under the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law (hereinafter referred to as “UNCITRAL”); or

(c) an arbitral proceeding under the Arbitration Institute of
Stockholm Chamber of Commerce.

(a) The consent given in paragraph (3) together with the written
consent of the Investor given pursuant to paragraph (4) shall be
considered to satisfy the requirement for:

(i) written consent of the parties to a dispute for purposes of
Chapter II of the ICSID Convention and for purposes of the Additional
Facility Rules;

(ii) an “agreement in writing” for purposes of article II of the
United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of
Foreign Arbitral Awards, done at New York, 10 June 1958 (hereinafter
referred to as the “New York Convention”); and

(iii) “the parties to a contract [to] have agreed in writing” for
the purposes of article 1 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

(b) Any arbitration under this Article shall at the request of any
party to the dispute be held in a state that is a party to the New York
Convention. Claims submitted to arbitration hereunder shall be
considered to arise out of a commercial relationship or transaction for
the purposes of article I of that Convention.

A tribunal established under paragraph (4) shall decide the issues in
dispute in accordance with this Treaty and applicable rules and
principles of international law.

An Investor other than a natural person which has the nationality of a
Contracting Party to the dispute on the date of the consent in writing
referred to in paragraph (4) and which, before a dispute between it and
that Contracting Party arises, is controlled by Investors of another
Contracting Party, shall for the purpose of article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID
Convention be treated as a “national of another Contracting State” and
shall for the purpose of article 1(6) of the Additional Facility Rules be
treated as a “national of another State”.

-14-

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

(8) The awards of arbitration, which may include an award of interest, shall
be final and binding upon the parties to the dispute. An award of
arbitration concerning a measure of a sub-national government or
authority of the disputing Contracting Party shall provide that the
Contracting Party may pay monetary damages in lieu of any other
remedy granted. Each Contracting Party shall carry out without delay
any such award and shall make provision for the effective enforcement
in its Area of such awards.”

[Footnotes omitted.]

60. In respect of the Fuchs arbitration, Article 8 of the Georgia / Israel BIT provides the
following in connection with the settlement of disputes between a Contracting State and

an investor of a Contracting State:

“Article 8&
Reference to International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

I. Each Contracting Party hereby consents to submit to the International
Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (hereinafter: the
“Centre”) for settlement by conciliation or arbitration under the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of Other States opened for signature at Washington on 18
March 1956 any legal dispute arising between that Contracting Party
concerning an investment of the latter in the territory of the former.

2. A company which is incorporated or constituted under the law in force
in the territory of one Contracting Party and in which, before such a
dispute arises, the majority of shares are owned by nationals or
companies of the other Contracting Party shall, in accordance with
Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention, be treated for the purposes of the
Convention as a company of the other Contracting Party.

3. If any such dispute should arise and cannot be resolved, amicably or
otherwise, within three (3) months from written notification of the
existence of the dispute, then the investor affected may institute
conciliation or arbitration proceedings by addressing a request to that
effect to the Secretary-General of the Centre, as provided in Article 28
or 36 respectively of the Convention. The Contracting Party which is a
party to the dispute shall not raise as an objection at any stage of the
proceedings or enforcement of an award the fact that the investor which
is the other party to the dispute has received, in pursuance of an
insurance contract, an indemnity in respect of some or all of his or its
losses.

4. Neither Contracting Party shall pursue, through the diplomatic channel,
any dispute referred to the Centre, unless:

-15-

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

(a) the Secretary-General of the Centre or a_ conciliation
commission or an arbitral tribunal constituted by it decides that
the dispute is not within the jurisdiction of the Centre; or

(b) the other Contracting Party shall fail to abide by or to comply
with any award rendered by an arbitral tribunal.”

2. The Substantive Clauses

6l. Mr. Kardassopoulos invokes two substantive provisions in the Georgia / Greece BIT in
connection with his expropriation and fair and equitable treatment claims, the relevant

portions of which are reproduced below:

“ARTICLE 2
Promotion and Protection of Investments
[...]

2. Investments by investors of a Contracting Party shall, at all times, be
accorded fair and equitable treatment and shall enjoy full protection and
security in the territory of the other Contracting Party. Each Contracting Party
shall ensure that the management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal, in
its territory, of investments by investors of the other Contracting Party, is not in
any way impaired by unjustifiable or discriminatory measures.

[...]”

“ARTICLE 4
Expropriation

J. Investments by investors of either Contracting Party in the territory of the
other Contracting Party, shall not be expropriated, nationalized or subjected to
any other measure the effects of which would be tantamount to expropriation or
nationalization (hereinafter referred to as “expropriation” ), except in the public
interest, under due process of law, on a non discriminatory basis and against
payment of prompt, adeq and effective Such

shall amount to the market value of the investment affected immediately before
the actual measure was taken or became public knowledge, whichever is the
earlier. It shall include interest from the date of expropriation until the date of
payment at a normal commercial rate and shall be freely transferable in a freely
convertible currency.

 

[...]”

62. In addition, Mr. Kardassopoulos invokes the following provisions of the ECT in
connection with his expropriation and fair and equitable treatment claims:
-16-

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

“Article 10

(1) Each Contracting Party shall, in accordance with the provisions of this
Treaty, encourage and create stable, equitable, favourable and transparent
conditions for Investors of other Contracting Parties to make Investments in its
Area. Such conditions shall include a commitment to accord at all times to
Investments of Investors of other Contracting Parties fair and equitable
treatment. Such Investments shall also enjoy the most constant protection and
security and no Contracting Party shall in any way impair by unreasonable or
discriminatory sures their i use, enjo) or
disposal. In no case shall such Investments be accorded treatment less
favourable than that required by international law, including treaty obligations.

“Article 13 Expropriation

(1) Investments of Investors of a Contracting Party in the Area of any other
Contracting Party shall not be nationalized, expropriated or subject to a
measure or measures having effect equivalent to nationalization or expropriation
(hereinafter referred to as “Expropriation” ) except where such Expropriation is:

(a) for a purpose which is in the public interest;
(b) not discriminatory;
(c) carried out under due process of law; and

(d) accompanied by the payment of prompt, adequate and effective
compensation.

Such compensation shall amount to the fair market value of the Investment
expropriated at the time immediately before the Expropriation or impending
Expropriation became known in such a way as to affect the value of the
Investment (hereinafter referred to as the "Valuation Date").

Such fair market value shall at the request of the Investor be expressed in a
Freely Convertible Currency on the basis of the market rate of exchange existing
for that currency on the Valuation Date. Compensation shall also include
interest at a commercial rate established on a market basis from the date of
Expropriation until the date of payment.
[...]”

63. Mr. Fuchs invokes a sole substantive provision in the Georgia / Israel BIT in connection

with his fair and equitable treatment claim:

“Article 2
Promotion and Protection of Investment

-17-

64.

65.

66.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

[...]

2. Investments made by investors of each Contracting Party shall be
accorded fair and equitable treatment and shall enjoy full protection and security
in the territory of the other Contracting Party. Neither Contracting Party shall in
any way impair by unreasonable or discriminatory measures the management,
maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of investments in its territory of
investors of the other Contracting Party.

[...]”

In his Request for Arbitration, Mr. Fuchs pleaded an expropriation claim under Article 5
of the Georgia / Israel BIT. However, Mr. Fuchs averred at paragraph 89 of his
Memorial that he “does not make any claims under the [Georgia / Israel] BIT in respect
of the 1996 expropriation of his investments, but rather seeks redress in these
proceedings for the protracted unfair and inequitable treatment by the Respondent which
took place after 18 February 1997 and arises out of the compensation process which

began on 23 April 1997”.

The Tribunal understands that Mr. Fuchs’ expropriation claim, as pleaded in his Request
for Arbitration, has either been disavowed or totally abandoned. Accordingly, this claim

is not considered further in the present Award.

G. The Parties’ Respective Prayers for Relief

In these arbitrations the Claimants seek both declaratory relief and damages for the
alleged violations by the Respondent of the terms of the Georgia / Greece BIT, the
Georgia / Israel BIT and the ECT. In particular, the Claimants seek the following relief

from this Tribunal:

(a) a declaration that Georgia unlawfully expropriated Mr. Kardassopoulos’ 25%
interest in GTI and his 50% interest in Tramex’s loan to GTI, contrary to Article
13(1) of the ECT;

(b) a declaration that Georgia treated the Claimants’ investments unfairly, contrary to
Article 10(1) of the ECT, Article 2(2) of the Georgia / Greece BIT and Article
2(2) of the Georgia / Israel BIT;

(c) an award of damages to Mr. Kardassopoulos for Georgia’s violation of Article

13(1) of the ECT, based on the full reparation standard required by customary
international law and, in any event, no less than the fair market value of his

- 18 -

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

investments on the Valuation Date (including his interest in Tramex’s loan to
GTD;

an award of damages to Mr. Fuchs for Georgia’s violation of Article 2(2) of the
Georgia / Israel BIT equal to the amount wrongfully denied to Mr. Fuchs in the
compensation process (equivalent to (c) above);

an award of damages to each Claimant for Georgia’s violation of Article 10(1) of
the ECT, Article 2(2) of the Georgia / Greece BIT and Article 2(2) of the Georgia
/ Israel BIT in the amount of $137,901, being each Claimant’s 50% share of
Tramex’s expenses incurred between 1997 and 2003 while participating in the
Georgian compensation process®;

pre-award interest, as well as post-award interest until the date of payment, on the
damages so awarded; and

an Order that Georgia pay the costs of these proceedings, including the costs of
the Claimants’ legal representation, experts’ fees and related disbursements, as
well as the Claimants’ share of all arbitration costs already paid or payable to the
Centre (including the fees and expenses of the Tribunal).

The Republic of Georgia, in turn, requests that this Tribunal:

67.
(a)
(b)
PART I.
68.

Dismiss the Claimants’ claims in their entirety; and
Award Georgia its costs incurred in connection with these proceedings, including

Georgia’s legal fees, experts’ fees and other costs and Georgia’s share of the fees
and expenses of the Tribunal and the Centre.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

This Tribunal sets out below the principal factual basis for its decisions in the present

Award in the form of a detailed chronology. Where disputed by the Parties, the Tribunal

has established these facts primarily from the contemporary documentation adduced in

evidence by the Parties, supplemented by the testimony of their factual witnesses (both

oral and written) as provided to the Tribunal in these arbitration proceedings.

> $137,901 being half of the total amount ($275,803) quantified by Deloitte Management Consultancy Israel Ltd. as
expenses incurred by Tramex while participating in the compensation process.

-19-

69.

70.

71.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

A. Introduction

Following its independence in April 1991, Georgia actively sought foreign investments as
a means of both developing its national energy infrastructure and securing new export
markets to replace the preferential access it had lost to the former Soviet Union. In
particular, Georgia sought investments to develop a transit corridor through its territory to

transport oil and gas from Azerbaijan to the Black Sea (the Western Route).

During the Hearing, Mr. Nanikashvili, a Georgian-born businessman living in Israel,
described the “vacuum” left in newly independent states, such as Georgia, following
independence from the Soviet Union, which had concentrated power at the centre in

Soviet Russia [Tr. D2:24]:

“After Soviet Union split, it appear vacuum in the system of the fuel and energy,
because every country, they own Transneft, they own oil field, and before
everything was concentrate in the centre: export in the centre, budget from the
centre, everything from the centre. And suddenly there is no centre, you are
alone. So they don’t have any contract, and this was the beginning; because of
this, there was need for foreign investors there. This was the beginning, either
way they cannot work.

I tell you one more thing, very important. Please, it’s important. Even big
companies like Lukoil, when they appear, they don’t know how to open a letter
of credit. Only the — it was vacuum, you must understand. I’m not saying they
are dangerous in the country, it really was financial vacuum: no banks giving,
no banks contact. So they really need. It’s not because they were stupid, no,
they were very clever people, but they need to begin -- even me when I begin to
learn, someone teach me this business. I do no learn myself.”

Mrs. MacDonald, testifying on behalf of the Respondent, stated that “/t/here was no law,
it was dangerous. You were quite worried about your safety. There was no concept of
bribery or anything being wrong because that was how you had to get anything done”
[Tr. D7:6]. Expert testimony suggests, however, that the rise to power of President
Shevardnadze in early 1992, following the coup d’état which removed President Zviad
Gamsakhurdia from office, brought some order and stability to Georgia thereby
significantly reducing the political risk associated with the very early period of Georgia’s
independence [Tr. D10:22]. In any event, the geopolitical landscape which prevailed at

the time of the Claimants’ investment foray into Georgia presented considerable risk.

- 20 -

72.

723.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

The possibility of investing in Georgia was first broached by Mr. Fuchs, an Israeli oil
trader. Mr. Fuchs was introduced to representatives of the Georgian Government by Mr.
Ephraim Gur, a Georgian-born Israeli politician and member of the Israeli Parliament.
Several meetings took place in September 1991 involving, on the one hand, Mr. Fuchs,
Mr. Gur and Mr. Nanikashvili, and, on the other hand, the President of Georgia at the
time, Mr. Zviad Gamsakhurdia, various ministers of the Georgian Government and Dr.
Revaz Tevzadze, the General Director of the Georgian State-owned oil company

SakNavtobi (also known as “Georgian Oil’).

As a result of these meetings, the Georgian Minister of Industry signed a Power of
Attorney on 4 September 1991 with Mr. Fuchs through the company Tramex
(International) Ltd. (“Tramex”), in which Mr. Fuchs held equal shares with Mr.
Kardassopoulos [Hearing Bundle, Tab 38]. The Tribunal recalls here that during the
jurisdictional phase the Respondent challenged Mr. Kardassopoulos’ status as an investor
for the purposes of his treaty claims on the basis of a shift in the identity of the corporate
investment vehicle from Tramex, a Delaware-based corporation, to Tramex International
Inc., a Panamanian corporation. The Tribunal dismissed this challenge, finding as

follows [Decision on Jur., paras. 135-36]:

“735. Tramex Panama was indeed the entity that signed the JVA with
SakNavtobi and the Tribunal so finds.

136. In this connection, it is interesting to note that the letter dated 15
November 2004 from the Georgian First Deputy Minister of the Ministry of
Justice to Claimant informing him that his claim for compensation before the
Commission had been rejected is additional compelling proof that Respondent
was aware that Tramex Panama was the true party to the JVA, not Tramex USA:

“Neither Mr. Fuchs nor Mr. Kardassopoulos carried out any
investments in Georgia in their own name or on their own behalf in
relation with the Claim. The investor in Georgia was Tramex, which is

a legal entity incorporated and registered in Panama, possessing a legal
identity separate and distinct from its owners.” (emphasis added)

137. Respondent also contends that there is insufficient documentary support
for Claimant’s assertion that he held an interest in Tramex Panama at the time
the JVA was executed in March 1992. Again, the Tribunal, on the basis of the
evidence before it, is not persuaded by Respondent’s contention.

138. There is, in the Tribunal’s view, ample evidence establishing that
Claimant had an interest in Tramex Panama at the time the JVA was executed.

-21-

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

This evidence includes a letter dated 4 May 1993 from Abacus (C.1.) Limited, a
company incorporated in the Channel Islands which owned all of the shares of
Tramex International Inc. (i.e. Tramex Panama), to Tramex Development BV, a
company incorporated in the Dutch Antilles and used as “an intermediate trust”
by Claimant and Mr. Fuchs for tax planning purposes. Claimant and Mr. Fuchs
stated in that letter:

“We, the undersigned, the owners of all the shares of Tramex
International Inc, a company registered in Panama, do hereby
irrevocably assign and transfer all our rights, title and interest in the
shares of Tramex International Inc without consideration to Tramex
Development BV. Enclosed please find the certificates numbered I and 2
issued to Bearer in respect of all the outstanding and issued shares of
Tramex International Inc.”

139. Claimant also produced a letter, dated 25 May 1993, again from Abacus
(C.L.) Limited to Tramex Development BV, which confirms that two bearer share
certificates were physically transferred on that date to Tramex Development BV
c/o Mr. Jack Smith, an attorney in Israel. This is supported by the witness
statement of Mr. Smith himself who confirmed that Claimant is the exclusive
beneficiary of one of the bearer shares.

140. It has been suggested by Respondent that Claimant only became the
exclusive beneficiary of one of the bearer shares in May 1993. As already
mentioned above, Claimant, however, maintains that he has been the beneficial
owner of one bearer share of Tramex Panama since February 1992. Claimant’s
affirmation is supported by the witness testimony of Mr. Fuchs. Respondent did
not file any witness statements contradicting the extensive evidence submitted by
Claimant on this point.

141. The Tribunal therefore concludes that Claimant had an interest in
Tramex Panama at the time the JVA was executed. The Tribunal accordingly
finds that Claimant was, at all relevant times (and remains now), the beneficial
holder of 50% of the share capital in Tramex Panama and indirectly owned a
25% interest in the joint venture vehicle GTI which carried out an investment in
Georgia.”

Two months following this first meeting, on 8 November 1991, the Georgian Cabinet of
Ministers adopted Resolution No. 834 “About Some Activities Related to the Oil and Gas
Production and Refining in the Republic of Georgia”. This Resolution authorized the
joint venture between SakNavtobi and Tramex for the purpose of exploiting the Georgian

oil fields of Ninotsminda, Manavi and Rustavi, as well as the export of oil under license.

In December 1991, Mr. Fuchs, Mr. Gur and Mr. Nanikashvili met again with the Prime

Minister, the Minister of Industry, the Deputy Minister of Industry and the General

Director of SakNavtobi in Georgia. During this visit, the 1991 revolution erupted which

led to the deposing of President Gamsakhurdia. As Mr. Fuchs explained during the
-22-

76.

77.

78.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Hearing, while others left Georgia during this period, the Claimants stayed: “we don’t
leave the county we come back, and they see that we were serious, we did not escape, we
come back, and they said, ‘These people had a good presentation, we know where they
are coming from, we can give them more business,’ and this is how it developed.” [Tr.

D4:153]. This commitment appears, at least initially, to have paid off.

On 7 December 1991, SakNavtobi and Tramex signed a “Letter of Intents”, the preamble
of which takes note that “the rational extraction and exploitation of the local resources
has great importance for the establishing of an independent market economy” [Hearing
Bundle, Tab 40]. This document details the planned activities of the joint venture as

follows:

“1.1 The construction of a small oil-refinery on the terrain adjacent to Samgori
Mine, with the capacity of 50-200 thousand tones per year;

The construction of the main ‘Baku-Gachiani’ Pipeline;
The construction of the main ‘Grozno-Gachiani’ Pipeline;

The construction of a branch of the ‘Gachiani-Batumi’ Pipeline (on the terrain
adjacent to Poti);

The construction of an oil-transferring unit (Supsa-Poti) on the basis of this
branch;

In prospect, the construction of a new main Pipeline for oil products —
Gachiani-Khashuri-Poti;

The construction of a large oil-refinery with the capacity of 8-10 million tones
per year.”

B. The Joint Venture Agreement

In the spring of 1992, on 3 March 1992, Tramex and SakNavtobi signed a Joint Venture
Agreement (“JVA”) which created GTI Ltd. (“GTI”), a joint venture vehicle owned in
equal shares by Tramex and SakNavtobi [Hearing Bundle, Tab 1]. The JVA provided for
an initial term of 25 years, automatically renewable for a second 25-year term unless
either Party notified its intention to terminate the agreement to the other Party within six

months of the expiry of the agreement.

The original draft ]VA was prepared by Mr. Fuchs’ attorney in Israel, Mr. Jack Smith.

Certain hand-written amendments were, however, made to the draft by both contracting
-23-

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

parties during the final negotiating session. Several of the JVA’s provisions, including
certain of those containing hand-written amendments, are central to the disputes between

the Parties and are therefore reproduced in full below.
GTI’s mandate is set forth in Article 3 of the JVA, which provides as follows:

“The Joint Venture is created for the purpose of developing and strengthening
the free and independent markets of the Republic of Georgia, of introducing
Western methods into the Georgian Oil and Gas industry, of improving the ability
of the Republic of Georgia to participate effectively in world Oil and Gas
markets, of providing for maximized efficiency in exploiting the natural resources
of the Republic of Georgia, of providing for increased inflow of foreign currency
into the Republic of Georgia, and of dealing in matters related to Oil and Gas,
including the construction of Oil and Gas pipelines and other Oil and Gas
pr ng, pr sing, refining, SE ion, storage and
other infrastructure facilities, and the purchase, sale, storage and export of Oil
and Gas products, representation of the Republic of Georgia in world Oil and
Gas markets, and exploitation of Oil and Gas resources in the Republic of
Georgia. In achieving the aforementioned Joint Venture shall act in accordance
with the following principles:

 

31 The Joint Venture shall take all actions and measures and enter into the
necessary agreements and arrangements to acquire and/or import Oil and Gas
and to sell and/or to export to the widest range possible of buyers, in the
Republic of Georgia and/or outside thereof, the largest volume possible of Oil
and Gas and/or to maximize the utilization of the Oil and Gas Facilities by the
widest range of users and customers possible, from both within the Republic of
Georgia and outside of it, at free market prices.

3.2 The Joint Venture shall have sole, exclusive and uninterrupted use of the Export
License — to be placed at the exclusive use of the Joint Venture by the Georgian
Partner as hereinafter described — and shall deal for the Republic of Georgia in
the acquisition, sale and export of Oil and Gas.

3.3 The Joint Venture shall have the sole, exclusive and uninterrupted use to be
provided exclusively to the Joint Venture by the Georgian Partner to maintain,
operate and use all Oil and Gas Facilities in the Republic of Georgia, currently
under the control of the Georgian Partner and future ones including offering use
of such Oil and Gas Facilities to third parties — for transport or storage — in
consideration for payment of a rental or users fee or royalties [handwritten text
in emphasis];

3.4 The Joint Venture shall have the sole and exclusive rights from the Republic of
Georgia to carry out the following Projects in the Republic of Georgia:

A. The construction, maintenance and operation of a small Oil

refinery on the terrain adjacent to Samgori Mine, with the capacity of 50-
200 thousand tons per year;

-24-

3.5

3.6

3.7

3.8

3.9

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

B. The construction, maintenance and operation of the main “Bako-
Gachiani” Pipeline;

Cc The construction, maintenance and operation of the main
“Grozno-Gachiani” Pipeline;

D. The construction, maintenance and operation of a branch of the
“Gachiani-Batumi” Pipeline (on the terrain adjacent to Poti);

E. The construction, maintenance and operation of an Oil-
transferring unit (Supsa-Poti) on the basis of the abovementioned branch
of the “Gachiani Batumi” Pipeline;

F. The construction, maintenance and operation of a new main
Pipeline for Oil products — Gachiani-Khashuri-Poti;

G. The construction, maintenance and operation of a large Oil
refinery with the capacity of 8-10 million tons per year on a site to be
agreed upon;

For the sake of clarity, the Partners acknowledge that the listing of the Projects
as above does not constitute establishment of priorities or order of
implementation and all Projects shall be implemented in accordance with the
provisions of Article 8 below.

The Joint Venture shall contact the Government of the Republic of Georgia
regarding inclusion of the construction of an oil-transferring unit and
corresponding terminal in the design of the reconstruction of Poti Port, and
regarding construction of the Supsa-Poti branch between Gachiani-Batumi
Pipeline and the Poti oil-transferring terminal; and further shall coordinate
contracts with the Republic of Azerbaijan and the Republic of Checheno-
Inghushety in order to coordinate the issues of the projecting and constructing of
the Bako-Gachiani and the Grozno-Gachiani Pipelines.

The Joint Venture shall have the sole and exclusive right of first refusal in the
Republic of Georgia to participate or implement any other Oil and Gas related
projects in the Republic of Georgia. If no agreement can be reached than the

Government will issue a tender [handwritten text in emphasis].

 

The Joint Venture shall have the sole and exclusive right to represent the
Republic of Georgia in any Oil and Gas or energy related projects with foreign
persons.

The Joint Venture will carry out the above mentioned activity using the
Authorized Fund and income of the Joint Venture.

The Joint Venture will be located in Tbilisi and its offices shall be located at a
suite in the Hotel “Tbilisi”. As may be expedient and according to the decision
of the Board, the Joint Venture will open branches and representations both in
the territory of the participating countries and in the territory of third countries.
Any branches opened by the Joint Venture shall receive all the necessary
licences from the competent authorities of the Republic of Georgia.

-25-

80.

81.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

The branches and representations of the Joint Venture may or may not be
separate legal entities, as decided by the Board. Branches or representations of
the Joint Venture which are legal entities, shall not be responsible for the
commitments of such branches or representations.

A separate branch or representation may be formed for the purpose of carrying
out any particular Project or Projects.

3.10 By unanimous decision of the Board, the Joint Venture may issue shares. The
nature and terms of such shares, and all other conditions connected with their
issuance, shall be as determined by the Board.

3.11 No third party may be granted preferred, equal or subordinate rights in any
rights granted to, or used by, the Joint Venture as stated above without prior
unanimous approval of the Joint Venture.”

The “Oil and Gas Facilities” contemplated in Article 3 were defined at Section 1.12 to

mean:

“all the existing pipelines, production, manufacturing, processing, refining and
transportation installations, rail lines, transferring units, storage and other
infrastructure facilities in the Republic of Georgia used by or related to the Oil
and Gas industry and all Oil and Gas Facilities included in the Projects.”

Under Article 4 of the JVA, SakNavtobi and Tramex each made certain declarations and
representations. Pursuant to Section 4.1, SakNavtobi declared and represented the

following:

“A, It is and will remain for the duration of the Joint Venture fully owned and
controlled by the Republic of Georgia and it has been duly appointed and
empowered by the Republic of Georgia to exclusively represent the Republic of
Georgia in all Oil and Gas and energy related matters.

B. that it holds the Export License under which it has the sole, exclusive and
irrevocable rights from the Republic of Georgia to acquire, import, export and
sell crude oil Oil [sic] products and Gas and chemical products in the Republic
of Georgia and abroad which it bought, processed, produced, and transported
and discovered that the said license will remain in force at least until December
1995, and that such license may be placed at the sole, uninterrupted and
irrevocable use of the Joint Venture for the duration of the license. [handwritten
text in emphasis]

The Partners agree and understand that the continued validity of said license
beyond said period, and its continued sole uninterrupted and irrevocable use by
the Joint Venture on the same terms of conditions thereafter, is of material
importance for the continued operation of the Joint Venture and its ability to
carry out the Projects as described hereinafter.

- 26 -

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

The Georgian side accepts and agrees that the Export License will be extended

lly by additional 5 years, i diately at the time of the registration of
the Joint Venture and will be renewed ically every 5 years. [handwritten
text in emphasis]

The Georgian partner shall place all new, additional or extended export licences
or permits received by it at the use of the Joint Venture on the same terms and
conditions stipulated herein.

C. that it has the sole, exclusive and irrevocable right to manage, maintain, possess,
operate and use the Existing Oil and Gas Facilities and to charge fees for the
use thereof.

[..]”

Pursuant to Section 4.2, Tramex declared and represented the following:

“A, that it has the necessary financial capability and resources to fulfil its investment
undertakings as specified in this Agreement.

B. that it has experience, expertise and Know-How in matters relating to Oil and
Gas and in particular to world Oil and Gas markets, export of Oil and Gas,
pricing and profit-maximization on world markets.

(on that it has experience, expertise and Know-How in Western methods in the Oil
and Gas industry.

D. that it has experience, expertise and Know-How in shipping of Oil and Gas.

that it maintains connections with persons and companies active in world Oil
and Gas markets and in Western banking and other institutions of relevance to
the Joint venture and its activities.

F. that it has at its disposal a staff of employees, representatives and agents to
conduct international trade in Oil and Gas.”

Article 5 of the JVA provided that GTI was to be funded by an initial amount of
20,000,000 roubles, deposited in an “Authorized Fund” and contributed in equal parts by
SakNavtobi and Tramex. Each Partner to the JV was also to make certain non-monetary
contributions to GTI. Pursuant to Section 5.3, SakNavtobi was to contribute the
following:

“5.3.1 to place at the sole, uninterrupted and irrevocable use of the Joint Venture, for

the term of the Joint Venture, the Export License and any extension thereof,
successor thereto or additional Export License received by it.

5.3.2 to place at the sole, uninterrupted and irrevocable use of the Joint Venture, for
the term of the Joint Venture, its exclusive right to construct, manage, maintain,
possess and operate Oil and Gas Facilities in the Republic of Georgia and

-27-

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

introduce therein any and all Oil and Gas produced or acquired by it or by the
Joint Venture in order to market, sell, import and export Oil and Gas, and
further to introduce into said Facilities Oil and Gas belonging to others for
transport, storage or processing, and to charge any rental, users fee or royalties
in connection therewith”

In addition, pursuant to Section 5.4 of the JVA, Tramex’s contribution was as follows:

“5.4.1 Its expertise, Know-How and international contacts relating to World Oil
Markets, export, pricing, Western methods in the Oil and Gas industry, and to
Oil and Gas generally.

5.4.2 Its international employees, agents and representatives in the Oil and Gas
industry.

5.4.3. Communication systems, such as computers, telex and telecopier machines,
required for the initial operation of the Joint Venture.

5.4.4 Its expertise, Know-How and international contacts in the shipping industry.”

Article 12 of the JVA addressed the procedure to be followed in the event of an

expropriation, nationalization or other similar event, stating as follows:

“ARTICLE 12
Continuity of Property and Other Rights

12.1 All property owned, leased or used by the Joint Venture is not subject to
expropriation, confiscation or nationalization. The property rights of the Joint
Venture are protected in accordance with regulations of the Georgian legislation
and applicable international conventions of treaties and public international law.
The rights for the Oil, Gas equipment and other property, including leased
equipment and property, which belong to the Joint Venture are protected
according to the Georgian legislation and the applicable international
conventions, treaties and public international law.

12.2. The entry of the Republic of Georgia into any confederation or union shall not
confer upon any entity the power to expropriate, confiscate or nationalize rights
or property of the Joint Venture or in any way derogate from rights mentioned in
Article 12.1 above.

12.3 Any purported attempted or alleged act or event of expropriation, confiscation or
nationalization of the Joint Venture, its property or its rights shall be null and
void, and shall forthwith entitle the Foreign Partner to full reimbursement for the
Foreign Partner’s contribution to the Authorized Fund and any amounts invested
by the Foreign Partner in any Projects, bearing interest on the free market value
of such investment, whichever is higher and until such reimbursement in full
shall forthwith entitle the Foreign Partner to payment of such users fee, rentals,
royalties or other compensation as shall be determined by an arbitrator to be
appointed pursuant to the provisions of this Agreement, during any period in

- 28 -

86.

87.

88.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

which any such purported, attempted or alleged acts are being carried out
against the rights of a property of the Joint Venture.

The Partners hereby stipulate that the rate of the rental, users fee or royalties to
be awarded shall be in the rate of at least fifty percent of the revenue of the Joint

Venture. The arbitrator may also award any additional amounts as
reimbursement of expenses or in respect of loss of profits.”

Finally, Article 21, which contained an acknowledgement of the JVA by the Georgian
State, was partially struck out by hand (as indicated here by strikethrough type), the final
clause appearing as follows:
“ARTICLE 21
Government Acknowledgement

The Parties hereto andthe-Government-of the-Republic_of- Georgia agree and
acknowledge that this Joint Venture Agreement involves a substantial, long-term
i -thetth ‘icablelovislati bli CS . ¢

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

hedate-t ddress-all-the-subjects-dealt-with herein—A dined:
is-hereb: and. d-by-the-Parties_and_the-Gr of th
Republ Gi hat—th isi £ this Joint—\ A
4 t 4 5
L d-by-the+ Gi. Joxisl Le he-ce
h shall Da b, J, 4 d 4
I 7 t
lesish hadl innclie de fy he heJdoint} f
5 Prep Tt “
heF P, j de Late Diy) ”

 

 

On 7 March 1992, the Georgian Cabinet of Ministers adopted Resolution 123G under
which it instructed the Minister of Finance to register the joint venture [Hearing Bundle,
Tab 5]. GTI was duly registered by the Minister of Finance on 9 March 1992 (It would
appear several years later that GTI was not, in fact, properly registered on this date,

although this fact has no material bearing on the Tribunal’s findings).
Resolution 123G defined GTI’s “fields of activity” as follows:

- “Construction of a compact, ecologically safe oil refinery, with a capacity of one
million tons per annum, on the terrain adjacent to the main facilities of Samgori
oilfield and development of the technology for producing a premium quality
luminescence oil (“Noroil” and others) widely used in pinpointing defects in
components with complicated configuration at the above refinery;

- Construction of the branch pipeline (Supsa-Poti) of the main oil pipeline
Gachiani-Batumi and construction of the new oil terminal (on a terrain adjacent
to Poti).

- Construction of — Baku-Gachiani main oil pipeline within the Republic’s
territory.”

-29 -

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

94.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

In addition, the Resolution noted that it was “advisable to elaborate, review and sanction

the appropriate design proposition” for the following projects:

- “Construction of a Grozny-Gachiani main oil pipeline.
- Construction of a new Gachiani-Khashuri-Poti oil product pipeline
- Construction of an 8-10 million-ton capacity oil refinery.”

The Cabinet of Ministers “acknowledge[d] that the agreement was coordinated with the

Ministry of Industry of The Republic of Georgia.”

On 14 December 1992, the Cabinet of Ministers issued Decree No. 1105, which effected
a reorganization of the management of fuel and energy resources in Georgia [Hearing
Bundle, Tab 6]. The purpose of this reorganization was “to improve the structure of
management of the fields included in the complex of fuel and energy of Georgia, increase

its effectiveness and provide the population with the fuel and energy resources”.

As a result of Decree No. 1105, SakNavtobi was established as a Department in the
Ministry of Fuel and Energy and the entity which held the rights over Georgia’s main oil
pipeline, Industrial Amalgamation of Georgian Main-Oil Pipelines (also known as

“Transneft”), was “united in the department of SakNavtobi”.

The so-called “early oil” project was officially approved by the Cabinet of Ministers in
Decree No. 951, passed on 15 December 1992 [Hearing Bundle, Tab 7]. In particular,
the Cabinet of Ministers authorized GTI to commence construction on a terminal at
Supsa and an oil-transhipment rack at Gachiani railway, estimating the total project cost,
including oil and oil product pipeline reconstruction in “the next stage”, at US $29.5

million.

Cc. The Deed of Concession

Following the restructuring of the Georgian fuel and energy sector, the contracting parties
to the JVA decided that GTI should obtain a formal Deed of Concession from Transneft
in order to confirm the rights it had obtained under the JVA. According to Dr. Tevzadze,
this was necessary to continue with the work already begun on the refurbishment of the

Samgori-Batumi pipeline [Tr. D8:19].

-30-

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

95. On 28 April 1993, Transneft executed a Deed of Concession (the “Deed”) in favour of
GTI, granting it a 30-year concession over Georgia’s Pipelines (the “Concession’”). The
Deed was signed by both Transneft and GTI, witnessed by SakNavtobi and ratified by the
Minister of Fuel and Energy [Hearing Bundle, Tab 3]. Several provisions in the Deed are

also material to these disputes and are therefore reproduced below.
96. Among those key terms defined in the Deed, “Concession” was defined as follows:

“The Ci ssion’ means — the ssion granted h der to GTI, includii
the sole and exclusive control and possession of the Pipelines, all the rights with
respect to the Pipelines, the right to possess and use the assets of Transneft,
excluding presently stored properties, which may be used by GTI.”

 

97. The “Pipelines” the subject of the Concession were further defined in the Deed as:

“the existing main pipelines systems in the geographical territory of the Republic
of Georgia for transport and/or storage of Petroleum — including pumping
stations, terminals, transferring units, loading, discharging and storage facilities,
workshops, stores and any other equipment or installations forming part of the
Petroleum transport Pipelines system and any extensions or new Petroleum
pipelines added in the future”

98. Article 6 of the Deed titled “Concession Fee” set forth the consideration for the grant of

the Concession:

“6.1 In consideration for the grant of the Concession, GTI agrees to bear on its
account and for its own responsibility during the Concession Period all the
expenses and investments involved in carrying out the ordinary and reasonable
maintenance of the Pipelines and based upon the existing method of Petroleum
transport cost calculations and in effecting any improvements or extensions to
the Pipelines it may deem necessary. The Board of Directors of GTI shall closely
consult on a regular basis with Transneft management in resolutions concerning
the Pipelines.

6.2 Having regard to the ongoing nature of the expenses and investments to be made
by GTI in the Pipelines throughout the Concession Period, the Concession Fee
shall accrue throughout the Concession Period and shall be deemed to be paid
throughout the entire Concession Period in consideration for the expenses and
investments of GTI.”

99. Article 7 contained the declarations of GTI, providing among other declarations that
“GTI confirms that the minimum initial investment in the Pipelines shall be US$
1,000,000 (One Million U.S. Dollars) and Transneft acknowledges that GTI has met this

obligation.”

-31-

100.

101.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Article 10 of the Concession contained several provisions concerning GTI’s rights to

effect certain “Improvements, Additions and Extensions to the Pipelines”:

“10.1 During the Concession Period, GTI shall have the right to effect improvements,
extensions or additions to the Pipelines, at its discretion and in consultation with
Transneft, including replacement of segments of the Pipelines, addition or
improvement of pumping Stations, terminals, transferring units, loading,
discharging and storage facilities, attachment of the Pipelines to existing or
prospective oil fields and attachment of the Pipelines to pipelines of other
sovereign states.

10.2 All improvements, additions or extensions shall be the sole property of GTI,
irrespective of whether they are detachable or non-detachable from the
Pipelines.

10.3 Without derogating from the generality of Section 10.2 and in conformity with its
provisions, Transneft hereby acknowledges that the rack for loading and
unloading Petroleum and the storage facilities constructed by GTI at the
Gachiani railway station and the Gachiani-Samgori segment of the Pipelines
installed at GTI’s expense and the pipeline extension terminal and marine
facilities constructed by GTI at Supsa, are the sole property of GTI.”

At the end of the 30-year period, GTI was to return the possession and use of the
Pipelines to Transneft. However, any investments, improvements, additions or
extensions made to the Pipelines by GTI were to remain its sole property. Transneft
undertook in this Article not to “pledge, lease or grant any rights whatsoever to the
Pipelines during the Concession Period.” Article 18 of the Deed thus provided the
following:

“8.1 At the termination of the Concession Period, GTI shall return the possession and
use of the Pipelines to Transneft.

 

18.2 Upon the ination of the Concession Period, any i
additions or extensions made to the Pipelines by GTI shall remain the sole
property of GTI and additionally GTI shall have a property interest in the
Pipelines equal to any outstanding loans of GTI to Transneft at the date of
termination of the Concession Period (and for the purposes of this Deed of
Concession such property interest shall also be deemed an_ investment,
improvement, addition or extension to the Pipelines).

Without derogating from the generality of the foregoing, upon the termination of
the Concession Period, Transneft shall continue to allow GTI the uninterrupted
use of any investments, improvements, additions or extensions to the Pipelines
made by GTI and accordingly shall maintain the connection to the Pipelines of
any such improvements, additions or extensions and shall continue the transport
of Petroleum and Gas through any such improvements, additions or extensions.

-32-

102.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

18.3 Upon the termination of the Concession Transneft shall notify GTI if it wishes to
purchase the investments, improvements, additions or extensions to the Pipelines
from GTI. If Transneft wishes to purchase the investments, improvements,
additions or extensions to the Pipelines, it shall pay GTI a price to be agreed
upon between the parties but in any event not less than the sum of (i) the cost of
GTI in ii lin ing and intaining the i imy 7
additions or extensions plus the LIBOR rate for U.S. Dollars accrued thereon
annually + 2.5% per annum calculated on the basis of costs and expenses of GTI
in each respective year.

 

The LIBOR rate to be applied shall be the twelve month LIBOR into [sic] in
effect for each separate year of the Concession Period, and (ii) compensation for
the contribution of GTI to the Pipelines in an amount to be agreed upon between
the Parties which shall be based upon the increased income generated by the
Pipelines at the date termination, operational and managerial improvements of
GTI, increased demand from users of the Pipelines, know-how and expertise
contributed by GTI concerning the Pipelines and any other tangible or
intangible asset created or established by GTI concerning the Pipelines.

18.4 The amounts due to GTI under Section 18.3 above shall be due and payable to
GTI I full upon the termination of the Concession Period and until such payment
is effected, GTI’s Concession rights and all other rights hereunder shall not
expire and GTI may continue to possess, use, manage and operate the Pipelines
under the terms and conditions hereof.

18.5 To ensure GTI’s rights hereunder Transneft undertakes not to sell, pledge, lease
or grant any rights whatsoever to the Pipelines during the Concession Period.”

Finally, Article 21 of the Deed, titled “No Expropriation”, provided as follows:

“21.1 The Pipelines and all property owned, leased or used by GTI in connection
therewith is not subject to expropriation, confiscation, nationalization or the
sale or grant of any rights to any persons or entities whatsoever. The
Concession rights of the GTI are protected in accordance with regulations of the
Georgian legislation and applicable international treaties and _ public
international law.

21.2 The entry of the Republic of Georgia into any confederation or union shall not
confer upon any entity the power to expropriate, confiscate or nationalize the
Pipelines or to sell or grant therein any rights to other persons or entities
whatsoever or in any way derogate from rights mentioned in Article 21.1 above.

21.3. Any purported attempted or alleged act or event of expropriation, confiscation,
nationalization of the Pipelines or grant of rights therein to other persons or
entities shall be null and void, and shall forthwith entitle GTI the right to receive
full reimbursement for any amounts expended by GTI in managing, operating or
maintaining the Pipelines or in carrying out improvements, additions or
extensions thereto, bearing interest on the free market value of such expenses or
investment and until such reimbursement in full shall forthwith entitle GTI to
payment of such users fee, rentals royalties or other compensation as shall be
determined by an arbitrator to be appointed pursuant to the provisions of this

- 33 -

103.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Agreement, during any period in which any such purported, attempted or
alleged acts are being carried out against the Pipelines or any part thereof.

The arbitrator may also award any additional amounts as reimbursement of
expenses or in respect of loss of profits.”

The relationship between these two instruments (the JVA and Deed of Concession) is
critically important to the scope of the rights in issue in these arbitrations. Further to
questioning by the Tribunal on this matter during the merits Hearing, Mr. Kardassopoulos

offered the following explanation of their inter-relationship [Tr. D4:33-35]:

“I am interested to know what significance you attach to the difference between
the breadth of the formula in the deed of concession and the formula that’s used
in the JVA to describe the oil facilities, where, for example, in the JVA, it refers
to oil refineries as one aspect of the facilities. Could you just explain how you
saw those two instruments?

A. The concession has to do with pipelines, and therefore, from my point of
view, from the commercial point of view that I saw, what is mentioned in the
concession is what is also applicable on the JVA, which means the joint venture,
GTI, had a concession on the pipelines that Transneft had on any future ones, or
extensions of the existing or future ones, or additional ones or whatever. I do
not see any difference.

Q. One reading of it may be to say that the deed of concession refers to
extensions of new petroleum pipelines but does not refer, for example, to
refineries and to other facilities. It doesn’t refer explicitly to rail facilities and
so on, so it’s a much narrower definition in that sense.

A. Yes.

Q. It’s a comparison between paragraph 2 of the deed of concession and
paragraph 1.2 of the notion of oil and gas facilities in the JVA. I should also say
that I appreciate that this is also a question for legal submissions rather than
direct witness evidence but I am interested to know how you saw the relationship
between the two instruments.

 

A. We discussed extensively the JVA, the concession came at a later stage.
Already, Transneft was part of the JVA. The Georgians felt that we needed the
deed of concession in order to solidify the JVA, and this is where it came about,
and we were -- we were negotiating the JVA, the Georgian part, with the
assistance of our lawyer, Jack Smith. The only thing that was of interest to us
was that the JVA terms would not be diminished.

And number two, that the same applications which means the deed of concession
also would be strong in international -- in any international arbitration,
international law and so on, and we were protected by the investment laws of
Georgia also.

-34-

104.

105.

106.

107.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Q. Can I just check what you said? On the transcript it says that your interest
was that the JVA terms would not be diminished, is that what you said?

A. Yes.”

D. Work Performed by GTI

The work involved in the GTI project was comprised of five principal elements: (1)
conversion of the Gachiani railway station to receive oil by rail from Azerbaijan; (2)
construction of an oil storage, mooring and distribution facility near the port of Supsa on
the Black Sea; (3) restoration of the existing Samgori-Batumi pipeline; (4) building of a
new branch of that pipeline to the rail loading station at Gachiani; and (5) building of an
extension to the Samgori-Batumi pipeline which would bring the pipeline to Supsa [Tr.

D2:65-66; Frenkiel I, paras. 15-44].

The Parties dispute the extent of work performed in respect of each element of the GTI
project. Whilst certain elements of the project were undertaken and progressed by GTI
during the period in which Tramex/GTI held rights in the early oil pipeline, such as
construction work on the Gachiani railway station, design work at Supsa port, and testing
of the Samgori-Batumi pipeline, others were not commenced at all. In any event, all
physical work on the project appears to have been put on hold by the spring of 1994, and
all work of any nature ceased by the end of 1995 [Tr. D2:101-102; D3:143:1 to 144:2].

In May 1995, an article was published in Petroleum Argus, an oil industry publication,
questioning Tramex’s commitment to the GTI project, because “minimal repair work”
had been performed to that date on the Gachiani-Batumi pipeline [Hearing Bundle, Tab
147]. On re-examination during the merits Hearing, Mr. Frenkiel, project director for
GTI from 1992 to 1996, explained that the criticism of Tramex’s commitment was
misplaced, as works had been completed on other elements of the GTI project, the repair

work on the pipeline being but one element of the whole [Tr. D2:114].

The written evidence of Mr. Levy, chief engineer from Ludan Engineering Co. Ltd. and a
witness for the Claimants (who was not called to testify), confirms that no suggestion was
made by any of the Georgian partners at the time that GTI’s work was deficient [Levy I,

para. 12.2]:

-35-

108.

109.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

“There was never any suggestion whatsoever by them that the quality of our
designs or the construction work was in any way deficient. This was a highly
important project to them, and when they had comments or suggestions, they
made them early on and we took full account of them. This was a partnership in
a truest sense.”

Whilst progress of the GTI project was clearly encumbered at different points due to
security concerns, including theft of project materials and insurgent fighting in certain
regions proximate to project sites, the oral and documentary evidence discloses that
Tramex’s commitment to the project appears to have waned only upon the emergence of
rumours and steps taken within the Georgian government which called into question the

validity of GTI’s exclusive rights in the development of the early oil pipeline.

E. The Proposed Partnership between Tramex and Brown & Root

In 1994, Tramex began to look for a partner that would either provide financing or
operational know-how to further advance the GTI project. Tramex had engaged the
services of a financial consultant, Ms. Chee Jap, a witness for the Claimants, in 1992 to
assist in securing a short-term loan to finance the Gachiani-Supsa pipeline project, with
no success. Financing proved to be unavailable without a guarantee of throughput or a
partner strong enough to carry the project [Tr. D1:193-94]. As Ms. Jap explained during
the merits Hearing [Tr. D1:183:9 to 183:7]:

“A. I looked to go to EBRD, I looked to Morgan Grenfell, and various other
entities, including Turkish contractors, I believe, in order to see if there were
possible export credits. It became apparent that this was a project in a war zone
which was going to be very difficult, insurance was going to be difficult and
expensive, and it seemed the best way to go about this was to ally oneself with
someone who was already in the region, who worked in the region, knew about
pipelines, oil, transportation, et cetera. We then looked around for one of those,
and Brown & Root happened to come along at the right time.

Q. Did any of your discussions with any sources of potential financing reach a
stage where you were discussing specific terms of the financing?

A. No, as I said to you, it didn't seem the right way to go, to go alone as GTI;
you had to align yourself with a large corporation who was well-versed in the
subject, and in the area, in order to be successful, and that's what we sought to
do.

Doing these projects means you have to be flexible and you have to go the route

that the circumstances dictate, not, you know, blindly following the route that
you first perhaps thought was possible.”

- 36 -

110.

111.

112.

113.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Around this same time, Brown & Root Ltd. (“Brown & Root’), a U.K. subsidiary of
Halliburton Inc., a U.S. engineering and construction firm involved in the oil and gas
sector, was seeking investment opportunities in the Caspian region. According to the
written evidence of Mr. Ted Ferguson, a former employee of Brown & Root and witness

on behalf of the Claimants, [Ferguson I, para. 2.1]:

“[...] the Caspian reserves were one of the planet’s largest untapped sources of
energy. We were keen to be a part of that development and began to work with
Chevron Corp., which was at that time extracting oil from the Tengiz fields in
Kazakhstan. We also established a relationship with [AIOC], a consortium of oil
companies which at that time included BP, ExxonMobil, Statoil, Ramco Oil &
Gas (“Ramco”), TPAO and Unocal. We had initiated our contact with AIOC by
designing some off-shore drilling structures for the consortium’s exploration
activities. During 1994-95, I was spending about 80% of my time in Russia and
the Caspian region.”

Mr. Ferguson learned of Tramex’s investment in Georgia through a contact involved in
oil and gas exploration in the Caspian region, and subsequently arranged for a meeting
with Ms. Jap in June 1994. According to Mr. Ferguson, Brown & Root was, at this time,
still in the early stages of its research into the export solutions for Caspian oil and
therefore did not take up contact with Ms. Jap again until early the following year

[Ferguson I, para. 2.10].

Mr. Ferguson met with Ms. Jap again in March 1995 to discuss GTI’s rights under the
JVA and the Concession in further detail. He explains Brown & Root’s interest in the

GTI project at this stage as follows [Ferguson I, para. 3.2]:

“From our perspective, a stake in GTI offered an ideal fit for Brown & Root’s
strategy in the region. Firstly, under the joint venture agreement GTI held the
licence that would enable us to export oil from the Georgian fields that we were
planning to develop with Halliburton and Makoil. Secondly, and more
importantly, GTI’s right over Georgia’s pipeline and rail transport systems
offered us the central plank in our proposed solution for exporting oil from the
Caspian reserves. It seemed that the very rights that Brown & Root was
interested in acquiring had already been allocated to GTI. Apparently, Tramex
had moved in ahead of the rest of the oil industry and I was quite interested to
meet the Greek and Israeli businessmen behind it all. I confirmed Brown &
Root’s interest through a letter to Ms Jap dated 13 March 1995. [...].”

This is confirmed by a contemporaneous email, dated 26 June 1995, sent by Mr. Larry

Farmer, a witness on behalf of the Respondent and Mr. Ferguson’s superior at Brown &

Root during the relevant period, to Mr. Larry Knight, President and CEO of Brown &
-37-

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Root International, and Mr. Emil Zerr, President and CEO of Halliburton Inc., which
states [Hearing Bundle, Tab 280]:

“Ted Ferguson met with Tramex and was able to come to agreement generally
on everything but price. Tramex will not budge from USD 10 million. I have been
adamant that whatever price we pay will have to come out of profit (after tax if
any) on our CAPEX work and that we will not commit an agreement that binds
us to pay until the construction agreement is in place with funding satisfactory to
us. Tramex understands this and has no problem with it. Faith Macdonald, our
lawyer here who is handling this, is in touch with Peter Arbour — and they agree
that the proposed heads of agreement give us adequate means to step out if we
want to.

The Turkey government has reiterated (through the Turkish Ambassador to the
UK) that they will fund this work. We don’t know the value of the CAPEX scope,
but our estimate is USD 25-50 million. If it is on the high end of a markup of
USD 10 million might be feasible—if on the low end I would think it difficult, and
we might have to step aside (but maybe not as we don’t know the drivers).

You may recall that the lawyer acting on behalf of the US DOE suggested the
value of USD 21 million for the Tramex 50 percent of the venture (we are
proposing to buy 25 percent).

I suggest that so long as we can legally withdraw that we go along with the USD
10 million. If the project won’t stand it at the time that we know the financing
requirements, tariff possibilities, and other factors to be determined, then my
guess is that Tramex will take a pragmatic view of their price in order to make
the project go. Our requirement must be that we can withdraw at any time up to
financial closure of the project without penalty.

As it is logical that oil will flow through Georgia someday, I suggest we go along
with USD 10 million to stay in the game.”

[Emphasis added.]

114. On direct examination during the merits Hearing, Mr. Ferguson was asked to explain his

understanding of this last paragraph in Mr. Farmer’s email [Tr. D3:9-10]:

“A. Yes, from our various managerial meetings, we had made some strategic
decisions on the Caucasus in particular. The principal client we were looking at
was AIOC in Azerbaijan and we wanted to have engineering contracts with them.
We were already working for Chevron in Kazakhstan, across the other side of the
Caspian, and we wanted to do more work for them, so our presence in the region
was already there and we wanted to expand it.

In looking forward we saw Georgia -- and we weren't unique in this, I must say --
we saw Georgia as a very important pivotal point for the export of crude oil in
the future, so any presence we had in Georgia, ahead of anyone else, and indeed,
if we could have some foothold by having equity in some existing, even outdated,
Russian supply lines and some export lines, that would be advantageous to us, we

- 38 -

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

would have a presence, and people would like to see an international engineering
company in the region, working independently.”

115. Later during the Hearing, Mr. Farmer confirmed on cross-examination the meaning of
this last paragraph, concerning the eventuality of oil flowing through Georgia [Tr.

D6:126:9 to 127:18]:

“Q. Why in your opinion in 1995 was it almost certain that oil would flow
through Georgia?

A. In my opinion, that was the path of least resistance, because it wasn't likely to
flow through Iran and down in that direction, it wasn't likely to flow through
Armenia, and there was resistance or doubt among the oil industry that they
wanted to flow it north through Russia, and of course a pipeline already existed
through Georgia, and so those are some of the factors that caused me to believe,
I believe at that time, that oil would flow through Georgia most likely.

Q. You mentioned north through Russia, is it a fact that the pipeline north of
Georgia that flows through Russia flows through Chechnya?

A. I believe that's true.
Q. As a businessman, can you comment on the reasons why there would have
been resistance or doubt amongst the oil industry to have a pipeline flow north

through Russia including Chechnya?

A. I believe at the time there was concern about the reliability of the delivery
through that area.

Q. Would the fact that it was in a hotly contested ethnic region be one of the
reasons for concerns about reliability of delivery?

A. I think that's true. There were various disruptions, as I recall, political
disruptions, that were perceived to possibly jeopardise the continuous flow of oil.

Q. You're speaking in very strategic terms; did you see the future of Georgia as

an oil corridor as a strategic issue in business terms, especially from the point of

view of a pipeline industry professional?

A. Yes, I think that would be a fair statement.

Q. It's also fair to say that AIOC saw it in the same terms, isn't it?

A. I suspect you're right.”

116. On 20 March 1995, Mr. Fuchs wrote to GTI’s Board of Directors and to SakNavtobi to

inform them of progress made in Tramex’s negotiations with Brown & Root concerning
their participation in the GTI project, as well as with AIOC in respect of the possibility of

their shipping crude oil from Azerbaijan through GTI’s oil transport system. In his letter,
-39-

117.

118.

119.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Mr. Fuchs advised that discussions with Brown & Root had reached a “serious stage”
and that they would bring “insurance cover, engineering expertise and connections, not
only to complete the project, but also to incorporate it as part of a wider transportation
network for crude oil and products and to bring additional finance.” At this point, it is
evident that Tramex believed both Brown & Root and AIOC to be “proceeding in good
faith” and Mr. Fuchs therefore proposed that the GTI Board of Directors consent to
providing the companies with requested documentation relating to GTI, its rights and
interest, subject to their entering into a confidentiality agreement [Hearing Bundle, Tab

95A].

On 27 April 1995, Dr. Tevzadze, a witness on behalf of the Respondent, confirmed in a
letter to Mr. Grahame Cook of AIOC, also a witness on behalf of the Respondent, that the
GTI Board had agreed to AIOC’s documentation request subject to the signature of a
confidentiality agreement, confirming also that Tramex was authorized to liaise and
negotiate with AIOC on behalf of GTI in all matters which cover the subject of the JVA
[Hearing Bundle, Tab 104].

AIOC and Tramex never agreed on the final terms of a confidentiality agreement and the
requested documents were therefore never forwarded by GTI or its partners, although it
appears that AIOC did obtain certain documents related to the GTI project through other
channels [see e.g. Hearing Bundle, Tab 296].

On 3 May 1995, Ms. Jap met with Bob Brendling, a colleague of Mr. Ferguson at Brown
& Root, to discuss the terms of a deal in respect of the GTI project. Ms. Jap’s Meeting
Note recording their discussion reflects the fact that AIOC was not interested in dealing
with Tramex or GTI, as they were unknown entities [Tr. D3:44:5 to 46:17]. Furthermore,
it is clear from this Note that Brown & Root would not commit to a deal with Tramex
without a commitment from AIOC to put a certain amount of oil through the system, i.e.
“throughput”, and would not finance or work on the Georgian development with other oil
companies because of a company directive to cooperate with AIOC. The Meeting Note
concludes as follows [Hearing Bundle, Tab 108]:

“T think B&R are still prepared to proceed to heads of terms with us but they
would carry the condition that AIOC can get B&R as a shareholder as soon as

- 40 -

120.

121.

122.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

possible in order that they can negotiate on behalf of GTI with AIOC, which may
move events a little faster; however, we still want the [$10] million, which they
would not wish to pay unless AIOC has committed. The structure contemplated
in their proposal I think is not workable.”

Mr. Ferguson confirmed on cross-examination during the merits Hearing that cooperation
with AIOC “was always Brown & Root’s first choice, because they needed the work with
AIOC [...]. So there was never any intent in anything that Brown & Root were doing in
Georgia to [...] interfere with the relationships with AIOC and the major oil companies.
Unfortunately, it happened.” [Tr. D3:46]

On 15 May 1995, Dr. Tevzadze wrote to Mr. Fuchs confirming that SakNavtobi would
“look favourably on Brown & Root as an equity partner sharing in Tramex’s interest in
GTI and, if needed, would undertake to obtain the necessary governmental authorizations

and consents to give effect to their participation.” [Hearing Bundle, Tab 110]

Before Tramex and Brown & Root reached agreement on the terms of a deal, the
Georgian Minister of Justice, Mr. Ninidze, a witness on behalf of the Respondent, wrote
to Dr. Tevzadze on 26 June 1995, informing him that GTI was improperly registered,
contrary to Georgian law, and that the Deed of Concession did not give GTI any rights as
it was not legal [Hearing Bundle, Tab 119]:

“The Ministry of Justice of the Republic of Georgia, according to the request of

the Cabinet of Ministers, reviewed the legal position of the foundation documents

of GTI and the Act of Concession, which were signed by SakTrans and GTI on
the 28 of April 1993.

After objective legal expertise of the presented documents, appeared that many
of the subjects are not in constitute [sic: conformance] with the existing

jurisdiction of Georgia.

From the above mentioned, The Ministry of Justice of the Republic of Georgia
requests to inform the foreign partner, Tramex the following:

I. The Joint Venture, GTI, was registered improperly and against the
existing law and has to be re-register[ed] as soon as possible.

2. According to the law of the Republic of Georgia, the Act of Concession
signed between SakTrans and GTI is not legal and does not give GTI any rights.

[...].”

-41-

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Tramex responded to the Minister’s letter on 17 July 1995, taking the following position
[Hearing Bundle, Tab 127]:

“I. We found the assertion made in your letter, namely that GTI Ltd. should be ‘re-
registered’ and that the Deed of Concession between GTI Ltd. and Saktrans is
not in conformity with Georgian law, totally unacceptable from any standpoint.

2. Our position, based upon legal advice that we have received, is that the
assertions in your letter are incorrect and are in clear contravention to
internationally accepted principles of law as implemented by national courts and
as adopted by all recognized international tribunals. As stipulated in the relevant
legal documents, all the agreements involving GTI Ltd. are governed by these
accepted principles of law and we expect the Georgian Government, forming
part of the community of civilized nations, to adhere to these principles.

3. On March 9, 1992 GTI Ltd. was registered and a certificate of incorporation was
issued by the Republic of Georgia. If, subsequently, the Republic of Georgia
enacted new legislation which required a new form of registration, this obviously
cannot affect the rights and interests of GTI Ltd. which were granted and
acquired in accordance with the prevailing laws.

One of the most basic and fundamental principles of customary commercial law
states that vested interests or rights cannot be invalidated or adversely affected
by legislation enacted after investiture of such interest or rights.

Therefore, it is quite clear that any reference to ‘re-registration’ of GTI Ltd. is
completely irrelevant since, as stated above, once registered in accordance with
the prevailing laws as explicitly confirmed by Georgian Government officials, the
rights and interests of GTI Ltd. are immune to any detraction due to any future
legislation.

We do not understand the basis for your assertion that under the existing laws a
re-registration of the Joint Venture, GTI is required and our above comment is
without prejudice to our examination of the relevant Georgian legislation
referred to in your letter.

4. The assertion concerning the Deed of Concession is in our opinion a blatant
attempt, based upon ulterior motives, to undermine clear rights and interests
accruing directly to GTI and indirectly to our company as a foreign investor. We
cannot accept that an agreement made between two Georgian State owned
companies — GTI Ltd. and Saktrans, which in the body of the Deed of Concession
was affirmed by yet a third Georgian State owned company, Saknavtobi, and was
ratified by the Minister of Energy, would be declared by another Department of
the Republic of Georgia to be invalid. This becomes even more incredulous in
light of the clear declarations given both by Saknavtobi and Saktrans contained
in the Deed of Concession as to the conformity of the Deed of Concession with all
government decrees.

[...]”

-42-

124.

125.

126.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

During the months of June and July 1995, Tramex and Brown & Root proceeded to
negotiate the terms of a draft Heads of Agreement, which was submitted for approval to
the GTI Board of Directors and approved on 12 July 1995 [Hearing Bundle, Tab 125].
The draft Heads of Agreement provided for the sale by Tramex of 50% of its rights and
interest in GTI to Brown & Root in exchange for payment of US$10 million. Brown &
Root also committed to obtaining throughput commitments from producers commencing
upon completion of the “Projects”, defined as follows:

“]. Cleaning, testing and refurbishing the existing pipeline between
Gachiyani and Supsa.

2. Upgrading and refurbishing of the existing pumping and pressure
regulation stations.

3. Completion and expansion of the rail car unloading system at Gachiyani
with a capacity in line with anticipated throughput volumes.

4. The construction of a new storage and loading facility at Supsa.”

Conclusion of final Heads of Agreement was subject to, among other things, completion
of Brown & Root’s due diligence review of GTI. A meeting note prepared by Ms. Jap
recording her discussion with Mrs. Faith Macdonald (a fact witness on behalf of
Respondent) and Mr. Michael Hartley (not a witness), in-house legal counsel to Brown &
Root, indicates that, as of 14 July 1995, Brown & Root was aware that Tramex and GTI’s
rights were being attacked and that “Jegalities are being called into question”, but were
unaware of the letter recently sent by the Minister of Justice declaring GTI’s rights under

the Deed of Concession invalid [Hearing Bundle, Tab 126].

In August 1995, Tramex and Brown & Root continued to develop a plan for
implementation of the GTI project. On 25 August 1995, Mr. Ferguson wrote to President
Shevardnadze to inform him of changes to their proposal. In this same letter, Mr.
Ferguson recommended “that Georgia sign no more agreements with AIOC until the
AIOC and Georgia have assessed this new proposal.” [Hearing Bundle, Tab 135]. Mr.
Adams, President of AIOC, who appeared as a witness on behalf of the Respondent in
these proceedings, was quite critical of Mr. Ferguson and his motives in respect of this
letter, stating that it is “interfering or attempting to interfere in an ongoing process

between a national government, or two national governments, and the potential for

-43-

127.

128.

129.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

investment in an export route through to the West’ [Tr. D9:91-92]. However, Mr.
Ferguson explained in his oral testimony that while “it helped [his] business initiative
somewhat” if President Shevardnadze did not sign AIOC’s proposal, the purpose of this
letter was to advise the President that AIOC was considering a separate offer from
Turkey and no further action should be taken until AIOC had completed its assessment of

this alternative [Tr. D3:67-69].

This tension between AIOC and Brown & Root, as well as internal conflict in Brown &
Root occasioned by their involvement with Tramex/GTI, is a recurrent theme of these
arbitrations. Whilst there can be no certainty that these tensions would have been
resolved in such a way as to enable the participation of Brown & Root (and the
Claimants) in any oil and gas export solution for the region, it is clear that the Georgian

State played a role in quashing any such possibility.

A Business Plan prepared by Tramex/GTI and Brown & Root was presented to the GTI
Board of Directors on 8 September 1995, which resolved to request a meeting with Prime
Minister Patsatsia to present him with the Plan. During this same Board meeting,
attended by Dr. Tevzadze, Mr. Asatiani, Mr. Kardassopoulos, Mr. Fuchs and Mr.
Frenkiel, the issue of action taken by “several parties, including AIOC” to undermine and
eliminate Tramex/GTI’s rights was discussed. The meeting minutes reflect the following

additional resolution [Hearing Bundle, Tab 140]:

“2. The Board of Directors irrevocably authorizes Tramex International Inc.
to receive legal advice as it deems necessary concerning the steps GTI should
take to protect its rights under the Joint Venture Agreement and/or the Deed of
Concession and to take all action required and to initiate legal proceedings
wherever necessary, on behalf of GTI, in connection therewith, against AIOC
and all other parties involved in activities which are in contradiction to GTI’s
rights.”

On 12 September 1995, Mr. Fuchs wrote to Prime Minister Patsatsia in connection with a
letter received the previous day from AIOC. Mr. Fuchs’ letter states, in relevant part, the
following [Hearing Bundle, Tab. 141]:

“It has come to our attention that members of the Cabinet of Ministers have

signed an agreement with AIOC intending to grant AIOC the sole and exclusive
rights over the Republic of Georgia’s existing crude oil pipeline system.

-44-

130.

131.

132.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

[...]

We had understood from Georgian governmental representatives that AIOC had
objected to Tramex/GTI being included in the ongoing discussions and
negotiations with AIOC regarding the pipeline system.

The letter of AIOC to Tramex, dated qr" September 1995, [...] advises us that
AIOC would be ‘more than willing to discuss its crude oil transportation
requirements with Tramex/GTI if we are advised to do so by the Government’.

Without derogating from AIOC’s liability towards us for their actions, it is
apparent that if AIOC would receive appropriate instructions, we would be
included in the discussion being held with AIOC.

It is our firm opinion that this matter should be urgently looked into and sorted
out and we hereby request an urgent meeting with you, at your earliest
convenience, so that we may obtain official clarification of the matter.”

It would appear that such instructions, to include GTI in any deal discussed with AIOC,
were never given. During the merits Hearing, Mr. Adams testified that “/i/f the
government of Georgia had said, ‘this company has rights which we acknowledge and we
request that they are accommodated in the consortium’, we would have reviewed the
situation at that time and assessed what would be an acceptable solution” [Tr. D9:97].
This is consistent with the opinion expressed by the Claimants’ industry expert in his

written and oral evidence [Tr. D10:71; Beazley Expert Report, para. 62].

Although development of a Business Plan with Brown & Root proceeded through the fall
of 1995, Tramex and GTI appear to have been overshadowed by AIOC’s presence in the
region and the ongoing negotiations with both the Georgian and Azeri governments in
respect of the development of an export solution for Azeri oil. By October 1995, Brown
& Root had arranged financing for the GTI project and purportedly secured a
commitment from the Turkish government to provide a credit facility of US$250 million

[Ferguson II, paras. 3.9-3.10]. No final agreement was, however, ever concluded.

Mr. Farmer met with Mr. Adams in November 1995, following the creation of GIOC (see
Part II.G below), to clarify the nature of Brown & Root’s activities in connection with the
Western Route. It is clear from the meeting notes recorded by AIOC that whatever
Brown & Root’s original intentions may have been, they had by this point determined not

to pursue a deal with Tramex [Hearing Bundle, Tab 150]:

-45-

133.

134.

135.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

“B&R advised that their relationship with Tramex goes back two years. At that
point, B&R had been invited to Georgia by a California company to assist with
the enhancement of production from the oilfields. Tramex, with others, had an
agreement with the Georgian Government for rights to the pipelines; and one
year ago, B&R signed an agreement with Tramex which provides B&R with an
option to purchase 50% of Tramex’s 50% share.

B&R advised they had decide to put more energy into their activity in
Azerbaijan, and in this respect wished to pursue other opportunities with AIOC.
AIOC welcomed this news, and urged B&R to initiate a dialogue with SOCAR’s
senior management.

At the end of the discussion both parties agreed that B&R was not a competitor
to AIOC, purely a contractor. The meeting was cordial, and both parties agreed
to maintain open ls of ication, with B&R confirming their sincere
intent not to interfere with AIOC and its external relationships. B&R wished to
maintain good relations with AIOC and its shareholders.”

 

The Parties dispute whether Brown & Root had the experience and technical ability to
construct and operate the early oil pipeline in whole or in part, let alone the main export
pipeline (“MEP”) which eventually crossed through Georgia. Mr. Guner, who provided
written evidence in support of the Respondent’s case but who was not called to give oral
testimony, stated that in his 25 years of experience with Brown & Root, “Brown & Root
never actually owned or operated pipelines, this wasn’t [its] core business” [Guner, para.
4]. This is countered by the testimony of the Claimant’s industry expert Mr. Beazley,
who insists that, at the time, the Brown & Root Halliburton group were taking equity in
oil fields around the world and, in his opinion, “there is just no shadow of doubt in my

mind but for the fact that Brown & Root could have done it” [Tr. D10:63].

As will be seen later, irrespective of what might have been the GTI project under
partnership with Brown & Root, it is unnecessary, in the Tribunal’s view, for the
Claimants to prove in order to prevail in these arbitrations that the deal with Brown &
Root would have proceeded as an absolute certainty or that it would have been a success

on the scale of what actually occurred under the direction of the AIOC.

F. AIOC and Negotiation of the PCOA

AIOC was formed by 13 multinational oil companies in December 1994 as a “no
profit/no loss” joint oil operating company consistent with the terms of the Azeri Chirag
Deepwater Gunashli (“ACG”) Production Sharing Contract (“PSA”), known as the

“Contract of the Century” [Hearing Bundle, Tab 274; Adams, para. 6]. The purpose for
- 46 -

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

this common venture is explained in the written evidence of Mr. Adams [Adams, para.

9):

“The commercial prize for the shareholders in AIOC was substantial, which
more than justified their risk exposure. The Azeri Chirag Deepwater Gunashli
(‘ACG’) oil field included in the PSA was discovered by the state oil company in
Soviet times, but could not be developed. (Soviet offshore technology could not
cope with the water depths involved.) Some 3.5bnbls (billion barrels) of
recoverable oil reserves had already been proven. In 1994 it was anticipated
that these oil reserves would ultimately increase to at lease Sbnbls following
appraisal drilling. This would result in a field production of some 1 mmbls/d
(million barrels per day) that would require an MEP to the Mediterranean. As
subsequent events have shown, ACG recoverable reserves have now increased to
9.Sbnbls, making it one of the world’s few supergiant oilfields. To place this in
perspective, if the ACG oilfield was overlain on a map of London it would stretch
from one side of the M25 to the other. ACG was roughly four times the size of
the Forties Field in the UK North Sea, and was located in an area not subject to
OPEC influence and control.”

136. Mr. Adams further explained the strategic importance of the PSA to both Georgia and
Azerbaijan vis-a-vis the strengthening of their independence from Russia [Adams, para.

23):

“The validity of Aliyev’s oil strategy was fully vindicated by subsequent events.
Both he and President Shevardnadze benefited from international political
exposure to the West that resulted in their being made welcome by the powers
that be, particularly in Washington. They had the remarkable ability to balance
not only conflicting political interests within the immediate region, but to
manipulate external political players of great influence. For example, the
pursuit of improved energy security from preferential access to Caspian oil
became an American political priority. Equally, the involvement of Russian
Lukoil and Turkish TPAO demonstrated the importance of the PSA for Moscow
and Ankara too. My direct involvement with President Aliyev and Shevardnadze
became critical for the effective management of AIOC, and the eventual delivery
of EOP [the Early Oil Pipeline]. In effect, nothing of significance in relation to
Baku oil would happen if President Aliyev did not consider it consistent with
Azerbaijan’s national interest. The same applied to President Shevardnadze in
Tbilisi. Presidents Aliyev and Shevardnadze were fundamentally aligned from
1995 to the activation of EOP in 1998.”

137. On 22 March 1995, two days after Mr. Fuchs wrote to the GTI Board requesting
permission to disclose documentation in respect of GTI’s status and rights to AIOC, Mr.
Gregory Rich, Vice President of AIOC, and Valekh Aleskerov, Advisor to the President
of the State Oil Company of Azerbaijan (““SOCAR”), jointly wrote to President
Shevardnadze providing a draft Protocol relating to the proposed transportation of

Azerbaijan oil through Georgia. They also advised of conflicting information received in
-47-

138.

139.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

respect of rights granted to GTI, which, if valid, would require appropriate modification

of the Protocol [Hearing Bundle, Tab 97]. They wrote, in relevant part, as follows:

“During the visit last week you were kind enough to instruct your officials to
research whether any Government Decrees had been issued to this effect. They
reported to us that whilst several Decrees had been issued recognising the
formation of the joint venture GTI and confirming certain rights; [sic] none
decreed the granting of any exclusive rights over, or long term lease of, any of
the facilities referred to in the Protocol.

However, we have been informed by Department of Georgian Oil that the joint
venture agreement signed by them with Tramex International Inc. does grant
GTI certain exclusive rights and in particular a long term lease agreement on
the Gachiyani-Samgori pipelines which was signed in April 1993.

Before we can progress our negotiations on the transportation of Azerbaijan Oil
across the territory of the Republic of Georgia, it is important that we fully
understand the extent and validity of the rights granted to the joint venture GTI.
Towards this end we would request the assistance and co-operation of your staff
in clarifying these matters. If it is deemed helpful, we are willing to retain a legal
advisory familiar with Georgian law to assist in this matter. Should such rights
have been granted and remain valid and in force then Item 2 of the protocol will
need to be modified accordingly.”

At or around this time, AIOC retained the legal firm Nabarro Nathanson to prepare an
analysis, inter alia, of the legality of the GTI joint venture and the rights granted to GTI
under the JVA and the Deed of Concession. Their report concluded that GTI validly
existed but that the grant of rights to GTI was invalid and the provisions in the JVA and
Deed of Concession purporting to grant rights to GTI were similarly invalid as neither
SakNavtobi nor Transneft had the authority to make such a grant of rights absent Cabinet
approval [Hearing Bundle, Tab 105]. This report, as stated in its introductory pages, was
prepared on the basis of document summaries, as opposed to a complete record of the
relevant legal and contractual instruments, and is therefore (and was at the time) of

limited use as a dispositive assessment of the Claimants’ rights.

The Protocol between the governments of Georgia and Azerbaijan, and AIOC, for the
transit of Azeri oil through Georgia was signed on 17 May 1995 and executed several
months later on 31 August 1995. According to Mr. Cook, the Protocol enabled
“preliminary positioning work ... on the western route without contractual commitment”

[Tr. D9:11]. Indeed, a contractual commitment in respect of the Western Route was not

- 48 -

140.

141.

142.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

finalized until March 1996 in the form of the Pipeline Construction and Operating
Agreement (“PCOA”).

In June 1995, the Claimants met with representatives of Velt Energie and United Perlite
Industries Ltd. who, acting either on behalf of several or all of the members of AIOC,
expressed an interest in buying out Tramex’s 50% interest in GTI. The meeting was
arranged and attended by Dr. Tevzadze. Various figures appear to have been discussed,
culminating in what the Claimants understood to be a tentative offer of US $25 million.
Shortly following the meeting, an exchange of correspondence ensued casting some
doubt on what may (or may not) have been agreed [Hearing Bundle, Tabs 120, 122;
Kardassopoulos III, paras. 3.10-11). A letter from Prime Minister Patsatsia to United
Perlite shortly following the meeting indicates, however, that the Georgian Government
considered that an offer was made and that it was “almost adequate”, with a possible
additional offer of 5% of share capital [Hearing Bundle, Tab 121]. Prime Minister
Patsatsia further expressed the opinion that the negotiations with Tramex should continue

and agreement should be reached as quickly as possible [Jbid.].

Discussions between the Claimants and representatives of Velt Energie and United
Perlite appear to have progressed no further. On the other hand, the Claimants’ concerns
in respect of AIOC’s involvement in the region and with the Georgian Government

appear to have intensified.

On 24 July 1995, Mr. Kardassopoulos wrote to Mr. Adams concerning Tramex’s

investment in GTI, advising as follows [Hearing Bundle, Tab 128]:

“Lod

3. Your activity and interests in the region adjacent to the Republic of Georgia are
well documented and have received expansive press coverage and we are well
aware also that you have made inquiries in the Republic of Georgia concerning
the possible use of the Georgian pipeline system for transport of oil, and as
evidenced by your contacts with us, you are cognizant of our rights and the
rights of GTI Ltd concerning the pipeline system.

4. We wish to bring to your urgent attention that we have received information that
certain elements allegedly associated with AIOC have deviated from accepted
business norms and are attempting to undermine our rights and the
abovementioned rights of GTI with the aim of promoting, what they perceive to

-49-

143.

144.

145.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

be, the interests of AIOC. This information has been provided to us by well
established sources involved in the situation.

5. We would therefore like to clearly and plainly state that our rights in GTI Ltd
and the rights of GTI Ltd pursuant to the Deed of Concession have been duly
granted and ratified by the competent authorities of the Republic of Georgia and
are fully valid and enforceable. Obviously, any attempts, whether directly or
indirectly, a knowing intervention in a contractual relationship and/or economic
interests of our company and we shall hold those responsible to such actions
liable for all damages or losses either we or GTI may suffer as a consequence of
such conduct.

[..]”

This letter was, in no uncertain terms, a shot across the bow from Tramex in defence of

its interests in Georgia.

Mr. Adams replied on July 25", confirming AIOC’s intention to “deal only with the
appropriate parties in [Georgia], whether they be Tramex, GTI, Georgian Oil or any
other properly sanctioned party.” Mr. Adams further advised that, in this light, [Hearing
Bundle, Tab 130]:

“AIOC have sought clarification and authorisation from the Republic of Georgia
as to such appropriate parties with whom to discuss AIOC’s export options
through the Republic of Georgia. We have received that authorisation from the
highest levels of Government who have in turn formally appointed certain
individuals to carry out these discussions on behalf of the Republic. We believe
that only the Georgian Government have the proper authority to instruct AIOC
as to the identity of those parties.

If representatives of Tramex or GTI have not been included in the efforts
currently underway in Georgia, AIOC suggest that you contact Georgian
authorities to determine your role in the discussions.

It is not nor has it ever been the intention of AIOC to interfere with the rights of
any third party. All the member companies of this Consortium are particularly
sensitive to their international business reputations; this sensitivity dictates the
ethical and business practices of the [AIOC].

[...]”
The next day, Mr. Adams signed an Indemnity and Guarantee Agreement between
Georgia and AIOC, on behalf of AIOC and in its favour [Hearing Bundle, Tab 129]. Mr.
Cook confirmed during his oral testimony that the Indemnity Agreement referred
generally to those facilities covered by the Protocol signed by the Georgian and Azeri

governments in May 1995 and contemplated the presence of Tramex/GTI as potential

-50-

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

third party claimants over those same facilities [Tr. D9:58-59]. The Indemnity

Agreement provided, in relevant part, as follows:

“Lod

WHEREAS certain of the Georgian facilities are or have been subject to various
claims of ownership and other claims of exclusive rights of use, management
and/or operation by individuals, entities and/or companies separate and apart
from the Government of the Republic of Georgia and its ministries, agencies and
state-owned enterprises;

WHEREAS AIOC now wishes to confirm its willingness to commence discussions
with any properly authorised representatives of the Government of the Republic
of Georgia (“Georgian Representatives”) on the express condition such
discussions will not in any way be considered to interfere with an valid Third
party (as defined below) contractual arrangements relating to the Georgian
Facilities; and

WHEREAS the Government of the Republic of Georgia (“Government”) now
wishes to confirm that the proposed discussions will in no way interfere with any
valid contractual arrangements between Third Parties and any Georgian
governmental units, ministries, officials, agencies or state-owned enterprises
(“Georgian State Entities”)

[..]

2. The Government confirms and warrants that it has the full power and
binding authority to enter into the discussions and legal and binding agreements
with AIOC and/or the Participants regarding the exclusive control and use of the
Georgian Facilities free of any valid claim of any person or entity, including
(without limitation) claims of enforceable contract or concession rights of
ownership, use, control, management of the Georgian Facilities, fees, royalties
or other charges.

3. The Government hereby agrees to defend and hold AIOC and the
Participants and their respective agents subsidiaries and affiliated companies
and its and their employees, officers and directors (collectively, “AIOC Group”)
harmless from and against all actions, causes of action (including claims of
tortuous interference with contract rights), claims, demands, liabilities, costs,
expenses, (including reasonable attorney fees) and damages incurred by AIOC
Group as a result of breach of the representation and warranty made by the
Government in clause 2 hereof.

LJ”
It is unclear from the record whether the Indemnity Agreement was triggered by Mr.
Kardassopoulos’ July 24" letter. Mr. Cook and Mr. Adams both testified that such an
Indemnity Agreement would be sought in the normal course of business [Tr. D9: 56, 57;
89] and would have taken some time to prepare [Tr. D9:57]. Mr. Cook testified that the
-51-

147.

148.

149.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Agreement was not specifically related to concerns about Tramex [Tr. D9:56], but later
confirmed that the recital (reproduced as the third recital in paragraph 145 above) in
respect of claims of exclusive rights over the Georgian facilities by individuals apart from
the government was understood by AIOC to refer to Tramex and GTI [Tr. D9:59]. On

any reading, the coincidence in the timing of these events is striking.

G. The Creation of GIOC

On 11 November 1995, President Shevardnadze adopted Decree No. 477, which
established the State-owned company Georgian International Oil Corporation (“GIOC”).

Decree No. 477 provided, in part, as follows [Hearing Bundle, Tab 11]:

As agreed upon with the International Oil Consortium, the founding companies
thereof, international financial, banking and investment structures, as well as the
governmental authorities and non-governmental organizations of Georgia, the
establishment of the Georgian International Oil Corporation is deemed as
expedient. “

The aim of the Georgian International Oil Corporation shall include:

Rehabilitation of oil pipeline and other oil transportation facilities available in

the territory of Georgia, including construction works, oil transportation,

processing and sale thereof, as well as formation of relevant infrastructure, and

coordination and management of financial, banking, investment, insurance and

other activities related to the aforesaid issues.”
Mr. Giorgi Chanturia, then serving as Georgia’s ambassador to Azerbaijan, was
appointed President of GIOC. At this time, Mr. Chanturia had little or no experience in
the oil and gas industry [Tr. D6:61, 100]. Nor does he appear to have been involved
during his service in Azerbaijan with pipeline development in Georgia until sometime in

late 1995 [Tr. D6:69-70].

Decree No. 477 also indicated that other companies would be invited to participate in

GIoc:

“The following be also invited to participate in the Georgian International Oil
Corporation: the State Oil Company of Azerbaijan, LUKOIL, the Russian Oil
Company, INTERSYSTEM company jointly held by Azerbaijan and Georgia and
other international oil companies, banks, financial, investment and insurance
companies.”

-52-

150.

151.

152.

153.

154.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

The creation of GIOC sparked further concern among the Claimants, who sought
reassurance from Dr. Tevzadze and other Georgian officials that this event would not
disadvantage them or their investment in GTI [Gur III, para. 1.3; Nanikashvili II, paras.

2.4ff; Fuchs III, para. 2.1ff].

During the period that followed, the Claimants met repeatedly with various government
officials to discuss whether and how GTI might be included in the new framework,
including as a shareholder of GIOC. GIOC, for its part, appears to have begun
considering potential foreign partners to participate in GIOC, as confirmed in a letter
from Mr. Chanturia to Dr. Tevzadze on 4 December 1995 in which Dr. Tevzadze is asked

[Hearing Bundle, Tab 151]:

“to prepare and present to us proposals and give information about the
intellectual, construction, transportation, financing, industrial potential and also
about other abilities which can be used by GIOC together with the foreign
partners, to solve the GIOC problems.

The above mentioned proposals will be learned by the invited foreign experts
and in case of using them, the corresponding structures will participate, as well
as other international organizations, in tender announced by us.”

The ambiguous reference in Mr. Chanturia’s letter to “foreign partners” may be
interpreted as referring either to the Claimants or to AIOC [Chanturia I, para. 21;
Nanikashvili, para. 2.6]. It is unclear, despite this invitation, whether a response

identifying GTI or the Claimants was ever sent.

On 30 January 1996, Georgia established an ad hoc commission, pursuant to Decree No.
133, to examine all contracts and arrangements relating to the oil sector in Georgia
[Hearing Bundle, Tab 12]. The preamble to the Decree noted that the ad hoc commission
was established in the spirit of “safeguarding the national interests of Georgia’. With
this aim, the commission was assigned the task of studying and analyzing all agreements
currently in place and those “in the process of preparation in the sphere of oil industry’,
and preparing a report for the President. Among those entities deemed “advisable” to

include in this work were the “International Oil Consortium”.

According to Mr. Fuchs, although this decree was an additional source of concern “it was

not necessarily inconsistent with what was being promised since we believed that the

-53-

155.

156.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

interests that had now just been taken away would effectively be integrated into the GIOC
structure. In that way, we would essentially be regaining the benefit of the rights that

had been taken away.” [Fuchs III, para. 2.09]

H. The Cancellation of GTI’s Rights

On 20 February 1996, the Cabinet of Ministers adopted Decree No. 178 “for the purposes
of creating essential favourable conditions for the transportation of oil and gas within the

territory of Georgia’ [Hearing Bundle, Tab 14]. The Decree included the following:

“3. To assign a shareholder partnership to [GIOC] in order to manage the
government-owned state property, without rights to transfer of joint-stock
company [GIOC], to provide the rights on ownership, use, management,
exploitation, reconstruction of the herein provided state property, including all
other rights, necessary for the specified company as to the party, which signed
the contract on construction and exploitation of the pipeline and also the right to
receive all kinds of profit from the specified property. To give the mentioned
rights to [GIOC] for the term not less than fixed by the contract on construction
and exploitation of pipeline, in view of possible prolongation of this contract, or
for thirty years:

On Samgori-Batumi pipeline with an external diameter of 530 mm;

On all kinds of the equipment, necessary for reception, storage, measurement,
check, control, pumping over, reduction of oil pressure and all other means and
equipment, functionally connected with the specified pipeline;

On the land, intended for construction and exploitation of oil pipeline, including
any plots of land through the whole extent of the pipeline, and also other
territories, the use of which is essential for realization of rights on ownership,
use, management, exploitation and reconstruction of the specified property.”

Decree No. 178 further provided that GIOC would represent Georgia in a contract with
the AIOC, among other entities, for the construction and exploitation of the Samgori-

Batumi pipeline:

“4. Joint-stock company [GIOC] to represent the Georgian party (instead of
Industrial Association of Main Oil Pipelines of Georgia) in the contract on
construction and exploitation of the pipeline, which according to the Protocol,
signed on August 31, 1995, will be concluded between the Government of
Georgia, the Government of Azerbaijan, Industrial Association of Main Oil
Pipelines of Georgia, State Oil company of Azerbaijan and International
Operating company of Azerbaijan.”

-54-

157.

158.

159.

160.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

The final provision of Decree No. 178 cancelled “all rights (given earlier by the
Georgian government to any of the parties) contradicting the present Decree”. This

brought to an abrupt end Tramex/GTI’s rights in Georgia.

With the passage of Decree No. 178, Mr. Chanturia, in effect, inherited control of the
early oil pipeline project, formerly in the hands of GTI, without any apparent background

in this industry.

Mr. Chanturia claims in his written evidence not to recall when he became aware that
Tramex claimed to have rights in the early oil pipeline [Chanturia I, para. 26], but during
his oral testimony stated that as late as 30 January 1996 (the date on which the ad hoc
commission was established) he had no knowledge of GTI or Tramex [Chanturia II, para.
1; Tr. D6:67]. On questioning by the Tribunal, he confirmed that he had knowledge of
Tramex by August 1996 [Tr. D6:149]. Mr. Chanturia also initially claimed not to have
knowledge of Tramex’s claims until sometime in 1997, but accepted during cross-
examination that several government documents presented to him indicated that he was
aware of Tramex’s claims in 1996 [Tr. D6:102-104, 149; see e.g. Hearing Bundle, Tab
159]. Mr. Chanturia stated that he did not recall much of the circumstances surrounding
the enactment of Decree No. 178 and the events which followed, even though he appears

to have been at the center of the action during this controversial period.

On 8 March 1996, consistent with the above-quoted decree, Georgia entered into a Host
Government Agreement (“HGA”) with AIOC, the preamble of which explains its
purpose as follows [Hearing Bundle, Tab 285]:

“WHEREAS the Oil Companies wish to develop a secure and efficient pipeline
system for the transportation of Petroleum across the territory of Georgia
(“Georgia”) to a new marine export terminal which the Oil Companies wish to
develop on the Black Sea coast of Georgia; and

WHEREAS in developing such pipeline system and marine export
terminal the Oil Companies wish to refurbish and upgrade certain existing
facilities and construct certain new facilities as well as to operate and utilise the
capacity in, such pipeline system and marine export terminal, all on the terms
and conditions of the Pipeline Construction and Operating Agreement; and

WHEREAS the Government is responsible for and controls the Georgian
Party; and

-55-

161.

162.

163.

164.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

WHEREAS the Facilities are, or will become, State property; and the
Government enters into this Agreement as the body ultimately responsible for
managing State property; and

WHEREAS the Government wishes to facilitate and support the activities
of the Oil Companies, as described above, and the Operating Company.”

On the same day, GIOC entered into a 30-year PCOA with AIOC for the transportation
of oil through Georgia. Under the terms of the PCOA, GIOC granted AIOC the sole and
exclusive rights to construct and operate the Samgori-Batumi pipeline [Hearing Bundle,

Tab 286].

On 19 August 1996, Transneft was “liquidated” pursuant to Order No. 33a and all of its
property was transferred to GIOC [Hearing Bundle, Tab 16]. In practice, Transneft

continued to function but now reported to a different government entity.

I. The Compensation Commission Process

Shortly following issuance of Decree No. 178, a meeting was arranged by Dr. Tevzadze
between President Shevardnadze and Mr. Gur, a witness on behalf of the Claimants, in
May or June 1996. According to Mr. Gur’s written evidence, President Shevardnadze
was grateful to the investors for their patience and indicated there was a “possibility of
including [them] within the new structure but if that was not possible then proper
compensation would be paid’ [Gur IV, para. 5.2]. Mr. Gur left this meeting feeling
satisfied that Georgia had committed to compensate Tramex, the only questions being
how much, in what form and from what sources [Gur IV, para. 5.3]. Although such
assurances are disputed by the Respondent, including by Dr. Tevzadze [Tevzadze I, para.
14], Mr. Gur was not called to be cross-examined on his written evidence and, as is
evident from the discussion which follows, President Shevardnadze initiated a

compensation process approximately two months later.

In a letter to President Shevardnadze, dated 26 August 1996, Dr. Tevzadze appealed
directly to the President for a resolution of Tramex’s legal rights and “expenditure
compensation issues”, noting that Tramex had presented SakNavtobi with a claim
demanding the reinstatement of its rights and compensation pursuant to the JVA. In
particular, he requested that President Shevardnadze instruct GIOC to resolve Tramex’s

legal and compensation issues [Hearing Bundle, Tab 159]. During cross-examination,
-56-

165.

166.

167.

168.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Dr. Tevzadze testified that Mr. Chanturia was not happy that he had appealed to the
President for Tramex’s rights to be considered [Tr. D8:45:11-23]. It is also clear that Dr.
Tevzadze understood, at the time, that Tramex sought compensation not only for its

expenses but for the rights that had been taken away [Tr. D8:46:11-23].

On 30 August 1996, President Shevardnadze issued Order No. 479, addressed to Mr.
Lekishvili, Mr. Chanturia, Dr. Tevzadze and Mr. Ninidze, urging that they “/g/Jather,
invite necessary people, and find a decision acceptable for all the parties”, then to
“[r]eport on to me” [Hearing Bundle, Tab 17]. This was the first step in what would
prove to be a long, drawn-out process, lasting over a decade, during which the Claimants

sought recompense for the loss of their investments in Georgia.

On 18 September 1996, Minister Lekishvili circulated an internal memorandum to certain
government officials, including Messrs. Ninidze, Chanturia and Tevzadze, requesting that
they express their “opinion in the shortest time” in connection with President

Shevardnadze’s request [Hearing Bundle, Tab 18].

In December 1996, a draft Order, prepared by Minister Lekishvili, was circulated for
review in connection with the assessment of the investments carried out by Tramex in
Georgia and determination of “its rights, applied costs and compensation volume of
future losses” [Hearing Bundle, Tab 22]. The draft Order contemplated the establishment
of a State Commission consisting of Mr. Silagadze (Chairman of the Commission), Mr.
Ninidze, Mr. Zubitashvili, Mr. Chkhenkeli, Dr. Tevzadze, and Mr. Chanturia. Mr. Fuchs

was also identified to participate in the commission as a representative of Tramex.

The draft Order (which was never adopted) stated that the purpose of the State

Commission was to effect the following:

“2. To offer company Tramex International (R. Fuchs) and Georgian
International Oil Corporation (G. Chanturia) jointly, on a par basis of costs to
be incurred, to invite acknowledged auditing firm for estimation of investments
carried out by company Tramex International in Georgia, its rights, applied
costs and compensation volume of future losses.

3. After obtaining conclusion of auditing firm, compensation within 30 days
period should discuss and determine volume of compensation to be assigned to
company Tramex International, work out recommendations re sources of
compensation and present for discussion.”

-57-

169.

170.

171.

172.

173.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

In a letter to Dr. Tevzadze, dated 31 March 1997, Mr. Chanturia rejected the above
formulation of the draft Order, stating that “/t/he commission should be created to
identify the real expenses borne by this company. We can not be liable for any future
income or expected losses, since such condition is not envisaged in any contractual
document” [Hearing Bundle, Tab 165]. Accordingly, Mr. Chanturia proposed amending
the title of the Order to read: “Commission for identification and possible compensation
of the expenses borne by company ‘Tramex International’ in Georgia’. In closing, Mr.
Chanturia observed that the “given remarks change not only Georgia’s responsibility
before the abovementioned company, it also objectively defines the matter that the
commission is created for. Therefore, it is necessary to take the above remarks into

consideration.”

Dr. Tevzadze testified that Mr. Chanturia’s opinion, as expressed in this letter, naturally
had some effect on the wording and scope of the Order ultimately adopted [Tr. D8:44-
45]. Indeed, on 23 April 1997, Georgia adopted State Minister Order No. 84
“[r]egarding Tramex International company’s expenses in Georgia, and a possible
reimbursement of the expenses” [Hearing Bundle, Tab 24]. This Order contains a single
operative provision, which provides as follows:

“To create a government committee for reviewing Tramex International

company’s expenses in Georgia, who will determine a possible reimbursement of
such expenses.”

Order No. 84 establishing the compensation commission reflects several important
changes from the December 1996 draft Order. Notably, there is no longer any mention of

“future losses”.

The compensation commission was composed of most of the same individuals proposed
in the draft Order, including Mr. Fuchs: Mr. Zubitashvili (Chairman of the Commission),
Mr. Ninidze, Dr. Tevzadze, Mr. Murjikneli (First Deputy Minister of Finance), Mr.
Silagadze, Mr. Chkhenkeli, Mr. Chanturia, Mr. Chumburidze (Deputy Head of Finance-
Budgeting and Credit Policy Development of State Chancellor).

Of particular interest to the Tribunal is the inclusion of Mr. Fuchs, one of the Claimants,

in the commission established to consider compensation for Tramex in respect of its

- 58 -

174.

175.

176.

177.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

investment in Georgia. Mr. Chkhenkeli, a Respondent witness, commented in his written
evidence that “it is very unusual for an interested party to participate in the work of a
governmental commission. Such commissions typically meet to discuss the issue in
private, rather than operating under the pressure of an interested party.” [Chkhenkeli,

para. 12].

Mr. Fuchs was subsequently removed as a member of the compensation commission
through State Minister Order No. 136, adopted on 12 September 1997 [Hearing Bundle,
Tab 26]. Nevertheless, it appears that Mr. Fuchs continued to attend certain meetings of

the commission.

Mr. Nanikashvili testified during the merits Hearing that Mr. Fuchs was unhappy with the
final wording of Order No. 84 because it omitted any reference to “damages”. He claims
that Mr. Zubitashvili reassured Mr. Fuchs that they would find a way to compensate the

Claimants for their damages [Tr. D2:32].

During a meeting of the compensation commission on 25 August 1997, Mr. Fuchs
requested that damages be included in the scope of the commission’s work and proposed
that an international audit be conducted to estimate compensation owing to the Claimants
[Hearing Bundle, Tab 174]. The Protocol recording the minutes of the meeting indicates
that Dr. Tevzadze endorsed the concept of an audit. However, Mr. Zubitashvili, who
chaired the meeting, stated that “the Commission will continue its work within the bounds
of the functions give to it by the Order” and “it won’t be possible to talk about any
damages if till [sic] the actual expenses of works carried out and their legality are not
estimated.” [ibid.| The commission therefore resolved to form a working group which

would review Tramex’s expenses.

Towards the end of 1997, Tramex appointed the firm Nexia International (“Nexia’”) to
conduct an independent audit of Tramex’s expenditures related to the GTI project [Fuchs
I, para. 9.13, Hearing Bundle, Tab 179]. Mr. Fuchs requested that the commission delay
conclusion of its review until Tramex had received and submitted the Nexia audit report
[Hearing Bundle, Tab 180]. Nexia completed its audit in May 1999, over a year later

than originally anticipated.

- 59 -

178.

179.

180.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Nexia examined Tramex’s internal operating expenses, payments to third parties, and loss
of revenue in association with the cancellation of GTI’s rights (i.e. the agreement to sell
25% of its share in GTI to Brown & Root for US$10,000), assessing its total losses at
US$24,040,904 [Hearing Bundle, Tab 199, p. 15]. Nexia clarified that this amount does
not include the loss of any future income and revenues due to Tramex upon the

completion of the GTI Project and its operational implementation [ibid.].

Tramex submitted the report to Mr. Giorgadze (Minister) and Mr. Chichua (Deputy
Minister) of the Ministry of Fuel of Energy in the summer of 1999 [Fuchs I, para. 9.15;
Hearing Bundle, Tabs 199, 200 and 201]. Having received no response, Mr. Fuchs wrote
to Mr. Mirtskhulava on 18 January 2000, shortly following the latter’s appointment as
Minister of Fuel and Energy, enquiring about the status of the Commission’s review

[Hearing Bundle, Tab 203].

On 24 August 2000, Mr. Mirtskhulava wrote to President Shevardnadze, chronicling the
involvement of Tramex in Georgia and advising that the “total losses” suffered by
Tramex should be determined on the basis for the Nexia report [Hearing Bundle, Tab

203):

“Due to the fact that Georgian International Oil Company became the legal
owner of the above facilities, investigation of Tramex’s legal rights and resolving
the expenditure compensation issues, upon your personal request, became the

if ibility of the of the aforesaid cory ion. A similar task
was assigned to the Ministry of Fuel and Energy of Georgia. The Ministry of
Finance, Minister of Economy and Ministry of Justice of Georgia participated in
the investigation as well.

 

As a result of the investigation, it became clear that there [was] a need to
conduct an international auditing in order to determine the losses of Tramex
caused by taking away Tramex’s rights.

Such an audit was initiated by Tramex and conducted by ‘Nexia International,’
an international law firm and their conclusions were sent on the 28" of May last
year to Deputy Minister of Fuel and Energy of that time, Mr. G. Chichua.

Based on this information, it will be advisable to instruct Georgian International
Oil Corporation to determine the total losses suffered by ‘Tramex’ on the basis
of ‘Nexia International’s’ audit conclusions, since the disputed facilities are now
under the control of GIOC’s management.

Please take the appropriate measures.”

- 60 -

181.

182.

183.

184.

185.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Approximately one month later, President Shevardnadze issued Order No. 1888/8
instructing Mr. Chanturia to “/dJiscuss, and make the appropriate decision”. Mt.
Chanturia’s response to this Order, on 10 October 2000, was to deny any obligations to
Tramex or GTI, averring that GIOC would not be able to determine Tramex’s loss “if
such loss was indeed incurred’. Mr. Chanturia advised that assessment and resolution of
the issue, in his view, fell under the competence of SakNavtobi [Hearing Bundle, Tab

205).

Several letters were exchanged between the Claimants and SakNavtobi in the period
which ensued, but no further action was taken. Mr. Fuchs wrote to Dr. Tevzadze on 5
November 2000, demanding payment within 30 days of US$ 24,040,904, with interest, in
compensation for Tramex’s losses [Hearing Bundle, Tab 206]. Mr. Fuchs highlighted as
support for Tramex’s position the letter from Mr. Mirtskhulava to President
Shevardnadze in August 2000. The General Director of SakNatobi, Mr. Makharadze
replied several weeks later, indicating that he expected a conclusion by the compensation

commission shortly [Hearing Bundle, Tab 207].

Dr. Tevzadze wrote to Mr. Fuchs on 18 December 2000 requesting additional
information, which Mr. Fuchs remitted a week later [Hearing Bundle, Tabs 210 and 211].

Nonetheless, no conclusion of the compensation commission was forthcoming.

In June 2001, Deputy State Minister Gvenetadze convened a meeting of various heads of
ministries, including Dr. Tevzadze and Irakli Kelbakiani, the Vice President of GIOC,
during which it was resolved that SakNavtobi would submit to the Ministries of Justice
and State Property Management and to GIOC available documents concerning any debts
owed to Tramex for their examination, and the Ministry of Justice would prepare a report
within one month on the “authenticity of debts to Tramex International and possibilities

for legal proceedings” [Hearing Bundle, Tab 216].

On 20 August 2001, Mr. Kelbakiani issued GIOC’s assessment of Tramex’s claims,
concluding that “the party violating the act of Concession is GTI itself and the request of

Tramex on damage compensation is absolutely groundless.” [Hearing Bundle, Tab 217]

-61-

186.

187.

188.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Deputy State Minister Gvenetadze convened another meeting of the heads of ministries
on 23 August 2001, during which it was again resolved that SakNavtobi would deliver all
materials in its possession to the Ministries of Justice and State Property Management
and to GIOC regarding the debts owed to Tramex in order to carry out a complete
examination of same, and that another meeting would be held at the State Chancellery to

discuss the outcome [Hearing Bundle, Tab 218].

Dr. Tevzadze wrote to Deputy State Minister Gvenetadze on 5 November 2001, advising
that while SakNavtobi had complied with its obligation to provide all available
documents concerning any debts owed to Tramex to the Ministries of Justice and State
Property Management and to GIOC, the Ministry of Justice had not prepared a
conclusion on the issues raised by Tramex, as stipulated in the minutes of the June 2001
meeting [Hearing Bundle, Tab 222]. It appears that further instructions were issued by
the Deputy State Minister to the Ministry of Justice following receipt of Dr. Tevzadze’s
letter [Hearing Bundle, Tab 225]

On 28 February 2002, Mr. Fuchs wrote to Dr. Tevzadze requesting confirmation that the
compensation issue would be resolved within the next 30 days [Hearing Bundle, Tab

223):

“Throughout the period of the State Commissions review, and in the course of
many discussions and negotiations, Saknavtobi and various representatives of
the Government of Georgia have requested Tramex to defer bringing
international arbitration proceedings in England, pursuant to the rules of the
International Chamber of Commerce (as provided for in Article 19 of the JVA)
assuring Tramex that our damages would be determined by the State
Commission, Saknavtobi’s liability to Tramex for the breach of the JVA having
already been accepted. Unfortunately, however, the work of the State
Commission has taken far longer than Tramex envisaged when these assurances
were given and Tramex must have seen positive progress within a defined time
period, or will be force to proceed with the ICC arbitration under English law as
originally agreed upon between us.

Within the last few days you have again requested that Tramex should not take
this course and have expressed your belief that the matter will be resolved
satisfactorily in the next few months without the need for arbitration.

If we are to hold off any longer, we require, as a sign of your good faith,

confirmation that the compensation issue will be resolved within a defined
period not to exceed 30 days.”

-62-

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

189. SakNavtobi’s response on 26 March 2002 was defensive by any measure [Hearing
Bundle, Tab 224]:

“In response to your letter dated February 28" 2002

Thank you for the above letter. As you are aware the issue concerning the Joint
Venture Agreement made in 1992 between Tramex and Georgian Oil is under
constant control of Georgian Oil directorate.

The Georgian Oil management has advised you several times that the agreement
has never been breached or canceled from Georgian Oil side (it was breached
under specific Decree of the President of Georgia of which you have been well
aware), and Georgian Oil is making all the efforts to ensure the recovery of the
losses and costs actually incurred by Tramex. It is obvious that the
consideration of this issue on authority level has been delayed, but this was
caused by quite an objective reason related to the changes in Georgian
government, and we believe that the Ministry of Justice will shortly finalize its
conclusion. From time to time the detail information on this matter was
provided to Tramex by Georgian oil.

The last letter signed by Mr. A. Zoidze — the Deputy State Minister of Georgia
was sent to the Ministry of Justice on February 2" 2002, in which the latest date
for the Ministry to present the conclusion was March 15" 2002.

Georgian Oil will try to provide Tramex with the mentioned conclusion
immediately upon its receipt. In addition, Georgian Oil would like to once again
point out that the Georgian Oil management can notice the Tramex desperate
effort to charge Georgian Oil with the breach.

We would once again like to officially advise you that there was not even an
attempt made from Georgian Oil side to breach or cancel the above agreement
(although there was and currently is the basis for that to happen), thus the
agreement was breached not by Georgian Oil but under the Decree of the
President of Georgia, which, as you are aware, is considered as Force Major for
both parties.

So, Tramex has no basis to require the recovery of its losses and costs from
Georgian Oil. Even more, Georgian Oil has carried no less losses, both moral
and financial, than Tramex and this issue will be fairly raised in the near future.

Dear Ron, you very well understand that Tramex will benefit more if it keeps
Georgian Oil as a true contractor and not as a defendant. This will enable us
both to achieve final results as both parties need so desperately.”

190. The Ministry of Justice released its report on 2 April 2002, attributing the prolonged
delay in preparing its report to the fact that the documents submitted to it were
incomplete and not submitted jointly. The report dealt not with compensation per se but
rather with the legal relationship between SakNavtobi and the Georgian State [Hearing

Bundle, Tab 225].
-63-

191.

192.

193.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Clearly frustrated by the failure of the Georgian State to compensate him and his business
partner, Mr. Fuchs sought the assistance of Dr. Henry Kissinger and his consulting firm.
In late 2002, Mr. Fuchs met with Mr. Alan Batkin, Vice Chairman of Kissinger
Associates, Inc., to discuss a retainer in connection with the on-going compensation
process. On 8 January 2003, Dr. Kissinger, Chairman of Kissinger Associates, wrote to
President Shevardnadze requesting that he meet with Mr. Batkin to discuss the matter

[Hearing Bundle, Tab 229].

In an Order dated 20 January 2003, President Shevardnadze asked Mr. Mirtskhulava to
prepare certain information in respect of the concerns outlined in Dr. Kissinger’s letter.
In a letter dated 7 February 2003, Mr. Mirtskhulava again chronicled Tramex’s
involvement in Georgia and in particular the saga of the compensation process [Hearing

Bundle, Tab 230]:

“In spite of multiple written resolutions from the President of Georgia, in spite
of the creation of a State Commission consisting of State Ministers, and in spite
of a series of department instructions, unfortunately, the case [of Tramex’s
claims] still remains unresolved.

 

[...]

As for the loss of Tramex, to determine of the amount [sic] of the loss and to
make arrangements for the compensation, the Minister of Heat and Power issued
letter No. 1/1276 dated August 24, 2000 and by virtue of Presidential Resolution
no. 1888/8 issued following this letter, dated September 19, 2000, the ‘consider,
and take the appropriate measures” task was assigned to Mr. G. Chanturia.
According to Letter No. 105 dated November 13, 2001, the management of
Saknavtobi made one more request to the President of Georgia to take
appropriate measures. On the basis of a Personal Presidential Decree in
response to this letter and according to former State Minister’s Gia Arsenishvil’s
order an appropriate State C¢ ission was blished. U ly, this
Commission also managed not to close the issue, because both the Minister (Gia
Arsenishvili) and the Deputy Ministers were replaced.

 

The only thing this Commission managed to do was to put the Ministry of Justice
in charge of investigating the legal aspects of the issue and carrying the issue to
its final conclusion.

Unfortunately, 6 months later (the replacement of the Minister and the Deputy
Ministers took place at this time) the issue was redirected again from the
Ministry of Justice back to GIOC and Saknavtobi management. It is clear that
neither of them is able to solve the issue independently, they could not solve it
during the last 7 years and definitely won't be able to solve it in the future.”

Mr. Mirtskhulava summarized the situation as follows [ibid.]:
-64-

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

“I find it natural that after all this it will be difficult to answer the question:
What did Tramex do wrong to Georgia for which it was so unduly ousted from
the country, the country for which Tramex did much more than any other
investor performing in Georgia?

We perfectly understand that Presidential Order No. 178 on February 20, 1996
was rather a political step for our country’s benefit, but how fair was it to
Tramex Company, which has carried out significant investments and spent a lot
of money for various purposes in the country?

If the mechanism of compensation of Tramex’s actual expenses had been
provided by draft order No. 178 of February 20, 1996, or even by a new order,
Tramex definitely would not have suffered so unfairly and undeservedly for the
7-year period in our country. This is the exact reason that Tramex Company not
only did not get its legitimate rights restored (or did not manage to get it) since
February 1996, but it did not even get any acknowledgement of its actual
expenses that had been incurred in the country.

[...]

It is clear that Mr. Kissinger’s legal firm would have never gotten engaged in the
Tramex case if the firm had not been sure of winning. One can notice that the
firm has scrutinized all the details and that is why they wanted to offer the
Georgian side the right approach — a mutual consent — from the very beginning.

Tramex’s demanded of 24 million dollar compensation is not the main thing, the
amount might be lower or higher; it will probably be determined by the
international audit. The main thing is to determine who will be responsible for
paying this money and who will be the respondent in Georgia.”

In a handwritten note to Mr. Jorbenadze (State Minister), prepared on the cover of Mr.
Mirtskhulava’s letter, President Shevardnadze observed that “Mr. Kissinger’s claims
should not be considered groundless, but at that time there was no other way out”, and
directed that he convene “interested persons’, i.e. Mr. Mirtskhulava, Dr. Tevzadze, and

Mr. Chanturia, in order to reach a conclusion [Hearing Bundle, Tab 230].

A subsequent Presidential Order, issued on 21 February 2003, cryptically directed
Messrs. Mirtskhulava, Jorbenadze and Chanturia “to assist’ [Hearing Bundle, Tab 232].
Mr. Mirtskhulava testified that this directive referred to SakNavtobi, and was predicated
on his letter to President Shevardnadze which concluded with the following resolve,
having recognized the likelihood of legal action against Georgia: “One thing is clear, that
the Georgian side — the Georgian Government — should determine who will be the

respondent before Mr. Kissinger’s deputy arrives.” [Tr. D6:20-21; 54:14 to 58:11]

- 65 -

196.

197.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

A meeting was arranged between various Georgian officials and Mr. Batkin, Mr. Fuchs
and Mr. Smith in Tbilisi on 19 May 2003. Mr. Batkin’s written evidence, which was

neither tested nor challenged at the Hearing, indicates as follows [Batkin I, para. 9]:

“At the meeting, the Georgian delegation did not dispute that Georgia had taken
away the rights once held by GTI and that Tramex was therefore entitled to
compensation. There was no debate or open disagreement about this issue. We
all agreed that it would be best to avoid litigation or arbitration by resolving the
matter of compensation amicably. The conversation therefore turned to
establishing how much should be paid and how that figure should be
calculated.”

According to Mr. Batkin’s recollection of events, Mr. Mirtskhulava told Mr. Fuchs and
colleagues that once a sum had been quantified and agreed, it would be repaid to Tramex
on terms similar to the Paris Club rules [Batkin I, para. 11]. Mr. Batkin subsequently
wrote to Mr. Mirtskhulava on 2 June 2003, memorializing the key points of the

agreement reached. His letter records the following [Hearing Bundle, Tab 234]:

“(i) Tramex entered into a Joint Venture Agreement with Georgian Oil, pursuant
to which Tramex and Georgian Oil established a Georgian company, GTI Ltd.,
owned in equal shares between them, which was to be granted exclusive rights to
the pipelines for transmission of petroleum through the territory of Georgia. The
establishment of GTI was approved by the Cabinet of Ministers.

(ii) GTI entered into a Concession Agreement with the government entity of
Georgia that, at the time, was the owner of the pipelines, which provided for the
grant to GTI of a long term concession over the existing and future pipeline
system in the territory of Georgia.

(iii) Tramex invested money in GTI, and on behalf of GTI, to implement the
pipeline project and other projects stated in the Joint Venture and the
Concession Agreement with Georgian Oil. Tramex also made donations of
money for the welfare of Georgia.

(iv) No assertions were ever made that Tramex or GTI defaulted on any of their
contractual obligations. It was acknowledged that Tramex met all of its
obligations under the various agreements it was a party to.

(v) The Government of Georgia later adopted another resolution unilaterally
cancelling the rights of Tramex and GTI under their respective agreements and
granting the same rights to GIOC.

(vi) Tramex is entitled to be compensated by the Government of Georgia for the
costs it incurred, the amounts it invested and for the value of the loss of the
business opportunities that would have evolved under the agreements signed.
Neither GTI nor Tramex have received any compensation for the costs incurred
or for the loss of rights.

- 66 -

198.

199.

200.

201.

202.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

(vii) The Parties prefer to resolve this issue amicably and to avoid litigation.”

The accuracy of Mr. Batkin’s record of the May 2003 meeting is disputed by Mr.
Mirtskhulava. Mr. Mirtskhulava denies having received the above record of their
meeting or having spoken to Mr. Batkin subsequent to their meeting in respect of the
contents of his letter, despite documentary evidence suggesting the contrary [Tr. D6:32].
An email sent by Mr. Batkin to Mr. Fuchs on 19 June 2003 records in relevant part the
following [Hearing Bundle, Tab 235]:

“TI spoke with the Minister today.

He confirmed that he had received my letter and agreed with the conclusions of
our meeting that I set forth in the letter. He said that they have sent the President
a decree to sign which authorizes appointing an accounting firm to determine the
economic costs to Tramex of losing the contract. He did not say out of pocket
costs — he said economic costs. He also said it usually takes about 10 days to get
a decree signed, so he expected to get it back next week.”

Mr. Mirtskhulava’s testimony stands in contradiction to Mr. Batkin’s written evidence, in
which he claims to have spoken with Mr. Mirtskhulava over the telephone on 19 June
2003, at which time Mr. Mirtskhulava confirmed that he had received Mr. Batkin’s June
2" letter and agreed with its contents [Batkin II, para. 5; Tr. D6:34-35]. However, as

noted above, the Respondent elected not to challenge Mr. Batkin’s evidence.

In any event, on 28 June 2003, President Shevardnadze agreed to an independent audit of
the costs incurred by Tramex and, on 27 October 2003, Tramex commissioned Deloitte
Management Consultancy Israel Ltd. (“Deloitte”) to conduct the audit [Hearing Bundle,
Tabs 236, 238].

In November 2003, President Shevardnadze resigned as the Rose Revolution gained
momentum in Georgia. In a subsequent election, a new government was established and

Mr. Mikheil Saakashvili became President in January 2004.

The Deloitte audit report, presented to the Ministry of Fuel and Energy on 5 February
2004, estimated the value of Tramex’s share in GTI’s rights in the Baku-Supsa and BTC
pipelines at US $64 million, as well as wasted expenditure and interest of US $12.1
million and US $30.2 million, respectively, for a total loss of US$ 106.3 million (as of
31 December 2003) [Hearing Bundle, Tab 238].

-67-

203.

204.

205.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

In a letter to Prime Minister Zhvania, dated 22 July 2004, Tramex gave notice through

counsel of its claim for reimbursement of this amount [Hearing Bundle, Tab 241].

On 9 October 2004, the new Georgian Government established another commission
under Decree No. 144 entitled “On setting up a governmental commission for studying
questions concerning the claims of the company ‘Tramex’ made on the Georgian
Government”. The Decree further noted that “the problem concerning the company
‘Tramex’ has existed for more than ten years. Study of this problem was discussed by
different specially set up commissions, but regrettably ways of solving it have not been

found.” (Hearing Bundle, Tab 31]

In a letter dated 15 November 2004, Ms. Ekaterine Gureshidze, the First Deputy Minister
of the Ministry of Justice and Chairman of the Commission, informed the Claimants that
the commission had decided there were no legal grounds for holding the Government

liable for the claim. The Commission reasoned as follows [Hearing Bundle, Tab 249]:

“The Government can not be held liable for the Claim because the Government
did not represent a party to any of the agreements which were concluded by
Tramex in Georgia.

The parties to the Joint Venture Agreement of 3 March 1992 and the Concession
Agreement of 28 April 1993 (collectively, the ‘Agreements’) were SakNavtobi and
TransNavtobi, respectively. Both entities, although state-owned, under the then-
existing legislation of Georgia, represented legal entities distinct and
independent from the state, had the ability to unilaterally make binding decisions
in commercial transactions, acted on their own behalf and were responsible for
their own obligations. According to both, the then-existing and current Georgian
legislation, SakNavtobi and TransNavtobi clearly possessed independent legal
capacity. As you may remember, the Agreements are governed by Georgian law.

Tramex undoubtedly was aware of the fact that under the legislation of Georgia
its contractual partners possessed legal identity separate from the state. In none
of the Agreements is there even a slightest reference to the Government as to a
party to the Agreements. Although the Minister of Fuel and Energy
countersigned the Concession Agreement of 28 April 1993, preceded by the
words, ‘I confirm,’ the state cannot be brought in as a party to an agreement
merely because it approved the project.

The fact that a government can not be held responsible for the
obligations/liabilities of a legal person even if the state is the sole shareholder of
such entity, does not constitute an idiosyncrasy of Georgian or Soviet legal
systems. This principle is widely recognized and accepted by developed
jurisdictions and, in fact, is upheld by different courts of international
arbitration.”

- 68 -

206.

207.

208.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

[Footnotes omitted.]

The Claimants wrote to Ms. Gureshidze through counsel on 24 November 2004, inviting
the commission to reconsider its position, failing which formal arbitral proceedings
would issue [Hearing Bundle, Tab 250]. Ms. Gureshidze replied on 10 December 2004,
confirming the commission’s position as set forth in its November 15" letter [Hearing

Bundle, Tab 251].

This was an unequivocal rejection of the Claimants’ demand for restitution and, indeed, a
complete denial of any responsibility on the part of the Georgian State for the events
which had transpired over the course of the preceding decade. Mr. Batkin’s conclusion
as regards this volte face of the Respondent reflects the Claimants’ disappointment in

such a bitter end to the long, drawn-out compensation process [Batkin I, para. 23]:

“T cannot help but remark that the approach adopted by the State commission in
2004 contradicted the express acknowledgements given to me and Mr. Fuchs in
Tbilisi during our meeting on May 19, 2003 and the agreement by the Georgian
Government that a third party process be engaged to determine compensation.
Our faith in the process was seemingly confirmed as the Government allowed the
appointed auditors to proceed over the ensuing months as planned, without
raising any objection. The State conunission’s response was also inconsistent
with my clear understanding, based on the admissions made by the Georgian
officials I had met, that Georgia regarded the obligation to Tramex as something
which had arisen as a result of the Government’s own conduct (the cancellation
of GTI’s rights) and not conduct by Georgian Oil.”

Mr. Batkin’s theory on the effect of the change in government on the compensation
process is confirmed by the testimony of Mr. Nanikashvili under questioning by the

Tribunal [Tr. D2:56-58]:

“Did Mr. Tevzadze ever say anything or do anything which led you to believe
that he had not been Georgia’s spokesperson on the issue of compensation for
Mr. Kardassopoulos and Mr. Fuchs?

A. Your Honour, our link to Georgian government in these particular days was
Mr. Tevzadze, we don’t --- because he was the head of the Georgian Oil in these
days, and we don’t have anyone else who can approach to the government on
this. He is going there and he is bringing there the answers, and he was pushed
for all these matters to not go in the court, because it was very important also for
him, for him, like Georgian Oil, who will be responsible for the payment, because
what he was like head of the company. So Georgian Oil will be payment. So for
us, he was the guy basically who was spokesman of the Georgian government, we
don’t have any other one.

- 69 -

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Q. When the negotiations broke down, what was the cause of the breakdown, in
your words, why weren’t the discussions successful? What was the cause?

A. First of all, when Mr. Shevardnadze finishes, because of the Rose Revolution,
who was pushing, from our best knowledge, for a solution, was Mr.
Shevardnadze. Even Mr. Kissinger established contact with Mr. Shevardnadze.
And then come the present president, and what he has done first is clear all the
people from Georgian Oil, including Mr. Tevzadze. So there is no one who is left
with whom we can talk, nobody was, no committee, nobody, and even anyone
have the intent, come young people now. So we understand nobody will even
have the intent to talk with us.

Mr. Fuchs tried, believe me, even with the new president and the people to find a
solution, try, try a lot, but not via me, because I already --- with these new
people, I was not involved in any ---

Q. So it’s your testimony, your evidence that the breakdown came with the
departure of Mr. Shevardnadze and the arrival of the new administration?

A. I think this was really the case, when everybody thought the committee is
finished and there would be no other chance to go to the --- Mr. Fuchs tried to
establish contact with them ---”

PART III. SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS

209.

210.

A. The Claimants’ Case

The Claimants submit that this is a simple case; it is, in essence, a question of the amount
owing to the Claimants by the Respondent for its unlawful conduct. That amount, in
their view, is not inconsiderable. The Claimants contend that in November 1995, the date
by which the cancellation of GTI’s rights could be foreseen, their rights had significant
value. In the Claimants’ view, the Respondent’s position in these arbitrations that the
Claimants are entitled to nothing is belied by Georgia’s conduct over the eight-year
period during which compensation was promised but never delivered and the testimony
of the Respondent’s own witnesses who maintain that some measure of compensation is

appropriate.

B. The Respondent’s Case

The Respondent submits that the Claimants’ claims are not timely, and that it would be
inequitable to allow these claims to be heard so long after the period in which the relevant
events occurred. To the extent the Claimants’ claims are not prescribed, the Respondent
submits that it is not liable to the Claimants under any treaty provision and, in any event,

that the Claimants are not entitled to compensation either because GTI’s rights are invalid
-70-

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

and unenforceable, or because the Claimants could not have had any legitimate

expectation to any compensation, or because the rights simply may not be valued.

PART IV.

ISSUES TO BE DETERMINED

211. The issues before the Tribunal for determination may be grouped into six categories and

are briefly summarized as follows:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Jurisdiction & Equitable Prescription: The issues of jurisdiction and equitable
prescription are comprised of the following three questions:

(i) Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction ratione temporis over Mr.
Kardassopoulos’ expropriation claim under the Georgia / Greece BIT?

(ii) Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction ratione temporis over Mr. Fuchs’ fair
and equitable treatment claim under the Georgia / Israel BIT?

(iii) Are the Claimants’ claims time-barred under equitable rules of
prescription?

Liability: The issue of liability is comprised of the following four questions:

(i) Are the contractual commitments, acts and omissions of SakNavtobi
and/or Transneft attributable to the Respondent?

(ii) What was the scope of GTI’s rights, if any, during the relevant period?

(iii) Was Mr. Kardassopoulos’ investment in GTI expropriated in breach of the
requirements of the ECT and/or the Georgia / Greece BIT?

(iv) Were the investments of Mr. Fuchs and Mr. Kardassopoulos treated
unfairly and inequitably or otherwise in breach of the standards of
treatment set out in the Georgia / Israel BIT, the Georgia / Greece BIT or
the ECT?

Causation: The issue of causation gives rise to the following question:

(i) Did the Claimants suffer any loss as a result of any of the above alleged
treaty breaches and, if so, did the Respondent cause the Claimants’ losses?

Quantum: The issue of quantum (if liability and causation are decided in favour
of the Claimants) is comprised of the following five questions:

(i) What is the effect of the stabilization clauses on damages?

(ii) What is the applicable standard of compensation for breach of Article
13(1) of the ECT and Article 4(1) of the Georgia / Greece BIT (the
expropriation provisions)?

-71-

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

(iii) What is the applicable standard of compensation for breach of Article 2(2)
of the Georgia / Israel BIT, Article 2(2) of the Georgia /Greece BIT and
Article 10(1) of the ECT (the fair and equitable treatment provisions)?
(iv) What is the appropriate methodology for valuing the Claimant’s claims?
(v) What is the amount of compensation owing to the Claimants?
(e) Interest: The issue of interest is comprised of the following two questions:
(i) What is the amount of pre-award interest owing to the Claimants?
(ii) What is the amount of post-award interest owing to the Claimants?
(f) Costs: Finally, the issue of costs requires the Tribunal to consider the appropriate
allocation (if any) of the costs of these arbitration proceedings as between the

Parties.

212. The Tribunal notes that the Claimants’ claim in respect of the alleged breach of Article
10(1) of the ECT and Article 2(4) of the Georgia / Greece (the “umbrella” clauses) has
been abandoned.° Accordingly, this claim shall not be considered further in the present

Award.

PART V. ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

213. The Tribunal shall now discuss and determine each of these issues in turn.

A, Preliminary Matters

214. The Tribunal has considered the full submissions of the Parties in identifying the
principal issues and in arriving at its decisions on those issues in this Award. The
Parties’ written and oral submissions in these arbitrations are extensive. The Tribunal has,
where convenient, reproduced or summarized parts of those submissions in the body of
the Award; however, it is not possible to incorporate the entirety of the Parties’

submissions, both written and oral, made in the course of these proceedings.

215. Before turning to the specific issues identified above, the Tribunal wishes to address
certain preliminary matters, including: (1) the law applicable to the merits of the present

disputes; and (2) the allocation of the burden of proof.

© Reply at para. 372.

-72-

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

1. The Law Applicable to the Merits
216. The Tribunal addressed the issue of the applicable law during the jurisdictional phase of
Kardassopoulos arbitration and made the following findings, which it finds convenient to

reproduce here [Decision on Jur., paras. 144-146]:

“144. As an international Tribunal, this Tribunal must decide the issues in
dispute between the Parties in accordance with the applicable rules and
principles of international law. It is thus essentially at this point to cite the
relevant provisions of the ICSID Convention, the ECT and the BIT which are
clear and prescriptive. They read as follows:

Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention

“The Tribunal shall decide a dispute in accordance with such rules of
law as may be agreed by the parties. In the absence of such agreement,
the Tribunal shall apply the law of the Contracting State party to the
dispute (including its rules on the conflict of laws) and such rules of
international law as may be applicable”

Article 26(6) of the ECT

“A tribunal established under paragraph (4) shall decide the issues in
dispute in accordance with this Treaty and applicable rules and
principles of international law.”

Article 9(4) of the BIT

“The arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute in accordance with the
provisions of this Agreement and the applicable rules and principles of
international law (...)”

145. There is no doubt that a choice of international law by the Parties either in
conjunction with a national law or on its own is valid and has to be respected by
our Tribunal. While this Tribunal is not authorized to apply Georgia law, it is
well established that there are provisions of international agreements that can
only be given meaning by reference to municipal law.

146. In the present case, Georgian law is relevant as a fact to determine
whether or not Claimant's investment is covered by the terms of the ECT and the
BIT. But, whatever may be the determination of a municipal court applying
Georgian law to the dispute, this Tribunal can only decide the issues in dispute
in accordance with the applicable rules and principles of international law.”

[Footnotes omitted.]
217. The Parties have provided no further submissions on this issue, with the exception of the
law applicable to Mr. Fuchs’ claim. The Tribunal recalls that the Georgia / Israel BIT,
which forms the basis for Mr. Fuchs’ claim, was not before the Tribunal during the

-73-

218.

219.

220.

221.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

jurisdictional phase. Unlike the treaty between Greece and Georgia, the Georgia / Israel
BIT does not explicitly set out the applicable law. The Claimants submit that the treaty
drafters’ intent is nevertheless clear in Article 11 of the Georgia / Israel BIT, which

provides as follows:

“Article 11
Application of Other Rules

If the provisions of law of either Contracting Party or obligations under
international law existing at present or established hereafter between the
Contracting parties in addition to the present Agreement contain rules, whether
general or specific, entitling investments by investors of the other Contracting
Party to a treatment more favourable than is provided for by the present
Agreement, such rules shall to the extent that they are more favourable prevail
over the present agreement.”

On the basis of Article 11, the Claimants reason that substantive treaty rules are the
principal source of law to be applied by the Tribunal, the law of the host State and other
tules of international law playing a secondary role and applying only to the extent they
offer more favourable treatment for the investor. The Claimants contend this analysis is

consistent with Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention.

Applying these principles, the Claimants take the position that Georgian law may be
relevant as a fact to determine certain issues, consistent with the “more pragmatic and
less doctrinaire approach” adopted by arbitral tribunals recently in the context of Article
42(1), but is nevertheless restricted by the primacy of the Georgia / Israel BIT as a

“product of international law”.

The Respondent makes no particular submission on this issue but invokes in aid of its

defence to the various claims both international law and Georgian law.

The authorities identified by the Claimants in connection with Article 42(1) of the ICSID
Convention confirm that arbitral tribunals must decide on the proper roles to be played by
each of the relevant sources of law and of obligations in applying the terms of agreements

and the provisions of domestic and international law to a given dispute, as the

-74-

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

circumstances warrant. This is set out by the ICSID Annulment Committee in Wena

Hotels v. Egypt" as follows:

“Some of these views [as to the role of international law in the context of Article
42(1)] have in common the fact that they are aimed at restricting the role of
international law and highlighting that of the law of the host State. Conversely,
the view that calls for a broad application of international law aims at
restricting the role of the law of the host State. There seems not to be single
answer as to which of these approaches is the correct one. The circumstances of
each case may justify one or another solution. [...] Further, the use of the word
“may” in the second sentence of this provision indicates that the Convention
does not draw a sharp line for the distinction of the respective scope of
international and of domestic law and, correspondingly, that this has the effect to
confer on to the Tribunal a certain margin and power for interpretation.

What is clear is that the sense and meaning of the negotiations leading to the

second sentence of Article 42(1) allowed for both legal orders to have a role.

The law of the host State can indeed be applied in conjunction with international

law if this is justified. So too international law can be applied by itself if the

appropriate rule is found in this other ambit.

 

 

In particular, the rules of international law that directly or indirectly relate to
the State’s consent prevail over domestic rules that might be incompatible with
them. In this context it cannot be concluded that the resort to the rules of
international law under the Convention, or under particular treaties related to
its operation, is antagonistic to that State’s national interest.””*

[Emphasis added.]

222. More recently the tribunal in Enron Corporation v. Argentina? observed that a discussion
of which law governs as between international law and domestic law in Convention
proceedings is “theoretical”, as Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention has “provided for
a variety of sources, none of which excludes a certain role for another”.'° In that case,
the tribunal determined that it would apply domestic law and international law to the

extent pertinent and relevant to the decision of the various claims before it.

7 ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Decision on Annulment (5 February 2002).

® Ibid. at paras. 39-41. See also CMS Gas v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/08, Award (12 May 2005) at
paras. 116-17 (“CMS Gas”), affirming this interpretation of Article 42(1) and noting in that case that there is a
“close interaction between the islation and the ions the gas privatization, the License and
international law, as embodied both in the Treaty and in customary international law. All of these rules are
inseparable and will, to the extent justified, be applied by the Tribunal.” CMS Gas at para. 117.

° ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/3, Award (22 May 2007) (“Enron”).

10 Tid. at para. 205.
-75-

223.

224.

225.

226.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

The Tribunal is satisfied in respect of Mr. Fuchs’ claim that, consistent with Article 42(1)
of the ICSID Convention, it may apply the substantive rules of the Georgia / Israel BIT,
international law and Georgian law, as the Tribunal determines relevant and appropriate,

to decide the claims before it.

2. Burden of Proof

The Parties agree that the Claimants bear the initial burden of proving their claims.
However, they disagree as to the weight of this burden. The Claimants contend that their
burden is not subject to a special or heavy onus, while the Respondent argues that this is
precisely what the Claimants face in proving their claims. Both Parties rely on the
decision of the ICSID tribunal in Asian Agricultural Products Limited v. Sri Lanka"!

(among other authorities) in support of their competing positions.

The Claimants assert that the AAPL tribunal’s statement, to the effect that “a Party
having the burden of proof must not only bring evidence in support of his allegations, but
must also convince the Tribunal of their truth, lest they be disregarded for want, or

insufficiency of proof’

, simply reflects the general rule in international arbitrations that
a claimant must present sufficient evidence to prove its case on a balance of probabilities.
According to the Claimant only one aspect of the treaty claims involved in AAPL was
characterized as being subject to a heavy onus as a result of the strict criteria of the
relevant treaty provision, that being whether the U.K. investor’s property was the subject
of either “requisitioning” by Sri Lanka’s forces or authorities or “destruction” by Sri

Lanka’s forces or authorities “which was not caused in combat action or was not

required by the necessity of the situation”.

The Claimants further observe, in reliance on the award in Methanex v. United States, Ba

NAFTA Chapter XI arbitration, that to hold that the Claimants bear a particularly heavy

"ICSID Case No. ARB 18713, Final Award (27 June 1990) (“AAPL”).

!? Ibid. at para. 56.

8 (NAFTA) UNCITRAL, Final Award (3 August 2005) (“Methanex”).

- 76 -

227.

228.

229.

'4 Tbid. at para. 54. The Tribunal notes that this statement was made in the context of the admis:

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

burden of proof would be “antithetical” to the “equality of arms” principle inherent in all

investment treaty arbitrations. 4

The Respondent, on the other hand, relies on the award in Salini Costruttori SPA &
Italstrade SPA v. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan" and the cases cited therein in
respect of burden of proof. However, the Tribunal does not understand this award (nor
the cases on which the tribunal in Sa/ini in turn relied) to support the proposition that the
burden on the claimant is especially “onerous” or “heavy”. It simply confirms the well-
accepted principle that the claimant must prove the facts on which it relies in support of

its claim.

The Claimants also contend that the evidentiary burden may shift to the Respondent, for
example where a claimant has made a prima facie evidentiary showing on a particular
issue or where the Respondent interposes an affirmative defence, and that in the
particular case of damages a tribunal’s inability to fix damages with mathematical
certainty is not a reason to award no damages at all where the facts otherwise prove that a
loss has occurred. The Respondent does not appear to oppose this first proposition
although, as shall be seen later, it has taken the position in respect of the second
proposition that the absence of certainty in calculating a value for GTI’s rights results in

ascribing a value of zero to those rights.

The Tribunal finds that the principle articulated by the vast majority of arbitral tribunals
in respect of the burden of proof in international arbitration proceedings applies in these
concurrent proceedings and does not impose on the Parties any burden of proof beyond a
balance of probabilities. With respect to proof of damages in particular, the Tribunal
finds the following passage quoted by the Claimants in their written submissions from the
award in Sapphire International Petroleums Ltd. v. National Iranian Oil Co.'* to be

apposite:

 

sibility of documents

and not the burden of proof per se, although the Methanex tribunal framed this principle in terms of a general duty
owed by the parties to each other and to the tribunal in the conduct of an arbitration.

'S ICSID Case No. ARB/02/3, Award (31 January 2006), at paras. 70-74 (“Salini”).

' arbitral Award (15 March 1963), reprinted in 35 LL.R. 136 (“Sapphire”).

-77-

230.

231.

232.

233.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

“It is not necessary to prove the exact damage suffered in order to award
damages. On the contrary, when such proof is impossible, particularly as a
result of the behaviour of the author of the damage, it is enough for the judge to
be able to admit with sufficient probability the existence and extent of the
damage.”"

Whilst, in certain instances, a more demanding burden may be imposed on a claimant (or
indeed a respondent), there is no basis on the facts of these cases to depart from the
general rule that the claimant bears the initial burden of proving its claims on the facts.
This burden may, in certain circumstances (including those identified by the Claimant

above), shift to the Respondent.

B. Jurisdiction & Equitable Prescription

The Respondent has raised three defences in these arbitrations that may, if proved, either
remove jurisdiction over the Claimants’ investment claims from the Tribunal or preclude

the claims from being heard on equitable grounds.

In its Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal joined the issue of its jurisdiction ratione
temporis over Mr. Kardassopoulos’ BIT claims to the merits, reasoning as follows

[Decision on Jur., at para. 257]:

“In the Tribunal’s view, Respondent's objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
ratione temporis under the BIT is clearly not ripe for decision. The Tribunal
cannot determine whether the alleged BIT breaches occurred before or after 3
August 1996, without having considered the testimony and other evidence that
can only be obtained through a full hearing of the case. A thorough examination
of the events which may have led to the expropriation of Claimant’s investment
in Georgia is necessary to determine whether Article 4 of the BIT was breached
and, if so, when it was breached. This must be left to the merits stage of the
proceeding when a full evidentiary hearing will take place.”

Having heard the Parties’ full cases and on the basis of a complete evidentiary record, the
Tribunal is now in a position to decide this remaining jurisdictional question, as well as
the jurisdictional defence in respect of Mr. Fuchs’ claim and the equitable prescription

defence raised by the Respondent.

"" Ibid. at p. 187-88.

- 78 -

234.

235.

236.

237.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

1. Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis under the Georgia / Greece BIT
a) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent submits that because treaties do not have retroactive effect, the Georgia /
Greece BIT cannot apply to conduct which occurred prior to 3 August 1996. The
Respondent takes the position that all of the relevant events relating to Mr.
Kardassopoulos’ expropriation claim were discrete acts that were completed before the
Georgia / Greece BIT came into force and all that remained was a complaint that Georgia
failed to compensate Mr. Kardassopoulos for that alleged expropriation. A mere claim for
compensation, however, does not in the Respondent’s view transform a completed act
into a continuing violation that extended beyond the entry into force of the Georgia /

Greece BIT.

However, the Respondent concedes that, in view of the Tribunal’s finding that the ECT
applied provisionally at the time of the alleged expropriation of Mr. Kardassopoulos’
interest in GTI in 1996 [see Decision on Jurisdiction, paras. 247ff], the Georgia / Greece
BIT’s non applicability ratione temporis over the claims is now of little practical

significance.

b) The Claimants’ Position

Mr. Kardassopoulos contends that his investment is constituted of two sets of rights, each
of which was expropriated by an independent act of the Georgian Government: (i) the
exclusive right to construct, operate and derive income from the early oil pipeline until
2023, together with a bundle of rights over associated assets such as the facilities at
Gachiani and land at Supsa; and (ii) a residual package of rights, unrelated to the early oil
pipeline, including the sole and exclusive control and possession of all future pipelines
for any petroleum products (including oil and natural gas) and all rights with respect to
those future pipelines, and sole and exclusive right to deal for the Republic of Georgia in
the acquisition, sale and export of oil and gas and represent Georgia in any oil and gas or

energy related projects with foreign persons.

According to Mr. Kardassopoulos, the first set of rights was expropriated by Decree No.

178 on 20 February 1996 and the second set of rights was taken through Order No. 33a

-79 -

238.

239.

240.

241.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

on 19 August 1996. Although the Georgia / Greece BIT entered into force on 3 August
1996, more than five months after the date of the first alleged taking, Mr. Kardassopoulos
argues that Georgia provided a contemporaneous undertaking to make reparation for this
taking. Relying on Article 4 of the Georgia / Greece BIT and international legal
principles governing takings, Mr. Kardassopoulos argues that so long as the first taking
was accompanied by an offer which may reasonably be considered to lead to

compensation which is both “adequate” and “prompt”, the taking remains legitimate.

Mr. Kardassopoulos further submits that because the elements of a breach of Article 4(1)
of the Georgia / Greece BIT were completed after that BIT entered into force, the breach

dates from the time at which the composite act was completed.

Mr. Kardassopoulos also submits that, in any event, it is unnecessary for the Tribunal to
make a jurisdictional finding with respect to expropriation under the Georgia / Greece

BIT given the Tribunal’s jurisdiction under the ECT [Cl. Post Hearing Br., fn. 103].

Finally, Mr. Kardassopoulos contends that Georgia violated Article 2(2) of the Georgia /
Greece BIT (fair and equitable treatment) through conduct which occurred after August

1996 and which, of itself, violates the standard of treatment required by the treaty.

c) The Tribunal’s Determination

For the reasons discussed below (see Part V.C.3(c)), the Tribunal finds that Georgia
expropriated Mr. Kardassopoulos’ investment in violation of Article 13(1) of the ECT
and it is therefore unnecessary to address the question of jurisdiction ratione temporis
under the Georgia / Greece BIT. Nevertheless, for greater certainty, the Tribunal
observes that the Georgia / Greece BIT entered into force on 3 August 1996. GTIs’ early
oil rights were expropriated by the Georgian Government several months earlier, on 20
February 1996, through Decree 178.'8. The Tribunal is therefore clearly bereft of
jurisdiction to consider Mr. Kardassopoulos’ expropriation claim under the Georgia /

Greece BIT.

'8 As explained below in Part V.C.2(c), the Tribunal has determined that any purported grant of rights in future oil
and gas facilities in Georgia is unenforceable.

- 80 -

242.

243.

244.

245.

246.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Whilst the Tribunal finds that it has jurisdiction ratione temporis to consider the separate
claim advanced by Mr. Kardassopoulos under Article 2(2) of the Georgia / Greece BIT as
regards fair and equitable treatment, the Claimants have acknowledged that consideration
of this claim is unnecessary in the event the Tribunal finds in favour of Mr.
Kardassopoulos on his expropriation claim, save for the amounts claimed by Mr.
Kardassopoulos as his share of the expenses incurred by Tramex while participating in
the compensation commission process [Tr. D12:5:14-18; Cl. Post-Hearing Br. at p. 39, n.

155].

2. Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis under the Georgia / Israel BIT
a) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent takes the position that the investments which form the basis of Mr.
Fuchs’ fair and equitable treatment claim were allegedly expropriated in 1996, prior to
entry into force of the Georgia / Israel BIT, and as no subsequent breaches relating to
those investments occurred after the BIT entered into force the Tribunal has no
jurisdiction over those claims. The Respondent reasons that in order for the Tribunal to
accept Mr. Fuchs’ fair and equitable claim, it must necessarily determine that Georgia

expropriated Mr. Fuchs’ investments in 1996.

Notwithstanding the above, the Respondent concedes that the Tribunal has jurisdiction
ratione temporis in respect of Mr. Fuchs’ claims to the extent that they pertain to the

compensation process.

b) The Claimants’ Position

Mr. Fuchs submits that the investments which are the subject of the Claimants’ claims
were made prior to entry into force of the Georgia / Israel BIT, even though the conduct
complained of occurred after that date. Mr. Fuchs notes that, in any event, Article 12 of
the BIT, which states “/t/he provisions of this Agreement shall apply to investments made
on or before the entry into force of this Agreement’, extends investment protection under

the BIT to such investments.

For further clarity, Mr. Fuchs confirms that he does not make any claims under the BIT in
respect of the 1996 expropriation of his investments.

-81-

247.

248.

249.

250.

251.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

c) The Tribunal’s Determination

The Tribunal observes that the Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction in connection with
the Georgia / Israel BIT pertains to the question of whether the expropriation of Mr.
Fuchs’ investment also serves as a basis for Mr. Fuchs’ fair and equitable treatment
claim. Indeed, the Respondent concedes that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over Mr.

Fuchs’ claim to the extent that it relates to the compensation process.

On the basis of the Claimants’ written and oral submissions, the Tribunal understands
Mr. Fuchs’ fair and equitable treatment claim to relate solely to the compensation process
and not to the expropriation of his investment per se. The first compensation commission
was established by Order No. 84 on 23 April 1997. The Georgia / Israel BIT entered into

force approximately two months earlier, on 18 February 1997.

Accordingly, the Tribunal is satisfied that it has jurisdiction ratione temporis over Mr.

Fuchs’ fair and equitable treatment claim.

3. Time-Bar for Equitable Prescription
a) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent argues that the Claimants’ claims should be time-barred due to their
delay in filing their claims, i.e. 10 years. In the Respondent’s view, it is inequitable to
permit the claims to proceed as the delay has resulted in the loss of crucial evidence
which has severely prejudiced Georgia’s ability to defend itself. The Respondent relies
upon the Gentini Case!” for the principle that equitable principles of prescription shall
prevent parties from asserting untimely claims where the delay has prejudiced the party

against which the claims are asserted.

The Respondent also refers the Tribunal to the ICSID case Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab
Republic of Egypt” in regard to the “parameters of prejudicial delay”, noting that in that
case the claims were allowed to proceed because both parties were able to produce

voluminous evidence and extensive testimony. Contrasting Wena Hotels to the present

RIAA. Vol. X (1903), pp. 551-561.

29 ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Award (8 December 2000) (“Wena Hotels”).

- 82 -

252.

253.

254.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

arbitration, the Respondent submits that it has suffered the harm the tribunal in Wena

Hotels contemplated would require the imposition of equitable prescription.

In response to the Claimants’ assertion that prescription in this instance would itself be
inequitable, the Respondent counters that the doctrine of laches applies because any delay
was occasioned by the Claimants’ own actions rather than Georgia’s. According to the
Respondent, in order for the Tribunal to accept the Claimants’ position, the Tribunal must
find that the claims process which Georgia established was both mandatory and a sham,
and further that the Claimants’ decision to forego arbitration was justified. The

Respondent contends there is no evidence on the record to support these propositions.

The Respondent recalls the opening proposition of the Stevenson Case”!

, which states
that prescription may only be avoided “when it appears that there has been no laches on
the part of the claimant ... in its presentation for payment.” The Respondent therefore
takes the position that the Stevenson Case forecloses actions under international law
regardless of the substantive merits at issue where there has been undue delay in
presenting a claim, by setting up a presumption either that the claim was paid or that
there was never a basis for the claim. Turning to the facts at hand, the Respondent

contends that the presumption referenced in the Stevenson Case is “particularly strong” in

this case and favours application of the laches doctrine.

b) The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants urge the Tribunal to reject the Respondent’s time-bar argument outright
for four independent reasons. First, the Claimants reason that principles of equity and
good faith, including the ex turpi causa non oritur actio principle, preclude a state from
relying on its own wrong (here, delay) to evade jurisdiction. The Claimants also rely
upon the Stevenson Case for the proposition that “it would be evident injustice to refuse
the claimant a hearing when the delay was apparently occasioned by the respondent

Government”.

1 R.LA.A,, Vol. IX (1903), pp. 385-87.

» Ibid. at p. 387.

- 83 -

255.

256.

257.

258.

259.

260.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Second, the Claimants take the position that, in this case, the Respondent has been on
notice of the claims since 1995 and, during the period from 1997 to 2004, claimed to be
calculating the compensation payable to the Claimants. Relying also on Wena Hotels, the
Claimants contend that claims are not time-barred where the other party had “ample

notice” of the dispute.

Third, the Claimants contend that the Respondent has not been disadvantaged by any
delay, observing that there exists an extensive documentary record upon which the
Tribunal may decide the claims, including hundreds of documents produced as exhibits

and in response to discovery requests, as well as over 30 witness statements.

Finally, and in any event, the Claimants submit that the proceedings implicate conduct
occurring as late as December 2004, in respect of which no case for time-bar could

possibly exist.

c) The Tribunal’s Determination

The Respondent first raised its equitable prescription defence in its Counter-Memorial,
after the jurisdictional phase of these proceedings. Whilst this time-bar defence is not in
the nature of a jurisdictional defence per se, the result, were the Respondent to succeed,
would effectively be the same as it would preclude the Tribunal from hearing and

considering the Claimants’ claims.

The passage of time over the 10-year period from 1995 to 2005, when Mr.
Kardassopoulos first brought his investment claim to ICSID, has clearly resulted in the
fading of memories and loss of certain documentary evidence that may have otherwise

assisted the Tribunal in shedding light on the facts in dispute.

Certain fact witnesses who testified on behalf of both the Claimants and the Respondent
had difficulty recalling the precise circumstances surrounding the Claimants’ investment
in Georgia as well as the events which transpired from 1995 through 2004, when the
Claimants gave up hope of receiving compensation through the commission process

commenced in 1997.

-84-

261.

262.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

However, the Tribunal is not persuaded that the Claimants’ delay in bringing their claims
was unreasonable or unjustified in the circumstances. Having reviewed the totality of the
evidence, it is abundantly clear to the Tribunal that the Claimants had good reason to
suppose that a fair resolution of the dispute could be achieved in the manner proposed by
the Georgian Government if the Claimants did not have recourse to arbitration. The
Claimants were (reasonably, in the circumstances) trying to avoid having to pursue

arbitration of the dispute.

The Tribunal accepts the following testimony offered on cross-examination by Mr.
Fuchs, which indicates the good faith belief he held in 1995 — and continued to hold for

years thereafter — that an amicable solution could be reached [Tr. D4:130-31]:

“A. The relations were relations of trust. We went there, into a very strange
place, went through wars, went through everything, helped them out. We traded
the crude oil. They said ‘We need wheat’, we gave wheat. People were sick, we
flew in medicine. We trusted them. We worked together, we sit with the two top
people in the country, President Shevardnadze, which I don’t have to describe
where is he coming from, and Professor Tevzadze, which is the only person in
the country which has the highest learning degree for labour. I mean, the guy is
working in the street, people stop and bow and say, ‘Professor Tevzadze’. He is
a very serious person. We flew with him to Moscow, Russians in offices in the
government come out of the corridor, employees, to shake his hand and say
‘Nice to see you sir’. The man is a very serious, straightforward, respectable
individual.

The man has been for 30 years the chairman of Georgian Oil, he survived 10 or
15 ministers of energy, coups, everything. The man is in a class on his own. So
we sit with such a person. We have a person of the calibre of Shevardnadze
coming with us and telling us, ‘So-and-so has happened, you will be fully
compensated’.

We see resolutions, we stay in the country, we bring wheat to the country, for
business. No donation, no nothing, no contribution, no loans. We bring in wheat
to the country, we mill the wheat, we sell the wheat in the country. We bring
gasoline into the country, the Zubitashvili ministers would ask us to bring in
gasoline, an extra credit quantity on open credit basis, and put it there before
the tax — we do it, we are close with them.

So with relations, and two people like this, we had no reason to believe that they
would not fulfil their word.

What did we stick to? The facts, the commission, the resolution, the meeting, the
report. Things were on the move. I have nothing to add to this. It is only the
new administration, after Shevardnadze, that changed the whole thing, because
Dr. Kissinger wrote to Shevardnadze, Shevardnadze accepted what Dr.
Kissinger wrote to him, and he appointed Deloitte, and everything was on the

- 85 -

263.

264.

265.

266.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

verge of solution and then there was the Rose Revolution, whatever they call it,
and everything is upside down.”

The cases on which the Respondent relies either support the conclusion that there is no
undue delay where (as here) a claimant has persistently pursued its claims in negotiations
with the government concerned, or are distinguishable on their facts. The Tribunal finds
the circumstances here, where the Claimants persistently pursued compensation from the
Georgian Government beginning in 1996 through to their ultimate rejection in 2004, to be
markedly different from cases such as Gentini, in which over 30 years had passed before
the Claimant presented its claim, in the nature of collection of a debt, for the first time to

the Government of Venezuela.

The Tribunal is also not persuaded by the Respondent’s argument that as a result of the
Claimants’ delay in presenting their claims it has suffered harm which would justify the

imposition of equitable prescription. The Wena Hotels tribunal found that:

“contrary to the Respondent’s claim that ‘Claimant severely compromised the
ability of the Respondent to defend itself in these proceedings’, the Tribunal
agrees with Wena that, given the voluminous evidence produced by the parties as
well as the extensive testimony provided by several witnesses (in particular,
EHC’s counsel, Mr. Munir, who showed a remarkable recollection of the case),
neither party seems to have been disadvantaged — which, of course, is one of the
equitable reasons for disallowing an untimely claim.””*

[Footnotes omitted.]

Despite the passage of time, the Parties to these proceedings have produced thousands of
pages of documentary materials and well over 30 fact witnesses. Many of these
witnesses did recollect the relevant events with a reasonable degree of clarity, and in a
manner that the Tribunal is satisfied has enabled it to arrive at a full understanding of the

documentary evidence.

The Wena Hotels tribunal also observed that the principle of repose applies to whether a

dispute has been commenced too late to permit it to proceed:

“Another equitable principle is the notion of ‘repose’ — that a respondent
believes that a dispute has been abandoned or laid to rest long ago should not be
surprised by its subsequent resurrection. Here, however, the Tribunal finds that

3 Wena Hotels at para. 104.

- 86 -

267.

268.

269.

270.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Wena continued to be aggressive in prosecuting its claims and that Egypt has
had ample notice of this on-going dispute.”*

[Footnotes omitted.]
The Claimants have continuously and persistently pursued compensation for the loss of

their investment in Georgia since 1996. It is simply not credible to suggest that Georgia

has not had ample notice of this dispute.
Accordingly, the Tribunal rejects the Respondent’s equitable prescription defence.
C. Liability

1. Attribution of SakNavtobi and/or Transneft’s Acts/Omissions to Georgia

a) The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants’ primary position in these arbitrations is that the Respondent directly
breached the relevant treaties through the adoption of certain executive instruments, i.e.
Decree No. 178 and Order No. 33a, and is therefore directly responsible for the
Claimants’ losses under international law. In the alternative, and in the event the
Tribunal determines that the acts or omissions of either SakNavtobi or Transneft gave
rise to the Claimant’s losses, the Claimants take the position that such acts or omissions
are attributable to the Respondent pursuant to the principles of state responsibility. In
this regard, the Claimants rely on the International Law Commission’s (“ILC”) draft
Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts (“Articles on
State Responsibility”) as an authoritative statement of the principles of international law

on the rules of the attribution of conduct to a State.

In addition, the Claimants rely on the two tests developed by the ICSID tribunal in
Maffezini v. Spain” - the “structural test” and the “functional test” — to determine
whether an entity is a State entity such that its acts are attributable to the State. These

tests were set forth by the Maffezini tribunal as follows:

*4 Thid. at para. 105.

°5 ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Award on Jurisdiction, (25 January 2000) (“Maffezini”).

-87-

271.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

“77. The question of whether or not SODIGA is a State entity must be examined
first from a formal or structural point of view. Here a finding that the entity is
owned by the State, directly or indirectly, gives rise to a rebuttable presumption
that it is a State entity. The same result will obtain if an entity is controlled by
the state, directly or indirectly. A similar presumption arises if an entity’s
purpose or objectives is the carrying out of functions which are governmental in
nature or which are otherwise normally reserved to the State, or which by their
nature are not usually carried out by private business or individuals.

[...]

79. Because of the many forms that State enterprises may take and thus shape
the manners of State action the structural test by itself may not always be a
conclusive determination whether an entity is an organ of the State or whether
its acts may be attributed to the State. An additional test has been developed, a
functional test, which looks to the functions of or role to be performed by the
entity. [...]

80. [...] [A] private corporation operating for profit while discharging
essentially governmental functions delegated to it by the State could, under the
functional test, be considered as an organ of the State and thus engage the
State’s international responsibility for wrongful acts.”*°

[Footnotes omitted.]

In the Claimants’ submission, SakNavtobi and Transneft satisfy both the structural and
functional tests for attribution as they were (a) wholly owned and controlled by the
Respondent; and (b) their activities and powers, as described in the JVA and the Deed of
Concession, were those of an organ of the State, as opposed to a commercial enterprise.
In support of its submission, the Claimants point to evidence of the Respondent
exercising, inter alia, a State function through SakNavtobi by entering into the JVA (i.e.
in Section 4.1A SakNavtobi represents that “it is and will remain ... fully owned and
controlled by the Republic of Georgia”) and governmental authority through several
provisions in the JVA whereby SakNavtobi makes commitments and representations that
only the State itself could perform (i.e. Sections 8.2(vi) and 8.6 of the JVA). The
Claimants further underscore the twin facts that the JVA was entered into in order to
achieve certain national objectives (as set out in Article 3 thereof) and the Deed of
Concession was ratified by the Minister of Fuel and Energy, an organ of the Georgian

State.

6 Tbid. at paras. 77 and 79-80.

- 88 -

272.

273.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

b) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent does not argue that it is not responsible for the executive instruments
alleged to have expropriated Mr. Kardassopoulos’ investment. However, the Respondent
takes the position that the State is not responsible for the contractual commitments of
SakNavtobi and Transneft, and that neither SakNavtobi nor Transneft may be held
responsible for the acts of the State, namely the cancellation of GTI’s rights. Moreover,
because Article 21 of the JVA (the acknowledgement by the Government) was
substantially deleted (see paragraph 86 above), the Respondent argues that the Georgian
Government did not agree to be bound by the terms of the joint venture [Tr. D1:140-42].
The Respondent’s arguments in this regard are intertwined with its submissions on

causation (see Part V.D below).

c) The Tribunal’s Determination

The Tribunal recalls that it made the following findings during the jurisdictional phase in
connection with the Respondent’s objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione

materiae, which relate to the issue of attribution [Decision on Jur., paras. 189-194]:

“189. Respondent, it is recalled, does not accept that these representations [in
the JVA and Deed of Concession to the effect that those instruments were
entered into in compliance with Georgian law] are relevant. Respondent
maintains that these representations cannot be attributed to it because it had not
yet entered into the ECT nor the BIT when SakNavtobi and Transneft concluded
the JVA and the Concession, respectively.

190. The Tribunal finds Respondent’s position untenable. The principle of
attribution, in principle, applies to Georgia by virtue of its status as a sovereign
State and is not contingent on the timing of its adherence to a treaty. It is also
immaterial whether or not SakNavtobi_and Transneft were authorized to grant
the rights lated by the JVA and the Concession or whether or not they
otherwise acted beyond their authority under Georgian law. Article 7 of the
Articles on State Responsibility provides that even in cases where an entity
empowered to exercise governmental authority acts ultra vires of it, the conduct
in question is nevertheless attributable to the State.

191, In the Tribunal’s view, Respondent cannot simply avoid the legal effect of
the repr ions and warranties set forth in the JVA and the C ion by
arguing that they are ined in agreements which are void ab initio under
Georgian law. The assurances given to Claimant regarding the validity of the
JVA and the Concession were endorsed by the Government itself, and some of

the most senior Government officials of Georgia (including, inter alia, President

 

G khurdia, President Shevardnadze, Prime Minister Sigua and Prime
Minister Gi hvili) were closely involved in the iation of the JVA and the

- 89 -

 

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Concession. _The Tribunal_also_notes_that_the Concession was signed and
“ratified” by the Ministry of Fuel and Energy, an organ of the Republic of
Georgi

192. The Tribunal further observes that in the years following the execution of
the JVA and the Concession by SakNavtobi and Transneft, respectively, Georgia
never protested nor claimed that these agreements were illegal under Georgian
law. In light of all of the above circumstances, the Tribunal is of the view that
Respondent created a legitimate expectation for Claimant that his investment
was, indeed, made in accordance with Georgian law and, in the event of breach,
would be entitled to treaty protection.

193. The Tribunal is comforted in this finding by the decision of the ICSID
Tribunal in the case of Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Limited v.
Egypt. In that case, Egypt had argued that certain acts of Egyptian officials
upon which the investor had relied were in fact “legally non-existent or
absolutely null and void” under Egyptian law. The arbitral tribunal found that
even if such acts were illegal, they were performed by governmental authorities,
which created a legitimate expectation for the investor:

“Tt is possible that under Egyptian law certain acts of Egyptian
officials, including even Presidential Decree No. 475, may be
considered legally non-existent or null and void or susceptible
to invalidation. However, these _acts were cloaked with the
mantle of Governmental authority and communicated as such to
foreign investors who_ relied _on_them_in making their
investments.

 

Whether legal under Egyptian law or not, the acts in question
were the acts of Egyptian authorities, including the highest
executive authority of the Government. These acts, which are
now alleged to have been in violation of the Egyptian municipal
legal system, created expectations protected _by established
principles of international law. A determination that these acts
are null and void under municipal law would not resolve the
ultimate question of liability for damages suffered by the victims
who relied on the acts. If the municipal law does not provide a
remedy, the denial of any remedy whatsoever cannot be the
final answer.

[1

The principle of international law which the Tribunal is bound
to apply is that which establishes the international
responsibility of States when unauthorized or ultra vires acts of
officials have been performed by State agents under cover of
their official character. If such unauthorized or ultra vires acts
could not be ascribed to the State, all State responsibility
would be rendered illusory.” (emphasis added)

194. The reasoning in Southern Pacific Properties is apposite to this case in
many respects. Thus, even if the JVA and the Concession were entered into in

- 90 -

274.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

breach of Georgian law, the fact remains that these two agreements were
“cloaked with the mantle of Governmental authority”. Claimant_had_ every
reason to believe that these agreements were in accordance with Georgian law,
not only because they were entered into by Georgian State-owned entities, but
also because their content was approved by Georgian government officials
without objection as to their legality on the part of Georgia for many years
thereafter. Claimant therefore had a legitimate expectation that his investment
in Georgia was in accordance with relevant local laws. Respondent is
accordingly estopped from objecting to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione
materiae under the ECT and the BIT on the basis that the JVA and the
Concession could be void ab initio under Georgian law.”

[Emphasis added. Footnotes omitted.]

In the Tribunal’s opinion, there can be no real question in these arbitrations as to the
attribution of any acts or omissions on the part of SakNavtobi or Transneft to the
Respondent. The Tribunal invoked Article 7 of the Articles on State Responsibility in its
Decision on Jurisdiction, but Articles 4, 5 and 11 are equally applicable here. They

provide as follows:

“Article 4
Conduct of Organs of a State

(1) The conduct of any State organ shall be considered an act of that State
under international law, whether the organ exercises legislative, executive,
judicial or any other functions, whatever position it holds in the organization of
the State, and whatever its character as an organ of the central government or of
a territorial unit of the State.

(2) An organ includes any person or entity which has that status in
accordance with the internal law of the State.

Article 5
Conduct of persons or entities exercising elements of governmental authority

The conduct of a person or entity which is not an organ of the State under
article 4 but which is empowered by the law of that State to exercise elements of
the governmental authority shall be considered an act of the State under
international law, provided the person or entity is acting in that capacity in the
particular instance.

Article 11
Conduct acknowledged and adopted by a State as its own

Conduct which is not attributable to a State under the preceding articles shall
nevertheless be considered an act of that State under international law if and to
the extent that the State acknowledges and adopts the conduct in question as its

own,

-91 -

275.

276.

277.

278.

279.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

The evidence demonstrates that both SakNavtobi and Transneft were incorporated within
the structure of the Ministry of Fuel and Energy. SakNavtobi was explicitly brought
under the auspices of the Ministry of Fuel and Energy as a department of the Ministry in
1992 through issuance of Cabinet Decree 1105. This same decree explicitly identified
the “management of main oil pipeline of Georgia” as “united in the department of
SakNavtobi of the Ministry of Fuel and Energy of the Republic of Georgia” [Hearing
Bundle, Tab 6].

Both SakNavtobi and Transneft also clearly exercised (or purported to exercise)
governmental authority. Indeed, among the representations made by SakNavtobi in
Section 4.1A of the JVA, it declares and represents that:
“It is and will remain for the duration of the Joint venture fully owned and
controlled by the Republic of Georgia and it has been duly appointed and

empowered by the Republic of Georgia to exclusively represent the Republic of
Georgia in all Oil and Gas and energy related matters.

Similarly, in Section 4.1 of the Deed of Concession, Transneft declares and represents the
following:
“It is duly authorized to grant the Concession to GTI as provided herein and no
further consent or approval of any third party or governmental authority is

required for Transneft to grant the Concession to the Pipelines to GTI in
accordance with the terms and conditions hereof.”

Georgian government officials espoused the terms of the JVA and the Deed of
Concession. While the formal government acknowledgement in Article 21 of the JVA
was struck out, an abundance of evidence suggests that the JVA was supported at the
highest levels of government. Indeed, the joint venture between SakNavtobi and Tramex
was approved by the Cabinet of Ministers in Resolution Nos. 834 and 123G. Decree No.
951 further confirms the Cabinet of Minister’s approval for the commencement of
construction on the projects outlined in the JVA. In addition, the Deed of Concession

was ratified by the Minister of Energy.

When considered together, the representations by SakNavtobi and Transneft and the
various espousals by the Georgian Government of the JVA and Deed of Concession are

conclusive.

-92-

280.

281.

282.

283.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Accordingly, whether one applies the principles of attribution set forth in the ILC Articles
on State Responsibility or the tests developed in arbitral jurisprudence to ascertain
whether the acts or omissions of a particular entity are attributable to a State, the answer
in these arbitrations is the same. The relationship between SakNavtobi and Transneft, on
the one hand, and the Georgian State, on the other hand, bears all of the hallmarks of
attribution under international law. The Tribunal is therefore satisfied that, for the
purpose of determining a breach of the applicable treaties, any acts or omissions of
SakNavtobi and/or Transneft constituting such breach may be attributed to the

Respondent and it so finds.

2. The Scope of GTI’s Rights
The Respondent has advanced several arguments in respect of the scope of the rights
allegedly held by GTI which the Tribunal considers most efficient to address prior to the

Claimants’ substantive treaty claims.

a) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent takes the threshold positions that: (i) the scope of the JVA and the
Concession was limited to the then-existing Gachiani-Supsa Pipeline; (ii) any rights to
the Gachiani-Supsa Pipeline were invalid and unenforceable; and further or alternatively
(iii) any remaining rights under the JVA and the Concession were limited to recovery of
Tramex’s and GTI’s proven expenses incurred in connection with developing the

Gachiani-Supsa Pipeline.””

In support of its first contention, Georgia argues that specific Government resolutions
(e.g. Resolutions 123g and 951), the express terms of the JVA and the Concession,
principles of justice and equity, industry practice and written evidence all preclude the
interpretation of the JVA or Concession as conferring rights to any and all future

pipelines.

*" In their Post-Hearing Brief, the Respondent also developed the argument that GTI was not entitled to be a passive
owner of the Gachiani-Supsa pipeline in response to the Claimants’ case on quantum. This argument is therefore
dealt with in Part V.E.4 below.

- 93 -

284.

285.

286.

287.

288.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Relying also on the witness statement of Dr. Tevzadze and expert report of David
Eliashvili (who was not called to testify at the Hearing), the Respondent argues that the
Claimants could only have had a legitimate expectation that the JVA and the Deed of

Concession granted rights within the scope of the aforesaid Government Resolutions.

The Respondent further argues that, when properly construed, neither the JVA nor the
Concession confers rights to future pipelines. Based on the text of Articles 1 and 3 of the
JVA, the Respondent submits that no rights to future pipelines were either conveyed or
contemplated. In response to the Claimants’ reliance on the wording “future ones” in
Section 3.3 of the JVA, the Respondent contends that if the parties had intended to
drastically alter the definition of “Oil and Gas Facilities” to include not only existing but
also any and all possible and unspecified future oil and gas facilities they would have
clearly so stated in Section 1.12 of the JVA. The Respondent suggests that the
Claimants’ decision not to cross-examine Dr. Tevzadze on this issue “is indicative of the

fact that their argument is unsustainable” [Resp. Post-Hearing Br. at para. 9].

In the Respondent’s view, Section 3.6 of the JVA (which granted GTI a right of refusal to
participate in other oil and gas projects in Georgia) does not assist the Claimants’
argument as it simply permitted the Claimants to propose future projects subject to the
Georgian Government’s agreement on the commercial terms for such projects. The
Respondent notes that this was confirmed in Mr. Kardassopoulos’ oral testimony [Tr.

D4:32-33].

The Respondent further argues that “good commercial sense,” in circumstances where no
term of reciprocal obligation was imposed for Tramex to construct all future oil and gas
facilities, precludes interpreting the JVA or the Deed of Concession so as to conclude that
either instrument conferred rights to future pipelines. The Respondent underscores Mr.
Kardassopoulos testimony on cross-examination that the Claimants’ obligations

concerning future pipelines were a “matter for discussion” [Tr. D4:39].

The Respondent identifies contemporaneous documents, including the Preliminary Note
of Advice prepared by a London barrister [Hearing Bundle, Tab 142], none of which
refer to the conferral of rights to future pipelines. The Respondent contends that recourse

may be had to such documents where a contract is ambiguous, pointing in particular to
-94-

289.

290.

291.

292.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

the UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial Contracts, which expressly

provide for regard to be given to “extrinsic evidence” in interpreting contracts.

In addition to documentary evidence supporting its interpretation of the JVA, the
Respondent explains that the geopolitical context at the time did not lend support to a
broad interpretation of GTI’s rights [Am. Rejoinder at paras. 117-118]:
“117. Georgian officials were of course aware of the pressing need to develop
Georgia's oil and gas facilities, yet neither they nor Mr. Fuchs specifically
contemplated or discussed the BTC or SCP projects (even Mr. Fuchs does not

claim that the BTC and SCP were his brainchild) and the Claimants have
adduced no evidence to the contrary.

118. Moreover, in light of the significant political aspect to Azerbaijan’s
choice of export route for Caspian oil and the uncertainties surrounding legal
title to Caspian reserves, there simply was no basis upon which the parties to the
JVA and the Concession could enter into any binding obligations in 1992 or
1993 for the BTC Pipeline or the SCP (which did not exist at the time).”

In a similar interpretation exercise, the Respondent relies upon the text of Article 2
(Definitions, as set out in paragraph 97 above) and Article 10 (Improvements, Additions
and Extensions to the Pipelines, as set out in paragraph 100 above) of the Concession to
construe narrowly the rights conferred under this instrument to those associated with the
development of the Samgori-Batumi pipeline. In particular, the Respondent contends
that the references to “extensions” and “new Petroleum pipelines added” must relate to
extensions or additions to the existing main pipelines in Georgia, and not entirely new

and distinct main pipeline systems (such as the BTC pipeline and the SCP).

With regard to those textual nuances relied upon by the Claimants in interpreting the
Deed of Concession, i.e. the distinction between extension and addition in Article 10, the
Respondent maintains that the text of the Deed supports its interpretation of the
Claimants’ rights. According to the Respondent, the examples of “improvements,
extensions or additions to the Pipelines” listed in Section 10.1 all concern the adding to
or extending of the existing main pipelines system and related facilities and do not

envisage the adding of new main pipeline systems at all.

Thus, in the Respondent’s view, Section 10.1 illustrates that “additions to the Pipelines”

(“Pipelines” being the main pipeline systems and all related facilities, in accordance with

-95 -

293.

294.

295.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

the definition in Article 2) could include the addition of new transferring units or

discharging facilities, whereas “extensions” would include extending the pipeline.

In response to the Claimants’ argument that GTI had the right to lease the Gachiani-
Supsa pipeline and remain a “passive owner” [Tr. D11:13], the Respondent argues that as
neither the JVA nor the Concession granted Tramex/GTI the “isolated right” to collect
transit fees, divorced from the “associated obligation” to reconstruct the Gachiani-Supsa
pipeline, no such right could be expropriated or transferred to GIOC [Resp. Post-Hearing

Br. at para. 25].

In support of its second submission concerning the alleged unenforceability of GTI’s
rights, the Respondent invokes three contractual defences: (1) inequity and/or
unconscionability; (2) misrepresentation; and/or (3) lack of performance or consideration.
In respect of this first defence, the Respondent argues that consideration should be given
to the fact that the Claimants’ lawyer, Jack Smith, drafted the JVA and the Concession
and negotiated with Georgian officials who had no experience with foreign concessions,

at a time when the Respondent was in a state of transition and instability.

The Respondent rejects the Claimants’ contention, based on the award in Bridas
S.A.LP.I.C., Bridas Energy International, Ltd., et al v. Government of Turkmenistan,”*,
that States are precluded from arguing that a contract is unconscionable, contending that
the facts in the Bridas case are distinguishable from the facts in these arbitrations. In
particular, the Respondent contends that it was not represented by legal counsel
experienced in oil and gas concessions when it entered into the JVA and Deed of
Concession. There is also, according to the Respondent, no evidence that “subsequent
amendments” were made which affirmed the Claimants’ interpretation of either the JVA
or the Concession. In this regard, the Respondent rejects the Claimants’ argument that
the Concession should be likened to an “amendment” to the original agreement (the
JVA), reasoning that the Concession was a separate agreement between different parties
to the JVA and does not, properly construed, serve to confirm the Claimants’

interpretation of the JVA.

°8 ICC Arbitration Case No. 9058/FMS/KGA, Partial Award (25 June 1999) (“Bridas”).

- 96 -

296.

297.

298.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

The Respondent further submits that the commitments under the JVA and the Concession
are inequitable and constitute an unconscionable (and therefore unenforceable) bargain.
In this regard, the Respondent points to Tramex’s financial commitment under the JVA
and the Concession, which was limited to providing a nominal payment to the Authorised
Fund, its share of GTI’s US$ | million minimum capital investment and only 50% of the
costs of each of the “Projects” carried out (as identified in Sections 3.4 and 3.5 of the
JVA). In addition, under Section 6.1, GTI’s “Concession Fee” comprised a requirement
merely to carry out “ordinary and reasonable maintenance of the Pipelines” and to effect
“any improvements or extensions to the Pipelines it may deem necessary.” According to
the Respondent, the language is even weaker elsewhere in Section 7.2 of the Concession,
in which GTI declared that it shall “wse its best endeavours to operate and manage the
Pipelines and to effect periodic ordinary maintenance of the Pipelines, at its

discretion...”.

In regard to its second contractual defence, the Respondent claims that the Claimants
misrepresented that they had the necessary financial resources and expertise to carry out
the project. The Respondent directs the Tribunal specifically to Section 4.2 of the JVA,
in which Tramex represented “that it has the necessary financial capability and resources
to fulfill its investment undertakings as specified in this Agreement” and “that it has
experience, expertise and Know-How in matters relating to Oil and Gas.” The
Respondent interprets “investment undertakings” more broadly than the initial financial
commitments stipulated in the JVA, comprising all investment undertaking required by
the JVA, including the requirement to contribute 50% of the budget of any project
pursuant to Section 5.4. The misrepresentation defence is, in the Respondent’s view,
borne out by Mr. Kardassopoulos’ evidence to the effect that “Tramex itself had no
stand-alone substantial funds” [Kardassopoulos I, para. 4.13] and witness testimony that
the Claimants were unknown in the industry and had no experience building pipelines

[Adams, para. 20; Cook II, para. 13; Ferguson testimony, Tr. D3:40].

In regard to its third contractual defence, the Respondent argues that the Claimants failed
to perform and/or provide adequate consideration under the JVA. In making this latter
point, the Respondent submits that Tramex and GTI were subject to implied terms, which

constituted their consideration for the alleged exclusive rights. Specifically, the
-97-

299.

300.

301.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Respondent identifies the following implied obligations incumbent upon Tramex and GTI
which, in the Respondent’s view, were not met (and whose failure to meet is not
excused): (i) to carry out the project works necessary to operate the Gachiani-Supsa
Pipeline; and (ii) to complete such project works in a reasonable time-frame, in light of

the urgent need to commence operation of the Pipeline.

The Respondent supports its position in this regard through reference to the Preliminary
Note of Advice provided to the Claimants by Paisner & Co. [Am. Rejoinder at paras.
174-175]:

“174. The Claimants’ protestations regarding the work they allegedly did are
flatly refuted by the unredacted legal advice that the Claimants received in 1995
that the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 3 dated 28 October 2008 required the
Claimants finally to disclose. A previously redacted section of a Preliminary
Note of Advice dated 19 September 1995 of Richard Field QC and Philip Sales
records the Claimants’ instructions and admission in this respect:

It is clear that little if any work has been done on the pipeline over the

years since the concession agreement was executed, and we shall have to
think how best to deal with this, particularly bearing in mind the
obligations of full and frank disclosure. (emphasis added)

175. A further previously redacted section of the Preliminary Note goes on to
record the following:

ip Risk of repudiatory breach by GTI

This issue has been adverted to with the clients. It was noted that
although the Georgian authorities in the course of posing many detailed
questions respecting the concession agreement asked for details of
GTI’s performance, no Georgian state entity had relied on repudiatory
breach as a ground for asserting that the concession agreement is of no
effect. The clients proposed that they give urgent instructions for work
suddenly to begin on the pipeline, but were told that this would appear
to be the contrivance which in substance it is. (emphasis added)”

The Respondent takes the position that in these circumstances the Claimants could not
have had a legitimate expectation of continuing to enjoy the rights granted under the JVA
and the Concession or, if they continued to hold rights, a legitimate expectation that a

knowledgeable third-party purchaser would have paid them for such rights.

In response to the Claimants’ submissions as to Georgia’s ability to assert the

unenforceability of the JVA and/or Concession and its failure to rescind the agreements,

- 98 -

302.

303.

304.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

the Respondent contends that the Claimants’ arguments fail for several reasons, including
because in its view it would be inequitable if a technical requirement to rescind the
contracts could entitle the Claimants to claim that they had legitimate expectations
regarding the scope of the JVA and the Concession in light of the Claimants’ admitted

repudiatory breaches of the contracts.

The Respondent rejects the Claimants’ argument that Georgia affirmed the Claimants’
rights, citing two principal reasons: first, the Claimants failed to establish that any of the
instances of alleged affirmation satisfy the legal test for affirmation; and second, in
circumstances in which there were continuing alleged affirmations, Georgia retained its
right to rescind the JVA and the Concession up to the date of the alleged expropriation.

The Respondent accordingly submits that the alleged affirmations were ineffective.

With regard to its third and alternative submission, the Respondent contends that in the
event Mr. Kardassopoulos retained an interest in rights under the JVA and the
Concession, those rights are limited to compensation for Tramex’s and GTI’s proven

expenses incurred in developing the Gachiani-Supsa Pipeline.

b) The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants submit that the Respondent’s interpretation of GTI’s rights as limited to
oil facilities existing at the time of the making of the JVA and the Concession is not
supported by the terms of the JVA or the Concession. The Claimants argue that the term
“Oil and Gas Facilities” plainly and unambiguously extended GTI’s rights to future
facilities. In the Claimants’ view, the Respondent is asking the Tribunal to ignore the
words “all ... future ones’, pointing to the following additional provisions which bespeak
a long-term, exclusive Joint Venture under which GTI was intended to have broad rights
in respect of all matters related to “Oil and Gas,” including the maintenance of future
pipeline facilities:

(a) The unqualified “right of first refusal” to participate or implement any other Oil
and Gas related projects in the Republic of Georgia.” (TVA at 11 §3.6)

(b) The unqualified “sole and exclusive right to represent the Republic of Georgia in
any Oil and Gas related projects with foreign persons.” (JVA at 11 §3.7)

- 99 -

305.

306.

307.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

(c) The unqualified right to use the “Export Licence” possessed by SakNavtobi.
(IVA at 8 § 3.2.)

(d) The unqualified right to “deal for the Republic of Georgia in the acquisition, sale
and export of Oil and Gas.” (JVA at 8 §3.2.)

(e) The general prohibition on “third part[ies]” being granted “preferred, equal or
subordinated rights” in any “rights granted to, or used by the Joint Venture.”
(IVA at 12 §3.7.)
The Claimants reject the Respondent’s reliance on contemporaneous documents as an
improper use of extrinsic evidence to interpret the terms of the parties’ agreement. In the
Claimants’ view, any doubts as to the breadth of GTI’s rights are dispelled by the terms
of the Concession, which clarifies and supersedes the JVA’s terms. Drawing on textual
nuances in the Concession’s definition of “Pipelines,” the Claimants assert that a plain
reading of this instrument can only support a broad reading of the scope of the Claimants’
tights. Finally, the Claimants point to an opinion prepared by the Georgian Ministry of
Justice in 2003 which indicates that the Concession’s provisions had granted to GTI “the
sole right to control, operate and use all existing or potential pipelines in Georgia” [Cl.

Post-Hearing Br. at para. 46; Hearing Bundle, Tab 228].

According to the Claimants, the Concession’s definition of “Pipelines” captures two
further categories of pipeline beyond “existing main pipeline systems”: (1) “extensions”
to the “existing main pipeline systems’, and (2) “pipelines added” to such systems “in the
future”. These terms are referred to disjunctively and are offset by the word “or”,
indicating that “extensions” are different from “additions.” Therefore, in the Claimants’
view, a new pipeline (such as the BTC or SCP), although not necessarily an “extension”
of any pre-existing pipeline (e.g., the Gachiani-Batumi pipeline used for transporting
Early Oil to the Black Sea), is nonetheless an “addition” to the pre-existing pipeline

system within Georgia, and thus within the scope of the Concession.

The Claimants contend that the JVA and Deed of Concession entitled GTI to license or
sub-lease the “Pipelines” to third parties in return for a fee, relying in particular on
Article 17 of the Deed, which provided that “GTI may license or sub-lease the Pipelines
or any segment thereof and any additions or extensions thereto, provided, however, it

shall notify Transneft of the segment sub-leased and the identity of the sub-lessees and

- 100 -

308.

309.

310.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

shall continue to be liable to Transneft for the performance of its obligations hereunder.”
The Claimants reject as “counter-textual” the Respondent’s position that a sublease
would be unconscionable, for the reasons set forth below, as well as the Respondent’s
position that the Deed only authorized a “build-own-operate” project [Cl. Post-Hearing

Br. at para. 51].

As regards the Respondent’s second contention, that GTI’s rights are unenforceable, the
Claimants take the position that the relevant inquiry must ascertain what rights existed at
the time of the relevant expropriatory conduct: if a particular contract was in force at the
time of the expropriation, then it can properly be the subject of an expropriation claim.
The Claimants identify several principles codified in the UNIDROIT Principles of
International Commercial Contracts as evidencing the /ex mercatoria that governs the
JVA and the Deed of Concession, which are set up to counter the Respondent’s contract-

based arguments [Cl. Post-Hearing Br. at para. 14].

As regards the Respondent’s other contractual defences, the Claimants submit that a
contract may only be avoided on the basis of misrepresentation if the aggrieved party
seeks to rescind it in a timely way. Absent such an affirmative election, the mere
possibility of a misrepresentation claim does not make the contract void. The Claimants
apply this principle mutatis mutandis to Georgia’s other contractual defences, i.e.
unconscionability, non-performance and/or failure of consideration. In the Claimants’
view, as both Saknavtobi and Transneft treated the JVA and the Concession as valid and

neither sought to rescind the agreements, these defences are unavailable.

In any event, the Claimants contend that the contractual representations concerning their
financial capability and experience were true when made and that the Georgians knew
who they were dealing with, citing Mr. Gur’s evidence that the Georgian “were well
aware that Tramex was just a vehicle for Mr. Fuchs and Mr. Kardassopoulos” [Gur I,
para. 4.3]. The Claimants further submit that they never represented themselves to be
other than “knowledgeable oil traders who held reserve funds in the mid/upper seven
figures and had the ability to earn additional funds for GTI through oil trading using
GTI’s export license and its access to the Samgori-Batumi pipeline” [Cl]. Post-Hearing

Br. at para. 22]. This is, in their view, what the JVA recorded.

- 101 -

311.

312.

313.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

The Claimants argue that the Respondent’s unconscionability defence has no foundation
and could not, in any event, prevail as such a defence is intended to protect disadvantaged
individuals. The Claimants assert that for the same reasons articulated by the tribunal in
Bridas,”? such a defence is inapposite to the facts here. The Claimants reject the
proposition that the terms of the JVA and the Concession are “one-sided”, pointing in
particular to the obligations and contributions contemplated in respect of Tramex in
Articles 5 and 9 of the JVA, e.g. the obligation to contribute its expertise in various areas.
The Claimants again point to the similarities between the terms of the Bridas agreement,
which was held not to be unconscionable, and the JVA. Finally, the claimants contend
they did not acquire their Concession rights “for nothing”: in their view, they paid the

market price for the rights at the time.

The Claimants maintain that the Respondent’s non-performance claims are also without
merit. They identify the following works performed by Tramex:
(a) an initial design for the whole Gachiani-Supsa line, including development of the

Gachiani railway, development of a Supsa port facility and improvement of the
pipeline between Gachiani and Samgori;

(b) significant work at Supsa;

(c) installation of large-scale equipment and other significant work at Gachiani;
(d) overall development of the pipeline; and

(e) negotiations with strategic investors and oil producers.

The Claimants contend there is simply no factual basis for the Respondent’s non-
performance claim. In all events, the Claimants assert on the basis of International Court
of Justice jurisprudence, and in particular the Case Concerning the Temple of Preah
Vihear® and the North Sea Continental Shelf Case*!, that the Respondent is estopped
from now arguing the unenforceability of the JVA and the Concession. The Claimants

further explain this position in their Post-Hearing Brief [at para. 15]:

?° ICC Arbitration Case No. 9058/FMS/KGA, Partial Award (25 June 1999) at pp. 22-23 (“Bridas”).

*° (Cambodia v. Thailand), Judgment of 15 June 1962: ICJ Reports 1962, p. 6.

5 (Federal Republic of Germany v. The Netherlands & Denmark), Judgment of 28 February 1969: ICJ Reports
1969, p. 3.

- 102 -

314.

315.

316.

317.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

“As explained previously, no Georgian witness involved in the GTI project has
testified in support of Georgia’s non-performance claim. Instead, Georgia relies
solely on (i) the evidence of Mr Gigolashvili, who acknowledged that he was not
involved in the GTI team and had no keys to the GTI site office, and (ii) a
hearsay remark from an English barrister who had been briefed on obviously
incomplete facts for an urgent injunction application against AIOC (hardly
“evidence”). The direct evidence tells the opposite story. It is common ground
that GTI’s physical works halted in 1994, but that does not mean that no work
continued to be done for the joint venture. The barrister’s comment in a
preliminary note has no evidentiary weight and, moreover, after further meetings
with Mr Fuchs and familiarising themselves with the case in more detail, the
barrister went on to draft the papers for an injunction application which
proceeded on the basis that GTI’s rights were extant. If counsel actually believed
that a risk of termination existed after hearing a fuller account of the facts, then
they would have been required to address this as part of the English law duty of
full and frank disclosure that governs an ex parte injunction application, as
stated in the preliminary note. Neither piece of “evidence” from Georgia
therefore carries any weight at all.”

[Footnotes omitted.]

In addition to the foregoing, the Claimants contend that Georgia “repeatedly and
expressly” affirmed GTI’s rights before and after the events on which the Respondent’s
contractual defences are based, relying for this proposition on a lengthy list of
correspondence and witness testimony adduced in these proceedings [Cl. Post-Hearing

Br. at para. 16].

Finally, the Claimants assert that they relied, to their detriment, on the Respondent’s
assurances that their rights would be vindicated through the compensation process by

refraining from seeking private law remedies.

As a result of the foregoing, the Claimants submit that GTI’s rights must be regarded as

valid and subsisting on the relevant valuation date.

c) The Tribunal’s Determination

In its Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal determined that Mr. Kardassopoulos
indirectly owned a 25% interest in GTI and that, irrespective of the validity of the JVA
and/or the Concession, the Georgian Government created a legitimate expectation that
this investment was made in accordance with Georgian law and that any breach would
trigger treaty protection [Decision on Jur., paras. 141, 191-192, 194]. As regards the

scope of GTI’s rights, the Tribunal made the following observation:

- 103 -

318.

319.

320.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

“152, A cursory comparison of the terms of Resolution No. 834, on the one
hand, and the rights and activities contemplated by the JVA, on the other hand,
demonstrates clearly that the scope of the latter far exceeds the terms of
Resolution No. 834. And while the Tribunal accepts that the JVA cannot be in
“breach” of Resolution No. 123G which was enacted four days earlier, it is a
fact that GTI’s scope of work under the JVA is far broader than that authorized
under Resolution No. 123G.”

The Respondent has contested not only the scope of the rights allegedly held by GTI, but
their very existence on the basis of contractual defences which seek to impugn the
validity of the rights granted under the JVA and the Concession. However, the Tribunal
does not understand the Respondent to be arguing in this phase that GTI/Tramex never
had any oil and gas rights in Georgia; but rather, that the rights granted under the terms of
the JVA and the Deed of Concession were limited to rights in the Gachiani-Supsa
pipeline, and that those rights were rendered unenforceable for several reasons outlined

above.

The Tribunal will first consider the question of precisely what rights GTI held under the
JVA and Deed of Concession. As noted in its Decision on Jurisdiction, the rights
described in the JVA are broader than the activities described in Resolutions 834 and
123G. The Claimants contend that the JVA and Deed of Concession granted them

present and future rights in the development of oil and gas pipelines in Georgia.

Central to the grant of rights to GTI was the right to export oil under SakNavtobi’s export
licence. The original terms of this licence were set out in Resolution No. 834, and
comprise a five-year renewable licence to export oil. Section 3.2 of the JVA provided
that GTI had the “sole, exclusive and uninterrupted use of the Export License” and that
GTI “shall deal for the Republic of Georgia in the acquisition, sale and export of Oil and
Gas”. Section 4.1B, which contains SakNavtobi’s declaration, further underscored the

importance and extent of this right :

“that it holds the Export License under which it has the sole exclusive and
irrevocable rights from the Republic of Georgia to acquire, import, export and
sell [crude oil] Oil [products] and Gas [and chemical products] in the Republic
of Georgia and abroad [which it bought, processed and transported and
discovered] that the said license will remain in force at least until [December]
1995, and that such license may be placed at the sole, uninterrupted and
irremovable use of the Joint Venture for the duration of the license.

- 104 -

321.

322.

323.

324.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

The Partners agree and understand that the continued validity of said license
beyond said period, and its continued sole uninterrupted and irrevocable use by
the Joint Venture on the same terms of conditions thereafter, is of material
importance for the continued operation of the Joint venture and its ability to
carry out the Projects as described hereinafter.

[The Georgian side accepts and agrees that the Export License will be extended
automatically by additional 5 years, inmediately at the time of the registration of
the Joint venture and will be renewed automatically every 5 years.]

The Georgian partner shall place all new, additional or extended export licenses
or permits received by it at the use of the Joint venture on the same terms and
conditions stipulated herein.”

[Handwritten amendments in brackets.]
Mr. Kardassopoulos explained the importance of this right for the Claimants, who were
quite unapologetically expert oil traders, not pipeline developers. He said [Tr. D3:140:8-
17):
“A. We were obligated, as far as I remember, to refurbish an existing pipeline,
to add some value to it, to make it capable of exporting early oil from Georgia,
and probably other countries within the area. Number two, we were, and this
was very important to us, we were given the sole and exclusive right to use the
export license to export oil through — from, through or for Georgia. This was a

very important issue, and I remember putting a special wording, we used a
special wording in the JVA.”

Turning to the alleged rights granted to GTI in respect of the development of present and
future oil and gas pipelines in Georgia, it is far from clear on a close reading of the JVA
and Deed of Concession that the parties intended a broad grant of rights to future oil and

gas pipelines in Georgia.

Beginning with the JVA, Section 1.12 defined “Oil and Gas Facilities” as “all the
existing pipelines” and “Oil and Gas Facilities included in the Projects”. The “Projects”
were further defined as those projects listed in Sections 3.4 and 3.5 of the JVA, which set
out a closed category of projects that GTI was to undertake, including reconstruction of

the Gachiani-Supsa Pipeline.

Whilst the Claimants emphasize the handwritten amendment to Section 3.3, which
qualified “Oil and Gas Facilities” as those “currently under the control of the Georgian
partner and future ones”, there is a troubling vagueness to this expression which is
underscored by the reliance placed upon it by the Claimants to expand the grant of

- 105 -

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

exclusive rights in the early oil pipeline to include rights in all future oil and gas pipelines

in the State of Georgia.”

325. Dr. Tevzadze, the author of the handwritten amendments to Section 3.3, testified in his
written evidence that such a broad grant of rights was not the Georgian partner’s intention

[Tevzadze II, para. 8]:

“Tt was certainly not my intention to grant to GTI rights to all future oil and has
facilities in Georgia. I could not have granted such rights because Saknavtobi
would not necessarily have control of any new pipeline or facility constructed in
Georgia in the future — this could only be decided by the Georgian Government.
Had I known that Tramex sought such broad rights to Georgia’s future oil and
has facilities, I would not have executed the JVA, as this was not the agreement
that I reached with Tramex, and I was not empowered to grant such rights to
future facilities. I do not understand how the Claimants can interpret the JVA or
Concession in this way. They always knew and understood quite well that we
granted GTI the rights only over the projects specifically referred to in the JVA
and that they would only have rights over facilities included in those projects if
they were carried out with the Claimants’ funding and investment.”

326. The Claimants criticize Dr. Tevzadze’s recollection in respect of his intentions during the
negotiation of the JVA [Cl. Post-Hearing Br., p. 23]. Dr. Tevzadze’s evidence on this
point was somewhat muddled due to difficulties posed by the translation of his testimony,

as is apparent from the following exchange on cross-examination [Tr. D8:15-17]:

“Q. Certainly, and I apologise for any confusion. We have looked at the cabinet
resolution of March 1992 and my question is: at around the same time as that
resolution was being drafted, you told Mr. Fuchs that if other future pipeline
projects were to be commenced, that further cabinet resolutions would be
obtained to authorise those future projects; that’s true, isn’t it?

MR. SVANIDZE: He still doesn’t understand the question.

MR. KBILASHVILI: If I could paraphrase the question? I understand the sense
of the question in English but the translation in Georgian is a bit confusing.
Shall I make a translation in Georgian to understand our witness? That’s my
question.

MR. NELSON: With the leave of the president, and as long as the other lawyer
in the room can hear the question and as long as you speak loudly enough for the
translators to hear the question.

* The Claimants rely on Mr. Kardassopoulos’ understanding of GTI’s rights to extend to future pipelines [Tr.
D4:39:23-25] and the “natural meaning” of the terms “and future ones” [Cl. Post-Hearing Br. at para. 47]. For the
reasons expressed herein, the Tribunal cannot accept this interpretation.

- 106 -

327.

328.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

THE CHAIRMAN: Agreed. (Question interpreted.)

A. Me and Mr. Fuchs were talking about a lot of issues, so I don’t remember
exactly. Maybe I told that to him, maybe I did not.

MR. NELSON: Is it likely that you did?

A. If Mr. Fuchs said that the other projects should take part in this, I think the
Minister would not refuse that at that time — Council of Ministers would not
refuse that at that time. I don’t remember exactly, because there were a lot of
projects that were being approved by this resolution, so at that time, it is hard to
remember specifically.

MS. SALOMON: He said, ‘I don’t think I said it’.

A. There were a lot of projects that were being approved by this resolution and I
don’t that at that period Mr. Fuchs had any other desires.

THE CHAIRMAN: Ms. Knox?

A. But if there was, the Cabinet of Ministers would not say no to that, in that
period, in that timeframe.

MS. KNOX: We understand that there was a correction to what was translated
earlier, where Mr. Tevzadze said there were a number of projects in this
resolution, he was explaining that because there were a number of projects, he
doesn’t think that there was a discussion about more projects, rather than he
doesn’t remember there being a discussion of more projects.

INTERPRETER MS. MOORE: Should 1 ask that to the witness?
THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, go ahead.
A. I don’t remember, and in particular, I don’t think so.”

Nevertheless, it is far from evident to the Tribunal that Dr. Tevzadze intended to commit

or indeed committed rights in all future oil and gas pipelines in Georgia to Tramex/GTI.

Section 3.6 of the JVA suggests that, at most, the Claimants had a qualified right of first
refusal to participate in or implement other oil and gas related projects, such as future oil
and gas pipelines:

“3.6 The Joint Venture shall have the sole and exclusive right of first refusal

in the Republic of Georgia to participate or implement any other Oil and Gas

related projects in the Republic of Georgia. If no agreement can be reached then

the Government will issue a tender.”

[Emphasis added.]

- 107 -

329.

330.

331.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

The fact that the Government of Georgia retained the right to issue a tender in the event
the parties to the JVA did not reach an agreement in respect of the GTI’s participation in
or implementation of other oil and gas related projects strongly suggests that the rights
granted under the JVA were limited to the exclusive right to maintain, operate and use
existing oil and gas pipelines in Georgia, i.e., “early oil” rights. In other words, Section

3.6 applied to those oil and gas rights not otherwise granted under the JVA.

The oral testimony of Mr. Kardassopoulos confirms this interpretation of Section 3.6 and
its implications in respect of the extent of the rights granted under the JVA [Tr. D4:31:22
— 33:2):

“PROFESSOR LOWE: How did you understand the procedure envisaged by
paragraph 3.6 as operating in relation to any future projects? What would
happen -- someone would come up with the idea for a completely new pipeline,
for example, and what would happen then?

A. Who that someone would be? Because the JVA was the one who was
operating, the JVA was responsible for these energy facilities in Georgia. The
JVA would put, as is described in various procedural matters, would put ideas to
the government, and the government would have to agree or issue a decree to
confirm specific projects.

I suppose if somebody came from abroad, or we represented, as we say in
paragraph 3.7, the Government of Georgia in discussions with third parties, with
foreign persons, and such a project would come. Maybe, I am not a legal --
maybe we would have had to present to the government, let's say, this proposal,
and then we would have had the right to say we would like to continue this
project or not.

Q. When it refers in 3.6 to the possibility of there being no agreement reached
with the government, and the government then being obliged to issue a tender,
that presumably means no agreement on the commercial terms.

A. No agreement on the commercial terms, yes.
Q. So what you had in relation to these other projects was the right to propose a
project, the right to propose the terms, but no necessary right to implement it

unless the government agreed on the commercial terms, is that correct?

A. If in practice they didn't want us to implement the project, and they put
hurdles, yes.”

Turning to the Deed of Concession, the picture is even less clear. This instrument,
coming later in time than the JVA and as a direct grant of rights by the State, is

unquestionably the more important document for the purpose of resolving the scope of

- 108 -

332.

333.

334.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

rights held by the Claimants through GTI. This is confirmed in Article 27 of the Deed,
which provided that the Deed superseded all prior agreements, arrangements or
understandings with respect to the subject matter thereof. Yet, it suffers from the same

problems of vagueness as the JVA.

Article 2 described the rights conveyed under the Concession by reference to the
definition of “Pipelines”, which in turn was defined to mean, inter alia, “the existing
main pipelines systems” in Georgia and “any extensions or new Petroleum pipelines
added in the future”. Petroleum, under the terms of the Concession, includes both oil and

gas.

However, the reference to “new pipelines added in the future” does not appear
consistently throughout the Deed. The consideration for the Concession, set forth in
Article 6, is consistent with the ordinary maintenance of existing pipelines and
extensions. Indeed, this Article refers exclusively to “extensions” to existing pipelines,
not new pipelines:
“6.1. In consideration for the grant of the concession, GTI agrees to bear on its
account and for its own responsibility during the Concession Period all the
expenses and investments involved in carrying out the ordinary and reasonable

maintenance of the Pipelines and based upon the existing method of Petroleum
transport cost calculations and in effecting any imy or @. to

the Pipelines it may deem necessary.
[J

6.2 Having regard to the on-going nature of the expenses and investments to be
made by GTI in the Pipelines throughout the Concession Period, the Concession

fee shall accrue throughout the Concession Period and shall be deemed to be

paid throughout the entire Concession Period in consideration for the expenses

and investments of GTI.”
[Emphasis added.]
Additionally, among the commitments undertaken by GTI, Article 7 provided for a
minimum investment of US$1 million — an obligation Transneft acknowledged to have
already been made by GTI. In other words, no new additional investment was required

on GTI’s part to obtain the purported exclusive rights in future oil and gas pipelines.

- 109 -

335.

336.

337.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Article 10 similarly contemplated “improvements, additions, and extensions” to the
pipelines, but does not address the construction or maintenance of “new” pipelines in the
future. Rather, the plain language of this Article suggests that “Pipelines” are those

pipelines already in existence at the time the concession was granted.

Article 17 again fails to make any provision for the licensing or subletting of new
pipelines in the future, but rather provided generically for the licensing and subletting of

“the Pipelines or any segment thereof and any additions or extensions thereto”.

Finally, Article 18 provided for the return of possession and use of the Pipelines to
Transneft upon termination of the Concession. However, there is no reference to new
pipelines in the future, but rather the same iteration of “improvements, additions or
extensions” as present throughout the Deed. Indeed, Section 18.3, which contemplated
the purchase by Transneft of any investments, improvements, additions or extensions to
the Pipelines from GTI, provides for a minimum purchase price reflective of the cost of
installing, managing, and maintaining those investments, improvements, additions or

extensions and not the value of entirely new Pipelines:

 

“18.2. Upon the ination of the Ce ion Period, any inves S,
improvements, additions or extensions made to the Pipelines by GTI shall
remain the sole property of GTI and additionally GTI shall have a property
interest in the Pipelines equal to any outstanding loans of GTI to Transneft as
the date of termination of the Concession Period (and for the purposes of this
Deed of Concession such property interest shall also be deemed an investment,
improvement, addition or extension to the Pipelines).

Without derogating from the generality of the foregoing, upon the termination of
the Concession Period, Transneft shall continue to allow GTI the uninterrupted
use of any investments, improvements, additions or extensions to the Pipelines
made by GTI and accordingly shall maintain the connection to the Pipelines of
any such improvements, additions or extensions and shall continue the transport
of Petroleum and Gas through such improvements, additions and extensions.

18.3. Upon the termination of the Concession Transneft shall notify GTI if it
wishes to purchase the investments, improvements, additions or extensions to the

Pipelines from GTI. If Transneft wishes to purchase the investments,

 

 

 

improvements, additions or ions to the Pipelines, it shall pay GTI a price
to be agreed upon between the Parties but in any event not less than the sum of
(i)_the_cost_of GTI installing, ing and intaining the inv 5,
improvements, additi or ©. ions plus the LIBOR rate for U.S. Dollars

 

accrued annually + 2.5% per annum calculated on the basis of costs and
expenses of GTI in each respective year.”

- 110-

338.

339.

340.

341.

342.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

[Emphasis added.]

These provisions in the Deed reflect the proper scale of the agreement between GTI and
its Georgian partners. Indeed, it is almost unimaginable that the Government of Georgia
sought through its State organs to commit its entire energy sector to the hands of the
Claimants in exchange for a relatively modest commitment of resources. The evidence

adduced in these arbitrations suggests the contrary.

Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the effect of the various instruments purporting to
vest rights in GTI is to convey the exclusive rights to possess, use and operate the early
oil pipeline and related facilities to GTI, including associated export rights, and to give a
right to make proposals regarding future projects, but not to grant any immediate rights in
future oil and gas pipelines in Georgia. This bundle of rights was, nevertheless, far from

insignificant.

Turning to the question of validity, the Tribunal is not persuaded by the Respondent’s
argument that these rights were invalid as of the date on which they were allegedly taken
by the State or that the Claimants’ rights are limited to recovery of Tramex’s proven
expenses. The Tribunal cannot help but observe that the contractual defences raised by
the Respondent, i.e. unconscionability, misrepresentation and lack of performance,
appear to be raised for the first time in these arbitration proceedings and are, in the

Tribunal’s opinion, unsupported by the oral and written evidence.

While it may have been unconscionable for the Claimants to have received a grant of

exclusive rights to all of Georgia’s future oil and gas pipelines in exchange for the

 

relatively modest financial commitment from the Claimants provided for in the Deed of
Concession, this argument is moot in view of the Tribunal’s interpretation of this

instrument and is certainly not the case in regard to the rights to the early oil pipeline.

The Tribunal finds no evidence to suggest that Georgia was disadvantaged in the
negotiation of the JVA. The text reflects that the terms of the JVA were not unilaterally
imposed on the Respondent; quite the contrary, they were negotiated and agreed by
capable, well-represented parties on both sides of the bargaining table. Dr. Tevzadze,

who negotiated the JVA on behalf of SakNavtobi, confirmed on cross-examination

-lil-

343.

344.

345.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

during the merits Hearing that he had reviewed a Georgian translation of the draft JVA
prior to the final negotiating session with Mr. Fuchs; had discussed the draft with
colleagues within the Georgian government; and had negotiated the final text over the
course of several days with the assistance of an English speaking lawyer within the
Georgian government [Tr. D8:7-8]. The evidence, including the final text of the JVA,
suggests that both contracting parties acted in their own best interests, neither being under
undue pressure or influence to agree the terms of the JVA. This first contractual defence

is therefore rejected.

The Respondent’s misrepresentation defence is similarly misplaced. The evidence
indicates that the Claimants represented their experience and financial resources
accurately; they do not appear, at any point, to have represented themselves as anything
other than experienced oil traders with substantial financial means at their disposal. This
is consistent with the declarations and representations made by Tramex** in Section 4.2
of the JVA. Tramex represented that it had the “financial capability and resources to
fulfill its investment undertakings’ (IVA, Section 4.2A). The record supports the
conclusion that the Claimants had significant financial resources available to them and
believed that these resources were adequate to enable them to fulfil their investment

undertakings [Tr. D4:71:3-25, 72:21-24].

Tramex also represented that it has experience, expertise and Know-How in “world Oil
and Gas markets, export of Oil and Gas and pricing and profit-maximization on world
markets” (JVA, Section 4.2B). The Tribunal understands this to refer to the Claimants
oil trading experience, which is not challenged in these proceedings. Finally, the further
representations in Section 4.2 invoke Tramex’s knowledge of various related aspects of
the oil and gas industry — “Western methods’, shipping and banking — all of which appear

to have been within the Claimants’ competence.

The Georgian Government officials with whom the Claimants dealt also appear to have
understood them to be successful oil traders, and not pipeline experts. This was

confirmed by Dr. Tevzadze during the merits Hearing [Tr. D8:17:10-24]:

r. Tevzadze testified that he understood Tramex was owned by the Claimants [Tr. D8:17:10-13].

-112-

346.

347.

348.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

“MR NELSON: At the time that you signed the joint venture agreement, you
knew that Tramex was owned by Mr Fuchs and Mr Kardassopoulos, didn't you?

A. Yes, of course.
Q. And you knew that they were both successful oil traders, didn't you?
A. Yes.

Q. And you believed that they would make sure that the Gachiani-Batumi
pipeline was refurbished, didn't you?

A. Yes.

Q. You also believed that once the Gachiani-Batumi pipeline was restored to
operations, that Mr Fuchs' and Mr Kardassopoulos' trading expertise would
earn a lot of revenue for Georgia, didn't you?

A. Yes.”

Accordingly, the Tribunal also rejects the second contractual defence.

The Respondent’s last contractual defence, lack of performance, is also quickly disposed
of on the facts. While it does appear that progress on the GTI project was impeded and
slowed at various points, the evidence suggests that works were conducted, as far as local
conditions would permit, up to the point in time when GTI’s rights were threatened by
actors within the Georgian Government who asserted the invalidity of those rights, and
there is no evidence to the contrary. Accordingly, this last contractual defence too is

rejected.

As regards the Respondent’s contention that any recovery in this case should be limited
to Tramex’s proven expenses, the Tribunal notes that during the Hearing on the merits,
one of the Respondent’s witnesses testified that the Claimants should be compensated for
the value of their rights if the rights were validly granted and were later taken by the State
[Cook testimony, Tr. D9:63:19 — 65:2]:

“Q. Well, because finally, this is in connection with prior discussions, our
Chairman has asked two key witnesses whether they thought that in the end of
the whole business, GTI or Tramex in particular should have been compensated
in some way. He asked that specifically of Mr Chanturia, who was so heavily
involved, more on the political side, and Professor Tevzadze, who was of course
on the more technical side. And the reply of both was yes, they should have been
compensated. Well, irrespective again of the amount of compensation or the
right to be compensated, that assumes there are rights.

- 113 -

349.

350.

351.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

You wouldn't compensate if there is nothing. Would you say that is right?

A. Well, my understanding is that the issue revolved around the nub that
Georgian Oil had granted clearly through the agreements, or as they were
related to us, because as I said we never saw the agreements, had granted
certain rights to GTI which were in conflict with those granted to AIOC. The
issue revolved around whether they were in a position, at least in my
understanding, the position revolved around whether they were in a position to
grant those rights.

Now I'm not a lawyer, and therefore, from a legal perspective, whether it is
appropriate to grant compensation for rights which are not validly granted is -- I
don't have a view as to what the law says about that.

PROFESSOR ORREGO VICUNA: Okay, thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: But assuming that the rights were validly granted, assuming,
for purposes of the follow-up question.

A. So if the rights were validly granted and then were later taken away from
them, then logically it is reasonable they should be compensated for it.”

In summary, the Tribunal is satisfied on the basis of the totality of the evidence that the
Claimants held rights in the early oil pipeline facilities in Georgia, including export
rights, and that these rights were not vitiated by virtue of any of the contractual defences
raised by the Respondent. The Tribunal shall next turn to consideration of whether
GTI’s rights were in fact taken by the Government of Georgia in breach of its treaty

obligations to Mr. Kardassopoulos.

3. Was Mr. Kardassopoulos’ Investment in GTI Expropriated?
In view of the Tribunal’s finding on jurisdiction under the Georgia / Greece BIT (see
paragraph 241 above), only Mr. Kardassopoulos’ claim arising from expropriation under

the ECT shall be considered here.

a) The Claimant’s Position
Mr. Kardassopoulos submits that his investments were unlawfully taken through Decree
No. 178, which extinguished the exclusive rights that GTI held in the Samgori-Batumi
pipeline and related facilities, and Order No. 33a, which extinguished GTI’s rights over

future pipelines, and that he has not been compensated for that taking.

-114-

352.

353.

354.

355.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

As a threshold position, Mr. Kardassopoulos submits that all of the conditions set out in
Article 13(1) of the ECT must be satisfied in order for an expropriation to be lawful
under the ECT. In this case, Mr. Kardassopoulos avers that the expropriation of his rights
satisfied none of these conditions. He also contends that Georgia’s breach of the
stabilization clauses in the JVA and Deed of Concession in itself renders the

expropriation unlawful.

As regards the public interest criterion applicable to expropriations under Article 13 of
the ECT, Mr. Kardassopoulos concedes that a State’s decision concerning the public
interest is entitled to a large measure of deference. However, Mr. Kardassopoulos
submits that “it is open to question whether or not the Respondent's decision to switch to
the GIOC business model (i.e. outsourcing all the construction, maintenance and
operation of the pipeline in return for collecting a greatly reduced transit fee) was in

Georgia’s interest.” [Supp. Mem. at para. 266].

Mr. Kardassopoulos rejects Georgia’s contention that “the development of the Georgian
oil and gas industry and a fully-functioning pipeline system were in the public interest’,
asserting that this effectively mis-states the public interest test. In any event, Mr.
Kardassopoulos contends that Mr. Chanturia’s role in the process taints the undertaking
and renders it unlawful as, having formed part of the ad hoc commission established in
January 1996 to examine existing agreements relating to Georgia’s pipelines, Mr.
Chanturia in particular stood to gain following the passage of Decree No 178 a month

later which transferred GTI’s rights in Early Oil pipeline to GIOC.

Mr. Kardassopoulos notes that commentary to Article 3 of the OECD Draft Convention
on the Protection of Foreign Property (1967) considers “a seizure undertaken ostensibly
for public purposes but, in fact, to be used by persons connected therewith solely for
private gain is unlawful and gives rise to a claim for damages.” Moreover, in Kenneth
Vandevelde’s treatise on U.S. investment treaties, he observes that the public purpose test
“prohibit[s] expropriations that merely transfer property from one private party to

1734

another or which are carried out as a political reprisa Thus, in Mr. Kardassopoulos’

* Kenneth Vandevelde, United States Investment Treaties: Policy and Practice (Kluwer Law and Taxation, 1992) at

p. 121.

- HIS -

356.

357.

358.

359.

360.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

submission, this purely political agenda (orchestrated under questionable circumstances

by Mr. Chanturia) renders the expropriation unlawful.

During the Hearing, the Claimants reiterated their submission that the evidence shows the
expropriation “was tainted by politics and factional interest’, as GTI’s rights were
essentially taken away and given to Mr. Chanturia, and could not therefore have been in

the public interest [Tr. D12:33-34].

Mr. Kardassopoulos contends that the expropriation was also discriminatory because
Georgia simply took the rights that had been granted to GTI and granted them to GIOC, a
wholly-owned state entity. GIOC, in turn, licensed those rights to AIOC and, in the
process, reaped 100% of the transit revenues that would have accrued to GTI. According
to Mr. Kardassopoulos, if GTI had licensed those rights, the Georgian partner would have

received only 50% of the revenues.

In their closing argument, the Claimants invited the Tribunal to draw an inference as to
Georgia’s discriminatory intent for the purpose of the expropriation claims: “the only
people who end up out of pocket were foreigners, so there can be an inference that

foreigners were target[ed] in a discriminatory way” [Tr. D12:34].

Notwithstanding Mr. Kardassopoulos’ position that the Respondent breached the above
two criteria, he submits that, at a minimum, the expropriation in any event lacked due
process. Mr. Kardassopoulos again relies on commentary to the OECD Draft Convention
on the Protection of Foreign Property for the proposition that the due process required by

Article 13(1) of the ECT corresponds to a minimal standard of international due process.

According to Mr. Kardassopoulos, beginning in mid-1995 Georgia began to negotiate
with AIOC in respect of rights held at that time by GTI. He was offered neither an
opportunity to participate in the process by which his rights were granted to third parties,
nor a forum in which to contest the ultimate re-granting of those rights. Mr.
Kardassopoulos contends that during this period, Georgia failed to give clear answers
about the status of GTI’s rights and assured him that GTI would continue to be involved
in the oil and gas industry in Georgia. Georgia did not cancel the JVA or Deed of

Concession — or, at least did not advise the Claimants of having done so.

- 116-

361.

362.

363.

364.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

The Claimants highlight the confidential report prepared by Mr. Ninidze, then Minister of
Justice, in March 1995 which concluded that the JVA and the Deed of Concession were
defective under Georgian law [Hearing Bundle, Tab 98], averring that “/p]Jrocedural due
process required Georgia to share its ‘conclusions’ with the affected investors and invite
their views. Substantive due process required Georgia to analyse the JVA and Deed of
Concession by reference to the body of law which Georgia agreed to apply when it
entered into the two contracts (which was international law, not Georgian law). Georgia
did neither. Instead, Mr. Ninidze described the investor’s lack of awareness of the

process as ‘their problem’.” [Cl. Post-Hearing Br. at para. 74]

The Claimants summarized their position on due process at the Hearing in closing

argument [Tr. D12:34-35]:

“MR NELSON: Let me just talk about due process. The best authorities on due
process which we've cited in our memorials indicate that due process must
involve judicial process, and a chance to answer the expropriating authority,
and to argue one's case. We had the opposite of that. ... We had assurances
from SakNavtobi and Patsatsia, from the government. People who spoke to us to
our face [and] said, "You're still our partners". Then we heard rumours about
other government departments. There was never a clear indication of why GIOC
seemed to be emerging, there was never any indication. Mr Chanturia was
opaque on a number of issues in his testimony, and I unfortunately have to deal
with them in a moment.

The messages fed to the claimants from certain parts of the Georgian
government were completely contradicted by the secret actions taken by other
parts of the government. This is the antithesis of transparency and due process.”

As regards the compensation criterion, Mr. Kardassopoulos takes the position that
Georgia’s failure to pay any compensation, much less “prompt, adequate and effective
compensation”, necessarily renders the expropriation unlawful under Article 13 of the
ECT. During the Hearing the Tribunal pressed the Claimants for further explanation of
their position [Tr. D1:99:4 to 103:1]. The Claimants insist that one of the requirements

of a lawful expropriation is payment, which did not occur here.

Finally, and apart from the criteria identified in Article 13(1) of the ECT for a lawful
expropriation, Mr. Kardassopoulos contends that the breach of the stabilization clauses
contained in the JVA (Article 12) and the Deed of Concession (Article 21) itself renders

the expropriation unlawful. According to Mr. Kardassopoulos, this follows ‘from the

-H7-

365.

366.

367.

368.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

basic underlying principle that contractual commitments freely entered into by host
States should be given legal effect. If no consequences flow under international law from
the violation of such clauses, they are meaningless. Host States will be encouraged to
attract investment by inserting such clauses in every investment contract safe in the

knowledge that no additional consequences flow from them.” [Supp. Mem. at para. 271].

b) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent’s principal defence is that there was no expropriation because the
Claimants had no expropriable rights and, in the alternative, that any expropriation was
lawful. In respect of this first position, the Respondent claims that prior to the passage of
Decree No. 178, Georgia had analyzed the existence of any exclusive rights to the
Gachiani-Supsa Pipeline under the JVA and the Concession and concluded that no valid
rights existed. In a report to President Shevardnadze dated 25 April 1995, the Minister of
Justice concluded that the JVA and the Concession were invalid because, inter alia, the
JVA exceeded the scope of Cabinet Resolution 123g and the Concession was void for
lack of authority and had been granted to GTI through “gross violations of law.”

[Counter-Memorial at paras. 314-318]

The Respondent further submits that Decree No. 178 “erased any prospect of generating
value for Mr. Kardassopoulos’ shareholding in GTI through the proposed Brown & Root
share purchase agreement” and that it was highly unlikely any agreement would have
been forthcoming between GTI and Brown & Root due to the conflict of interest such a

deal would have posed for Brown & Root and AIOC.

Arguing in the alternative, the Respondent next contends that should the Tribunal
determine that Georgia expropriated any investments protected by the Georgia / Greece
BIT or the ECT, such expropriation was lawful under customary international law. The
Respondent acknowledges that a lawful expropriation requires that the expropriation (a)
be for a purpose which is in the public interest; (b) not be discriminatory; (c) be carried

out under the due process of law; and (d) be accompanied by appropriate compensation.

By contrast to the Claimants, however, the Respondent adopts the threshold position that

an expropriation is provisionally lawful so long as it meets the first three criteria of the

- 118 -

369.

370.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

treaty expropriation provision. This argument was succinctly made by the Respondent in

closing argument [Tr. D12:158]:

“Now we would argue that in order for an expropriation to be [...] lawful, or as
some commentators have coined it, provisionally lawful, in the context of
determining the appropriate measure of damages, it is only of concern for the
first three factors, and not a question of whether payment of compensation was
actually made. If that were the case, then there would never be a BIT case
brought in which there was a claim for lawful expropriation. Furthermore
applying the Amoco v Iran test, you don't look at the fourth factor.”

Turning to the criteria for a lawful expropriation, the Respondent argues that there is no
precise definition of “public purpose” for the purpose of the lawful expropriation test
under customary international law. Relying on Antoine Goetz v. République du
Burundi* concerning the discretion afforded to governments to act in the national
interest Georgia submits that in “the absence of a legal or factual error, or a manifest
error in the evaluation for an abuse of power, the Tribunal may not substitute its own
judgment for the discretionary evaluation made by [the Government] of ‘considerations

of public interest ... or national interest.’” [Am. Rejoinder at para. 270].

The Respondent points to the Expert Report of Igor Effimoff, the Witness Statements of
Messrs. Chanturia, Khetaguri and Adams, and its Supplemental Memorial (which
recognized at paragraph 27 that the Gachiani-Supsa Pipeline was of “great national
importance”) for the proposition that the development of Georgia’s oil pipeline
infrastructure was of crucial national importance and key to the country’s economic
development and political stability. Mr. Effimoff’s first report encapsulates this position

as follows [Effimoff I, paras. 59-60]:

“On the other hand, there was a competing concern on the part of neighboring
countries, namely Turkey and Georgia, and the U.S regarding Russia’s
hegemony over energy in the Caspian Sea region. Moscow had used its
monopoly as political leverage against its smaller neighbors, at times stopping
imports. To countries like Turkey and Georgia, and also to the U.S., a multiple
pipeline solution that promoted diversified energy resources and providers
offered the key to dimishing Russia’s power. For example, as an energy corridor,
Georgia would be able to get part of its energy from countries other than Russia
and therefore hopefully could decrease its energy dependency.

35 ICSID Case No. ARB/95/3, Award (10 February 1999), at para. 120 (“Antoine Goetz”).

- 119-

371.

372.

373.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

At the same time, [Turkey and Georgia] hoped to achieve economic
independence by reaping the direct economic benefits of maintaining the
pipeline. President Shevardnadze realized that for Georgia to become a viable
independent state, Georgia had to develop its economy, align itself closer to the
West and in general shed its “Sovietness” ... the Georgian government viewed
the pipeline as the vehicle to make Georgia attractive to the West ... The Western
reliance on oil from the Caspian would encourage the West to be Georgia’s
“protector” because the West would have a vested interest in ensuring there
were no disruptions to the pipeline’s operations.”

The Respondent submits that it was in the public interest for GIOC to enter into
arrangements with a business that possessed the unquestionable ability to develop the
country’s oil infrastructure and, correspondingly, not in the public interest for the
construction and operation of the pipeline to remain in GTI’s hands, citing four principal

reasons [Counter-Memorial at para. 358]:

“(1) the JVA and the Concession were void and unenforceable. Accordingly,
Tramex and GTI had no right to construct and operate the pipeline or to claim
the revenues arising therefrom;

(2.) by 1996, Tramex and GTI had failed to make any material progress in
developing and operating the Gachiani-Supsa Pipeline. Accordingly, it was not
in Georgia’s interest further to entrust the development of these facilities to
Tramex and GTI;

(3) Tramex and GTI did not have the necessary expertise or financial
capability to develop the Gachiani-Supsa Pipeline and accordingly Tramex and
GTI would have been unable to implement the project; and

(4) Tramex and GTI did not have a feasible business plan, any throughput
commitments from end users and, accordingly, Tramex and GTI would have
been unable to finance the project.”

Thus, the Respondent reasons President Shevardnadze had no choice, acting in Georgia’s
public interest, but to grant the rights to re-construct the Gachiani-Supsa Pipeline to

AIOC.

The Respondent relies upon Amoco International Financial Corporation v. Tran” and
argues that a state’s decision to increase its share of revenues derived from exploitation of
a national natural resource is in the public interest, citing the following passage from that

award:

36 15 IRAN-U.S.C.T.R. 189 (1987) (“Amoco”).

- 120-

374.

375.

376.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

. in recent practice and mostly in the oil industry, States have admitted
expressly, in a certain number of cases, that they were nationalizing foreign
properties primarily in order to obtain a greater share, or even the totality, of
the revenues drawn from the exploitation of a national natural resource, which,
according to them, should accrue to the development of the country. Such a
purpose has not generally been denounced as unlawful and illegitimate.”*”

The Respondent also denies the Claimants’ allegations in respect of the existence of
political or factional interests in Georgia. During the Hearing, the Respondent submitted
in closing argument there is no evidence on the record that the expropriation of the
Claimants’ rights was motivated by politics (as opposed to the public interest), there is
only “innuendo” relating to the selection of Mr. Chanturia to head GIOC instead of Dr.

Tevzadze [Tr. D12:158-59].

The Respondent also contends that the alleged grant of GTI’s rights to GIOC was not
discriminatory, reasoning firstly that there was no discrimination on the basis of
nationality: Tramex and SakNavtobi were in “a similar material situation as the only
shareholders in GTI’ and both were “affected in equal terms by the alleged grant of
GTI’s alleged rights to GIOC” [Counter-Memorial at para. 367]. The Respondent relies
upon the award in Government of Kuwait v. AMINOIL* and the Case Concerning Oscar
Chinn®? in support of its view that an expropriatory law is not discriminatory simply
because it affects only one foreign enterprise. According to the Respondent, GTI and
GIOC were in fundamentally different positions and created for entirely distinct
purposes, and therefore they cannot be said to have been in a similar situation, which is

an important element of discrimination.

In response to Mr. Kardassopoulos’ allegation that the alleged expropriation was effected
in order to fulfill the political agenda of Mr. Chanturia and, as such, was discriminatory
in the same manner as was found in BP Exploration Company (Libya) Limited v.

Government of the Libyan Arab Republic”, the Respondent distinguishes the BP

°7 Ibid. at para. 145.

38 YCA 1984, Award (24 March 1982) (“AMINOIL”).

* PCH, Ser A./B., N. 63, 1934 (“Oscar Chinn”).

*° Award (Merits) (10 October 1973), 53 ILR 297 (1979) (“BP Exploration”).

-121-

377.

378.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Exploration case by noting there is no evidence of Tramex being singled out for its
Panamanian nationality. In its closing argument, the Respondent insisted that /t/here's
no evidence whatsoever that there was any intention on Georgia's part to discriminate
against Tramex or the claimants because of their foreign nationality, which we say is

determinative of this limb of lawful expropriation [...]” [Tr. D12:160].

During the Hearing the Tribunal solicited the Respondent’s view on the significance, for
the purposes of the discrimination criterion, of a situation in which, after both a private
and a State entity are expropriated, the State entity alone returns to participate in an

investment or business [Tr. D1:130-31]:

“PROFESSOR ORREGO VICUNA: Do you mind if I put to you a question
before you move over, in relation to the non-discriminatory nature of the alleged
expropriation, in this respect, that if a Georgian entity, as you mention in point
1, SakNavtobi, was also allegedly affected by this assignment of rights, what
would you comment on the question of whether that Georgian entity, either
directly or indirectly being a part of the Georgian state, got its way in the new
business that was being developed with AIOC or whoever else, in a hypothetical
example.

You would expropriate both sides of the equation, but one side might be left out
and the other one might be brought back in through some door, particularly if
you look at the larger idea of a state business entity of some sort. How would
you comment on that?

MS SALOMON: Well, in this case, SakNavtobi was not brought in. Mr

Tevzadze of SakNavtobi will talk about being upset, and so we don't have that

real situation, and we have SakNavtobi as a state-owned entity but different than

the government itself, and so we would submit that that entity itself, to the extent

it was ively imp d as the clair allege, is imy d in exactly the

same way as the claimants.”
In regard to due process, the Respondent submits that the Commentary to the OECD
Draft Convention on the Protection of Foreign Property, although not binding for the
interpretation of Article 13(1)(c) of the ECT, is of some assistance. The Commentary
provides that due process “implies that whenever a State seizes property, the measures
taken must be free from arbitrariness. Safeguards existing in its Constitution or other
laws or established by judicial precedent must be fully observed; administrative or

judicial machinery used or available must correspond at least to the minimum standard

required by international law.”

- 122-

379.

380.

381.

382.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

In this case, the Respondent avers there is no evidence of arbitrariness nor any evidence
that the relevant governmental orders breached any administrative requirement under
international law or otherwise. Nor, in the Respondent’s view, can there be any
allegation of a failure in the Respondent’s “judicial machinery’. The Respondent
concludes that, consistent with the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal’s reasoning in Amoco, the
government orders had a “legal basis” and therefore cannot properly be considered to be

in breach of due process.

The Respondent dismisses the “innuendo of shadowy activity” argument and reiterates its
view that any expropriation was carried out in accordance with due process [Tr. D12:160-
61):

“The fourth factor in terms of due process, again, we have no evidence, we just

have innuendo of shadowy activity, and somehow, because the claimants didn't

know every single thing that happened in government decision-making, in terms

of the pipelines, that somehow, there was a lack of due process. The suggestion

that a government cannot act behind closed doors in making certain decisions,

or that the Ministry of Justice could not provide advice to the government that

doesn't get distributed is not in any way a suggestion that due process wasn't

met. There's no evidence of arbitrariness, the acts about which they complain
concern governmental orders and decrees.”

The Respondent reiterates that there is no evidence to support Mr. Kardassopoulos’
allegation that there were political factions driven by AIOC within the Georgian
Government. In the Respondent’s submission, many of Mr. Kardassopoulos’ complaints

relate to AIOC’s conduct rather than Georgia’s.

As regards the compensation criterion, the Respondent also submits that while the
obligation to pay compensation is a settled criterion of a lawful expropriation in
customary international law, the amount that must be paid is “less well settled”.
According to the Respondent, the determination of appropriate compensation is subject to
equitable considerations and the particular circumstances of each case. In this case, the
Respondent contends that it created a governmental commission by Order No. 84 for the
purpose of examining the possible payment of compensation to Tramex. Tramex was
invited to produce all relevant documents in support of their claims to compensation.
However, the Respondent states that Tramex failed to produce documents evidencing its

expenditure.

- 123 -

383.

384.

385.

386.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

As Mr. Kardassopoulos failed to provide proper evidence of the value of his allegedly
expropriated investment, despite repeated requests from a government commission
specifically established to examine the payment of compensation, the Respondent
submits that Mr. Kardassopoulos has failed to establish that Georgia breached the
requirement for compensation to be paid. Thus, the absence of payment of compensation
in this case to date, bearing in mind these particular circumstances, does not render the
alleged expropriation unlawful. In this regard, the Respondent draws a parallel between
this case and Amoco, reasoning that in that case the tribunal found the alleged
expropriation was lawful even though Iran made no compensation payments. Because
the claimant had failed to produce documents to a commission “in support of their
demands,” the tribunal found Iran did not breach the treaty compensation provision

requiring “prompt payment of just compensation”.

Finally, the Respondent states that any breach of the JVA or the Concession by either
Saknavtobi or Transneft does not render the alleged expropriation unlawful. The
Respondent observes that there is no stipulation in the ECT that an expropriation in
breach of a contractual provision is ipso facto in breach of international law. Rather, in
its view, the stabilization clauses establish an agreed formula for the calculation of

damages.

Relying on Amoco, in which the tribunal stated that it would be “particularly
adventurous” to construe a contract to which the State is not a party as forbidding
nationalization, the Respondent argues that the tribunal in that case expressly found that
the State had not breached the stabilization clauses since these clauses “bind only the

parties to the ...Agreement, namely NPC and Amoco”.

c) The Tribunal’s Determination

The Tribunal considers it helpful to recall the terms of Article 13(1) of the ECT which
permits the expropriation of the investment of an investor of a Contracting Party where

that expropriation is carried out in accordance with certain conditions:

“Article 13 Expropriation

(1) Investments of Investors of a Contracting Party in the Area of any other
Contracting Party shall not be nationalized, expropriated or subject to a

-124-

387.

388.

389.

390.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

measure or measures having effect equivalent to nationalization or expropriation
(hereinafter referred to as “Expropriation” ) except where such Expropriation is:

(a) for a purpose which is in the public interest;

(b) not discriminatory;

(c) carried out under due process of law; and

(d) accompanied by the payment of prompt, adequate and effective
compensation.

[...]”

The Tribunal finds that the circumstances of Mr. Kardassopoulos’ claim present a classic
case of direct expropriation, Decree No. 178 having deprived GTI of its rights in the early
oil pipeline and Mr. Kardassopoulos’ interest therein. The Tribunal also finds that this

deprivation was not an exercise of the State’s bona fide police powers.

It is clear on the record, however, that an expropriation of GTI’s rights was planned in
advance of 20 February 1996, the date on which Decree No. 178 was adopted. Decree
No. 477, adopted on 11 November 1995, established GIOC, the entity to whom GTI’s
rights were eventually transferred, with essentially the same aims as GTI. In other words,
the groundwork for the expropriation of GTI’s rights was laid through the adoption of
Decree No. 477. While there may have been some discussion of GTI’s participation in
the new GIOC regime, the status of GTI’s rights in Georgia was clearly in serious
question by November 1995. This finding has particular significance for the Tribunal’s

consideration of the Parties’ submission on quantum, discussed in Part V.E. below.

Turning to the criteria for a lawful expropriation set forth in Article 13(1) of the ECT, it
is undisputed that the Georgian Government never compensated Mr. Kardassopoulos for
the taking of GTI’s rights, let alone met the standard of “prompt, adequate and effective
compensation” prescribed in Article 13(1). However, the Respondent, relying on the
reasoning of the U.S.-Iran Claims Tribunal in Amoco, claims that failure to satisfy this

criterion does not in itself render an expropriation unlawful.

It is unnecessary for the Tribunal to decide whether the Respondent’s argument is valid
since its conduct also fails to meet another criterion set out in Article 13(1) of the ECT,
namely the requirement that any expropriation be carried out in accordance with due

- 125 -

391.

392.

393.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

process of law. Such a failure, the Respondent concedes, would in any event render the

expropriation unlawful.

Beginning with the first criterion, the Tribunal finds that, on all the evidence, it is
arguable that the expropriation of Mr. Kardassopoulos’ rights was in the Georgian public
interest. As the Claimants acknowledge, the Respondent is entitled to a measure of
deference in this regard. The Tribunal heard both fact and expert industry witnesses who
asserted that the development of Georgia’s oil pipeline infrastructure was of crucial
national importance to the country’s political independence in the region and its
economic development. The Tribunal finds this evidence compelling in light of all the
circumstances prevailing in Georgia and the wider region during the relevant period. The
evidence of Mr. Effimoff, the Respondent’s industry expert, was particularly illuminating

in this regard.

The Tribunal is also of the view that while Mr. Chanturia’s role in the expropriation is a
matter of concern, it is not clear on the evidence that the so-called “factional interest”
which coalesced around Mr. Chanturia was the driving factor which led to the
expropriation of GTI’s rights, although it would seem that it may have shaped the manner
in which the expropriation and ensuing compensation discussions were carried out.
There was a broader context to the expropriation of GTI’s rights, namely the need to find
someone who could deliver a pipeline solution on a scale required to satisfy the
prevailing geopolitical and economic concerns of Georgia during the mid-1990s.
Considered in this light, Georgia’s decision to pursue an arrangement with AIOC, even at
the expense of the Claimants, may be understood as a decision taken in the public
interest, even though, as shall be seen below, the manner in which it was carried out
cannot be reconciled with Georgia’s treaty obligations. Therefore, the Tribunal is
accordingly not convinced that the Respondent breached the “public interest”

requirement in the ECT’s expropriation provision.

With respect to the second criterion, while it does appear that the Georgian partner in the
joint venture, SakNavtobi, was restored in some measure to a role in the development of
Georgia’s oil and gas infrastructure following the taking of GTI’s rights, the Tribunal

does not find that the expropriation was carried out in a discriminatory manner. While it

- 126-

394.

395.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

may, in certain circumstances, be the case that a taking can be considered discriminatory
absent an intention to discriminate against an investor on the basis of nationality, the
Tribunal is not convinced that this is such a case. Although GTI’s rights were taken
away and handed to GIOC, to the detriment of both Tramex and SakNavtobi, GIOC
subsequently struck up a partnership with AIOC, another foreign entity. In other words,
this was not a case in which the Georgian government discriminated against Tramex or
Mr. Kardassopoulos qua foreign investor, but rather a case in which it determined that
there was a better deal to be had with a different foreign investor. The Tribunal is not
convinced that there has been a breach of the non-discrimination element of the ECT’s

expropriation provision.

This brings us to the third criterion concerning due process. The Tribunal observes, as a
starting point, that both Parties rely upon the definition of due process contained in the
OECD’s Draft Convention on the Protection of Foreign Property, which provides as

follows:

“In essence, the contents of the notion of due process of law make it akin to the
requirements of the “Rule of Law”, an Anglo-Saxon notion, or of “Rechtsstaat”,
as understood in continental law. Used in an international agreement, the
content of this notion is not exhausted by a reference to the national law of the
parties concerned. The “due process of law” of each of them must correspond to
the principles of international law.”

In their Post-Hearing Brief, the Claimants rely on a discussion of an identical
expropriation criterion contained in the BIT between Hungary and Cyprus by the ICSID

tribunal in ADC v. Hungary,"' which the Tribunal finds apposite to the present case:

“The Tribunal agrees with the Claimants that “due process of law”, in the
expropriation context, demands an actual and substantive legal procedure for a
foreign investor to raise its claims against the depriving actions already taken or
about to be taken against it. Some basic legal mechanisms, such as reasonable
advance notice, a fair hearing and an unbiased and impartial adjudi to
assess the actions in dispute, are expected to be readily available and accessible
to the investor to make such legal procedure i l._In general, the legal
procedure must be of a nature to grant an affected investor a reasonable chance
within a reasonable time to claim its legitimate rights and have its claims heard.
If no legal procedure of such nature exists at all, the argument that “the actions

+! ICSID Case No. ARB/03/16, Award (2 October 2006) (“ADC”).

- 127-

396.

397.

398.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

are taken under due process of law” rings hollow. And that is exactly what the
Tribunal finds in the present case.”””

[Emphasis added.]

The Tribunal agrees with the reasoning of the ADC tribunal and, in particular, with the
proposition that whatever the legal mechanism or procedure put in to place, it “must be of
a nature to grant an affected investor a reasonable chance within a reasonable time to
claim its legitimate rights and have its claims heard” if it is to be found to have been
carried out under due process of law. As in ADC, the Respondent in the present case
failed to ensure that there was a procedure or mechanism in place, either before the taking
or thereafter, which allowed Mr. Kardassopoulos, within a reasonable period of time, to

have his claims heard.

Rather, contrary to several elements which may be considered to form part of the due
process obligation, such as reasonable advance notice and a fair hearing, the
expropriation of Mr. Kardassopoulos’ rights was carried out in a manner that can at best
be described as opaque. This is best illustrated by the documentary and oral evidence,
discussed as part of the factual matrix above, which underscores the Georgian
Government’s role in the events that led to squeezing the Claimants out of the investment
picture once AIOC had entered the region. While the evidence indicates that AIOC had
some reservations about embracing the Claimants within their corporate structure or
ceding control to them on a long-term basis, the evidence is equally clear that if the
Georgian Government had confirmed the existence and validity of the Claimants’ rights
in the early oil pipeline, AIOC would have taken the Claimants’ presence seriously.
Although AIOC repeatedly sought clarification from Georgia of the Claimants’ status in

Georgia they were assured that no conflict existed.

The testimony of Mr. Ninidze, former Minister of Justice, evidences the Georgian
Government’s disregard for the Claimants’ rights once AIOC expressed its interest in
Georgia as part of the Caspian reserves export solution. When presented with a report
prepared by his Ministry in March 1995, which concluded that the Claimants’ rights

under the JVA and Deed of Concession were invalid, Mr. Ninidze testified that he was

® Thid. at para. 435.

- 128 -

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

unaware whether the report had ever been forwarded to the Claimants, but that it would
have been sent to them if they had simply asked for it. If the Claimants did not know that
the report existed, how could they ask for it, he was asked. Mr. Ninidze replied that was
simply “their problem” [Tr. D5:26-28]:

“Q. So I take it that at no time in March or April 1995 was this report to your

knowledge sent to Tramex, is that right?

A. No, I'm not saying that. I'm looking at the report which was signed by the
head of the department and was sent to the Cabinet of Ministers. I cannot speak
of anything else.

Q. You're not aware of it being sent to Tramex in March or April 1995 then, is
that right?

[J

INTERPRETER MS WILLSEA: The question Mr Svanidze was clarifying was:
do you actually know whether this report was sent to them or not? And the
answer was not.

MR SVANIDZE: The answer was I don't know.

A. This report was prepared by the ministry, it was addressed to the Cabinet of
Ministers, it was signed, it wasn't signed by the Minister of Justice, it was signed
by the head of the department.

THE CHAIRMAN: And he doesn't know whether it was sent to GTI or Tramex.
A. I don't know, as I have stated, but I would like to say that this document
would have been sent to GTI should they have asked and requested this

document from us.

MR NELSON: Would it have been sent to AIOC if AIOC asked and requested
for it?

A. According to the legislation, in-country legislation, if any subject is
requesting from the government an official document, we have to respond to that
request. If they don't request, we will not send it.

Q. But they have to know that it exists first, isn't that true?

A. That's their problem.

Q. Well, it's also an opportunity, isn't it, if you do know that it exists, it's helpful,
because then you can ask for it, right?

A. I do not argue with that, yes.”

- 129-

399.

400.

401.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

However, Nabarro Nathanson, the law firm advising AIOC on the status of the
Claimants’ rights in Georgia, received a copy of this report shortly after it was completed
[Tr. D5:28; Hearing Bundle, Tab 105]. Nabarro Nathanson in their report to AIOC in
April 1995, less than a month after receiving the Ministry of Justice report, concluded
tentatively that the Claimants’ rights were invalid. The Tribunal notes that AIOC and
their legal counsel appear to have received other government documents concerning the

Claimants’ rights, completely unbeknownst to the Claimants (see Parts II.E and F above).

According to Mr. Frenkiel, the first time the Claimants became aware that their rights
were being challenged was through the publication of an article in an oil and gas industry
newsletter in May 1995 [Tr. D2:108-109; Hearing Bundle Tab 147, p. 132 (Petroleum
Argus); Kardassopoulos I, para. 8.2]. This is confirmed by the statement of Mr. Gur,

whose evidence has not been challenged in these proceedings.

Mr. Gur confirms not only that although the first signs of trouble emerged in mid-1995,
the Claimants nevertheless continued to receive comfort from senior officials in the
Georgian Government including from President Shevardnadze and were told that they

“need not worry” [Gur I, paras. 8.2 and 8.4]:

“I was accordingly very surprised when it was first brought to my attention by
Mr. Fuchs that there were troubles brewing with the Georgian government. I
believe it was around the middle of 1995. I was told that there were rumours
that the Georgian government were going to offer to an international oil
consortium (called AIOC) rights to the very same pipeline that GTI were in the
middle of constructing. Mr. Fuchs asked if I could try to find out if there was any
truth to the rumours and to see if there was now a risk that the Georgian
government would betray the Joint Venture arrangements. Naturally I was very
concerned to hear about this but did not believe such a thing could happen, after
all of the government approvals and endorsements we had obtained earlier. Mr.
Sigua was no longer Prime Minister by this time, but I did my best to find out
what was happening by speaking to various contacts within the Ministries. No-
one in the government seemed to be very certain and I received conflicting
reports. It did seem clear that a new person was now quite influential within
Chairman Shevardnadze’s sphere, namely Giorgi Chanturia. I was not able to
arrange any private meeting with him. Up until now, whenever I needed to
access anyone within the Georgian government, this had been arranged
immediately so this was unusual.

[...]

I spoke to President Shevardnadze about this matter in early November 1995
when he came to Israel for the funeral of Israel’s Prime Minister Rabin. I

- 130-

402.

403.

404.

405.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

escorted him in the official bus during his time in Israel and we had a good
opportunity to speak when his plane was delayed for several hours at the airport.
[...] He invited me onto his plane and we sat in the plane while it waited on the
tarmac discussing many things and also this investment. I expressed my concern
about the rumours that a deal had been struck on the Azeri side such that rights
to the pipeline would be given to AIOC. He said that he had taken no decision
yet but that we did not need to worry. He personally assured me that the
investors I had introduced would be fully protected. He added that his door was
always open. I was greatly reassured by his words and passed them onto Mr.
Fuchs and Mr. Nanikashvili to relay to Mr. Kardassopoulos.”

The Tribunal agrees with the Claimants that “[bJack-door press reports are the opposite
of due process.” (Cl. Post-Hearing Br. at para. 78]. It is also clear that these were not idle
rumours, but were a reflection of a process afoot within the Georgian Government to

back a faster, bigger and stronger horse - AIOC— at the expense of the Claimants.

The evidence reveals to the satisfaction of the Tribunal that, during the remainder of
1995, while Tramex pursued partnership discussions with Brown & Root with the full
knowledge and approval of Dr. Tevzadze, as well as other Georgian officials, the
Georgian Government was pursuing negotiations with AIOC in respect of the same rights

already held by Tramex through GTI.

Viewed in its totality, the process by which the Respondent took GTI’s rights, and
thereby expropriated Mr. Kardassopoulos’ investment, cannot by any definition be
considered to have been carried out under due process of law. Moreover, the
Respondent’s failure to grant Mr. Kardassopoulos a reasonable chance within a
reasonable time to have his claims heard following the expropriation of his investment
unquestionably, in the eyes of the Tribunal, falls short of what is required by this
criterion. Accordingly, the Tribunal determines that the expropriation of Mr.

Kardassopoulos’ investment was carried out in breach of Article 13(1) of the ECT.

Finally, and as noted above, it is uncontroversial on the facts of these cases that no
payment was made to Mr. Kardassopoulos by the Georgian Government in compensation
for the expropriation of his investment, let alone payment that may be considered
“prompt, adequate and effective”. The Tribunal is not persuaded by the Respondent’s
defence that non-payment in this case was justified due to Mr. Kardassopoulos’ alleged

failure to provide proper evidence of the value of his investment. The circumstances of

-131-

406.

407.

408.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

this case are simply not comparable to those in Amoco. First, there is evidence on the
record that documentary support to assist in valuing Mr. Kardassopoulos’ investment was
provided to the compensation commission at various points in the compensation process,
unlike in Amoco. Second, the claimant in Amoco never pursued a remedy before the
commission established to consider claims arising from the nationalization of investments
by the Government of Iran, whereas the evidence on the record here indicates that Mr.
Kardassopoulos persistently sought compensation for the expropriation of his investment
through the compensation commission process.** Therefore, the Tribunal finds that this

argument too must fail.

The Tribunal notes that Mr. Kardassopoulos also argued that the Respondent’s breach of
the stabilization clauses in the JVA and the Deed of Concession, in itself, renders the
expropriation unlawful, regardless of whether the expropriation otherwise met the criteria
enumerated in Article 13(1) of the ECT. The Respondent rejects this allegation, claiming
that, as a non-party to either instrument, it had no contractual obligations capable of being
breached and, in any event, that Article 13(1) of the ECT contains no requirement that an

expropriation must not be carried out in breach of a contractual commitment.

This last element of Mr. Kardassopoulos’ expropriation claim is put forward in the
alternative to his primary submission that, on the basis of the enumerated requirements of
the ECT, the expropriation of Mr. Kardassopoulos’ rights was carried out unlawfully, in
breach of the treaty. In view of the Tribunal’s finding that the expropriation of Mr.
Kardassopoulos’ investment was unlawful, as it violated at least one of the prescribed
conditions for a lawful expropriation, it is in the Tribunal’s opinion unnecessary to

address this last element of Mr. Kardassopoulos’ expropriation claim.

Based on the foregoing, the Tribunal determines that the Respondent expropriated Mr.
Kardassopoulos’ rights by Decree No. 178 and that such expropriation was unlawful by
virtue of the Respondent’s failure to carry out the expropriation in accordance with due

process of law. The Tribunal also finds that the Respondent breached the ECT by reason

* See Amoco, at para. 134.

- 132-

409.

410.

411.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

of its continuing failure to pay prompt, adequate and effective compensation, as required

by the terms of Article 13(1) of the ECT.

4. Was Mr. Fuchs Treated Unfairly and Inequitably?
a) The Claimant’s Position

Mr. Fuchs submits that the fair and equitable treatment (“FET”) standard contained in
Article 2(2) of the Georgia / Israel BIT is an autonomous standard requiring a higher
level of conduct than the customary international law minimum standard. Mr. Fuchs
relies on the reasoning of the ad hoc tribunal in Saluka Investments v. Czech Republic,"
to the effect that the FET standard is “meant to be a guarantee providing a positive
incentive for foreign investors” and a violation of the standard may therefore occur even

» 45 (i.

where a State’s conduct “displays a relatively lower degree of inappropriateness e.

than the minimum standard of treatment at customary international law).

Mr. Fuchs alleges that the various measures adopted by Georgia over the period 1997
through 2004, considered in their totality, constitute a breach of Georgia’s FET obligation
to Mr. Fuchs in respect of four key elements: (1) breach of an investor’s legitimate
expectations; (2) arbitrary and/or negligent administration and insufficiency of action; (3)
failure to provide due process in administrative decision-making; and (4) inconsistency in

a State’s dealings with a foreign investor.

Mr. Fuchs submits that the legitimate expectations element of the FET standard is the
dominant element of that standard*® and may arise from various sources, including
contracts, treaties, domestic law and unilateral government statements. He argues that
Georgia created a legitimate expectation through the establishment of various
commissions and other conduct that it would compensate Mr. Fuchs for the loss of his

investment.

“ UNCITRAL, Partial Award (17 March 2006) (“Saluka”).

45 Thid. at para. 293.

“© The Claimants rely upon the ad hoc award in Saluka v. Czech Republic, ibid. at para. 302, for this proposition.

- 133 -

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

412. Mr. Fuchs summarizes his position in respect of the Respondent’s alleged breach of his
legitimate expectations as follows, identifying instances of both procedural and

substantive unfairness [Cl. Post-Hearing Br. at paras. 88-89]:

“The facts prove that Georgia’s handling of the compensation process was
procedurally unfair. The Tribunal is familiar with the eight-year, zero-yield saga
and we will not repeat it here. It is accepted that the Claimants were slow in
submitting the Nexia Report, but this was due in part to SakNavtobi, whose
officers did not confirm GTI’s $1.5 million debt to Tramex until 25 May 1999
[Tab 198] Nexia proceeded swiftly to finalise the report as soon as this final
necessary item had been received. Moreover, even if the Claimants had
contributed in some minor way to the delay in processing their claims, that would
hardly justify the long delays indisputably caused by Georgia or the fact that,
when the report was submitted, no-one in the Georgian Government bothered to
read it. On any view, a delay of eight years in rendering a decision on Tramex’s
claims is unfair and excessive. Georgia’s belated election to assess (and
ultimately dismiss) Tramex’s claims solely by reference to internal Georgian law
was also procedurally unfair, because it failed to analyse the claims under the
laws by which it was bound and that it had previously agreed to supply.

The facts also prove that the result of the compensation process was
substantively unfair. When it passed Decree No. 178 and liquidated Transneft,
Georgia triggered an obligation to compensate Tramex for the fair market value
of its interest in GTI. The obligation arose as a matter of customary international
law (a standard mirrored in Georgia’s own foreign investment statute). This was
reinforced by the contractual obligations in the JVA and Deed of Concession
(which had expressly incorporated customary international law’s rules on
reparation for expropriation and the corresponding guarantees in Georgia’s Law
on Foreign Investment). In short, the FET standard required Georgia to produce
a substantive result consistent with the applicable law and the principle of pacta
sunt servanda.”

413. In respect of the second element of Mr. Fuchs’ FET claim, Mr. Fuchs submits that
Georgia breached the FET standard through arbitrary conduct, administrative negligence
and “extreme insufficiency of action”. Relying on the awards in Metalclad Corp. v.
Mexico,” Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. Ecuador and PSEG
Global Ine. et al. v. Turkey,” Mr. Fuchs contends that the considerations identified by

these tribunals “are present, to an even greater degree” in the present case.

47 ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1, Award (30 August 2000) (“Metalclad”).
*8 LCIA Case No. UN 3467, Final Award (1 July 2004) (“OEPC’).

* ICSID Case No. ARB/02/5, Award (19 January 2007) (“PSEG”).

- 134-

414.

Als.

416.

417.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Mr. Fuchs claims that the Shevardnadze Government led him down a “tortuous path,
whose signposts all pointed to one destination: an award of compensation”. However,
under the new regime, Georgia reneged on all previous undertakings and assurances.
Perhaps more importantly, in Mr. Fuchs’ view, the process by which Tramex’s claims
were shuffled from one Minister to another between 1997 and 2003 falls short of the
minimum level of competent administration. Throughout this process, “official
statements from the highest levels of Government were made and conveyed to the
investor but never implemented. Commissions established to resolve the matter fell apart
and never reached conclusions. Ministers were replaced but their responsibilities were
not. Correspondence went unanswered for months, if not permanently. Two independent
audits to quantify the investors’ loss were called for, performed, paid for by Tramex and

their findings ignored ....” [Fuchs Memorial at paras. 159-161]

With regard to the third element of his FET claim, Mr. Fuchs argues that Georgia failed
to accord him due process, pointing to the procedures implemented by the Respondent, in
particular with respect to the 2004 Commission, which failed to provide “any adequate
information as to how the Claimant’s claims would be assessed and failed to offer the
Claimants an opportunity to see the material on which it based its decision or participate

in the meetings at which it reached its conclusion.” [Fuchs Memorial at para. 169].

Finally, in respect of the fourth element of his FET claim, Mr. Fuchs claims that Georgia
violated its obligation not to act in a manner that is “manifestly inconsistent, non-
transparent, unreasonable ... or discriminatory”, citing by way of example the repeated
official position of SakNavtobi that: (1) compensation would soon be forthcoming; (2) it
regarded the JVA as still valid and in force; (3) Tramex had fully and properly complied
with all its obligations under the JVA and Deed of Concession [Fuchs Memorial at para.

165].

b) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent submits, as a preliminary point, that the FET standard is an objective
standard synonymous with customary international law and that the threshold for breach
is high. In particular, the Respondent rejects the Claimants’ interpretation of Saluka,
observing that in applying the standard in that case, the tribunal explained that something

- 135 -

418.

419.

420.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

more than mere illegality or lack of authority is required to find a treaty violation.
Drawing from Saluka, Genin v. Republic of Estonia™’ and NAFTA arbitral authorities,
the Respondent concludes that a claimant must show a measure inconsistent with

customary international law to establish a breach.

Accordingly, in the event of an equivalence between these two standards, the Respondent
takes the position that any determination as to whether there has been a breach of this
obligation must be understood from the perspective of international law, and reached
from a perspective of deference to domestic regulators. The Respondent further submits
that none of the three elements of this obligation identified by the Claimants — the
protection of legitimate expectations, the requirement for transparency, and due process —

has been breached.

As regards the protection of legitimate expectations, the Respondent recalls the principle
articulated by the Maffezini tribunal that claimants are not permitted to use the right to
FET as a means to transform investment treaties into “insurance polices against bad

business judgments” or to relieve investors of the business risks inherent in investment.

Relying on several ICSID awards, the Respondent submits that not every wish or desire
of a potential investor, nor every general statement of a host state, will give rise to a
legitimate expectation. Rather, the doctrine of legitimate expectations must be
interpreted “in a manner that permits host states a reasonable degree of flexibility so that
they retain the ability to respond effectively to changing circumstances.” [Counter-
Memorial at paras. 440-442]. Accordingly, the Respondent contends that proper
consideration must be given to the prevailing investment climate in Georgia at the time of

the Claimants’ investment, which it describes as follows [ibid. at paras. 452-453]:

“Much like Lithuania [as described in Parkerings-Compagniet AS v. Lithuania],
Georgia was very much a country in transition from the prior Soviet era. Mr.
Kardassopoulos’ pleadings make apparent that the Claimants were well aware
of the uncertainty at the time of their investment. In this constantly changing
environment, Mr. Kardassopoulos could not reasonably expect a stable political
environment. In passing remarks, Mr. Kardassopoulos asserts that Tramex was
given “specific assurances” from Mr. Abdulshelishvili and former Prime
Minister Sigua that “the lack of detailed framework would not prejudice the

°° ICSID Case No. ARB/99/2, Award (25 June 2001).

- 136 -

421.

422.

423.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

investment and that investment law would be made around the law.” As
explained by Prime Minister Sigua, it would have been readily apparent to any
reasonable investor (especially a sophisticated one apparently capable of
insisting upon certain commercial terms as indicated by Mr. Fuchs in his
statement), that neither former Prime Minister Sigua nor the Georgian
Government could make good on such a promise. Nor would it be realistic or
legitimate for an investor to assume that national law would be formed on the
basis of one investor (e.g., that national law would discriminate in favour of one
foreign investor).”

The Respondent thus asserts that Mr. Fuchs’ claims to legitimate expectations are invalid,
as they are based on what he subjectively wanted to receive, but not conditions or
assurances that he objectively and legitimately could have expected at the time of his
investment. The Respondent discounts statements by Georgian officials as to the
government’s approval of the JVA as general and non-specific, submitting there could be
no reasonable expectation that the agreements with SakNavtobi or Transneft would bind

the executive.

In regard to the stated expectation surrounding the compensation process, the Respondent
contends, on the basis of the evidence provided by various former ministers, that the
Georgian Government never admitted liability during the compensation commission
process. Moreover, relying on the Preliminary Note prepared by Paisner & Co., the
Respondent contends that such a proposition is not credible as the Paisner advice makes
clear that, as early as September 1995, the Claimants were aware that it was likely that
Georgia would claim breach of contract once it learned the “true facts concerning

Tramex’s lack of performance” [Am. Rejoinder. at para. 344; Hearing Bundle, Tab 142].

The Respondent also contends in regard to Mr. Fuchs’ claim to expectations concerning
the timing of a decision by the compensation commission that Tramex had failed to

respond to the commission’s request for evidence of its expenses, despite repeated

 

requests. According to the Respondent, when Tramex produced the Nexia report, Dr.
Tevzadze found the amount claimed to be far in excess of his understanding of the
amount that Tramex had spent in connection with the joint venture. The Respondent
takes the position that Mr. Fuchs’ claim fails because he has not demonstrated “a single
promise or an expectation that Georgia created or reinforced through its own actions, on
which he reasonably relied to then assert his right to recover” [Counter-Memorial at

para. 489; Resp. Post-Hearing Br. at para. 66].
- 137-

424.

425.

426.

427.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

In respect of the amount of compensation that Mr. Fuchs’ could legitimately have
expected to receive, the Respondent submits that Mr. Fuchs’ claim is inconsistent with
his admission that “the precise amount of compensation was never agreed upon” [Fuchs
Ill, at para. 3.4]. Moreover, the Respondent takes the position that by entering into the
compensation process without specifying the criteria for compensation, the Claimants
accepted the risk of not being able to reach agreement on terms that were acceptable to
them -- on the face of Order No. 84, “it is evident that there was nothing certain about

whether reimbursement would be forthcoming” [Resp. Post-Hearing Br. at para. 63].

In any event, the Respondent submits that all of the alleged assurances concerning
compensation were made years after the investments were made, and therefore the
Claimants did not make any investment in Georgia in reliance on such alleged assurances

and compensation.

In respect of Mr. Fuchs’ transparency, consistency and good faith arguments, the
Respondent submits that irrespective of whether the Tribunal adopts a narrow or broad
definition of transparency, the Respondent has not breached this obligation. In the
Respondent’s view, the Claimants have no basis for asserting that the Georgian
Government was not transparent because it did not permit the Claimants to participate in

their own deliberations as to whether it should compensate the Claimants.

The Respondent also claims that no due process was owed to the Claimants in the context
of the settlement procedures established by Georgia, arguing that it would be novel and
unprecedented if due process rights attached to settlement discussions merely because
they were held with a sovereign. In the event that any due process rights were owed to
the Claimants, the Respondent submits that there is nothing about the compensation
process that “shocks or surprises in a manner that would lead one to question the
propriety of the process.” All the Georgian Government agreed to do, according to the
Respondent, was to review Tramex’s claims; and, to the extent that any due process

duties attached to that review, they were satisfied.

- 138 -

428.

429.

430.

431.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

c) The Tribunal’s Determination

Article 2(2) of the Georgia / Israel BIT requires that “/iJnvestments made by investors of
each Contracting Party shall be accorded fair and equitable treatment’. The Parties
dispute what precisely is required by “fair and equitable treatment”. The Respondent
claims that this standard is synonymous with the customary international law standard.
The Claimants contend that the FET standard is not synonymous with the customary
international law “minimum standard”, but rather may be breached by conduct of a less

egregious nature.

The Tribunal is required to interpret and apply the treaty in good faith, in accordance with
the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their proper context, and in
light of the treaty’s object and purpose, consistent with Article 31(1) of the Vienna

Convention of the Law Treaties.

Several tribunals have attempted to parse the meaning of “fair and equitable”, producing
a catalogue of alternative dictionary meanings, including “just”, “even-handed”,

unbiased” and legitimate”.*!

The Saluka tribunal added to this catalogue the statement by
the NAFTA tribunal in S.D. Myers, to the effect that an infringement of the standard
requires “treatment in such an unjust or arbitrary manner that the treatment rises to the

9952

level that is unacceptable from the international perspective”, concluding that this is

likely as close to the “ordinary meaning” of fair and equitable as one may get.

Turning to the context of Article 2(2) of the Georgia / Israel BIT, the Tribunal notes the
following provision which immediately precedes the FET clause: “Each Contracting
Party shall, in its territory, encourage and create favourable conditions for inve. é!

by investors of the other Contracting Party and, subject to its right to exercise the powers

conferred by its laws, shall admit such investments” (emphasis added).

 

*! See e.g., MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. & MTD Chile S.A. v. Chile, \CSID Case No. ARB/O1/7, Award (25 May 2004), at

para. 113 (“MTD Equity
February 2007), at para. 390

 

Siemens A.G. v. The Argentina Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/8, Award (6
Siemens”).

 
 

*? UNCITRAL (NAFTA), Partial Award (13 November 2000), at para. 263 (“S.D. Myers I”).

% Saluka ,at para. 297.

- 139 -

432.

433.

434,

435.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

The Treaty’s preamble sets out its object and purpose as follows:

“The Government of the State of Israel and the Government of the Republic of
Georgia (referred to hereinafter as the “Contracting Parties”)

DESIRING to intensify economic cooperation to the mutual benefit of both
countries,

 

INTENDING to create f ble ditions for greater i) by investors
of either Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party, and,

RECOGNIZING that the promotion and reciprocal protection of investments on
the basis of the present Agreement will be conducive to the stimulation of
individual business initiative and will increase prosperity in both states.”

The standard of FET in Article 2(2) must therefore be understood in the context of this
aim of encouraging the inflow and retention of foreign investment. As the Saluka
tribunal explained, such provisions form the basis for an investor’s decision to invest—
or not — in a particular territory:

“An investor’s decision to make an investment is based on an assessment of the

state of the law and the totality of the business environment at the time of the

investment as well as on the investor’s expectation that the conduct of the host
State subsequent to the investment will be fair and equitable.”

The Tribunal takes note of the Parties’ respective positions as regards the legitimate
expectations element of Mr. Fuchs’ claim, which appears to form the gravamen of his
claim. In particular, the Respondent contends that Mr. Fuchs’ FET claim, centered as it
is on legitimate expectations, fails because it does not conform to the requirement
articulated by the tribunal in LG&E Energy Corp et al., v. Argentine Republic® that any
expectations must be based on conditions offered by or prevailing in the host State at the

time the original investment is made.

The relevant discussion of legitimate expectations in LG&E on which the Respondent
relies is contained in the following passage:
“It can be said that the investor's fair expectations have the following

characteristics: they are based on the conditions offered by the host State at the
time of the investment; they may not be established unilaterally by one of the

* Tbid. at para. 301.

55 ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1, Decision on Liability (3 October 2006) (“LG&E”).

- 140 -

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

parties; they must exist and be enforceable by law; in the event of infringement
by the host State, a duty to compensate the investor for damages arises except for
those caused in the event of state of necessity; however, the investor’s fair
expectations cannot fail to consider parameters such as business risk or
industry’s regular patterns.”

436. The purported assurances by Georgian government officials that Mr. Fuchs would be
compensated for his losses were made many years after his initial investment and were
not intended to induce reliance, and the Respondent accordingly submits there can be no

breach on this ground.

437. The Claimants, rather than seeking to distinguish LG&E, emphasize that, just as in
LG&E, the assurances of compensation in this case were designed precisely to modify the
Claimants’ behaviour, and they did, in fact, take the step of foregoing private law claims
in reliance on those assurances. The Claimants also rely on the award in Pey Casado y
Fundacion Presidente de Allende y. Chile’ where a similar compensation process,

initiated years after the initial investment, was held to create legitimate expectations.

438. The Tribunal finds the following passage in Saluka to be particularly helpful in
understanding the potential sources of expectations, and the time at which they arise for

the purpose of asserting the breach of a treaty standard:

“A foreign investor protected by the Treaty may in any case properly expect that
the Czech Republic implements its policies bona fide by conduct that is, as far as
it affects the investors’ investment, reasonably justifiable by public policies and
that such conduct does not manifestly violate the requirements of consistency,
transparency, even-handedness and non-discrimination. [...].”

439. In the present case, although the specific assurances of compensation alleged to have
been given to Mr. Fuchs came years after his initial investment in Georgia, the Tribunal
considers the Respondent’s interpretation of the legitimate expectations element of the
FET standard to presuppose limitations upon the notion of fair and equitable treatment
that are not established as a matter of law and that are inconsistent with the terms of the

BIT read in their proper context.

*© Thid. at para. 130.
57 ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2, Award (8 May 2008) (“Pey Casado”).

-141-

440.

441.

442.

443.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

As the tribunal in Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed SA v. United Mexican States”

explained, the obligation to provide FET consists of providing “treatment that does not
affect the basic expectations that were taken into account by the foreign investor to make
the investment.” Similarly, the tribunal in Sempra Energy International v. Argentina
Republic determined that the measures in question had “substantially changed the legal
and business framework under which the investment was decided and implemented.

Where there was business certainty and stability, there is now the opposite. vol

Applied to the present case, the fact that it was after the investment was made that
specific assurances of compensation were given, which assurances gave rise to a specific
expectation of compensation, does not preclude Mr. Fuchs from holding throughout the
term of his investment the legitimate expectation that Georgia would conduct itself vis-a-
vis his investment in a manner that was reasonably justifiable and did not manifestly
violate basic requirements of consistency, transparency, even-handedness and non-
discrimination. This includes, in the view of the Tribunal, implementing a compensation
process following the expropriation of GTI’s rights that is both procedurally and

substantively fair.

Although Mr. Fuchs advances a claim based on the standards of treatment set out in the
Georgia / Israel BIT (as opposed to its expropriation provision), Article 12 of the JVA
and Article 21 of the Deed of Concession (the stabilization clauses) provided assurances
in principle to both Claimants that neither GTI’s property nor its rights would be
expropriated or confiscated by the State and, in such event, reimbursement would be

forthcoming not only for the amounts invested but potentially also for loss of profits.

The compensation process appears to have initially begun in the spirit of reaching an
amicable settlement consistent with what Mr. Fuchs may reasonably have expected,

President Shevardnadze having ordered the formation of a commission to find a “decision

58 ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2, Award (29 May 2003) (“Tecmed”).

°° Thid. at para. 154.

 ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16, Award (28 September 2007) (“Sempra”).

®! Pbid. at para, 303; LG&E ,at paras. 124-25.

-142-

444,

445.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

acceptable for all the parties” [Hearing Bundle, Tab 17]. Lamentably, despite this initial
instruction, the spirit of settlement appears to have diminished over time as lengthy
delays, refusals by various government officials to address the matter, and internal
disputes over who carried responsibility for the matter combined to result in an overall
obfuscation of the compensation process and disregard for the duty to provide

compensation.

The original draft Order prepared in response to President’s Shevardnadze’s instruction
contemplated that an auditing firm would be hired to conduct an audit of the “investments
carried out by company Tramex International in Georgia, its rights, applied costs and
compensation volume of future losses.” [Hearing Bundle, Tab 22]. Order No. 84, by
contrast, provided simply that the commission would review Tramex’s expenses in
Georgia and “determine a possible reimbursement of such expenses.” [Hearing Bundle,
Tab 24]. The oral evidence of Dr. Tevzadze clearly indicates that Mr. Chanturia, the
President of GIOC, to whom GTI’s rights were given, was unhappy with the proposition
of compensating Tramex for anything, let alone compensating Tramex for the full value
of its rights, and that he was responsible for the change reflected in the final Order [see
Tr. D8:45:5-23]. This is confirmed by the written evidence of Mr. Gur, who also states
that Mr. Chanturia was entrusted with the “negotiation details” following the adoption of
Decree No. 178 [Gur I, para. 8.7], and a contemporaneous document prepared by Mr.

Chanturia himself [Hearing Bundle, Tab 165].

The Tribunal finds the following summary of the evidence concerning assurances of
compensation given by the Georgian Government to various of the Claimants’ witnesses,
whose testimony in this regard was not challenged by the Respondent, to be consistent

with the Tribunal’s own analysis of the record [Cl. Post-Hearing Br. at fn. 153]:

“[] Mr. Gur’s uncontradicted testimony establishes that President Shevardnadze
assured him in November 1995 and mid-1996 that the Claimants would be
treated in the most civilised manner, and would receive either a replacement
interest in GIOC or else compensation equivalent to the full value of their
interest in GTI. [Gur I paras. 8.4-8.7, Gur II para. 1.5, and Gur IV paras. 5.1-
5.6] Whilst Georgia suggested (based solely on the wording of Order No. 84
that Georgia offered only to reimburse expenses, it is notable that Georgia made
no attempt to challenge the direct evidence of the Claimants’ witnesses who
received assurances of full compensation. For example, as well as electing not to

call Mr Gur for cross-examination, Georgia also failed to cross-examine Mr.
- 143 -

446.

447.

448.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Nanikashvili on his evidence dealing with the compensation process, including
his testimony that Professor Tevzadze, Mr. Basilia, Mr. Tsereteli and Mr.
Zubitashvili repeatedly assured him that full compensation would be paid to
Tramex for its losses. [Nanikashvili IT paras. 2.10-2.17; Nanikashvili III para.
5.7] Similarly, Georgia did not cross-examine Mr. Batkin, whose uncontradicted
testimony establishes that Mr. Mirtskhulava and other Government officials
committed on 19 May 2003 to provide full compensation: a commitment
recorded in Mr. Batkin’s letter of 2 June 2003. [Tab 234]”

[Emphasis added.]

The process which ultimately unfolded following constitution of the compensation
commission in 1997 can only be described as non-transparent, arbitrary and unfair. The
relevant question is not whether the Georgian Government had an obligation to include
the Claimants in their deliberations. Rather, the record shows that the Claimants did
substantially participate in the compensation process, both formally when the 1997
Commission was established and informally after Mr. Fuchs was removed from its roster.
Georgia was, however, obligated to act reasonably, transparently and in a non-arbitrary
manner towards the Claimants. The evidence on the record demonstrates that this is not,

in fact, what transpired.

There is moreover no defence, on the evidence presented, for the delay with which the
process was carried out, even allowing for some delay on the part of the Claimants in
submitting documentation of their claims. The record shows that the Claimants were
repeatedly asked for documentation of their expenses in Georgia and told that a
conclusion of the process would be forthcoming. While the Claimants complied with
each request in an effort to settle the matter of their investment amicably, arranging for
the preparation of two audit reports by reputable accounting firms, their efforts were
consistently met with a circular response in which a resolution of the matter was ordered
from the highest level of the Georgian Government only to be avoided or passed off by

the individuals tasked with effecting such a resolution.

Over the course of a seven year period following the formal establishment of a
compensation process, responsibility for Tramex’s claim was shuffled from one
government ministry to another, without any progress. An overview of this process
prepared by Mr. Mirtskhulava for President Shevardnadze in 2003 exposes the process

for the farce that it had become [Hearing Bundle, Tab 230]. While some relief appeared

-144-

449.

450.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

to be on the horizon for the Claimants following Mr. Kissinger’s intervention in 2003, the
tide turned again as a new government was elected and yet another State commission
established to consider the matter of Tramex’s claims. This commission accomplished in
one month what each previous commission had found itself incapable of accomplishing —
the final disposition of the Tramex matter. This disposition was, however, wholly

unacceptable.

The Tribunal finds inexcusable the categorical denial of any responsibility or obligation
towards the Claimants, which came eight years after Georgia initiated the compensation
process. All the more so since, throughout this period, the evidence discloses that senior
members of the Georgian Government believed that the State was responsible for the
Claimants’ losses and that some amount of compensation was owed to them [see e.g.
Hearing Bundle, Tabs 230, 232, 233, 235; Gur I, paras. 8.4-8.7; Tevzadze testimony, Tr.
D8:64; Chanturia testimony, Tr. D6:150].

Mr. Batkins’ uncontroverted evidence provides a succinct summary of the
disappointment with which the Claimants received the final decision of the Respondent

[Batkin I, paras. 22-24]:

“I recall that, in October 2004, the Georgian Government established yet
another State commission to examine the Tramex issue. The commission’s
findings were communicated though a letter sent by the First Deputy Minister of
Justice, Ms. Ekaterine Guershidze, to the Skadden, Arps firms on November 15,
2004. [...] The letter was a complete turnaround from all the assurances and
commitments entered into by the previous Government during the previous
years. In short, the commission had apparently resolved that Georgia bore no
liability to Tramex because the Joint venture and Concession had been entered
into by State-owned entities, rather than by the State itself.

I cannot help but remark that the approach adopted by the State commission in
2004 contradicted the express acknowledgements given to me and Mr. Fuchs in
Tbilisi during our meeting on May 19, 2003 and the agreement by the Georgian
Government that a third party process be engaged to determine compensation.
Our faith in the process was seemingly confirmed as the Government allowed the
appointed auditors to proceed over the ensuing months as planned, without
raising any objection. The State commission’s response was also inconsistent
with my clear understanding, based on the admissions made by the Georgian
officials I had met, that Georgia regarded the obligation to Tramex as something
which had arisen as a result of the Government’s own conduct (the cancellation
of GTI’s rights) and not conduct by Georgian Oil.

-145-

451.

452.

453.

454,

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

I believe that the process had ultimately become a victim of the change in
Government, with the assurances given by one Government simply ignored after
a new Government had been elected. I remain disappointed that my efforts,
which at one point seemed very close to producing an amicable settlement, have,
so far, led to nothing.”

Based on the totality of the evidence, the Tribunal has no hesitation in finding that the
Respondent failed to afford Mr. Fuchs fair and equitable treatment as required pursuant to

Article 2(2) of the Georgia / Israel BIT.

The Tribunal also finds, having considered the overlap in the factual and treaty matrices
and, in particular, the shared essential ingredients required to establish the Claimants’
respective fair and equitable treatment claims in connection with the compensation
commission process, that the Respondent failed to afford Mr. Kardassopoulos fair and
equitable treatment as required pursuant to Article 2(2) of the Georgia / Greece BIT and
Article 10(1) of the ECT. In view of the Claimants’ submissions on double recovery
(see paragraph 242 above), this finding is made only in respect of that part of Mr.
Kardassopoulos’ claim which he maintains for his share of the expenses incurred by

Tramex while participating in the compensation commission process.

D. Causation

Whilst the Claimants hold the burden of proving their loss in accordance with
international law principles of causation, the Respondent has advanced several positive
arguments in respect of causation. The Tribunal therefore considers it most efficient to
reverse the order in which the Parties’ submissions are set out, understanding that this in
no way alters the burden respectively held by the Parties as explained in Part V.A.2 of the
Award.

1. The Respondent's Position
The Respondent submits as a threshold proposition that in order to be recoverable the
Claimants’ losses must have been caused by the State’s infringing conduct. In the
Respondent’s submission, the Claimants have not discharged their burden of proof.
Specifically, the Respondent claims the Claimants have failed to demonstrate that, but for
Georgia’s alleged conduct: (i) Tramex/GTI would have been able to construct and/or
operate the Gachiani-Supsa Pipeline or the Future Pipelines and to derive profits

- 146 -

455.

456.

457.

458.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

therefrom; (ii) Tramex/GTI would have been able to stand in GOGC’s shoes and receive
all of the transit fees that the Claimants now seek; or (iii) the Claimants would have
recovered unspecified damages by pursuing claims against AIOC, SakNavtobi and

Transneft through either litigation or arbitration.

Thus, the Respondent argues that the Claimants’ case falls on the question of causation
and that the Tribunal’s analysis of causation ought to be guided by the analysis in
Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of Tanzania, citing the following
passage from that award:
“compensation for any violation of the BIT, whether in the context of unlawful
expropriation or the breach of any other treaty standard, will only be due if there

is sufficient causal link between the actual breach of the BIT and the loss
sustained.

Put another way, the claimant must show a link between the wrongful act and the
damages, or rather must prove that the “value of its investment was diminished
or eliminated ... and that the [complained of actions] were the actual and
proximate cause of such diminution...”°

On the basis of this formulation, the Respondent submits that the proposed transaction
would not have materialized because of the Claimants’ inexperience in pipeline
development. The Respondent further submits that not even Brown & Root had the
required skills to own and operate the pipeline, claiming that their “back of the envelope”

plan was inadequate, particularly as regards its ability to secure throughput agreements.

In addition, the Respondent avers that the Western Route was never a certainty, nor was
any accommodation of the Claimants, relying upon evidence of the geopolitical
conditions in the region and AIOC’s strategy for developing the early oil pipeline as a
pilot for future oil exports as discussed in the witness statements of Messrs. Cook and

Adams and the expert report of Mr. Effimoff.

The Respondent also contends that GTI could never have stepped into GOGC’s shoes,
and is therefore not entitled to the transit fees that AIOC has paid GOGC for the Western
Route. Specifically, the Respondent argues that the Claimants have failed to prove that

GTI had the right under the JVA or the Deed of Concession to enter into a leasing

® ICSID Case No. ARB/5/22, Award (24 July 2008), at para. 779-80 (“Biwater”).

-147-

459.

460.

461.

© UNCITRAL (NAFTA), Second Partial Award (21 October 2002) (*

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

arrangement in respect of the Gachiani-Supsa pipeline or, alternatively, that GTI could

have leased its rights to AIOC under the terms that GOGC achieved.

Finally, the Respondent submits that neither of the Claimants suffered any damage as a
result of the alleged breaches of the FET standard. Specifically, the Respondent submits
that the only damage which the Claimants specifically attribute to the breach of the FET
standard is the value of the private law claims that they say they could have brought
against SakNavtobi, Transneft and AIOC in 1995. The Respondent avers that the
Claimants’ failure to bring those claims “cannot properly be attributed to any unfair
conduct on Georgia’s part, but rather was their own choice, presumably based upon
their own belief that they stood to gain more from seeking to negotiate with Georgia than
from pursuing legal claims which suffered from so many defects and uncertainties (and
where they may well have been left with significant adverse costs exposure).” [Am.

Rejoinder at para. 479].

The Respondent concludes that the Claimants simply made a bad investment of a high

risk nature without adequate experience and with no guarantee of profit.

2. The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants argue that while losses, in order to be recoverable, must have been caused
by the State’s infringing conduct, this issue does not present an obstacle to recovery in
the present case. The Claimants quote the following passage from the NAFTA award in
S.D. Myers, Inc. v. Government of Canada,® and argue that the same principles apply

here:

“The Inquiry in this case is more akin to ascertaining damages for a tort or
delict. The damages recoverable are those that will put the innocent party into
the position it would have been in had the interim measure not been passed. The
focus is on causation, not foreseeability in the sense used in the law of contract.
In the contract law, foreseeability may limit the range of recoverability. That is
not the case in law of tort or delict. Remoteness is the key.

Similarly, a debate as to whether damages are direct or indirect is not
appropriate. If they were caused by the event, engage Chapter I] and are not too

 

). Myers IT”).

- 148 -

462.

463.

464.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

remote, there is nothing in the language of Article 1139 that limits their
recoverability.”

The Claimants advance four propositions to rebut the Respondent’s causation arguments:
(1) Georgia was a preferred route for the early oil and main export pipelines; (2) AIOC
would have negotiated with GTI in order to access Georgia’s pipelines; (3) Brown &
Root had the technical and financial capability to build and operate the Baku-Supsa
pipeline; and (4) had the early oil pipeline remained with GTI, it would have been viable

and probably more profitable than it was under AIOC.

In their Post-Hearing Brief, the Claimants characterize the Respondent’s causation theory
as introducing a speculative element that is inapposite to the assessment of fair market
value in treaty claims generally or in determining whether an expropriation has caused a
loss. According to the Claimants, causation in expropriation claims has nothing to do
with speculation about what might have happened in the future had the rights not been
seized. Rather, expropriations “by their very nature cause the loss of the rights taken.”

[Cl. Post-Hearing Br. at para. 93].

The Claimants distinguish the facts of the present case from those in Biwater, denying in
any event that Biwater introduced a new requirement of “speculative” causation in cases
of expropriation. According to the Claimants, the issue which dictated the result in
Biwater was the valuation of the rights, not causation. In that case, the claimant had a
“worthless business that was about to be taken away from it anyway [as it was
insolvent]” and “[ujnsurprisingly, the ICSID tribunal found that there would be no
hypothetical willing buyer prepared to pay anything for the rights.” [Cl. Post-Hearing
Br. at para. 96] In other words, on the valuation date, the expropriated asset had no
value. Reviewing the evidence in the present arbitrations, the Claimants contend that
their rights were very valuable as of the valuation date and neither the JVA nor the Deed
of Concession had been terminated, which is altogether different from the rights at issue

in Biwater.

 Tbid. at paras 159-60.

- 149 -

465.

466.

467.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

3. The Tribunal’s Determination

On the matter of causation, the Tribunal finds that there can be no real question that but
for the Respondent’s conduct, the Claimants would not have suffered the loss of their
rights. Whatever contractual rights the Claimants possessed as a result of their
investment in Georgia disappeared with Decree No. 178, the proverbial deathblow. The
coffin was nailed shut with the letters from Ms. Gureshidze of the Ministry of Justice in
November and December 2004, which stated finally that the Respondent had no liability
in respect of the claims made by Tramex and that no compensation would be
forthcoming. The Georgian Government’s repudiation of any liability towards the

Claimants was a clear breach of their rights under international law.

The award in Biwater, relied upon by the Respondent, is inapposite on the facts of the
present cases. In that case, the Tribunal focused on the absence of any “factual link”
between the wrongful acts and the damage suffered, finding that as of the date of
expropriation, the investment had no economic value. The Biwater tribunal explained
that,

“[b]y the beginning of May 2005, and before the events that begin on 13 May

2005, the normal contractual termination process was underway, and in the

Arbitral Tribunal’s view, in all the circumstances, termination of the Lease

Contract was inevitable and was going to materialise within a matter of weeks —
quite apart from the events that then occurred as of 13 May 2005.”

The Biwater tribunal called in aid Professor James Crawford’s Commentary on Article 31
of the Articles on State Responsibility,” which establishes that a State is under an
obligation to make full reparation for the injury caused by an internationally wrongful

act. Specifically, Article 31 provides as follows:

“Article 31. Reparation

I. The responsible State is under an obligation to male full reparation for
the injury caused by the internationally wrongful act.

2. Injury includes any damage, whether material or moral, caused by the
internationally wrongful act of a State.”

5 Biwater, at para. 791.

© Tbid. at para. 785.

- 150 -

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

468. The Commentary to Article 31 with respect to the establishment of a causal link between

a wrongful act and damage sustained provides:

“The allocation of injury or loss to a wrongful act is, in principle, a legal and
not only a historical or causal process. Various terms are used to describe the
link which must exist between the wrongful act and the injury in order for the
obligation of reparation to arise. For example, reference may be made to losses
“attributable to [the wrongful] act as a proximate cause”, or to damage which is
“too indirect, remote, and uncertain to be appraised”, or to “any direct loss,
damage including environmental damage and the depletion of natural resources
or injury to foreign Governments, nationals and corporations as a result of” the
wrongful act. Thus, causality in fact is a necessary but not a sufficient condition
for reparation. There is a further element, associated with the exclusion of injury
that is too “remote” or “consequential” to be the subject of reparation. In some
cases, the criterion of “directness” may be used, in others “foreseeability” or
“proximity”. But other factors may also be relevant: for example, whether State
organs deliberately caused the harm in question, or whether the harm caused
was within the ambit of the rule which was breached, having regard to the
purpose of that rule. In other words, the requirement of a causal link is not
necessarily the same in relation to every breach of an international obligation.
In international as in national law, the question of remoteness of damage “is not
a part of the law which can be satisfactorily solved by search for a single verbal
formula”. The notion of a_sufficient causal link which is not_too remote is
bodied in the general requirement in article 31 that the injury should be in
ce_of the wrongful act, but without the addition of any particular

qualifying phrase. °”

 

[Emphasis added.]

469. In this case, the failure to provide adequate compensation following adoption of Decree
No. 178, which had directly and deliberately caused the loss of GTI’s rights and, at the
same time, the loss of the Claimants’ entire investment in Georgia, is a clear violation of
the Respondent’s duties towards the Claimants. There is no question of remoteness or
foreseeability of damage here — the loss that Mr. Kardassopoulos suffered was a direct
and foreseeable consequence of the process that began with the establishment of GIOC,
through Decree No. 477, and culminated in the cancellation of GTI’s rights in favour of
GIOC, pursuant Decree No. 178. As a matter of international law, this should have been
followed by the payment of compensation, but it was not. Similarly, the loss that Mr.

Fuchs sustained through breach of the FET provision in the Georgia / Israel BIT was a

°" Draft Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Act, with commentaries, Report adopted by
U.N. General Assembly, A/56/10, in Yearbook of the International Law Commission, 2001, vol. II, Part 2, Article
31, Commentary para. 10.

-151-

470.

471.

472.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

direct and foreseeable consequence of the Georgian Government’s conduct throughout

the compensation commission process, culminating in the denial of any relief in 2004.

Having found that the Claimants held valid and subsisting rights in the early oil pipeline,
including export rights, as of 11 November 1995, the date on which Decree No. 477 was
passed creating GIOC; that these rights were taken by the Respondent on 20 February
1996 through Decree No. 178; that the Respondent was under a legal duty following that
taking to compensate Mr. Kardassopoulos and the failure to fulfill that duty caused loss
to Mr. Kardassopoulos; and that Mr. Fuchs was treated unfairly and inequitably,
culminating in a breach of the Georgia / Israel BIT on 10 December 2004, which
treatment also caused loss to Mr. Fuchs, the Tribunal will now address what

compensation is due to the Claimants by the Respondent.

E. Quantum

1. The Effect of the Stabilization Clauses on Damages
a) The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants submit that compensation is due to them on the scale generally applicable
in international law in respect of takings of foreign property. The Claimants also submit
that private parties cannot by contract vary customary international law or a formula
agreed to among States in a multilateral treaty such as the ECT. It follows, in their view,
that the stabilization clauses in the JVA and the Deed of Concession do not affect the
measure of damages the Respondent is liable to pay for a violation of Article 13(1) of the

ECT.

The Claimants note that they have brought their claims under treaties, not the contractual
stabilization clauses. Considering the language of the contractual clauses, however, the
Claimants contend that as in many other cases where internationalised stabilization
clauses have been revoked (e.g. TOPCO v. Libya®’) the clauses in issue here effectively
bring in the Chorzéw Factory standard of compensation. Moreover, as Section 12.1 of
the JVA establishes that the principle therein shall not be derogated from, the Claimants

contend that in construing Section 12.3 of the JVA one would have expected a very

8 Award (19 January 1977), 17 LL.M. 3 (1978).

- 152 -

473.

474.

475.

476.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

explicit derogation in order to “subtract” from the Chorzéw Factory standard. In their

view, the terms of Article 12 of the JVA amplify and not cap a damages award.

As an alternative position, the Claimants submit that the stabilization clauses would not,
in any event, dictate any different award. Both Section 12.1 of the JVA and Section 21.1
of the Deed of Concession provide that “the property rights of the Joint venture are
protected in accordance with regulations of Georgian legislation and applicable
international conventions of treaties and public international law”. The Claimants
contend that both customary international law and Georgian law require payment of at

least Fair Market Value (“FMV”) in reparation for an expropriation.

b) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent takes the opposing view that the stabilization clauses do, in fact,
represent an agreement by the Parties to limit damages for expropriation. The effect of
this interpretation is that Mr. Kardassopoulos can have no legitimate expectation to
damages greater than those provided for in the JVA itself. According to the Respondent,
Section 12.3 of the JVA provides, in the event of an expropriation, for full reimbursement
of the Claimants’ contribution to the Authorised Fund and any amounts invested in any
projects covered by the JVA. Similarly, Section 21.3 of the Deed of Concession provides
that GTI is entitled to full reimbursement for any amounts expended on managing,
operating or maintaining the pipelines, or carrying out improvements, additions or

extensions thereto.

The Respondent further argues that provision for other expenses or lost profits in the
arbitrator’s discretion, until reimbursement of the amount invested, reflects the Parties’
agreement that an award of profits would be permissive rather than mandatory and that,
in any event, such profits would be paid for a short duration and not the entire life of the

JVA or Concession.

Referring to the Claimants’ submission that the clauses do not cap damages, the
Respondent notes that the ECT did not exist when the JVA and Concession were
negotiated. As Georgia signed the ECT in 1994, well after Mr. Kardassopoulos made his

investment in 1992, the Respondent contends that this post facto event cannot be said to

- 153 -

477.

478.

479.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

have influenced what Mr. Kardassopoulos legitimately expected to receive when making

his investment in 1992.

c) The Tribunal’s Determination

The Tribunal recalls that both the JVA and the Deed of Concession contain stabilization
clauses which contemplate a situation in which the Claimants’ investment is, either in
whole or in part, expropriated or nationalized by Georgia. In particular, Section 12.3 of

the JVA provides:

“2.3 Any purported attempted or alleged act or event of expropriation, confiscation or
nationalization of the Joint Venture, its property or its rights shall be null and
void, and shall forthwith entitle the Foreign Partner to full reimbursement for the
Foreign Partner’s contribution to the Authorized Fund and any amounts invested
by the Foreign Partner in any Projects, bearing interest on the free market value
of such investment, whichever is higher and until such reimbursement in full
shall forthwith entitle the Foreign Partner to payment of such users fee, rentals,
royalties or other compensation as shall be determined by an arbitrator to be
appointed pursuant to the provisions of this Agreement, during any period in
which any such purported, attempted or alleged acts are being carried out
against the rights of a property of the Joint Venture.

The Partners hereby stipulate that the rate of the rental, users fee or royalties to
be awarded shall be in the rate of at least fifty percent of the revenue of the Joint
Venture. The arbitrator may also award any additional amounts as
reimbursement of expenses or in respect of loss of profits.”

Similarly, Section 21.3 of the Deed of Concession provides as follows:

“21.3 Any purported attempted or alleged act or event of expropriation, confiscation,
nationalization of the Pipelines or grant of rights therein to other persons or
entities shall be null and void, and shall forthwith entitle GTI the right to receive
full reimbursement for any amounts expended by GTI in managing, operating or
maintaining the Pipelines or in carrying out improvements, additions or
extensions thereto, bearing interest on the free market value of such expenses or
investment and until such reimbursement in full shall forthwith entitle GTI to
payment of such users fee, rentals royalties or other compensation as shall be
determined by an arbitrator to be appointed pursuant to the provisions of this
Agreement, during any period in which any such purported, attempted or alleged
acts are being carried out against the Pipelines or any part thereof.

The arbitrator may also award any additional amounts as reimbursement of
expenses or in respect of loss of profts.”

The Tribunal addressed the Parties’ arguments concerning the Claimants’ legitimate

expectations of compensation for the taking of their rights based on Article 12 of the JVA

- 154-

480.

481.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

and Article 21 of the Deed of Concession in its discussion of liability (see Part V.C.4
above). Therefore, in this part the Tribunal considers only the issue of whether the
stabilization clauses constitute an agreement to limit the amount of damages recoverable
in these arbitrations or otherwise impose a ceiling of compensation beyond which the
Claimants could not have legitimately expected to recover in the event of an

expropriation.

The Tribunal recalls that the Claimants’ claims are treaty-based. Therefore the relevant
provisions for the purpose of both liability and quantum are contained in the treaties and,
more broadly, international law. Whilst the JVA and Deed of Concession are relevant to
the factual matrix which underpins those claims, the Tribunal has not been constituted
under the provisions of the JVA nor the Deed of Concession to consider the Parties’
contractual dispute. Article 12 of the JVA and Article 21 of the Deed do not, therefore,
as such, govern the legal framework within which the Tribunal must consider the

compensation owing to the Claimants for breach of the ECT and the BITs.

This finding is without prejudice to a host State and an investor’s ability to contractually
limit the compensation which may be owed following an expropriation where a treaty is
also in play. Indeed, the Tribunal is loathe to accept the categorical denial of such an
arrangement urged by the Claimants as a matter of law. The Claimants themselves

appeared to soften their position on this issue during the Hearing [Tr. D12:71-75]:

“PROFESSOR LOWE: I understand the difference between the contract and the
treaty claim. Is it your position that an investor has the legal capacity to agree
upon an approach to damages that might be claimed in a treaty claim, and to do
so by contract?

MR NELSON: An investor can enter into a concession agreement with a
government. It can do a number of things. I think, and I'll want to caveat, I'm
not sure whether there's any case law on this, off the cuff, I think if you had
investors and governments who saw a treaty in front of them and clearly agreed
upon a liquidated damages clause, or a cap on damages, there might be an
argument that if you stipulated, in effect, that for the ECT -- I'm going into
Turkmenistan, I know the ECT applies, but we'll stipulate that damages for
expropriation will be liquidated in this -- that's a different case. I do
acknowledge that if you had foreknowledge of the treaty standard, and a clear
liquidated damages provision, it would be a different case, and it could well be.

- 155 -

482.

483.

484.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

PROFESSOR LOWE: Why should a liquidated damages clause be possible, but
a clause stipulating a general approach to the determination of quantum not be
possible?

[..]

MR NELSON: In principle, if you can clearly, and there's contractual language
that puts the language beyond doubt, the expectations beyond doubt, I can
imagine that's possible, but our position is that that didn't happen here obviously.

PROFESSOR LOWE: If they had intended to do that, how would a clause
having that effect have differed from this clause?

MR NELSON: It would say, "Notwithstanding the Energy Charter Treaty,
notwithstanding article 11 of the Energy Charter Treaty, the parties hereby
agree that", or it would say, "Notwithstanding the provisions of public
international law", or it would say, "It is agreed that the following events shall
not be deemed to be unlawful expropriation", that would at least take Chorzow
off the table. You could do it in a number of very informed and explicit ways.
You don't see that here.”

Nevertheless, even if the stabilization clauses were to be applied in this case, the Tribunal
is of the opinion that the result would be the same as the application of international law
principles of compensation. This is generally consistent with the conclusions reached by

both quantum experts during the witness conferencing procedure.

The contractual formula agreed upon contemplates the award of compensation for all
amounts expended / invested in managing, operating or maintaining the Pipelines or in
carrying out improvements, additions or extensions thereto, bearing interest on the “free
market value” of such expenses or investment as well “as additional amounts as
reimbursement of expenses or in respect of loss of profits”. Whilst under the terms of the
JVA and the Deed of Concession the award of lost profits is in the discretion of the
arbitrator appointed to consider the amount of compensation due upon an expropriation,

the exercise of that discretion in this case would yield essentially the same result.

The Claimants could legitimately expect that a neutral arbitrator vested with the authority
to award compensation under the JVA and Deed of Concession for the expropriation of
GTI’s rights (as opposed, for example, to a confiscation that otherwise left those rights

intact), would exercise his or her discretion to award compensation not only for the sums

© See Kaczmarek, Tr. D13:174; Lagerberg, Tr. D13:176.

- 156 -

485.

486.

487.

488.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

expended by the Claimants but also for the loss of profits from the investment, the
expected value of which points to the value of the investment, as is required by

international law.

Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the stabilization clauses do not “cap” damages for
the purposes of valuing the Claimants’ rights, nor do they establish a ceiling of
compensation beyond which the Claimants could not have legitimately expected to

recover in the event of an expropriation.

2. The Applicable Standard of Compensation for Expropriation

In view of the Tribunal’s findings on jurisdiction and liability (see paragraphs 241 and
408 above), the Tribunal shall in this part of the Award only consider the applicable

standard of compensation for expropriation applicable under Article 13(1) of the ECT.

a) The Claimant’s Position

Mr. Kardassopoulos submits that he is entitled to full reparation for the loss of his
investment, i.e. compensation that wipes out all of the consequences of the illegal act or
acts. In support of this position, Mr. Kardassopoulos relies upon Articles 31, 34 and 36
of the ILC’s Articles on State Responsibility, the judgment of the Permanent Court of
International Justice (“PCIJ”) in the Case concerning the Factory at Chorz6w" and the

USS.-Iran Claims Tribunal’s interpretation of Chorzéw Factory in Amoco.

As a starting point, Mr. Kardassopoulos cites the following well-known passage from

Chorz6w Factory:

“The essential principle contained in the actual notion of an illegal act - a
principle which seems to be established by international practice and in
particular by the decisions of arbitral tribunals — is that reparation must, as far
as possible, wipe out all the consequences of the illegal act and re-establish the
situation which would, in all probability, have existed if that act had not been
committed.

Restitution in kind, or, if this is not possible, payment of a sum corresponding to
the value which a restitution in kind would bear; the award, if need be, of

7 Judgment No. 13, 13 September 1928, Merits, 1928, PCI Ser. A, No. 17 (“Chorz6w Factory”).

- 1S7-

489.

490.

491.

492.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

damages for loss sustained which would not be covered by restitution in kind or
payment in place of it ...””"

Mr. Kardassopoulos submits that in Chorzéw Factory the PCIJ established two now
widely accepted propositions: (i) there is a distinction between lawful and unlawful
expropriations; and (ii) reparation for an unlawful expropriation must wipe out the
consequences of the illegal act and, when awarded in monetary rather than restitutionary

form, may be higher than compensation due for a lawful expropriation.

On a textual analysis of the ECT, Mr Kardassopoulos argues that a distinction may be
made out between a lawful and an unlawful expropriation in Article 13(1) of the Treaty.
In particular, Mr. Kardassopoulos contends that this provision spells out the standard
applicable to “such compensation”, i.e. a reference to the compensation requirement.
Article 13 neither expressly requires nor implies that compensation due in the event, for
example, of a discriminatory expropriation should be the same as compensation due in
the event of an expropriation that complies with the Treaty’s “conduct requirements”.
Moreover, Mr. Kardassopoulos claims that it is for the Respondent to show that the ECT
creates a lex specialis which supersedes the principles articulated by the PCIJ in Chorzow

Factory — which, in Mr. Kardassopoulos’ opinion, it has not done.

Mr. Kardassopoulos contends that this textual conclusion is also supported by arbitral
authority, such as the US-Iran Claims Tribunal award in Amoco and more recent
decisions in the Siemens, ADC and Vivendi v. Argentina” arbitrations, which recognize
the possibility of higher recovery where the value of the investment has increased

following the taking.

Whilst Mr. Kardassopoulos recognizes the body of arbitral authority which has expressed
an opposing view to this interpretation of the Chorzéw Factory case, he seeks to
distinguish such awards as inapposite on the grounds they either do not support the

proposition that an unlawful expropriation cannot be compensated according to a

1 Ibid. at p. 47.

™ ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Award (20 August 2007) (“Vivendi”).

- 158 -

493.

494.

495.

496.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

measure of damages exceeding the treaty standard or they simply do not deal with the

case of an unlawful (as opposed to a lawful) expropriation.

Based on the foregoing principles, Mr. Kardassopoulos claims he is entitled to damages
equal to his 25% interest in the greater of: (1) the value of GTI at 10 November 1995, one
day prior to the date on which Decree 477, establishing the GIOC, was passed, plus any
profits that would have been earned by it between 1996 and the date of the Tribunal’s
award; or (2) the value of GTI’s rights under the JVA and the Concession as of the date

of the Tribunal’s award.

In the alternative, even if the Tribunal determines that the alleged expropriation was
lawful, Mr. Kardassopoulos claims he is nonetheless entitled to “prompt, adequate and
effective” compensation equal to the FMV of the investment at the time immediately

before the expropriation.

b) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent agrees that should the Tribunal determine Mr. Kardassopoulos’
investment was lawfully expropriated, the relevant standard of compensation is “prompt,
adequate and effective compensation” or payment equal to the FMV of Mr.

Kardassopoulos’ investment at the date immediately prior to the expropriation.

In the event the Tribunal determines the expropriation of Mr. Kardassopoulos’ rights was
unlawful, the Respondent submits that Mr. Kardassopoulos is entitled to full reparation in
accordance with the principle established in Chorzéw Factory, that is: the status quo prior
to the wrongful act ought to be restored without unjustly enriching the injured party. The
Respondent rejects the proposition that Mr. Kardassopoulos is entitled to higher damages

in this case [Am. Rejoinder at para. 535]:

“Nothing in Chorzéw Factory can be interpreted to mean that international law
requires that the valuation date be moved mechanically to the date of the award
in all instances of unlawful expropriation. Rather, the above cited language from
Chorzé6w Factory makes apparent that the inquiry is a factual one, and a
decision-maker should only change the date of valuation where to do so would
further the goals of restitution, including to emphasize the consequence of
breach and provide remedial justice. However, where assessing the value of the
investment as of the date of the award would trample rather than serve well-
accepted principles of remuneration, such an approach would not, and should

- 159 -

497.

498.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

not, be required. It is telling that the Chorzéw Factory panel expressly held that
a party should not be entitled to more damages than it would have been able to
earn had it retained control of its investment. For example, the panel held that if
an investment of fresh capital would have been required for the normal
development of the undertaking, such sums should be deducted from any award
of damages.”

[Footnotes omitted.]

The Respondent reasons that numerous tribunals have calculated damages for an
unlawful expropriation by reference to the applicable treaty standard without regard to
customary international law, citing the U.S.-Iran Claims Tribunal cases in Phillips
Petroleum Co. Iran y. Iran” and Amoco, as well as more recent awards in the arbitrations
of Wena Hotels, Tecmed and Middle East Cement Shipping and Handling Co SA v.
Egypt”. The Respondent notes that the Claimants have conceded that the question of
what standard will apply to unlawful expropriations is an open issue, arguing that the
approach advocated in Phillips Petroleum should be followed here — that is, the standard

of compensation is the same whether the expropriation is lawful or unlawful.

The Respondent contends that the cases cited by Mr. Kardassopoulos turned on particular
facts not present here, such as profitable operation of the expropriated asset both prior to
and following expropriation. The Respondent likens the present facts to those in Vivendi,

reasoning that the tribunal in that case denied recovery of the profits sought by the

 

claimant because it had failed to establish with a suffi

  

ent degree of certainty that a
profit had been made while under the claimant’s operational control and its ability to
produce profits in the particular circumstances it faced. Seizing on the deterrence aims of
the tribunals in the cases relied upon by Mr. Kardassopoulos, the Respondent further
submits that Georgia did not seek to profit from the investment that Tramex made,
therefore allowing Mr. Kardassopoulos to value the investment as of the date of the
Award would not only hold no deterrent value but it would permit Mr. Kardassopoulos to

realize the value of someone else’s labour, i.e. AIOC.

721 Iran-U.S. Cl. Trib. Rep 79, Award No. 425-39-2 (Chamber Two) (29 June 1989) (“Phillips Petroleum”).

7 ICSID Case No. ARB/99/6, Award (12 April 2002) (“Middle East Cement’).

- 160 -

499.

500.

501.

502.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

The Respondent concludes that the Claimants seek to use customary international law
inappropriately in order to recoup speculative and non-foreseeable damages, averring that
customary international law does not allow the windfall that the Claimants seek. The
Respondent explains that this case must be distinguished from others where an investor,
whether by luck or skill, happened on a situation in which its investment would

necessarily have yielded windfall profits if the expropriation had not occurred.

Here, the Respondent argues, the evidence shows that the Claimants’ investment was a
fundamentally bad one: they lacked the requisite experience, expertise and financial
backing to turn their investment into a profitable one and they have not presented any
evidence that, had they retained their rights, they would have been in a substantially
different position than the one they were in prior to the alleged expropriation, i.e. in
possession of a failed investment. Moreover, they have not established that absent the
alleged unlawful expropriation, they would have earned or sold their rights to third-

parties for the windfall amounts they now claim.

c) The Tribunal’s Determination

Article 13(1) of the ECT provides that any expropriation shall be “accompanied by the
payment of prompt, adequate and effective compensation”, which compensation shall

further consist of the following:

“Article 13 Expropriation
[J

Such compensation shall amount to the fair market value of the Investment
expropriated at the time immediately before the Expropriation or impending
Expropriation became known in such a way as to affect the value of the
Investment (hereinafter referred to as the "Valuation Date").

Such fair market value shall at the request of the Investor be expressed in a
Freely Convertible Currency on the basis of the market rate of exchange existing
for that currency on the Valuation Date. Compensation shall also include
interest at a commercial rate established on a market basis from the date of
Expropriation until the date of payment.”
The Parties appear to agree that in the event of a lawful expropriation, the applicable
standard of compensation is “prompt, adequate and effective compensation”, which shall
amount to the FMV of the investment as of the date immediately before the expropriation

- 161 -

503.

504.

505.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

became known so as to affect the value of the investment. However, consistent with the
Tribunal’s findings in respect of liability, we are no longer in the realm of a lawful

expropriation.

The Parties differ in their appreciation of the appropriate standard of compensation for an
unlawful expropriation, although they begin their analysis in the same place. In
particular, both Parties rely on the statement of the PCIJ in Chorzéw Factory to the effect
that “reparation must, as far as possible, wipe out all the consequences of the illegal act
and re-establish the situation which would, in all probability, have existed if that act had

not been committed.””°

The Chorzéw Factory standard is reflected today in the ILC’s Articles on State
Responsibility, and in particular in their compensation provision, which provides as

follows:

“Article 36. Compensation

I. The State responsible for an internationally wrongful act is under an
obligation to compensate for the damage caused thereby, insofar as such
damage is not made good by restitution.

2. The compensation shall cover any financially assessable damage
including loss of profits insofar as it is established.”

The Commentary to Article 36 confirms that this compensation is generally assessed on

the basis of the FMV of the property rights lost:

“(21) The reference point for valuation purposes is the loss suffered by the
claimant whose property rights have been infringed. This loss is usually assessed
by reference to specific heads of damage relating to (i) compensation for capital
value; (ii) compensation for loss of profits; and (iii) incidental expenses.

(22) Compensation reflecting the capital value of property taken or destroyed as
the result of an internationally wrongful act is generally assessed on the basis of
the “fair market value” of the property lost. The method used to assess “fair
market value”, however, depends on the nature of the asset concerned. Where
the property in question or comparable properly is freely traded on an open
market, value is more readily determined. In such cases, the choice and
application of asset-based valuation methods based on market data and the
physical properties of the assets is relatively unproblematic, apart from
evidentiary difficulties associated with long outstanding claims. Where the

™ Chorz6w Factory, at p. 47.

- 162 -

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

property interests in question are unique or unusual, for example, art works or
other cultural property, or are not the subject of frequent or recent market
transactions, the determination of value is more difficult. This may be true, for
example, in respect of certain business entities in the nature of a going concern,
especially if shares are not regularly traded.”

506. The Parties part company in respect of how these principles apply to the present case.
The Respondent takes the position that whether the Tribunal applies the treaty standard or
the customary international law standard, these two standards present a distinction
without a difference, as FMV must be assessed at the date of the expropriation and not

the date of the Award, absent exceptional circumstances not present here.

507. The Claimants contend that this distinction does present a difference, because when
compensation is awarded for an unlawful expropriation in monetary rather than
restitutionary form it may be higher than the compensation due for a lawful
expropriation, such as where the expropriated rights have increased in value since the
date of the expropriation. They rely on the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal’s exposition of this
principle in Amoco, which adopted the proposition articulated by the PCIJ in Chorzéw

Factory”:

“Restitutio is well defined by the Court. It means the restitution in kind or, if that
is impossible, the payment of the monetary equivalent. In both cases the principle
on which it lies is the same: “that reparation must, as far as possible, wipe out
all the consequences of the illegal act and reestablish the situation which would,
in all probability, have existed if this act had not been committed.” Id. at 47. One
essential consequence of this principle is that the compensation “is not
necessarily limited to the value of the undertaking at the moment of
dispossession” (plus interest of the day of payment). According to the Court,
“this limitation would be admissible only if the Polish Government [the
expropriating State] had had the right to expropriate, and if its wrongful act
consisted merely in not having paid ... the price of what was expropriated.” Id.
This last statement is of paramount importance: It means that the compensation
to be paid in case of a lawful expropriation (or of a taking which lacks only the
payment of a fair compensation to be lawful) is limited to the value of the
undertaking at the moment of the dispossession, i.e., “the just price of what was
expropriated.”

 

[Footnotes omitted.]

© The PCI stated that damages are “not necessarily limited to the value of the undertaking at the moment of
dispossession”. Chorz6w Factory, at p 47.

7 Amoco, at para. 196.

- 163 -

508.

509.

510.

S11.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

However, the Amoco tribunal went on to clarify that even in case of an unlawful
expropriation, “the damage sustained is the measure of the reparation, and there is no

indication that ‘punitive damages’ could be considered.”

This debate concerning the distinction between the standard of compensation applicable
in the case of a lawful versus an unlawful expropriation was more recently summarized
by the ICSID tribunal in ADC, which found that the answer lies in the terms of the

applicable treaty:

“There is general authority for the view that a BIT can be considered as a lex
specialis whose provisions will prevail over rules of customary international law
(see e.g. Phillips Petroleum Co. Iran v. Iran, 21 Iran-U.S. Cl. Trib. Rep. at 121).
But in the present case the BIT does not stipulate any rules relating to damages
payable in the case of an unlawful expropriation. The BIT only stipulates the
standard of compensation that is payable in the case of a lawful expropriation,
and these cannot be used to determine the issue of damages payable in the case
of an unlawful expropriation since this would be to conflate compensation for a
lawful expropriation with damages for an unlawful expropriation. This would
have been possible if the BIT expressly provided for such a position, but this
does not exist in the present case.””

Since the treaty in that case (the BIT between Hungary and Cyprus) did not contain any
lex specialis rules governing the issue of compensation in the event of an unlawful
expropriation, the tribunal determined that the customary international law standard
prescribed in Chorzéw Factory applied. The tribunal further determined, in the unique
circumstances of the case, that because the value of the rights had appreciated
considerably since the date of expropriation the Chorzéw Factory standard required that

the rights be valued as of the date of the Award.

This approach has since been followed by other ICSID tribunals, including the tribunal in
Siemens, which ventured the following explanation:
“The law applicable to the determination of compensation for a breach of such

Treaty obligations is customary international law. The Treaty itself only provides
for compensation for expropriation in accordance with the terms of the Treaty.

78 Tid. at para. 197.

7 ADC, at para. 481.

- 164 -

512.

513.

514.

515.

80

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

The key difference between compensation under the Draft Articles and the
Factory at Chorzow case formula, and Article 4(2) of the Treaty is that under the
former, compensation must take into account “all financially assessable
damage” or “wipe out all the consequences of the illegal act” as opposed to
compensation “equivalent to the value of the expropriated investment” under the
treaty. Under customary international law Siemens is entitled not just to the
value of its enterprise as of May 18, 2001, the date of expropriation, but also to
any greater value that enterprise has gained up to the date of this Award, plus
any consequential damages.”*°

In the present case, it is clear that restitution is no longer possible. The Tribunal must

therefore determine the amount of compensation owing to Mr. Kardassopoulos.

As may be seen from the cases above in which a higher recovery has been permitted
under the customary international law standard of compensation, there must be a factual
basis on which to award such higher recovery. Any such recovery must, furthermore,

measure the damage sustained and not impose punitive damages on the Respondent State.

In certain circumstances full reparation for an unlawful expropriation will require
damages to be awarded as of the date of the arbitral Award. It may be appropriate to
compensate for value gained between the date of the expropriation and the date of the
award in cases where it is demonstrated that the Claimants would, but for the taking, have
retained their investment. For the reasons set out herein, however, this is not the case on

the facts of these arbitrations.

The evidence on the record indicates that the Claimants would likely have sold their
shares in GTI to AIOC (or a member of AIOC) in 1995 had Georgia affirmed the
Claimants’ rights. The Claimants appear to concede this proposition, although they argue
that it is a conservative scenario [see Kaczmarek I, para. 127]. This is precisely the
outcome they sought, however, in entering into negotiations with Velt Energie and
United Perlite. While the Claimants may have preferred to remain in the game in some
capacity, the record confirms that selling their shares in the GTI project would have been

an entirely acceptable outcome, assuming a fair price for those shares could be obtained.

Siemens, at paras. 349 and 352. This approach was also adopted by the tribunal in Vivendi. See Vivendi, at paras.

8.2.2-8.2.5.

- 165 -

516.

517.

518.

519.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Moreover, regardless of the Claimants’ preference to retain some interest in the Gachiani-
Supsa pipeline, the oral evidence of Mr. Adams suggests that AIOC’s shareholders would
have viewed their presence as an irritant, being a very small company on the scale of the
consortium and not having any technical expertise, and sought to negotiate the purchase
of their shares in the pipeline rather than work together [Tr. D9:97-101]. This is
confirmed by both industry experts, Mr. Beazley [Tr. D10:71] and Mr. Effimoff [Tr.
D10:127], who expressed the view that had the Georgian Government confirmed GTI’s
rights AIOC would likely have sought to negotiate with Tramex and purchase its interest

in GTI outright.

The Tribunal therefore finds that the appropriate standard of compensation from which to
approach the calculation of the damage sustained by Mr. Kardassopoulos is the FMV of
the early oil rights (including export rights) as of 10 November 1995. Whilst this pre-
dates the expropriation effected by Decree No. 178, the Tribunal considers that the
circumstances of this case require it to value Mr. Kardassopoulos’ investment as of the
day before passage of Decree No. 477 precisely to ensure full reparation and to avoid any
diminution of value attributable to the State’s conduct leading up to the expropriation.
This compensation is, in effect, the amount that Mr. Kardassopoulos should have been
paid as a result of the compensation process which the Respondent was obliged to put in

place promptly after the taking of the Claimants’ investment.

3. The Applicable Standard of Compensation for Fair and Equitable Treatment
In view of the Tribunal’s findings on jurisdiction and liability (see apragraphs 241, 248
and 449-50), the Tribunal shall in this part of the Award only consider the applicable

standard of compensation for breach of the FET provision under the Georgia / Israel BIT.

a) The Claimant’s Position

Mr. Fuchs submits that because no compensation standard is prescribed for a breach of
the FET obligation in the Georgia / Israel BIT, customary international law should apply.
Mr. Fuchs therefore asserts that damages should restore the investor to the situation that
would have resulted if the Respondent’s legal, contractual and/or unilateral commitments

had been honoured.

- 166 -

520.

521.

522.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Mr. Fuchs relies upon Article 30(1) of the Draft Convention on State Responsibility
(1961), which provides that:

“If... in any civil proceeding an alien has been denied access to a tribunal or an
administrative authority or an adverse decision or judgment has been rendered
against an alien or an inadequate recovery obtained by an alien, damages shall
include compensation for the amount wrongfully assessed against or denied such
alien and any other losses resulting directly from such proceeding or denial of
access.”

Mr. Fuchs takes the position that, in quantifying damage in an FET claim, a tribunal must
quantify the value of the protected expectation that was defeated by the unfair and
inequitable conduct. In support of this proposition Mr. Fuchs highlights the award in
Victor Pey Casado et al. v. Chile*!, in which the tribunal awarded damages for breach of
the FET provision in the Spain-Chile BIT (which contained no compensation standard in
connection with this provision) equivalent to what a fair State compensation process
would have awarded, as well as in OEPC v. Ecuador,” where the tribunal awarded
damages equal to the amount that should have been reimbursed under the applicable

VAT laws plus interest.

Mr. Fuchs recalls that Section 12.1 of the JVA and Section 21.1 of the Deed of
Concession stipulate that “the property rights of the Joint Venture are protected in
accordance with regulations of Georgian legislation and applicable international
conventions of treaties and publication international law”. In Mr. Fuchs’ view, this
represents an express commitment by Georgia not to expropriate and, in so doing,
incorporates investment protections under Georgian and customary international law
which require payment at least of FMV, thereby placing the present case squarely

alongside Pey Casado and OEPC, among other similar authorities.

8! ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2, Award (8 May 2008) (“Pey Casado”).

®? OEPC at paras. 198ff.

3 The Claimants note that the Law of the Republic of Georgia on Foreign Investments (30 June 1995) mirrors
customary international law in its Article 11.4, which provides that “The compensation that is paid to a foreign
investor shall be adequate to the real value of the seized investment at the moment of the requisition.” [Cl. Post-
Hearing Br. at para. 124, n. 222.

- 167 -

523.

524.

525.

526.

527.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Mr. Fuchs submits that, applying these principles, there are two potential approaches the
Tribunal may take in valuing Mr. Fuchs’ FET claim. The first approach would involve
awarding him the same sum as would be awarded to Mr. Kardassopoulos for the early oil

rights in 1995, plus interest. Mr. Fuchs takes the position that this is the best approach.

The second approach would involve awarding Mr. Fuchs a sum equivalent to half of all
of Tramex’s expenses associated with the GTI project, in the period before and after the
expropriation, based on either the Nexia or the Deloitte report, plus interest from the date

of the report.

Mr. Fuchs contends that the Respondent’s approach to the question of expenses is “totally
wrong”, explaining that he is entitled to have back everything he has spent in Georgia as
part of the whole GTI project, including the value of his time put in to the project and

post-expropriation expenses, i.e. the cost of the various audit reports and legal advice.

b) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent submits that, to the extent the same damages are claimed in respect of
Mr. Fuchs’ FET claim as the expropriation claim, it is inappropriate “to have the same
damages when the damage did not relate to the asset itself’ [Tr. D11:63]. In the
Respondent’s view, the standard applicable to Mr. Fuchs’ FET claim is that prescribed by
customary international law, namely to restore him to the position he would have been in

had there been no treaty breach.

The Respondent takes the position that there is no evidence to support the proposition
that Mr. Fuchs had a legitimate expectation of receiving compensation for the FMV of
his investment, pointing to the legal advice the Claimants received in September 1995
indicating that they were potentially in breach of contract, the modest amount of
construction work done by 1995 and the limited remit of the compensation commission
established in 1997. Even applying a hypothetical willing buyer-willing seller analysis,
the Respondent explains that the question is what would a reasonable buyer do if, after
doing due diligence, the reasonable buyer believed that the Claimants were in breach and

therefore had no rights.

- 168 -

528.

529.

530.

531.

532.

533.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

The Respondent argues, for greater certainty, that to the extent Mr. Fuchs’ request for
damages equivalent to FMV derives from Georgia’s alleged promise to provide the
Claimants with an equity interest in GIOC, this claim must fail because there is no

reliable evidence that Tramex was invited to participate in GIOC.

There is also no basis, in the Respondent’s view, for Mr. Fuchs to expect that the terms of
the JVA or Deed of Concession would apply to the compensation commission’s work.
But even if the JVA or Deed of Concession did apply, the Respondent takes the position

that these instruments only provide for the reimbursement of expenses.

However, the Respondent also rejects the proposition that Mr. Fuchs could have had a
legitimate expectation that even his expenses would be reimbursed, submitting that when
considered in proper context, i.e. in the context of a threat of legal action against
SakNavtobi, contemporaneous documentation, including President Shevardnadze’s
handwritten note in 1996 to “find a decision acceptable to all parties” and Order No. 84

establishing the compensation commission, brings even this proposition into question.

To the extent Mr. Fuchs had any legitimate expectation of compensation, the Respondent
takes the view that he could at the very most only have expected that Georgia would

compensate them for reasonable, proven expenses.

c) The Tribunal’s Determination

The Georgia / Israel BIT is silent on the standard of compensation applicable to breach of
Article 2(2). However, Article 36 of the ILC Articles on State Responsibility, reproduced
above, provides that a “state responsible for an internationally wrongful act is under an
obligation to compensate for the damage caused thereby, insofar as such damage is not
made good by restitution” and that such compensation “shall cover any financially

assessable damage, including loss of profits insofar as it is established.”

The effect of this provision, in the absence of specific treaty language to the contrary,
was described by the ICSID tribunal in Vivendi as follows:
“Based on these principles, and absent limiting terms in the relevant treaty, it is

enerally accepted today that, regardless of the type of investment, and
regardless of the nature of the _illegiti measure, the level of d

- 169 -

534.

535.

536.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

awarded in international i arbitration is d to be sufficient to
the affected party fully and to elimi the of the
state’s action.

Of course, the level of damages necessary to compensate for a breach of the fair
and equitable treatment standard could be different from a case where the same
government expropriates the foreign investment. The difference will generally
turn on whether the investment has merely been impaired or destroyed. Here,
however, we are not faced with a need to so differentiate, given our earlier
finding that the same measures emasculated the Concession Agreement,
rendering it valueless. Put differently, the breaches of Articles 3 and 5 caused
more or less equivalent harm.”

[Emphasis added.]

This approach has been endorsed by ICSID arbitral tribunals and other investment treaty
arbitration tribunals,** and the Tribunal finds no reason to depart from it in the present
case. There is no basis, in principle, on which to differentiate between the damage
caused as between Mr. Kardassopoulos and Mr. Fuchs given that, in each case, their

investment was irretrievably and entirely lost.

The Tribunal rejects the Respondent’s submission that Mr. Fuchs could not even have
legitimately expected to be reimbursed his expenses through the compensation
commission process or could only have expected that reimbursement would be limited to
his “proven” expenses, as seen by the Respondent. This argument is belied by the

documentary evidence, as well as witness testimony.

The Tribunal also rejects the contention that Mr. Fuchs could not have held a legitimate
expectation that he would be reimbursed more than just his share of the expenses
following the expropriation of GTI’s rights. The Tribunal is persuaded in this regard by
Mr. Fuchs’ submissions in connection with the JVA and the Deed of Concession and, in
particular, the effect of their respective invocation of Georgian law and _ public

international law.

Vivendi, at paras. 8.2.7-8.2.8.

85 See e.g. S.D. Myers, Inc. v. Canada, UNCITRAL (NAFTA), Partial Award (13 November 2000), at paras. 311-
315; Metalclad Corporation v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1, Award (30 August 2000), at
para. 122; MTD, at para. 238; Enron, at paras. 359-61.

- 170-

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

537. Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the applicable standard of compensation to Mr.
Fuchs’ FET claim is the FMV of his investment as of 10 November 1995, the same

measurement as applied in respect of Mr. Kardassopoulos’ expropriation claim.

4. The Appropriate Methodology for Valuing the Claimants’ Claims
538. In light of the Tribunal’s findings above in respect of the scope of the Claimants’ rights
(see paragraphs 317 to 349 above), only those quantum submissions related to the early

oil rights (including export rights) shall be considered in this part of the Award.

a) The Claimants’ Position

539. The Claimants submit that FMV is the price at which property would change hands
between a hypothetical willing and able buyer and a hypothetical willing and able seller,
acting at arm’s length in an open and unrestricted market, when neither is under
compulsion to buy or sell and when both have reasonable knowledge of the relevant
facts. Furthermore, the Claimants take the position that the Discounted Cash Flow
(“DCF”) method or income approach, complemented by the market approach, should be

used to arrive at the FMV of the Claimants’ 50% interest in GTT’s rights®®,

(1) The Market/Income Approaches

540. The Claimants assert that past arm’s-length transactions, whether executed or only
contemplated, represent strong evidence of an asset’s FMV™ and that the later operation
of the early oil pipeline by GTI’s successor, GIOC, constitutes ample proof of such value

in this case.

8° While the Claimants presented an alternative valuation intended to quantify the FMV of GIOC as of November
1999, this analysi based on the transit fees GIOC expected to collect from both the Baku-Supsa (early oil)
pipeline and the BTC (Main Export) pipeline. This analysis is also predicated on the factual circumstance that on 15
November 1999 Georgia informed the Claimants that they would not receive any compensation or a stake in GIOC
as the Claimants had expected. The Tribunal is not persuaded in any event that this alternative valuation is
appropriate in valuing the FMV of the Claimants’ interest in GTI.

 

§7 See e.g., Sergey Ripinsky and Kevin Williams, Damages in International Investment Law, at p. 216; Mark
Kantor, Valuation for Arbitration: Compensation Standards, Valuation Methods and Expert Evidence, at pp. 18-19.
See also Enron, at para. 387, and CME Czech Republic BV v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Award (14 March
2003), at paras. 514-62, where those tribunals had recourse to arms-length transactions in respect of the asset in
issue within proximity of the valuation date.

-171-

S41.

542.

543.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Proceeding under the premise that the Georgian Government would have acknowledged
the rights and property interest GTI possessed, Mr. Kaczmarek, the Claimants’ quantum
expert, established three distinct contemporaneous valuations of the Claimants’ 50%
interest in GTI. The Claimants accordingly take the position that the Tribunal’s task of
valuing their investment is assisted in this case by the fact that the market for GTI’s rights
in 1995 was not a hypothetical one but rather one of actual buyers and sellers, relying
upon the following three independent sources of valuation to the FMV of their
investment: (1) the leasing transaction between GIOC and AIOC; (2) the Brown & Root

transaction; and (3) the Velt Industries and United Perlite offer.

These three transactions are each weighted in order to arrive at a proxy for the FMV of
the Claimants’ 50% stake in GTI. Mr. Kaczmarek originally estimated the total weighted

average of these comparables to be US$31.3 million [Kaczmarek I, para. 137, table 10]:

Fair Market Value of a 50 Percent Interest in GTI as at 10 November 1995

 

 

Valuation Approach Weight | Valuation Weighted

Valuation
Lease of Gachiani-Supsa Assets | 55% $32,543,219 | $17,898,770
& Rights to AIOC

 

Brown & Root Analysis of | 35% $30,281,837 | $10,596,643
Gachiani-Supsa
Offer from Velt Energie 10% $28,100,000 | $2,810,000

Total 100% $31,307,413

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Following an adjustment for the deduction of security costs related to operation of the
Gachiani-Supsa pipeline, the Claimants reduced this weighted average to US $30.2
million [Cl. Post-Hearing Br. at para. 117, n. 202]. The Claimants reject any further
adjustment of this sum, such as to take account of taxes, project or country risk or other
risks, although Mr. Kaczmarek has provided adjusted figures in the event the Tribunal

determines a further deduction for taxes is appropriate.

The GIOC-AIOC Leasing Transaction

544.

The first comparable identified by the Claimants is based on GIOC’s leasing of the rights
and assets associated with the Gachiani-Supsa pipeline to AIOC. These were, according

to the Claimants, the same rights owned by GTI and taken by Decree No. 178. Mr.

-172-

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Kaczmarek assessed the leasing transaction as a low-risk, low-cost transaction for GIOC,
explaining his methodology in respect of this comparable as follows [Kaczmarek I, paras.

125-128]:

“T[...] GIOC would collect transit fees for the oil AIOC would pump through the
pipeline without incurring any construction, operating, or maintenance costs.
All of these costs would [be] borne by AIOC. However, the cost of this low-risk,
low-cost transaction was foregoing the higher profits that GTI could have
earned by operating the pipeline. According to our extension of Brown & Root’s
forecasts, GTI could have earned net profits of US$ 1.12 per barrel in tariffs
between 2002 and 2023. Thus, Georgia’s 50 percent stake in GTI would have
yielded US$ 0.56 per barrel or more than three times the transit fee GIOC
negotiated with AIOC.

Had Georgia supported GTI in negotiations with AIOC rather than GIOC (as
Counsel has asked us to assume), it is reasonable to conclude that GTI could
have negotiated the same (or more favourable) deal than that which GIOC
negotiated with AIOC for the Gachiani-Supsa pipeline assets and rights.
Accordingly, the value GIOC received by leasing the Gachiani-Supsa pipeline to
AIOC could have accrued to the benefit of GTI.

It is important to note that Claimants could have leased the Gachiani-Supsa
pipeline assets and rights to AIOC, just as GIOC did, without selling their shares
in GTI. Hence, Claimants could have retained their rights to construct and
operate all future pipelines in Georgia plus all of the additional rights granted
under the Joint Venture Agreement. However, in valuing Claimants’ GTI shares
utilizing the GIOC/AIOC transaction, we have conservatively assumed
Claimants would have transferred their GTI shares to AIOC for the same
remuneration GIOC received for leasing the assets and rights to AIOC. This
assumption is consistent with our view that a reasonably informed buyer would
value the GTI shares based upon the most certain and realistic projects GTI was
likely to undertake. It is also not unreasonable to believe that GIOC and AIOC
had agreed to cooperate on future pipeline projects as well. If GIOC had
promised cooperation to AIOC on potential future pipelines, the GIOC/AIOC
deal would more closely resemble a sale of GTI shares with GIOC receiving
potential future upside.

Claimants, as 50 percent owners of GTI, would have been entitled to half of the
transit fees AIOC agreed to pay GIOC. Thus, the fair_market value of
Claimants’ investment in GTI as of the Valuation Date can be measured by
valuing half of the expected transit fees under the terms of the agreement
between AIOC and GIOC. As such, we constructed a discounted cash flow
valuation model based on the pipeline tariff fees that GTI was expected to
receive from AIOC. Our discounted cash flow valuation covers the period 1996
to 2023, which is the year GTI’s rights under the 30-year concession would have
expired. Our estimate of the transit payments was calculated using two key
inputs: the per-barrel pipeline transit rate and the number of barrels expected to
be shipped through the Western Route.”

[Footnotes omitted. Emphasis added.]

- 173 -

545.

546.

547.

548.

549.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Mr. Kaczmarek estimated the per-barrel transit rate based on the PCOA between GIOC
and AIOC, which set this rate at $0.17 per barrel beginning in 1996, adjusted for inflation
at 3% per year. He further estimated annual throughput at 40,000 barrels per day in
1997, increasing to 100,000 barrels per day by 2000, based on Brown & Root’s estimates

of throughput volume for the Gachiani-Supsa pipeline in 1995.

In order to determine the cash flows the Claimants would have received by selling their
50% interest in GTI to AIOC, Mr. Kaczmarek multiplied the forecasted throughput by
the forecasted transit rate for each year until 2023, the year GTI’s rights under the Deed
of Concession would have expired. A nominal discount rate of 10% (representing a real
rate of 7%) was applied to these expected future cash flows, and the result multiplied by

50% to account for the Claimants’ share.

Mr. Kaczmarek explained that a 10% nominal discount rate, although lower than the rate
applied in the Brown & Root valuation (see below), corresponds to a significantly lower
tisk profile associated with leasing the operations of the pipeline rather than operating it.
By leasing the pipeline to AIOC, the only risk borne by the Claimants would be potential
disruptions to throughput caused by lower than expected production of oil by AIOC and
AIOC credit risk, i.e. the risk of being a lender to AIOC. Mr. Kaczmarek further
explained that annual production from ACG was expected to reach 8 to 10 times the
throughput level used in his valuation model, therefore the risk of lower throughput (and
correspondingly lower cash flow) is minimal. The risk of lending to AIOC was also
considered to be minimal given that the consortium is composed of international oil
companies with significant resources. Thus, Mr. Kaczmarek estimated that the lending
rate to AIOC would likely be US prime. Given the US prime rate of interest was 8.75
percent in late 1995, he considered a 10% discount rate (a spread of 1.25 percent over

prime) adequate to compensate for the above throughput risks.

In their Post-Hearing Brief, the Claimants also pointed out that in August 1995, AIOC
had modelled its projections for the Western Route on discount rates between 5% and

10% [Cl. Post Hearing Br. at para. 109, citing Hearing Bundle, Tab 307].

In response to several criticisms by the Respondent as to the appropriateness of relying

on this transaction to estimate the value of Tramex’s 50% interest in GTI’s rights, the
-174-

550.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Claimants observe that the JVA and the PCOA overlap in an important respect, namely in
that GTI had the right to lease the pipelines under Article 17 of the Deed of Concession.
The Claimants take the position that they do not need to prove that they could have built
the pipeline to rely on the leasing scenario, but only that their rights would have been

honoured.

The Claimants also reject criticism by Mr. Lagerberg, the Respondent’s quantum expert,

of the AIOC leasing transaction as misconceived [Tr. D12:78-80]:

“Look at the reasons he gives for why he rejected the comparable for the GIOC
sale -- I call it a sale loosely, obviously it's technically a lease, but it was
effectively a sale -- of the rights to AIOC in March 1996. He says, "Ah, two
problems with that, this is why they're not the same. GTI was a different kind of
seller to what GIOC would have been. GTI was 50 per cent commercially
owned, and GIOC was 100 per cent government owned, so they had different
priorities". This is a big theme in the respondent's case: so you can't compare the
number.

His second reason is: "GTI's business model was different because what GTI
was going to do was refurbish an existing pipeline and run it themselves and
then have transit fees, whereas AIOC was going to build its own, so what the
buyer was going to do afterwards with the rights was very different, so I can't
compare". Both of those reasons show a complete lack of understanding of what
a fair market analysis requires the valuer to do. You don't look at what the
buyer and seller want and their intentions and their strategies, you look at
whether the rights are the same rights. It doesn't matter who GIOC was,
whether they were government owned or whether they were a commercial
enterprise.

The reason you're looking at that transaction is because it's actual evidence of
what transit rights were worth in the market in March 1996, and because it's so
close to the evaluation date for expropriation, you can make the assumption that
it was about the same number as it would have been worth if it had been sold on
the valuation date. They're very close in time. It's an actual transaction, and
because it was an actual transaction, you don't go into the minutiae of what
motivated GIOC and AIOC to reach that deal, because if you did, in fact, if you
adjust the analysis, it would adjust to our favour, because in fact, it was a very
low price. It was a very low price, we say, because GIOC was basically just a
patsy. AIOC had all of the bargaining power, Georgia was desperate for the
pipeline to go through, it's a very cheap price.

[...]

So if you're looking at whether that was a commercial deal, it probably wasn't,
but we're not allowed to say that, because if you're just looking at market value,
it was a real deal. It was a real deal, and the rights were the same, they were the
transit rights through the western route, and it doesn't matter how AIOC was
planning to exploit them. It doesn't matter that they were going to build their

- 175 -

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

own pipeline in the end and not use the existing one, because they decided to do
a Rolls Royce job instead of the patch job that GTI were going to do. It doesn't
matter that an individual buyer and an individual seller had a different game
plan.

What matters is the rights are the same, and they had a price, and it's a price
that's at a timeframe that is very close to the valuation date.”

551. Mr. Kaczmarek estimates the value of a 50% interest in GTI based on this transaction at
US$ 32,543,219. Having conceded a deduction of US$ 0.01 per barrel for security costs,
i.e. US$ 1,914,307, Mr. Kaczmarek adjusts this value to US$ 30,628,912.

552. In the event the Tribunal determines that a deduction for payment of corporate income
and income withholding taxes is also appropriate, Mr. Kaczmarek offers an alternative
value for the Claimants’ stake in GTI of US$ 21,440,238, having assessed those taxes at
US$ 18,377,347 [Kaczmarek II, para. 61, Table 5].

The Brown & Root Offer

553. The second comparable put forward by the Claimants is the offer extended by Brown &
Root in 1995 to purchase a 25% stake in GTI. Mr. Kaczmarek explains the methodology
applied to arrive at a value for this transaction in his first expert report as follows

[Kaczmarek I, para. 98]

“Brown & Root created a number of detailed financial analyses and cash flow
projections that can serve as a reliable basis for a DCF valuation of GTI as of
the Valuation Date. These analyses were constructed by a willing buyer in the
course of its due diligence on an investment in GTI and represent the most
reliable view of the project at the time in our view. While it is possible for us to
independently develop our own projections for the Western Route project as of
late 1995, in our view it would be disingenuous to do so because it would
suggest that our own projections, prepared nearly 12 years after the relevant
date, would somehow be better or preferable to Brown & Root’s
contemporaneously prepared projections. Even if the Brown & Root projections
were too conservative or too aggressive, the projections still represent the best
available evidence for the expectations of the project at that time. However, in
an effort to better understand Brown & Root’s analysis, we evaluated their
projections and assumptions for reasonableness.”

554. As Brown & Root evaluated the financial and operational scenarios of the transaction on
three different levels — pessimistic, expected and optimistic — Mr. Kaczmarek selected the

middle ground expected scenario on which to base his DCF valuation.

- 176 -

555.

556.

557.

558.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

The Claimants’ 50% share of GTI was then valued in two “tranches”. The first tranche
reflects the 25% stake in GTI that Brown & Root was willing to purchase for cash. The
second tranche reflects the 25% stake in GTI that the Claimants would have retained, but
which, in a “post-money” analysis, would accrue additional value based on Brown &

Root’s in-kind contribution.

With respect to the first tranche, Mr. Kaczmarek observes that the ten-year cash flow
projections Brown & Root prepared to support a cash offer for a 25% interest in GTI
resulted in a US$ 11 million to US$ 16.5 million valuation. This was the basis on which
Brown & Root agreed to pay cash consideration of US$ 10 million. As this $ 10 million
was to be paid in instalments over time, Mr. Kaczmarek applies a 12% discount rate (a
real rate) — the same rate used by Brown & Root to determine the $10 million purchase

price for its shares in GTI — arriving at a present value of US$ 9,536,691.

With respect to the second tranche, Mr. Kaczmarek observes that Brown & Root had
based its valuation of GTI on projections up to 2006 as opposed to 2023, thereby
establishing a “pre-in-kind” valuation. To extend the cash flow projections, Mr.
Kaczmarek extends the same assumptions Brown & Root used to develop the cash flows

for the first ten years of the project.

To discount cash flows to present value, Mr. Kaczmarek again applies a 12% discount
rate, the same used by Brown & Root in its original analysis. Mr. Kaczmarek explains
why, in his consideration, this rate is an acceptable measure of the risks of investing in

GTI in 1995 [Kaczmarek I, paras. 116-120]:

“[...] First, the discount rate was established by an informed buyer and is the
best reflection of how a third party viewed the risks of making an investment in
GTI shares at the time.

Second, GTI was to earn tariffs in US dollars. Thus, GTI was not exposed to
potential inflationary environment in Georgia. In fact, with its revenues
denominated in US dollars and its operating costs denominated in Georgian
Lari, GTI was more likely to experience higher margins in the future if the Lari
lost value against the US dollar (which was not a very unlikely situation given
the emerging market status of Georgia at the time).

Third, GTI had the benefit of the state’s participation in the venture. Any
political action resulting in harm to GTI would also harm the state itself.

-177-

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Fourth, although GTI would face competition from regional and international
players, GTI’s concession eliminated competition in [the] Georgian pipeline
construction and operation sector during the period of concession. Accordingly,
GTI did not face any competition for the development of these projects in
Georgia.

Fifth, GTI’s core business was tied more closely to the global oil and gas
markets rather than to the Georgian economy. Thus, local economic risk would
have a minimal effect on GTI’s business operations.”

[Footnotes omitted.]

Mr. Kaczmarek concludes that the FMV of the second tranche of the Brown & Root offer
is US$ 20,745,146.

The Claimants reject Mr. Lagerberg’s criticisms of this comparable as misplaced,
summarizing their response to the reasons given by Mr. Lagerberg as follows [Tr.

D12:82-84, 85]:

“First reason: the Brown & Root offer was too uncertain, because there were too
many variables which hadn't happened yet before the deal could be
consummated, and one of those variables he mentions is the fact that Brown &
Root required a condition that the Georgian government confirm that they would
honour the rights, and of course that didn't happen.

Well, we all know if you're valuing for the purposes of expropriation, the one fact
you're absolutely not supposed to take into account is the expropriatory conduct
of the , so that's a letely irrelevant consideration. Equally
irrelevant is this idea that he's supposed to take into account the fact that the deal
hadn't yet been consummated, but again if it had been there would have been a
sale in the market. If he's right, it means you can never have as a comparable a
sale that's almost concluded and we know from the cases that valuers do that all
the time. Almost deals, heads of agreement, where someone's actually agreed the
price, and what it is they're buying, if that bit's agreed, that's a very good
indication of a market value, and it doesn't matter, contrary to what Mr
Lagerberg thinks, it doesn't matter that Brown & Root might have wanted to buy
the rights to position themselves to get a really good construction project later. It
doesn't matter why you want to buy something, it just matters that you want to
pay for it.

The fact that you have a different game plan of how you want to use those rights
is irrelevant, because as Mr Effimoff says, these rights had value in a different
amount to different buyers. Everybody might have wanted them for a different
reason. A competitor of AIOC that also had oil in the ex-Soviet Union might well
have wanted to buy the pipeline rights and screw their competitors on the transit
fees when they needed to get their Caspian Sea oil out to market. There's all
sorts of people that could have been interested in this pipeline. And Mr
Kaczmarek says we've got evidence of three different constituents in the market,
all of whom had different motivations, who each wanted to buy these rights, and
who each would have done something very different with them.

- 178 -

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

What you do is if you've got three different lots, then you can put them together,
and say, "Here's what a construction firm wanted to pay for these rights, here's
what the producers in the Caspian wanted to pay for these rights, and look at the
Velt Energie offer, this is what the government was prepared to get a broker to
come in and buy the rights for, to get rid of Tramex."

So you've got a number for the nuisance value payment, you've got a number for
someone who wants it for construction, and you've got a number for somebody
who want it for the transit. All of those are valuable, it creates valuable
information from which you can create a hypothetical deal, and you weight them,
you say which ones are the most important, and he's right, the most important
one is the AIOC one, and Mr Lagerberg hadn't even looked at the evidence of
AIOC's calculations in December of 1995, of how they got to the number. He
hadn't even seen that evidence. Because if he's right, if it's impossible to know
what these rights could have been worth in November 1995, how on earth could
AIOC, three months later, have bought them?

They did numbers, Brown & Root did numbers, and to say, oh yes, it didn't get
consummated, you don't sign a heads of agreement unless you've at least worked
out the number, and it wasn't Mr Ferguson's frolic all by himself, as the
respondent seems to suggest; the number that was offered by Brown & Root was
approved at the highest level of Brown & Root by the head man himself. So
companies like Brown & Root don't sign heads of agreement and commit to
numbers if they haven't at least worked out that what they're going to buy is
something worth what they're prepared to pay for it.”

561. Mr. Kaczmarek estimates the FMV of the Claimants’ 50% interest in GTI based on this
offer to be US$ 30,281,837 (i.e. US$ 9,536,691 + US$ 20,745,146), unless an adjustment
is made to incorporate the impact of corporate income taxes, which would reduce the

value of the second tranche to US$ 14,260,325 for a total FMV of US$ 23,797,015.

The Velt Energie Offer

562. Finally, the Claimants rely on an offer extended to Tramex at a meeting on 20 June 1995

by United Perlite Industries and Velt Energie for the Claimants’ interest in GTI.

563. Mr. Kaczmarek explains the approach taken to arrive at a value for this comparable as

follows [Kacmarek I, para. 135]:

“At the meeting, Velt Energie effectively offered Claimants US$ 20 million for
the GTI shares held by them through Tramex. This offer was quickly rejected by
Claimants, who responded with a counter-offer of US$ 50 million plus a 5
percent stake in the AIOC’s pipeline project. Later over dinner, we understand
that Velt Energie expressed a willingness to increase its offer to US$ 25 million.
Ultimately no final agreement was reached between the parties at this meeting.
However, a letter sent by Prime Minister Patsatsia to Mr. Fayek Ataya (a person
apparently authorized to negotiate the Velt Energie offer with Georgia’s

- 179 -

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

approval) subsequent to the meeting indicates that the Prime Minister felt Velt
Energie’s offer plus a remaining stake of 5 percent in the project, was ‘almost
adequate’ and asked Mr. Ataya to negotiate further. In short, it appears that
Prime Minister Patsatsia felt the Velt Energie offer could fairly be increased. If
the ‘offer’ Prime Minister Patsatsia referred to in his letter is the US $25 million
offer verbally extended by Velt Energie and if our GTI share valuation of
approximately US $62 million is correct (based upon our prior two valuati
analyses), then one can conclude that Prime Minister Patsatsia believed _an
ic offer of US $28.1 million (US $25 million plus 5% of US $62 million

was ‘almost adequate’ for Claimant’s rights. Thus, the Prime Minister’s letter
(presumably reflecting the views of the Georgian government) corroborates the
valuation conclusions reached by our first two analyses.”

[Emphasis added.]

564. During the Hearing, the Claimants took the position that this offer was effectively
confirmed by Georgia, as evidenced by contemporaneous documentation [Tr. D11:22-
24):

“So Georgia, through Professor Tevzadze, was there at the meeting, participated
and affirmed the opening offer, and if you look at the same letter, I don't have it
up on the slide, and in the time available, I'm not going to spend too much time
on this, but if you look in the same tab, you'll see that it describes Mr Ataya as
attending the meeting on behalf of the government of Georgia.

Our understanding of the background to this is that United Perlite and Velt
Energie were shareholders in a special purpose vehicle called -- I believe it was
called the Trans-Georgian Pipeline Company, which was in discussions with
SakNavtobi as to a buy-out of the rights in mid 1995, and under the contract,
Georgia would have to pay back out of its share of the revenues of the contract
whatever was paid to Tramex.

So this is not only a third party offer, but this is an offer that's coming out of
Georgia's pocket and being endorsed by Georgia.

Mr Kardassopoulos has testified that the opening offer was raised to 25 million
subsequently over dinner, he wasn't cross-examined about that. And the
claimants returned by seeking 50 million, plus a 5 per cent interest in the
successor entity. If you look at Mr Kardassopoulos' third statement, they wanted
the 5 per cent interest not simply for transit fees but rather to pump their own oil
through the pipeline in the way that they had initially envisaged under the
original GTI model in 1992.

The Prime Minister replies to Mr Ataya's report of the meeting:

"We have received your detailed information. We think the offer you suggested
was almost adequate, if you can go on to sweeten the deal by offering another 5
per cent of the share capital in the way that Tramex has requested."

And that offer comes out at 28. [...]”

- 180 -

565.

566.

567.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

As with the above comparables, Mr. Kaczmarek has provided an alternative calculation
for this comparable to take account of the payment of taxes, estimating a value of US$
27,144,029 (US$ 25 million plus 5% of US$ 42,880,476, the alternative value for the
GTI under the GIOC-AIOC leaving transaction).

The Claimants conclude that the use of three contemporary sources of value and the
weighting of those “mutually-reinforcing valuation techniques” is in keeping with
orthodox valuation methodology. They reject the Respondent’s contention that the above
sources are inapposite to value their investments. The Claimants insist that the evidence
of these transactions is being proffered to show the terms that a willing buyer would have
offered to GTI, a willing seller, had the JVA and Concession been honoured and is not, as

the Respondent alleges, an attempt to “step into another’s shoes” [Reply at para. 205].

(2) The Cost Approach

The Claimants assert that the Respondent’s approach to valuation, which would ascribe a
value of “nil” to the Claimants’ project rights and award them only their costs of the
project, is misconceived, contending that the Respondent has effectively asked the

“wrong questions” and, in so doing, has arrived at the wrong answer [Tr. D12:76-77, 86]:

“Unfortunately, yesterday, it's pretty clear that experienced though he is, Mr
Lagerberg has approached the quantum issue in this case as basically a forensic
auditor. He's not approached it in what we would say the proper way is to
approach the question of fair market value. He allowed himself to be very
distracted by some of the factual pattern that's very important to the respondents,
and which we say is completely irrelevant to the question of quantum, and he has
allowed himself, in being distracted by that fact pattern, and it's an alleged fact
pattern, to actually ask himself the wrong questions, and although he says he's
asking the question, and he accepts that the right question is hypothetical
buyer/hypothetical seller, as at the date of valuation, November 1995, and to try
and fix an objective price on that, if you actually look at the answers he gave to
the questions, you realise that he was asking himself a different question, and had
a different series of assumptions.

Before I turn to the numbers, because I do want to explain why it is that the only
viable numbers you have before you are our numbers, and why you should feel
comfortable with that, I think it's very important to know why it is that Mr
Lagerberg went so terribly wrong. In fact, the question he really has asked
himself in valuing these rights is to say what were the rights worth in the hands of
these claimants. That is the wrong question. It's not the test. And if you look at
some of the answers he gave to the questions yesterday, he's essentially said, "If
these claimants held on to the rights and tried to exploit them, there would have

- 181-

568.

569.

570.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

been too many uncertainties and too many risks. These claimants [he says] I
don't think could have made money from these rights".

He might be right about that, it doesn't matter, because it's not the question. This
is not a contract claim. We are not coming to you as an ICC tribunal under the
contract on behalf of Tramex rather than the two individual claimants that you
actually have, and we're not saying to you, "We want loss of profit for the life of
the joint venture, and this is what we think we would have made".

[J

So I think for an expert to sit there and say, "There are no valid comparables",
just shows that he has been too distracted by this notion that these claimants
somehow don't deserve to get a number of any value, because they couldn't have
ever made these rights work, but that is not the test. Mr Lagerberg has asked
himself all the wrong questions, and if you ask yourself the wrong question, no
matter how respectable you are, you get completely the wrong answer. So I am
sorry to say that virtually all of his expert report is completely useless to you in
what you have to do in this case, which is to determine what the number is.”

Nevertheless, Mr. Kaczmarek provides a further alternative valuation of GTI’s rights
based on the cost approach, stating that such an approach could provide a reliable
measure of the FMV of the Claimants’ interest in GTI if applied properly. Proper
application of the cost approach would, in his view, involve a determination of what it
would cost to acquire the rights GTI possessed at 10 November 1995. According to Mr.
Kaczmarek, this would necessarily include valuing the exclusive rights to build and
operate the Gachiani-Supsa export system. On Mr. Kaczmarek’s assessment under the
cost approach, a 50% share of GTI in November 1995 would be worth US$ 36,517,031,
i.e. approximately US$ 18 million, net of interest, for each Claimant [Kaczmarek II,

paras. 163-168].

b) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent takes the position that, whether under the Treaties or under customary
international law, the Claimants are required to prove their loss, and they have not done
so in this case. In the absence of reliable evidence, the Respondent therefore submits that
it is appropriate to approach valuation in this case on the basis of historical expenditure,

not a cash flow analysis.

The Respondent submits that FMV requires the following five elements: (i) a willing and

able buyer and seller; (ii) acting at arm’s length; (iii) in an open and unrestricted market;

- 182 -

S71.

572.

573.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

(iv) where both buyer and seller have reasonable knowledge of the relevant facts; and (v)
no special motivation or circumstance [Tr. D11:40]. Furthermore, an FMV assessment
assumes conditions as they actually exist. In valuing GTI’s rights, the Respondent
considers that, in the circumstances, the latter two elements (reasonable knowledge and
special motivation) preclude the approach taken by the Claimants and, in particular, any

reliance on the three comparables.

In the Respondent’s view, the price that a third party buyer would have been willing to
pay for GTI’s rights would have been impacted by the “lack of legal certainty” in respect
of those rights. The Respondent adds that if there is a reasonable basis to believe that a
willing buyer in the hypothetical willing seller —willing buyer scenario was not made
aware of relevant facts, and would have acted differently in the face of those facts, then
any value the buyer offered while in a state of ignorance would not be a meaningful

proxy of how any other party in the market would act.

In this regard, the Respondent highlights the Tribunal’s finding in its Decision on
Jurisdiction, to the effect that Tramex’s rights were void under Georgian law [Tr.

D12:200-01):

“In the jurisdictional award, and I'm glad to see some of the Tribunal members
re-reading it, the Tribunal dealt with the issue of the validity of the claimants’
rights, under both Georgian law and international law, and under Georgian law,
this Tribunal found that Tramex's rights were void, and we believe that any third
party who was reasonably informed would reach a similar conclusion as this
Tribunal.

We would only add that while the Tribunal determined that Georgia was
estopped from evoking Georgian law vis-a-vis the claimants, in terms of asserting
jurisdiction in this case, that says nothing, nor could it, about how a third party
would view the claimants' rights.”

The Respondent further submits that the price that a third party buyer would have been
willing to pay would have been impacted by the “risk of rescission”, relying upon the
advice provided in the Paisner & Co. Preliminary Note [Hearing Bundle, Tab 142] and
the testimony of Mr. MacDonald, to wit [Tr. D7:12]:

“I don’t recall that Chee Jap ever told us that their rights were being attacked,

and being called into question.... I would have immediately gone to Larry Farmer
and told him, and without a doubt he would have pulled the plug there and then.

- 183 -

574.

575.

576.

577.

578.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

We couldn’t afford to get involved in an argument between the government of
Georgia and entrepreneurs that we were thinking of.”

In regard to the fifth element of the FMV test, the Respondent states that the Brown &
Root offer is an inappropriate comparable because Brown & Root had “special
motivation” for striking a deal in respect of GTI’s rights. The Respondent relies, in this
regard, on the testimony of Mr. Ferguson and Mr. Farmer to the effect that Brown &
Root’s main interest was securing engineering contracts with AIOC and the investment
would have only proceeded if the investment could have been recovered from profit from

the provision of engineering and construction services [Tr. D3:10; Farmer I, para. 8].

The Respondent submits that, on an FMV analysis, there is a “threshold of evidentiary
value that any comparable must meet, and it is certainty’. The Respondent agrees that
while this threshold does not require perfection, it does require “‘sufficient probability”
[Tr. D12:198-99]. The Respondent cautions against accepting numbers proffered by the

Claimant simply because those numbers existed during the relevant period.

(1) The Market/Income Approaches

In considering the most appropriate approach to valuing the Claimants’ rights, the
Respondent takes the position that the cost approach is to be preferred over the market or
income approach, because there is more reliable evidence for a valuation on this basis.

The Respondent’s cost approach is set out below in Part V.E.4(b)(2).

As regards the income and market approaches deployed by the Claimants, Mr. Lagerberg
concludes that neither approach produces a credible valuation and that, while valuations
using these approaches may be theoretically possible, they are not appropriate in the
present case because the resulting valuations are highly speculative and fundamentally
unreliable. In considering the proposed comparables under the market approach, Mr.
Lagerberg cautions that an offer that is mature and close to completion has “greater
credence for valuation purposes than an offer that might be no more than a the starting
point of a negotiation”. Mr. Lagerberg considers both the Brown & Root and Velt

Energie offers to fall in the latter category [Lagerberg I, para. 3.11].

In considering the GIOC-AIOC leasing transaction developed under the income

approach, i.e. using a DCF model, Mr. Lagerberg considers that the immaturity of the
- 184 -

579.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

project and the absence of credible data for fundamental assumptions, such as tariff rates,
capital expenditure, financing and realistic timescales, means that the valuation would be
based on such a high degree of speculation the result would be inherently unsound and

unreliable.

Mr. Lagerberg also takes the view that the weightings assigned to each of the Claimants’
proposed comparables are arbitrary. However, to the extent these weightings are
considered “appropriate in principle”, he states that a 25% interest in GTI would be worth
US$ 1.5 million, based on his adjusted calculation of the value to be ascribed to each
comparable respectively: GIOC-AIOC leasing transaction - US$ 801,985 (x 17.5%);
Brown & Root transaction - US$ 4,974,177 (x 17.5%) + US$ 501,511 x 45%; and the
Velt Energie Offer - US$ 2,775,000 (x 10%) [Lagerberg I, para. 5.73].

The GIOC-AIOC Leasing Transaction

580.

581.

582.

Mr. Lagerberg raises three main criticisms of this transaction: (a) the role of GIOC was
fundamentally different from that of GTI; (b) GTI was a joint venture between Tramex
and SakNavtobi for a Build, Own Operate or “BOO” project; and (c) GIOC was a state-
owned company with different priorities than GTI and entered into a leasing arrangement
with AIOC (who had rights to throughput/reserves in Azerbaijan) for a number of

pipelines, not limited to the Gachiani-Supsa pipeline [Lagerberg I, para. 5.54].

In Mr. Lagerberg’s view, a valuation of GTI based on the leasing arrangement “is not
realistic and should be positioned as a theoretical exercise about a hypothetical situation
rather than a meaningful assessment of the value of the Claimants’ interest in the equity

of GTI as at 1995.” [Lagerberg I, para. 5.57].

Mr. Lagerberg elaborated on the basis for his rejection of the leasing transaction during

the witness conferencing procedure as follows [Tr. D11:151-52]:

“MR LAGERBERG: Without diving into detail, if, for example, you're looking at
the leasing transaction between GIOC and AIOC, and you're by implication
saying the economic benefits of that deal should be used to value GTI because
they're comparable, now look at that transaction from the perspective of the
different players, if you're Tramex, you see money, and so you think there's value
in that, we'll take the value.

- 185 -

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

You then look at it from GIOC's perspective, Georgia's perspective, would it be
the same? Mr Kaczmarek has described accurately that the high value
proposition was the build and operate, run your own thing, maximise your
revenue, and then the leasing is a lower value operation.

If we're looking at GTI, on the basis that the primary purpose, the intention of
GTI was to build and operate, we're now talking about a different scenario,
inherently by nature a very different operation, which is a leasing one. So
Georgia is now going from a high value down to a low value operation. In the
BOO, it was looking for an equal contribution from its joint venture partner.
It's now going to a venture where there's no contribution from its partner.

If you look from AIOC's perspective, in the GIOC transaction, AIOC is dealing
with essentially the sovereign state, sovereign government, and they're looking to
it to deliver what they expect of the sovereign government. From their
perspective, just logically, dealing with an entity which is 50 per cent
government owned, 50 per cent commercial, privately owned, is a different
proposition. You have interests immediately which may not be aligned. You
then may be, and I accept that in the GIOC transaction there weren't many
obligations on GIOC, but in principle, if you're dealing with a state-owned
entity, from AIOC's perspective, they would expect Georgia to deliver.

There might be concerns that if you're dealing with an entity which has got a
state-owned and a commercial enterprise, would your counterparty be able to
deliver? Would the commercial enterprise be able to deliver? And then again,
from Tramex's perspective, would they want to deal long-term, partnership, or
short-term, in any basis, with Tramex?

THE CHAIRMAN: Isn't that a pretty good indication of the value which the
Republic of Georgia recognised was attached to those rights?

MR LAGERBERG: I think it's too easy just to simply say it was a deal therefore
it must by reference be the value that GTI could have got. What I'm saying is
what you're trying to do is say that the value of GTI is the same as the value of
this GIOC transaction, because they're comparable. What I'm pointing out is
that actually there are significant, fundamental differences between the two, and
therefore to simply say we must assume that whatever Georgia's position would
be, whatever AIOC's position would be, is irrelevant.

So if you look at Georgia, they're going for a low value proposition, so giving up
the value from a BOO, and they're giving 50 per cent away, does that make
economic sense from Georgia? It might, but I'm just saying that the very fact
that they're different by nature, counterparty, et cetera, means you cannot make
a simple assumption, A equals B, simply because they both happen to be in the
universe.”

583. As a result, the Respondent rejects the GIOC-AIOC leasing transaction, asserting that it
is an inappropriate comparator to establish a value for GTI’s rights because it is too

different from the model contemplated by the GTI project and therefore one cannot stand

- 186 -

584.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

as a proxy for the other. The Respondent therefore defended Mr. Lagerberg’s position

during the Hearing, explaining as follows [Tr. D11:130-32]:

“We say this isn't Mr Lagerberg misunderstanding the position. The fact is that
GTI didn't have the right to simply collect transit fees and to divorce that right
from its obligations, and as Professor Lowe mentioned this morning, there is
article 20 to consider, and under article 20, there needs to be consent to assign
your rights under the joint venture agreement. Now what would have happened
had in 1995 the claimant said to SakNavtobi, "We want to sell all our rights to
receive transit fees -- this is at a point where we have not constructed a pipeline -
- we want to sell our right to collect transit fees and we want you to consent to
that"? SakNavtobi wouldn't have consented to them simply selling their rights,
they would have had to sell their obligations at the same time, they go hand in
hand.

This is the whole root of this contract, it was a project to build a pipeline when
it was desperately needed to create income. This contract didn't confer the right
the claimants are now trying to claim in valuing their damages claim, and this
analogy that they say is a very simple analogy, very attractive, that the Tribunal
should look at, the GIOC/AIOC leasing model, is entirely misconceived for that
reason, because it is based on them having the right to something they didn't
have.”

Notwithstanding Mr. Lagerberg’s general position concerning the propriety of using this
transaction, he has put forward several specific criticisms in respect of the assumptions
made in Mr. Kaczmarek’s analysis, which would substantially reduce the value

attributable to this comparable. These are considered in Part V.E.4(c)(2) below.

The Brown & Root Offer

585.

In Mr. Lagerberg’s analysis, whilst this offer may potentially stand as a benchmark to
value the Claimants’ rights in GTI “the pre-money/post-money” approach taken by Mr.
Kaczmarek to value the offer in two tranches is unsound for at least three reasons

[Lagerberg I, para. 5.15]:

“(a) There should not be a difference between the ‘fair market value’ of one
equity share and another equity share given the same rights (i.e. the same stake)
in an equity at a single date. This flows from the definition of the ‘fair market
value’ [...];

(b) Brown & Root was not a shareholder of GTI at the Valuation Date because
the deal had not completed. Therefore, the valuation should not assume that it
was; to do so breaches the logic of a contemporaneous valuation; and

(c) The terms ‘pre-money valuation’ and ‘post-money valuation’ refer to
situations in which an investment is being made in an entity. Pre-money means a

- 187-

586.

587.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

luation before the ii is made. A pos y is the
after the investment is made and is equal to the pre-money valuation plus the
value of the investment. Brown & Root had not made an investment in GTI at
the Valuation Date and thus I do not think the term ‘post-money’ is applicable to
the situation.”

The Respondent therefore describes the Brown & Root offer as a “non-starter” for
several reasons. First, the Respondent claims that Brown & Root had insufficient
knowledge to satisfy the requirements of the FMV test, relying upon the testimony of
Mrs. MacDonald to the effect that, had Brown & Root known there was a “question
mark” over the validity of GTI’s rights, they never would have proceeded with the

transaction [Tr. D1 1:52]:

“Had Brown & Root known that there was a question mark over validity of rights
being granted to GTI, they wouldn't have proceeded. Chee Jap withheld from
Faith Macdonald the ninja, she took a conscious decision not to tell Brown &
Root what the position was. According to Faith Macdonald, Faith Macdonald's
evidence is very clear, she was not informed by Chee Jap that there were question
marks about the rights which Tramex said GTI possessed. The claimants were
not open with Brown & Root.

Faith Macdonald, on cross-examination, said — this is page 13, line 11:

"If they were hiding that information from us, what did it bode for the future?
What else were they going to hide, if they're hiding something as fundamental as
that?"

She also made clear that in due course, external counsel would have been
instructed in the normal process conducted by Brown & Root. We say that
external counsel brought in to consider the position would have assessed the
question as to the validity of rights which had been granted and would reach a
conclusion no different from that arrived at subsequently by Nabarro Nathanson.
At least there would have been a question mark.”

Second, the Respondent submits that the Brown & Root transaction was motivated by
special circumstances and therefore cannot stand as a proxy for FMV [Tr. D11:50-51]:
“In any event, the goal for Brown & Root was a set of construction contracts, a
particular -- which positions Brown & Root, and this is, I think, probably more
an issue for an expert accountant, but it positions Brown & Root in a rather

unique situation where what it's seeking to acquire is a benefit of potentially very
significant value to it, but its position is unique.

[...]

PROFESSOR LOWE: Are you saying then that the fact that Brown & Root had a
particular interest means that we have to discount them as a hypothetical buyer?

- 188 -

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Why should that be? Why should we not say that amongst the category of
hypothetical buyers, there would be people with a range of different ways of
exploiting the rights that they were buying, and we take all of them into account?

THE CHAIRMAN: Because, as Mr Farmer said, it's likely that oil is going to
flow through Georgia. Now this isn't just Ferguson driven, this is Farmer
reacting to Ferguson saying, yes, it may be in our interests to acquire those
rights.

   

MR SAUNDERS: Our answer to that is that that doesn't position -- Brown &
Root is not positioned as a fair market reference point. It is not operating in, I
guess, a fair market, it has a particular desire, a particular position, and that
takes it from a valuation set of rules, that takes it outside of the process. But
again, I'm straying into expert accounting territory.”

 

Third, the Respondent contends that the Brown & Root offer was too uncertain, as a
“sober” analysis of what the transaction was worth never took place; it “died before it
ever got to that point, and it died for reasons that meant it was always going to fail” [Tr.

D11:50]:

“Mr Kaczmarek relies on forecasts, figures that were prepared in June 1995.
The document in which those figures are to be found is entitled "Preliminary
Business Plan Proposal"; preliminary, very preliminary is Georgia's case.
Georgia's case is that the figures contained within that document are really no
more than examples of hypothetical working case scenarios. They were
calculated without access to capital expenditure, significant advance to capital
expenditure figures. They were calculated without reliable data in terms of
throughput agreements that were actually being negotiated, or had actually been
entered into.

So we say they were not the subject of a sober financial assessment exercise of
the sort that can properly form material for an expert valuer to work with,
they're the sort of financial calculations that appear all the time in commercial
deals, where one party is seeking to persuade another party to do something, and
is seeking to suggest, look, here's a working case scenario, look how good these
figures are, and that's what Mr Ferguson was doing. Clearly ambitious in
seeking to promote his project within Brown & Root, which involved selling his
project to the claimants, and selling his project in a fashion that pushed the
envelope, just as he accepted he had done in presentations given to Georgia in
September: aren't all presentations done that way? He said something to that
effect in his evidence.

On the single most important piece of information, the single most important
piece of information, where you're considering pipeline economics, commitment
actually to use the pipeline, there's nothing. Without throughput agreements,
and the evidence of those in the know has been consistent that throughput
agreements are vital, vital towards obtaining finance; without throughput
agreements, the pipeline is just a piece of metal in the ground, and a piece of
metal in the ground with holes in it.

- 189 -

589.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

We say it's relevant that in this case, as was clarified yesterday, no sound cost
estimate was ever arrived at, and it was never arrived at because there was
actually no final test or even advanced test as to whether the pipeline was in an
adequate working condition, and exactly what repairs might have been needed.”

Apart from the above general criticisms of this comparable, Mr. Lagerberg proposes an
upward adjustment to the discount rate applied from 12% to 36% to reflect market risks
and project specific risks, which would reduce the proxy value of a 25% stake in GTI to
US$ 4,974,177 [Lagerberg I, para. 5.30]. Alternatively, using Brown & Root’s
assumptions, as did Mr. Kaczmarek, but adjusting for these factors as well as taxes, Mr.

Lagerberg arrives at a value of US$ 801,985 for a 25% interest in GTI.

The Velt Energie Offer

590.

591.

The Respondent rejects the Velt Energie offer as too uncertain, characterizing it as little

more than a “vague conversation over dinner” [Tr. D11:47]:

“To look at the Velt Energie offer, even Mr Kardassopoulos accepted that the
offer from Velt Energie was not to be taken seriously. At most, it's Georgia's
case it was a matter of a conversation over dinner, no due diligence was
undertaken in relation to the offer, there's certainly no proof of any, and on a
normal contractual analysis, it would lack sufficient certainty to be
characterised as an offer. A vague two-line letter from Prime Minister Patsatsia
doesn't change that position. We say that after 14 years have passed, from a
vague conversation over dinner, there's little more that can be said than to
endorse Mr Kardassopoulos' assessment that it wasn't very serious.”

The Respondent submits that there is no evidence that the prospective buyer conducted
due diligence regarding the exact rights that the Claimants held, which is an important
element of the FMV analysis [Tr. D12:200]. It is therefore submitted that this offer, to
the extent it may be considered as such, was uninformed and is an inappropriate measure

of value [Tr. D12:201; see also Lagerberg I, para. 5.69]:

“We know by virtue of a letter between Velt Energie and United Perlite that
Tramex assured Velt Energie that their legal position was a strong one, having
been repeatedly confirmed and supported by previous legal proceedings. There
was no basis for this assertion by Tramex, and in fact, the evidence is just the
opposite. To the extent that Velt Energie made any offer, and we're not certain
they did, their offer was not an informed one, and the value of that offer could
not be considered to be an appropriate measure of damage.”

- 190 -

592.

593.

594.

595.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

(2) The Cost Approach

Mr. Lagerberg states that the cost approach is the only viable methodology to be used in
this case. Following an assessment of GTI’s balance sheet as of 10 November 1995, and
the Nexia and Deloitte reports, Mr. Lagerberg concludes that the Claimants expended
between US$ 5.5 million to US$ 6.2 million in the operations of GTI’s business

[Lagerberg I, para. 7.25].

Even then, Mr. Lagerberg states that, due principally to the lack of accounting records
and original source documents, he is unable to reach a conclusion as to the validity of all
the expenditures incurred by Tramex on behalf of GTI. Mr. Lagerberg therefore arrives
at the conclusion that, of the total amount allegedly expended by the Claimants, only US$
3.2 million may be tied directly to the construction or refurbishment of the pipeline
project and, of this amount, only US$ 981,425 is supported by payment documentation
[Lagerberg I, paras. 7.31-32].

c) The Tribunal’s Determination

The Tribunal recalls that the customary international law standard of compensation
requires that reparation must, as far as possible, wipe out all the consequences of the
illegal act and re-establish the situation which would, in all probability have existed if
that act had not been committed.** As stated above, this standard is intended to eliminate
the consequences of the wrongful act for which the State is responsible. It does not,
however, prescribe the method for arriving at an appropriate value. The Tribunal’s duty
is to make the best estimate that it can of the amount of the loss, on the basis of the
available evidence. That must be done even if there is no absolute documentary proof of

the precise amount lost.

(1) The Appropriate Valuation Method

The Tribunal finds the Claimants’ approach to valuing the Claimants’ 50% interest in
GTI’s rights, based on the income and market approaches, to be compelling in this case.

The Claimants have also cited several authorities in support of their position that a

88 See Chorzéw Factory, at p. 47.

-191-

596.

597.

598.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

completed or seriously contemplated transaction offers the best evidence of an asset’s

FMV.

For example, in Sapphire, the sole Arbitrator (M. Pierre Cavin) observed on the basis of
expert evidence that “the concessions which must be appraised are not situated in an
area where rights of extraction are often the object of sale transactions. The usual
method ... cannot therefore be applied.”® The Arbitrator concluded, following an
assessment of transactions in neighbouring territories and expert evidence concerning the
value of the right to extract oil derived from geographical publications devoted to Iran
and the Middle East generally, that “such an appraisal [of future profits] is not free from
uncertainty. But it is difficult to see what other proof could reasonably have been
required of the plaintiff”

Similarly, in Enron the tribunal determined that it could be assisted in assessing the FMV
of the rights in issue by considering several market transactions which had transpired in
respect of the claimant’s participation in a natural gas transportation company (TGS),
namely a swap and a share sale transaction. The tribunal aptly noted: “Willing sellers
and willing buyers in this case are thus no longer hypothetical but real enough, a

situation that has turned [out] to be meaningful in the Tribunal ’s findings.”?'

It is not common in investment treaty arbitrations that a Tribunal has available to it three
arm’s-length, contemporaneous transactions (or potential transactions) to assist in valuing
an investment, much less three that converge in a narrow range of value, i.e. US$ 28.1
million to US$ 30.6 million. The Tribunal is not persuaded by the Respondent’s
argument that the Brown & Root offer may not be considered an arm’s-length offer
because Brown & Root had a “special interest” in securing certain construction contracts
in the region. As the Tribunal indicated during the Hearing, it sees no reason why,
among the category of hypothetical willing buyers in an FMV analysis, there may not be

a range of different ways in which such buyers would seek to exploit GTI’s rights [Tr.

® Sapphire, at p. 161.

°° Thid. at p. 189.

°' Enron, at para. 387.

- 192 -

599.

600.

601.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

D11:50-51]. The Tribunal agrees with the Claimants that it matters not to a hypothetical
willing seller how the buyer proposes to extract profit from an asset, but only what the
hypothetical buyer is willing to pay for the investment. The Tribunal also agrees that, in
any event, Brown & Root’s offer appears to have been based on the strategic value that it
attached to GTI’s rights, as evidenced by Mr. Farmer’s belief that “oil [would] flow

through Georgia someday”. [Hearing Bundle, Tab 280]

The Tribunal is similarly not persuaded on the evidence before it by any of the grounds
raised by the Respondent for rejecting the GIOC-AIOC leasing scenario as a valid
comparable. Rather, the Tribunal agrees with the Claimants and their expert, Mr.
Kaczmarek, that it is difficult to conceive of clearer evidence of the likely value of an
expropriated asset (and related rights) than a sale transaction involving the same asset
(and rights) 16 days after the expropriation [Cl. Post-Hearing Br. at para. 103;
Kaczmarek, Tr. D11:151-52].

Additionally, whilst the Tribunal agrees that an offer or transaction which is close to
completion has greater credence than an offer or transaction that has yet to mature, the
Tribunal finds that the Claimants have properly taken into account the relative maturity
of each transaction or offer by weighting the comparables as Mr. Kaczmarek proposed.
In this connection, the Tribunal notes Mr. Kaczmarek’s testimony concerning the Velt
Energie offer, characterised by the Respondent as no more than “vague conversation over
dinner”:

“As a standalone, I would tend to agree with Mr Lagerberg. If that's all we had,

was the Velt Energie offer, nothing more, I think we would all agree

considerable caution ought to be exercised, but that's not all we have. We have

far more, and we do have an actual transaction involving these rights, that can
be valued. So again, I only ascribed it a 10 per cent weight to my approach

Although the proposed weighting of the comparables is based entirely on the professional
judgment of Mr. Kaczmarek and his team, and in this sense is not scientific, the Tribunal
does not consider that this renders the weightings arbitrary, noting the view expressed by
Dr. Shannon Pratt in his treatise on valuation (relied upon also by the Respondent):

“An intuitively appealing method of concluding the value estimate is for the
analyst: (1) to use subjective but informed judgment and decide on a percentage

- 193 -

602.

603.

604.

605.

606.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

weight to assign to the indications of each meaningful valuation approach or
method and (2) to base the final value estimate on a weighted average of the
indications of the various methods.”

The Tribunal also agrees with the Claimants that the Respondent’s expert has, with all
due respect, asked the “wrong questions” and arrived at the “wrong answers”. This is not
an appropriate case in which to value the Claimants’ interest in GTI on the basis of a
costs approach, much less the wasted costs approach advocated by the Respondent. The

Respondent’s arguments in this respect are therefore rejected.

Accordingly, the Tribunal finds it appropriate in the circumstances of this case to rely on
the three comparables, weighted as proposed by the Claimants, to arrive at the FMV of
the Claimants’ 50% interest in GTI as at 10 November 1995, which is the value that
should have formed the starting point for the work of the compensation commission; and

the Tribunal accordingly adopts the methodology developed by Mr. Kaczmarek.

(2) Proposed Adjustments to Value

As noted above, several specific criticisms have been levied by the Respondent, in the
event that the Tribunal adopts the Claimants’ valuation methodology, in respect of Mr.
Kaczmarek’s valuation model concerning adjustments that, in its view, must be made in
respect of both the GIOC-AIOC leasing transaction and the Brown & Root offer in order
to arrive at a reliable estimate of the value of the Claimants’ 50% interest in GTI. The

Tribunal shall consider each in turn.

(a) Outages

Mr. Lagerberg proposes an adjustment in connection with the leasing scenario to take
account of outages in the pipeline by reducing the number of days in a year that revenues

accrue from 365 to 355.

Mr. Kaczmarek confirms that his model incorporates an assumption that the pipeline
would operate at an average 83% of capacity to account for planned outages, as well as a

risk premium of 1.5% to account for unplanned outages.

* Pratt, Reilly & Schneihs, Valuing a Business: the Analysis and Appraisal of Closely Held Companies, 4" ed.
(McGraw-Hill, 2000) at p. 445.

- 194 -

607.

608.

609.

610.

6ll.

612.

613.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Mr. Lagerberg accepts Mr. Kaczmarek’s explanation concerning outages, but asserts that
it remains an open question whether the level of outages Mr. Kaczmarek has assumed in

his analysis is reasonable.

The Tribunal finds Mr. Kaczmarek’s assumed level of outages to be reasonable and the

proposed adjustment is therefore rejected.

(b) Security Costs

Mr. Lagerberg proposes that a deduction be made to the value of the leasing scenario to
take account of security costs, i.e. the costs of security services provided by Georgia,
assuming for “illustrative” purposes a deduction of US$ 0.01 per barrel from the initial

US$ 0.17 per barrel transit fee assumed by Mr. Kaczmarek.

Mr. Kaczmarek accepts this proposed adjustment and has recalculated the value of the

leasing scenario accordingly.

Mr. Lagerberg nevertheless contends that as this adjustment was illustrative only, it
cannot be considered an accurate assumption. Mr. Lagerberg does not, however, provide
any indication of what might be a more accurate assumption than the one he himself has

proposed.

In the absence of any further evidence of what might constitute a more accurate
assumption as regards security costs, the Tribunal finds the proposed adjustment of US$

0.01 per barrel to be reasonable.

(c) Taxes

Mr. Lagerberg proposes that the valuations of the leasing transaction and the Brown &
Root offer be adjusted to take account of corporate income tax and income withholding
tax, arguing in respect of the leasing transaction that AIOC and GTI were very different
entities such that GTI would not likely have received the same treatment. This
adjustment would take account of prevailing tax rates in Georgia in 1995 of 20% on
corporate income and 10% on dividend income. Whilst Mr. Lagerberg originally

proposed that an adjustment also be made to take account of a “windfall profits tax”, he

- 195 -

614.

615.

616.

617.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

appears only to have maintained the propriety of an adjustment for income and dividend

withholding taxes.

Mr. Kaczmarek states that he excluded taxes from his valuation methodology because
both potential operators of the Gachiani-Supsa export system, i.e. AIOC and Brown &
Root, did not consider in their own analyses that they would be subject to Georgian taxes.
Moreover, while GTI may have been subject to corporate income taxes and dividend
withholding taxes of 20% and 10%, respectively, counsel advised that because Georgia
had permitted AIOC to operate the Gachiani-Supsa export system on a tax-free basis, the
most favoured nation (“MFN”) clause in the Georgia / Greece BIT would allow the
Claimants to recover damages on the basis that GTI would not have been taxed either

[Kaczmarek II, paras. 59-60].

Although Mr. Kaczmarek has provided adjustments to reflect the payment of corporate
income and income withholding taxes, he categorically rejects Mr. Lagerberg’s third
proposed adjustment for “windfall profit” taxes (to the extent it is maintained),
characterising it as “provocative and unsound”, and reasoning that several foreign
investors have brought international arbitration proceedings claiming that windfall taxes

such as those proposed by Mr. Lagerberg constitute a violation of international law.

The Claimants add in respect of MFN treatment that, in circumstances where both of the
BITs and the ECT provide MFN treatment for covered investments, it would be
inequitable and impermissible for the Respondent to seek to reduce damages on the basis
of taxation given that AIOC was never taxed for exercising its pipeline rights. The
Respondent, on the other hand, contends that the MFN clauses only permit the Claimants
to take advantage of more favourable rights granted by another treaty and any tax benefits
bestowed on AIOC were not given pursuant to a treaty. The Respondent adds that there

is no general obligation to accord MEN status under international law.

The Tribunal accepts that, with the exception of a windfall profits tax, these adjustments
may be appropriate in circumstances where a cash flow analysis so requires. To the
extent the Respondent maintains its’ position as regards an adjustment for windfall taxes,

the Tribunal rejects it.

- 196 -

618.

619.

620.

621.

622.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

It is not disputed that AIOC was, in fact, exempt from the application of income taxes
and that Brown & Root, a hypothetical willing buyer in the FMV analysis, did not take
these taxes into account in its cash flows analysis. In considering whether, as a matter of
law, GTI would have been exempt from paying these taxes, the Tribunal finds it helpful

to reproduce the language of the Treaties.

Article 3(1) of the Georgia / Greece BIT provides that “feJach Contracting Party shall
accord to investments, made in its territory by investors of the other Contracting Party,
treatment not less favourable than that which it accords to investments of its own

investors or to investments of investors of any third State, whichever is more favourable.”

The Georgia / Israel BIT similarly provides in its Article 3(1), titled “Most Favored
Nation and National Treatment”, that “/n]Jeither Contracting Party shall, in its territory,
subject investments or returns of investors of the other Contracting Party to treatment
less favourable than that which it accords to investments or returns of its own investors

or to investments or returns of investors of any third state.

Article 10 of the ECT also provides, in relevant part, that covered investments shall not
be accorded “treatment less favourable than that required by international law, including
treaty obligations’, treatment being the “treatment accorded by a Contracting Party
which is no less favourable than that which it accords to its own Investors or to Investors

of any other Contracting Party or any third state, whichever is the most favourable”.

The Tribunal recalls that the Georgia / Greece BIT entered into effect in August 1996,
and the Georgia / Israel BIT entered into effect in February 1997. Neither would have
been binding on Georgia at the time of the valuation date, i.e. 10 November 1995, but
both would have entered into effect before the compensation commission began its work.
The ECT would have been provisionally applicable during both of these periods. The
Tribunal can see no reason in theory why an MEN clause could not operate to secure
preferential tax treatment in respect of an investment if such treatment was available to
other foreign investors. However, it is not necessary in this case for the Tribunal to
determine whether any of these particular provisions apply with the effect advocated by

the Claimants.

- 197-

623.

624.

625.

626.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

The Tribunal considers that the expectations of willing buyers as to the tax treatment of
GTI would certainly have been relevant to the price that they were prepared to pay for its
tights. Even without the existence of an MFN clause applicable to the Claimants’
investment at the critical time, as a matter of law, the tax treatment of AIOC is a relevant
factor in the valuation of GTI. This tends to support the view that there should be no
deduction in respect of taxes from the valuation figure because no taxes would have been

paid. Accordingly, the Tribunal rejects the proposed adjustment for taxes.

(d) The Discount Rate

Mr. Lagerberg proposes that an upwards adjustment be made to the discount rate applied
in respect of both the leasing transaction and the Brown & Root offer in order to reflect
the political and economic risks facing the Claimants in Georgia in 1995. Mr. Lagerberg
therefore proposes to increase the discount rate associated with the leasing scenario to
30% which reflects a risk free rate of 6.17% and a country risk premium of 23%. Mr.
Lagerberg also proposes to increase the discount rate applicable to the Brown & Root

valuation to 36%, which also reflects the addition of a country risk premium of 23%.

As regards the discount rate used in the Brown & Root valuation, Mr. Kaczmarek avers
that a contemporaneous estimate developed by an informed, experienced buyer such as
Brown & Root (that is a nominal 15% discount) provides a more accurate basis for
assessing the risk of investing in GTI at the relevant time than an after-the-fact
assessment of risk (that is a discount factor of 36%) in the context of a contentious legal
proceeding. Moreover, Mr. Kaczmarek argues that the appropriate discount rate in this
scenario must reflect the cost of lending money to Brown & Root, i.e. Brown & Root’s

cost of debt, not the cost of equity to GTI.

With respect to the discount rate applied in the leasing scenario, Mr. Kaczmarek argues
that the proposed discount is so high as to deter any international oil companies from
every doing business in Georgia. Mr. Kaczmarek considers that [Kaczmarek II, paras.

70-71]

“[i]f investing in an oil pipeline in the Caspian region indeed did require a 30

percent return on capital ... the implicit indication is that the pipeline is likely to

suffer frequent and prolonged periods of inoperability. In fact, through his use of

a 30 percent discount rate, Mr. Lagerberg is implicitly suggesting that the
- 198 -

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

expected throughput of the pipeline would have to be discounted by 76 percent
(i.e. the pipeline would only operate at 24 percent of its expected capacity over
the life of the concession) due to country risk.

If transportation risks were really as high as suggested by Mr. Lagerberg, oil
companies would have considered investment in oil production in the Caspian
region to be very unattractive. But the evidence shows that international oil
companies were interested in an did invest in the development of oil fields in the
Caspian region and did do business with Georgia. This fact standing alone
belies any suggestion that an excessively high discount rate such as 30-36
percent is appropriate.”

627. Mr. Kaczmarek also reasons that an appropriate assessment of the risks faced by GTI,
especially under a leasing scenario, indicates that the oil transportation business is not
tied in any meaningful way to the macroeconomic environment in Georgia, as was the

case in CMS.°

628. The Tribunal notes that both experts appear to agree that risk may be accounted for either
in the cash flows of a DCF analysis or in the discount rate [Kaczmarek II, at para. 129;

Lagerberg I, at para. 4.17].

629. During the Hearing, the Tribunal sought further explanation of the experts’ view on the
appropriateness of an additional premium for country risk and, in particular, a premium
in the nature of that proposed by Mr. Lagerberg. Mr. Lagerberg offered the following
explanation in defence of his proposal [Tr. D13:185-187]:

“MR LAGERBERG: Country risk is -- political risk, country risk can be
factored into a calculation in various different ways. Mr Kaczmarek mentioned
the differential yield on sovereign US denominated debt, that's one method. The
method used for Georgia here, 23 per cent was the number that came out, was
based on an analysis that we do, and my firm does, as a matter of routine, every
quarter. The 23 per cent at that time reflected the particular sort of chaos, the
particular difficulties that Georgia faced at that time. Huge, huge, uncertainty,
political ris

 

Georgia was hammered by the World Bank, I think, in 1998, the risk went up.
The political risks have generally trended down, and before coming here, I went
to get to my colleagues to say, what are the risk numbers looking now? What's
the country risk percentage that you have calculated now? Nothing to do with

°3 Mr. Kaczmarek notes that, in the CMS case, pipeline cash flows depended to a large extent on the situation of the
domestic economy, as the pipeline in issue supplied gas to the people of Argentina for heating and cooking purposes
and to Argentina businesses with fuel for power generation. By contrast, in this case, the Gachiani-Supsa export
system did not distribute oil domestically to Georgians, but rather to a consortium of international oil companies,
with transit fees negotiated in U.S. dollars as opposed to Georgian Lari.

- 199 -

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

this arbitration. And they said that the risk figure as of the end of December this
year was 10.8 per cent, December last year, 10.8 per cent. They said, well, treat
that --

PROFESSOR ORREGO VICUNA: That is a discount rate?
MR LAGERBERG: That is the country risk premium that you would include --
PROFESSOR ORREGO VICUNA: But it would reflect the --

MR LAGERBERG: Yes, so about 10.8 compared with 23 per cent, and about
half the risk back in 1995, and I said, okay, how much of that represents Russia's
intrusion in the country, invasion of the country, and they said, difficult to know
because what's happened is that the country risk premium for Georgia has
almost doubled. The average for last year was around 6.5 per cent, but it was
10.8 per cent at the end of the year, which reflected a combination, uncertainty
to do with Russia, but generally what's been happening in the bond markets,
which has seen essentially a flight to quality, and the quality bonds, if you regard
US and UK as quality, the yields on the quality bonds are going down and
therefore the spreads are going up. I think the 10.8 is a temporary one, therefore
I wouldn't place too much reliance on it for long-term ten year projections.

But the country risk premium, you use country risk premiums now, if you say an
average for 2008, 6 or 6.5 per cent, that's substantially lower than what it was
back in 1995, and I think that reflects the fact that Georgia, subject to Russia, is
a much more stable developed place than it was back in the days in 1995,
because things were -- the evidence around there was that things were really
very, very uncertain. Slightly better than they were maybe in 1992 but still very,
very dangerous, very uncertain, and therefore justifying the CRP that you
included in the discount rate.”

630. In reply, Mr. Kaczmarek offered the following view [Tr. D13:187-189]:

“MR KACZMAREK: I'll start by recalling the previous comment I made about
these are just spreads between lending to governments and the risk is really
embedded in how the government runs its fiscal affairs. One needs to take
exceptional caution as to how that particular type of risk would affect
commercial activity, and especially in the energy industry, people like to take
into account risks such as this, country risk, political risk, into the cashflows.

How is this going to really affect the daily operation of this business? I've
demonstrated that small changes, a 1.25 per cent change increase; 1.25
decreases throughput 13 per cent, which is a pretty good reduction. Now, 3.5, 1
think, had a 33 per cent reduction on value. And so I think you have to think
about how the quantity of what you're applying and adding to the discount rate
really affects the business's operations and what you would expect. Would you
expect oil that is really mostly travelling underground, not being sold to any
Georgian citizens, not dependent upon the currency value in Georgia of the Lari,
you know, literally being transited underground, being sold out into Western
markets, how much does the political turmoil really affect that type of business
operation? In my view, not much, potentially a few disruptions to the pipeline,
and I've factored, I think, a very appropriate discount for that, but to take --

- 200 -

631.

632.

633.

634.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

PROFESSOR ORREGO VICUNA: Which was what?

MR KACZMAREK: Well, looking at it from the Brown & Root perspective,
about 3.5 per cent in running it, and looking at it from the AIOC transaction
perspective, 1.25. 36 per cent really just eviscerates value and puts the project
on a basis as if, you know, oil is hardly going to reliably flow through that
pipeline, and I just don't think that's realistic. So in my view, you have to bring it
down to a commercial context all the time before you just carte blanche apply
that spread.

THE CHAIRMAN: Because it has, and it still does, flow through the pipeline.
MR KACZMAREK: Yes, absolutely right.”

The Tribunal is satisfied that GTI was not exposed to significant country risk so as to
justify application of a risk premium of 23% to either valuation. It is further satisfied that
Mr. Kaczmarek’s methodology takes adequate account of the risks involved in each
valuation scenario as of the valuation date. Mr. Lagerberg’s proposed adjustment to the

discount rate is therefore rejected.

(e) Project Risk Premium

Mr. Lagerberg proposes that an additional risk premium be applied to both the Brown &
Root and the leasing valuations to take account of project execution risk. Specifically, as
regards the Brown & Root offer, Mr. Lagerberg considers the value of an early stage
project to be 20-30% of the value it would be once completed. In other words, the
valuation of this offer should be further discounted by 70-80%. Mr. Lagerberg therefore

proposes the mid-point of this range, 25%, to discount the value of this comparable.

As regards the leasing scenario valuation, Mr. Lagerberg considers that there are even
greater uncertainties in this scenario as the Claimants had not considered the leasing
option to be a realistic one as of the valuation date. Mr. Lagerberg therefore proposes a
discount of 80%, averring that while this is not a verified figure it is, in his view, a

realistic assumption.

Mr. Kaczmarek rejects these proposed adjustments for several reasons. First, as regards
the leasing scenario, Mr. Kaczmarek considers any execution risks to be relegated to
“when” the Gachiani-Supsa export system would be built and operational, not “if” the

system would be built and operate successfully, stating that AIOC needed an export route

- 201 -

635.

636.

637.

638.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

to be able to achieve any value out of the ACG field and noting in any event that
considerations of delay in building and operating the system were taken into account

through use of a conservative projection of throughput.

Second, Mr. Kaczmarek contends that the 80% discount results in double counting,
explaining that while early stage projects are often priced at a discount to the value of the
operating project, this discount generally represents the time delay in receiving the cash
flow between a project in the construction phase and one in the operating stage. In
assuming that cash flows would begin in 1997 at 40,000 barrels per day and gradually
reach a peak of 100,000 barrels per day in 2000, Mr. Kaczmarek reasons that he has

taken this into account.

With respect to the Brown & Root valuation, Mr. Kaczmarek claims that Mr. Lagerberg’s
approach to probability is significantly flawed. In his view, while there was some risk
the project would not have proceeded as planned, this is better captured through the
addition of a premium to the cost of lending money to Brown & Root, which Mr.
Kaczmarek has incorporated into his proposed discount rate, i.e. a 3.25% premium added

to the US Prime lending rate of 8.75%.

Mr. Lagerberg offers a simple analogy in response to Mr. Kaczmarek’s comments on his
proposed adjustment, pressing his point that an early stage project contains a relatively
low value compared to a completed project, partly to reflect the inherent risks that the
project will not be completed but also because little value has yet been created. Offering
the example of a bread baking operation, Mr. Lagerberg reasons that flour is less valuable
than a loaf of bread not only because of risk that it will burn in an oven but also because
someone has yet to go through the process to make the ingredients valuable. According
to Mr. Lagerberg, the baker will spend time and expend labour to make the bread, which

process adds value that is then reflected in the price of the bread.

Applying this analogy to GTI, Mr. Lagerberg suggests that GTI was at a stage in which it
did not have even flour in 1995, let alone dough or an oven. GTI did not have the
required skills, nor had it expended much labour. What it had, in Mr. Lagerberg’s view,
was the rights to bake the bread as well as a high level feasibility study on how this might

be accomplished. Mr. Lagerberg also notes that GTI was seeking an agreement with a
- 202 -

639.

640.

641.

642.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

“baker”, i.e. Brown & Root, who has certain of the appropriate skills and equipment and
who indicated a willingness to bake the bread in exchange for 25% of the loaf. However,
this “baker” had not yet committed to a price, or even to bake the bread, so GTI could not
be certain of the economic gain from the bread. At some stage GTI would receive cash
for bread but, in 1995, there was no money and GTI could not, “without even flour’,

sensibly claim it was entitled to the cash value of a load of bread.

The Tribunal has considered these submissions and decided that, based on the evidence
before it, an appropriate level of risk is incorporated into the valuation scenarios, and that

no further adjustment is necessary.

5. The Amount of Compensation Owing to the Claimants
a) The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants provide several alternative conclusions as regards compensation in their

Post-Hearing Brief [at para. 118].°4

1995 valuation. If the Tribunal concludes that GTI would have been required to divest
itself of its rights due to larger geopolitical forces in the region, then the Claimants
concede that GTI would likely have been required to sell its early oil rights in November
1995. This would yield a value of US$ 15.1 million, excluding interest, for 25% of GTI’s

early oil rights.

Interest to reflect Georgia’s unlawful conduct: Should the Tribunal conclude that GTI
would have been required to dispose of its early oil rights at the end of 1995, the
Claimants submit that it should “nevertheless account for Georgia’s unlawful conduct by
wiping out the consequences of the ‘free loan’ Georgia obtained through its
expropriation and subsequent denial of compensation.” This may, in their view, be

accomplished by awarding a commensurate interest rate (see Part V. F.1(a) below).

** As stated above, the Tribunal does not here consider the Claimants’ arguments concerning any future rights.

- 203 -

643.

644.

645.

646.

647.

648.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

b) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent states that it is appropriate to award only a sum equivalent to sunken
costs in this case, because of the express contractual limitations contained in the JVA and
the Deed of Concession, and because this is the only reliable measure of damages on the
facts of these cases. Sunken costs would result in an award in the amount of US$ 3.1

million for each Claimant [Resp. Post-Hearing Br. at para. 81].

Alternatively, if the Tribunal were to rely on market transactions, the Respondent claims
that the Tribunal should look only to Brown & Root’s offer. When this analysis is
conducted in accordance with “proper valuation practices”, the Respondent claims that

this value is limited to US$ 4,974,177 [Resp. Post-Hearing Br. at para. 82].

c) The Tribunal’s Determination

By using the three comparables described above, properly weighted and adjusted, the
Tribunal finds that Mr. Kardassopoulos is entitled to damages in the amount of US$ 15.1
million, which reflects the value of his one quarter interest in GTI’s early oil rights. This
is the Tribunal’s estimate of the amount that should have been the basis of the decision of
the compensation commission set up after the taking effected by Decree No. 178; and it is
accordingly the starting point for assessing what the Claimants lost by reason of the

Respondent’s failure to fulfil its duties under international law to pay compensation.

Having decided in this case that the same standard of compensation is applicable to the
valuation of the Claimants’ respective claims, the Tribunal also finds that Mr. Fuchs is

entitled to damages in the amount of US$ 15.1 million.

The Tribunal finds that there is insufficient evidence on the record to support a further
award of damages to Mr. Kardassopoulos in the amount of US$ 750,000, i.e. 50% of US$
1.5 million, in connection with his interest in an alleged loan to the Batumi Oil Refinary.
The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that the allegations concerning this “loan” are
insufficiently clear or supported by documentary evidence and therefore rejects Mr.

Kardassopoulos’ plea.

The Tribunal also rejects the Claimant’s plea for reimbursement of Tramex’s expenses

related to pursuit of the compensation commission process, totalling US $275,803. The
- 204 -

649.

650.

651.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Tribunal does not consider, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, that these
expenses would have been recoverable from the compensation commission. In other
words, the Claimants could not have had a legitimate expectation to recover such

expenses.
The Tribunal shall next address the appropriate interest rate.

F. Interest
1. Pre-Award Interest
a) The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants take the position that the floor above which interest must rise is LIBOR,
the rate prescribed in the Georgia / Italy BIT [Tr. D11:37]. During the Hearing, the
Claimants contended that LIBOR + 2% was the “absolute minimum” that ought to apply
to any sum awarded for the early oil rights, observing that US Prime + 2% and LIBOR +
4% are also open to the Tribunal in a lawful expropriation analysis [Tr. D12:89]. The
Claimants point out that while the interest rates “bump up the number, it is not their fault

that the Respondent has not paid one bean to the Claimants” [Tr. D12:90].

In their Post-Hearing Brief (paras. 137-38), the Claimants asserted that while LIBOR +
2% has been adopted in the awards of previous arbitral tribunals, this rate falls short of
the commercial rate required by Article 17(1) of the ECT, as well as the rate of interest

° The Claimants therefore

provided for in Section 18.3 of the Deed of Concession.”
contend that the best indicator of a commercial rate is the rate agreed to in the PCOA,
noting that Section 5.6 of the PCOA (relating to delay in payment by AIOC to GIOC)
provides for a rate of LIBOR + 4%. Similarly, Section 18.4(f) of the PCOA stipulates, in
the event of a dispute, that the arbitral tribunal must apply a rate of “LIBOR plus four
percent (4%) over the period from the date of the breach or other violation to the date the
award is paid in full.” [Hearing Bundle, Tab 286]. This same rate was applied in the
HGA and the PSA [Hearing Bundle, Tabs 285 (Art. 13.3(f)) and 274 (Art. 12.4(d)(iii))].

°5 Article 18.3 of the Deed of Concession stipulates a rate of LIBOR + 2.5% had Transneft wished to repurchase

assets from GTI at the end of the conces

 

ion period.

- 205 -

652.

653.

654.

655.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

In demanding a higher interest rate, the Claimants contend that Georgia has effectively

had a free loan from them [Tr. D12:96-97]:
“[...] Instead of paying Tramex the 30 million, they have kept that money, and if
they wanted to borrow that money at the time, what would they have been
borrowing at? What have we saved them by the fact that we're out of pocket? I
think that is an appropriate way of looking at it if someone's behaved unlawfully.
They've got a lot to gain by not giving us anything, because if they had to loan
that money, at the time, their sovereign rate, the interest rate is very high, their
Treasury bill rates, and these are all provable rates, they are all set out by Mr
Kaczmarek, those rates, significantly more than LIBOR plus 4. If they had had
to go to a bank, if SakNavtobi had had to go to a bank in Georgia and borrow
the money to pay us, if it had been determined that SakNavtobi was the one that
had to pay us out, the interest rates were so high then in Georgia that in fact the
15 million they owed to Mr Kardassopoulos would have become by now 413
million.”

The Claimants also submit that compound interest is necessary to compensate them fully
and that this is now an accepted principle in international law, relying upon the ICSID
awards in Tecmed and Santa Elena. The Claimants offered interest multipliers for
several start dates in their post-hearing submissions, compounding interest semi-annually,
noting that the appropriate date on which interest should begin to accrue in respect of
both Mr. Kardassopoulos’ and Mr. Fuchs’ claim is 20 February 1996. As regards the dies
a quo for Mr. Fuchs’ claim, the Claimants reason that even if the date of Treaty breach is
determined to be in 2004, a fair compensation process was required to award interest to

Mr. Fuchs from the date of expropriation.

b) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent submits that the Claimants seek an inappropriate rate of interest. On the
basis of Mr. Lagerberg’s analysis, the Respondent claims that the risk premia sought by
the Claimants above the risk free rate is inappropriate in the circumstances of this case,
reasoning that the benchmark yield on 3-year U.S. government bonds is a more

appropriate rate.

In response to the Claimants’ request for a higher rate of interest in the event of a finding
of unlawful expropriation, the Respondent argues that it is not the function of the

Tribunal to punish the State. The Chorzéw Factory test requires that a claimant be

- 206 -

656.

657.

658.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

awarded the damages suffered and, in the Respondent’s view, an excessive interest rate

would add a punitive element to the award that would render it unenforceable.

The Respondent also submits that an award of simple interest, as opposed to compound
interest, would more appropriately compensate the Claimants, relying on the reasoning of
the tribunal in Santa Elena that “[w]here an owner of property has at some earlier time
lost the value of his asset but has not received the monetary equivalent that then became
due to him, the amount of compensation should reflect, at least in part, the additional
sum that his money would have earned, had it, and the income generated by it, been

996

reinvested each year at generally prevailing rates of interest. Mr. Lagerberg

nevertheless presents his interest calculations on a compounding basis.

In respect of the dies a quo, the Respondent submits that, according to Article 38(2) of
the ILC Articles on State Responsibility, a state’s interest obligation starts on the date
when the principal sum should have been paid and, in the context of an expropriation,
this has traditionally been interpreted as the date of expropriation. In the context of a
non-expropriatory breach, the Respondent notes that the date for interest to begin is less
clear but, according to Thomas Walde and Borzu Sabahi®”, should be the date when the
state becomes aware or should have become aware that a serious treaty breach exists. As
regards Mr. Fuchs’ FET claim in particular, the Respondent submits that should the
Tribunal rule there has been a breach of the FET standard, interest should not begin to

accrue until 2004.

c) The Tribunal’s Determination

The Tribunal recalls that Article 13(1) of the ECT requires that compensation “shall also
include interest at a commercial rate established on a market basis from the date of
Expropriation until the date of payment.” (emphasis added). Article 2(2) of the Georgia /
Israel BIT is silent on the interest applicable to an award of compensation for breach of

the FET obligation.

°° Santa Elena, at para. 104.

°7 “Compensation, Damages and Valuation in International Investment Law” (Nov. 2007) 4:6 Transnational Dispute
Management at p. 47.

- 207 -

659.

660.

661.

662.

663.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

However, in view of the Tribunal’s findings above in respect of the unlawful character of
the Georgian Government’s conduct vis-a-vis the investments of both Mr.
Kardassopoulos and Mr. Fuchs, it is appropriate also to consider that interest for damages
may be awarded by the Tribunal with the necessary discretion so as to ensure full
reparation. In this regard, Article 38 of the ILC’s Articles on State Responsibility

provides:

“]. Interest on any principal sum due under this chapter shall be
payable when necessary in order to ensure full reparation. The interest
rate and mode of calculation shall be set so as to achieve that result.

2. Interest runs from the date when the principal sum should have
been paid until the date the obligation to pay is fulfilled.”

[Emphasis added.]

The Commentary to Article 38 notes that the awarding of interest depends on the
circumstances of each case and, in particular, whether an award of interest is necessary in

order to ensure full reparation.**

The Tribunal finds that in order to achieve full reparation in the circumstances of these
cases, the PCOA rate (see paragraph 651 above) provides the best available evidence of
what constitutes a fair commercial rate in the present context, and accordingly the

Tribunal decides that it is appropriate to award interest at the rate of LIBOR + 4%.

As regards compound interest, both Parties to these proceedings rely upon the award in
Santa Elena for the competing propositions that any award of interest either should or
should not be compounded. That tribunal ultimately awarded compound interest,
observing that the purpose of compound interest is not to attribute blame or to punish, but
is simply a mechanism to ensure that the compensation awarded to a claimant is

appropriate in the circumstances.”

The Santa Elena tribunal applied compound interest as a mechanism to ensure that the

claimant received the full present value of the compensation that it should have received

°8 TLC Commentary, Article 38, at para. 7.

°° Santa Elena, at para. 104.

- 208 -

664.

665.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

at the time of the taking, noting that “the taking state is not entitled unjustly to enrich
itself by reason of the fact that the payment of compensation has been long delayed.”'”
In that case, it took almost 20 years from the time of the taking to the date of the award

for the host State to pay the claimant compensation for its expropriated investment.

Simple interest has the great advantage of simplicity; but it is often a simplicity combined
with arbitrariness. When the question is, what amount has the Claimant lost by being
wrongly denied payment of a sum on a certain date in the past, in circumstances where
the Claimant could have invested an equivalent sum, or could only have borrowed an
equivalent sum, on terms of compound interest, the award of compound interest is
appropriate. The Tribunal takes the view that an award of compound interest is
appropriate in this case. In so finding, it takes comfort in the principles articulated in
Santa Elena, which apply equally here:

“[W]hile simple interest tends to be awarded more frequently than compound,

compound interest certainly is not unknown or excluded in international law. No

uniform rule of law has emerged from the practice in international arbitration as

regards the determination of whether compound or simple interest is appropriate

in any given case. Rather, the determination of interest is a product of the

exercise of judgment, taking into account all of the circumstances of the case at

hand and especially considerations of fairness which must form part of the law
to be applied by this Tribunal.”'"

The Parties do not appear to dispute that the relevant date for the calculation of interest in
respect of Mr. Kardassopoulos’ claim is 20 February 1996, the date on which the
expropriation of Mr. Kardassopoulos’ investment crystallized. On the other hand, the
date from which interest under this Award is payable must be the date of the breach,
which the Tribunal regards as having occurred with the definitive repudiation of the
Respondent’s liability in November and December 2004. That said, the amount of
compensation that should have been paid at the end of 2004 should itself have included
an element in respect of interest from the date of the taking (1996) to the date of the
compensation commission’s award. Accordingly, as the Tribunal does not see any good

reason for applying a different interest rate for the period 1996-2004 than that applicable

1 Thid., at para. 101.

101 Santa Elena, at para. 103.

- 209 -

666.

667.

668.

669.

670.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

from 2004 onwards, the interest due to Mr. Kardassopoulos will in effect be LIBOR +
4% from 20 February 1996.

Though Mr. Fuchs’ claim is somewhat different, being confined to the FET provisions,
the Tribunal considers that the loss suffered by Mr. Fuchs as a result of the Respondent’s
repudiation of any liability to pay compensation to the Claimants is the same as that

suffered by Mr. Kardassopoulos.

Accordingly, the Tribunal awards pre-Award interest to both Claimants at the rate of
LIBOR + 4%. This interest shall accrue on the sum awarded to Mr. Kardassopoulos
beginning as of the date of expropriation, i.e. 20 February 1996, compounded semi-
annually to the date of Award. This same rate of interest shall also accrue on the sum
awarded to Mr. Fuchs as of 20 February 1996, also compounded semi-annually to the

date of Award.

The Tribunal has compounded interest semi-annually at the six-month term LIBOR rate
for U.S. dollar deposits published by the Wall Street Journal, plus four percent (4%),
from 20 February 1996 and reset thereafter to the current six-month LIBOR rate in effect
at the beginning of each six-month period from 1 July 1996 to the date of the present
Award, i.e. 28 February 2010, resulting in the total sum of pre-Award interest of US$
30,024,736.83 each to Mr. Kardassopoulos and Mr. Fuchs.

2. Post-Award Interest
a) The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants also request post-Award interest to the date of payment of any damages
sum, submitting that the Georgian Sovereign Debt Rate should apply during this period.
The Claimants acknowledge that whilst interest is “compensatory, not punitive”,
compensation has been withheld from the Claimants for 13 years and Georgia has yet to

pay an outstanding ICSID award against it.

In the Claimants’ view, even a post-Award interest rate of LIBOR + 4% is too low, as it
“incentivises” Georgia to continue withholding compensation indefinitely [Cl. Post-

Hearing Br., para. 142].

- 210-

671.

672.

673.

674.

675.

676.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

The Claimants reject the Respondent’s submission that interest should be applied at the
“risk free” rate for three principal reasons [Reply at para. 401]. First, the purpose of
damages is to compensate the Claimants. It is commercially unrealistic to suppose that
the Claimants, as businessmen, would have simply put their money into U.S. bonds and

not sought a more remunerative investment.

Second, the Respondent’s position improperly presupposes that the principal sum is
already in the Claimants’ hands, without taking into account that the Claimants still face

the task of recovering that sum from the Respondent.

Third, the Republic of Georgia’s sovereign default risk is viewed by the market as being
far higher than that of the United States, therefore it is inappropriate to apply a U.S.

treasury rate.

b) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent submits that an order for post-award interest on all damages at the
Georgian Sovereign Rate would be inequitable and would result in an award of interest
that greatly outweighs the value of the Claimants’ actual investment. Accordingly, in the
Respondent’s submission, the Tribunal ought not to award any post-award interest or, in
the alternative, ought to award interest in accordance with the benchmark yield on 3-year

U.S. government bonds.

The Respondent observes that the Claimants provide no legal or other rationale for
awarding a different rate of interest for post-award and pre-award interest. By contrast,
the Respondent notes that “/m/Jost [international] tribunals do not distinguish between

compensatory and moratory interest and award them together at the same rate.”'

The Respondent further notes that the Claimants have pointed to no arbitral awards in
which the tribunal has examined a Respondent State’s payment history to assess the

appropriate rate of interest, concluding that the Claimants’ request is, in essence, a

1 J Gotanda, Supplemental Damages in Private International Law (Kluwer Law International, 1998), Chapter 3,

Sec. 3.1.

-211-

677.

678.

679.

680.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

request to punish Georgia for (alleged) non-compliance, which punishment is prohibited

under international law.

c) The Tribunal’s Determination

The Tribunal sees no reason in this case to depart from its conclusion in respect of pre-
Award interest, i.e. that interest is to be awarded at such a rate so as to achieve full
reparation and runs from the date when the principal sum should have paid until the

obligation to pay is fulfilled.

The Tribunal therefore determines that the sum awarded to each Claimant shall bear
interest at the rate of LIBOR in effect as at the date of issuance of this Award plus four
percent (4%), compounded semi-annually from the date of issuance of the Award at the
six-month term LIBOR rate for U.S. dollar deposits published by the Wall Street Journal,
plus four percent (4%), and such interest rate reset semi-annually to the current six-month
LIBOR rate in effect each January 1 and July 1 until such time as the Award is satisfied

in full.

G. Costs
1. The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants request that they be awarded their costs in these proceedings, including
the costs of their legal representation, experts’ fees and related disbursements, as well as

their share of all arbitration costs already paid or payable to ICSID.

The Claimants submit that there is an increasing trend towards outcome-based recovery
in investment treaty arbitration, anticipating that they will have prevailed on liability as
they did on jurisdiction. In any event, the Claimants contend that the particular facts of
these arbitrations present a “compelling case” for an award of costs, identifying eight
primary factors which, in their view, weigh in favour of a full costs award: (1) the
Claimants have prevailed on jurisdiction and liability; (2) Georgia’s decision to contest
liability and its strategy of raising “every conceivable defence”; (3) Georgia raised factual
objections it knew to be false; (4) many of Georgia’s arguments were “unarguable or
irrelevant” to an investment treaty claim; (5) Georgia was given every opportunity to
compensate the Claimants between 1996 and 2004; (6) Georgia insisted that Mr.
-212-

681.

682.

683.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

Kardassopoulos file a full merits memorial and witness statements in 2006, even though
its jurisdictional objections were confined to net points of law that could have been
resolved on the facts as set out in the Kardassopoulos Request; (7) any costs that are not
borne by Georgia will reduce the Claimants’ net recovery, resulting in less than full
recovery; (8) the Claimants have no assurance that they will recover the entire amount of

the Tribunal’s awards.

The Claimants assess their total fees at US$ 6,235,429.15 (US$ 4,779,745.50 on account
of the Kardassopoulos claim and US$ 1,455,683.65 on account of the Fuchs claim), and
total disbursements at US$ 1,706,868.41 (US$ 173,607.53 on account of the
Kardassopoulos claim; US$ 84,190.88 on account of the Fuchs claim; and US$ 1,449,070

on account of expert fees and advances on the costs of arbitration).

2. The Respondent's Position
The Respondent requests that it be awarded its costs incurred in connection with these
proceedings, including Georgia’s legal fees, experts’ fees and other costs, as well as
Georgia’s share of the fees and expenses of the Tribunal and the Centre. The Respondent
assesses its total legal fees at £ 3,075,844.22 and total other fees and disbursements at £
941,560.91 (£ 475,759.90 on account of expert fees and disbursements; £ 151,881.17 on
account of other disbursements and expenses; anf 343,919.84 on account of ICSID

fees).

In the event that the Claimants are successful in all or any of their claims, the Respondent
submits that it would not be fair or appropriate for Georgia to bear the costs of the
arbitrations and/or the costs of the Claimants’ legal representation, noting that the
prevalent approach in investment treaty arbitration has been to avoid the “loser pays”
principle. Among the reasons identified by the Respondent in support of its argument
that costs ought not be awarded against it are: (1) the delay with which the Claimants
commenced arbitration proceedings, which caused Georgia to undertake a “factual
investigation of an unusually historical nature”; (2) the Claimants’ “lack of discipline” in
pleading their case which has needlessly complicated the case; (3) the application of
interest rates by Mr. Kardassopoulos which increased his claim by almost ten-fold,
yielding an excessive damages claim; (4) conduct by the Claimants which increased costs

- 213 -

684.

685.

686.

687.

688.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

unnecessarily, such as the delayed disclosure of documents and the pursuit of “untenable
applications” in respect to Georgia’s August 2008 request for an adjournment of the
Hearing; and (5) the case raised novel and complex legal issues, including the provisional

application of the ECT.

The Respondent also submits that because the Claimants abandoned certain claims prior
to the hearing, such as Mr. Fuchs’ expropriation claim and Mr. Kardassopoulos’ umbrella
clause claim, Georgia has incurred unnecessary costs in relation to these claims. As a
result, even if the Tribunal were to consider that costs follow the event, the Claimants’

success is mixed such that each Party should bear its own costs.

In regard to the Claimants’ submissions as to the costs likely associated with recovery of
any amount awarded by this Tribunal, the Respondent avers there is no recognized
principle that legal costs should be awarded as an insurance policy for any costs a party

perceives it may incur in an enforcement action.

Finally, the Respondent claims that the Claimants’ legal costs are excessive and because
the Claimants’ costs have been borne in part by a third party investor it is questionable

whether such costs are properly recoverable.

3. The Tribunal’s Determination

Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention confers on the Tribunal broad discretion in
assessing and allocating the costs of an arbitration proceeding. Article 61(2) provides as
follows:

“In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as the parties

otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the parties in connection with

the proceedings, and shall decide how and by whom those expenses, the fees and

expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the
facilities of the Centre shall be paid. Such decision shall form part of the award.”

Prior to their first scheduled submission on costs, the Claimants wrote to the Tribunal
requesting the right to submit correspondence exchanged between the Parties “without
prejudice save as to costs”. The Claimants reasoned that if the Tribunal considered such
correspondence to be material in exercising its discretion as to costs under Article 61(2),

then it would be appropriate to render an award on liability and quantum, followed by a

-214-

689.

690.

691.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

separate award on costs. The Respondent objected to the disclosure of such
correspondence. The Tribunal does not find the Claimants’ proposed approach to be
necessary in exercising its discretion as to costs and the Claimants’ application is

therefore denied.

ICSID arbitration tribunals have exercised their discretion to award costs which follow
the event in a number of cases, demonstrating that there is no reason in principle why a
successful claimant in an investment treaty arbitration should not be paid its costs. For
example, the tribunal in ADC found no reason “to depart from the starting point that the

77103 Tn that

successful party should receive reimbursement from the unsuccessful party
case, the tribunal found relevant to its costs award the fact that the respondent State had
made no attempt to honour its obligations under the BIT in issue and had acted

throughout with callous disregard of the claimants’ contractual and financial rights.

In PSEG, while the claimants were only partially successful on the merits of their claim,
the tribunal noted that in order “/t/o obtain justice, they had no option but to bring this
arbitration forward and to incur related costs”, thereby ordering the Respondent to bear

65% of the costs associated with the arbitration. '“*

The Tribunal is not persuaded in the circumstances of these cases that the Claimants
should not be allowed to recover their reasonable costs. The Tribunal observes that
among those factors identified by the Respondent in support of its submissions on costs is
the fact that the Claimants have an arrangement with a third-party concerning the
financing of these proceedings. The Tribunal knows of no principle why any such third
party financing arrangement should be taken into consideration in determining the
amount of recovery by the Claimants of their costs. In this connection, the Tribunal notes
that, while not directly applicable, the Georgia / Greece and Georgia / Israel BITs both
provide in their respective dispute settlement provisions that a Contracting Party shall not
raise as an objection at any stage of the proceedings the fact that the investor has received

compensation or an indemnity under an insurance contract in respect of all or part of the

103 4 DC at para. 553.

14 See PSEG at para. 352.

- 215 -

692.

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

damages incurred (Georgia / Greece BIT, Article 9(5) and Georgia / Israel BIT, Article
8(3). It is difficult to see why in this case a third party financing arrangement should be
treated any differently than an insurance contract for the purpose of awarding the

Claimants full recovery.

The Tribunal finds that it is appropriate and fair in this case to award the Claimants their
costs of the arbitrations, including legal fees, experts’ fees, administrative fees and the
fees of the Tribunal. The Tribunal finds the total fees assessed by the Claimants to be
reasonable, i.e. US $6,235,429, as well as total disbursements assessed, that is US

$1,706,868.

PART VI. OPERATIVE PART

693.

For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal awards as follows:

(a) The Tribunal sustains the Respondent’s objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
ratione temporis over Mr. Kardassopoulos’ expropriation claim under the Georgia

/ Greece BIT;

(b) The Tribunal dismisses the Respondent’s objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
ratione temporis over Mr. Fuchs’ fair and equitable treatment claim under the

Georgia / Israel BIT;

(c) The Tribunal dismisses the Respondent’s objection to the Claimants’ claims on

grounds of equitable prescription;

(d) The Respondent has unlawfully expropriated Mr. Kardassopoulos’ investment
and failed to pay him the compensation due on the taking of his investment, in

breach of Article 13(1) of the ECT;

(e) The Respondent has breached the fair and equitable treatment standard applicable
to Mr. Fuchs’ investment under Article 2(2) of the Georgia / Israel BIT and failed

to pay him the compensation due on the taking of his investment;

- 216 -

(f)

(g)

(h)

@

@

(k)

@

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

The Respondent is liable to pay for the losses caused by its said breaches of the
ECT and Georgia / Israel BIT in the principal sums of US$15.1 million each to
Mr. Kardassopoulos and Mr. Fuchs;

The Respondent is liable to pay compound interest on such compensation from 20
February 1996 to 28 February 2010 in the amount of US$ 30,024,736.83 each to
Mr. Kardassopoulos and Mr. Fuchs, for a total sum payable each to Mr.

Kardassopoulos and Mr. Fuchs of US$ 45,124,736.83;

The Respondent is liable to pay to Mr. Kardassopoulos and Mr. Fuchs,
respectively, on the said principal sums interest at the rate of LIBOR in effect as
at the date of issuance of this Award plus four percent (4%), compounded semi-
annually from the date of issuance of the Award at the six-month term LIBOR
rate for U.S. dollar deposits published by the Wall Street Journal, plus four
percent (4%), and such interest rate reset semi-annually to the current six-month
LIBOR rate in effect each January | and July 1 until such time as the Award is

satisfied in full;

The Respondent is liable to pay the Claimants their costs of these arbitration
proceedings in the total sum of US$ 7,942,297, to be allocated between the
Claimants consistent with their respective share of fees and disbursements, as set
out above, and expenses incurred in respect of expert fees and advances on the

costs of arbitration to be divided equally among them;

The Respondent shall bear all the costs of these arbitration proceedings in full,

without recourse to either of the Claimants;

The Respondent shall pay forthwith to Mr. Kardassopoulos and Mr. Fuchs

respectively all amounts which it is liable hereunder to pay; and

Save as aforesaid, all other claims by the Claimants and the Respondent made in

these arbitration proceedings are hereby dismissed.

-217-

Kardassopoulos / Fuchs v. Georgia

[signed] [signed]

Prof. Francisco Orrego Vicuiia Prof. Vaughan Lowe, Q.C.

Date: [28 February 2010] [Date: 23 February 2010]
[signed]

Mr. L. Yves Fortier, C.C., O.C., Q.C.

Date: [26 February 2010]

- 218 -

