INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the proceedings between

IOANNIS KARDASSOPOULOS AND RON FUCHS
(Respondents)

v.

GEORGIA
(Applicant)

ICSID Case N°s. ARB/05/18 and ARB/07/15
(Annulment Proceeding)

 

DECISION OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE
ON THE STAY OF ENFORCEMENT OF THE AWARD

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Judge Dominique Hascher (President)
Tan Sri Cecil W. M. Abraham
Professor Karl-Heinz Bockstiegel
Secretary of the ad hoc Committee

Ms. Aissatou Diop

Representing the Applicant Representing the Respondents
Ms. Louise Roman Bernstein Ms. Kary] Nairn
Mr. Derek C. Smith Mr. Timothy G. Nelson
Mr. Luis Parada Mr. John Gardiner
Mr. Tomas Solis Mr. David Herlihy
Ms. Erin Argueta Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom (UK) LLP

Dewey LeBoeuf LLP

INTRODUCTION

1. On 30 June 2010, Georgia (or the “Applicant”) filed in accordance with Article 52 of the
Washington Convention of 18 March 1965 on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States
and National of Other States (“the ICSID Convention”), timely applications for annulment of the
Award rendered on 3 March 2010 in ICSID case n°s ARB/05/18 and ARB/07/15 in favor of two oil
traders, Mr. Ioannis Kardassopoulos, a Greek national, and Mr. Ron Fuchs, an Israeli national, by an
Arbitral Tribunal composed of Mr. L. Yves Fortier C.C., O.Q., Q.C. (President), Professor Francisco

Orrego Vicufia and Professor Vaughan Lowe Q.C. (Co-Arbitrators).

2. On 16 July 2010, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the applications and, in
accordance with Rule 50(2) of the Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“ICSID
Arbitration Rules’), transmitted a Notice of Registration to the parties. In the Notice of
Registration, the Secretary-General advised the parties that the Chairman of the ICSID
Administrative Council will be asked to appoint the ad hoc Committees that will consider the
applications. On 21 July 2010, the Secretary-General proposed to the parties that the same three
persons be designated to each of the two ad hoc Committees, and the parties agreed. The Secretary-
General notified the parties on 11 August 2010 of the constitution of ad hoc Committees composed
of Judge Dominique Hascher, a national of France, as President, Professor Karl-Heinz Bockstiegel,
a national of Germany, and Tan Sri Cecil W. M. Abraham, a national of Malaysia, as Members. The
parties were also informed on 11 August 2010 that Ms. Aissatou Diop, Junior Counsel, ICSID,

would serve as secretary of the ad hoc Committees.

3. The applications for annulment are based on the grounds enumerated in Article 52(1)(b) and
(e) of the ICSID Convention, namely that the Arbitral tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and

that it failed to state reasons on which the Award is based. The applications also contain each a

request (paragraph 5), pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 54(1) of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules, that enforcement of the Award be stayed pending the ad hoc Committees’
decision on the applications for annulment. In accordance with Rule 54(2) of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules, enforcement of the Award was provisionally stayed on 16 July 2010 by the Deputy

Secretary-General of ICSID.

4. Georgia filed on 12 August 2010 a Request for the Continuation of the Stay of Enforcement
of the Award pending the ad hoc Committees' decision on its applications for annulment. Messrs.
Kardassopoulos and Fuchs wrote on 12 August 2010 to oppose this Request and to further declare
that, should any stay be granted, it should be conditional on the posting of security corresponding to

the full amount of the Award.

5. By letter of 1 September 2010, the ad hoc Committees took note of the parties’ agreement
on the timetable for the exchange of their written submissions on the stay of enforcement. Messrs.
Kardassopoulos and Fuchs submitted accordingly on 2 September 2010 a Response to Georgia's
Application for an Unconditional Stay of Enforcement and Application for Security as a Condition
of any Continued Stay. Georgia filed a Response to Respondents' Request for Conditions to Stay
Enforcement of the Award on 30 September 2010. The parties also agreed that the hearing would

take place in London on 18 October 2010.

6. On 15 October 2010, the counsels of Messrs. Kardassopoulos and Fuchs informed the
Secretariat of the incarceration on 14 October 2010 of Mr. Fuchs in Georgia on charges of bribery.
Georgia responded on 17 October 2010 that the criminal proceedings against Mr. Fuchs are outside

the scope of the annulment proceeding.

7. The oral hearing was held on Monday, 18 October 2010 in London, at the IDRC Center

located on 70 Fleet Street, from11:15 a.m. until 3:40 p.m., after hearing the procedural matters of
the First Session required by Rules 13 and 53 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules,where it was decided
that the Committees would be combined into one Committee (the “ad hoc Committee” or the
“Committee”) for the annulment proceedings pursuant to the applications of Georgia to set aside the
Award of 3 March 2010. Before adjournment of the hearing, the ad hoc Committee ruled that,
pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(2), the provisional stay of enforcement was to continue until

the Committee issued its Decision on Georgia's Stay Request.

8. The parties were informed on 19 October 2010 by the Secretariat that the ad hoc Committee
granted the Respondents until 25 October 2010 to submit comments, if any, on the letters of
Bonelli, Erede and Pappalardo Studio Legale of 22 October 2009 and of DLA Piper LLP (US) of 30
October 2009 exchanged in the matter of Ares International s.r.l. and Metalgeo s.r. v. Georgia!

which had been distributed by Georgia to the Committee and the Respondents at the hearing.

THE PARTIES' SUBMISSIONS

9. Georgia submits that the circumstances of the case justify a stay of enforcement of the
Award which should be continued without conditions. It argues that its applications for annulment
constitute a legitimate exercise of its rights pursuant to the ICSID Convention, not a dilatory tactic.
Georgia declares that its applications raise important issues of international law related to the
correct interpretation and application of one multilateral treaty (the Energy Charter Treaty, “ECT”)
and two bilateral investment treaties (“BIT”, the Georgia/Israel BIT and the Georgia/Greece BIT).
Georgia contends that, despite the fact that the relevant treaties were not yet in force, the Tribunal
improperly asserted jurisdiction by rewriting the unambiguous text of the ECT in redefining “entry

into force” as date of signature although it recognized that the two concepts are different, and by

' Ares International S.r1. and MetalGeo S.r., 1CSID Case N° ARB/05/23, Award, 28 February 2008

4

giving causal relevance to events that occurred prior to the entry into force of the Georgia/Israel
BIT in converting post-BIT claims into claims for pre-BIT events. The grounds for annulment are
based on manifest excesses by the Arbitral Tribunal when asserting jurisdiction and would support
annulment of the entire Award as the pecuniary obligations imposed by the Arbitral Tribunal with
respect to Messrs. Kardassopoulos' and Fuchs' proceedings are the results of such excesses. With
respect more precisely to the claim of Mr. Fuchs, the application for annulment is otherwise
grounded on the failure to state reasons for the violations of the Fair and Equitable Treatment
standard. In sum, Georgia, raises important issues of international law, according to the applications

for annulment’.

10. Georgia underlines that the exercise of its right to request annulment and the consequent
stay of the Award are not prejudicial to Respondents who, should the Award not be annulled, are
compensated for any delay in the payment of the Award by post-award interest as included in the
Arbitral Tribunal's decision. Georgia also argues that there is a risk of irreparable injury in light of
the risk of non-recoupment if the Award is enforced and later annulled. Georgia alleges that the risk
is all the more increased that the two Respondents are individuals. Georgia adds that there is also
the risk that the Respondents, once the Award is enforced, would have no longer an interest in

participating in the annulment proceedings’.

11. Georgia contends that the stay should be continued without conditions. According to
Georgia, neither the ICSID Convention nor the ICSID Rules expressly state whether an ad hoc
committee can grant a request for a stay subject to conditions, and that as a consequence, the ad hoc
committees' power to impose conditions must be exercised restrictively*. The Applicant declares
2 Georgia's Request for Continuation of the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, paras. 6-8

3. Georgia's Request for Continuation of the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, paras. 10-13

4 Georgia's Response of 30 September 2010 to Respondents’ Request for Conditions to Stay Enforcement of the
Award, paras. 7-11

that there is no uniform practice by ad hoc committees in granting a stay of enforcement subject to
conditions, whether for justifiable doubts as to compliance, as alleged by Messrs. Kardassopoulos
and Fuchs, or otherwise’. Georgia relies mainly on the Argentina cases as well as on cases
involving ICISD Convention Contracting States other than Argentina in support of its contention
that, even where it was found that a State will in fact not comply with Article 53, ad hoc committees
have extended stays without conditions in light of “all relevant circumstances” so that that

circumstance alone, even if established, is not sufficient to grant a stay subject to conditions®.

12. Georgia reminds that it is under an international legal obligation laid out in Article 53 of the
ICSID Convention to comply with the Award if it is not annulled, and Respondents have failed to
raise “justifiable doubts” that Georgia will not comply with its Article 53 obligation’, although
justifiable doubt alone is insufficient. Instead, all circumstances of the case should be viewed,
certainty or near certainty of non-compliance being an adequate standard®, Georgia argues that the
fact that payment is still pending in the Ares v. MetalGeo case, one of several ICSID cases to which
Georgia has been a party, is irrelevant to Georgia's compliance with Article 53 of the ICSID
Convention? . Georgia declares that Respondents erroneously conflate Articles 53 and 54 of the
ICSID Convention which in fact address separate issues. The obligation to comply with an award is
imposed by Article 53, the enforcement mechanism in Article 54 is instead designed to ensure
compliance against private parties. Article 54 thus has no relevance for the determination of
whether a Contracting State will comply with an ICSID award pursuant to Article 53 of the

5 Georgia's Response of 30 September 2010 to Respondents’ Request for Conditions to Stay Enforcement of the
Award, paras. 12-15

6 Georgia's Response of 30 September 2010 to Respondents’ Request for Conditions to Stay Enforcement of the
Award, para. 29

7 Id; Georgia's Request for Continuation of the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, paras. 14-15; Provisional Tr., p.

8 Provisional Tr., pp. 38, 49

9 Georgia's Response of 30 September 2010 to Respondents’ Request for Conditions to Stay Enforcement of the
Award, paras. 30-34

Convention. The prospect of compliance with Article 53 is what is relevant for the determination of

whether or not a stay should be granted and whether it should be subject to conditions'°,

13. According to Georgia, all references to a possible application of the New York Convention
or a possible application of the Georgian Constitution to an ICSID award are purely speculative and
cannot be the basis for implying the existence of a condition on an explicit right given to State
Parties under the ICSID Convention. Indeed, the facts of this case provide irrefutable evidence that
Georgia has not taken, and will not take the position that it would apply the New York Convention

and/or its Constitution to avoid compliance with ICSID awards",

14. Respondents' further arguments, that Georgia's legal position in the course of the underlying
arbitration is relevant to the grant of a stay subject to conditions and that Georgia's exercise of its
rights under the ICSID Convention is in breach of its ECT obligation, have no weight. Unlike the
Argentina cases cited by Respondents, there is no risk that Georgia will not comply with the Award
if the request for annulment is denied. Even in cases where committees have found that a State will
not comply with an award, the test has still been to assess all the circumstances of the case, and

committees have granted stay without conditions”.

15. Georgia requests that enforcement of the Award be stayed without conditions pending the ad
hoc Committees' decision on the applications for annulment. However, to the extent there is any
doubt as to Georgia's commitment to comply with the Award if it is not annulled, Georgia would be

willing to provide the Committee a letter of assurance, should the Committee decide that the totality

1

Georgia's Response of 30 September 2010 to Respondents’ Request for Conditions to Stay Enforcement of the
Award, paras. 43-48

Georgia's Response of 30 September 2010 to Respondents’ Request for Conditions to Stay Enforcement of the
Award, paras. 49-52

v

Georgia's Response of 30 September 2010 to Respondents’ Request for Conditions to Stay Enforcement of the
Award, paras. 59-60

of the circumstances justify imposing such condition for the continuation of stay of enforcement of

the Award",

sea

16. Messrs. Kardasspoulos and Fuchs (Respondents) “recognize that it is customary for ad hoc
annulment committees to grant a stay of enforcement pending the determination of the loosing
party's annulment application”,

17. The Respondents say that the unique facts of the case provide compelling grounds for
requiring Georgia to post security, failing which the stay of enforcement should be automatically
lifted'®. Messrs. Kardassopoulos and Fuchs underline that ad hoc committees are empowered to
require the posting of security and moreover stress that ad hoc committees have uniformly endorsed
the posting of security where justifiable doubts exist as to the host State's intentions to honor an

ICSID award as is precisely the case with Georgia's conduct!®.,

18. The Respondents submit that, by failing to pay even the one modest ICSID award rendered
against it in 2008 in the matter of Ares v. MetalGeo, Georgia is already in breach of Article 53 of the
ICSID Convention which imposes an unconditional obligation on Georgia to abide by and comply
with ICSID awards. There is no evidence of a convincing nature, the Respondents claimed at the

hearing, that Georgia respects its obligation under Article 53 of the ICSID Convention to comply

a

Georgia's Response of 30 September 2010 to Respondents’ Request for Conditions to Stay Enforcement of the
Award, para. 61
14 See Response to Georgia's Appli for ant ditional Stay of Enf and Application for Security as a

Condition of any Continued Stay of 2 September 2010, para. 3
15. Response to Georgia's Appli for an Unconditional Stay of E and for Security as a

Condition of any Continued Stay of 2 September 2010, para. 4
16 Response to Georgia's Application for an Unconditional Stay of Enf and Application for Security as a
Condition of any Continued Stay of 2 September 2010, paras. 11-17

with ICSID awards'”. Respondents add that security is also warranted in light of Georgia's failure to
implement Article 54 of the ICSID Convention which requires the Contracting States to enable
enforcement of ICSID awards in their own national courts. Messrs. Kardasspoulos and Fuchs also
declare that Georgia is in breach of its obligation under Article 26(8) of the Energy Charter Treaty
(“ECT”) which calls on the Contracting States to carry out without delay any award and to make
provision for the effective enforcement in its area of such awards. The Respondents submit that
Georgia’s obligation under Article 26(8) of the ECT should be taken into account in addition to the

obligations under Articles 53 and 54 of the ICSID Convention'®,

19. The Respondents contend that Georgia's internal laws fail to comply with its international
obligations for at least the four following reasons: (i) Georgian legislation improperly subjects
ICSID awards to potential non-recognition on the grounds similar to those in article V of the New
York Convention; (ii) under Georgian law, recognition of its obligations under the ICSID
Convention is secondary to the requirements of Georgia's Constitution; (iii) Georgian law denies
private parties legal standing to seize assets of Georgia in satisfaction of an ICSID award; (iv) as
applied in the Ares v. MetalGeo case, Georgian law and procedure has been conclusively proven to
deliver no remedy to creditors holding an ICSID award'®. At the hearing, the Respondents argued
that the enforcement mechanism is self-judging because it allows the State to have complete control

over whether the enforcement proceedings can be brought”.

20. Messrs. Kardassopoulos and Fuchs declare that their treatment by Georgia provides further

compelling evidence that Georgia will fail to abide and comply with the Tribunal's Award. The

17 Provisional Tr., p. 17

18 Response to Georgia's Application for an { itional Stay of Enfi and
Condition of any Continued Stay of 2 September 2010, paras. 22-24

for Security as a

19 Response to Georgia's Appli for an Unconditional Stay of and ion for Security as a

Condition of any Continued Stay of 2 September 2010, para. 25
20 Provisional Tr., p. 19

Respondents rely on some passages of the Tribunal's Award which notably declare that the case
arises from a “farce” of broken promises by Georgia to compensate them. They add that they are
regarded by Georgia as non-strategic investors who do not merit priority and it is evident that
Georgia treats them with hostility. The Respondents further declare that Georgia conducted its
defense in the ICSID arbitration proceedings in a dilatory manner which creates additional doubts
over good faith compliance with the Award. The Respondents finally stress that security is also
appropriate and cannot be characterized as unfair because Georgia unlawfully expropriated their

shareholding in the GTI joint venture”!

21. Messrs. Kardassopoulos and Fuchs also allege that the parties' competing arguments on the
merits of the annulment applications are irrelevant to security applications. None of the points
raised by Georgia in its applications to set the award aside are relevant to the question presented to
the Committee of whether the stay should be unconditional or, quite to the contrary, as Respondents

declare, conditional on providing security”.

22. The Respondents request the Committee to:

(a) condition the continued stay of enforcement of the Award on the posting by Georgia
of adequate security in the following form:

(i) an unconditional and irrevocable bank guarantee or standby letter of credit
with a reputable international bank for the full amount of the Award including
post-award interest (or such other amount as may be determined by the
Committees), callable by the Claimants upon the outcome of the Committees’
final decision on the current applications for annulment;

(ii) in the alternative, the deposit by Georgia of the full amount of the Award plus

the post-interest to date (or such other amount as may be determined by the

Committees) in a mutually-acceptable escrow account with a reputable

international bank, pledged in favor of Messrs. Kardassopoulos and Fuchs and

under the control of the sole control of an international escrow agent;

21 Response to Georgia's Appli for an l ditional Stay of E and for Security as a
Condition of any Continued Stay of 2 September 2010, paras. 40 — 49

22. Response to Georgia's Application for an Uncond and ion for Security as a

tay of
Condition of any Continued Stay of 2 September 2010, paras. 50-51

(iii) in the further alternative, the irrevocable commitment by Georgia (to be held
in escrow and in a form acceptable to them) to pay them an agreed percentage of
any income received by Georgia or its relevant state-entities by way of transit fee
for any oil pipeline within its territory for such period as may be necessary to
discharge the Award in full plus post-award interest; or,

(iv) in the further alternative, in such other form as may be determined by the
Committees;

(b) order that security so provided be collectable by Messrs. Kardassopoulos and Fuchs in
full if the current annulment applications are rejected, or in the event of partial
annulment, partially collectable by the appropriate Respondent(s) in the remaining
amount of the Award rendered in his or their favor;

(c) order that if Georgia fails to provide the security so ordered within 90 days or defaults
in paying any other amount required by the Centre to be paid in the course of the current
annulment applications (including the costs of the Centre and/or the costs of the
Annulment Committees), the stay on enforcement of the Award shall be terminated; and
(d) order that Georgia pay the costs of the present application, or, in the alternative,

reserve its decision as to the costs of this application until the conclusion of these
annulment proceedings.

THE COMMITTEE'S ANALYSIS

23. Awards made under the ICSID Convention are binding on the parties as spelled out in
Article 53(1) of the Convention:

(1) [t]he award shall be binding on the parties and shall not be subject to appeal or to any

other remedy except those provided for in this Convention. Each party shall abide by and

comply with the terms of the award except and to the extent that enforcement shall have
been stayed pursuant to the relevant provisions of this Convention.

24. Once an award is made, completion of any further process is unnecessary for the acquisition
of a binding character. Should the award debtor not carry out voluntarily the award, the award
creditor is only invited by Article 54(2) of the ICSID Convention to furnish to a competent court or
other authority of a Contracting State a copy of the award certified by the Secretary-General of
ICSID. The party seeking recognition or enforcement of an ICSID award has no condition to prove
other than the authenticity of the award, as Article 54(1) of the Convention obliges the Contracting

States to recognize an ICSID award as binding and to enforce the pecuniary obligations imposed by

that award as if it were a final judgment of a court in that State. Article 53(1) reinforces this
obligation to recognize and enforce by specifying that an ICSID award is not subject to appeal or
any other remedy except as otherwise provided in the Convention as regards interpretation, revision

or annulment of the award.

25. The ICSID Convention provides only one exception to the obligation to comply promptly
and spontaneously with an award whenever according to Article 53(1) “[e]nforcement shall have
been stayed pursuant to the relevant provisions of this Convention”. Article 52(5) expressly

provides in this regard that,

[t]he Committee [which has authority to annul the award] may, if it considers that the
circumstances so require, stay enforcement of the award pending its decision. If the
applicant requests a stay of enforcement of the award in his application, enforcement shall
be stayed provisionally until the Committee rules on such request.

26. Consonant with the extraordinary nature of the annulment remedy, the stay of the
enforcement is an exception to the ICSID enforcement regime. Stay of enforcement during the
annulment proceeding is by no way automatic, quite to the contrary, a stay is contingent upon the
existence of relevant circumstances which must be proven by the Applicant. Contrary to the
Applicant's position, the Committee agrees with the Respondents” that the granting of a stay with
or without conditions does not require an analysis of the importance of the issues. The Committee's
task is not to evaluate at this stage in a preliminary manner whether the arguments in support of the
applications for annulment are important or serious enough to the success of Georgia's request for a

stay.

27. Messrs. Kardassopoulos and Fuchs have however refrained from putting Georgia's request
for a stay to test and have instead agreed that enforcement of the Award made on 3 March 2010

23. Provisional Tr., p. 6; see also Response to Georgia's Application for an Unconditional Stay of Enforcement and
Application for Security as a Condition of any Continued Stay of 2 September 2010, pars. 52-54

  

ordering Georgia to pay them more than US $ 90 million in damages be stayed as requested by
Georgia. This is acknowledged by Georgia in its response of 30 September 2010 that “[t]he parties
agree that the stay of enforcement of the Award should continue”**. The Committee will therefore

focus its further analysis on the parties' arguments on whether the stay should be conditional or not.

28. Respondents' agreement on the continuation of the stay is, however, subject to the
imposition of conditions which, they argue, ad hoc committees are empowered to require. In their
view, an ad hoc committee's power to order the posting of security flows from Article 52(5) of the
ICSID Convention which confers broad discretion on committees regarding the stay of enforcement
of ICSID awards. The Applicant replied however that a power which is not explicitly found in the
text of the Treaty but which is considered to exist implicitly within a broader power must be
exercised restrictively. The parties are in disagreement over the extent to which there is a uniform
practice on the granting of security. Georgia maintains that there are no cases that use “justifiable
doubts” as the test for granting a stay subject to conditions, while Messrs. Kardassopoulos and
Fuchs submitted that ad hoc committees have uniformly endorsed the posting of security where

justifiable doubts exist as to the host State's intentions to honor an ICSID award.

29. The powers of the Committee to subject the stay of enforcement to conditions is implied by
the broad discretion given to it under Article 52(5) of the Convention to stay enforcement of the
award “if it considers that the circumstances so require”. This was made clear by the decisions of

the ad hoc Committees in Victor Pey Casado v. Republic of Chile? and Enron vy. Argentine

24 Georgia's Response of 30 September 2010 to Respondents’ Request for Conditions to Stay Enforcement of the
Award, para. 1

25 Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile, 1CSID Case N° ARB/98/2, Decision on
the Republic of Chile's Application for a Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 5 May 2010, para. 28; Index of Legal
Authorities to the Response to Georgia's for an l Stay of an or
Security as a Condition of any Continued Stay, n° 16

 

Republic”®, and we agree with the ad hoc Committee in Vivendi v. Argentine Republic that “the
Committee will not revisit the question whether the continuation of the stay can be made
conditional. There is ample case law that has confirmed this opportunity”?”. It is not the case, as the
Applicant alleges, that the powers of an ad hoc committee in this regard are to be exercised
restrictively because conditional stays are not expressly mentioned in the ICSID Convention. An ad
hoc committee enjoys rather all latitude to find the proper balance between the interests of the
parties in a given case and the legitimate right to enforce the award in order to rule on the request
for a stay presented to it pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention, with or without

conditions.

30. The parties take issue with how the Committee should exercise its discretion to subject the
stay of enforcement to conditions. The Respondents declare that Georgia's conduct creates
justifiable doubts as to its intention to honor the Award. According to Messrs. Kardassopoulos and
Fuchs, Georgian law denies private parties legal standing to seize assets of Georgia in satisfaction
of an ICSID award. They cite in their response of 2 September 2010 to Georgia's Application for an
Unconditional Stay of Enforcement and Application for Security as a Condition of any Continued
Stay”* the recommendations issued in January 2003 by the Council of Europe on the Enforcement

Law of 16 April 1999 that,

[i]t is not realistic that State enforcement agents should be expected to take enforcement

iS)
a

Enron Creditors Recovery Corporation (formerly Enron Corporation) and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine
Republic, ICSID Case N° ARB/O1/3, Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of
Enforcement of the Award, 7 October 2008, para. 26, First stay decision); Index of Legal Authorities to the
Response to Georgia's A for an L 1 Stay of Et an or Security as a
Condition of any Continued Stay, n° 11

 

 

XN
u

Compaiiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case N°
ARB/97/3, Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award
rendered on 20 August 2007 (Rule 54 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules), 4 November 2008, para. 38; Index of Legal
Authorities to the Response to Georgia's for an l di Stay of Enfc and or
Security as a Condition of any Continued Stay, n° 12

28 Para. 33

action against State enforcement authorities and should not be held accountable for the
failure to enforce against such authorities; enforcement agents are not equipped with the
appropriate means to resolve the problems of internal State debt”.

The simplified and automatic enforcement system of Article 54(1) of the ICSID Convention should
not be conflated with the measures of execution that follow the order granted by the court or
authority designated in accordance with Article 54(2) for enforcement of the award and which are
referred to in Article 54(3) providing that “[e]xecution of the award shall be governed by the laws
concerning the execution of judgments in force in the State in whose territories such execution is
sought”. The object and purpose of the Enforcement Law of 16 April 1999 are chiefly the
modalities concerning execution against assets of court judgments and awards in Georgia and the
authority of enforcement agents*?. This analysis is buttressed by the Recommendations of the
Council of Europe which, as an introduction, call for the necessity of the implementation of judicial
decisions to conform with the fair trial standards of Article 6 of the European Convention on
Human Rights? ‘a concern which does not fall within the obligations undertaken by Georgia under
the ICSID Convention. The criticisms raised by the Respondents regarding the Georgian
Enforcement Law of 16 April 1999 are irrelevant to the enforcement context of Article 54(1) and

(2).

31. Messrs. Kardassopoulos and Fuchs further contended that Georgia's implementation of
Article 54 of the ICSID Convention is demonstrably inadequate. They stressed that Georgia has not
enacted any specific laws to implement Article 54 of the Convention®. Georgia is not, as the

Respondents also note, listed among the countries which have adopted legislative measures

 

29 Index of Exhibits to the Response to Georgia's Application for an Unconditional Stay of Enforcement and
Application or Security as a Condition of any Continued Stay, n° R-7

30 Id.

31 Recommendations on the Law of Georgia on the Enforcement Proceedings, Introduction, points 1 and 4, Exhibit n°

32 See www.worldbank.org/icsid Contracting States and Measures taken by them for the Purpose of the Convention,
(ICSID/8-E)

regarding the promulgation and ratification of the Convention in pursuance of Article 69 of the
ICSID Convention**, but it is not disputed that Georgia is, notwithstanding, a Contracting State to
the Convention since 6 September 1992. According to the Respondents, Georgia's internal laws fail
to comply with Article 54 because Georgian law improperly subjects ICSID awards to potential
non-recognition on the grounds similar to those in the New York Convention. The Applicant, which
denied that its courts would review ICSID awards if brought to enforcement, pointed out to the
travaux préparatoires of the ICSID Convention in support of its argument that Article 54 provides

the Contracting States with a forced enforcement mechanism against a defaulting private investor.

32. The Committee notes that the text of Article 54(1), which, in contrast to the Georgian Law
on Arbitration of 19 June 2009 inspired from the UNICTRAL Model-Law, leaves no discretion to
the court or authority to discuss the validity of the award, makes however no distinction as to
enforcement against a State or a private investor. A comparison of the list of the Contracting States
to the ICSID Convention with the list of those States which made the designation under Article
54(2) shows that far from all Contracting States, actually seventy four, have notified to the
Secretary-General of ICSID the competent court or authority for the purpose of recognition or
enforcement while seventy, including Georgia, have not. “A failure by a State seeking annulment to
put in place laws implementing the obligations under Article 54(1) may” as declared by the ad hoc

Committee in Enron v. Argentine Republic, “be one factor giving rise to doubts”**

regarding
whether there would be compliance with the obligations to pay the award if the application is

rejected.

33. The Respondents further stressed that, under the Georgian Law on Normative Acts of 22

October 2009, recognition of Georgia's obligations under the ICSID Convention is secondary to the

33. Id., (ICSID/8-F)
34. See Enron v. Argentine Republic, para. 49

16

requirements of its Constitution, which raises the possibility of Georgia applying to the Georgian
Constitutional Court to claim that its enforcement obligations under the ICSID Convention may be
unconstitutional. It is not possible however to follow the Respondents on that latter ground, as this
Committee must be satisfied of the existence of concrete circumstances which would warrant the
imposition of conditions to grant a stay of enforcement, while speculations on a party's possible

attitude in the future are irrelevant.

34. As far as the Respondents question Georgia’s compliance with its obligations arising under
the ICSID Convention on a general level unrelated to the circumstances of the enforcement of the
pecuniary obligations arising out of the award of 3 March 2010, it must be noted that Article 64 of

the ICSID Convention provides that,

[a]ny dispute arising between Contracting States concerning the interpretation or application
of this Convention which is not settled by negotiation shall be referred to the International
Court of Justice by the application of any party to such dispute, unless the States concerned
agree to another method of settlement.

The remit of this Committee is only the control of the Award of 3 March 2010 and the possibility of
ordering a stay pending the Committee’s decision on annulment, not to decide a case of State
responsibility under public international law or whether Georgia has breached its obligations under

the ICSID Convention.

35. The same can be said about the Respondents' arguments that Georgia is also in breach of
Article 26(8) of the ECT to create procedures to ensure enforcement of the Award. Article 26(8) of
the ECT reads, “[t]he awards of arbitration, which may include an award of interest, shall be final
and binding upon the parties to the dispute... Each Contracting Party shall carry out without delay
any such award and shall make provision for the effective enforcement in its Area of such awards”.

Such provisions are an encouragement to spontaneous performance, but as remarked by Georgia in

its Response of 30 September 2010, Article 26(8) does not bar the parties from requesting
annulment of an ICSID award and certainly imposes no obligation to execute the Award during the
pendency of the stay of enforcement*. Actually, the above mentioned language would seem to
focus more on enforcing awards which are made pursuant to the other investor-state arbitration

options envisaged by Article 26 of the ECT*.

36. The Respondents denounced the conduct of Georgia with regard to the enforcement of the
ICISD award rendered against Georgia under the Italy-Georgia BIT in Ares International &
MetalGeo v. Georgia which, they stressed, has still today not been honored by Georgia in spite of
the relatively small amount of the condemnation. They asserted that this is a 100% track record of
non-compliance. Georgia replied that this is far from the truth. The Applicant declared that it never

took the position that it would not pay the award which is

 

still in enforcement proceedings due to
the award creditor's choice in that case to seek judicial remedy. Georgia specifies that it has been, or
is involved, in other ICSID proceedings and that its situation should be clearly distinguished from

the stance taken by Argentina in Sempra where the ad hoc Committee noted,

Argentina's posture makes it clear that it will in fact not comply with its obligation to abide
by and comply with an award in Sempra's favour unless and until Sempra seeks recognition
and enforcement of the Award before an Argentine judicial tribunal in the manner prescribed
by the national laws of Argentina’.

As contrasted with the Argentina annulment cases notably discussed by the Respondents at the

hearing**, the Committee must acknowledge that Georgia never declared that it would not comply

35 Georgia's Response of 30 September 2010 to Respondents' Request for Conditions to stay Enforcement of the
Award, para. 54

36 Ad hoc arbitration under the UNCITRAL Rules, Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce

37 Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case N° ARB/02/16, Decision on the Argentine
Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 5 March 2009, para. 104, Index of Legal
Authorities to the Response to Georgia's for an L Stay of and ion or
Security as a Condition of any Continued Stay, n° 13

38. Tr, pp. 9-14, See Vivendi v. Argentine Republic (para. 45); Enron v. Argentine Republic, First Stay Decision of 7
October 2008, para. 101 and Second Stay Decision of 20 May 2009, para. 28-29, Index of Legal Authorities to the

with the Award of 3 March 2010”.

37. The Respondents further contended that, as applied in the Ares & MetalGeo case, Georgian
law and practice has been conclusively proven to deliver no remedy to creditors holding an ICSID
award. They said that the experience of the Ares & MetalGeo case proves the inadequacy of the
Georgian enforcement mechanism. They explained that, faced with Georgia's continued refusal to
pay more than a year after the award was rendered, the claimants in that case sought recognition of
the ICSID award in the Georgian courts. Although the Supreme Court recognized the award”, the
Respondents pointed out that the National Enforcement Bureau (“NEB”), which is an agency under
the management and control of the Ministry of Justice, has done nothing to recover payment from
the Ministry of Finance. The Respondents claimed that the NEB, far from fulfilling its supposed
statutory duty of enforcing awards, actually exists to block enforcement. The Applicant replied at
the hearing that the NEB is nowadays an independent agency which is not under the supervision of
the Ministry of Justice after new legislation was passed in 20084". Georgia also declared that
because payments, like in all countries, is at the discretion of the Executive Branch, it has to follow

its budgetary proceedings”.

38. The likelihood that Georgia will fail to pay the Award of 3 March 2010, just as it failed to
pay the Ares & MetalGeo award, is, according to Messrs. Kardassopoulos and Fuchs, amplified by
the specific facts of this dispute, which evidence a pattern of consistently mistreating the

Respondents since the mid-1990's. The Respondents denounce a pattern of hostility by the Ministry

 

Response to Georgia's Application for an Uncond

Condition of any Continued Stay, n°s 12, 11 and 14

1 Stay of Et and or Security as a

39 Georgia's Response of 30 September 2010 to Respondents' Request for Conditions to stay Enforcement of the
Award, para. 23

40 Index of Exhibits to the Response to Georgia's Application for an Unconditional Stay of Enforcement and
Application or Security as a Condition of any Continued Stay, n° R-10

41 Provisional Tr., p. 50

42. Provisional Tr., pp. 47, 50

of Justice that contributed to the failure of the compensation process for seven years with repeated
promises by senior Georgian officials to compensate them which were subsequently denied. They
referred more specifically to paragraphs 445-450 of the Award where the Tribunal condemned

Georgia's behavior in the strongest terms.

39. Messrs. Kardassopoulos and Fuchs declared that Georgia belittled their investment and
regarded them as non-strategic investors who do not merit priority. The Respondents also declared
that the posting of security cannot be unfair because Georgia has already acquired from them the
economic value of the security without paying compensation or offering restitution when their
shares in GTI, the joint venture created in 1992 by Tramex and SakNavtobi, were expropriated. The
Respondents cannot however rely as evidence of Georgia's intention not to comply with the Award
on the impugned passages of the Award regarding Georgia's attitude which are precisely criticized

in the applications for annulment on the ground of failure to state reasons”,

40. Messrs. Kardassopoulos and Fuchs added that Georgia's dilatory approach to the arbitration
proceeding creates additional doubts as to its good faith compliance with the Award. The
Committee cannot follow this approach. It observes that Messrs. Kardassopoulos and Fuchs did not
claim damages before the Arbitral Tribunal for the dilatory tactics which, they now allege before the
Committee, had been displayed by Georgia in the arbitration proceedings. There is no evidence that
Georgia was in breach of its procedural obligation of loyalty inherent to a fair trial and that its
comportment in the arbitration proceeding is now an indication to renege on its obligation to
comply with the Award under Article 53 of the ICSID Convention if the applications for annulment

are rejected.

43. Georgia's Application for annulment of 30 June 2010, section D. The Tribunal failed to state the reasons for its
findings of a breach of the Fair and Equitable Treatment standards under the Georgia/Greece BIT and the ECT in
favor of Mr. Kardassopoulos, p. 26.

20

41. The Committee can only assess whether a conditional stay is necessary on the objective and
concrete circumstances of the case. In making its analysis, the Committee holds that it will not take
into account the events of Mr. Fuchs' arrest and detention by the Georgian authorities in the last
days preceding the hearing in London which have no influence on the motivation of its Decision on

a conditional stay.

42. It is undisputed that Messrs. Kardassopoulos and Fuchs made an investment in Georgia as
early as the spring of 1992 with the creation, through Tramex, of the Joint Venture GTI and that a
Compensation Commission was established pursuant to an Order n° 84 of 23 April 1997 “for
reviewing Tramex International company's expenses in Georgia...”. It is also an undisputed fact that
after years of discussions and negotiation, the Respondents were finally informed on 15 November
2004 of the decision of the reconstituted Compensation Commission established a month earlier in
October 2004 by Decree n° 144 that there were no legal grounds for holding the Government liable
for their claims, a finding which it refused to reconsider on 10 December 2004. In the end, Mr.
Kardassopoulos submitted his Request for Arbitration with ICSID on 2 August 2005 and Mr. Fuchs.

did the same on 20 April 2007.

43. Against this backdrop of the protracted character of the dispute and discussions over the
claims for compensation of the investment and reimbursement of losses, the further deferment of
the payment of the Award to individuals which is implied by the stay would amply justify the
imposition of conditions to the stay. The Applicant however has several times pointed out that post-
award interest will compensate for any delay in enforcement of the Award if it is not annulled“,
Such interests compensate for the forbearance of the principal until payment of the award. Although
they have a bearing on the efficacy of the award, post-award interests are not directly related to the
issue of award enforcement. Additionally, in the present case, under the above mentioned

44 Tr. p. 41; Georgia's Request for Continuation of the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, para. 7

21

circumstances, the absence of a proper mechanism to ensure the implementation of ICSID awards

further reinforces the necessity to make the stay of enforcement conditional.

44. There is again disagreement between the parties on the nature of the condition. Georgia
indicated that it would be willing to provide a letter that it will comply with the Award to the extent
it is not annulled“’. The Committee cannot however accept such condition which it regards both as
unsatisfactory in view of an already prolonged negotiation and litigious process between the parties
and as a belated offer in response to Respondents’ submissions on a conditional stay when the
Applicant could have proposed an assurance letter in the first place upon the filing of its request for
a stay. Georgia chose instead to apply on 12 August 2010 for an unconditional stay of enforcement
and cannot now complain that Messrs. Kardassopoulos and Fuchs, who accepted the continuation of
the stay, subject to conditions, may be in a more favorable position with the posting of security than
they would have enjoyed in the absence of a request for a stay*®, Georgia besides argued at the
hearing that committing the amount of the Award to an escrow account or letter of credit will reduce
its cash flow and ability to make expenditures for about USD 100 Million, that money being
withdrawn from other budget items*”. The latter remark is of course an inescapable conclusion that
monies used for one purpose cannot serve another, but no evidence has been proffered that the
budgetary constraints of the country are such that Georgia could not afford to pay the costs of the
issuance of an unconditional and irrevocable bank guarantee with a reputable international bank as

requested by Messrs. Kardassopoulos and Fuchs.

45. The Committee therefore decides that the stay of enforcement of the Award of 3 March 2010

shall continue, provided that within ninety days following the notification by the Secretariat of this

4

a

Georgia's Response to Respondents’ Request for Conditions to Stay Enforcement of the Award of 30 September
2010, para. 61

A
4

a

Provisional Tr., p. 39

a

Provisional Tr., p. 42

22

Decision, Georgia furnishes an unconditional and irrevocable bank guarantee with a reputable

international bank (with no principal establishment in either Georgia, Greece or Israel) as prescribed

in the dispositive section of this Decision for the full amount of the Award, with the exception of

post-award interest.

THEREFORE THE COMMITTEE DECIDES:

Enforcement of the Award of 3 March 2010 shall continue to be stayed until the date on which the

ad hoc Committee issues its decision on the pending applications for annulment submitted by

Georgia under the following conditions:

23

Provided that within ninety (90) days following the notification by the ICSID Secretariat of
this Decision, Georgia furnishes an unconditional and irrevocable bank guarantee issued by
a reputable international bank (with no principal establishment in Georgia, Greece or Israel)

for the full amount of the Award, with the exception of post-award interest.

Such bank guarantee must be approved by the Committee and therefore, within no more
than sixty (60 days) following the notification by the ICSID Secretariat of this Decision, it
must be submitted to the Committee for its consideration and to Messrs. Kardassopoulos

and Fuchs for any comments they may wish to make on it.

The said bank guarantee may be collected by Messrs. Kardassopoulos and Fuchs in full if
the applications for annulment are rejected, or in the event of partial annulment, may be
partially collected by Messrs. Kardassopoulos and Fuchs in the remaining amount of the

award rendered in his or their favor.

24

The costs of the present application are reserved until the conclusion of the annulment

proceeding.

[signed]
On behalf of the ad hoc Committee

Judge Dominique Hascher
President of the ad hoc Committee

[12 November 2010]

Date

