 

4.9.2015 Official Journal of the European Union L 232/43

 

COMMISSION DECISION (EU) 2015/1470
of 30 March 2015

on State aid SA.38517 (2014/C) (ex 2014/NN) implemented by Romania — Arbitral award Micula v
Romania of 11 December 2013

(notified under document (2015) 2112)
(Only the Romanian text is authentic)

(Text with EEA relevance)
THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION,

Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular the first subparagraph of
Article 108(2) thereof ('),

Having regard to the Agreement on the European Economic Area, and in particular Article 62(1)(a) thereof,

Having called on interested parties to submit their comments pursuant to the provision(s) cited above (?) and having
regard to their comments,

Whereas:

1. PROCEDURE

(1) By award of 11 December 2013 (‘the Award’), an arbitration tribunal (‘the Tribunal’) established under the auspices
of the International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes (‘ICSID’) in the case Micula a.o. v Romania (*)
awarded compensation in favour of the five claimants (the brothers Viorel and Ioan Micula and the companies S.C.
European Food SA, S.C. Starmill S.R.L., and S.C. Multipack, all owned by the Micula brothers; collectively, ‘the
claimants) against Romania in the amount of RON 376 433 229 (ca. EUR 82 million (*)) for Romania's failure to
ensure a fair and equitable treatment of the claimants’ investments, which amounted to a violation by Romania of
Article 2(3) of the Agreement between the Government of the Kingdom of Sweden and the Government of
Romania on the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments (‘the BIT) (°). In addition, the Tribunal
decided that interest should accrue on that sum until Romania’s full implementation of the Award. By 11 December
2013, the total amount thus owed by Romania to the claimants amounted to RON 791 882 452 (ca. EUR
178 million (°)).

(2) By letter of 31 January 2014, the Commission services informed the Romanian authorities that any implemen-
tation or execution of the Award would constitute new aid and would have to be notified to the Commission.

(3) On 20 February 2014, the Romanian authorities informed the Commission services that they had partially
implemented the Award by offsetting a portion of the compensation awarded to the claimants by the Tribunal
against taxes owed by one of the claimants, namely S.C. European Food SA, to the Romanian authorities. The tax
debt that was thus offset amounted to RON 337 492 864 (ca. EUR 76 million (7). Romania further sought
clarification from the Commission services as to the possibility of paying the outstanding amount to a natural
person (the brothers Viorel and loan Micula or any other natural person to whom the claim may be assigned).

(4) On 12 March 2014, the Commission services requested further information from Romania regarding the envisaged
further implementation or execution of the Award, which Romania provided by letter of 26 March 2014.

(}) With effect from 1 December 2009, Articles 87, and 88 of the EC Treaty have become Articles 107 and 108, respectively, of the
Treaty. The two sets of Articles are in substance identical. For the purposes of this Decision references to Articles 107 and 108 of the
Treaty should be understood as references to Articles 87 and 88 of the EC Treaty when appropriate. The Treaty also introduced
certain changes in terminology, such as the replacement of ‘Community’ by Union’ and ‘common market’ by ‘internal marker’, The
terminology of the Treaty will be used throughout this Decision.

) Of C 393, 7.11.2014, p. 27.

(°) ICSID Case No ARB/05/20, Ioan Micula, Viorel Micula, SC European Food SA, SC Starmill SRI, SC Multipack SRL v Romania, final award
of 11 December 2013.

(*) Reference exchange rate of the European Central Bank on 11 December 2013: 1 EUR = 4,45 RON.

(°) The BIT entered into force on 1 April

(%) See footnote 4.

(?) Reference exchange rate of the European Central Bank on 15 January 2014: 1 EUR = 4,52 RON.

Official Journal of the European Union 4.9.2015

 

 

(5) On 1 April 2014, the Commission services alerted the Romanian authorities as to the possibility of issuing a
suspension injunction to ensure that no further incompatible State aid would be paid out and sought Romania's
comments thereon. By letter of 7 April 2014, Romania declared that it did not wish to comment on the possibility
of the Commission issuing a suspension injunction.

(6) By letter of 26 May 2014, the Commission informed Romania of its decision to issue a suspension injunction (‘the
suspension injunction’) pursuant to Article 11(1) of Council Regulation (EC) No 659/1999 (8), obliging Romania to
suspend any action which may lead to the implementation or execution of the part of the Award that had not yet
been paid, as that would constitute payment of unlawful State aid, until the Commission has taken a final decision
on the compatibility of that State aid with the internal market.

(7) By letter dated 1 October 2014, the Commission informed Romania that it had decided to initiate the procedure
laid down in Article 108(2) of the Treaty (‘the opening decision’) in respect of the partial implementation of the
Award by Romania that took place in early 2014 (’) as well as in respect of any further implementation or
execution of the Award.

(8) The Commission decision to initiate the procedure was published in the Official Journal of the European Union (*°) on
7 November 2014. By that decision, the Commission invited interested parties to submit their comments.

(9) Romania submitted its comments on the opening decision on 26 November 2014. The claimants submitted
comments as an interested party on 8 December 2014, after the rejection, by the Commission, of their request to
have a longer period of time available for submitting their comments. The claimants’ comments were forwarded to
Romania, which was given the opportunity to react; Romania’s observations on the claimants’ comments were
received on 27 January 2015.

(10) The claimants also requested access to all written correspondence between the Commission and Romania
contained in the case file. The request was rejected on 19 December 2014 and the rejection was affirmed on
2 March 2015.

(11) By letters of 9 and 11 March 2015 the Romanian authorities informed the Commission that in the period
5 February to 25 February 2015, the court-appointed executor seized an additional amount of RON
9197 482 from the Ministry of Finance and that a voluntary payment of the remaining amount (i.e. RON
466 760 066) (!!) was made by the Ministry of Finance into a blocked account opened in the name of the five
claimants.

2. BACKGROUND
The State aid law applicable in Romania before its accession to the Union

(12) On 1 February 1995, the Europe Agreement (‘EA’) between the European Community (the ‘Community and its
Member States, on the one hand, and Romania, on the other hand, entered into force ('). The aim of the EA was
to prepare Romania for accession to the Union. Article 64(1)(iii) of the EA declared incompatible with the proper
functioning of the EA any public aid which distorts or threatens to distort competition by favouring certain
undertakings or the production of certain goods in so far as they may affect trade between the Union and
Romania. According to Article 64(2) EA, any practices contrary to this Article had to be assessed ‘on the basis
of criteria arising from the application of the rules of Articles 85, 86 and 92 of the Treaty establishing the
European Economic Community’ (now Articles 101, 102 and 107 of the Treaty). This dynamic reference to
‘criteria arising from the application of the rules’ refers to all Union rules on State aid, including those governing
the grant of regional State aid (15). In addition to the substantive obligation to comply with Union State aid law,

) Council Regulation (EC) No 659/1999 of 22 March 1999 laying down detailed rules for the application of Article 108 of the Treaty
n the Functioning of the European Union (OJ L 83, 27.3.1999, p. 1).

0) See recital 3.

(°) See footnote 2.

() An additional RON 6 028 608 have been transferred on the blocked account as compensation for the execution costs.

(2) Of L 357, 31.12.1994, p. 2.

(8) See also Article 2 of the Implementing Rules to Decision No 4/2000 of the EU-Romania Association Council of 10 April 2001
adopting the implementing rules for the application of the provisions on State aid referred to in Articles 64(1)(ii) and (2) pursuant
to Article 64(3) of the Europe Agreement establishing an association between the European Communities and their Member States,
of the one part, and Romania, of the other part, and in Article 9(1)(ii) and (2) of Protocol 2 on European Coal and Steel
Community (ECSC) products to that Agreement (OJ L 138, 22.5.2001, p. 16).

 

4.9.2015 Official Journal of the European Union L 232/45

 

Articles 69 and 71 of the EA obliged Romania to harmonise its domestic legislation with the acquis communautaire,
expressly mentioning Union competition law and thus Union State aid law which forms part thereof. Accordingly,
the EA obliged Romania, and Romania committed, to comply with the entire corpus of Union State aid law.
Furthermore, the EA has been part of the domestic legal order after been ratified by law 20/1993 by the national
Parliament and published in the national Official Journal on 12 April 1993 (*4).

(13) In order to comply with its harmonisation obligation under the EA, Romania passed Law No 143/1999 on State
aid (State aid law) in 1999, which entered into force on 1 January 2000. That law included the same definition of
State aid as that contained in Article 64 of the EA and under Union law. That law also designated the Romanian
Competition Council (1) and the Romanian Competition Office ('*) as its national State aid surveillance authorities
competent for assessing the compatibility of State aid granted by Romania to undertakings (17) and laid down the
procedure to be followed for the notification and authorisation of State aid which was modelled on Article 108 of
the Treaty.

The investment incentives scheme

(14) On 2 October 1998, Romania enacted Emergency Government Ordinance 24/1998 (EGO 24), granting certain
investors in disfavoured regions a series of incentives, inter alia:

— Article 6(1)(a): an exemption from payment of custom duties and value added tax on machinery, tools,
installations, equipment, means of transportation, other goods subject to depreciation which are imported
or manufactured domestically with the purpose of making investments in that region (Machinery Facility’),

— Article 6(1)(b): refunds of customs duties on raw materials, spare parts and/or components necessary for
achieving the investor's own production in that region (‘Raw Materials Facility),

— Article 6(1)(c): an exemption from payment of profit tax during the period for which the relevant area is
designated as a disfavoured region (‘Profit Tax Facility’).

(15) The Romanian Government determined which regions should be designated as disfavoured and for how long, up
to a maximum of 10 years. By decision of 25 March 1999, the Government declared the mining area of Stei-
Nucet, Bihor county, to be a disfavoured region for 10 years, effective on 1 April 1999.

(16) On 15 May 2000, the Romanian Competition Council adopted Decision No 244/2000, in which it found that
several of the incentives offered under EGO 24 distorted competition. It considered that ‘[e]Jxemption from
customs duty on raw materials are deemed State aid for operating purposes ... leading to distortion of
competition’ and decided that ‘the reimbursement of customs duties on imported raw materials, spare parts
andjor components necessary for own production purposes within an area ... shall be deleted’. That decision
was adopted as a result of the notification by the national agency for regional development (the aid grantor under
EGO 24) to the Competition Council, in accordance with Law No 143/1999, of envisaged modifications to EGO
24 included in the draft Emergency Government Ordinance 75/2000 (EGO 75’). Amongst other modifications
notified, the Romanian legislator envisaged replacing the reimbursement of custom duties under Article 6(1)(b) of
EGO 24 (the Raw Materials Facility) with an exemption from custom duties on imported raw materials, spare parts
and/or components necessary for own production purposes. In Decision No 244/2000, the Competition Council
granted conditional authorisation to draft EGO 75, provided the following conditions were complied with: (i) the
facilities under Article 6(1)(b) of EGO 24 should be repealed and the envisaged amendment to replace the
reimbursement of custom duties with an exemption from custom duties should be withdrawn; and (ii) the
envisaged amendments to Article 6(1)(c) of the EGO 24 (the Profit Tax Facility) would be limited only to the
profit that is reinvested.

(4) Monitorul Oficial, first part, No 73 of 12 April 1993.

('5) The Competition Council was and is an autonomous administrative authority in the field of competition law and State aid law with
regulatory and investigative powers, similar to the European Commission in the field of competition and State aid law.

(5) The Competition Office was a specialised authority subordinate to the government. The main responsibilities of the Office were: (i)
to carry out investigations and to survey the effective enforcement of legal provisions and the decisions of the Competition Council;
(ii) to supervise the setting of prices by public entities and public companies; and (iii) to ensure transparency of State aid, and to
monitor and report State aid expenditure.

(”) By Article 1 of the implementing rules to Decision No 4/2000 the EU-Romania Association Council designated the Competition
Council and Competition Office as the Romanian entities responsible for surveying and assessing the compatibility of State aid with
the 1995 Europe Agreement.

 

L 232/46 Official Journal of the European Union 4.9.2015

 

(17) On 1 July 2000, EGO 75 entered into force. EGO 75, as adopted, did not, however, comply with the Competition
Council’s conditions to repeal the Raw Materials Facility and withdraw the envisaged amendment thereto. Instead,
it amended Article 6(1)(b) of EGO 24 by replacing the refund on customs duties under the Raw Materials Facility
with an exemption on customs duties on imported raw materials in direct contravention of Decision No
244/2000.

(18) The Competition Council challenged the failure to implement its decision before the Bucharest Court of Appeal,
which however dismissed the application on 26 January 2001 as inadmissible ('8). The inadmissibility was
grounded on the fact that EGO 75 was considered a legislative, not an administrative measure, the legality of
which the Competition Council could not contest under Law No 143/1999 and that any conflicts between legal
provisions had to be resolved by the government and parliament without interference from the courts. The High
Court of Cassation of Justice of Romania rejected the Competition Council's appeal against the Court of Appeals
decision on 19 February 2002 as inadmissible on similar grounds (').

(19) In February 2000, Romania began accession talks to the Union. Competition policy, including compliance with
Union State aid rules, formed part of those negotiations. In the context of those negotiations, the Union Common
Position of 21 November 2001 noted that ‘there are a number of existing as well as new incompatible aid schemes
which have not been brought into line with the acquis’, including ‘facilities provided under [EGO 24 and EGO
75) ?).

(20) On 31 August 2004, Romania repealed all the incentives provided under EGO 24, as amended by EGO 75, except
the Profit Tax Facility. The revocation of the EGO 24 incentives took effect on 22 February 2005. The report
accompanying the act repealing EGO 24, as amended by EGO 75, explained: ‘In order to meet the criteria in the
Community rules on State aid, and also to complete the negotiations under Chapter No 6 — Competition Policy it
is necessary to eliminate all forms of State aid in national legislation incompatible with the acquis communautaire
in this area and, in this respect, it is proposed to repeal [...] the provisions of Article 6 paragraph (1), letter (b),
letter (d) and letter (e) of the Emergency Government Ordinance No 24/1998 on the disadvantaged areas [...] (?').’

The claimants’ investments and ICSID arbitration proceedings

(21) The claimants made certain investments in area of Stei-Nucet, Bihor County, Romania, in the early 2000s. On
1 June 2000, S.C. European Food SA obtained a permanent investor certificate, while S.C. Starmill S.R.L. and S.C.
Multipack obtained their permanent investor certificates (‘PICs’) on 17 May 2002, thereby making those companies
eligible to benefit from the scheme set up by EGO 24, as amended by EGO 75, for investments made by them
from those dates onwards in the region of Stei-Nucet, Bihor county, Romania.

(22) In 2003, Romania and Sweden concluded the BIT, which granted each country’s investors (including for
investments entered into prior to the entry into force of the BIT (?)) certain protections when investing in the
other country. The BIT guaranteed, inter alia, the covered investments’ fair and equitable treatment in the host
state, which was interpreted to also include a protection of the investors’ legitimate expectations. It also allowed
the investors to institute proceedings before an international arbitration tribunal in case they believed their rights
under the BIT were violated by the host state. As the Micula brothers hold Swedish citizenship, they claimed that
their investments in Romania were covered by the BIT.

(23) On 28 July 2005, and in reaction to the revocation of the investment incentives under EGO 24, the claimants
requested the establishment of an arbitration tribunal pursuant to the dispute settlement provisions of the BIT. By
decision of 24 September 2008, the Tribunal found that the claimants’ claims were admissible. The claimants had
initially requested the re-establishment of the EGO 24 investment incentives that had been revoked as of
22 February 2005. However, during the proceedings, the claimants partially withdrew their claim in 2009 and
instead requested compensation for damages resulting from the revocation of the EGO 24 incentives. The

(8) Civil Decision No 26; see Award, paragraph 219.

() See Award, paragraph 224.

() European Union Common Position of 21 November 2001, CONF-RO 43/01, p. 4. During the accession process of an applicant
country, the Commission regularly proposes and the Council adopts so-called common positions, in which the progress of the
candidate country towards compliance with the accession criteria is evaluated.

(*) Substantiation Report accompanying EGO 94/2004, 26 August 2004, pp. 12-13.

(2) Article 9(1) of the BIT.

 

4.9.2015 Official Journal of the European Union L 232/47

 

claimants alleged that by revoking the incentives, Romania had infringed their legitimate expectations that those
incentives would be available, in substance, until 1 April 2009. Thus, according to the claimants, Romania had
violated its obligation of fair and equitable treatment owed to them as Swedish investors under Article 2(3) of the
BIT.

(24) In the course of the arbitration proceedings, the Commission intervened as amicus curiae. In its intervention,
submitted on 20 July 2009, the Commission explained that the EGO 24 incentives were: ‘incompatible with
the Community rules on regional aid. In particular, the incentives did not respect the requirements of Community
law as regards eligible costs and aid intensities. Moreover, the facilities constituted operating aid, which is
proscribed under regional aid rules’.

(25) The Commission also observed that ‘[aJny ruling reinstating the privileges abolished by Romania, or compensating
the claimants for the loss of these privileges, would lead to the granting of new aid which would not be
compatible with the EC Treaty’. It also advised the Tribunal that the ‘execution of [any award requiring
Romania to re-establish investment schemes which have been found incompatible with the internal market
during accession negotiations] can thus not take place if it would contradict the rules of EU State aid policy’.

(26) In the Award of 11 December 2013, the Tribunal found that by revoking the EGO 24 incentives, Romania
‘violated the Claimants’ legitimate expectations with respect to the availability of the EGO 24 incentives’ until
1 April 2009 (3). The Tribunal further concluded that, with the exception of maintaining the investors’ obligations
under EGO 24 after revocation of the relevant incentives, ‘Romania’s repeal of the incentives was a reasonable
action in pursuit of a rational policy. (24) However, the Tribunal went on to state that (7°): ‘[T]his conclusion does
not detract from the Tribunal’s holding [...] above that Romania undermined the Claimants’ legitimate expec-
tations with respect to the continued availability of the incentives until 1 April 2009. As a result, Romania's
actions, although for the most part appropriately and narrowly tailored in pursuit of a rational policy, were unfair
or inequitable vis-a-vis the Claimants’.

The Tribunal concluded its analysis by stating that (2): ‘[B]y repealing the EGO 24 incentives prior to 1 April
2009, Romania did not act unreasonably or in bad faith (except that [Romania] acted unreasonably by maintaining
investors’ obligations after terminating the incentives). The Tribunal, however, concludes by majority that Romania
violated the Claimants’ legitimate expectations that those incentives would be available, in substantially the same
form, until 1 April 2009. Romania also failed to act transparently by failing to inform the Claimants in a timely
manner that the regime would be terminated prior to its stated date of expiration. As a result, the Tribunal finds
that Romania failed to “ensure fair and equitable treatment of the investments” of the Claimants in the meaning of
Article 2(3) of the BIT.

(27) The Tribunal further decided that Romania had to pay damages to the claimants (””). In total, the Tribunal awarded
the claimants RON 376 433 229 plus interest. The damages are made up as follows: the Tribunal found that
Romania had to pay the claimants RON 85,1 million (?5) in damages for the increased cost of sugar (for the import
of which the claimants had to pay customs duties after the revocation of the Raw Materials Facility), RON
17,5 million 2) in damages for the increased cost of raw materials other than sugar and PET (°), RON 18,1 mil-
lion (°!) in damages for the loss of the ability to stockpile sugar at lower prices, and RON 255,7 million (2) in
damages for lost profit deriving from lost sales of finished goods. In addition, the Tribunal ordered Romania to pay

(2) Award, paragraph 725.
24) Award, paragraph 827.

() See footnote 24.

5) Award, paragraph 872.

() Award, paragraphs 875 et seq.

8) This amount is calculated for imports made during 22 February 2005 and 31 March 2009.

(2) See footnote 28.

() The claimants asked for compensation for the increased cost of PET. However, the Tribunal rejected this claims on the basis that the
claimants had never in fact benefited from the Raw Materials Facility with respect to PET imports.

(*) This amount is calculated on the basis of custom duties charged on imported sugar and that would have been avoided, if the
claimant had had the opportunity to stockpile sugar before the envisaged expiry of the EGO (ie. 1 April 2009). The benchmark is
based on stockpiles in 2004/2005.

() Lost profits are calculated over the period 2004-2008 for loss of market shares of soft drinks and other products that did contain
sugar. The claim is that after the revocation of the EGO incentives, the costs increased leading to higher prices and thus to lower
market shares.

 

 

L 232/48 Official Journal of the European Union 4.9.2015

 

interest (ROBOR plus 5 %), calculated from 1 March 2007 with respect to the increased cost of sugar and other
raw materials, from 1 November 2009 with respect to loss of ability to stockpile sugar, and from 1 May 2008
with respect to lost profits. On the date of the Award, the principal and interest due to the claimants amounted to
RON 791 882 452, as illustrated in the table.

Damages and interest as awarded to the claimants by the Award

 

 

 

 

 

Damages awarded Amount (in RON) Interest calculated from
Increased cost of sugar 85 100 000 1 March 2007
Increased cost of raw materials other 17 500 000 1 March 2007
than sugar or PET
Lost opportunity to stockpile sugar 18 133 229 1 November 2009
Lost, profits on the sale of finished 255 700 000 1 May 2008
goods

 

Total including interest. ~— on
11 December 2013:

TOTAL 376 433 229 RON 791 882 452

 

 

 

The ICSID annulment proceedings

(28) On 18 April 2014, Romania filed an application for the annulment of the Award on the basis of Article 52 of the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States of 18 March
1965 (ICSID Convention’) before an ad hoc committee. Due to the procedural rules applicable to those
proceedings, Romania has not provided the Commission with its application. However, it has become clear
that in its application, Romania also requested the ad hoc committee to order a stay of enforcement of the
Award until the committee had ruled on the application for annulment. By letter of 18 August 2014, Romania
informed the Commission that by order of 7 August 2014, the ad hoc committee granted a stay of enforcement of
the Award under the condition that Romania deposit, within one month, the following assurances: ‘Romania
commits itself subject to no conditions whatsoever (including those related to [EU] Law or decisions) to effect the
full payment of its pecuniary obligation imposed by the Award in ICSID Case No ARBJ05/20 — and owed to
Claimants — to the extent that the Award is not annulled — following the notification of the Decision on
annulment.

(29) At the request of Romania, the Commission explained to Romania that it could not provide the unconditional
commitment that it would pay the compensation awarded under the Award to the claimants even if that entailed a
violation of its obligations under Union law and regardless of any decision of the Commission. Romania replied
accordingly to the ad hoc committee which lifted the stay of enforcement of the Award as of 7 September 2014.

(30) On 15 October 2014, the Commission submitted an application to the ad hoc committee for leave to intervene as
a non-disputing party in the annulment proceedings. Leave to intervene was granted by the ad hoc committee on
4 December 2014 and the Commission submitted its amicus curiae brief in those proceedings on 9 January 2015.

The claimants’ actions for recognition and execution of the Award in Romanian and US courts

(31) The Romanian authorities further informed the Commission services about the national proceedings introduced by
the claimants to enforce the award. In February 2014, Viorel Micula introduced first the court proceedings with a
view to recognise the award on the basis of the New Procedural Civil Code (Articles 1124-1132) (?). On 7 May
2014, the Commission intervened in those proceedings pursuant to Article 23a(2) of Regulation (EC) No
659/1999. However, Viorel Micula withdrew his action on 28 May 2014 and therefore no judgement has been
rendered. Separately, on 18 March 2014 the other four claimants (S.C. European Food SA, S.C. Starmill S.R.L., S.C.
Multipack, and Mr Ion Micula) initiated court proceedings in Romania with a view to enforcing the Award
pursuant to Article 54 of the ICSID Convention requesting the payment of 80% of the outstanding amount
(ie. RON 301 146 583) and the corresponding interest.

() Case No 3456/3/2014, Bucharest Tribunal.

 

4.9.2015 Official Journal of the European Union L 232/49

 

(32) On 24 March 2014, the Bucharest Tribunal allowed the execution of the Award as requested by the four claimants
considering that, on the basis of Article 54 of the ICSID Convention which has been ratified by Romania and is
part of the domestic legal order, the Award is a directly enforceable act and must be treated as a final domestic
judgment, thus obviating the procedure to recognise the Award on the basis of the Romanian New Procedural Civil
Code (Articles 1123-1132) (4). On 30 March 2014, an executor started the enforcement procedure by setting the
Romanian Ministry of Finance a deadline of 6 months to pay to the four claimants 80 % of the Award plus the
interests and other costs.

(33)

Romania challenged the execution of the Award before the Bucharest Tribunal and asked for interim measures, i.e.
a temporary suspension of execution until the case had been decided on the merits (3). On 14 May 2014, the
Bucharest Court temporarily suspended the execution of the Award until a decision on the merits of Romania’s
challenge and request to suspend the execution had been taken. On 26 May 2014, the Commission intervened in
those proceedings pursuant to Article 23a(2) of Regulation (EC) No 659/1999. The Commission invited the
Bucharest Tribunal to suspend and annul the forced execution of the Award. In the alternative, the Commission
invited the Bucharest Tribunal to refer a preliminary question to the Court of Justice of the European Union
(CJEU’)..

(34)

On 23 September 2014, the Bucharest Tribunal, in the interim measure case, lifted the suspension and rejected
Romania's request for a suspension of the execution of the Award. The primary reason for that rejection was the
lifting of the stay of enforcement of the Award by the ICSID ad hoc committee on 7 September 2014 (see recital
29). On 30 September 2014, Romania decided to appeal the decision of Bucharest Tribunal of 23 September
2014 (°°). On 13 October 2014, the Bucharest Tribunal rejected the request to send preliminary questions to the
CJEU on the basis of Article 267 of the Treaty. On 17 October 2014, against the backdrop of the Commission
decision of 1 October 2014 to open the formal investigation procedure, in the context of the case No
15755/3/2014 before the Bucharest Tribunal, Romania again requested interim measures in the form of the
suspension of the forced execution of the Award.

G5)

Despite the obligation of all Romanian authorities, including the judiciary, to comply with the Commission
decisions of 26 May 2014 and 1 October 2014, the executor appointed by the Bucharest Tribunal issued
orders on 31 October 2014 to seize the accounts of Romania's Ministry of Finance and seek the execution of
80 % of the Award. As a result of the letters of attachment issued by the executor, some parts of the Ministry of
Finance's state treasury and bank accounts are currently frozen.

(36) On 24 November 2014, the Bucharest Tribunal also rejected Romania’s main action against the execution order of
24 March 2014, including the request for interim measures of 17 October 2014. On 14 January 2015, Romania
has appealed the decision of the Bucharest Tribunal (°”), On 24 February 2015, the Bucharest Court of Appeal
lifted the decision of the Bucharest Tribunal of 23 September 2014 and suspended the forced execution until the
appeal against the decision of Bucharest Tribunal of 24 November 2014 is decided. The Commission has decided
to seek leave to intervene in those appeal proceedings on the basis of Article 23a(2) of Regulation (EC) No
659/1999.

(37) On 5 January 2015, the court-appointed executor seized RON 36 484 232 (ca. EUR 8,1 million (°)) from
Romania's Ministry of Finance. Of this sum, the executor subsequently transferred RON 34 004 232 (ca. EUR
7,56 million) in equal parts to three of the five claimants, and kept the remainder as compensation for execution
costs. Between 5 February and 25 February 2015, the court-appointed executor seized an additional RON
9197 482 (ca. EUR 2 million) (*°) from the Ministry of Finance. On 9 March 2015 the Ministry of Finance
voluntarily transferred the remaining amount of RON 472 788 675 (ca. EUR 106,5 million (*°)) (including the
costs of court appointed executor of RON 6 028 608) into a blocked account in the name of the five claimants in
order to implement the Award. However, the five claimants can withdraw the money only if the Commission
decides that the State aid granted on the basis of the Award is compatible with the internal market.

(4) Order issued by Bucharest Tribunal in Case No 9261/3/2014, Section IV Civil.

(°) Case No 15755/3/2014, Bucharest Tribunal, Section III Civil.

(9) Case No 15755]3/2014/al, Bucharest Court of Appeal, Section IV Civil.

() See footnote 36.

('8) Reference exchange rate of the European Central Bank on 5 January 2015: 1 EUR = 4,49 RON.
() See footnote 38.

(#9) Reference exchange rate of the European Central Bank on 9 March 2015: 1 EUR = 4,44 RON.

L 232/50 Official Journal of the European Union 4.9.2015

 

 

(38) The Commission has furthermore discovered that Mr Viorel Micula also initiated an action for enforcement against
Romania before the United States District Court for the District of Columbia (*'). That case is pending. The
Commission intends to apply for leave to file an amicus curiae brief in those proceedings. Mr Viorel Micula also
initiated further enforcement proceedings against Romania before the Romanian courts on 3 October 2014, but
that claim was rejected by the Bucharest Tribunal on 3 November 2014.

3. DESCRIPTION OF THE MEASURE AND GROUNDS FOR INITIATING THE PROCEDURE
Description of the measure

(39) The measure under assessment is the payment of the compensation awarded to the claimants by the Tribunal by
virtue of the Award, whether by implementation or execution of that Award, plus the interest that has accrued
since the Award was issued.

(40) As noted in recital 3, Romania already partially paid out that compensation in early 2014 by offsetting tax debts
owed by one of the claimants, S.C. European Food SA, to the Romanian State. The tax debts thus offset amount to
RON 337 492 864 (ca. EUR 76 million (*2)).

(41) As noted in recital 37, the court-appointed executor seized RON 45 681 714 (ca. EUR 10,17 million (%)) from
Romania's Ministry of Finance in order to execute the Award. Furthermore, the Romanian authorities have trans-
ferred the remaining amount of RON 472788 675 (ca. EUR 106,5 million (‘)) (including the costs of court
appointed executor of RON 6 028 608) into a blocked account in the name of the five claimants.

(42) According to the Romanian authorities the arbitration award has been fully implemented.

Grounds for initiating the formal investigation procedure

(43) In the opening decision, the Commission reached the preliminary conclusion that payment of the compensation
awarded by the Tribunal to the claimants through the implementation or execution of the Award constitutes State
aid within the meaning of Article 107(1) of the Treaty. This preliminary conclusion rests on the preliminary
findings that:

— the five claimants constitute one economic unit that must be qualified as an undertaking,

— payment of the awarded compensation would grant the claimants an economic advantage not otherwise
available on the market,

— the presence of an advantage is not precluded by the fact that the compensation awarded by the Tribunal is
designated as compensation for damages, since the Award does not fall within the scope of the Asteris case-law
distinguishing damages from State aid,

— the advantage granted is selective, since only the claimants would benefit from the measure,

— the advantage is granted from state resources, since the relevant payments would be made from the state
budget, and the decision to grant the advantage is imputable to Romania, regardless of whether Romania
implemented the Award voluntarily or on the order of a court,

— payment of the compensation awarded to the claimants distorts competition and affects trade between Member
States.

(44) The Commission then determined that the application of the State aid rules in this case does not affect rights and
obligations protected by Article 351 of the Treaty. The Commission further found that payment of the compen-
sation awarded to the claimants would constitute new aid, since the implementation or execution of the Award
would take place after Romania's accession to the Union, and that it did not matter that some of the costs which
the measure would de facto reimburse were incurred by the claimants before accession. Finally, the Commission
reached the preliminary conclusion that the payment of the compensation awarded by the Tribunal to the
claimants through the implementation or execution of the Award would not be compatible with the internal
market, since it would not fulfil the applicable compatibility conditions for regional aid.

(*!) Case No 1-14-cv-600 Viorel Micula v Government of Romania in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia —
Petition to confirm ICSID award and enter judgment.

() See footnote 7.

(8) See footnote 38.

(#) See footnote 40.

 

4.9.2015 Official Journal of the European Union L 232/51

 

4. COMMENTS FROM ROMANIA

(45) Romania points out, first, that under Article 54(1) of the ICSID Convention, to which Romania became a party in
1975, each state party ‘shall recognise an award rendered pursuant to this Convention as binding and enforce the
pecuniary obligations imposed by that award within its territories as if it were a final judgment of a court in that
state’. Romania argues that the consequence of this clause is that every state party has an obligation to recognise
and enforce an ICSID arbitral award the execution of which has not been stayed in accordance with the rules under
the ICSID Convention, with there being no possibility of appeal against such an award before the national courts.

(46) Second, Romania stresses that the Romanian government is bound to comply with the Romanian constitution,
which bars it from unduly influencing national judges as regards the question of whether or not to enforce the
Award. It stresses that the national court autonomously decided that the various acts issued by the Commission in
2014 could not suspend the enforcement of the Award under Romanian law. Romania argues further that, while
according to the Romanian constitution Union law generally takes precedence over (ordinary) Romanian national
law, Union law could not overrule the Romanian constitution itself.

(47) Third, Romania submits that the compensation awarded to the claimants by the Tribunal should not be treated as
new incompatible aid, but as compensation for damages within the meaning of the Asteris case-law. Romania
objects, in particular, to the application of the Lucchini case-law to the present case, arguing that the factual
background distinguishes the present case from that adjudicated upon by the CJEU in Lucchini (*).

(48) Finally, Romania repeatedly stresses the conflict borne out in the present case between Romania’s obligations under
the ICSID Convention and under Union law. It submits that until it has been determined at ICSID level whether
the ICSID Convention or Union law should take precedence, the implementation or execution of an ICSID award
should not be considered to constitute illegal State aid.

5. COMMENTS FROM INTERESTED PARTIES

(49) The only interested party to submit observations on the opening decision was the claimants in the arbitration
proceedings giving rise to the Award. The claimants contest the preliminary findings contained in the opening
decision. In particular, they make observations regarding (i) the background of the case; and (ii) the allegedly
incorrect description of the measure; they argue that (iii) there is no conflict between Union State aid rules and
intra-EU BITs; they submit that (iv) the implementation or execution of the Award does not constitute State aid; or
(v) at least not new aid; they assert that if characterised as aid; (vi) the implementation or execution of the Award
would be compatible aid; they maintain that (vii) the protection of legitimate expectations precludes the
Commission from adopting a negative decision; and finally they argue that (viii) the Commission must take
steps to properly involve the claimants in the investigation procedure.

Regarding the background of the case

(50) The claimants explain that after the collapse of the communist regime in 1989, Romania found itself in a state of
dire economic deprivation. The situation was such that when Romania started the accession process to the
European Union in 1995, it was far from meeting the Union's accession criteria. In order to accelerate
economic development and reduce regional disparities, the Romanian government established a framework for
regional development and shortly thereafter adopted EGO 24 to incentivise private sector investments in
disfavoured regions. The EGO 24 incentives were aimed solely at investors creating jobs in the most disadvantaged
regions in one of the poorest countries in Europe. In this context, the claimants stress in particular that EGO 24
did not only provide advantages to investors, but also imposed obligations, such as the duty to create jobs and
employ previously unemployed workers, develop and produce new materials in a disfavoured region, maintain the
head office of the newly established companies in the disfavoured region, and the obligation to apply for and
receive a PIC.

(51) The claimants further explain that their companies obtained PICs between 2000 and 2002 for investing in Bihor
County. Under the terms of those PICs, which were valid until 1 April 2009, the claimants committed to
maintaining their investments for ‘twice the period of time in which [the claimants] enjoyed the advantages’
put in place by EGO 24. Through their investments, the claimants claim to have created approximately 9 000
new jobs, of which 7 000 continue to exist to this day. The claimants further assert that their investments led to

() See opening decision, recital 39.

 

L 232/52 Official Journal of the European Union 4.9.2015

 

significant spillover effects in the region. The conclusion that the claimants draw from these observations is that
through their investments they contributed to alleviating the hardship brought about by the dire economic
conditions in the Bihor County region and have improved the quality of life in that region.

(52) With respect to the State aid laws in place in Romania prior to Romania's accession to the Union, the claimants
argue that since EGO 24 was set up before Law No 143/1999 entered into force, EGO 24 was existing aid for the
purpose of that law and did not have to be authorised by the Competition Council. The claimants also recall that
while the Competition Council attempted to challenge EGO 75 in Romania's courts, it did not contest the
compatibility of EGO 24 with Law No 143/1999. The claimants also recall that, with the exception of the EU
Common Position of 21 November 2001, no statement issued by the Union in the course of the accession process
specifically identified EGO 24 as being problematic from a State aid perspective.

(53)

Finally, the claimants state that any failure to fully implement the Award, or the recovery of the part that has
already been implemented by means of setting of the claimant's tax debts against the compensation owed, would
be disastrous for the claimants and the region, jeopardising thousands of jobs and reversing the economic
development that took place in the region.

Regarding the description of the measure

(54) The claimants argue that the opening decision is not consistent when it comes to identifying the relevant measure.
Referring to recitals 25 and 26 of the opening decision, the claimants stress that while the Commission claims to
be investigating only the implementation or execution of the Award, in reality it is challenging the underlying EGO
24 scheme. The claimants also assert that, in any event, it has never been validly established that EGO 24
amounted to incompatible State aid.

(55)

Asserting further that the opening decision mischaracterises the Award, the claimants argue that the Award
exclusively grants compensation for damages arising from Romania's violation of the BIT and does not
replicate the EGO 24 benefits. Indeed, according to the claimants the Tribunal did not award compensation for
the premature revocation of EGO 24 incentives per se, but rather that the measures found to be in breach of the
BIT are that Romania acted unreasonably by: (i) maintaining as a whole the investor's obligation under EGO 24
despite having revoked virtually all the benefits thereunder; (ii) by undermining the claimants’ legitimate expec-
tations with respect to the continued availability of the EGO 24 incentives; and (iii) by being insufficiently
transparent with the claimants.

(56) The claimants furthermore put forward that the opening decision is based on the presumption that EGO 24
constituted incompatible aid, and that this presumption is flawed because EGO 24’s compatibility as regional aid
has never been validly determined.

Regarding the lack of conflict between the Union State aid rules and intra-EU BITs

(57) Referring to recitals 51 to 55 of the opening decision, the claimants assert that provisions of Union law dealing
with international law obligations of Member States are irrelevant in this case, as there is no conflict between
Union State aid law and the BIT. Centrally, the claimants argue that any conflict is excluded by the fact that the
arbitral proceedings in question were initiated before Romania acceded to the Union. Romania's obligation to
implement the Award is said to stem from the point in time at which the alleged violation of the BIT occurred, i.e.
before Romania's accession to the Union, and is thus unaffected by Union law.

Regarding the characterisation of the implementation/execution of the Award as State aid

(58) The claimants submit that the implementation or execution of the Award by Romania does not constitute State aid
within the meaning of Article 107(1) of the Treaty.

(59) First, while they do not dispute the qualification of S.C. European Food SA, S.C. Starmill S.R.L., and S.C. Multipack.
as undertakings, the claimants assert that loan and Viorel Micula cannot themselves be said to be engaged in
economic activities. Particularly, the fact that the Micula brothers hold shares in various undertakings is said to be
insufficient to qualify them as undertakings themselves. The claimants also maintain that the three aforementioned
companies and the Micula brothers cannot be treated as a single economic unit, as the brothers’ interests are not
identical to those of the companies.

(60) Second, the claimants emphasise that implementing the Award does not confer an advantage upon them. They
argue that measures which serve to fulfil legal obligations, such as the payment of compensation for damages, do
not constitute preferential treatment of undertakings. In this context, the claimants assert that the Commission
cannot rely on Advocate-General Colomer’s statement in Atzeni, since that case related to damages paid to a
beneficiary in compensation for the recovery of incompatible aid that had already been paid out. The claimants

4.9.2015

 

Official Journal of the European Union L 232/53

 

maintain that, in contrast, in the present case no State aid — much less unlawful State aid — had been paid out to
them, thus distinguishing it from Atzeni. Similarly, the claimants maintain that the present case cannot be equated
with the cases cited in the opening decision in which contract clauses indemnifying beneficiaries for recovery of
incompatible State were judged to constitute State aid themselves.

(61) The claimants further maintain that the implementation or execution of the Award would fall squarely under the
Asteris case-law. They argue that the rationale behind the Asteris case-law, as well as such cases as Denkavit (*°) and
ThyssenKrupp (*”), is that payment of damages is not within the discretion of Member States, so that it cannot
qualify as State aid. Romania's commitments under the BIT are further claimed to be an expression of general rules
of liability to which the Asteris case-law applies. Regarding the Commission’s argument that Asteris does not apply
to damages awarded on the basis of intra-EU BITs considered incompatible with Union law, the claimants maintain
that any such incompatibility would not render the Award granted on the basis of such a BIT void. Implemen-
tation or execution of the Award could furthermore not be seen as granting State aid ‘by the back door’, as the
Award does not reinstate the abolished EGO 24 scheme; rather, the Award is said to grant damages for Romania's
autonomous decision to, inter alia, maintain an unreasonable burden imposed on the claimants.

(62) The claimants further assert that the Commission’s arguments regarding the incompatibility of the BIT with Union
law are irrelevant, since the dispute leading to the arbitral proceedings and ultimately the Award arose before
Romania's accession to the Union. Arguing that the Commission’s argumentation in the opening decision is based
on mistakenly linking the implementation/execution of the Award with the incompatibility of the EGO 24 scheme,
the claimants reassert that in any event the Award did not grant damages on the basis of Romania's decision to
comply with Union State aid rules.

(63) The claimants further dispute that the CJEU’s decision in Lucchini, which the Commission referred to in the opening
decision, has any relevance for the present case. In their view, Lucchini establishes only that provisions of national
law cannot frustrate the recovery of incompatible aid, and has no bearing on the implementation/execution of an
arbitral award granting damages for the breach of a BIT.

(64) Third, as regards the imputability of the implementation/execution of the Award to Romania, the claimants argue
that the Commission’s assessment cannot rely on the imputability of EGO 24 itself. They maintain further that the
implementation/execution of an ICSID award is an automatic and involuntary consequence of Romania's
obligations under the ICSID Convention. Any involuntary act is, according to the claimants, not imputable to
the state and cannot constitute State aid. They stress further that ICSID awards are not open to review by national
courts and their enforcement cannot be blocked for reasons of domestic ordre public or incompatibility with Union
law.

(65) The claimants further argue that Romania's obligations under the ICSID Convention were not affected by
Romania's subsequent membership to the Union. They explain that since the alleged breach of the BIT and the
institution of proceedings occurred before Romania acceded to the Union, EU law is not applicable to the present
case.

(66) Fourth, with respect to selectivity, the claimants claim that implementation/execution of the Award is not selective,
since BITs and the ICSID Convention establish a system of general liability that is equally applicable to any
investor. Damages awarded under this system are, accordingly, not selective. In this context, the claimants also
quote a statement allegedly made by the Commission that ‘BITs, although conferring a benefit by securing property
rights abroad, technically cannot qualify as [S]tate aid prohibited by Article 107(1) [of the Treaty] since the benefit
does not favour certain undertakings or the production of certain goods but is granted generally to all investors
irrespective of the sector they operate in.’

(67)

Finally, the claimants deny that implementing the Award would be liable to distort competition and affect trade
between Member States. They claim that the reasoning contained in the opening decision cannot apply to the
Micula brothers, who are allegedly not engaged in any economic activity, with the consequence that any payments
to them cannot distort competition or affect trade between Member States. More generally, the claimants argue
that implementing the Award would not grant the claimants an advantage, so that any effect on competition or
trade can be excluded.

(9) Case 61]79 Amministrazione delle finanze dello Stato v Denkavit italiana EU:C:1980:100.
(”) Commission Decision 2008/408/EC of 20 November 2007 on the State aid C 36/A/06 (ex NN 38/06) implemented by Italy in
favour of ThyssenKrupp, Cementir and Nuove Terni Industrie Chimiche (OJ L 144, 4.6.2008, p. 37).

 

L 232/54 Official Journal of the European Union 4.9.2015

 

Regarding the characterisation of the implementation/execution of the Award as new aid

(68) The claimants further take issue with the characterisation of the implementation/execution of the Award as new
aid. They note that the only events that took place after Romania’s accession were the adoption of the Award itself
and the execution thereof. Romania’s execution in particular is said to be a mere automatic consequence of the
Award, rather than the result of a distinct decision. The relevant points in time were, according to the claimants,
the enactment of EGO 24, the issuance of PICs to the claimants, or at the latest the conclusion of the BIT. The
claimants also rely on case-law and Commission practice on state guarantees (according to which the relevant
point in time is when the guarantee is given, not when it is invoked or payments issued) to argue that where
compensation is paid based on a i included in an i ional agreement, the date of the
of that agreement should be considered decisive.

 

Regarding the compatibility of the implementation/execution of the Award

(69) The claimants first claim that where the Commission is investigating non-notified aid, and the Member State
concerned fails to bring forward any compatibility argument whatsoever, the Commission is under a duty to
consider whether the aid may be compatible under any applicable rules or guidelines, if necessary by requesting
further information from the Member State or the beneficiary.

(70) As regards the preliminary compatibility analysis contained in the opening decision, the claimants maintain that it
is conceptually flawed since it applies the current Regional Aid Guidelines (RAG’) to the implementation/execution
of the Award, even though it is plainly obvious that the implementation/execution of the Award is not motivated
by any regional development objective. In the claimants’ opinion, and stressing again that the opening decision
wrongly assumes that implementing the Award would retroactively reinstate EGO 24, the only aid that could have
been granted were the benefits under the EGO 24 scheme. The EGO 24 should then have been assessed under the
1998 RAG, under which they should have been found compatible.

(71) The claimants next assert that there has never been a valid formal decision establishing that EGO 24 constitutes
incompatible State aid. The decision of the Romanian Competition Council (Decision No 244) denouncing EGO
24 was, according to the claimants, defective, as it did not assess compatibility and failed to provide reasoning for
its findings. In addition, the claimants argued that the adoption of EGO 75, which reaffirmed EGO 24, by the
Romanian Government overrode the Competition Council's decision. They further argue that the rejection of the
Competition Council’s challenges against EGO 75 before Romanian courts is further proof that EGO 24 and EGO
75 took precedence over the Competition Council's decision.

(72) The claimants further assert that the Commission had and has no competence to review EGO 24, even inci-
dentally. The relevant parts of EGO 24 were revoked before Romania's accession to the Union. In so far as the
Award is seen as reinstating aid granted under EGO 24, the claimants thus assert that the Commission has no
competence of review. In this context, they refer also to the Commission decision in State aid case N 380/2004,
where the Commission found that implementing an arbitral award after accession which had been rendered before
accession and related entirely to periods before accession did not constitute new aid.

(73)

Finally, the claimants argue that EGO 24 and individual incentives under EGO 24 were compatible with the
internal market pursuant to the applicable 1998 RAG, given that all the compatibility conditions were fulfilled. In
this context, they assert, first, that EGO 24 can in fact be seen as compatible investment aid, rather than operating
aid, and, second, that even if perceived as operating aid, EGO 24 was still compatible.

Regarding legitimate expectations

(74) The claimants claim that a Commission decision finding that the implementation or execution of the Award
contravenes State aid rules would violate the claimants’ legitimate expectations. They argue that the Union
expressly encouraged Romania to conclude BITs with Member States prior to Romania’s accession; that the
Commission continues to support the conclusion of BITs; that the claimants relied on their expectation that
the arbitral proceedings would allow them to receive compensation for the damage caused by Romania’s decision
to maintain all the investors’ obligations under EGO 24; and that there is no overriding public interest in setting
aside the claimants’ legitimate expectations.

 

 

4.9.2015 Official Journal of the European Union L 232/55
Regarding the claimants’ procedural rights
(75) Finally, the claimants assert that according to case-law interested parties ‘have the right to be involved in the

administrative procedure to the extent appropriate in the light of the circumstances of the case’ (*8). Arguing that
Romania has failed to properly involve the claimants in the State aid procedure, which allegedly placed the
claimants at a particular disadvantage, the claimants warn that failure on the part of the Commission to enable
the claimants to properly defend their interests by involving them more fully in the procedure could vitiate the
Commission's final decision. The claimants conclude by noting that the Commission's practice in State aid cases in
general does not sufficiently safeguard the alleged beneficiaries’ procedural rights, and is, by failing to provide an
effective remedy, contrary to Article 6(1) of the European Convention on Human Rights and Article 47 of the EU's
Charter of Fundamental Rights.

6. COMMENTS FROM ROMANIA ON THIRD PARTY COMMENTS

(76) In its response to the comments submitted by the claimants, Romania first rejects the claim that loan and Viorel
Micula could not themselves be considered to constitute undertakings for the purpose of the application of EU
State aid law. Romania argues that the five claimants should rather be regarded as one economic unit, since the
Micula brothers exert direct or indirect control over the corporate claimants. To underpin this assertion, Romania
explains, inter alia, that during the negotiations between Romania and the claimants that took place after the
Award was issued the Micula brothers took formal decision on behalf of the three corporate claimants.

(77) Second, Romania rebuts the claimants’ attempt to deny the connection between the revocation of the EGO 24
incentives and the granting of damages under the Award. It maintains that it is clear from the Award that the value
of the damages was established by the Tribunal on the basis of the economic advantages that the claimants would
have obtained if the incentives had been maintained.

(78) Third, as regards the claimants’ assertion that they had not been and are not being properly involved in the State
aid investigation, Romania denies that it failed to immediately forward the opening decision to the claimants. It
further asserts that Romania is under no legal obligation to involve the claimants more fully than is and has been
the case.

7. ASSESSMENT
7.1. Existence of aid

(79)

Article 107(1) of the Treaty provides that ‘aid granted by a Member State or through state resources in any form
whatsoever which distorts or threatens to distort competition by favouring certain undertakings or the production
of certain goods shall, in so far as it affects trade between Member States, be incompatible with the internal
market’. Accordingly, a measure constitutes State aid if the following four cumulative conditions are met:

— the measure must confer a selective economic advantage upon an undertaking,
— the measure must be imputable to the state and financed through state resources,
— the measure must distort or threaten to distort competition,

— the measure must have the potential to affect trade between Member States.

(80) The Commission stresses that the notion of State aid is an objective and legal concept defined directly by the
Treaty. To establish whether a particular measure constitutes State aid depends not on the intentions or justifi-
cations of the Member States when granting it, but on the effects of the measure in question (*).

Undertaking
(81

The CJEU has consistently defined undertakings as entities engaged in an economic activity, regardless of their legal
status and the way in which they are financed (°°). The classification of a particular entity thus depends entirely on
the nature of its activities.

() Referring to Case T-68/03 Olympiaki Acroporia Ypiresies, EU:T:2007:253, paragraph 42.

() Case C-487/06 P British Aggregates v Comision EU:C:2008: 737, paragraphs 85 and 89 and the case-law cited, and Case C-279/08 P
mmission v Netherlands (NOx) EU:C:201 aragraph,

(°%) Joined Cases C-180/98 to C-184/98 Pavlov and Others EU:C.2000:428, paragraph 74.

 

 

L 232/56 Official Journal of the European Union 4.9.2015

 

(82)

Separate legal entities may be considered to form one economic unit for the purpose of the application of State aid
rules. That economic unit is then considered to be the relevant undertaking. As the CJEU has previously held, ‘[iJn
competition law, the term “undertaking” must be understood as designating an economic unit [...] even if in law
that economic unit consists of several persons, natural or legal.’ (>!) To determine whether several entities form an
economic unit, the CJEU looks at the existence of a controlling share or functional, economic or organic links (°).

(83) The claimants in the arbitration proceedings giving rise to the Award are the brothers loan Micula and Viorel
Micula and three companies owned by them (S.C. European Food SA, S.C. Starmill $.R.L., and S.C. Multipack). It is
clear that the three companies are engaged in economic activities, as they specialise in industrial manufacturing of
food products, milling products, and plastic packaging, respectively. The three companies therefore constitute
undertakings. This characterisation is not disputed by the claimants.

(84) The claimants maintain, however, that the Micula brothers themselves cannot, as natural persons, be considered to
constitute undertakings for the purposes of Article 107(1) of the Treaty, and that accordingly funds paid out to
them in implementation or execution of the Award would not constitute State aid. In particular, the interests of
the Micula brothers are said not to coincide with those of the three corporate claimants.

(85) The Commission finds, however, that the three companies and the Micula brothers together constitute a single
economic unit for the purpose of the application of the State aid rules. This economic unit is therefore considered
the relevant undertaking.

(86)

This finding relies, first, on the fact that the Micula brothers have, directly or indirectly, virtually exclusive
ownership of the three corporate claimants, thus demonstrating a controlling interest over those companies.

(87) Second, this finding takes into account that the corporate claimants form part of a larger group of companies, the
European Food and Drinks Group (EFDG). During the arbitral proceedings, the Micula brothers also claimed
compensation for other companies forming part of EFDG that allegedly suffered losses as a result of Romania's
actions giving rise to the proceedings. In fact, rather than claiming and quantifying separate losses for each
corporate claimant and the two individual claimants, the claimants based their application for compensation on
the losses allegedly suffered by EFDG as a whole. After examining the ownership structure of EFDG and deter-
mining that the Micula brothers, directly or indirectly, owned at least 99,96 % of the all companies in EFDG for
which the Micula brothers claimed damages (these are European Drinks SA, Rieni Drinks SA, Scandic Distilleries
SA, Transilvania General Import-Export $.R.L., West Leasing S.R.L), the Tribunal accepted this approach and
allowed the claimants to seek compensation for the losses of EFDG as a whole (53). This behaviour of the
claimants during the arbitral proceedings and the corresponding determinations of the Tribunal demonstrate
that the Micula brothers and the three corporate claimants, as well as the aforementioned companies forming
part of EFDG, form a single economic unit with a single economic interest.

(88) Third, the characterisation of the Micula brothers and their companies as one economic unit is further reinforced
by how the Award eventually awarded compensation to them. Rather than apportioning compensation individually
to each of the five claimants, the Award awarded the compensation to them ‘collectively’ on the basis of a
‘common entitlement’. The fact that the five claimants together (i.¢., including the corporate claimants) asked
the Tribunal to award all compensation only to the Micula brothers shows that the corporate claimants have no
autonomy vis-a-vis the Micula brothers. The Tribunal finally allowed each claimant to recover the entire amount of
compensation awarded, and then to allocate that compensation among the claimants however they deem fit,
regardless of the damages actually sustained by each claimant.

 

 

(89) The foregoing conclusion is not affected by the claimants’ argument that the present case must be distinguished
from the Hydrotherm judgment, as the natural person in that case was a partner personally liable for the financial
obligations of the various companies with which he was considered to constitute a single economic unit, whereas
the Micula brothers are not so personally liable. In response, the Commission recalls that in the relevant para-
graphs of its Hydrotherm judgment the CJEU did not mention the personal liability of the natural person in
question at all; rather, the CJEU limited itself to pointing out that the natural person in question ‘has complete

@) Coe C 170]83 Hydrotherm EU:C:1984:271, paragraph 11. See also Case T-137/02 Pollmeier Malchow v Commission EU:T:2004:304,
yh 5

ragra

() Case C 720/09 P Acea Electrabel Produzione SpA v Commission EU:C:2010:787 paragraphs 47 to 55; Case C-222/04 Cassa di Risparmio
di Firenze SpA and Others E (6:8, paragraph 112.

(°) See Award, paragraphs 935-936 and 943,

 

4.9.2015

 

Official Journal of the European Union L 232/57

 

control’ of the companies in question (*4). As already mentioned, by virtue of their ownership the Micula brothers
similarly have complete control over the corporate claimants, and in fact the other relevant EFDG companies.

(90) The Commission also considers, contrary to the assertions of the claimants, that the logic underpinning the Cassa
di Risparmio di Firenze judgment is equally applicable in this case. In that judgment, the CJEU recognised that an
economic activity can be exercised by an entity directly or indirectly, through controlling an operator as part of an
economic unit which they form together. Although the CJEU acknowledges that the mere fact of holding shares,
even controlling shareholdings, is insufficient to characterise as economic an activity of the entity holding those
shares when it gives rise only to the exercise of the rights attached to the status of shareholder or member, as well
as the receipt of dividends, which are merely the fruits of the ownership of an asset, it is clear that the present
situation is different. Indeed, according to the CJEU ‘an entity which, owning controlling shareholdings in a
company, actually exercises that control by involving itself directly or indirectly in the management thereof
must be regarded as taking part in the economic activity carried on by the controlled undertaking.’ (°°) The
CJEU was also concerned to point out that ‘simple separation of an undertaking into two different entities’
cannot be sufficient to circumyent State aid rules (°°). This rationale also applies where one of the two entities
concerned is a natural person. Otherwise granting aid to a natural person who is the controlling shareholder of an
undertaking would not be considered to constitute State aid, even though the natural person could use that aid for
the benefit of the undertakings which it controls. Indeed, in the present case, it cannot make any difference for the
purposes of applying the State aid rules whether the compensation collectively awarded to all five claimants by the
Tribunal is paid out to the Micula brothers or to the companies owned by them.

(91) In conclusion, the Commission finds that the Micula brothers and the three corporate claimants together form a
single economic unit that constitutes an undertaking for the purpose of applying Article 107(1) of the Treaty. The
other EFDG companies for whose alleged losses the Micula brothers were awarded compensation by virtue of the
Award (European Drinks SA, Rieni Drinks SA, Scandic Distilleries SA, Transilvania General Import-Export S.R.L.
West Leasing S.R.L) (°”) likewise form part of this single economic unit. The final beneficiary of the aid measure is
this single economic unit, made up of the five claimants and those EFDG companies.

 

Economic advantage (1)

(92) An advantage, as required by Article 107(1) of the Treaty, is any economic benefit which an undertaking would
not have obtained under normal market conditions, i.e. in the absence of the state intervention (°8). The precise
form of the measure is irrelevant for establishing whether it confers an economic advantage on the undertaking.
The notion of advantage includes, for example, all situations where undertakings are relieved of inherent costs of
their economic activities.

(93) By the Award, the Tribunal has awarded the claimants compensation of RON 376 433 229 plus interest against
Romania. To fully understand why the implementation or execution of the Award grants the claimants an
economic advantage, it is first instructive to examine on which basis the Tribunal determined that compensation
should be paid out to the claimants in that Award.

(94)

After it had decided that Romania had breached the BIT, the Tribunal explained that damages had to be awarded
on the basis of the principle that ‘the claimant must be placed back in the position it would have been “in all
probability” but for the international wrong’ (°°). It further explained that only losses that are causally linked to the
act constituting the international wrong could be compensated by means of damages, and that ‘all of the violations
of the BIT alleged by the Claimants arise from the same fact: the premature revocation of the [EGO 24] incentives
or in direct connection with that premature revocation’ (°°). In assessing the precise compensation due to the
claimants, the Tribunal took into account whether losses were in reality incurred and whether they were directly
related to the revocation of the incentive scheme. For instance, with regard to the damages awarded for the

(4) Case C-170/83 Hydrotherm EU:C:1984:271, paragraph 10.

(55) Case C-222/04 Cassa di Risparmio di Firenze SpA and Others EU:C:2006:8, paragraph 112.

(55) Case C-222/04 Cassa di Risparmio di Firenze SpA and Others EU:C:2006:8, paragraph 114.

(°?) See recitals 87 and 88.

(58) Case C-39/94 SFEI and Others EU:C:1996:285, paragraph 60; Case C-342/96 Spain v Commission EU:C:1999:210, paragraph 41.
(°°) Award, paragraph 917.

(©) Award, paragraph 928.

 

L 232/58 Official Journal of the European Union 4.9.2015

 

increased price of sugar, the Tribunal held (°"): ‘Both the existence of the damage and the causal link between the
revocation of the incentives and the damage suffered have been adequately proved. There is no dispute that, as a
result of the revocation of the Raw Materials Incentive, the Claimants were required to pay an increased amount
for the sugar they purchased after February 2005’.

(95)

In light of these considerations, it is clear that through the implementation or execution of the Award, Romania
grants the claimants an amount corresponding exactly to the advantages foreseen under the abolished EGO 24
scheme from the moment it was repealed (22 February 2005) until its scheduled expiry (1 April 2009). More
precisely, implementing or executing the Award de facto reimburses customs duties charged on imported sugar and
other raw materials between 22 February 2005 and 31 March 2009, as well as the customs duties charged on
imported sugar that the claimants would have avoided if they had had the opportunity to stockpile sugar before
the schedule expiration of the EGO 24 facilities on 31 March 2009. In addition, to ensure that the claimants fully
benefit from an amount corresponding to that of the abolished scheme and are ‘placed back in the position it
would have been “in all probability”’, the Tribunal also awarded interest and compensation for the allegedly lost
opportunity and lost profit (2). In effect, the implementation or execution of the Award re-establishes the situation
the claimants would have, in all likelihood, found themselves in if the EGO 24 scheme had never been repealed.

(96)

Accordingly, the implementation or execution of the Award grants the claimants an economic advantage not
otherwise available on the market. First, the costs of raw materials, as inputs for final products, constitute ordinary
operating expenses of undertakings, and relieving them of a part of their ordinary operating expenses grants them
a distinct advantage. Second, granting the claimants compensation for lost profits because they had to bear their
own operating expenses themselves likewise constitutes an economic advantage not available under normal market
conditions and in absence of the Award; under normal market conditions, the undertaking would have had to bear
itself the costs inherent in its economic activity and would therefore not have generated these profits. Third, paying
interest to the claimants on payments that were allegedly due in the past, but which themselves must be qualified
as conferring an advantage, confers a separate and additional advantage. Again, under normal market conditions
and in the absence of the Award, the undertaking would have had to bear its ordinary operating expenses, would
have not generated the allegedly lost profits, and would therefore not have been able to draw an interest on this
capital. In fact, by repealing the EGO 24 scheme, Romania re-established normal conditions of competition on the
market on which the claimants operate, and any attempt to compensate the claimants for the consequences of the
revocation of the EGO 24 incentives grants an advantage not available under those normal market conditions.

(97) The claimants’ attempts to separate the award of compensation from the revocation of the EGO 24 incentives are
unconvincing. The claimants argue: ‘[I]n the present case the ICSID Tribunal concluded that the decision to comply
with EU State aid rules complied with Romania's obligations under the BIT and did not award damages to the
Claimants on this basis. Instead, the ICSID Tribunal awarded damages for the Romanian state’s wrongdoing
consisting in maintaining obligations imposed in relation to EGO 24 after the withdrawal of the scheme and
non-transparent behaviour towards the investors’.

(98) This description of the Award is inaccurate and in any event fails to consider the effects of implementing/executing
the Award. It has been already pointed out that the Tribunal considered that the alleged breaches of the BIT all
resulted from ‘the premature revocation of the incentives or in direct connection with that premature revoca-
tion’ (°), and awarded damages for losses resulting directly from the revocation of the incentive scheme. The
Tribunal was also already quoted as stating that (*): ‘[B]y repealing the EGO 24 incentives prior to 1 April 2009,
Romania did not act unreasonably or in bad faith (except that [Romania] acted unreasonably by maintaining
investors’ obligations after terminating the incentives). The Tribunal, however, concludes by majority that Romania
violated the Claimants’ legitimate expectations that those incentives would be available, in substantially the same
form, until 1 April 2009. Romania also failed to act transparently by failing to inform the Claimants in a timely
manner that the regime would be terminated prior to its stated date of expiration. As a result, the Tribunal finds
that Romania failed to “ensure fair and equitable treatment of the investments” of the Claimants in the meaning of
Article 2(3) of the BIT.

(") Award, paragraph 953.
() See recital 27 for the description of the amounts due under the arbitration award,
(®) Award, paragraph 928.
(4) Award, paragraph 872.

 

4.9.2015 Official Journal of the European Union L 232/59

 

(99) In light of this conclusion, it cannot be maintained, as the claimants do, that the Tribunal found Romania's
decision to comply with Union State aid rules by revoking EGO 24 not to have been in breach of the BIT, or that
it did not award damages on that basis (°°). The Commission notes that in justifying its decision to award
compensation for increased prices and the loss of the ability to stockpile, as well as lost profits, the Tribunal
referred only to damages incurred by the claimants as a result of the revocation of the EGO 24 incentives (°*).
Notably, the Tribunal did not refer to, or award additional damages on the basis of, its finding that Romania acted
unreasonably in maintaining the investors’ obligations under EGO 24 and failed to act transparently.

Economic advantage (2): damages and State aid

(100) The presence of an advantage is, contrary to the submission of the claimants, furthermore not precluded by the
fact that the payment of the compensation awarded to the complainants by the Tribunal through the implemen-
tation or execution of the Award entails a payment of compensation for damages. The central question in this
regard is whether the principles laid down in the CJEU’s Asteris (°7) judgment are applicable to the case at hand. In
its judgment in Asteris, the CJEU set out that State aid ‘is fundamentally different in its legal nature from damages
which the competent national authorities may be ordered to pay to individuals in compensation for the damage
they have caused to those individuals.’ (°) The claimants argue that the present case falls squarely under this case-
law, and that any attempt by the Commission to distinguish the Asteris case from the one at hand is unconvincing.
The Commission disagrees with this position.

(101) The Commission observes, first, that the Asteris case arose out of a very different context than the present case. In
the former case, the CJEU rendered a judgment in response to a reference for a preliminary ruling by a Greek court
by which the CJEU was asked to pronounce itself on the jurisdiction of the courts of the Member States to
entertain claims for damages brought by individuals against national authorities in respect of non-payment of aid
under the Union’s common agricultural policy. The non-payment of aid was not the result of a broken promise by
the Greek authorities to grant that aid, but rather the consequence of the inclusion of technical errors by the
Commission in a regulation. The affected undertakings had already brought an action for damages against the
Commission before the CJEU, which had rejected it as unfounded. In response to the reference for a preliminary
ruling, the CJEU specified in its judgment that since it had previously dismissed the action for damages against the
Commission, any action for damages against the Greek state would have to be on different grounds from the
action against the Commission it dismissed, that is to say a wrongful act of the Greek authorities themselves.
Notably, the CJEU did not state that an award of damages equal to an amount of illegal State aid promised but not
paid out would not amount to State aid itself. Thus, it does not follow from the Asteris judgment that every award
of damages is automatically outside the scope of Union State aid law, as the claimants seem to argue. Rather, in
cases of liability based on the wrongful conduct of national authorities, no advantage is granted to an undertaking
where such liability merely ensures that the damaged party is given what it is entitled to, just as any other
undertaking would be, under the general rules of civil liability in that Member State. Compensation granted
under those general rules of civil liability differ from State aid to the extent that they cannot result in the
damaged individual being better off after receiving compensation.

(102) Second, for compensation to fall outside the Union State aid rules under the Asteris case-law it must be based on a
general rule of compensation (°*). In the present case, the compensation has been awarded to the claimants on the
basis of an intra-EU BIT which the Commission considers invalid as of Romania’s accession to the Union. The
Commission has consistently taken the view that intra-EU BITs, such as the BIT upon which the claimants base
their claim (7°), are contrary to Union law since they are incompatible with provisions of the Union Treaties and

 

(°) The Tribunal concluded that the revocation of the EGO 24 incentives violated the claimants’ legitimate expectations before it even
considered the reasonableness or transparency of Romania's actions (Award, paragraphs 725, 726; reasonableness and transparency
were only considered in paragraphs 727 et seq. and 837 et seq., respectively), There is thus no basis for maintaining, as 1
claimants suggest, that the Tribunal’s finding of a breach of the BIT was conditioned on the unreasonableness of keeping in place the
investors’ obligations under EGO 24 or on the insufficient transparency of Romania's actions.

(°9) Award, paragraphs 953, 961, 971, 984, 1 016, 1020, 1 136.

() Joined ‘Cases 106/87 to 120/87 Asters El 3457.

(°$) Joined Cases 106/87 to 120/87 Asteris EU:C:1988:457, paragraph 23.

(©) See Commission Decision of 16 June 2004 on Dutch aid in favour of Akzo-Nobel in order to minimise chlorine transports (Case N
304/2003), summary notice in OJ C 81, 2.4.2005, p. 4; see also Commission Decision of 20 December 2006 on Dutch aid for
relocation of car dismantling company Steenbergen (Case N 575/05), summary notice in OJ C 80, 13.4.2007, p. 1

(”°) For the same reasons, the Commission would also consider invalid the intra-EU BITs at the basis of the arbitral proceedings listed in
footnote 53 of the application.

 

S$

 

L 232/60

 

 

should therefore be considered invalid (71). The Commission has repeatedly made this view known to the Member
States, including the Member States in question.

(103)

Third, the Commission notes that the purpose of the Award is to compensate the applicants for the incentives
which Romania had promised them under EGO 24 (modified by EGO 75) but had been required to abolish by the
Union to complete the negotiation process for its accession to the Union. Thus, in contrast to the Asteris case, the
reason the applicants claim compensation in this case is because they were denied the incentives Romania
promised to grant them in violation of its obligations under Article 64 of the Europe Agreement and Law No
143/1999 as interpreted by Decision No 244/2000 of the Romanian Competition Council not to grant unlawful
State aid. However, as Advocate-General Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer has explained (”2), an award of damages equal to the
sum of the amounts of aid that were envisaged to be granted would constitute an indirect grant of State aid found
to be illegal and incompatible with the internal market. Following that line, the General Court has considered
indemnification clauses for the recovery of State aid to constitute State aid (7%). Moreover, in the judgment in
Lucchini, the CJEU held that a national court was prevented from applying national law where the application of
that law would have the effect to ‘frustrate the application of Community law in so far as it would make it
impossible to recover State aid that was granted in breach of Community law’ (74).

 

(104

The attempts by the claimants to distinguish those cases from the present case are unconvincing. What matters is
not that the precise facts underlying those cases differ from those of the present case, but the principle informing
those cases, which is that national law, including liability arrangements under national law, cannot be applied
where doing so would frustrate the application of Union State aid law and thus ultimately result in the grant of
illegal State aid. In this light, the Asteris case does not exempt damages awarded as compensation for the recovery
of illegal State aid or the failure to receive illegal State aid. The Commission considers that same principle to apply
where the liability flows from an international law treaty concluded between two Member States (such as an intra-
EU BIT) the application of which gives rise to the grant of State aid. Where giving effect to an intra-EU treaty by a
Member State would frustrate the application of Union law, that Member State must uphold Union law since
Union primary law, such as Articles 107 and 108 of the Treaty, takes precedence over that Member State's
international obligations.

(105) The claimants’ contention that there has never been a valid formal decision establishing that EGO 24 constitutes
illegal State aid nor that those incentives were incompatible with the internal market is irrelevant in this respect,
since it is the implementation/execution of the Award and not the investment incentives promised under EGO 24
which constitute the contested measure and form the basis of the present Decision. Indeed, considering EGO 24
was abolished on 22 February 2005 and no aid was disbursed under that legislation after that date, neither the
Romanian Competition Council nor the Commission could conclude in a formal decision that EGO 24 gave rise to
incompatible State aid in the period 22 February 2005 to 1 April 2009, which is the period for the which the
Award grants compensation to the claimants.

(106

For that very reason, there is also no need for the Commission to adopt a formal decision finding the existence of
State aid in cases where a national court or an arbitral tribunal awards compensation against a Member State for
the withdrawal of an aid measure. Article 107(1) of the Treaty contains a general prohibition on the grant of State
aid ‘in any form whatsoever’. The precise form of the measure is thus irrelevant in establishing whether it confers
an economic advantage on the undertaking (”*). Thus, if the State aid is granted through the implementation or
execution of a judgment or an award, which the Commission considers to be the case in relation to the Award, it

("}) See response of Commissioner De Gucht to Parliamentary oral Question ©-000043/2013/rev.1 in which he stated The Commission
agrees that bilateral and investment treaties (BITS) between EU Member States do not comply with EU law’, debate of the plenary of 22 May
2013. See, further, Commission Staff Working Document of 3 February 2012 on capital movements and investments in the EU —
Commission Services’ Paper on Market Monitoring, SWD(2012)6 final, page 13. See also, Commission Staff Working Document of
15 April 2013 on the free movement of capital in the EU, SWD(2013)146 final, pages 11 and 14; Commission Staff Working
Document of 18 March 2014 on the free movement of capital in the EU, SWD(2014)115 final, page 12; and European
Commission, Monitoring activites and analysis, Bilateral Investment Treaties between EU Member States (intra-EU BITS) 2012;
available at: http:/] ,_activities_and_: r

(2) Opinion of 28 April 2005 in Joined te C-346/03 and C-529]03 Atzori ECLI:EU:C:2005:256, paragraph 198.

() Case T-384/08 Elliniki Nafpigokataskevastiki AE Chartofylakeiou v Commission EU:T:2011:650, and Case T-565/08 Corsica Ferries v
Commission EU:T:2012:415, paragraphs 23, 114 and 120 to 131. See also, by analogy, Case C-111/10 Commission v Council
EU:C:2013:785, paragraph 44,

(’4) Case C-119/05 Lucchini EU:

(°5) Case C-280/00 Altmark Trans EU:

5

    

 

  

34, paragraph 59.
003:415, paragraph 84.

 

Official Journal of the European Union 4.9.2015

 

4.9.2015 Official Journal of the European Union L 232/61

 

is in relation to that implementation or execution that the Commission must show that the cumulative conditions
of Article 107(1) of the Treaty are fulfilled and that that aid is incompatible with the internal market.

(107) In any event, the Commission recalls that the Romanian Competition Council, several Union Common Positions
and the Romanian Government upon repealing EGO 24 all concluded that EGO 24 gave rise to unlawful State aid
under the Europe Agreement, Decision No 4/2000 of the EU-Romania Association Council, Law No 143/99 and
the acquis communautaire. Moreover, Decision No 244/2000 of the Romanian Competition Council has never been
challenged nor annulled, but only ignored by the Romanian legislator through the adoption of EGO 75 contrary to
the provisions of Law No 143/1999 on State aid and thus in violation of its obligations under the European
Agreement and Decision No 4/2000 of the EU-Romania Association Council. The Union then insisted Romania
comply with that decision, its obligations under Europe Agreement and the acquis communautaire in the context of
the accession negotiations, which the latter did by repealing EGO 24.

(108) For the foregoing reasons, the Commission concludes that payment of the compensation awarded to the claimants
by the Tribunal through the implementation or execution of the Award constitutes an economic advantage in
favour of the claimants that they would not have obtained under normal market conditions.

Selectivity
(109)

Not all measures which grant an undertaking an economic advantage constitute State aid, but only those which
confer an economic advantage in a selective manner upon certain undertakings or categories of undertakings or to
certain economic sectors.

(110) The Award awards compensation only to the claimants. Therefore by paying that compensation, either through the
implementation or execution of the Award, Romania grants an advantage only to the claimants. The measure is
thus selective.

(111) Moreover, as follows from the Asteris judgment, compensation for damages will not selectively benefit an indi-
vidual undertaking only insofar as that compensation follows from the application of a general rule of law for
government liability which every individual can invoke, so that it excludes that any compensation granted confers
a selective benefit on certain groups in society. The contested measure, which follows from the application of the
provisions of the BIT, does not comply with this requirement for all of the reasons in the present case.

(112

First, the BIT only confers this right of compensation to a certain group of investors, that is, to investors of the
two Member States covered by the intra-EU BIT, ie. Sweden and Romania. Accordingly, not every similarly
situated Union investor could rely on that BIT to claim damages corresponding to the incentives promised
under the abolished EGO 24 aid scheme, but only investors of a certain nationality. Thus, to the extent that
paying compensation awarded to an investor pursuant to a BIT amounts to granting an advantage, the advantage is
selective. As regards the claimants’ contention that the general character of the benefits provided by BITs has
previously been recognised by the Commission (see recital 66), the statement cited by the claimants in support of
that claim is not in fact a Commission statement at all, but an excerpt from a study prepared by an external
contractor for the Policy Department of the European Parliament's Directorate-General for External Policies.
Secondly, in order to discard any doubts about the ownership of the opinions expressed in this study, it
contains a disclaimer specifying that the author bears the sole responsibility for them and that they do not
reflect the official position of the European Parliament. The statement made in this report cannot be imputed
to the Commission and is irrelevant for the case at hand.

(uy)

Second, the contested measure compensates the applicants for the repeal of investment incentives which them-
selves are selective in nature. Indeed, the incentives offered under EGO 24 were only available to undertakings
investing in certain regions. Accordingly, the compensation awarded to the complainants by the Tribunal should in
themselves be considered selective since they correspond to the advantages promised under the abolished EGO 24.

(114) In any event, the Commission considers the BIT upon which the Tribunal awarded compensation to the claimants
to have been rendered invalid upon Romania's accession to the Union, so that it cannot be considered to form the
basis for a general rule of law for government liability which every investor can rely upon.

(115)

For all of the above reasons, the Commission concludes that the implementation or execution of the Award grants
the claimants a selective advantage.

 

L 232/62 Official Journal of the European Union 4.9.2015

 

State resources

(116

Only advantages granted directly or indirectly through state resources can constitute State aid within the meaning
of Article 107(1) of the Treaty. In the present case, Romania has already partially implemented the Award by
setting it off part of the compensation awarded to the claimants by the Tribunal against taxes owed by one of the
claimants to the Romanian State. The court-appointed executor has furthermore seized funds from state accounts
to satisfy the claimants’ outstanding claims under the Award. Direct payments from the state budget, the foregoing
of state income by writing off taxes owed, or the transfer of other state assets (such as shares in other undertakings
or the transfer of seized assets) to the claimants, whether made voluntarily or through court-ordered execution, are
all to be regarded as measures financed through state resources.

Imputability

(117) For a selective advantage to constitute aid within the meaning of Article 107(1) of the Treaty, it must, inter alia, be
imputable to the state (7). In the present case, the claimants maintain that since the implementation of the Award
is ‘an automatic and involuntary consequence of Romania's obligations under the ICSID Convention, it is clearly
not imputable to the State, and thus cannot constitute State aid’. The main thrust of the claimants’ argument is that
since Romania is under an international law obligation to implement the Award, doing so is not imputable to the
State. The Commission disagrees with this line of reasoning and considers the measure imputable to Romania for
the following reasons.

(118) The Commission notes at the outset that the voluntary agreement of Romania to enter into the BIT, in particular
Article 7 thereof, created the conditions for the selective advantage resulting from the Award as explained in
recitals 110 et seq.

(119) Moreover, if Romania voluntarily implements the Award by paying out the compensation awarded to the
claimants by the Tribunal, there is no question that that action is imputable to the Romanian state. That is, in
any event, the case for the portion of the compensation awarded to the claimants by the Award which Romania
offset against taxes owed by one of the claimants, namely S.C. European Food SA, to the Romanian authorities.
That is also the case when Romania decided to voluntarily pay out the outstanding compensation awarded by the
Tribunal.

(120

Finally, every act of Romania's state organs is imputable to Romania. Those state organs include the Member
State's government and other public authorities. Notably, also domestic courts of a state and court-appointed
executors and bailiffs are to be considered organs of that state and are thus bound under Article 4(3) of the Treaty
on European Union by their duty of sincere cooperation vis-d-vis the Union. Accordingly, the actions of domestic
courts and court-appointed executors and bailiffs are imputable to the Romanian state, so that if Romania is
compelled to compensate the claimants under the Award by the action of its courts or court-appointed executors
and bailiffs, that action is also imputable to the Romanian state. Union law recognises only a narrow exemption
from this general principle of imputability: a measure is not imputable to a Member State if that Member State is
under an obligation under Union law to implement that measure without any discretion. In that case, the measure
stems from an act of the Union legislature and is not imputable to the State. It is, however, undisputed that
Romania is not obliged by Union law to implement the Award. Any decision to implement or execute the Award,
whether taken by the Romanian government or Romania's domestic courts, is thus imputable to the Romanian
State

 

 

(12

In light of the above, the Commission concludes that the measure is imputable to Romania.

Distortion of competition and effect on trade

(122) A measure granted by the state is considered to distort or threaten to distort competition when it is liable to
improve the competitive position of the recipient compared to other undertakings with which it competes (’’). For
all practical purposes, a distortion of competition within the meaning of Article 107 of the Treaty is thus assumed
as soon as the state grants a financial advantage to an undertaking in a liberalised sector where there is, or could
be, competition. An advantage granted to an undertaking that distorts competition will normally also be liable to
affect trade between Member States. Trade between Member States is affected where a measure strengthens the
competitive position of the beneficiary undertaking as compared with other undertakings competing in intra-
Community trade (’8).

(’9) Case T-351]02 Deutsche Bahn AG v Commission EU:T:2006:104, paragraph 1
”) Case 730/79 Phillip Morris EU:C:1980:209, paragraph 11. Joined Past “i-298)97, 7-312]97. etc. Alzetta EU:T:2000:151,

 

ragraph 8
sy Case e887 Friulia Venezia Giulia EU:T:2001:115, paragraph 41.

4.9.2015 Official Journal of the European Union L 232/63

 

 

(123) The Commission already concluded (see recitals 81 et seq.) that the claimants jointly form a single economic unit,
which in turn constitute the relevant undertaking for the purpose of the application of Union State aid rules. That
undertaking is active on a liberalised market, competing with other undertakings. The Commission has also
concluded that payment of compensation to the claimants, whether by implementing or executing the Award,
would improve their competitive position as compared to other undertakings with which they compete, who have
not received similar compensation for the withdrawal of unlawful State aid. The compensation provided for by the
Award is based on an amount corresponding to the customs duties charged on raw materials, lost profits and
interest on the total sum of damages awarded. The costs of raw materials, as inputs for final products, constitute
ordinary operating expenses of undertakings. Relieving the applicants of a part of their ordinary operating expenses
grants them a distinct competitive advantage, as does compensating the applicants for lost profits and the payment
of interest. The claimants are engaged in manufacturing food products, milling products, and plastic packaging. A
liberalised market exists for all those products, so that any advantage granted to the claimants is liable to distort
competition. Considering that the products primarily produced by the claimants can and indeed are widely traded
between Member States, it is clear that any advantage granted to the claimants is also liable to affect trade between
Member States.

(124) The Commission notes that the claimants’ arguments denying a distortion of competition merely repeat the
assertions that the Micula brothers cannot be considered as undertakings and that the implementation of the
Award would not grant the claimants any advantage. Both assertions were already extensively addressed above (see
recitals 81 et seq. and 92 et seq.) and require no further comments.

Conclusion
(125) For the foregoing reasons, the Commission considers that the payment of the compensation awarded to the
claimants by the Tribunal amounts to State aid for the purposes of Article 107(1) of the Treaty.
7.2. The application of the State aid rules does not affect rights and obligations protected by Article 351
e Treaty
(126) Article 351 of the Treaty provides that ‘[t]he rights and obligations arising from agreements concluded [...] for

acceding States, before the date of their accession, between one or more Member States on the one hand, and one
or more third countries on the other, shall not be affected by the provisions of the Treaties’. In the present case,
the rights and obligations on which the claimants rely are those arising from the BIT.

(127) It is clear from the wording of Article 351 of the Treaty that it does not apply in the present case, since the BIT is
a treaty concluded between two Member States of the Union, Sweden and Romania, and not a treaty ‘between one
or more Member States on the one hand, and one or more third countries on the other’. Accordingly, the
application of State aid law in the present case does not affect rights and obligation protected under Article 351
of the Treaty.

(128) In this context, the Commission recalls that different rules apply under Union law to intra-EU BITs, on the one
hand, and BITs concluded between a Member State of the Union and a third country, on the other. In the case of
intra-EU BITs, the Commission takes the view that such agreements are contrary to Union law, incompatible with
provisions of the Union Treaties and should therefore be considered invalid. By contrast, BITs concluded between a
Member State of the Union and a third country are governed by Regulation (EU) No 1219/2012 of the European
Parliament and of the Council (7°) which establisk for bilateral i
between Member States and third countries until those agreements are progressively replaced by agreements of the
Union relating to the same subject matter, in light of the Union’s exclusive competence with respect to the
common commercial policy under which foreign direct investment falls (°°).

(129) Romania is also a party to the multilateral ICSID Convention, to which it has acceded prior to its accession to the
Union. However, because no third country Contracting Party to the ICSID Convention is party to the BIT involved
in the present proceedings, Article 351 is not relevant for this case.

(%) Regulation (EU) No 1219/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2012 establishing transitional
arrangements for bilateral investment agreements between Member States and third countries (OJ L 351, 20.12.2012, p. 40).
(*) Article 3(1)(@) of the Treaty.

 

L 232/64 Official Journal of the European Union 4.9.2015

 

7.3. New aid

(130)

Article 107(1) of the Treaty provides that State aid is, in principle, incompatible with the internal market. Unless
an aid measure is declared to be compatible with the internal market by the Commission, the Member States are
prohibited from putting State aid measures into effect. Under Article 108(3) of the Treaty, a Member State must
notify any plans to alter or grant aid to the Commission and shall not put its proposed measure into effect until
the Commission has taken a final decision on that measure's compatibility with the internal market.

(131) The obligation not to put into effect any aid measure without a final decision from the Commission on the
compatibility of that aid measure only applies, of course, to aid measures put into effect after the entry into force
of the Treaty for the Member State concerned. For Romania, the Treaty entered into force on 1 January 2007.

(132) The claimants dispute that the implementation or execution of the Award would constitute ‘new aid’ within the
meaning of Article 1(c) of Regulation (EC) No 659/1999. They maintain that even if the Commission's assessment
is correct quod non and the implementation or execution of the Award would constitute aid, the date of the grant
of that aid would be the initial granting of benefits under EGO 24 to the claimants, which took place in 2000 and
2002 and thus before Romania’s accession to the Union. According to the claimants, the very latest point in time
which could be considered the granting date is the entry into force of the BIT, on which the Award is based, and
which entered into force in 2003.

(133) The Commission disagrees with the claimants and considers that payment of the compensation awarded to the
claimants by the Tribunal, whether through the implementation or execution of the Award, amounts to new aid
and is thus subject to the full State aid control mechanism set out in Articles 107 and 108 of the Treaty.
According to the case-law of the CJEU, aid must be considered to be granted at the time that an unconditional
right to receive it is conferred on the beneficiary under the applicable national rules (8'). Neither the adoption of
EGO 24 on 2 October 1998, nor the designation of $tei-Nucet, Bihor county, as a disfavoured region for 10 years
(effective on 1 April 1999), nor the grant of permanent investor certificates to S.C. European Food SA (on 1 June
2000) and S.C. Starmill $.R.L. and S.C. Multipack (on 17 May 2002) conferred on the claimants an unconditional
right to obtain the Raw Material Facility until 1 April 2009. Rather, a right to that Facility was only obtained by a
company eligible for aid under the scheme set up by EGO 24:

    

— under the initial scheme set up by EGO 24: when the regional development agency approved the company’s
production sales documents attesting that an import of raw materials intended for integration into internal
production had taken place, giving right to a reimbursement of customs duties paid (*), and

— after the Raw Material Facility of EGO 24 was transformed into an exemption from customs duties under EGO
75: when a company eligible for aid under that scheme imported raw materials for integration into internal
production and requested the exemption from the border control authorities on the basis of duly justified
documents.

(134) Since the scheme set up by EGO 24, as modified by EGO 75, was revoked on 22 February 2005, no right to aid
could be obtained by any company after that date under the national regulatory framework by importing raw
materials into Romania for integration into internal production. Thus, the applicants’ claim for compensation from
the Romanian state derives only from the Award in conjunction with Romanian domestic law giving it legal effect
in Romania's domestic legal order. As the Award was rendered and risks being implemented or executed after
Romania acceded to the Union, the unconditional right under Romanian domestic law to receive the compensation
awarded by the Tribunal, arising from the ratification of the ISCID Convention integrating it in Romania’s domestic
legal order and thus giving the Award legal effect in Romania's domestic legal, was conferred on the claimants only
after Romania's accession to the Union.

(") Case C-129/12 Magdeburger Miihlenwerke EU:C:2013:200, paragraph 40.

(®) An English-language translation of the initial provision providing for the Raw Materials Facility (which is the investment incentive
the revocation of which led to damages being awarded to the applicants under the Award) can be found at paragraph 148 of the
Award. According to that translation, Article 6(1)(b) provides that ‘Privately held companies, Romanian legal entities, as well as small
or family business, authorised pursuant to the Decree-Law No 54/1990 concerning the organisation and operation of free initiative-
based economic activities that are headquartered and conduct business within the disadvantaged region, will be granted the following
advantages for their new investments in the these regions: [...] refunds of customs duties on raw materials, spare parts andjor
components necessary of achieving the investor's own production in that region. The refunds will be made based on the approval by
the regional development agencies of the companies’ production sales documents. The funds necessary for the refund of the customs
duties will be provided to the Agency for Regional Development from the Regional development Fund. In case of unprivileged
regions belonging to two or more administrative-territorial units, the funds necessary for the refund of the customs duties will be
provided by the National Agency for Regional Development from the National Development Fund [the “Raw Materials Incentive”
or “Raw Materials Facility’).

 

4.9.2015 Official Journal of the European Union L 232/65

 

(135)

It is also important to note in this regard that the Award grants to the claimants compensation in an amount
corresponding to the advantages foreseen under the abolished Raw Materials Facility of the EGO 24 scheme from
the moment that that legislation was repealed (22 February 2005) until its alleged scheduled expiry (1 April 2009).
That period comprises a little over 49 months, during the majority of which (27 months) Romania was a full
member of the Union directly subjected to the State aid discipline laid down in the Treaty. In addition, the Award
grants to the claimants compensation for the lost opportunity to stockpile sugar in 2009, assuming that the
connected losses were incurred between 31 March 2009 and 1 July 2010. These alleged losses were thus incurred
entirely after Romania had acceded to the Union in 2007. Finally, the Tribunal awarded compensation for lost
profits, taking into account claimed losses incurred between 1 January 2005 and 31 August 2011. That period
comprises 80 months, during the vast majority of which (56 months) Romania was a full member of the Union
directly subjected to the State aid discipline laid down in the Treaty.

(136

Finally, the EGO 24 incentive scheme is not mentioned in Annex V, chapter 2, n.1 of the Act of Accession of
Romania to the Union which exhaustively lists the State aid measures which would be considered existing aid
upon Romania's accession to the Union (8) (*).

(137) The fact that neither the Act of Accession nor the Treaty were applicable to Romania at the time when Romania
allegedly breached its obligations under the BIT by revoking the aid scheme established by EGO 24 or when the
claimants brought their claims under the BIT before the Tribunal is irrelevant. At neither point did the claimants
obtain an unconditional right to the payment of the compensation awarded by the Tribunal, which is the measure
under consideration. It is only when the Tribunal established that there was a breach of Article 2(3) of the BIT by
rendering the Award on 11 December 2013, in conjunction with Romanian domestic law giving legal effect in
Romania's domestic legal order to the Award, that the claimants received an unconditional right to that compen-
sation which they could enforce against Romania. That date was after Romania's accession to the European Union.

(138) The claimants’ case therefore is not comparable to the Commission's decision in Case N 380/04 to which they
refer. Case N 380/04 concerned a contract concluded between the company Latvijas Gaze (‘LG’) and Latvia in
1997. When a dispute arose between LG and Latvia over the latter's obligations under the contract, commercial
arbitration proceedings were initiated in Stockholm under Uncitral rules. The arbitration tribunal established for
those proceedings decided, on 19 June 2003, that Latvia owed LG compensation for the period 10 January 2001
until 10 March 2003. Latvia did not comply with the arbitral award before it acceded to the Union on 1 May
2004 and notified the envisaged implementation of that award to the Commission after accession. In its decision,
the Commission observed that the compensation obligation arose on the basis of the 1997 contract, that the
compensation awarded by the arbitration tribunal related in its entirety to a period before Latvia's accession, and
that the arbitral award itself was issued before Latvia's accession to the Union. On this basis, the Commission
concluded that ‘the payment [...] of the damages awarded by the Tribunal [...] constitute a mere act of imple-
mentation of a measure that crystallised entirely before accession’ and that implementing the 2003 arbitral award
could not be regarded as constituting ‘new aid’. Furthermore, the Commission’s decision in Case N 380/04 itself
points out that it did not prejudge the analysis of possible future payments under the contract that related to
periods after accession, thus narrowly limiting the approach chosen to the specific facts notified by Latvia.

(139)

By contrast, in the present case the compensation obligation arises from the Award, which was rendered in 2013,
the compensation awarded to the claimants by the Tribunal relates for the most part to the period after Romania
acceded to the Union and the Award itself was issued almost seven years after Romania acceded to the Union.
Finally, the decision in Case N 380/04 differs most starkly to the present case in that there was no indication in
the former case that by implementing or executing the 2003 arbitral award LG would obtain unlawful State aid
which Latvia had promised to grant contrary to its State aid obligations as a candidate country acceding to the
Union.

(5) The three categories of existing aid mentioned in the Act of Accession are:
measures put into effect before 10 December 1994,
— aid measures listed in the Appendix to this Annex,
— aid measures which prior to the date of accession were assessed by the State aid monitoring authority of the new Member State
and found to be compatible with the acquis, and to which the Commission did not raise an objection on the ground of serious
doubts as to the compatibility of the measure with the common market, pursuant to the procedure set out in paragraph 2.
Any decision to execute the Award is not covered by any of these three categories. Even if it were considered that implementation of
the Award merely reinstates the claimants’ rights pursuant to EGO 24 as if the relevant incentives thereunder had not been repealed
before their scheduled expiration, that retroactive reinstatement would still need to be considered as ‘new aid’ as of the accession of
Romania to the Union.
(%) See also Joint Cases T-80/06 and T-182/09 Budapesti Erémit EUT:2012:65, paragraph 54.

 

L 232/66 Official Journal of the European Union 4.9.2015

 

(140) The Commission therefore finds that the payment of the compensation awarded by the Tribunal to the claimants
constitutes new aid and that that measure can only be put into effect if and after the Commission has authorised it
under the State aid rules.

7.4. IMlegality under Article 108(3) of the Treaty
(ay

The compensation awarded by the Tribunal has already been partially paid out by Romania to the claimants
through the offsetting of certain tax debts owed by one of the claimants, S.C. European Food SA, to the Romanian
state. Since that partial implementation of the Award was not notified to the Commission by Romania, the
measure has unlawfully been put into effect in violation of Article 108(3) of the Treaty. Any further payment
of the compensation awarded by the Tribunal, whether by implementation or execution of the Award, that the
Commission is either unaware of or that might occur after the adoption of this Decision would, for the same
reasons, also constitute a violation of Romania's obligation to comply with Article 108(3) of the Treaty.

7.5. Compatibility with the internal market

(142) At the outset, the Commission recalls that when assessing the compatibility of a measure with the internal market
under Articles 107(2) and 107(3) of the Treaty, the burden of proof is the principal responsibility of the Member
State (°°). In this context, the Commission also recalls that a State aid measure cannot be declared compatible with
the internal market, if it entails a non-severable violation of other specific provisions of the Treaty (8). At present,
Romania has presented no arguments that could justify the measure under Articles 107(2) and 107(3) of the
Treaty. Nevertheless, for the sake of completeness, the Commission considers it appropriate to undertake a
compatibility assessment of its own motion.

(143)

The claimants contend that the measure constitutes compatible regional aid. On the basis of Article 107(3)(a) and
107(3)(c) of the Treaty, the Commission may consider compatible with the internal market State aid to promote
the economic development of certain disadvantaged areas within the Union. The conditions under which aid to
promote regional development can be considered compatible with the internal market are set out in the Guidelines
on regional State aid for 2014-2020 (‘RAG 2014’). Recital 188 of those Guidelines explains that they apply for
assessing the compatibility of all regional aid intended to be awarded after 30 June 2014. This means that regional
aid awarded unlawfully or regional aid intended to be awarded before 1 July 2014 are to be assessed in accordance
with the Guidelines on national regional aid for 2007-2013 (8”) (RAG 2007).

(144) As explained in recital 134, an unconditional right to the aid was granted to the claimants when the Award was
issued on 11 December 2013, in conjunction with Romanian domestic law giving legal effect in Romania's
domestic legal order to the Award, that is, before the entry into force of the RAG 2014. Therefore, the
payment of the compensation awarded by the Tribunal to the claimants should be assessed under the RAG 2007.

(145)

In those guidelines, the Commission sets out that regional aid aimed at reducing the current expenses of an
undertaking constitutes operating aid and will not be regarded as compatible with the internal market, unless it is
awarded in exceptional circumstances to tackle specific handicaps faced by undertakings in disadvantaged regions
falling within the scope of Article 107(3)(a) of the of the Treaty (8%).

(146) In the present case, the compensation awarded to the claimants by the Tribunal refers to the losses directly linked
to the revocation of the EGO 24 incentives and are aimed at placing the beneficiary in the position in which it
would ‘in all probability’ have found itself in had the EGO 24 incentives had not been revoked. In effect, the
implementation of the award re-establishes the situation in which the claimants would have, in all likelihood,
found themselves if EGO 24 had never been repealed by Romania. As the advantages granted under EGO 24 were
connected to the recurrent costs of the claimants and were not linked to an initial investment, those advantages
constituted operating aid. Therefore, placing the beneficiary in the position in which it would have been if the EGO
24 incentives had not been revoked and thus compensating the losses linked to this revocation constitutes
operating aid. As explained in recitals 92 et seq., payment of the compensation awarded to the claimants by
the Tribunal in reality retroactively reduces the operating expenses incurred by them pursuing their economic
activity under normal market conditions.

(8) Case T-68/03 Olympiaki Acroporia Ypiresies AE v Commission HUsT:2007:253, paragraph 34.
(8) Case C-225/91 Matra v Commission EU:C:1993:239, paragraph

(®) Guidelines on national regional aid for 2007-2013 (OJ C 54, 4 iF ‘2006, p. 13).

(8) RAG 2007, point 76.

 

4.9.2015 Official Journal of the European Union L 232/67

 

(147

According to points 76, 77 and 79 of the RAG 2007, operating aid is normally prohibited, and can be granted
only exceptionally in Article 107(3)(a) regions provided that:

— it is justified in terms of its contribution to regional development (targeted),
— its nature and its level is proportional to the handicaps it seeks to alleviate,

— it is temporary and reduced over time, and should be phased out when the regions concerned achieve real
convergence with the wealthier areas of the EU,

— in principle it is granted in respect of a predefined set of eligible expenditures or costs and limited to a certain
proportion of those costs,

— the Member State has committed itself to respect detailed reporting rules, as laid down in point 83 of the RAG
2007.

(148) The economic activities benefitting from the implementation of the Award are located in an area falling within the
scope of Article 107(3)(a) of the of the Treaty, as established by the Commission in the decision of the regional aid
map for Romania for 2007-2013 (°°) and for 2014-2020 (°%).

(149) However, the Commission fails to see how the payment of the compensation awarded to the claimants is justified
in terms of its contribution to the regional development of the areas concerned. The operating aid resulting from
that payment is not aimed at contributing to the common equity objective as required under Article 107(3)(a) of
the Treaty, but merely at compensating the beneficiary for the losses incurred from the revocation of EGO 24
before its envisaged expiry date. This results in free money for the claimants without any positive impact on the
development of the region.

(150)

It is not sufficient that the economic activity is located in ‘an area’ to assume that the measure is proportional to
the handicaps it seeks to alleviate, since it must first be demonstrated what these handicaps are and, second, how
they create an obstacle to the development of the region concerned. In the absence of any proof, the Commission
could not identify the specific handicaps the aid measures would seek to alleviate.

(151) The payment of the compensation awarded to the claimants by the Tribunal is temporary in nature, as it has no
effects after the implementation or execution of the Award is completed. However, it is not limited to a certain
portion of predefined costs, since that compensation is aimed at ensuring that all losses incurred by the claimants
are covered.

(152

In view of the above, the Commission considers that the payment of the compensation awarded to the claimants
by the Tribunal does not comply with the RAG 2007 and can therefore not be declared compatible with the
internal market. As no other basis of compatibility is otherwise applicable, the Commission considers that the
compatibility of the aid measure has not been established.

7.6. Conclusion on the assessment of the aid measure

(153)

The foregoing analysis indicates that the payment of the compensation awarded by the Tribunal to the claimants
amounts to the granting of incompatible new aid which is incompatible with the Treaty. The Commission regrets
that Romania has already partially paid out that compensation by offsetting tax debts owed by one of the
claimants, $.C. European Food SA, to the Romanian state against part of that compensation, as well as by the
action taken by the court-appointed executor.

8. RECOVERY
(154

In accordance with the Treaty and the CJEU’s established case-law, the Commission is competent to decide that the
Member State concerned must abolish or alter aid when it has found that it is incompatible with the internal
market (°'). The Court has also consistently held that the obligation on a Member State to abolish aid regarded by
the Commission as being incompatible with the internal market is designed to re-establish the previously existing
situation (°?). In this context, the Court has stated that that objective is attained once the recipient has repaid the
amounts granted by way of unlawful aid, thus forfeiting the advantage which it had enjoyed over its competitors

(®) Commission Decision N 2/07, summary notice in OJ C 73, 30.3.2007, p. 15.

(°°) Commission Decision SA 38364, summary notice in OJ C 233, AS72014, pl.

(°) Case C-70]72 Commission v Germany EU:C:1973:87, paragraph 1

(2) Joined cases C-278/92, C-279/92 and C-280/92 Spain v Cchimission EU:C:1994:325, paragraph 75.

 

L 232/68 Official Journal of the European Union 4.9.2015

 

on the market, and the situation prior to the payment of the aid is restored (%). Following that case-law,
Article 14(1) of Regulation (EC) No 659/1999 provides that ‘where negative decisions are taken in respect of
unlawful aid, the Commission shall decide that the Member State concerned shall take all necessary measures to
recover the aid from the beneficiary [...]

(155)

The claimants contend that they had a legitimate expectation that the incentives granted under EGO 24 were
lawful and that they could benefit from those incentives until their scheduled expiry on 1 April 2009. The
Commission observes, in that regard, that Article 14(1) of Regulation (EC) No 659/1999 further specifies that
[t]he Commission shall not require recovery of the aid if this would be contrary to a general principle of [Union]
law.’ The principle of the protection of legitimate expectations has been recognised by the CJEU to constitute such
a general principle of Union law. The Commission does not consider, however, that the claimants can claim such a
legitimate expectation.

(156

According to the case-law of the CJEU, save in exceptional circumstances, undertakings to which an aid has been
granted may not, in principle, entertain a legitimate expectation that the aid is lawful unless it has been granted in
compliance with the procedure laid down in Article 108(3) of the Treaty. The CJEU, in its more recent case-law,
has declared that in the absence of sufficiently precise assurances arising from a positive action taken by the
Commission, which has the exclusive competence to authorise the grant of State aid by the Member States of the
Union, that lead the beneficiary to believe that the measure does not constitute State aid, no exceptional circum-
stances can warrant the application of the principle of the protection of legitimate expectations to prevent recovery
if that aid measure was not notified to the Commission (°*). Indeed, it is long-standing case-law that the principle
of the protection of legitimate expectations cannot be relied upon against a precise provision of Union law and
that the conduct of a national authority responsible for applying Union law, which acts in breach of that law,
cannot give rise to legitimate expectations on the part of an economic operator that he will benefit from treatment
which is contrary to that law (°*). A diligent economic operator must be assumed to be able to determine whether
that procedure has been followed (°5).

(157) The Commission notes that, as regards the compensation awarded by the Tribunal to the claimants, it should have
been clear without any doubt to the claimants even before that aid was granted to them through the adoption of
the Award, in conjunction with Romanian domestic law giving legal effect in Romania’s domestic legal order to
the Award, that the Commission considered payment of that compensation to give rise to unlawful and incom-
patible State aid. That position was expressly communicated to the Tribunal on 20 July 2009 and communicated
to the claimants.

(158)

As regards the claimants’ claim that they had a legitimate expectation that the EGO 24 were lawful and would
remain in place until 1 April 2009, the Commission recalls, as a preliminary matter, that it is the payment of
compensation awarded to the claimants by the Tribunal and not EGO 24 that form the basis for this Decision.
Nevertheless, the Commission adds, for the sake of completeness, that the claimants cannot justifiably claim a
legitimate expectation as to the validity and continued existence of that scheme until 1 April 2009. As regards that
scheme, it was not the Commission, but the Romanian Competition Council, which, by virtue of Decision No
4/2000 of the EU-Romania Association Council and Romanian Law No 143/1999 on State aid, was responsible
for the monitoring and authorisation of the grant of State aid prior to Romania's accession to the Union. The
Commission notes in that regard that EGO 24 was notified to the Romanian Competition Council in light of the
modifications envisaged by EGO 75 and that the Romanian Competition Council, by its Decision No 244/2000 of
15 May 2000, found those incentives to constitute incompatible State aid. It was after the adoption of that
decision, on 1 June 2000, that S.C. European Food SA obtained its PIC, which made it eligible to obtain State aid
under the scheme set up by EGO 24 as explained in recital 133. However, that does not mean the aid was granted
on that date, as explained in recital 134.

(159)

It follows from that at the time S.C. European Food SA was granted the unlawful State aid provided by EGO 24,
which is in any event after 1 June 2000, it must have been fully aware of the Romanian Competition Council's
decision of 15 May 2000 declaring the EGO 24 incentives to be incompatible State aid. Moreover, it must also
have been aware of the Europe Agreement, which entered into force on 1 January 1995, and Romanian Law No
143/1999 on State aid, which entered into force on 1 January 2000, both of which prohibited Romania from
granting State aid and conferred the power on the Romanian Competition Council to authorise the grant of new
State aid. Absent such an authorisation from the Competition Council and in line with the case-law of the CJEU,
which applied by virtue of the Article 64 of the 1995 Europe Agreement, Article 1 of the Implementing Rules to
Decision No 4/2000 of the EU-Romanian Association Council and the acquis communautaire, $.C. European Food

 

() Case C-75]97 Belgium v Commission EU:C:1999:311, paragraphs 64-65.

(°4) Case C-148/04 Unicredito Italiano EU:C:2005:774, paragraphs 104 to 111.

(°5) Judgment in Case C-217/06 Commission v Italy EU:C:2007:580, point 23 and the case-law cited.
(°9) Case C-5/89 Commission v Germany EU:C:1990:320, paragraph 14.

  

 

4.9.2015 Official Journal of the European Union L 232/69

 

SA could never have entertained a legitimate expectation that the incentives granted under EGO 24 constituted
compatible State aid, regardless of the subsequent actions of the Romanian Government after Decision No
244]2000 was adopted. The same reasoning obviously applies to Multipack and Starmill, which only obtained
their PICs on 17 May 2002, two years after Decision No 244/2000 was adopted. Thus, the claimants cannot even
validly claim a legitimate expectation that the EGO 24 scheme constituted lawful State aid, which the Commission
considers irrelevant for the purposes of the present Decision.

(160) Therefore, any payment of the compensation awarded to the claimants by the Tribunal must be recovered by
Romania since that payment constitutes unlawful and incompatible State aid. As the five claimants, together with
the other relevant EFDG companies constitute a single economic unit (see recital 91), the five claimants and the
other relevant EFDG companies shall be jointly liable to repay the State aid received by any one of them to the
Romanian state. According to Article 14(2) of Regulation (EC) No 659/1999 the aid to be recovered pursuant to a
recovery decision shall include interest at an appropriate rate fixed by the Commission. Interest shall be payable
from the date on which the unlawful aid was at the disposal of the beneficiary until the date of its recovery.
Article 14(3) of Regulation (EC) No 659/1999 provides that recovery shall be effected without delay and in
accordance with the procedures under the national law of the Member State concerned, provided that they allow
the immediate and effective execution of the Commission's decision. To this effect and in the event of a procedure
before national courts, the Member States concerned shall take all necessary steps which are available in their
respective legal systems, including provisional measures, without prejudice to Union law.

(161) The Commission observes in this respect that Romania has already offset the amount of RON 337 492 864 (ca.
EUR 76 million (°”)) against tax debts owed by one of the claimants, $.C. European Food SA. The Commission
further observes that on 5 January 2015 the court-appointed executor seized RON 36 484 232 (ca. EUR 8,1 mil-
lion (°8)) from Romania's Ministry of Finance and subsequently transferred RON 34 004 232 (ca. EUR
7,56 million) in equal parts to three of the five claimants, and kept the remainder as compensation for
execution costs. Between 5 February and 25 February 2015, the court-appointed executor seized a further
RON 9197 482 (ca. EUR 2 million) (°%) from the bank accounts of the Ministry of Finance. In addition, the
Commission takes note of the fact that the Romanian authorities have voluntarily transferred RON 472 788 675
(ca. EUR 106,5 million (!°)) (including the costs of court appointed executor of RON 6 028 608) into a blocked
account in the name of the five claimants. Those sums, as well as any further payments to the claimants in
fulfilment of the Award which have taken or will take place, must be recovered by Romania. Accordingly, the
Commission,

HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION:

Article 1

The payment of the compensation awarded by the arbitral tribunal established under the auspices of the International
Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) by award of 11 December 2013 in Case No ARB/05/20 Micula a.o.
v Romania ('°) to the single economic unit comprising Viorel Micula, loan Micula, $.C. European Food SA, S.C. Starmill
S.R.L., S.C. Multipack, European Drinks SA, Rieni Drinks $A, Scandic Distilleries SA, Transilvania General Import-Export
S.R.L., and West Leasing S.R.L constitutes State aid within the meaning of Article 107(1) of the Treaty which is
incompatible with the internal market.

   

Article 2

1. Romania shall not pay out any incompatible aid referred to in Article 1 and shall recover any incompatible aid
referred to in Article 1 which has already been paid out to any one of the entities constituting the single economic unit
benefiting from that aid in partial implementation or execution of the arbitral award of 11 December 2013, as well as
any aid paid out to any one of the entities constituting the single economic unit benefiting from that aid in further
implementation of the arbitral award of 11 December 2013 that the Commission has not been made aware of or that is
paid out after the date of this Decision.

2. Viorel Micula, loan Micula, S.C. European Food SA, S.C. Starmill $.R.L., S.C. Multipack, European Drinks SA, Rieni
Drinks SA, Scandic Distilleries SA, Transilvania General Import-Export S.R.L., and West Leasing S.R.L shall be jointly
liable to repay the State aid received by any one of them.

 

() See footnote 7.

(°8) See footnote 38.

() See footnote 38.
(2) See footnote 40.
(11) ICSID Case No ARB/05/20, Ioan Micula, Viorel Micula, SC European Food SA, SC Starmill SRI, SC Multipack SRL v Romania, Final
Award of 11 December 2013.

 

L 232/70 Official Journal of the European Union 4.9.2015

 

3. The sums to be recovered are those resulting from the implementation or execution of the award of 11 December
2013 (principal and interest).

4. The sums to be recovered shall bear interest from the date on which they were put at the disposal of the
beneficiaries until their actual recovery.

5. Romania shall provide the exact dates on which the aid provided by the state was put at the disposal of the
respective beneficiaries.

. The interest shall be calculated on a compound basis in accordance with Chapter V of Commission Regulation (EC)
No 794/2004 (2),

7. Romania shall ensure that no further payments of the aid referred to in Article 1 shall be effected with effect from
the date of adoption of this Decision.

Article 3
1. Recovery of the aid referred to in Article 1 shall be immediate and effective.

2. Romania shall ensure that this Decision is implemented within four months following the date of notification of
this Decision.

Article 4
1. Within two months following notification of this Decision, Romania shall submit the following information:
(a) the total amount of aid received by each entity mentioned in Article 1 of this Decision;
(b) a detailed description of the measures already taken and planned to comply with this Decision;
(c) documents demonstrating that the beneficiaries have been ordered to repay the aid.

2. Romania shall keep the Commission informed of the progress of the national measures taken to implement this
Decision until recovery of the aid referred to in Article 1 has been completed. It shall immediately submit, on simple
request by the Commission, information on the measures already taken and planned to comply with this Decision. It shall
also provide detailed information concerning the amounts of aid and recovery interest already recovered from the
beneficiaries.

Article 5

This Decision is addressed to Romania.

Done at Brussels, 30 March 2015.

For the Commission
Margrethe VESTAGER
Member of the Commission

() Commission Regulation (EC) No 794/2004 of 21 April 2004 implementing Council Regulation (EC) No 659/1999 laying down
detailed rules for the application of Article 93 of the EC Treaty (O} L 140, 30.4.2004, p. 1).

