International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

IOAN MICULA,
VIOREL MICULA,

S.C. EUROPEAN FOOD S.A.,
S.C. STARMILL S.R.L.
AND
S.C. MULTIPACK S.R.L.
CLAIMANTS
v.

ROMANIA

RESPONDENT

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/20

 

AWARD

 

Rendered by an Arbitral Tribunal composed of:

Dr. Laurent Lévy, President
Dr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov, Arbitrator
Prof. Georges Abi-Saab, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Martina Polasek

Assistant to the Tribunal
Ms. Sabina Sacco

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: 11 December 2013

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

Il. INTRODUCTION 9
A. OVERVIEW OF THE DISPUTE 9
B. THE PARTIES 9

1. The Claimants 9g
2. The Resp 10

Il. PROCEDURAL HISTORY 11
A. INITIAL PHASE 11
B. THE JURISDICTIONAL PHASE 12
C. THE MERITS PHASE. 12

1. Initial p steps 12
2. The written phase on the merits. 13
3. Procedural steps predating the hearing on the merits...
4. The hearing on the merits and quantum...
5. Procedural matters following the hearing.
a. The Claimants’ Applications for Provisional Measures and the Respondent's Application for
Revocation of Provisional Measure 28
b. The Claimants’ Renewed ication for a Site Visit 35
c. The Claimants’ Revised Request for Relief...
d. Post-hearing briefs and oral closing arguments
e. Closure of the PI ing and Submissions on Cost: 38

Ill. FACTUAL BACKGROUND 40
A. O
B. LEGAL FRAMEWORK FOR THE DISFAVORED REGIONS.

1. Romania's efforts to attract ir in the early 1990: 41
2. EGO 24/1998
3. Government Decision 194/1999 and the 1999 Methodological Norms
C. THE CLAIMANTS’ INVESTMENTS
1. The Claimants’ initial investments in reliance on previous incentive regimes ..
2. The Claimants’ investments in reliance on the EGO 24 incentives..
3. Permanent Investor Certif 51
D. Romanta’s ACCESSION PROCE: 52
1. Early steps: the Europe and Romania's ication for EU it 52
2. Romania’s initial efforts to align its state aid laws ..
3. Romania and the EU begin formal
4. The Decision of the Romanian Competition Council and amendments to the EGO 24 regime.....
5. Romania's progress towards accession in the period 2000-2001.....
6. Further amendments to the EGO 24 Regime (2000-2001).
7. Parallel developments in the EU and EGO 24 fronts (2002,
8. Events leading up to the ion of EGO 24
9. events 76
IV. SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITION 77

 

A. THE CLAIMANTS’ POSITION. 7

 

 

 

B. THE RESPONDENT’S P' 82
V. PRELIMINARY MATTERS: 86
A. THE TRIBUNAL’S JL 86
B. APPLICABLE LAw. 87

 

The Claimants’ position.

a. There is no conflict of treaties, and even if there were, the BIT should prevail.
b. Romania's interpretation of the provisions of the BIT is flawed ..

c. EU law requirements would not justify or excuse breaches of the BIT or international law.....
2. The Resp position ot
a. The BIT must be interpreted consistently with EU law...
b. In any event, the Contracting Parties to the BIT intended European law to prevail

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

c. EU lawis relevant to the i of
3. The C 's position
4. The Tribunal's analysis
C. THE ENFORCEMENT OF THE ARBITRAL AWARD AND EU LAW

1. The Resp position. 96
2. The p Ce 's position. 96
3. The Claimants' position 97
4. The Tribunal’s analysis 97

 

VI. ANALYSIS OF THE CLAIMANTS’ TREATY CLAIMS

 

A. UMBRELLA CLAUSE 99
1. The Claimants’ position.

a. Nature and scope of the BIT’s umbrella clause

b. The EGO 24 regime gave rise to a specific obligation vi

c. Romania breached the BIT’s umbrella clause...

 
 
   
 
 
   
  
 
 

 

is the Claimants.

 

2. The 3p position.
a. Nature and scope of the BIT’s umbrella clause...
b. Romania did not enter into a specific obligation with the Claimants.....
c. Even if the umbrella clause were applicable, Romania did not breach it
3. The Tribunal’s analysis
a. Interpretation of the BIT’s umbrella clause ..
b. Did Romania enter into a specific obligation with the Claimants? ..
i. Content of the Claimants’
ii. Does Romania’s undertaking qualify as an “obligation” under Romanian law? If yes, did

 

 

 

 

 

 

Romania breach it?. 123

B. Fair AND EQUITABLE TREATMENT 128
1. Summary of the Parties’ position. 128

a. The Claimants’ position 128

b. The F 's position 133

 

 

2. Nature, interpretation and content of the fair and equitable treatment standard .

138,

 

 

 

a. Interpretation and general contours of the standard.... -

b. Conduct that is st i improper. 143
c. Regulatory stability and legiti i 145
d. Ti / Consis 146

 

3. Did Romania fail to provide a predictable and stable legal framework for the Claimants’
investments? In particular, did it violate the Claimants’ legitimate expectations of regulatory
stability ?. 147
a. The Claimants’ position 147
i. The standard for determining whether there has been a breach of legitimate expectations .... 148
ii. Romania made a promise or assurance to the Claimants that gave rise to a legitimate

 

 

 

149

iii. The Claimants relied upon that promise or assurance... 150
iv. The Claimants’ reliance was reasonable .... + 153
(a) The purpose and content of EGO 24 and its enacting legislation... .. 153

 

(b) The issuance and content of the PICs .. .154
(c) Romania's intimate involvement in the granting of the EGO 24 incentives .. 155
(d) Romania's promotion and support of the EGO 24 regime and previous incentive regimes 156
(
(

 

 

 

(e) Romania’s interaction with the Competition Council .... . 157
(f) The Claimants’ expectations were reasonable in light of Romania's impending accession

 

 

 

 

to the EU 159
v. Romania violated this legiti i 164
b. The F 's position 165
i. The standard for determining if a measure has undermined legitimate expectations .... -. 166
ii. Romania did not make a promise or assurance that could have created a subjective
i 168

 

 

iii. Any expectation of regulatory stability would have been unreasonable.
iv. The Claimants have not proven that they relied on a subjective expectation that the facilities
would not change for 10 year:
c. The Tribunal’s analysi
The standard to determine whether a legitimate expectation has been breached
Did Romania make a promise or assurance that gave rise to a legitimate expectation?
|. Was this i ?
(a) Reasonableness in the context of Romania's Accession to the EU....
(b) Reasonableness under Romanian law..

 

 

   
 
 

 

 

 

iv. Did the Claimants in fact rely on that expectation?
4. Did Romania act ?,
a. The Claimants’ position
b. The F 's position
i. The Respondent's motivation in amending EGO 24 was to comply with EU accession ....
ii, Romania balanced icting policies

 

 

ii. None of the Claimants’ contentions about what Romania could or should have done
differently prove that Romania acted unreasonably...
c. The Tribunal’s analysi
i. Did Romania act in pursuit of a rational policy? . -
ii. The Claimants’ specific i of conduct. 214

 

(a) The Claimants’ allegation that Romania actively promoted and extended the EGO 24
regime, while at the same time negotiating for the scheme’s early termination...
(b) The Claimants’ allegation that Romania revoked the incentives regime prematurely,
without being required to do so by any competent legal authority and without attempting
to mitigate damage: 215

 

(c) The Claimants’ allegation that Romania revoked the benefits of the incentives regime for
investors, while maintaining the investors’ obligations under that regime ... 217

 

iii, Ce

5. Did Romania act in bad faith?.
a. The Parties’ positions

b. The Tribunal’s analysi:

 

 

6. Did Romania fail to act
a. The Claimants’ position
b. The F 's position
i. Romania's balancing of confidentiality and openness was reasonable ..
ii. Romania complied with any standard of consistency or transparency that could reasonably
be imposed in the context of complex or politically sensitive legislation and negotiation
iii. It was common knowledge that the facilities were vulnerable...
c. The Tribunal’s analysi

or

 

 

 

 

 

C. THE CLAIMANTS’ CLaims
Vil. DAMAGES 234
A. O

 

 

 
 
 
   

1. Overview of the Claimants’ damages case...
a. The Claimants’ original damages case.
b. The Claimants’ damages case in their Reply
c. The Claimants’ revised request for relief ..

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2. Overview of the Re position.
B. PRELIMINARY MATTER
1. Legal
2. Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction over claims for damages relating to the non-claimant companies
of the EFDG? 247
C. ANALYSIS OF THE CLAIMANTS’ DAMAGES CLAIMS -252
1. General 252
2. cost of raw material: 254
a. Increased cost of sugar 254
b. Increased cost of PET 256
c. Increased cost of other raw material: 258
d. Lost opportunity to stockpile sugar... -. 259
3. The Claimants’ claims for lost profits. 262
a. Standard for an award of lost profit 263
i. The 's position 263
ii. The Claimants’ position. 265
iii. The Tribunal’s analysis 267
b. Lost profits on sales of finished good: 268
c. Lost profits on sales of sugar containing products (SCPs) ... .277
i. The Claimants never sold SCPs to industrial third parties
ii. The Claimants have not proven that they would have in fact engaged in the business of
selling SCPs to industrial third parties...
d. Lost profits incurred as a result of the Claimants’ inability to complete the Incremental
Ir 286
i. Overview of the Parties’ position: 286
ii. The Tribunal’s analysis 288
(a) The Claimants’ integrated business model — Advance planning for the Incremental
288

 

b) The malt mar uring plant

 

 

 

 

(b)

(c) The can ing plant
(d) The ion plant

(e) C

4. Financial penalties for failure to pay taxes .
a. Overview
b. The Tribunal’s analysi: 311

 

 

  
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

D. THE RESPONDENT’S DEFENSE THAT ACCESSION TO THE EU BENEFITED THE CLAIMANTS
E. THE CLAIMANTS’ REQUEST THAT DAMAGES BE AWARDED NET OF TAXES...
F. To WHOM SHOULD THE AWARD BE MADE? ....
1. The Claimants’ request for a different allocation of damages ....
2. The Parties’ position:
a. The Individual Claimants’ right to claim damages in their capacity as shareholders .
b. Is it possible for the Individual Claimants to be designated as the sole or principal claimants at
this stage of the ings? 333
c. The impact of the Claimants’ requested allocation on the factual or legal bases for the claimed
damages or their qu
3. The Tribunal's analysis with respect to the requested allocation of damages..
a. The Claimants’ request that all damages be awarded to the Individual Claimants.
b. Allocation of damages to all five Claimants ....

Vill, INTEREST 346
A. INTRODUCTION 346
B. THE CLAIMANTS’ POSITION. 347
C. THE RESPONDENT'S Pt 349
D. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS 351

1. Simple versus interest 351
2. Rate 351
3. Date of ic 352

IX. THE PARTIES’ OTHER REQUESTS FOR RELIEF...

A.

 

 

THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS CONCERNING SET-OFF OF THE AMOUNTS AWARDED AGAINST THE
EFDG’s Tax DEBTS
1. The
2. The Claimants’ position.
3. The Tribunal’s analysis
THE CLAIMANTS’ REQUEST FOR POST-AWARD INJUNCTIVE RELIEF...
1. The Claimants’ position.
2. The
3. The Tribunal’s analysis

 

 

3p position.

 

 

3p position.

 

 

X. COSTS. 366

XI. DECISION. 367

Arbitration Rules

BIT

Claimant 1
Claimant 2
Claimant 3
Claimant 4
Claimant 5
Commission
C-PHB
C-Reply

C-SoC.

EC

EC Treaty
ECHR

ECJ
Commission's Written
Submission
EFDG or EFDC

EGO

ER

Exh. C
Exh. EC
Exh. HEC
Exh. R
Exh. RB

Exh. RJ

EU
GD
GO
ICSID Convention

ICSID or the Centre
ILC Articles

PIC

R-CM

RFA

RL or RLA

R-PHB

ABBREVIATIONS

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings effective 1
January 2003

Agreement between the Government of the Kingdom of Sweden
and the Government of Romania on the Promotion and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments dated April 1, 2003

Mr. loan Micula

Mr. Viorel Micula

European Food S.A

Starmill S.R.L.

Multipack S.R.L.

European Commission

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Submission dated May 13, 2011
Claimants’ Reply dated December 22, 2009

Claimants’ Statement of Claim dated March 9, 2007

European Community

Treaty Establishing the European Community

European Court of Human Rights

European Court of Justice

European Commission's Written Submission dated July 20, 2009
European Food and Drinks Group (or European Food and Drinks
Companies)

Emergency Government Ordinance

Expert Report

Claimants’ Exhibits

European Commission's Exhibits

Exhibits referred to at the Hearing on the merits and quantum
Respondent's Exhibits

Exhibits filed with the Legal Opinion of F. Baias dated June 11,
2010

Exhibits filed with Expert Opinion of F. Jacobs dated June 11,
2010

European Union

Government Decision

Government Ordinance

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between
States and Nationals of Other States dated March 18, 1965
International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes
The ILC Articles on State Responsibility

Permanent Investor Certificate

Respondent's Counter-Memorial dated April 6, 2009

Request for Arbitration dated July 28, 2005

Respondent's Legal Authorities

Respondent's Post-Hearing Submission dated May 13, 2011

R-SPHB

R-Rejoinder
TIC

TGIE

Tr.

Tr. Jur.
VCLT

Respondent's Supplementary Post-Hearing Submission dated
May 27, 2011

Respondent's Rejoinder dated June 11, 2010

Temporary investment certificate

Transilvania General Import Export S.R.L.

Transcripts of the Hearing on the merits and quantum

Transcripts of the Hearing on jurisdiction

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of 1969

INTRODUCTION

A. OVERVIEW OF THE DISPUTE

The present dispute arises from Romania's introduction and subsequent revocation of
certain economic incentives, contained in Emergency Government Ordinance
24/1998 (“EGO 24”), for the development of certain disfavored regions of Romania.
The Claimants claim that, in reliance on those incentives, and in reliance on the
expectation that these incentives would be maintained during a 10-year period, they
made substantial investments in the $tei-Nucet-Draganesti disfavored region located
in Bihor County in northwestern Romania. The Claimants further claim that
Romania’s premature revocation of these incentives was in breach of its obligations
under the Agreement Between the Government of the Kingdom of Sweden and the
Government of Romania on the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments
(the “BIT” or the “Treaty”), which entered into force on 1 April 2003 (Exh. C-1), and
caused damages to the Claimants, as described further below.

B. THE PARTIES
The Claimants

There are five claimants in this case: two individual persons (the “Individual
Claimants” or “Messrs. Micula”) and three companies (the “Corporate Claimants”)
owned directly or indirectly by the Individual Claimants.

The Individual Claimants are:

a. Mr. loan Micula, who is domiciled at Teatrului Street no. 1-2, Oradea, Bihor
County, Romania (hereinafter referred to as “Claimant 1”). Mr. loan Micula was
born in Romania on 8 April 1957. He moved to Sweden in 1987 where he
obtained Swedish nationality in 1992 after having renounced his Romanian
nationality.

b. Mr. Viorel Micula, who is domiciled at Colinelor Street no. 48, Oradea, Bihor
County, Romania (hereinafter referred to as “Claimant 2”). Mr. Viorel Micula is
loan Micula’s twin brother. He left Romania for Sweden in 1989. He obtained
Swedish nationality in 1995 after having renounced his Romanian nationality.

The Corporate Claimants are:

a. European Food S.A., with its registered office at 13 Septembrie Street, Stei,
Bihor County, Romania, registered with the trade register under no. J5/892/1999,
registration number 12457015 (hereinafter referred to as “Claimant 3” or
“European Food”). Claimant 3 specializes in industrial manufacturing of food
products.

b. Starmill S.R.L., with its registered office at 41 Draganesti, Pantasesti Village,
Bihor County, Romania, registered with the trade register under no. J5/177/2002,
registration number 14467201 (hereinafter referred to as “Claimant 4” or
“Starmill”). Claimant 4 specializes in the manufacturing of milling products.

c. Multipack S.R.L., with its registered office at 41, Draganesti, Pantasesti Village,
Bihor County, Romania, registered with the trade register under no. J5/178/2002,
registration number 14467210 (hereinafter referred to as “Claimant 5” or
“Multipack”). Claimant 5 specializes in the manufacturing of plastic packaging.

In its Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility of 24 September 2008 (the “Decision
on Jurisdiction and Admissibility’), the Tribunal found that the Individual Claimants
and the Corporate Claimants (collectively, the “Claimants”) are Swedish nationals for
the purposes of this arbitration.

Mr. loan Micula and the Corporate Claimants are represented in this arbitration by
Messrs. Kenneth R. Fleuriet, Reginald R. Smith and Craig S. Miles and Ms. Amy
Roebuck Frey of the law firm of King & Spalding, London, Houston and Paris. They
were previously represented by Mr. Eric A. Schwartz of the law firm of King &
Spalding, as well as by Mr. Gerold Zeiler of the law firm of Schénherr Rechtsanwalte
OEG, Vienna, in cooperation with Prof. Christoph Schreuer as Of Counsel, of the
University of Vienna.

Mr. Viorel Micula is represented in this arbitration by Prof. Emmanuel Gaillard, Dr.
Yas Banifatemi and Ms. Veronika Korom of the law firm of Shearman & Sterling LLP,
Paris. He was previously represented by Messrs. David Reed and Alex Bevan of
Shearman & Sterling LLP, London, Messrs. Eric A. Schwartz and Alain Farhad of the
law firm of Dewey & LeBoeuf, Paris, and Messrs. Gheorghe Musat and Gelu Titus
Maravela and Mrs. Luminita Popa of the law firm Musat & Asociatii, Bucharest.

The Respondent
The Respondent is Romania (the “Respondent” or “Romania”).

The Respondent is represented in this arbitration by H.E. Daniel Chitoiu, Minister of
Public Finances and Messrs. Cipriam Badea and Mr. Bogdan Mirghis, Legal
Department of the Ministry of Public Finances; Messrs. D. Brian King, Georgios
Petrochilos and Boris Kasolowsky of the law firm of Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer,
New York, Paris and Frankfurt, and Mmes. Adriana |. Gaspar, Ana Diculescu-Sova
and Manuela M. Nestor of the law firm of Nestor Nestor Diculescu Kingston Petersen
in Bucharest.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

A. INITIAL PHASE

On 2 August 2005, the Claimants filed a Request for Arbitration dated 28 July 2005
(the “Request” or “RFA”) with the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”), accompanied by 14 exhibits (Exh. C-1 to C-14).

On 3 August 2005, the Centre, in accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID Rules of
Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (the
“Institution Rules”), acknowledged receipt and transmitted a copy of the Request to
Romania.

On 21 September 2005, the Request was supplemented by a statement concerning
the entry into force of the BIT with accompanying exhibits C-15 to C-19.

On 13 October 2005, the Acting Secretary-General of the Centre registered the
Request as supplemented, pursuant to Article 36(3) of the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (the
“ICSID Convention”). On the same date, in accordance with Institution Rule 7, the
Acting Secretary-General notified the Parties of the registration of the Request as
supplemented and invited them to proceed, as soon as possible, to constitute an
Arbitral Tribunal.

On 10 January 2006, in the absence of an agreement between the Parties, the
Claimants elected to submit the arbitration to a Tribunal constituted of three
arbitrators, as provided in Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. On the same day
they appointed Prof. Dr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov, a national of Bulgaria. On 7
February 2006, Romania appointed Dr. Claus-Dieter Ehlermann, a national of
Germany. The Parties agreed to appoint Dr. Laurent Lévy, a national of Switzerland
and Brazil, as the President of the Tribunal.

On 12 September 2006, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID, in accordance with
Rule 6(1) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration
Rules”), notified the Parties that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments
and that the Tribunal was therefore deemed to be constituted and the proceedings to
have begun on that date. The Parties were also informed that Mrs. Martina Polasek,
ICSID Counsel, would serve as Secretary to the Tribunal.

On 10 November 2006, the Tribunal held the first session of the Tribunal in Paris,
France. At the outset of the session, the Parties expressed agreement that the
Tribunal had been duly constituted (Arbitration Rule 6) and stated that they had no
objections in this respect. It was agreed that the applicable ICSID Arbitration Rules
were the ones that entered into force on 1 January 2003. The remainder of the
procedural issues set forth in the agenda of the session were discussed and agreed
upon. In particular, the Tribunal and the Parties agreed upon a timetable for the
submissions on the merits and reserved provisional hearing dates. It was agreed that

11

20.

21.

if Respondent decided to raise any objections to jurisdiction or admissibility before the
filing of its Counter-Memorial, the schedule would be revisited. It was also decided
that the language of the proceedings would be English, and that the place of
arbitration would be Paris, France. The audio recording of the session was later
distributed to the Parties. Minutes of the first session were drafted and signed by the
President and the Secretary of the Tribunal, and sent to the Parties on 20 December
2006.

B. THE JURISDICTIONAL PHASE

The proceedings in respect of the jurisdictional phase are described in detail in the
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, which was notified to the Parties on 25
September 2008 and makes integral part of this Award.

The Tribunal dismissed the Respondent's objections on jurisdiction and admissibility
and concluded that it had jurisdiction over the claims asserted by the Claimants for
breaches of the BIT. Specifically, the dispositive part of the Decision on Jurisdiction
and Admissibility stated:

For the reasons set forth above,
e The objections of Respondent are dismissed.

e The Tribunal has jurisdiction over the dispute submitted to it in this
arbitration and rejects any objections as to the admissibility of the
claims.

« The decision on costs is deferred to the second phase of the
arbitration on the merits.

(Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, § 170).

C. THE MERITS PHASE
Initial procedural steps

By letter of 26 September 2008, the Tribunal invited the Parties to confer and revert to
the Tribunal within six weeks from the date of notification of the Decision on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility with joint or separate proposals concerning the
timetable and other motions and suggestions for the proceedings on the merits.

On 29 September 2008, Messrs. Zeiler and Schreuer resigned as counsel for Mr.
loan Micula and the Corporate Claimants effective 26 September 2008. On 30
September 2008, the Tribunal was advised that Mr. loan Micula and the Corporate
Claimants would be henceforth represented by Messrs. Kenneth R. Fleuriet, Reginald
R. Smith and Craig S. Miles of the law firm of King & Spalding, London and Houston.

By letters of 7 November 2008 (Claimants) and 13 November 2008 (Respondent), the
Parties presented their proposals for the timetable on the merits. On the basis of the
Parties’ agreements and after considering their positions on the points in dispute, on

12

22.

23.

24.

25.

18 November 2008 the Tribunal fixed the procedural schedule for the merits phase.
After further correspondence from the Parties, by letter of 2 December 2008 the
Secretary confirmed the procedural schedule for the merits phase.

By letter of 25 March 2009, the Respondent advised the Tribunal that the Parties had
agreed on certain time extensions to the time limits set in the Secretary’s letter of 2
December 2008. By letter of the Secretary of 27 March 2009, the Tribunal confirmed
the time extensions agreed by the Parties and set out the amended procedural
schedule as follows:

Respondent's Counter-Memorial 6 April 2009
Claimants’ Reply (including full case on quantum 20 August 2009
and any accompanying expert reports)

Respondent's Rejoinder (including any expert 27 November 2009
reports)

Pre-hearing Conference 4 January 2010;
Claimants’ Rebuttal Expert Reports on Quantum 26 January 2010;
Respondent's Rebuttal Expert Reports on 5 March 2010;
Quantum

Hearing 3-7 May 2010;
Hearing reserve days 10-11 May 2010.

On 2 April 2009, the European Community (“EC”) requested that it be allowed to file a
written submission as a non-disputing party in this arbitration. On 7 April 2009, the
Tribunal invited the Parties to file their observations on the EC’s request by 7 May
2009.

The written phase on the merits

In accordance with the procedural schedule agreed by the Parties and confirmed in
the Secretary's letter of 27 March 2009, the Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial on
the merits (“R-CM”) on 6 April 2009. The Counter-Memorial was accompanied by:

a. Expert Report of Professor Rudolf Streinz (“First ER of R. Streinz”)
b. Exhibits R-59 through R-132
c. Legal authorities RL-177 through RL-273.

On 7 May 2009, the Parties submitted their observations on the EC’s request to file a
written submission as a non-disputing party. The Claimants opposed that request.
The Respondent submitted that the EC’s request was one that could not be
reasonably opposed, but in the event that the Claimants opposed that request, it
requested the opportunity to provide a fuller response.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

Also on 7 May 2009, Mr. Viorel Micula advised that the law firm of Dewey & LeBoeuf
would no longer be representing him, although the firm of Musat & Asociatii remained
as his counsel.

By letter of the Secretary of 15 May 2009, having considered the Parties’ positions
and the applicable procedural rules, the Tribunal decided that it would allow the
participation of the EC as a non-disputing party in the present case. The Tribunal
noted that:

In doing so, the Tribunal is particularly sensitive to the fact that the
European Community may bring a factual or legal perspective that could
assist the Tribunal in the adjudication of the Parties’ rights. In granting
leave to the European Community to participate as a non-disputing party,
the Arbitral Tribunal is mindful of the need to preserve due process and the
good order of the proceeding. In particular, the European Community shall
act as amicus curiae and not as amicus actoris vel rei. In other words, the
non-disputing party shall remain a friend of the court and not a friend of
either Party.

In light of this, the Tribunal invited the Parties to confer and agree on a procedure for
the participation of the EC as a non-disputing party on or before 22 May 2009, and
provided certain guidelines for that procedure. It also requested the Parties’
comments on a draft letter to the EC by the same date.

On 18 May 2009, Mr. loan Micula and the Corporate Claimants submitted a request
for a site visit pursuant to Article 43(b) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 37 of the
2003 ICSID Arbitration Rules.

On 22 May 2009, all Parties submitted their observations on the Tribunal’s draft letter
to the EC concerning its amicus participation and the proposed procedure for such
participation. Mr. loan Micula and the Corporate Claimants also expressed a concern
at certain communications that had taken place between the Respondent and the EC,
and requested an instruction from the Tribunal that Romania, its counsel and its
expert refrain from any further communications with the EC about this case until after
the hearing and the closure of the proceedings.

On 25 May 2009, the Respondent opposed Mr. loan Micula’s and the Corporate
Claimants’ request for a site visit. It also argued that this request was being used to
present an entirely new case on damages, which was impermissible at that stage of
the proceedings.

Also on 25 May 2009, Dr. Claus-Dieter Ehlermann submitted his resignation as an
arbitrator to the other members of the Tribunal and to the Acting Secretary-General of
ICSID and indicated his grounds of personal nature for such resignation. On 26 May
2009, pursuant to Arbitration Rule 8(2), the Tribunal consented to Dr. Ehlermann’s
resignation and on that day notified the Acting Secretary-General of its decision. On
that same day, pursuant to Arbitration Rule 10(1) and (2) and on behalf of the Acting
Secretary-General, the Secretary notified the Parties of Dr. Ehlermann’s resignation
and the Tribunal’s consent thereto, and of the resulting vacancy on the Tribunal. In
accordance with Arbitration Rule 11(1), the Respondent was invited to promptly

14

33.

34.

35.

36.

appoint an arbitrator to fill that vacancy. Pursuant to Arbitration Rule 10(2), the
arbitration proceedings were suspended until the vacancy created by Dr. Ehlermann’s
resignation had been filled. The Parties were also invited to inform the Tribunal, as
soon as the vacancy had been filled, whether they would agree to maintain the
existing procedural timetable.

On 4 June 2009, the Respondent advised the Tribunal that it was in the process of
identifying a new arbitrator and that it was committed to attempting to preserve the
current procedural schedule. Given that the question of the modalities of the EC’s
participation as an amicus curiae was still pending before the Tribunal and would
likely impact the procedural schedule, the Respondent invited the Claimants to agree,
and the Tribunal to approve, that
(a) the stay on the proceedings be lifted insofar as the Tribunal’s decision
on the modalities of the European Community’s participation as
amicus curiae is concerned;

(

the Tribunal render that decision in its present, provisionally truncated
formation, by consent of the parties.

At the invitation of the Tribunal, on 16 June 2009 Mr. loan Micula and the Corporate
Claimants agreed with the Respondent's proposal that the Tribunal should proceed to
rule on the modality of the EC’s participation as an amicus curiae, notwithstanding the
stay of the proceedings. The Claimants noted that they were not in a position to
communicate their views as to the impact of the stay on the procedural timetable, but
would do so once the Tribunal’s vacancy was filled.

On 19 June 2009, Mr. Viorel Micula advised that he had retained as new counsel
Messrs. David Reed, Alex Bevan and Emmanuel Gaillard of the law firm of Shearman
& Sterling LLP, London and Paris, and accepted the Respondent's request for a
partial lift of the stay of the proceedings.

By letter of the Secretary of 25 June 2009, the Tribunal approved the Parties’
agreement to partially lift the stay of the proceedings concerning the modalities of the
EC’s amicus curiae participation and issued its decision on those modalities, as set
forth below. On that same day, the Tribunal informed the EC that it would be allowed
to participate as a non-disputing party in this arbitration, specifying that the purpose of
such participation would be to assist the Tribunal in its adjudicatory work. The
Tribunal set forth the following procedure for the EC’s participation:

1. The European Community shall file a written submission on or before
July 20, 2009. It shall send an electronic copy of the submission by
e-mail to the Secretary of the Tribunal at mpolasek@worldbank.org
and 15 (fifteen) hard copies of the submission by courier to the
Secretary at ICSID, for transmission to the Tribunal and the Parties.

2. The European Community’s written submission shall not respond or
comment upon the Parties’ prayers for relief, but shall be focused on
assisting the Tribunal in the determination of factual or legal issues at
stake in the present dispute. It is expected that the scope of the
Community's input will be limited to facts within its own knowledge
and to European law rather than to any other facts or legal matters at

15

37.

38.

39.

issue in this arbitration. The Community may within this scope decide
which facts and laws are relevant to the dispute.

3. The European Community's written submission shall be limited in
length (40 pages) and written in English.

4. The European Community may file any relevant exhibits with its
written submission within the scope described under paragraph 2
above. Any exhibit for which the original language is not English shall
be submitted in the original language accompanied by a translation
into English. If the document is lengthy and relevant only in part, it is
sufficient if only the relevant parts, which must be precisely specified,
are translated.

5. The Tribunal may request the European Community to produce any
document or evidentiary material that the Tribunal deems useful for
the resolution of this dispute, or which has been requested by either
Party.

6. The European Community shall have access to the Parties’ pleadings
in their entirety as existing at this juncture, except for materials that
have been designated as commercially confidential or legally
privileged. Should a disagreement arise as to whether such materials
have been so designated, the Tribunal will resolve such
disagreement. The Secretary of the Tribunal will transmit electronic
copies of the materials to the European Community at the latest by
July 6, 2009.

7. Any person who has participated in the elaboration of the European
Community's written submission may be called to provide
clarifications on that submission at the hearing, as may be required by
the Tribunal of its own initiative or at the request of the Parties. Such
clarifications will be given in the form directed by the Tribunal and
under its control.

8. The European Community will bear its own costs incurred in
connection with its participation in the proceeding, including any costs
relating to any appearance by the Community's representative(s) for
examination at the hearing.

9. The European Community shall indicate whether it had any direct
contact with either Party to this arbitration concerning the subject
matter of this arbitration and should as far as possible avoid any
future contact in this respect.

In its letter to the Parties of 25 June 2009, the Tribunal also invited the Parties to
comment on the Commission’s Written Submission within two months from the date
of receipt of that submission.

On 7 July 2009, the Secretary sent the EC two CD-ROMs containing the Parties’
pleadings on the merits, including supporting documents, filed as of that date.

On 16 July 2009, in accordance with Articles 56(1) and 37(2)(b) of the ICSID
Convention and Arbitration Rule 11(1) and (3), the Respondent appointed as its
arbitrator Professor Georges Abi-Saab, a national of the Arab Republic of Egypt. The
Respondent also agreed to maintain the current procedural timetable.

40.

4.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

On 20 July 2009, the EC submitted its written submission as a non-disputing party,
including 10 exhibits.

On 22 July 2009, the Secretary informed the Parties that the Tribunal had been
reconstituted and the proceedings resumed. On 24 July 2009, the Tribunal proposed
to the Parties that, subject to their reasoned objection by 7 August 2009, the acts
accomplished by the Tribunal regarding the modalities of the EC’s participation as a
non-disputing party while the suspension of the proceeding was partially lifted were
validated. In that same letter, the Tribunal also invited the Parties to state their views
on the procedural timetable in consideration of the suspension of the proceedings.

By letters of 30 and 31 July 2009, all Claimants agreed to the validation of the acts
taken by the Tribunal during the suspension of the proceedings with respect to the
EC’s amicus curiae submission and submitted their views on the procedural
timetable. Specifically, the Claimants stated that they would require an extension of
the time limits set out in the procedural timetable as a result of the suspension of the
proceedings. On 7 August 2009, the Respondent submitted its comments on the new
procedural timetable suggested by the Claimants.

On 7 September 2009 the Respondent informed the Tribunal that the Parties had
reached an agreement on the procedural timetable. By letter of 14 September 2009,
the Tribunal confirmed the procedural timetable agreed by the Parties, as follows:

Parties’ responses to EC amicus brief 16 November 2009
Claimants’ Reply 14 December 2009
Respondent's Rejoinder 12 April 2010
Claimants’ Rebuttal Expert Reports on Quantum 10 June 2010
Respondent's Rebuttal Expert Reports on Quantum 19 July 2010

After consultation between the Parties and the Tribunal, on 19 October 2009 the
Tribunal confirmed that the hearing on the merits would take place between 8 and 19
November 2010, excluding the weekend.

On 16 November 2009, the Parties submitted their comments to the EC’s amicus
curiae submission. In addition, the Claimants expressed their concern that there may
have been improper contact between the EC and the Respondent or its counsel, in
violation of the Tribunal’s instructions of 25 June 2009, and requested the Tribunal to
order the Respondent to produce copies of all records of communications between
the Respondent or any of the Respondent's legal counsel and the EC since 1 January
2009 related to the subject matter of this arbitration.

On 23 November 2009, the Tribunal invited the Respondent to provide its comments
to the Claimants’ request for production of documents by 11 December 2009. This
deadline was subsequently extended by agreement of the Parties to 16 December
2009.

47.

48.

49.

On 4 December 2009, counsel for Mr. loan Micula and the Corporate Claimants
informed the Tribunal that all Parties had agreed to extend the deadlines for their
upcoming briefs. On 14 December 2009, the Secretary confirmed the amended

procedural timetable as follows:

Respondent's Reply to the Claimants’ request for

production of documents
Claimants’ Reply

Respondent's Rejoinder

Claimants’ Rebuttal Expert Reports on Quantum

Respondent's Rebuttal Expert Reports on

Quantum

Hearing on the Merits

16 December 2009

22 December 2009
28 April 2010
25 June 2010

4 August 2010

8-19 November 2010

On 16 December 2009, the Respondent submitted its objections to the Claimants’
request for the production of communications between the EC and the Respondent or

its counsel.

On 22 December 2009, the Claimants submitted their Reply on the Merits (“C-
Reply”), which was accompanied by the following evidence:

a. Third Witness Statement of Mr. loan Micula (“Third WS of |. Micula”)

b. Third Witness Statement of Mr. Viorel Micula (“Third WS of V. Micula)

c. Witness Statement of Mr.
d. Witness Statement of Mr.
e. Witness Statement of Mr.
f. Witness Statement of Mr.
g. Witness Statement of Mr.

h. Witness Statement of Mr.

. Sorin Baciu (“First WS of S. Baciu”)

. Moisa Ban (“First WS of M. Ban”)

. Mircea Halbac (“First WS of M. Halbac”)
. Christian Balog (“First WS of C. Balog”)
. Neculai-Liviu Marcu (“WS of N. Marcu)

. Nicolae Staiculescu (“WS of N. Staiculescu”)

i. Expert Report of Professor Donald L. Lessard (“First ER of D. Lessard”)

j. _ Expert Report of Professor Alan Dashwood (“First ER of A. Dashwood”)

k. Expert Report of Professor David Caron (“ER of D. Caron”)

|. Expert Report of Professor Lucian Mihai (“ER of L. Mihai”)

m. Expert Report of Professor Jan-Benedict Steenkamp (“First ER of J. Steenkamp”)

50.

51.

52.

53.

n. Expert Report of Mr. Chris Osborne (FTI) (“First ER of C. Osborne”)
o. Expert Report of Dr. James Fry (LMC) (“First ER of J. Fry”)

p. Boston Consulting Group Report, originally filed as Exh. C-655 (“First ER of
BCG’)

q. Claimants' Exhibits and Legal Authorities 271 to 675

By means of Procedural Order dated 8 January 2010, the Tribunal rejected the
Claimants’ request for the production of correspondence between the EC and the
Respondent or its counsel. Specifically, the Tribunal found:

6. That after deliberating on the arguments advanced by the Parties, the
Tribunal is not persuaded that the documents requested by the
Claimants are necessary or useful for the determination of the
outcome of the dispute in this arbitration;

7. That even if, for the sake of argument, the Tribunal were to accept the
Claimants’ allegations and find that the European Community
cooperated with the Respondent in preparing its Submission, which
the Respondent denies, such finding would not affect the Tribunal's
conclusion that the requested documents lack relevance;

8. That to the extent that the requested documents might be relevant for
the purposes of establishing the objectivity of the arguments
advanced by the non-disputing party in its Submission and the weight
to be given to them by the Tribunal, this matter has already been
adequately addressed in the Tribunal's letter of 25 June 2009, which,
if necessary, provides the Claimants with the opportunity to examine
at the hearing any person who has participated in the preparation of
the Submission.

On 14 January 2010, the Claimants advised that they had found inadvertent errors
and omissions in their Reply submission, and submitted corrected versions of their
Reply Memorial, three witness statements and 29 exhibits, together with an errata
sheet.

By letter of 5 February 2010, the Respondent notified the Tribunal that, in accordance
with its obligations under the Treaty of Lisbon, it proposed to make available to the
EC the Claimants’ Reply and its annexes. The Respondent alleged that the
Claimants’ Reply represented a fundamentally new case, and that, as an EU Member
State, it is obliged under the Treaty of Lisbon to notify the EU of any pending
international litigation threatening to jeopardize a state’s EU law obligations. By
letters of 9 February 2010, the Claimants objected to the proposed disclosure,
alleging, inter alia, that the amicus curiae phase of the arbitration had been
concluded, that the Reply did not present a fundamentally new case, that such
disclosure would violate the Tribunal’s order of 25 June 2009, and that the Reply
contained material that was commercially confidential to the Claimants.

Considering that the Respondent's proposed disclosure could raise issues of
confidentiality and privilege, on 10 February 2011 the Tribunal invited the Parties to

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

make brief submissions addressing (i) the content and scope of Respondent's legal
obligation under the Treaty of Lisbon to notify the EU of any pending international
litigation threatening to jeopardize a state’s EU law obligations; (ii) whether the
disclosure would possibly aggravate the dispute and/or adversely affect the conduct
of the proceedings, and (iii) whether the disclosure would violate the Claimants’ rights
to confidentiality and/or privilege. The Parties filed their submissions on 19 February
2010. An additional submission was made by Mr. Viorel Micula on 22 February 2010.

By means of a Procedural Order issued on 3 March 2010 and pursuant to Article 47
of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule 39, the Tribunal recommended that the
Respondent refrain from providing the EC with the full text of the Claimants’ Reply
and its exhibits, inviting it instead to provide the EC with the text of the Claimants’
amended request for relief, as set forth in the Reply. In making its decision, the
Tribunal took into consideration the role of the EC as an amicus curiae, the fact that
the Claimants had withdrawn a claim and amended their prayers for relief, and issues
of confidentiality, privilege, and possible aggravation of the dispute.

On 8 April 2010, following the Tribunal’s recommendation, the Respondent notified
the EC that the Claimants had withdrawn their request for restitution of the legal
framework in force at the time of approval of EGO 24/1998.

On 19 March 2010, the Respondent requested an extension of its time limit to file its
Rejoinder on the merits, alleging, inter alia, that the Claimants’ Reply was incomplete.
On 25 March 2010, the Claimants objected to that request. After further
correspondence among the Parties and a proposal from the Tribunal, the Parties and
the Tribunal finally agreed on the following procedural calendar, as confirmed by the
Secretary's letter of 12 April 2010:

Respondent's Rejoinder 11 June 2010
Claimants’ Rebuttal Expert Reports on Quantum 30 July 2010
Respondent's Rebuttal Expert Reports on Quantum 10 September 2010
Hearing on the Merits and Quantum 8-19 November 2010

On 9 April 2010, the Respondent made an application for production of documents.
The Claimants objected to that request by letters of 19 and 26 April 2010. After
further comments from the Parties (Respondent's letter of 27 April 2010 and
Claimants’ submissions of 29 April and 10 May 2010), on 27 May 2010 the Tribunal
issued a Procedural Order ruling on the Respondent’s request. The Parties further
agreed on the timing for the Parties’ comments on the documents produced
(Respondent's letter of 3 June 2010). The Tribunal approved the Parties’ agreement
by letter of 7 June 2010 and invited the Parties to report on the production progress
(which they did through the Claimants’ letter of 10 June 2010).

On 13 April 2010, loan Micula and the Corporate Claimants renewed their request for

a site visit. The Respondent objected to that request on 22 April 2010, and the
Claimants submitted further comments on 26 and 28 April 2010. On 5 May 2010,

20

59.

60.

61.

62.

having considered the Parties’ submissions, the Tribunal concluded that a site visit
would not enlighten the Tribunal at that stage in the proceedings, as any information
gleaned from such visit would be either irrelevant for the resolution of the dispute or
unnecessary given that the record supplied sufficient evidence, at least at that
juncture. However, the Tribunal invited the Parties to renew the application for a site
visit after the hearing on the merits if they continued to wish for one.

On 28 May 2010, Mr. Viorel Micula advised that Musat & Asociatii no longer
represented him as counsel.

On 11 June 2010, the Respondent submitted its Rejoinder (“R-Rejoinder’), which was
accompanied by the following evidence:

a. Expert Report of Professor Flavius Baias (“ER of F. Baias”)
b. Expert Report of Sir Francis Jacobs (“ER of F. Jacobs”)
c. Expert Report of Mr. Asger Petersen (“ER of A. Petersen”)

d. Rebuttal Expert Report of Professor Dr. Rudolf Streinz (“Second ER of R.
Streinz”)

e. Expert Report of Agra CEAS Consulting, Mr. Conrad Caspari, in conjunction with
F.O. Licht (“ER of C. Caspari”)

f. Expert Report of KPMG, Mr. John Ellison (“First ER of J. Ellison”)'
g. Expert Report of Dr. Bill Robinson (“First ER of B. Robinson”)

h. Witness Statements of Mr. Leonard Orban (“WS of L. Orban”)

i. Witness Statement of Professor Mihai Berinde (“WS of M. Berinde”)
j. Documentary evidence (Exhibits R-134 through R-203)

k. Legal authorities (Exhibits RL-284 through RL-336).

On 22 July 2010, the Respondent submitted its comments on the documents
produced by the Claimants in response to the Procedural Order of 27 May 2010. The
Claimants submitted their comments on 3 September 2010. In the interim, the
Parties further corresponded on the production of specific documents.

On 21 July 2011, loan Micula and the Corporate Claimants requested permission to
submit four additional witness statements that would be relied upon by the Claimants’
damages experts in their rebuttal expert reports due on 30 July 2010. On 22 July
2010, the Respondent objected to that request. The Parties submitted further
comments (Claimants’ letters of 23 and 26 July 2010 and Respondent's letter of 26

' Mr. Ellison also submitted an expert report during the jurisdictional phase that is not referred to in this

Award.

21

63.

64.

65.

July 2010). After considering the Parties’ submissions and in the exercise of the
discretion granted to it under paragraphs 14(II)(c) and (e) of the Minutes of the First
Session, by letter of 28 July 2010 the Tribunal granted the Claimants permission to
submit, by 30 July 2010, new witness statements from the following persons: Messrs.
Juan Gamecho, Mircea Halbac, Sorin Baciu and Cristian Balog. The Tribunal
specified that these witness statements should be strictly limited to factual allegations
that will be relied upon by the Claimants’ damages experts in their rebuttal expert
reports, and that the Claimants should make these witnesses available for cross-
examination at the hearing.

On 30 July 2010 (by separate letters sent by counsel to Mr. loan Micula and the
Corporate Claimants, on one hand, and counsel to Mr. Viorel Micula, on the other),
the Claimants submitted the following rebuttal expert reports on quantum and
additional witness statements:

a. Expert Reply Report of Professor Donald R. Lessard (“Second ER of D.
Lessard”)

b. Expert Reply Report of Professor Jean-Benedict Steenkamp (“Second ER of J.
Steenkamp”)

c. Expert Opinion of Professor Georghe Piperea (“ER of G. Piperea”)

d. Rebuttal Expert Report of Dr. James Fry of LMC International (“Second ER of J.
Fry”)

e. Expert Report of Mr. Richard Boulton of LECG (“ER of R. Boulton”)

f. Rebuttal Expert Report of BCG (“Second ER of BCG”)

g. Witness Statement of Mr. Juan Gamecho (“WS of J. Gamecho”)

h. Second Witness Statement of Mr. Mircea Halbac (“Second WS of M. Halbac”)
i. Second Witness Statement of Mr. Sorin Baciu (“Second WS of S. Baciu”)

j. | Second Witness Statement of Mr. Christian Balog (“Second WS of C. Balog”)
k. Exhibits and Legal Authorities C-680 to C-1034

On 2 August 2010, the Claimants submitted the rebuttal expert report of Mr. Chris
Osborne of FTI Consulting.

In their letter of 30 July 2010, Mr. loan Micula and the Corporate Claimants also noted
that the Claimants continued to suffer from acts of the Romanian state, including the
initiation of forced execution proceedings against companies of the EFDG, that
directly threatened their ability to continue their business activities and reserved their
right to request interim relief from the Tribunal. The Claimants also objected to
Section VI.G of the Respondent's Rejoinder, entitled “Any Compensation Must Be

22

66.

67.

68.

69.

Reduced by the Value of Benefits Received as a Result of Romania’s EU Accession.”
The Claimants argued that this defense constituted a new legal theory that had been
raised in the Respondent's Counter-Memorial and was thus untimely. In the event
that the Tribunal was minded to accept it, the Claimants alleged that it should be
rejected on the substantive grounds described in their letter.

By letter of 10 August 2010, the Respondent requested the Tribunal to (i) strike
certain new evidence (specifically, certain expert reports or relevant parts of them,
and new factual exhibits) filed by the Claimants with their rebuttal expert reports
submitted on 30 July 2010 and 2 August 2010, as well as certain new legal
submissions and allegations made by the Claimants in their letters accompanying
such reports; (ii) grant it a four week extension to submit its rebuttal expert reports on
quantum; and (iii) grant it the opportunity to comment on the Claimants’ new evidence
and allegations, to the extent that they are not stricken and, if necessary, to adduce
responsive evidence. At the Tribunal’s invitation, all Claimants commented on these
requests by letters of 19 August 2010. The Respondent submitted further comments
on 24 August 2010.

By means of a Procedural Order issued on 24 August 2010 and in accordance with
ICSID Arbitration Rule 34, the Tribunal declined to strike any evidence filed by the
Parties at this stage of the proceeding, stating that it would decide in due time what
weight to give to any such evidence. The Tribunal also granted the Respondent a
two-week extension (until 24 September 2010) to submit rebuttal expert reports on
quantum, and invited the Respondent to produce in advance of the new time limit
whatever written evidence they were able to produce without disruption of their work.
The Tribunal also ruled that, if the Respondent wished to present new witness
statements, it should file a formal application pursuant to Paragraph 14(II)(c) and (e)
of the Minutes of the First Session. The scope of any such witness statements would
in any event be strictly limited to the factual allegations relied upon by the
Respondent's damages experts in their rebuttal expert reports. Finally, the Tribunal
ruled that the Respondent should respond to the new documents submitted by the
Claimants together with its rebuttal expert reports on damages.

By letter of 14 September 2010, the Tribunal asked the Parties if they would be
agreeable to the appointment of Ms. Sabina Sacco of the law firm of Lévy Kaufmann-
Kohler as Assistant to the Tribunal, which the Parties accepted.

On 24 September 2010, the Respondent submitted its Observations on Claimants’
Additional Evidence, together with the following evidence and rebuttal expert reports:

a. Factual Exhibits R-210 through R-229
b. Legal Authorities RLA-337 through 346
c. Reply Expert Report of Mr. Conrad Caspari (“Second ER of C. Caspari”)

d. Reply Expert Report of Mr. John Ellison (“Second ER of J. Ellison”)

23

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

e. Reply Expert Report of Dr. Bill Robinson (“Second ER of B. Robinson”)
Procedural steps predating the hearing on the merits

On 30 September 2010, the President of the Tribunal and the Parties held a pre-
hearing telephone conference to discuss all outstanding matters with respect to the
organization of the hearing on the merits and quantum. During that telephone
conference, the Parties reached an agreement with respect to certain issues, but
maintained disagreement on others (in particular the sequestration of the Messrs.
Micula and the modality for the examination of certain witnesses and experts). In
addition, the Respondent requested clarification from the Claimants with respect to
their quantum case.

On 8 October 2011, all Parties identified the witnesses and experts they would call for
cross-examination at the hearing and provided further comments on outstanding
issues with respect to the hearing. After further correspondence from the Parties, the
Tribunal ruled on these issues by means of a Procedural Order of 13 October 2010.

By letters of 15 October 2010, the Parties submitted proposed hearing schedules and
discussed the need for oral closing submissions. The Claimants also requested that
the Tribunal, of its own initiative, call Professor David Caron, Claimants’ international
law expert, to appear at the hearing for examination despite the fact that the
Respondent did not call him for cross-examination. The Respondent provided further
comments on 20 October 2010. The Tribunal ruled on these issues by letter of 22
October 2010. By letter of 28 October 2010, the Respondent expressed concerns
with respect to the time allocation during the hearing and reserved its rights. On 1
November 2010, the Tribunal clarified that the ruling of 22 October 2010 contained a
clerical error, and issued a corrected time allocation.

On 5 October 2010, the Secretary invited the representatives of the EC who had
drafted the EC’s amicus brief to provide clarifications on that submission at the
hearing. On 13 October 2010, the relevant EC representatives confirmed they would
attend the hearing. On 15 October 2010, the Tribunal informed the Parties of the EC
representatives’ attendance and invited the Parties to confer in view of reaching an
agreement with respect to the timing, scope and form of the EC’s testimony. The
Parties provided their comments on 22 and 25 October 2010. On 27 October 2010
the Tribunal issued directions with respect to the EC’s participation at the hearing,
which were communicated to the EC on 28 October 2010. On 3 November 2010, the
Claimants [Viorel Micula] advised the Tribunal that due process required that the EC
be treated as a hostile witness vis-a-vis the Claimants, and required more time for
their cross-examination. After hearing the Respondent's position, the Tribunal ruled
on this matter during the hearing.

By letter of 1 November 2010, the Claimants alleged that Romanian tax enforcement
officials had seized significant assets of the EFDG necessary for the continuation of
the Claimants’ business (in particular, production equipment and machinery) and
were threatening to commence the forced sale of these assets as early as 8

24

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

November 2010. The Claimants advised that they would shortly file an application for
provisional measures and for a temporary “standstill” order, and requested that their
applications be heard during the first day of the hearing. After an invitation from the
Tribunal, on 3 November 2010 the Respondent submitted preliminary comments on
the Claimants’ letter, to which the Claimants responded on the same date.

On 3 November 2010, the Claimants submitted an Application for Provisional
Measures (“Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures”) pursuant to Article 47 of
the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule 39, together with a request for an
emergency temporary order.

On 5 November 2010, at the invitation of the Tribunal, the Respondent submitted its
comments on the Claimants’ request for an emergency temporary order, requesting
that it should be dismissed for the reasons stated in that submission. In that same
letter, the Respondent proposed that the Claimants’ Application for Provisional
Measures be addressed following, rather than during, the evidentiary hearing,
preferably in December 2010, noting that there was no need to disrupt the hearing
due to the Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures.

On 5 November 2010, the Tribunal issued a Procedural Order in which it (i) denied
the Claimants’ request for an emergency temporary order, without prejudice to the
Tribunal’s authority to issue a different determination at a later stage in the
proceedings if the circumstances should change; (ii) determined that it would address
the Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures after the hearing on the merits;
and (iii) gave instructions with respect to briefing by the Parties.

The hearing on the merits and quantum

From 8 to 19 November 2010, the Tribunal and the Parties held a hearing on the
merits and quantum in Paris, France. During the course of the hearing, the Parties
made oral arguments regarding their merits and quantum cases, had the opportunity
to examine the witnesses and experts that had been called to testify, and addressed
several evidentiary and procedural issues. The EC representatives invited by the
Tribunal provided clarifications to their written submission and answered the Parties’
questions. The Tribunal was addressed by Messrs. Eric A. Schwartz, Reginald R.
Smith and Kenneth R. Fleuriet and Ms. Amy R. Frey on behalf of Mr. loan Micula and
the Corporate Claimants; by Messrs. Emmanuel Galliard and David Reed on behalf of
Mr. Viorel Micula, and by Messrs. D. Brian King, Georgios Petrochilos, Noah Rubins,
Boris Kasalowsky and Ben Juratowitch on behalf of the Respondent.

The following persons participated in the hearing:

On behalf of Mr. loan Micula and the Corporate Claimants:
Mr. loan Micula
Mr. Eric Schwartz, King & Spalding

Mr. Reggie Smith, King & Spalding
Mr. Ken Fleuriet, King & Spalding

25

Mr. Ric Toher, King & Spalding
Mrs. Amy R. Frey, King & Spalding
Ms. Jamie Miller, King & Spalding
Ms. Catalina Constantina, King & Spalding
Mrs. Eva Micula

Ms. Natalie Micula

Ms. Olivia Micula

Mrs. Oana Popa

Mrs. Diana Radu

Mr. Vasile Popa-Bota

Mr. Traian Bulzan

On behalf of Mr. Viorel Micula:

Mr. Viorel Micula

Mr. Emmanuel Gaillard, Shearman & Sterling
Mr. David Reed, Shearman & Sterling

Mr. Robert Williams, Shearman & Sterling
Ms. Veronika Korum, Shearman & Sterling
Mr. Henry Ovens, Shearman & Sterling
Ms. Valerie Ollivier, Shearman & Sterling
Ms. loana Aron Blahuta

Ms. Medora Purle

Mr. Cristian Flora

Mr. Calin Vidican

Ms. Eva Fogarassy

Mr. Adrian Rotar

Ms. Alexandra Gheorghe-Duca

Mr. Mihai Clepce

On behalf of the Respondent:

HE Minister Gheorghe lalomitianu, Ministry of Public Finance
Ms. Manuela Nestor, Nestor Nestor Diculescu Kingston Petersen
Ms. Georgeta Harapcea, Nestor Nestor Diculescu Kingston Petersen
Mr. D. Brian King, Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP

Mr. Georgios Petrochilos, Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Mr. Noah Rubins, Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP

Mr. Boris Kasolowsky, Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP

Mr. Jonathan J Gass, Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP

Mr. Ben Juratowitch, Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP

Mr. Sami Tannous, Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP

Ms. Evgeniya Rubinina, Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP

Mr. Moritz Keller, Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP

Mr. Marcus Benzing, Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP

Mr. Ignacio Stratta, Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP

26

Ms. Victoria Bokelmann, Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Ms. Rebecca Smith, Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Ms. Lauren Henschke, Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Ms. Smaranda Miron, Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Ms. Eleonore Gleitz, Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP

The Tribunal heard oral testimony from the following persons:

Claimants’ witnesses and experts

Mr. loan Micula

Mr. Viorel Micula

Professor Lucian Mihai
Professor Alan Dashwood QC
Professor David Caron

Mr. Liviu Marcu
Mr. Nicolae Staiculescu
Mr. Mircea Halbac

Mr. Moisa Ban

Mr. Sorin Baciu

Mr. Jaun Gamecho
Professor Don Lessard
Mr. Alexis Maniatis

Ms. Natasha Dupont
Mr. Chris Osborne

Mr. Richard Edwards
Mr. Richard Boulton
Mr. lan Clemmence

Dr. James Fry

Mr. Laszlo Juhasz

Respondent's witnesses
Mr. Leonard Orban

Professor Mihai Berinde

Sir Francis Jacobs QC

Mr. Alexander Milner
Professor Flavius Baias
Professor Dr. Rudolf Streinz
Professor Dr. Christoph Herrmann
Mr. John Ellison

Dr. Bill Robinson

Mr. Nishad Morjaria

Mr. Dan Aylward

Mr. Conrad Caspari

Claimant

Claimant

Expert Witness, University of Bucharest
Expert Witness, Henderson Chambers
Expert Witness, University of California at
Berkeley

Witness

Witness

Witness

Witness

Witness

Witness

Expert Witness, MIT, The Brattle Group
Expert Witness, The Brattle Group
Expert Witness, The Brattle Group
Expert Witness, FTI Consulting

Expert Witness, FTI Consulting

Expert Witness, LECG

Expert Witness, LECG

Expert Witness, LMC

Expert Witness, BCG

Fact Witness, Office of the President of
Romania

Witness

Expert Witness, Fountain Court Chambers
Expert Witness, Fountain Court Chambers
Expert Witness, Bucharest Public University
Expert Witness, University of Munich
Expert Witness, University of Passau
Expert Witness, KPMG

Expert Witness, KPMG

Expert Witness, KPMG

Expert Witness, KPMG

Expert Witness, Agra CEAS

27

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

Mr. Asger Petersen Expert Witness, Cleary Gottlieb Steen &
Hamilton

Non-disputing Parties (EC’

Mr. Bernd Martenczuk, Legal Representative, European Commission
Mr. Frank Hoffmeister, Legal Representative, European Commission
Mr. lon Rogalski, Legal Representative, European Commission

A transcript of the hearing was distributed among the Parties. An audio recording
was made in English and Romanian and also distributed among the Parties.

Procedural matters following the hearing

By the end of the hearing, the following evidentiary and procedural issues remained
outstanding: (i) the Claimants requested that Mr. Mihai Berinde, who had to leave the
hearing early, be made available for cross-examination at a later date, whether in
person or via videoconference; (ii) the Claimants confirmed that their (or rather Mr.
loan Micula's) application for a site visit was still in place; (iii) the form and time of the
Parties’ closing arguments remained outstanding, and (iv) the Respondent requested
that the Claimants reformulate their request for relief in such a way that it identified
each breach alleged and the specific relief requested on the basis of such breaches.

On 25 November 2010, the Tribunal issued a Procedural Order ruling on the
evidentiary and procedural matters that remained outstanding. Specifically, the
Tribunal (i) decided that Mr. Berinde would not be called for oral examination, but
specified that this would not prevent the Parties or the Tribunal from relying on Mr.
Berinde’s written testimony (and that the same would apply to the other called
witnesses/experts that the Parties did not cross-examine at the hearing); (ii) gave
instructions on further briefing with respect to the Claimants’ application for a site visit;
(iii) determined that the Parties should present oral closing arguments and gave
instructions for a future hearing in that respect, but also invited the Parties to submit
voluntary post-hearing briefs; and (iv) gave directions to the Claimants with respect to
the submission of their amended request for relief. The Tribunal also gave further
instructions to the Parties with respect to the review of the hearing transcript and
audio tapes, and with respect to the Parties’ briefs on provisional measures.

The Tribunal will address the more relevant procedural matters separately below.

a. The Claimants’ Applications for Provisional Measures and the
Respondent’s Application for Revocation of Provisional Measures

As noted in para. 75 above, on 3 November 2010 the Claimants submitted an
Application for Provisional Measures, as well as a request for an emergency
temporary order. Specifically, the Claimants requested (Claimants’ Application for
Provisional Measures, {| 43):

28

86.

87.

88.

a. “an Order preserving the status quo ante by instructing Respondent
to withdraw or otherwise cease and desist from enforcing the above-
described seizure orders, or from implementing any new such orders
against any of the EFDG companies, prior to the Tribunal’s issuance
of its final award (and that the award itself deal with the matter as
appropriate at that time, such as by maintaining the Order in place
until Romania has satisfied the terms of the award in full); and

b. an Order that Respondent refrain from taking any other measure
against any of the EFDG companies that would aggravate or extend
the existing dispute prior to the Tribunal’s issuance of its final award.”

By Procedural Orders of 5 and 25 November 2010, the Tribunal gave instructions with
respect to briefing by the Parties. In accordance with these instructions, on 30
November 2010, the Respondent submitted its observations on the Claimants’
Application for Provisional Measures. After further correspondence from the Parties
and leave from the Tribunal, on 20 December 2010 the Claimants submitted a reply in
support of their Application for Provisional Measures, and the Respondent submitted
a rejoinder on 17 January 2011. At the invitation of the Tribunal, the Parties
submitted further comments on 9 February 2011.

On 2 March 2011, the Tribunal issued a Decision on the Claimants’ Application for
Provisional Measures (the “Decision on Provisional Measures”). In that Decision, the
Tribunal recommended that the Respondent “inform the Claimants, with a copy to the
Tribunal, if it intends to proceed with the seal or forced sale of the seized assets or
take any other tax collection measure that could have a similar effect, two months
prior to the date in which it intends to implement such seal, sale or other measure,
until this arbitration is completed or until reconsideration of this Decision.” The
Tribunal denied at that stage the remaining requests for provisional measures brought
by the Claimants, and invited either Party to apply to the Tribunal for a
reconsideration of the Decision if it should consider that the circumstances under
which the Decision was made had changed (Decision on Provisional Measures, {| 98).

On 4 March 2011, the Claimants informed the Tribunal that the Romanian
government had garnished Starmill’s bank accounts to satisfy the payment of overdue
taxes and associated penalties, in violation of “the spirit, if not the letter, of the
Tribunal’s Decision [on Provisional Measures]” (Claimants’ letter of 4 March 2011, p.
1, or “Claimants' Second Application for Provisional Measures”). The Claimants
requested the Tribunal to order the Respondent to (i) lift the current garnishment of
Starmill’s accounts; (ii) replenish those accounts with any funds that have been
transferred to the Government’s accounts; (iii) refrain from garnishing the bank
accounts of any of Claimants’ companies in relation to the taxes and penalties
covered by the Decision on Provisional Measures unless it provides the two months’
advance notice required by the Decision, and (iv) clarify its position on the impending
sale of Starmill’s (and the other companies’) seized physical assets (Second
Application, pp. 3-4). By letter of 7 March 2011, the Tribunal stated that it understood

29

89.

90.

91.

92.

this letter to be a new request for provisional measures, and invited the Respondent
to comment.

By letter of 11 March 2011, the Respondent submitted its comments to the Claimants’
letter of 4 March 2011, noting that it also considered the letter to be a new application
for provisional measures and requesting that Claimants’ request be denied with a full
award of costs. The Claimants replied by letter of 17 March 2011, reiterating their
first three requests for relief but denying that the 4 March letter constituted a new
request for provisional measures. The Parties exchanged further correspondence
setting out their positions (Respondent's letters of 23 and 31 March 2011, and
Claimants’ letters of 28 March and 13 and 22 April 2011).

On 27 May 2011, the Tribunal issued a Supplemental Decision on Provisional
Measures (the “Supplemental Decision on Provisional Measures”) in which it
confirmed its Decision on Provisional Measures, with certain amendments.
Specifically, the Tribunal recommended that the Respondent inform the Claimants,
with a copy to the Tribunal, if it intended to proceed with the seal or forced sale of the
seized assets or take any other tax collection measure (including garnishments of
bank accounts) that could have a similar effect, two months prior to the date in which
it intends to implement such seal, sale or other measure, until this arbitration is
completed or until reconsideration of the Supplemental Decision. The Tribunal also
recommended that the Parties seek to reach an agreement on a mutually acceptable
security or assurance to be provided by the Claimants and that, conditioned upon that
agreement, the Respondent should lift the current garnishments over Starmill’s
accounts. The Tribunal denied the Claimants’ request that the garnished accounts be
replenished. Once again, the Tribunal invited either Party to apply to the Tribunal for
a reconsideration of this Decision if it should consider that the circumstances under
which this Decision was made changed (Supplemental Decision on Provisional
Measures, § 80).

On 5 July 2011, the Claimants informed the Tribunal of further enforcement actions
taken by the Respondent with respect to the Claimants’ assets, and requested the
Tribunal to confirm that the Supplemental Decision on Provisional Measures covered
all assets of the EFDG companies seized by the Respondent at any time until the
completion of the arbitration. In a letter of 12 July 2011, the Respondent agreed with
the Claimants’ interpretation. By letter of 22 July 2011, the Tribunal confirmed that
the parties’ interpretation concerning the scope of the Supplemental Decision was
correct.

On 13 September 2011, the Respondent notified the Tribunal and the Claimants that
it intended to take enforcement measures with respect to three EFDG companies:
European Food, European Drinks S.A. (“European Drinks”) and Transilvania General
Import Export SRL (“TGIE”). The enforcement measures consisted of the seizure of
further movable and immovable property of the three companies and the garnishment
of their bank accounts for approximately EUR 55 million. The Respondent advised
that the seized property would remain in the companies’ control, to be used in their

30

93.

94.

95.

96.

business. The Respondent attached the notices in respect of the enforcement
measures to each of the three EFDG companies (“Garnishment Notices’).

On 12 October 2011, the Respondent notified the Tribunal and the Claimants that,
pursuant to Romanian tax law, two EFDG companies had been denied renewal of
certain authorisations which enabled the companies to postpone the payment of
customs and excise duties for goods imported into or manufactured in the EU if the
goods were stored in “fiscal warehouses”. The Respondent did not consider that the
decisions to repeal and deny renewal of the authorisations were within the scope of
the provisional measures recommended by the Tribunal, but advised that it would
voluntarily refrain from giving effect to the decisions until two months from the date of
their communication.

On 14 October 2011, the Claimants submitted an Emergency Supplement to their
Application for Provisional Measures (“Claimants’ Third Application”), seeking the
following emergency interim relief:

a. “preventing the Respondent from proceeding with the garnishments of the bank
accounts of European Food, European Drinks and TGIE as set out in the
[Garnishment] Notices;

b. ordering the Respondent to refrain from garnishing the accounts of any other
EFDC company until the Tribunal issues its Final Award (collectively, the
‘Garnishment Application’); and

c. ordering the Respondent to refrain from repealing the fiscal warehouse
authorizations of European Food and Scandic Distilleries until the Parties have
fully briefed that issue and the Tribunal issues a decision with respect to it (‘Fiscal
Warehouse Application’).

d. Insofar as any further briefing may be required on any of these issues or the
Tribunal is not able to take up this application immediately, the Claimants further
request that the Tribunal issue a temporary emergency order instructing the
Respondent to refrain from the acts cited in the preceding paragraph until such
time as the Tribunal is able rule upon this application.”

The Claimants clarified that they "do not in this application request an order
preventing the seizure orders as announced in the [Garnishment] Notices over
additional assets up to an aggregate value of €55 million, provided that Romania
continues to abide by the existing orders of the Tribunal regarding the seal and forced
sale of those assets" (Claimants' Third Application, § 25). The Claimants’ Third
Application was divided into two applications with separate briefing schedules: the
Garnishment Application and the Fiscal Warehouse Application.

On 1 November 2011, the Claimants supplemented their Fiscal Warehouse

Application, requesting the Tribunal to order the Respondent to refrain from repealing
the fiscal warehouse authorizations until the final award.

31

97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

The Parties and the Tribunal exchanged correspondence with respect to the briefing
schedule and the timing of the enforcement measures. At the invitation of the
Tribunal, the Respondent represented that the garnishments would not take effect
before 25 November 2011, and that the decision regarding fiscal warehouse
authorizations would not take effect before 12 December 2011 (Respondent's letter of
20 October 2011).

On 11 November 2011, in accordance with the agreed briefing schedule, the
Respondent submitted its observations on the Claimants’ Garnishment Application.
On 16 November 2011, the Claimants wrote to rebut certain allegations made by the
Respondent with respect to the Garnishment Application, and offered to produce the
documentation supporting these allegations at the Tribunal’s request. On 18
November 2011, the Tribunal requested the Claimants to produce such supporting
documentation and also invited the Respondent to submit any documentation it
deemed relevant. The Claimants produced the requested documentation to the
Tribunal on 21 November 2011.

On 22 November 2011, the Respondent submitted its comments on the Claimants’
letter of 16 November 2011, requesting the Tribunal to dismiss the Claimants’
Garnishment Application.

On 23 November 2011, the Tribunal issued the following temporary order concerning
the Claimants’ Garnishment Application (the “Temporary Order on Garnishment”’):

5.1. The Claimants’ request for a temporary emergency order is granted, until
the Tribunal is able to issue its final recommendation with respect to the
Claimants’ Third Application in its entirety. Specifically, until the Tribunal
is able to hand down its final recommendation,

(i) the Respondent shall refrain from proceeding with the garnishments of
the bank accounts of European Food, European Drinks and TGIE;

(ii) the Respondent shall refrain from garnishing the accounts of any other
EFDC company.

Following a further exchange of correspondence (Respondent's letters of 29 and 30
November and 8 December 2011, and Claimants’ letter of 5 December 2011) on the
Garnishment and Fiscal Warehouse Applications, on 16 December 2011 the Tribunal
issued a Third Decision on Provisional Measures (“Third Decision”). The Tribunal
made the following recommendations (Third Decision, { 109):

a. “The Respondent shall refrain from proceeding with the garnishments of the bank
accounts of European Food, European Drinks and TGIE as set out in the
[Garnishment] Notices.

b. The Respondent shall refrain from repealing the fiscal warehouse authorizations

of European Food and Scandic Distilleries until the Tribunal issues its Final
Award.

32

102.

103.

104.

c. The Tribunal otherwise confirms its (First) Decision on Provisional Measures of 2
March 2011. Accordingly, the Respondent shall inform the Claimants, with a copy
to the Tribunal, if it intends to proceed with the seal or forced sale of the seized
assets or take any other tax collection measure (including garnishments of bank
accounts) that could have a similar effect, two months prior to the date in which it
intends to implement such seal, sale or other measure, until this arbitration is
completed or this Decision is reconsidered.

d. The Parties shall continue to seek to reach an agreement on a mutually
acceptable security or assurance to be provided by the Claimants.

e. If either Party considers that the circumstances under which this Decision is
made have changed, either Party may apply to the Tribunal for reconsideration of
this Decision.

f. The other prayers are dismissed.
g. Costs are reserved for a later decision or award.”

The Tribunal noted in its Third Decision that no additional security had been provided
by the Claimants in respect of the lifting of the garnishment on Starmill’s accounts, a
condition that was imposed by the Tribunal in its Supplemental Decision. It did,
however, note that the Micula brothers made a good faith offer of certain properties to
satisfy their debts, and requested that the Claimants submit a formal valuation of
these properties as soon as it was finalized. Although the Tribunal granted the
Claimants’ Garnishment Application, it repeated that it expected the Claimants to
supply some form of security and recommended that the Parties continue to seek to
reach an agreement on a mutually acceptable security or assurance.

On 14 March 2012, the Respondent asked the Claimants to produce the valuation
report pursuant to the Tribunal’s instructions in the Third Decision. On 30 March
2012, the Respondent repeated its request. Following further exchanges of
correspondence (Claimants’ letters of 17 April, 7 June and 11 July 2012 and
Respondent's letters of 18 May, 21 June, 19 and 20 July 2012), the parties failed to
reach a mutual agreement on security to be provided by the Claimants.

On 1 August 2012, the Respondent filed an Application to Revoke Provisional
Measures (“Respondent's Revocation Application”) seeking the revocation of the
provisional measures recommended by the Tribunal, or, in the alternative, the
suspension of the provisional measures until the Claimants had posted security
adequate to protect the Respondent's right to collect taxes owed by the eleven EFDG
companies. The Respondent also requested that the Tribunal’s Award provide that
any amount awarded to any of the Claimants (whether as damages or costs) be
subject to set-off against the EFDG companies’ tax debts, including lawful interest
and penalties. At the Tribunal’s invitation, the Parties consulted and agreed on a
briefing schedule to submit their comments on the Respondent’s Revocation
Application. The Parties informed the Tribunal of this briefing schedule on 17 August
2012.

33

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

110.

On 28 September 2012, the Claimants submitted their observations on Respondent's
Revocation Application. The Claimants opposed the Respondent's Application in its
entirety and requested that the provisional measures remain in force until the date of
the Award. In addition, the Claimants made three requests of their own: (i) that the
Award provide that the Respondent be enjoined from any further tax collection
measures until full payment of any damages awarded to the Claimants by the
Tribunal, (ii) that the Tribunal declare that the Respondent cannot set-off tax debts as
requested, and (iii) that the Respondent is ordered to pay all the Claimants’ costs in
relation to Respondent's Application.

On 8 October 2012, the Respondent submitted a request for production of the
valuation reports in regard to the properties which the Claimants had offered to the
Respondent as payment in kind to extinguish their existing tax debts. On 18 October
2012, the Claimants opposed production of the valuation reports, stating that the
arbitral proceedings were not the appropriate forum to negotiate the details of a
proposed payment in kind and that they were prepared to make the reports available
to the Romanian authorities in direct meetings.

On 30 October 2012, the Tribunal issued a Procedural Order in which it ordered the
production of the valuation reports, if the Claimants confirmed that the relevant
properties were offered as security for their tax debts owed to the Respondent, rather
than as payment in kind. The Tribunal found that the reports were relevant and
material to its assessment of the Claimants’ good faith efforts to provide additional
security to meet the requirement of proportionality, so that they were thus necessary
for the determination of the Respondent's Revocation Application. On 9 November
2012, the Claimants confirmed that the properties were offered as payment in kind
and not as security, but produced the valuation reports nonetheless. They also
mentioned additional assets as potential security. Valuation reports concerning these
additional assets were submitted on 23 November 2012.

On 21 December 2012, the Respondent filed its reply concerning its Revocation
Application and, on 15 February 2013, the Claimants filed their rejoinder.

On 5 March 2013, the Claimants submitted their Fourth Application for Provisional
Measures (“Claimants’ Fourth Application”). The Claimants informed the Tribunal
that, on 5 March 2013, Romania had seized brewery-related assets belonging to
European Food and requested that the Tribunal order provisional relief to stop the
seizure and forced execution of assets. The Claimants argued that the seizure
violated the existing provisional measures because Romania had given no notice of
the measures and planned a forced sale if the Claimants’ tax debt was not paid within
15 days.

At the invitation of the Tribunal, the Respondent submitted its response to the
Claimants’ Fourth Application on 8 March 2013. It argued that the seizure of assets
belonging to European Food did not constitute a violation of the provisional measures
in place because no notice requirement applied to the seizure of assets and Romania
did not intend to proceed with a forced sale of the assets. The Respondent

34

contended that the seizure was justified because of time limitations on debt collection
efforts under Romanian law. The Parties filed further comments by letters of 14
March 2013 (Claimants) and 21 March 2013 (Respondent).

111. On 27 March 2013, the Tribunal issued its Fourth Decision on Provisional Measures
(‘Fourth Decision”) concerning the Respondent's Revocation Application. The
Tribunal concluded that the Claimants had made good faith attempts to reach an
agreement with the Respondent regarding a mutually acceptable security and that the
provisional measures preventing garnishment of the bank accounts of European
Food, European Drinks and TGIE remained proportional. It further considered that
the circumstances surrounding the fiscal warehouse authorizations had not changed
to such an extent as to warrant the revocation, suspension or modification of the
provisional measures in question. The Tribunal thus confirmed the existing
provisional measures and dismissed Romania's request for revocation or suspension
of those measures (Fourth Decision, § 119). It further ruled that the Claimants’
request for post-award injunctive relief concerning Romania’s tax debt collection
measures, as well as the Parties’ requests with respect to the set-off of tax debts
against a pecuniary award in favor of the Claimants, would be deferred for
determination in the Award.”

112. On 5 April 2013, the Tribunal issued its Fifth Decision on Provisional Measures (“Fifth
Decision”) concerning Claimants’ Fourth Application. The Tribunal found that the
mere seizure of assets without providing any notice that did not prevent the Claimants
from continuing to use those assets did not, in and of itself, violate the provisional
measures recommended by the Tribunal. The Tribunal thus dismissed Claimants’
Fourth Application and all other prayers for relief (Fifth Decision, 39). The Tribunal
also urged the parties to continue seeking a mutually acceptable agreement on
security, as previously recommended (Fifth Decision, { 38).

b. The Claimants’ Renewed Application for a Site Visit

113. On 9 December 2010, the Claimants submitted a renewed application for a site visit,
specifying which allegations a site visit would help prove or disprove and commenting
on the Tribunal’s authority to order it. On 17 December 2010, the Respondent
objected to Claimants’ application, stating that a site visit was unnecessary and would
be procedurally unfair.

114. After careful consideration of each Party’s position and a review of the evidence in the
record, the Tribunal concluded that a site visit was neither necessary nor useful for
the resolution of the dispute. Accordingly, by Procedural Order of 20 January 2011
the Tribunal denied the Claimants’ application for a site visit. In that same Procedural
Order, the Tribunal gave further directions to the Parties with respect to oral closing
arguments.

? These matters are addressed in Section IX below.

35

115.

116.

117.

118.

119.

120.

c. The Claimants’ Revised Request for Relief

On 20 December 2010, the Claimants submitted a revised request for relief (the
“Revised Request for Relief”).> On 10 January 2011, the Respondent objected to the
procedural propriety and content of the Revised Request for Relief and requested that
the Tribunal reject specific evidence. The Parties exchanged further submissions on
this matter (Claimants’ letters of 31 January 2011 and 9 February 2011, and the
Respondent's letter of 2 February 2011).

The Tribunal ruled on this matter by means of a Procedural Order issued on 6 April
2011. With respect to the procedural propriety of the Revised Request for Relief, the
Tribunal declined to reject any evidence submitted by the Claimants, but found that
the Claimants’ reliance on certain quantum experts was new, and thus invited the
Respondent to rebut these testimonies in writing or by further examination of those
experts.

The Tribunal also found that there had been no prejudice to the Respondent as a
result of the reformulation of the Claimants’ expropriation case or of their claim for
interest. However, it found that the Claimants’ request that any damages be awarded
to the Individual Claimants on a 50/50 basis, and in the alternative that any damages
be awarded to all five Claimants, was a reformulation of the Claimants’ case that
raised several issues of procedure and merits. The Tribunal also requested the
Parties to address the merits of the Claimants’ damages case in their post-hearing
briefs and gave further directions with respect to briefing. The Tribunal also noted
that the Claimants’ reformulation of their damages case could affect the procedural
schedule for closing arguments. It thus invited the Claimants to confirm if they wished
to maintain their request for an award of damages to be distributed to the Individual
Claimants on a 50/50 basis. The Claimants provided this confirmation on 15 April
2011.

d. _ Post-hearing briefs and oral closing arguments

The Tribunal’s Procedural Order of 25 November 2010 provided that the Parties
would present oral closing arguments, setting as a tentative date 1-2 March 2011. It
also provided that the Parties could submit voluntary post-hearing briefs.

On 25 January 2011, the Respondent informed the Tribunal that its Romanian
counsel would not be available for a hearing on 1-2 March 2011. After consulting with
the Parties, on 3 February 2011 the Tribunal determined that the hearing for the
Parties’ closing arguments would take place on 6 and 7 June 2011.

As mentioned in paragraph 116 above, on 6 April 2011 the Tribunal issued a
Procedural Order that ruled on the Claimants’ Revised Request for Relief and gave
directions to the Parties with respect to further briefing. Following the Claimants’
confirmation that they wished to maintain their reformulated damages case, at the

° The Claimants’ Revised Request for Relief is addressed in more detail in Sections IV.A and VII.A.1

below.

36

Tribunal’s invitation the Parties consulted on the next procedural steps. On 4 May
2011 they informed the Tribunal that they had reached an agreement with respect to
post-hearing briefs, additional submissions on damages, the hearing schedule and
cross-examination of experts.

On 12 April 2011, the Respondent requested leave to submit three new fact exhibits.
After hearing both Parties’ positions, on 29 April 2011 the Tribunal determined that
the record was sufficiently complete on the subject matters of those documents
insofar as such matters were relevant to the outcome of the dispute, and denied the
Respondent's request.

On 6 May 2011, in accordance with its Procedural Order of 25 November 2010, the
Tribunal submitted to the Parties a list of questions to be addressed in their closing
arguments.

On 13 May 2011, the Parties submitted their written post-hearing briefs. On 27 May
2011, the Respondent submitted an additional submission with respect to the
Claimants’ Revised Request for Relief in accordance with the Tribunal’s Procedural
Order of 6 April 2011.

On 6 and 7 June 2011, the Parties and the Tribunal held a hearing in Paris. During
the course of the hearing, the Parties presented their oral closing arguments and
responded to questions from the Tribunal. The Tribunal was addressed by Messrs.
Fleuriet, Gaillard, Reed and Schwartz, on behalf of the Claimants, and by Messrs.
King, Petrochilos and Rubins, on behalf of the Respondent.

The following persons participated in the hearing:

On behalf of Mr. loan Micula and the Corporate Claimants:

Mr. Eric Schwartz King & Spalding

Mr. Ken Fleuriet King & Spalding

Mr. Ric Toher King & Spalding

Ms. Amy R. Frey King & Spalding

Mr. loan Micula Claimant

Ms. Nathalie Micula Representative for loan Micula, European Food, Starmill,
and Multipack

Ms. Olivia Micula Representative for loan Micula, European Food, Starmill,
and Multipack

Ms. Dorin Floruta Representative for loan Micula, European Food, Starmill,
and Multipack

Mr. Vasile Popa-Bota Representative for loan Micula, European Food, Starmill,
and Multipack

Mr. Mircea Halbac Representative for loan Micula, European Food, Starmill,
and Multipack

Mrs. Oana Popa Representative for loan Micula, European Food, Starmill,

and Multipack

37

126.

127.

Mr. Ciprian Popa

On behalf of Mr. Viorel Micula:

Prof. Emmanuel Gaillard
Mr. David Reed

Mr. Robert Williams
Ms. Veronika Korom
Mr. Richard Kiveal

Ms. Gresa Matoshi

Mr. Viorel Micula

Ms. Doina Micula

Mr. Victor Micula

Ms. loana Aron Blahuta
Ms. Medora Purle

Mr. Calin Vidican

Mr. Cristian Flora

Ms. Eva Fogarassy

On behalf of the Respondent:

Ms. Georgeta Harapcea
Mr. D. Brian King

Mr. Georgios Petrochilos
Mr. Boris Kasolowsky
Mr. Noah Rubins

Mr. Jonathan J. Gass
Mr. Ben Juratowitch

Mr. Sami Tannous

Ms. Evgeniya Rubinina
Mr. Moritz Keller

Ms. Smaranda Miron
Mr. Tunde Oyewole

Mr. Ignacio Stratta

Ms. Kate Bousfield

Mr. Nishad Morjaria

Representative for loan Micula, European Food, Starmill,

and Multipack

Shearman & Sterling
Shearman & Sterling
Shearman & Sterling
Shearman & Sterling
Shearman & Sterling
Shearman & Sterling
Claimant

Representing Mr Viorel Micula
Representing Mr Viorel Micula
Representing Mr Viorel Micula
Representing Mr Viorel Micula
Representing Mr Viorel Micula
Representing Mr Viorel Micula
Representing Mr Viorel Micula

Nestor Nestor Diculescu Kingston Petersen

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
KPMG

A transcript of the hearing was distributed among the Parties.

e. Closure of the Proceeding and Submissions on Costs

On 14 June 2013, in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 28(2), the Tribunal

invited the Parties to file statements of costs by 12 July 2013, and their comments on
the other Parties’ statements of costs by 2 August 2013. The Parties were given the
opportunity to inform the Tribunal if they saw a need for submissions on costs, rather
than statements. By the same letter, the Tribunal declared the proceeding closed

38

128.

129.

pursuant to Rule 38(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. The Parties subsequently
agreed that they would file submissions on costs, but that they would not file any reply
submissions.

On 19 July 2013, the Parties submitted their respective submission of costs, each
requesting an award requiring the other party to bear the entirety of the expenses
incurred by the parties, the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal, and
the charges for the use of ICSID’s facilities. The Claimants also requested compound
interest on a costs award. The Claimants’ submission was accompanied by an
Annex and Exhibits C-1035 to C-1044. The Respondent’s submission was
accompanied by two declarations of co-counsel Nestor Nestor Diculescu Kingston
Petersen and Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP, Exhibits R-245 to R-268 and
Legal Authorities RL-375 and RL-376.

On 7 October 2013, the period of 120 days for the rendering of the award was
extended pursuant to Rule 46 of the Arbitration Rules.

39

130.

131.

132.

133.

134.

135.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

A. OVERVIEW

The present dispute arises from Romania’s introduction of certain economic
incentives for the development of disfavored regions of Romania, and their
subsequent revocation in the context of Romania's accession to the European Union
(“EU”).

Specifically, in 1998, Romania enacted Emergency Government Ordinance 24/1998
(“EGO 24/1998” or “EGO 24”), which made available certain tax incentives, including
customs duties exemptions (called alternatively by the Parties the “Incentives” or the
“Facilities”), to investors in certain disfavored regions who met the requirements set
out in EGO 24/1998 and its implementing legislation. The Claimants claim that, in
reliance on those incentives, and in reliance on the expectation that they would be
maintained for a 10-year period, they made substantial investments in the Stei-Nucet-
Draganesti disfavored region located in Bihor County, northwestern Romania. The
Claimants further claim that Romania’s revocation of these incentives (effective 22
February 2005) was in breach of its obligations under the BIT and caused damages
to the Claimants, as described further below.

Romania does not dispute that in 1998 it passed EGO 24, which offered tax
incentives to investors investing in disfavored regions, nor does it dispute that,
effective 22 February 2005, it repealed most of the tax incentives offered under EGO
24, with the exception of a profit tax incentive. However, it denies that this revocation
breached any of its obligations under the BIT. In addition, it argues that this
revocation was necessary to comply with EU state aid obligations, which in turn was
necessary for Romania to complete its accession to the EU.

The Claimants began to invest in Romania in 1991, and continued investing
throughout the next two decades. During this time, Romania was undergoing its
economic transition from communism to a market economy. As stated by the
Respondent, during this time “the factual record [...] portrays a government trying to
pursue two policies that came into increasing conflict” (R-Rejoinder, § 103): one
directed to the development of its disfavored regions, and another directed to
obtaining accession to the EU.

There are, therefore, three main areas of factual inquiry for the Tribunal: the evolution
of Romania’s policy for the development of disfavored areas, the history of the
Claimants’ investments, and Romania’s EU accession process.

The Tribunal will first describe the evolution of Romania’s policy for the development
of disfavored areas, in particular the EGO 24 framework, up to the point at which the
Claimants allege that they began investing in reliance on it (Section B). The Tribunal
will then describe the Claimants’ investments (Section C). It will then describe the
main facts surrounding Romania’s accession process, together with related events
affecting the EGO 24 framework as that process developed (Section D).

40

136.

137.

138.

139.

140.

141.

Sections B, C and D are meant to give a general overview of the facts of the present
dispute. They do not include all factual aspects which may be of relevance,
particularly as they emerged from the extensive testimony of witnesses and experts at
the hearing. The latter, as far as is relevant, will be discussed in the context of the
Tribunal’s analysis of the disputed issues.

B. LEGAL FRAMEWORK FOR THE DISFAVORED REGIONS
Romania’s efforts to attract investment in the early 1990s

As noted by the European Commission in a 1997 report, “[a]fter the overthrow of the
Ceausescu regime in December 1989, Romania found itself in a deep economic and
social crisis” (Exh. C-317). This was followed by several years of reforms directed at
transforming Romania into a market economy with the ultimate objective of obtaining
EU accession.

In this context, Romania undertook serious efforts to attract investment, both foreign
and domestic. On 14 March 1990, Romania issued Decree Law 96/1990, entitled “on
certain measures for the attraction of foreign capital investment in Romania” (Exh. R-
134), which contained provisions regulating foreign investment in Romania and
granted foreign investors certain tax benefits.

This Decree Law was replaced a year later by Law 35/1991 on foreign investment
(‘Law 35”, enacted on 3 April 1991 and effective 10 April 1991, Exh. C-275). To
“induce foreign investment in Romania’, this law offered the following incentives for
new investments made by foreign investors [later amended to include domestic
investors] (Arts. 12-15):

a. An exemption from customs duties related to certain types of imported
machinery, equipment and means of transportation;

b. A two-year exemption from customs duties on imported raw materials;

c. A profit-tax exemption ranging from 2 to 5 years, depending on the type of
investment; and

d. A profit-tax reduction for certain investments following the expiration of the profit-
tax exemption.

On 5 August 1996, Romania passed Government Ordinance No. 27/1996 (“GO
27/1996", Exh. C-276), which offered certain benefits to individuals domiciled or
working in some localities from the Apuseni Mountains and the Biosphere Reserve
(also known as "the Danube Delta"). These benefits included a corporate profit tax
incentive for investors ranging from 5 to 10 years, depending on the location of the
investment.

In the following years, Romania began serious efforts to promote regional
development, which was identified as “one of the essential elements of the general

41

142.

143.

144.

145.

146.

strategy reform of Romania” in Romania’s Government Program for 1998-2000. One
of the objectives of this regional development was “[s]trengthening the ability of
Romania to undertake responsibilities as a future member of the European Union.”
The program also stated that the Government defined a minimum set of priorities,
“achievement of which is in full compliance with the criteria and objectives of the
National Program on the Accession of Romania to the European Union.” (Annex 2 to
Government Decision 6 issued 15 April 1998, Exh. C-567).

In this context, on 16 July 1998, Romania passed Law 151/1998 on Regional
Development (the “Regional Development Law”, Exh. C-392). Among its objectives
was the “diminution of existing regional imbalances by stimulation of a balanced
development, by accelerated recovery of delays in the development of deprived
zones as a result of some historical, geographic, economic, social, and political
conditions, and prevention of the production of new imbalances.” (Art. 1(a)). The
methodological norms issued for Law 151 (Exh. C-392) stated that the objective of
regional development was the improvement of the economic performance of certain
development regions, and that such objective had the support of the Government and
the EU (Art. 1).

The Regional Development Law divided the country into 8 development regions. The
area in which the Claimants invested (the Stei-Nucet-Draganesti region in Bihor
County) is located in the North West Regional Development Area, and was managed
by the NW-Regional Development Agency (NW-RDA). A key objective of the NW-
RDA was to “increase[e] the living standard and long-lasting social-economic
development of the region within a European context”, by inter alia increasing the
attractiveness of the region, establishing a business environment and promoting long-
lasting development (Exh. C-393, Section III.2).

At the time of these reforms, unemployment levels in Bihor County were high. In its
effort to restructure the mining industry, between 1997 and 2005 the Romanian
government closed down over 500 uneconomic mines. By the end of 1998,
approximately 100,000 miners were out of work. Unemployment was felt strongly in
Bihor County, which had been dependent on mining for many years (Exh. C-319, C-
320, C-321, C-325, C-566).

EGO 24/1998

It was in this context that on 30 September 1998 (effective 2 October 1998), Romania
adopted Emergency Government Ordinance No. 24/1998 (“EGO 24/1998” or “EGO
24”, Exh. R-5 or C-38). EGO 24/1998 established the legislative framework for the
granting of certain incentives to investors investing in certain “disfavored” regions.

EGO 24/1998 was subsequently approved and amended by Law No. 20/1999 of 15
January 1999 (effective 19 January 1999) (Exh. C-39), and a renumbered version
containing the amendments made by Law 20 was republished on 8 November 1999
(Exh. R-68). It is on this republished version that the Claimants claim they relied. As

42

147.

148.

a result, for the sake of simplicity, henceforth all references to EGO 24/1998 will refer
to its reformulated version republished on 8 November 1999 (Exh. R-68).

EGO 24/1998 provided that the Government could declare the creation of certain
“disadvantaged areas”, in response to proposals of the National Council for Regional
Development (Art. 3). This declaration would be done by means of a “government
decision”, which would also approve (a) the period for which a geographical area
would be declared a disadvantaged region, (b) the fields of interest for investments,
and (c) “the required financing and advantages provided by law, and granted to the
investors” (Art. 4). Article 5 provided that “[a] geographical area may be declared a
disadvantaged area for a period of at least 3 years, but for not more than 10 years,
with possibility for extension, under the conditions of this Emergency Ordinance.”

Article 6(1) went on to say that investors meeting certain requirements “will be
granted the following advantages for their new investments in these regions”, and
proceeded to list the incentives:

Art. 6. - (1) Privately held companies, Romanian legal entities, as well as
small or family businesses, authorized pursuant to the Decree-Law no.
54/1990 concerning the organization and operation of free initiative-based
economic activities that are headquartered and conduct business within the
disadvantaged region, will be granted the following advantages for their
new investments in these regions:

(a) exemptions from payment of:

- customs duties and value added tax on machinery, tools,
installations, equipment, means of transportation, other goods
subject to depreciation which are imported for the purpose of
making investments in that region;

value added tax on machinery, tools, installations, equipment,
means of transportation, other goods subject to depreciation
manufactured domestically with the purpose of making
investments in that region;

[the “Machinery Incentive’ or “Machinery Facility’|

=

refunds of customs duties on raw materials, spare parts and/or
components necessary for achieving the investor's own production
in that region. The refunds will be made based on the approval by
the regional development agencies of the companies’ production
sales documents. The funds necessary for the refund of the customs
duties will be provided to the Agency for Regional Development from
the Regional Development Fund. In case [of] unprivileged regions
belonging to two or more administrative-territorial units, the funds
necessary for the refund of the customs duties will be provided by
the National Agency for Regional Development from the National
Development Fund [the “Raw Materials Incentive’ or “Raw
Materials Facility’);

S

exemptions from payment of the profit tax during the existence of the
disadvantaged region [the “Profit Tax Incentive” or “Profit Tax
Facility’);

43

149.

150.

(d) exemptions from payment of the taxes collected for the changes of
the destination of the land or for the removal from the agricultural
use of some plots of land that had been earmarked for the fulfillment
of the investment [the “Agricultural Land Incentive’ or
“Agricultural Land Facility’)[;]

=

preferred payments from the Special Development Fund of the
Romanian Government, which was established pursuant to the
Emergency Government Ordinance no. 59/1997 concerning the
purpose of the funds collected by the State Property Fund during the
privatization process of the companies where the State is a
shareholder, with the purpose of:

encouraging the exports of the final products and/or for the
industrial services, as the case may be;

- guaranteeing external credits, within the annual limit set by the
Ministry of Finance;

- financing special programs, approved by Government Decision;

- financing investment projects for companies through the state's
participation in the share capital.

[the “Subsidies’]

2) The advantages and the financing stipulated in paragraph (1) letter e) is
established through a Government Decision.

Article 8 provided the requirements for investors to qualify for the incentives: “[t]he
advantages stipulated in the present Emergency Ordinance are granted to
businesses, privately held Romanian legal entities, as well as to small and family
businesses, authorized according to Decree-Law No. 54/1990, who have their
headquarters and conduct business in this area, if the investment made yields new
jobs for the unemployed or for their family members who live in the disadvantaged
area.”

Articles 7 and 9 set out investors’ obligation to stay in the disadvantaged area for
twice the period they received the incentives, as follows:

Art. 7. - If an investment which is benefiting from the provisions of the
present Emergency Ordinance is voluntarily liquidated in a period of
time shorter than twice the period of time in which they enjoyed the
advantages granted through the Government Decision to create the
underprivileged area, the liquidator(s) is/are obligated first to pay the
funds related to the advantages granted in accordance with the
provisions of the present Emergency Ordinance, to the State Budget, the
State Social Insurance Budget and the Special Funds Budgets from the
funds resulting from the liquidation procedure.

Ll

Art. 9. - Businesses established in a disadvantaged area may voluntarily
cease to operate in the respective area, and those opening subsidiaries
as legal entities in such an area may close them or move the location of
their headquarters out of the disadvantaged area in a period shorter
than the one provided in Art. 7 only if they pay the funds they owe to

44

151.

152.

153.

the State Budget, the State Social Insurance Budget and the Special
Funds Budgets related to the advantages granted in accordance with the
provisions of the present Emergency Ordinance.

Finally, Article 15 provided that “the Government will approve, through a decision, the
methodological standards to be used for the implementation of this Emergency
Ordinance.”

Government Decision 194/1999 and the 1999 Methodological Norms

By means of Government Decision 194/1999, dated 25 March 1999 (Exh. C-31, also
C-280), Romania designated the Stei-Nucet region as a disfavored region for a period
of ten years, starting on 1 April 1999. The Stei-Nucet region is located in Bihor
County in the northwestern part of Romania, and its primary industry at the time was
the mining and oil industry. GD 194/1999 also stipulated that all six incentives offered
under EGO 24/1998 would be available to investors in the Stei-Nucet region while
that region was designated disfavored, and set out the types of investments that
could benefit from the incentives. Specifically, GD 194/1999 provided:

Art. 1. - The mining area of Stei-Nucet, Bihor county, is established as a
disfavoured region.

Art. 2. - The geographical boundaries of the mining area of $tei-Nucet,
Bihor county are represented by Stei and Nucet, as administrative-
territorial units having a surface of 4,678 ha, according to annex no. 1.

Art. 3. - The mining area referred to in art. 1 will be established as a
disfavoured region for a period of 10 years.

Art. 4. - During the existence of the disfavoured region, established
according to this decision, the facilities under annex no. 2*) will be
granted. [“se acorda’” in the Romanian original]

In turn, Annex 2 of GD 194/1999 listed all of the incentives provided under Article 6(1)
of EGO 24, with slightly amended language. Specifically, it stated:

Companies the majority of the share capital of which is privately owned,
Romanian legal entities, as well as the private investors or family
associations authorized pursuant to the "Decree-Law no. 54/1990 on the
organization and operation of economic activities based on free initiative"
that were set up after the date of establishment of the disfavoured region
and have their registered seat and operate in the disfavoured region, will
be granted the following facilities for new investments in these regions:

(a) an exemption from payment of:

- custom duties and value added tax on machinery, tools,
installations, equipment, means of transportation, other goods
subject to depreciation which are imported with a view to
performing and conducting investments in that region;

- value added tax on machinery, tools, installations, equipment,
means of transportation, other goods subject to depreciation
manufactured in the country with a view to performing and
conducting investments in that region;

45

154.

155.

On 29 June 1999, Romania issued Government Decision No. 525/1999, which set out
norms for the application of EGO 24/1998 (the “1999
(The 1999 Methodological Norms repealed a
previous version issued in December 1998 which has not been relied upon in this
arbitration).

the methodological
Methodological Norms”, Exh. R-6).

With respect to the requirements for granting the incentives, Article 5 of the 1999

refund of custom duties on raw materials, spare parts and/or
components necessary for achieving the investor's own production
in that region;

an exemption from payment of profit tax during the existence of the
disfavoured region;

an exemption from payment of taxes collected for changes in the
nature of land or for conversion of agricultural plots of land into
industrial land for the implementation of the investment;

preferred payment of amounts available from the Special
Development Fund at the disposal of the Romanian Government
that was established pursuant to the "Emergency Government
Ordinance no. 59/1997 on the amounts collected by the State
Property Fund during the privatization process of the companies in
which the State is shareholder" to - encourage the export activities
for the final products and/or for the industrial services, as the case
may be;

- guarantee the external credits within the annual limit set by the
Ministry of Finance;

- finance special programs approved by Government Decision;

- finance investment projects for companies through the state's
participation in the share capital.

Methodological Norms provided:

(1) The incentives provided by the law shall be granted [in Romanian,

“se acorda”] pursuant to the certificate of investor in a disfavored
area, which is issued, upon the business entity's request, by the
Regional Development Agency under the jurisdiction of which the
head office of such business entity is located.

[1

Business entities requesting the issuance of the certificate of
investor in a disfavored area shall prove they meet the requirements
set forth by the [EGO].

Emerging business entities, unable to produce evidence regarding
the investment, the commissioning of the operations and the
creation of new jobs, may request the issuance of a temporary
certificate of investor in a disfavored area, for a maximum of 3
months. In case they do not bring, during this period, evidence of
having met the requirements set forth by the [EGO], they shall be
compelled to pay and return, respectively the equivalent value of all
the incentives they have benefited of.

46

156.

157.

158.

159.

160.

(5) The temporary certificate shall be issued pursuant to the business
entity's commitment regarding the investment and the creation of
new jobs.

c. THE CLAIMANTS’ INVESTMENTS

The Individual Claimants claim to be the majority shareholders of a group of
companies (the European Food and Drinks Group or “EFDG”) engaged in food and
beverage production in the disfavored region of Stei-Nucet-Draganesti, Bihor County.
The Corporate Claimants (European Food, Starmill and Multipack) are part of the
EFDG, and are thus owned directly or indirectly by the Individual Claimants.

The evolution of the Claimants’ investments can be separated in two phases: their
initial investments (principally in the beverage production business), allegedly made in
reliance on the incentive programs that predated EGO 24, and their investments (in
the food and beverage production business), allegedly made in reliance on the EGO
24 incentives.

The Claimants’ initial investments in reliance on previous incentive regimes

The Individual Claimants allege that their beverage business was initially developed
in reliance on the incentive programs established by Law 35 and GO 27,
predecessors to EGO 24. (C-Reply, %§ 62-124; Third WS of I. Micula J 10-27). Law
35 (C-275) was enacted in 1991 to attract foreign investors to Romania by offering
the incentives for new investments, including customs duties and profit tax
exemptions (see 139 above). GO 27/1996 (Exh. C-276) was enacted in 1996 to
attract investments in Bihor County and other disadvantaged regions, and provided a
corporate profit tax incentive ranging from 5 to 10 years, depending on the location of
the investment (see { 140 above).

The Claimants claim that these incentives allowed them to produce a wide variety of
beverages at a low cost. Law 35’s encouragement of additional production activities
and the Claimants’ knowledge of advanced technologies enabled them to sell their
beverages in a variety of different packages, including TetraPak and PET packaging.
Capitalizing on this expertise, they began to produce intermediate products related to
packaging (C-Reply, {{ 81-96, Third WS of I. Micula, 1 10-24).

After the success of their initial investments, Messrs. Micula expanded their beverage
production business, building what would become an integrated system of production
companies. All of the core companies, with the exception of the Corporate Claimants
and Scandic Distilleries, were established under Law 35 (C-Reply, {] 77, 81-96; Third
WS of I. Micula, § 29).*

* The record shows the following with respect to the Claimants’ incorporation or participation in
companies during this period (1991-1997):

47

161.

162.

163.

The Claimants claim that their business model was premised on the existence and
specific form of the incentives. Because an investor could benefit from Law 35
incentives each time he created a new company, the Law 35 incentives encouraged
the establishment of an expanding group of companies. New companies, and thus
the expansion of Claimants’ production business, were planned and created to
coincide with the expiration of the incentives for older companies. The new
companies and investments were integrated into the existing companies and
investments, so that all companies functioned cooperatively to create, manufacture,
package, and distribute products efficiently (C-Reply, {| 77-80; Third WS of I. Micula,
{9 26-27; WS of M. Ban, § 27).

The Claimants allege that this integration allowed them to realize an increased level
of profit. They also state that profits were consistently re-invested to support the
expansion of the business and to take advantage of the tax profit exemption under
Law 35. Moreover, the raw materials customs duty exemption in Law 35 encouraged
production activities, because it only applied to raw materials used to produce new
end-products. It thus encouraged a proliferation of businesses that worked together
to produce a variety of products, and provided a competitive advantage because the
incentives allowed the companies to keep product prices low (C-Reply, 80-81,
Third WS of |. Micula, 25).

The Claimants claim that they were able to successfully expand their production
activities by using savings from the incentives programs and their profits, which they
consistently reinvested in the business. The Claimants claim that they followed this
approach throughout the years: using the realized savings during the time in which
the incentives were offered to reinvest and build facilities that were functional and
profit-producing by the time the incentives expired. (C-Reply, { 96).

 

On 19 October 1990, Messrs. Micula allegedly incorporated the Romanian company Transilvania
General Import Export S.R.L (“TGIE”) (Claimants’ “Correct Timeline of Messrs. Micula’s
Investments”, C-Reply at page 25). The Claimants allege that this company was set up to benefit
from Law 35/1991, as it was originally set up for the five years for which Law 35 granted
corporate profit tax exemptions (C-Reply, Note 102). The Tribunal notes however that Law 35
was enacted after TGIE’s stated date of incorporation, so it understands the Claimants to be
saying that TGIE was established to benefit from the earlier Decree Law 96/1990, which was later
replaced by Law 35. That being said, the Tribunal also notes that, according to the information
provided by the Bihor Trade Register Office (Exh. R-60) and TGIE’s 1993 Fiscal Report (Exh. C-
356), TGIE was assigned its trade register reference number in May 1991. TGIE’s date of
incorporation is therefore not established with certainty.

From June 1993 to April 1995, Messrs. Micula incorporated or acquired an interest in ten
Romanian companies, including European Drinks S.A. and Rieni Drinks S.A. (Claimants’ “Correct
Timeline of Messrs. Micula’s Investments”, C-Reply at page 25; R-CM, Figure 1, p. 7; Exh. R-60
and R-61).

From November 1996 to July 1998, the Claimants incorporated or acquired an interest in three
additional Romanian companies (Claimants’ “Correct Timeline of Messrs. Micula’s Investments”,
C-Reply at page 25; R-CM, Figure 1, p. 7; Exh. R-60 and R-61.)

On 8 July 1997, the Claimants, through their company Edri Trading SRL purchased shares in SC
Ipic Bucaresti S.A., a previously state-owned company which owned 88,000 square meters of
land in Bucharest (Third WS of |. Micula, §§ 31-36; Tr., Day 2, 211, Day 3, 133,141,145-150
(I.Micula); Exh. C-346; C-439).

48

164.

165.

166.

167.

168.

In turn, the GO 27 incentives motivated the Claimants to relocate certain projects to
Draganesti (in the Apuseni region of Bihor County, which was expressly covered by
GO 27). In particular, the Miculas relocated the distillery for what would eventually
become Scandic Distilleries from the Madaras region to Draganesti (C-Reply, | 105-
110). Other companies developed new projects in Bihor County to realize GO 27
benefits (C-Reply, 4 111-118).

The Claimants claim that their beverage business was very successful. By 2001,
they state that European Drinks held an estimated 55% of the total carbonated drink
market in Romania and a 51% share of the bottled mineral water market (C-Reply, 7
87).

The Claimants’ investments in reliance on the EGO 24 incentives

After Romania's introduction of the EGO 24 incentives, the Claimants allege that they
built a large, highly integrated food production platform in reliance on these
incentives, in particular the Raw Materials Incentive. The Respondent disputes this
reliance, the Claimants’ description of their business plan and the Claimants’ intention
to build certain parts of the platform.

Specifically, the Claimants allege that, starting in 1998, they expanded their business
under a ten-year plan to capitalize on the EGO 24 incentives with the objective of
building an integrated food platform, incorporating several companies in the process.°
In 1999 they incorporated European Food (Claimant 3), which as explained below
was the first Corporate Claimant to benefit from the EGO 24 program (see paragraph
174 below). The Claimants state that they imported the majority of their raw material
products through European Food, which brought them customs duties savings and
allowed them to pursue a two-phase expansion plan (C-Reply, {{ 161-170).

The first phase consisted in production of fast-moving consumer products new to the
Romanian market, which had significant market potential and would generate quick

° The record shows the following with respect to the Claimants’ incorporation or participation in
companies during this period (1998-2007):

a.

From June 1998 to December 1999, Messrs. Micula incorporated or acquired an interest in 23
Romanian companies, including S.C. European Food S.A., which was established as a
Romanian joint stock company in Stei, Bihor county on 30 November 1999 (Exh. HEC-1).

During 2000, Messrs. Micula incorporated or acquired an interest in five other Romanian
companies (“Correct Timeline of Messrs. Micula’s Investments”, C-Reply at page 25), including
Scandic Distilleries S.A., which was incorporated on 20 January 2000 (Exh. R-60).

During 2001, Messrs. Micula incorporated or acquired an interest in 3 Romanian companies
(“Correct Timeline of Messrs. Micula’s Investments”, C-Reply at page 25; Exh. R-60).

During 2002, Messrs. Micula incorporated or acquired an interest in five Romanian companies,
including S.C. Multipack S.R.L. and S.C. Starmill S.R.L., which were incorporated on 21 February
2002 (“Correct Timeline of Messrs. Micula’s Investments”, C-Reply at page 25; Exh. R-60).
During 2003 and 2004, Messrs. Micula incorporated or acquired an interest in four Romanian
companies (“Correct Timeline of Messrs. Micula’s Investments”, C-Reply at page 25; Exh. R-60).
Between July 2005 and January 2007, Messrs. Micula incorporated or acquired an interest in
three Romanian companies (“Correct Timeline of Messrs. Micula’s Investments”, C-Reply at page
25; Exh. R-60).

49

cash flow. Together with the incentive savings, this approach would allow the
companies to integrate vertically and achieve economies of scale. The companies
could thereby save on operational costs and minimize waste and energy
consumption.

169. In this context, in February 2002 the Claimants incorporated Starmill and Multipack
(Claimants 4 and 5):°

a. Starmill was incorporated to establish integrated in-house grain milling facilities.
It was designed to provide the milling capacity necessary for the planned
brewery, but started as a corn mill which provided raw materials for the distillery.
It was also responsible for the production of flour for several food products.
According to the Claimants, through the use of the Raw Materials Incentive,
Starmill would create cost efficiencies to help carry the businesses forward after
the incentives expired. The Claimants claim that they made substantial
investments for Starmill, including the purchase of land and construction (C-
Reply, {4 197-200).

b. Multipack was incorporated to carry out the packaging and labeling for nearly all
of the companies’ products. The Claimants also allege that it relied heavily on
the Raw Materials Incentive, and required substantial investments and created
over 200 new jobs (C-Reply, {J 201-204).

170. The second phase of the Claimants’ alleged expansion plan was to build a brewery,
the core capital expenditure for which would be funded by the profits from the other
investments. According to the Claimants, the construction and integration of the
brewery consisted of 4 components:

a. A state-of-the-art brewery with an initial capacity for 2M _ hectoliters/year,
expandable to 6M.

b. A malt plant, which would reduce the cost of malt by in-house manufacture;
c. Acanning plant, which would reduce packaging costs;

d. A co-generation plant, which would use the biomass by-products of the brewery
and other food and beverage production, and would save costs and produce
revenue through sales back to the state of excess electricity.

171. The Claimants allege that in 2001 they started construction of the brewery
(component (a) of paragraph 170 above), which was integrated into the other facilities
of the companies. The first phase of construction was completed in 2003 and the
second in 2006. (C-Reply, { 205-207).

172. The Claimants claim that they had plans to build the components identified in letters
(b) through (d) of paragraph 170 above, but their completion was thwarted by cash-

° Starmill and Multipack were incorporated on 21 February 2002 (“Correct Timeline of Messrs. Micula’s
Investments”, C-Reply at page 25; Exh. R-60).

50

constraints caused by the revocation of the incentives. The Claimants further claim
that the construction of these components began prior to the revocation of the
incentives, but that none of these components was ever completed. The Respondent
disputes all of these assertions (See Section VII below on Damages).

3. Permanent Investor Certificates

173. In order to benefit from EGO 24, the Claimants allege that the three Corporate
Claimants were required to obtain Permanent Investor Certificates (“PICs”), all of
which were issued by the North-West Regional Development Agency. Prior to their
issuance, the Claimants state that the Corporate Claimants could operate on the
basis of a Temporary Investor Certificate (“TIC”) for a period of 3 months (C-Reply, 1
156-160; WS of M. Ban, 9 41-46).

174. European Food (Claimant 3) obtained its Temporary Investor Certificate on 9
December 1999 (Exh. C-442). It was then issued PIC No. 524 on 1 June 2000 (Exh.
C-42, Exh. C-638), which stated that European Food

is the beneficiary of the facilities under Government Decision no. 194/1999,
in accordance with the provisions of Emergency Government Ordinance
no. 24/1998, republished and subsequently amended, and in accordance
with the provisions of Government Decision no. 728/2001 on the approval
of the methodological norms for the application of Emergency Government
Ordinance no. 24/1998 on the disfavoured regions regime.

The present certificate is valid until 01.04.2009.”

175. Starmill (Claimant 4) was issued PIC No. 1664 on 17 May 2002 (Exh. C-43), which
stated that Starmill

is the beneficiary of the facilities under Government Decision no. 194/1999,
in accordance with the provisions of Emergency Government Ordinance
no. 24/1998, approved and amended by Law no. 20/1999 and in
accordance with the provisions of Government Decision no. 525/1999 on
the approval of the methodological norms for application of Emergency
Government Ordinance no. 24/1998 on the disfavoured regions regime.

The present certificate is valid until 4/1/09

176. Multipack (Claimant 5) holds PIC No. 1663 issued on 17 May 2002 (Exh. C-44),
which stated that Multipack

is the beneficiary of the facilities under Government Decision no. 194/1999,
in accordance with the provisions of Emergency Government Ordinance
no. 24/1998, republished and subsequently amended, and in accordance
with the provisions of Government Decision no. 728/2001 on the approval

’ The Tribunal observes that this cannot have been the original PIC, because it includes a reference to
the 2001 Methodological Norms, which had not been issued at the time. The original PIC appears to
be at page 1 of Exh. C-638, which has not been translated. This version also appears to state that
European Food is the beneficiary of the facilities under GD 194/1999, in accordance with the
provisions of EGO 24. However, it does not say “republished and subsequently amended”, but rather
appears to say “approved and amended by Law 20/1999”, and adds a reference to the 1999
Methodological Norms (GD 525/1999).

51

of the methodological norms for application of Emergency Government
Ordinance no. 24/1998 on the disfavoured regions regime.

The present certificate is valid until 01.04.2009.

177. The legal nature and relevance of the PICs are disputed by the Parties.

D. ROMANIA’S ACCESSION PROCESS

178. In this section, the Tribunal will set out the chronology of events leading up to
Romania’s accession to the EU. One of the key areas of tension between Romania
and the EU during this process was the alignment of Romania’s competition policy
and state aid laws with the acquis communautaire (hereinafter the “acquis”), namely
the European body of law as it existed at a given time and resulting from, without
limitation, legal acts, court decisions or Commission's ordinances. In this process, the
incentives granted under the EGO 24 framework became increasingly relevant, and
were finally repealed. As a result, the Tribunal will include in this chronology the
developments relating to this framework.

1. Early steps: the Europe Agreement and Romania’s application for EU
membership

179. On 1 February 1993, Romania signed the Europe Agreement with the predecessor of
the EU (the “European Community”) and its Member States (Exh. R-10, C-565). The
Europe Agreement, which was to enter into force on 1 February 1995, established an
association between the European Community, its existing Member States and
Romania and provided the legal framework for the accession process. Among its
objectives was the promotion of Romania’s economic development and its gradual
integration into the European Community, in exchange for which Romania would
have to work towards fulfilling certain conditions (Europe Agreement, Article 1).

180. The Europe Agreement covered many different areas of governance, including
competition. With respect to state aid, Article 64 of the Europe Agreement provided:

Article 64

1. The following are incompatible with the proper functioning of this
Agreement, in so far as they may affect trade between the Community
and Romania: [...] (iii) any public aid which distorts or threatens to
distort competition by favouring certain undertakings or the production
of certain goods.

2. Any practices contrary to this Article shall be assessed on the basis of
criteria arising from the application of the rules of Articles 85, 86, and
92° of the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community.

® The Tribunal will use the term “European Community” to refer to the predecessor of the EU that
signed the Europe Agreement, formed by the European Economic Community, the European Atomic
Energy Community and the European Coal and Steel Community.

° Article 92 of the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community became Article 87 of the EC
Treaty (Exh. RS-9; C-583), which provided:

52

181.

182.

183.

3. The Association Council shall, within three years of the entry into force
of the Agreement, adopt the necessary rules for the implementation of
paragraphs 1 and 2.

4. (a) For the purposes of applying the provisions of paragraph 1, point
(ili), the Parties recognize that during the first five years after the entry
into force of the Agreement, any public aid granted by Romania shall
be assessed taking into account the fact that Romania shall be
regarded as an area identical to those areas of the Community
described in Article 92(3)(a) of the Treaty establishing the European
Economic Community. The Association Council shall, taking into
account the economic situation of Romania, decide whether that
period should be extended by further periods of five years. [...]

In turn, Article 87(3)(a) of the EC Treaty (which replaced Article 92(3)(a) of the Treaty
establishing the European Economic Community) (Exh. RL-177; C-583) provided:

The following may be considered to be compatible with the common
market: (a) aid to promote the economic development of areas where the
standard of living is abnormally low or where there is serious
underemployment; [...]

Another of the aims of the Europe Agreement was to promote economic cooperation
between Romania and the EC Member States. In this context, Article 74 of the
Europe Agreement on investment promotion and protection provided:

Article 74 - Investment promotion and protection

1. Cooperation shall aim to establish a favourable climate for private
investment, both domestic and foreign, which is essential to the
economic and industrial reconstruction of Romania.

2. The particular aims of the cooperation shall be:

for Romania to establish and improve a legal framework which
favours and protects investment;

the conclusion by the Member States and Romania of Agreements
for the promotion and protection of investment [...]

In addition to establishing principles and rules of governance, the Europe Agreement
provided that Romania would have to harmonize its existing and future legislation with
that of the Community:

Article 69 - The Parties recognize that an important condition for Romania's
economic integration into the Community is the approximation of

 

2.
L
3.
(

. Save as otherwise provided in this Treaty, any aid granted by a Member State or through State

resources in any form whatsoever which distorts or threatens to distort competition by favouring
certain undertakings or the production of certain goods shall, in so far as it affects trade
between Member States, be incompatible with the common market.

. The following shall be compatible with the common market:

 

. The following may be considered to be compatible with the common market:
‘a) aid to promote the economic development of areas where the standard of living is abnormally

low or where there is serious underemployment; [...]

53

184.

185.

186.

187.

188.

189.

190.

Romania's existing and future legislation to that of the Community.
Romania shall endeavour to ensure that its legislation will be gradually
made compatible with that of the Community.

Article 70 - The approximation of laws shall extend to the following areas in
particular: [...] rules on competition [...].

On 21-22 June 1993, the European Council concluded at its meeting in Copenhagen
that countries from Central and Eastern Europe which wished to become members of
the European Union would have to satisfy the economic and political conditions
required for membership (known as the “Copenhagen criteria”), including “the
existence of a functioning market economy as well as the capacity to cope with
competitive pressure and market forces within the Union.” The European Council
also “underlined the importance of approximation of laws in the associated countries
to those applicable in the Community, in the first instance with regard to distortion of
competition [...]” (Exh. R-62).

On 1 February 1995, the Europe Agreement entered into force.

On 22 June 1995, Romania presented its application for EU membership. On 17 July
1995, Romania’s application was submitted to the Commission, which pursuant to
[the EC Treaty] was required to give a favorable opinion for accession negotiations to
begin (Exh. C-317).

In its December 1995 meeting in Madrid, the European Council referred to the need,
in the context of the pre-accession strategy, “to create the conditions for the gradual,
harmonious integration of the applicant countries, particularly through: the
development of the market economy, the adjustment of their administrative structure,
[and] the creation of a stable economic and monetary environment” (Exh. C-317).

The European Commission, in an opinion dated 15 July 1997 (Exh. C-317),
summarized the state of Romania’s economy in 1995 as follows:

Romania, with a population of 22.6 million, had in 1995 a gross domestic
product (GDP) of ECU 93 billion (expressed in purchasing power parity); its
population was about 6.5% of the Union's, while its economy was only
about 1.5%. Per capita GDP is about 24% of the Union average.

On 10 April 1996 (effective 30 April 1996), Romania passed Law No. 21/1996 on
competition (Exh. R-73). The purpose of this law was to “protect, sustain and
stimulate competition and a normal competitive environment in order to promote the
interests of consumers.” This law created the Competition Office and the Competition
Council, which were tasked with overseeing the implementation of the law.

On 15 July 1997, the European Commission issued its Opinion on Romania’s
Application for Membership of the European Union (Exh. C-317). That Opinion
concluded that, despite its post-communist reforms, Romania did not meet the
Copenhagen criteria and thus was not yet ready to initiate accession talks.
Specifically, the European Commission concluded that:

54

- Romania has made considerable progress in the creation of a market
economy, but it would still face serious difficulties to cope with competitive
pressure and market forces within the Union in the medium term;

- despite the progress that has been made, Romania has neither
transposed nor taken on the essential elements of the acquis, particularly
as regards the internal market. It is therefore uncertain whether Romania
will be in a position to assume the obligations of membership in the
medium term. [...]

191. The European Commission described Romania’s economic situation in the pre-
accession context as follows (Section 2.2):

Romania has made enormous progress since the beginning of the
transition, although it cannot be considered, as yet, to be a functioning
market economy. [...]

Policy-making on economic issues has not always been coherent. As a
result, progress towards macroeconomic stability has not been steady:
recent years have been characterised by widely fluctuating performances
in term of growth, inflation and unemployment. Economic agents do not
necessarily perceive the macroeconomic environment to be stable enough
to promote the necessary level of savings and investment (both domestic
and foreign).

If fully implemented, the comprehensive programme of macroeconomic
stabilisation and structural reforms announced by the authorities in early
1997 should radically transform Romania's economy and lay the
foundations for healthy growth in the years ahead. But the implementation
of the basic features of the programme, especially with regard to
restructuring, will take many years. It is yet too early to assess whether the
programme will be implemented fully and successfully. [...]

In order to complete its transformation process successfully and prepare
for EU membership, the country still needs to implement many, detailed
and complex measures. [...]

In the past, foreign investors have singled out the unpredictable evolution
of the legal system and the different interpretation of double taxation
treaties as obstacles to doing business in Romania. [...]

[T]he ability to withstand competitive pressure depends not only on the
current structure of the economy, but also on the way in which it will
develop in the near to medium-term future. In this respect, Romania offers
a contrasted situation: the existing economic structure points to very
important structural weaknesses, while the reforms that have been
announced at the beginning of 1997 could have a very positive impact in a
relatively short period of time, especially if rapid privatisation is achieved
and foreign direct investment is forthcoming. However, in order to
withstand competition within the Union both the industrial and agricultural
sectors would need to undergo major structural transformation.

Ll

The current production base in industry relies to a large extent, although
not exclusively, on sectors with very high energy intensity, or which are
strongly dependent on imported raw materials, or have been the object of
exercises of capacity reduction within the Union. [...] The current structural
reforms should aim at the restructuring of the very large state-owned

55

combinats, which, in their present condition, would face strong competitive
pressures from their western competitors.

A diversification of the industrial base towards lighter industries, entailing
the creation of a large number of new, small and medium-sized
enterprises, and increased participation of foreign capital and know-how,
will help Romania adjust to the restructuring of the large enterprises. Light
industry is already well-developed in some sectors (wood products, leather,
textiles) and has achieved good performances on exports markets.

Although agriculture has been neglected in the last decades, it represents
a potentially important source of comparative advantage for Romania [...].
But the process of modernisation of the agricultural sector has just begun
and will require a policy aiming at stimulating investments both in the
farming sector and in the food industry.

Foreign direct investment has been low for a country the size of Romania:
at the end of 1996 cumulative FDI per capita stood at ECU 50. With a few
notable exceptions, FDI has not made a significant contribution to the
modernisation of either industry or agriculture. This means that production
in many sectors still relies on old and obsolete technologies. Increasing
the chances that Romanian producers will be able to withstand competition
of high-quality, high-standards EU goods, and improving the level of skills
in the economy calls for much bigger inflows of FDI.

Ll

Romania possesses a number of key advantages: its geographical location
at the cross-roads of many trade routes and in particular as the sea-gate
for accessing central European markets; the size of its population which
will attract industries with economies of scale; the relatively young
population which points to vast needs for durable goods; and its low level
of labour costs. All these factors could make Romania a strong export
base for accessing markets of smaller neighbours, especially for consumer
goods.

Ll

The relative success which Romania achieved in macroeconomic
stabilisation during 1995 and 1996 rested on very fragile foundations. In
fact, given the very slow progress in structural reforms, the high growth
rates of this period were not sustainable, and not compatible with the aim
of integrating Romania in the European and world economy. This diagnosis
was at the heart of the economic and social programme of the new
government elected in November 1996.

The programme of macroeconomic stabilisation and structural reforms
announced in February 1997 represents a very ambitious attempt to
radically transform, in a relatively short period of time, the old economic
structures and lay the foundations for a fully-functioning market economy.
However, this is only a first step in the right direction and much remains to
be done.

A stable and predictable macroeconomic framework is the first key
condition for laying the foundations of sustainable growth and
modernisation of the microeconomic side of the economy. [...]

The new Romanian authorities have already recognised the crucial role

that foreign investors and international financial institutions will play in the
success of their reform efforts. Restoring confidence among international

56

investors and lenders and securing their medium-term investment in
Romania calls for a stable macroeconomic framework, a sustained and
credible commitment to structural reforms, a clear and broad political
consensus over a medium-term strategy and the continuing legitimacy of
reforms among the population. These conditions are indispensable to
reduce political and economic uncertainty and so lay the foundations for
successful investment planning.

192. The Commission concluded with respect to the economic conditions for accession
(Section 2.3):

Romania has made considerable progress in the creation of a market
economy. The reorientation of economic policy since the recent change of
government marks a change for the better, but much still needs to be done.
While prices have been almost fully liberalised, property rights are not yet
fully assured for land, the legal system is still fragile and policy-making on
economic issues has not always been coherent. Further efforts to
consolidate the legal and administrative framework, and to address
persistent macroeconomic imbalances, are required to ensure a stable
environment.

Romania would face serious difficulties coping with competitive pressure
and market forces within the Union in the medium term. It has recently
made progress towards improving the competitive capacity of its economy,
notably by addressing major distortions such as low energy prices,
accelerating privatisation and beginning to wind up large loss-making state-
owned firms. However, much of Romania’s industry is obsolete, and
agriculture needs to be modernised. The low levels of research and
development, and of skills among the workforce also suggest that the
economy needs a number of years of sustained structural reform.

2. Romania’s initial efforts to align its state aid laws

193. On 10 March 1998, the European Commission issued its Guidelines on Regional Aid,
a set of criteria for assessing whether to allow regional aid under Article 87(3) of the
EC Treaty (previously Article 92(3) of the Treaty establishing the ECC) (Exh. RJ-9).
These Guidelines stated:

1. Introduction

Ll

Regional aid is designed to develop the less-favoured regions by
supporting investment and job creation in a sustainable context. It
promotes the expansion, modernisation and diversification of the activities
of establishments located in those regions and encourages new firms to
settle there. In order to foster this development and reduce the potential
negative effects of any relocation, it is necessary to make the granting of
such aid conditional on the maintenance of the investment and the jobs
created during a minimum period in the less favoured region.

In exceptional cases, such aid may not be enough to trigger a process of
regional development, if the structural handicaps of the region concerned
are too great. Only in such cases may regional aid be supplemented
by operating aid.

Ll

57

2. Scope

A derogation from the incompatibility principle established by Article 92(1)
of the Treaty may be granted in respect of regional aid only if the
equilibrium between the resulting distortions of competition and the
advantages of the aid in terms of the development of a less-favoured
region (6) can be guaranteed. The weight given to the advantages of the
aid is likely to vary according to the derogation applied, having a more
adverse effect on competition in the situations described in Article 92(3)(a)
than in those described in Article 92(3)(c) (7).

3. Demarcation of regions
[J
The derogation in Article 92(3)(a)

3.5. Article 92(3)(a) provides that aid to promote the economic
development of areas where the standard of living is abnormally low or
where there is serious underemployment may be considered compatible
with the common market. As the Court of Justice of the European
Communities has held, ‘the use of the words "abnormally" and "serious" in
the exemption contained in Article 92(3)(a) shows that it concerns only
areas where the economic situation is extremely unfavourable in relation to
the Community as a whole* (12).

The Commission accordingly considers, following a tried and tested
approach, that the conditions laid down are fulfilled if the region, being a
NUTS (13) level Il geographical unit, has a per capita gross domestic
product (GDP), measured in purchasing power standards (PPS), of less
than 75,0 % of the Community average (14). The GDP/PPS of each region
and the Community average to be used in the analysis must relate to the
average of the last three years for which statistics are available. These
amounts are calculated on the basis of data furnished by the Statistical
Office for the European Communities.

[J
4. Object, form and level of aid

4.1. The object of regional aid is to secure either productive investment
(initial investment) or job creation which is linked to investment. Thus this

method favours neither the capital factor nor the labour factor.

4.2. To ensure that the productive investment aided is viable and sound,
the recipient's contribution (20) to its financing must be at least 25 %.

The form of the aid is variable: grant, low-interest loan or interest rebate,
government guarantee or purchase of a State shareholding on favourable
terms, tax exemption, reduction in social security contributions, supply of
goods and services at a concessionary price, etc.

In addition, aid schemes must lay down that an application for aid must be
submitted before work is started on the projects.

[J
Operating aid

58

4.15. Regional aid aimed at reducing a firm's current expenses (operating
aid) is normally prohibited. Exceptionally, however, such aid may be
granted in regions eligible under the derogation in Article 92(3)(a) provided
that (i) it is justified in terms of its contribution to regional development and
its nature and (ii) its level is proportional to the handicaps it seeks to
alleviate (36). It is for the Member State to demonstrate the existence of
any handicaps and gauge their importance.

4.16. In the outermost regions qualifying for exemption under Article
92(3)(a) and (c), and in the regions of low population density qualifying
either for exemption under Article 92(3)(a) or under 92(3)(c) on the basis of
the population density test referred to at point 3.10.4, aid intended partly to
offset additional transport costs (37) may be authorised under special
conditions (38). It is up to the Member State to prove that such additional
costs exist and to determine their amount.

4.17. With the exception of the cases mentioned in point 4.16, operating
aid must be both limited in time and progressively reduced. In addition,
operating aid intended to promote exports (39) between Member States is
ruled out.

(Emphasis added).

194. In its Annual Report of 1998 regarding PHARE Program" (Exh. C-391), the European
Commission concluded:

Romania meets the Copenhagen political criteria. Much remains to be
done in rooting out corruption, improving the working of the courts and
protecting individual liberties and the rights of the Roma. Priority should
also be given to reform of the public administration.

Romania has made very little progress in the creation of a market economy
and its capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces has
worsened.

Despite progress made in transposition of key parts of the acquis, Romania
has a long way to go in terms of additional legislative transposition,
implementation and enforcement before the country will be able to assume
the obligations of membership. (p. 61).

195. The EC’s 1998 Annual Report also highlighted the importance of regional
development in Romania (p. 63):

Case study: regional development in Romania

Through a series of projects beginning in 1994, Phare is contributing to the
creation of the institutional and legal framework for the development of

' The Programme of Community aid to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe (Phare) is the
main financial instrument of the pre-accession strategy for the Central and Eastern European
countries (CEECs) which have applied for membership of the European Union. Since 1994, Phare's
tasks have been adapted to the priorities and needs of each CEEC. The revamped Phare programme,
with a budget of over EUR 10 billion for the period 2000-2006 (about 1.5 billion per year), has two
main priorities, namely institutional and capacity-building and investment financing. Although the
Phare programme was originally reserved for the countries of Central and Eastern Europe, it is set to
be extended to the applicant countries of the western Balkans (See http://europa.eu/
legislation_summaries/enlargement/ 2004_and_2007_enlargement/e50004_en.htm).

59

196.

197.

regional policy in Romania, and to preparations for programmes to be
implemented along the lines of the EU structural funds.

Under a 1994 Phare budget, EU and Romanian experts prepared an
analysis of regional disparities in Romania, and drew up proposals for a
legal and institutional framework for the development of regional policy.

In 1997, the conclusions of a Phare-financed study were published as a
Green Paper on Regional Development, which proposed the establishment
of a number of macro regions as planning units, based on associations of
elected county councils. The Green Paper also defined a national
framework for the development of regional policy and the financing of
programmes.

The government adopted the main points of the Green Paper as its policy
on regional development; consequently, a 1997 Phare budget was
approved, providing support for institution building at national and regional
level.

In 1998 a Law on Regional Development was passed, creating an
appropriate institutional framework and establishing a National Agency for
Regional Development and a National Fund for Regional Development.

A 1998 Phare budget was approved, providing preliminary financial support
for projects which would be proposed by the regions and financed out of
the National Fund for Regional Development. Linked to this is technical
assistance under the Special Preparatory Programme for Structural Funds,
which provides further support and training to relevant institutions at
regional and national level.

It is in this context that Romania adopted EGO 24/1998, which established the
legislative framework for the incentives at issue in this arbitration. As noted in
paragraph 145 above, the original version of EGO 24/1998 was passed on 30
September 1998 and entered into force on 2 October 1998.

On 22 March 1999, the Council of the EU issued Council Regulation (EC) No.
659/1999, which set out detailed rules for the application of Article 93 of the EC
Treaty with respect to the implementation of state aid measures and recovery of
unlawful and incompatible state aid (Exh. R-128)."' Article 1 of this Regulation
provided the following definitions:

"' articles 88 and 89 of the EC Treaty (previously Articles 93 and 94 of the Treaty establishing the
EEC) provided:

Article 88 [previously Article 93]

1. The Commission shall, in cooperation with Member States, keep under constant review all
systems of aid existing in those States. It shall propose to the latter any appropriate measures
required by the progressive development or by the functioning of the common market.

2. If, after giving notice to the parties concerned to submit their comments, the Commission
finds that aid granted by a State or through State resources is not compatible with the common
market having regard to Article 87, or that such aid is being misused, it shall decide that the
State concerned shall abolish or alter such aid within a period of time to be determined by the
Commission.

If the State concerned does not comply with this decision within the prescribed time, the
Commission or any other interested State may, in derogation from the provisions of Articles 226
and 227, refer the matter to the Court of Justice direct.

60

198.

199.

200.

201.

(b) “existing aid” shall mean: (i) all aid which existed prior to the entry into
force of the Treaty in the respective Member States, that is to say, aid
schemes and individual aid which were put into effect before, and are still
applicable after, the entry into force of the Treaty; [...]

(c) 'new aid’ shall mean all aid, that is to say, aid schemes and individual
aid, which is not existing aid, including alterations to existing aid; [...]

(f) ‘unlawful aid’ shall mean new aid put into effect in contravention of
Article 93(3) of the Treaty;

Under the Regulation, if the Commission considered that an existing aid scheme was
not, or was no longer, compatible with the common market, it would consult with the
Member State and issue a recommendation, which could consist in a substantive
amendment of the aid scheme, the introduction of procedural requirements, or the
abolition of the aid scheme. If the Member State did not accept the proposed
measures, the Commission could initiate a formal investigation procedure (Articles
17-19, 4(4), 6-9 of the Regulation).

On 27 July 1999, Romania passed Law No. 142/1999 on state aid (the “State Aid
Law’, Exh. R-75), which granted the Competition Council a wide range of powers to
regulate state aid in Romania, including the power to authorize or forbid the granting
of state aid.

In its composite paper “Reports on Progress towards Accession by each of the
Candidate Countries” dated 13 October 1999 (Exh. R-76), the EC noted that Romania
had made “some progress” in aligning state aid laws.

For context, the Tribunal recalls that, during 1999, the following events relating to the
EGO 24 framework and the Claimants’ investments took place:

 

On application by a Member State, the Council may, acting unanimously, decide that aid which
that State is granting or intends to grant shall be considered to be compatible with the common
market, in derogation from the provisions of Article 87 or from the regulations provided for in
Article 89, if such a decision is justified by exceptional circumstances. If, as regards the aid in
question, the Commission has already initiated the procedure provided for in the first
subparagraph of this paragraph, the fact that the State concerned has made its application to
the Council shall have the effect of suspending that procedure until the Council has made its
attitude known.

If, however, the Council has not made its attitude known within three months of the said
application being made, the Commission shall give its decision on the case.

3. The Commission shall be informed, in sufficient time to enable it to submit its comments, of
any plans to grant or alter aid. If it considers that any such plan is not compatible with the
common market having regard to Article 87, it shall without delay initiate the procedure provided
for in paragraph 2.

The Member State concerned shall not put its proposed measures into effect until this
procedure has resulted in a final decision.

Article 89 [previously Article 94]

The Council, acting by a qualified majority on a proposal from the Commission and after
consulting the European Parliament, may make any appropriate regulations for the application
of Articles 87 and 88 and may in particular determine the conditions in which Article 88(3) shall
apply and the categories of aid exempted from this procedure.

61

202.

204.

205.

a. On 25 March 1999, by means of Government Decision No. 194/1999 (“GD
194/1999”, Exh. C-31), Romania designated the $tei-Nucet region as a
disfavored region for a period of ten years, starting on 1 April 1999, and
stipulated that all six incentives offered under EGO 24/1998 would be available to
investors in the Stei-Nucet region while that region was designated disfavored.

b. As noted in paragraph 146 above, on 8 November 1999, Romania republished a
renumbered version of EGO 24/1998 (Exh. R-68).

c. On 9 December 1999, European Food obtained its Temporary Investor
Certificate (Exh. C-442).

Romania and the EU begin formal accession negotiations

On 10 and 11 December 1999, the European Council met in Helsinki to take a series
of decisions related to the EU’s enlargement process. As reflected in the
Presidency’s Conclusions (Exh. R-11, C-318), the European Council decided to
convene bilateral intergovernmental conferences in February 2000 to begin accession
negotiations with Romania and other countries.

In February 2000, Romania began its formal accession negotiations with the EU.
Chapter 6 was dedicated to competition policy.

The Respondent's expert Prof. Streinz notes that in July 2000, “[i]Jn accordance with
its mandate under Article 106 of the Europe Agreement, the Association Council
determined [...] to extend retroactively the application of Art. 87(3)(a) of the EC Treaty
to Romania for an additional period of five years.” (First ER of R. Streinz, p. 7, note
22). According to Prof. Dashwood, this was done in Decision 4/2000 published in
April 2001 (Exh. R-65; C-579).

The Decision of the Romanian Competition Council and amendments to the
EGO 24 regime

On 15 May 2000, the Romanian Competition Council, in the context of reviewing
proposed amendments to EGO 24/1998, issued Decision No. 244/2000 (Exh. R-78),
in which it determined, inter alia, that certain facilities provided under EGO 24/1998
distorted competition (specifically, the Raw Materials Incentive and the Components
Incentive) and had to be eliminated. It stated:

Whereas:

3. Exemption from customs duties- on raw materials are deemed State aid
for operating purposes and goes beyond the purpose of Emergency
Government Ordinance No 24/1998 on Less-Favoured Areas, leading to
distortion of competition. The granting of such facilities, subject to the
conditions set forth in the Ordinance, solely to economic operators who
make and register new investments puts the economic operators already in
the market at a disadvantage, as was alleged before the Competition
Council by both the Milling and Baking Industry Employers' Association
and the Romanian Meat Association. Exemption from paying customs
duties effectively stimulates imports to the detriment of domestic

62

206.

207.

producers. Largescale importing of live pigs from Hungary and the mere
slaughtering of these animals in Less Favoured Areas have occurred, with
the meat being sold in the form of carcases and no significant degree of
processing occurring. The cost of these products, which were subsidised in
their country of origin and also benefited from the facilities provided by
Emergency Government Ordinance No 24/1998, is lower and they are
penetrating neighbouring markets, with the result that they are in
competition with products produced outside Less Favoured Areas.

The Competition Council takes the view that the granting of these facilities
is distorting competition within the market, and has also expressed this
opinion in other similar cases.

Ll

On the basis of Article 12(2) [unclear letter - possibly "c" or "e"], the
Competition Council hereby takes the following:

DECISION

Article 1. The aid scheme set forth in Article 6 of Emergency Government
Ordinance No 24/1998 is authorised subject to the following conditions:

a) the provisions of Article 6(1)(b) of Emergency Government Ordinance
No 24/1998 republished, concerning the reimbursement of customs
duties on imported raw materials, spare parts and/or components
necessary for own production purposes within an area, and
consequently, the proposed amendment concerning exemption from
customs duties on raw materials shall be deleted;

d) the methodological standards for the application of Emergency
Government Ordinance No 24/1998 on Less Favoured Areas are to
be submitted to the Competition Council for approval, in accordance
with the provisions of Article 27(j) of Law No 21/1996.

Article 2. Pursuant to Article 13(2) of Law No 143/1999, the Competition
Council may decide to suspend the State aid scheme if the aid provider
fails to take the steps referred to in Article 1 of this Decision.

Ll

It was in this context that, on 1 June 2000, European Food was issued its PIC (see
paragraph 174 above).

On 16 June 2000 (effective 1 July 2000), Romania passed Emergency Government
Ordinance No. 75/2000 (“EGO 75/2000”, Exh. C-45, R-81), which amended EGO
24/1998 in the following ways: (a) it provided for an exemption (rather than the refund
originally contemplated) on customs duties on imported raw materials; (b) it excluded
spare parts and components from the customs duty exemption, and (c) it amended
the provisions regarding the award of funds under the Special Development Fund. It
did not eliminate the Raw Materials Incentive and the Components Incentive, as
recommended by the Competition Council.

63

5. Romania’s progress towards accession in the period 2000-2001

208. On 1 August 2000, the Romanian government presented a Position Paper on Chapter
6 (Competition Policy) (Exh. EC-1), in which Romania “accepts the entire acquis
communautaire in force on 31 December 1999, does not request transition periods or
derogations and declares that it will be able to entirely implement it upon accession.”
However, Romania added that:

Regarding the state aid rules and agreeing to the principles provided for in
Art. 87 and 88 of the Treaty establishing the European Community, it is
necessary to grant state aids to the sensitive sectors of economy and the
deprived areas due to the difficulties confronting the Romanian economy
during the transition to a market economy.

It is also obvious that, after accession, Romania's development level will
not exceed the EU average, and, consequently, the whole territory of
Romania will comply with the conditions laid down in Art. 87(3) of the
Treaty establishing the European Community.

209. In this Position Paper, Romania gave a detailed description of EGO 24/1998, as
amended by EGO 75/2000:

Regional development. Deprived areas

Based on the Romanian legislation, namely the Law on Regional
Development no. 151/1998, eight development regions were established.
Those regions correspond to the NUTS Il level of the European
classification. At that level, the programs and projects of regional
development are funded through the National Fund for Regional
Development that was established according to the Law no. 151/1998. The
funds for these programmes are yearly allocated through the state budget
as distinct item [sic] for the policy on regional development and also from
other domestic and foreign resources. The National Agency for Regional
Development administers, as provided for in the law, the National Fund for
Regional Development by annual allocations of funds to the eight Funds for
Regional Developments that were established in accordance to same law
and are managed by eight Agencies for Regional Development. The funds
allocated in this manner are granted to the recipients on competitive basis,
such as tendering for regional development projects.

The Government Emergency Ordinance no. 24/1998 on the deprived areas
(D areas) ensures a framework for granting state aid for the NUTS IV
(villages) to NUTS Ill (counties) areas. Since July 1999 the majority of
facilities granted to the investors within those areas became applicable
after the Methodological Rules which were authorised by Government
Decision no. 525/1999, came into effect.

On 16 June 2000, the Government Emergency Ordinance no. 75
amending the Government Emergency Ordinance no. 24/1998 was
adopted, the main facilities granted to the investors acting within the D
areas being the following:

- customs duty and VAT exemptions for machinery, equipment, motor-

vehicles, other capital assets which are imported for making
investments within the area;

64

210.

- VAT exemption for the domestic machinery, equipment, motor-
vehicles, other capital assets which are used for making investments
within the area;

- customs duty exemption for the raw materials imported for producing
within the area; profit tax exemption during the existence of the 0
area;

- fee exemption for the alteration of destination or driving out from
agricultural use of lands necessary for the investment.

In accordance to the legislation in force, the terms under which the
investors are deemed to benefit of the mentioned facilities are the
following:

- the facilities are granted only to the companies where the majority is
owned by private shareholders, Romanian legal persons; to private
undertakings or family associations which are licensed in accordance
to the Law no. 54/1990;

- the companies must have their headquarters and act within the D
area;

- the new investment to be made and registered within the financial
records of the undertaking, after the qualification of [sic] as a D area;

— the investment to be made within the interest fields which are covered
by the Government Decision qualifying the area as D area;

- through investment new jobs must be created for the unemployed
people which live within the D area;

- the goods for which facilities, such as fee exemption, must be used for
investments/production within the D area;

- _ the investment within the D area must be in function for a period twice
as long as the period when the facilities were granted, otherwise, the
investor is held to reimburse the amounts granted as facilities.

On 31 October 2000, at an Accession Conference with Romania, fifteen EU Member
States and Romania adopted the first European Union Common Position on

Competition Policy (‘EU Common Position 2000”, Exh. EC-2).
Position, the EU stated:

In this Common

The EU underlines the particular importance of the "acquis" under chapter
6 for the proper functioning of the internal market, including the creation of
a level playing field for investment. The significance of the "acquis" is such
that Romania has undertaken, under the Europe Agreement, to comply
with the Community rules on competition. Thus, while welcoming
Romania's statement that it accepts the "acquis" and will apply it as from
the accession, the EU underlines that the "acquis" under chapter 6, in
accordance with the Europe Agreement, has to be applied by Romania
already now. In this context, the EU also underlines the importance of
reinforcing the administrative capacity for effective implementation and
enforcement of the "acquis". Therefore, the EU will conduct a general
assessment of whether Romania has set up effective structures to enforce
and apply the relevant substantive rules of the "acquis". Moreover, the full
and immediate application of the "acquis" is also necessary in order to
adapt companies well before the date of accession to be able to withstand

65

the competitive pressures of the internal market resulting from the full and
direct application of the competition "acquis" upon accession. It is
inconceivable that the Romanian economy would be able to support the
switching from one day to the next to the full and correct application of the

 

211. With respect to the timely implementation of the Europe Agreement and the fulfillment
of accession criteria in the state aid field, the EU invited Romania, inter alia, to

- provide details regarding existing aid measures (i.e. those programs
on the basis of which aid continues to be granted and which existed
already before the entry into force of the present state aid law). In
particular, Romania should explain which measures are envisaged for
bringing such aid into line with the EU "acquis";

— provide a more detailed analysis of the aid facilities in the so-called D
areas of the country. In particular, Romania should explain what
action, in light of the Community Guidelines on Regional Aid, the
Competition Council has taken with regard to the Government
Ordinances providing for these aid facilities.

212. In its Regular Report on Romania’s progress towards accession dated 8 November
2000, the EC noted that:

Romania has made further progress in the transposition in the acquis in
this chapter.

Further alignment with the EC competition legislation and the improvement
of the administrative capacity in this field is a short-term priority in the
Accession Partnership.

Romania’s anti-trust legislation is largely in line with the acquis. During the
period under consideration the legislative framework for anti-trust has been
developed further by the adoption of secondary legislation. The anti-trust
enforcement authorities have dealt with an increasing number of cases.
The main challenge is now to ensure that the application and enforcement
of the anti-trust rules is effective and that priority is given to such cases that
concern the most serious distortions of competition. In order to achieve
this, the administrative capacity of the Romanian Competition Council and
Competition Office will need to be reinforced.

As concerns state aid the entry into force of the new state aid law on 1
January 2000 and the subsequent adoption of secondary legislation is an
important step forward. However, the major challenge is to ensure that the
legislation will be properly implemented and enforced. The recent adoption
of the law on ‘industrial parks’ is a major concern.

State aid reports have still to be submitted for the years 1998 and 1999.
The latest report broadly follows the methodology and the presentation of
the Community's Survey on State Aid. Additional work is needed in order to
finalise a comprehensive state aid inventory covering all aid measures in
operation in Romania.

In order to ensure a differentiation of maximum aid intensities in assisted

areas, Romania still has to prepare a regional aid map in consultation with
the Commission.

66

213. On 28 February 2001, Romania issued its Complementary Position Paper on Chapter
6 (Competition Policy) (Exh. EC-3). In this Complementary Position Paper, Romania
explained the EGO 24/1998 incentive regime as follows:

Through the Emergency Ordinance no. 75/2000 modifying the Emergency
Ordinance no. 24/1998 on the deprived areas, the following facilities may
be granted to the investors within D areas:

- customs duty and VAT exemptions for machinery, equipment,
installations, motor-vehicles, other capital assets which are imported
for making investments within the area;

- VAT exemption for the domestic machinery, equipment, installations,
motor vehicles, other capital assets, which are used for making
investments within the area;

- customs duty exemption for the raw materials imported for the own
production within the area;

- profit tax exemption during the existence of D area;

- fee exemption for the alteration of destination or driving out from
agricultural use of lands necessary for the investment.

Facilities provided for by Government Emergency Ordinance (GEO) no.
24/1998, amended by GEO no. 75/2000, are granted to undertakings
operating within deprived areas, mention being made that in the deprived
area co financing is approved only for projects selected by the National
Agency for Regional Development (NARD) through public tender,
nationwide, and within "Special Programs", as approved by decision of the
Government, programs which have been notified to the Competition
Council.

[The] Competition Council analyzed the existing state aid scheme provided
in GEO no. 24/1998; it found out that it seriously distorts competition, and
thus issued Decision no. 244/15.05.2000 whereby it authorized with
conditions the state aid scheme as contained in art. 6 of the GEO no.
24/1998. Providing for the elimination of art. 6 (I)(b) referring to refunding of
customs duties for imported raw materials, spare parts and/or components
dedicated to the own production in the deprived area, and for modification
of art. .6 (I)(c), mainly, the exemption from profit tax payment during the
existence of the deprived area shall be done only for plowed-back profit.
The modification of the existing state aid scheme contained in 311.6 of the
GED no. 24/1998, referring to exemption from customs duty payment for
imported raw materials, notified by NARD, has not been authorized by the
Competition Council.

GEO no. 75/2000 amending GED no. 24/1998 overlooked the conditions
set by the Competition Council through Decision no. 244/15.05.2000, and
maintained the facilities in art. 6 (I)(b) and (c) of GEO no. 24/1998.
Although the Competition Council did not authorize the modification of the
state aid scheme, GEO no. 75/2000 provides for exemption from payment
of custom duties for imported raw materials for the own production in the
deprived area.

In December 2000, the Competition Council has brought action at the

Court of Appeals alleging failure to comply with Competition Council's
Decision no. 244/15.05.2000 by the Government, which authorized, with

67

214.

215.

conditions, the modification of the state aid scheme within GEO no.
24/1998, modification made through GEO 00.75/2000.

The request was made in front of the Court of Appeals to cancel GED no.
75/2000 and to recover the state aid.

The Government will made [sic] a study in order to assess the effects of
enforcing this Ordinance, and further takes necessary measures.

On 10 April 2001, the EU-Romania Association Council adopted Decision 4/2000 (the
“Implementing Rules”, Exh. R-65), which prescribed the manner in which Article 64 of
the Europe Agreement would be implemented by Romania.

In its Regular Report on Romania’s progress towards accession dated 13 November
2001 (Exh. R-141), the EC provided the following assessment of Romania's
competition policy:

Romania has made considerable progress in creating a legal framework in
this area that is broadly aligned with the Community acquis. However,
additional efforts are necessary to complete the legal framework and
ensure its adequate enforcement.

As regards anti-trust, Romania’s legislation is largely in line with, and
covers most of, the acquis provisions. However, further secondary
legislation still needs to be adopted, to take account of the Commission's
new vertical restraints policy and its policy on horizontal cooperation
agreements. The Competition Council has broad powers to enforce
competition rules but will need further reinforcements- especially in the
form of training and IT equipment, in order to fulfil the tasks assigned to it.
It is essential that the Competition Council could focus its resources more
effectively on cases with most serious distortions to competition. A more
deterrent sanctioning policy will also be required. Finally, general
transparency, including an improved access of the public to relevant
documents should be increased.

As regards state aids, the existing legislation covers the basic principles of
state aid control. However, the field of application of this law is not
comprehensive and numerous state aid measures are not notified to the
competition authorities. Romania should rapidly adopt the required
secondary legislation on state aids, which is currently being prepared. This
is a precondition to any effective enforcement activities. A significant
number of unaligned aid schemes remains such as the profit tax rate 5%
on export earnings and the law on direct investment promotion. Moreover,
implementation of state aid policy in sensitive sectors is still at an early
stage. There are continuous problems with the monitoring of frequent
waivers by public bodies of the accumulated debt.

Romania has now formally adopted state aid reports for the period 1996 —
1999 but has yet to finalise the state aid inventory. In addition, Romania's
recent proposal for the regional aid map would allow aid intensities for
regional investment aid of up to 50% net grant equivalent. In the area of
state aids, both the Competition Office and the Competition Council require
further strengthening in terms of human resources and training.

In addition to strengthening administrative capacity within the competition
authorities, particular attention should also be given to intensifying the
training of the judiciary in the specific fields of anti-trust and state aid.
There is also a need to raise awareness amongst all market participants,

68

216.

217.

218.

219.

220.

221.

and especially amongst administrations granting state aids, of the policy
and legislative provisions in this area.

The EU Common Position issued on 21 November 2001 (the “2001 EU Common
Position’, Exh. EC-5) once again stressed “the particular importance of the acquis
under chapter 6 for the proper functioning of the internal market, including the
creation of a level playing field for investment’, and reminded Romania that “the
acquis under chapter 6, in accordance with the Europe Agreement, has to be applied
by Romania already now.” The EU Common Position also stated:

The EU further notes that there are a number of existing as well as new
incompatible aid schemes which have not been brought into line with the
acquis. The EU notes that such schemes include in particular the new
draft law on industrial parks, the fiscal facilities offered in the free areas
which are set up under Law No. 84/1992, the reduced rate of corporate
income tax of 5% for income from exports, and facilities provided under
Emergency Ordinances no. 24/1998 and 75/2000 in the so-called "D-
areas". The EU urges Romania to align the existing incompatible aid
schemes without delay. (2001 EU Common Position, p. 4)

However, the 2001 EU Common Position also stated:

With regard to aid which Romania wishes to operate beyond the date of
accession, the EU invites Romania to draw up a list of those existing aid
measures which the Competition Council considers as compatible with the
acquis. The EU invites Romania to transmit this list to the Commission;
Romania may continue to operate any aid which is included in the list and
against which the Commission has not objected for the period for which the
aid was approved by the Competition Council. A reference to the existing
aid list and to the procedure for its establishment will be included in the
Accession Treaty. (2001 EU Common Position, p. 4)

Further amendments to the EGO 24 Regime (2000-2001)

On 29 November 2000, by means of Government Decision No. 1199/2000 (Exh. C-
32) Romania extended the boundaries of the Stei-Nucet disfavored region to include
Draganesti, and specified that the entire region would remain disfavored until 31
March 2009.

On 26 January 2001, by means of Civil Decision No. 26 (Exh. C-582, R-140), the
Bucharest Court of Appeals dismissed the Competition Council’s application for the
partial annulment of EGO 75/2000.

On 26 April 2001, Government Decision No. 728/2001 repealed the earlier
methodological norms [for the implementation of] EGO 24/1998 and provided new
methodological norms (the “2001 Methodological Norms”, Exh. R-69, R-35).

In August 2001, Prime Minister Nastase announced a new policy in relation to the
establishment of new disfavored regions and the time periods for which the zones
would be declared disfavored. As reported by the press, he stated that “for the
existing zones, the current law shall be maintained”, although “the economic and
social status of the area shall be considered when allotting budgetary funds, with a
view to balance facilities through the level of budgetary allotments” (Exh. C-630).

69

222.

223.

224.

225.

226.

227.

228.

229.

On 7 November 2001, Romania passed Law No. 621/2001 (Exh. R-33, R-129), which
amended EGO 75/2000 by, among others, reinstating the customs duties exemption
on imported components.

Parallel developments in the EU and EGO 24 fronts (2002)

In its Regular Report on Romania's progress towards accession dated 9 October
2002, the EC noted that “there are still a large number of incompatible fiscal aid
schemes which need to be aligned” (Exh. R-109).

On 19 February 2002, the High Court of Cassation of Justice of Romania rejected, on
admissibility grounds, the lawsuit brought by the Competition Council for the partial
annulment of EGO 75/2000 (Exh. C-643).

On 17 May 2002, Multipack and Starmill were issued their PICs (see paragraphs 175-
176 above). Both PICs stated that they would be valid until 1 April 2009.

On 29 May 2002, Romania and Sweden signed the Bilateral Investment Treaty under
which this arbitration is brought (Exh. C-1). Romania ratified the BIT through Law No.
651/2002 (Exh. C-15) enacted on 7 December 2002. The BIT entered into force on 1
April 2003.

On 1 June 2002, Romania passed Law No. 345/2002 (Exh. R-90), which abolished
two of the incentives contemplated under EGO 24/1998, the Machinery Incentive and
the VAT Incentive.

In June 2002, the Romanian Government issued a “Report on the progress in
preparing for the accession to the European Union September 2001-May 2002”,
dated June 2002 (Exh. HEC-6), which stated that:

All existing State aid measures will be assessed, establishing their
compatibility with the acquis in order to suggest measures eliminating or
transforming the incompatible ones in compatibles [sic] aids, taking into
account the legal and economic implication of the modification of any
incompatible schemes on the already granted specific allocations.

This approach will be made according to the European Commission
recommendation and will take into consideration [sic] following three steps:
(i) closing the incompatibles [sic] schemes in order to stop potential future
allocations; (ii) the modification of these scheme to reach the compatibility
with the acquis; (iii) the identification of the solutions for the economic
agents that received the State aid under the present schemes (e.g. Free
areas, deprived areas etc). [...] (p. 132)

More specifically with respect to EGO 24, it stated that:

Regarding the “D areas”, the State aid granted in the present must [] be
converted into a compatible State aid. The Ministry of Development and
Prognosis started the technical debates with the beneficiary associations in
order to identify solutions and to make, in 2 months, proposals for
alteration of the present system of facilities. (p. 133)

70

231.

232.

233.

At the same time, Romania’s “National Programme for Accession of Romania to the
European Union” dated June 2002 (Exh. HEC-7) stated that “[t]he provisions of the
normative acts on facilities granted for ’D areas’ will be maintained till the moment of
Romania’s accession to the European Union” (p. 148).

On 1 July 2002, Romania passed Law No. 414/2002 (Exh. C-48), which repealed the
Profit Tax Incentive but grandfathered it for investors who held a PIC prior to the date
in which this law entered into force. The Profit Tax Incentive was later reintroduced
on 1 January 2004 by Law No. 507/2004 (Exh. C-52).

On 7 November 2002, Romania provided the EC with Additional Information on
Chapter 6 — Competition Policy (Exh. EC-6). With respect to EGO 24, Romania
merely informed the Commission that state aid for the D-areas was regulated by Law
621/2001, which approved EGO 75/2000, and informed the Commission of the
amendment to the VAT and the repeal of the profit tax incentive (noting that it had
been grandfathered for PIC holders).

"D area" granted facilities

Presently in Romania D areas are regulated by Law no. 621/2001 on the
approval of Government Emergency Ordinance (GEO) no. 75/2000 for the
alteration of Government Emergency Ordinance no. 24/1998, republished,
on deprived area (OG no. 737 of 19" November 2001), GEO no. 75/2000
for the alteration of GEO no. 24/1998, republished and GEO no. 24/1998
on deprived areas, approved and modified by Law no. 20/1999.

The regime of the facilities granted in "D" areas was changed by the recent
entering into force of the law on VAT and of the law on profit tax.

The Law 345/2002 on VAT entered into force on 01.06.2002 and
abrogated the facility of exempting from VAT payment granted for
machines, outfits, installations, equipments, means of transport, other
depreciable goods imported or produced in the country that were
necessary for the investments in a D area. This facility was stipulated in
Art. 6(1) of the GEO no. 24/1998 regarding the regime of the deprived
areas.

The Law no. 414/2002 (OG no. 456/27.06.2002) on profit tax abrogated the
facility of exempting undertakings acting in "D" areas from the payment of
the profit tax. This facility was stipulated in Art. 6(1), let. c) of the GEO no.
24/1998 regarding the regime of the deprived areas.

For ensuring the legislative continuity, the legal persons that had obtained
the permanent certificate of investor in "D" area before the Law no.
414/2002 entered into force, will further benefit from the profit tax
exemption on the whole duration of existence of the deprived area,
according to Art. 35, par. 3.

On 19 November 2002, Romania passed Law No. 678/2002 (Exh. C-49) which
amended the Raw Materials Incentive by excluding from the customs duties
exemption raw materials for the production, processing and preservation of meat.

71

Events leading up to the revocation of EGO 24

On 7 April 2003, the Mission of Romania to the EU sent a communication to the
Romanian Minister for European Integration and other state officials, including Mr.
Orban and Mr. Berinde (Communication No. 1480, Exh. R-93). It stated:

Community officials stated clearly that the negotiations on this chapter
may be closed if, and only if, the following conditions (relating
primarily to State aid, which was found to have the highest potential to
distort the Internal Market) are met: new aid must comply strictly with the
acquis, existing aid must be aligned or in the process of being aligned
(including in terms of duration; the granting of transition periods may be
considered depending on the outcomes of discussions between the
competent institutions in Romania and the relevant operators), and ALL
cases of non-notified State aid must be analysed and resolved.

Ll

The Commission stated that it had asked all of the candidate countries to
bring their tax breaks into line with the acquis communautaire, including
those granted in Free Zones or Less Favoured Areas, which entails either
their withdrawal or their conversion into compatible aid. In the latter case,
negotiations with a view to converting them into compatible schemes
must be pursued directly by the Competition Council with the
economic operators concerned. Only once this has occurred can the
companies for which transition periods may be negotiated with the EU be
identified.

(Emphasis added)

In its Common Position dated 28 May 2003 (Exh. EC-8), the EU invited Romania to
provide information on benefits granted in disfavored regions and urged Romania to
close “incompatible aid schemes for new entrants with immediate effect.” More
specifically:

The EU recalls that all fiscal aid provisions, (for example those included in
the VAT Law; the Law on customs duties exemptions - including
benefits for transactions undertaken by firms located in industrial parks,
free zones and disadvantaged areas [...]) should be subject to the
approval by the Competition Council. In cases where the Competition
Council the to be i ible with
the State aid rules, the E\ U it invites Romania to either end the measures
or to align them with the acquis.

The EU invites Romania to bring all incompatible aid measures in line with
the acquis without delay and to continue to provide information on the
progress made towards this goal. [...]

The EU moreover invites Romania to provide information on individual
benefits granted in the free zones and the disadvantaged areas and on any
other individual tax benefits that have already been granted and which
provide for tax benefits beyond Romania's target date for accession. The
EU urges Romania to close incompatible aid schemes for new
entrants with immediate effect.

 

In this context Romania is further invited to present a plan outlining how
it intends to convert the benefits that are incompatible with the acquis

72

237.

and to hold further technical consultations with the Commission to explore
the possibilities for this conversion.

Ll

With regard to aid which Romania wishes to operate beyond the date of
accession, the EU recalls it's invitation to Romania to draw up a list of
those existing aid measures which the Competition Council considers as
compatible with the acquis and to transmit this list to the Commission. The
EU recalls that Romania may continue to operate any aid which is included
in the list and against which the Commission has not objected for the
period for which the aid was approved by the Competition Council. A
reference to the existing aid list and to the procedure for its establishment
will be included in the Accession Treaty.

The EU recalls that the existing aid measures are subject in accordance
with Article 88(1) of the EC Treaty to the appropriate measures
procedure, under which the Commission can, in cooperation with the
(future) Member State, propose changes to an aid measure for the future.
To the extent that Romania wishes to benefit from this mechanism, the EU
invites Romania to present the following to the Commission, every six
months as from 1 January 2002, and up until the date of accession:

(a) a list of all existing aid measures (both schemes and ad hoc aid) (i)
which have been assessed by the Competition Council and (ii) which it
found to be compatible with the acquis; (b) any other information which is
essential for the assessment of the compatibility of the aid measures
referred to under (a).

Details on the precise format for this reporting have been provided by the
Commission.

The EU underlines that all aid measures in Romania which are considered
State aid according to the acquis and which are not included in this list
shall be considered as new aid upon Romania's accession. After that date,
application of such an aid measure will be conditional upon Romania's
notification of it pursuant to Article 88 of the EC Treaty, and a decision of
the Commission that the aid measure in question is compatible with the
Common Market. As regards individual aid, no measures which continue
to have effects after accession and which are incompatible will be
acceptable.

(Emphasis added)

On 23 December 2003, Law No. 571/2003 on the Fiscal Code (Exh. R-37) revoked
Law 345/2002, thus reinstating the Machinery Incentive and the VAT Incentive.

In an interview on national TV conducted on 12 January 2004, Prime Minister
Nastase indicated that the incentives regime provided by EGO 24/1998 could be
terminated due to EU requirements. However, he also stated that the Government
was examining whether some of the incentives would remain in place until 2007,
noting that the Government had negotiated some transition periods with the EU and
that they were trying to find “elegant solutions” (Exh. C-651). When asked to confirm
if certain investors could benefit from the program until 2007, Minister Nastase stated
that they would try to negotiate an extension that would allow the incentives to remain
in place until that time. When asked what would happen to investors who had

73

239.

240.

invested large amounts of money, the Minister stated that the Government was
negotiating with each investor.

On 24 March 2004, Romania issued its Complementary Position Paper III on Chapter
6 — Competition Policy (Exh. EC-9). With respect to EGO 24/1998, Romania noted:

The Ministry of Administration and Interior elaborated a draft law for
completing the Government Emergency Ordinance no. 24/1998 on the
regime of deprived areas. The draft provides that the facilities the
undertakings that have an investor certificate and operate in deprived
areas benefit from, will be granted below the maximum admitted intensity
foreseen in the Regulation on regional aid. At present, the draft normative
act is under inter-ministerial endorsement procedure.

By entering into force of the Fiscal Code, the fiscal facilities have been
significantly diminished. In fact, the undertakings with investor
certificate in the deprived areas will benefit from the exemption from
the payment of the taxes perceived for changing the destination or
removing from the agrarian circuit of certain fields designated to achieving
the investment as well as the exemption from the custom duties
payment for raw materials and imported components, excepting the
import of the raw material for meat production, processing and
preserving. Also the undertakings that obtained before 1 July 2003 the
permanent certificate of investor in the deprived area, will benefit from
exemption from the profit tax payment related to the new investment,
during the whole existing duration of the deprived area.

(Emphasis added).

In May 2004, in an interview in Oradea, Bihor County (Exh. C-652), Prime Minister
Nastase indicated that “[s]ubsequent to 2007, when we want to be accepted in the
European Union, these disfavored areas will no longer exist in Romania.” When
asked about compensation to investors in those areas, the Prime Minister answered
that Romania would discuss these matters during its negotiations with the European
Union and they would see if Romania was “able to obtain some transition periods for
them.” The Prime Minister specified that “there will be no fiscal incentives, there will
be some compensation packages, established during direct negotiations.” The Prime
Minister also stated that the government would talk to the investors, and “based on
the conclusions of the negotiations of the Competition Chapter, we will negotiate with
those who initially obtained these fiscal incentives” (Exh. C-652, pp. 7-9 of
translation).

On 7 June 2004, Romania passed Law No. 239/2004 to supplement EGO 24/1998
(Exh. R-147). This law subjected all state aid to a maximum intensity requirement. *
In other words, it provided that the EGO 24/1998 facilities could not exceed the
thresholds of permissible state aid approved by the Competition Council. If investors
exceeded the maximum permitted intensity, the facilities would cease to be granted.

" In June 2004, Romania passed Law 239/2004, which made all State aid subject to a maximum-
intensity requirement. According to a definition provided by the Respondent, “[vjalid intensity is
measured as the amount of aid in relation to the costs of production or the costs of investment of the
company or project that receives the aid.” P. Nicolaides, M. Kekelekis, P. Buyskes, State Aid Policy in
the European Community (2nd edn 2005) (Exh. RL-179), p. 38.

74

241.

242.

243.

244.

245.

On 31 August 2004, by means of Government Ordinance No. 94/2004 (“GO
94/2004”, Exh. R-94), Romania repealed Article 6(1)b)d) and e) of EGO 24/1998, thus
repealing/revoking the incentives provided under EGO 24/1998, including the Raw
Materials Incentive, with the exception of the Tax Profit Incentive. The repeal was
originally to become effective 90 days from the date of entry into force of GO 94/2004
(that is, on 3 December 2004). However, the date of repeal was subsequently
extended to 22 February 2005 by means of Law No. 507/2004 of 22 November 2004
(Exh. C-52), which approved and amended GO 94/2004 to that effect. The
substantiation report accompanying GO 94/2004 stated:

In order to meet the criteria in the Community rules on state aid, and also
to complete the negotiations under Chapter No. 6 — Policy it is necessary
to eliminate all forms of State aid in national legislation incompatible with
the acquis communautaire in this area and, in this respect, it is proposed to
repeal [...] the provisions of Article 6 paragraph (1), letter (b), letter (d) and
letter (e) of the Emergency Government Ordinance no. 24/1998 on the
disadvantaged areas [...]

(Substantiation Report accompanying EGO 94/2004, 26 August 2004, Exh.
R-95, pp. 12-13).

On 13 September 2004, the Claimants requested Romania to restore the tax
incentive regime (Exh. C-8, ER of G. Piperea, [ 5.3).

On 8 December 2004, the EU issued a Common Position (“2004 EU Common
Position”, Exh. EC-10), in which it welcomed the amendments to the regimes related
to Free Trade Areas and Deprived Areas. In this context, the EU noted that Romania
had requested two transitional periods, one with respect to the Profit Tax Incentive
under EGO 24/1998 and another with respect to a royalty exemption under Law No.
84/1992. The EU accepted both transitional arrangements proposed by Romania.
With respect to the Deprived Areas, this meant that investors holding a PIC granted
prior to 1 July 2003 could continue to benefit from the Profit Tax Incentive for as long
as the Deprived Areas continued to exist, under certain conditions (limited to 2008,
2009 or 2010, depending on the deprived area; net intensity of aid granted must
remain below certain specified aid ceilings and the eligible costs must be defined in
accordance with the Regional Aid Guidelines).

On 22 February 2005, the revocation of the EGO 24/1998 incentives (with the
exception of the Profit Tax Incentive) became effective.

Also on 22 February 2005, the EC issued its Opinion on Romania’s EU application
(Exh. R-50) where it stated:

(7) In joining the European Union, the Republic of Bulgaria and Romania
accept, without reserve, the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe,
and until its entry into force, the Treaty on European Union and the
Treaties establishing the European Communities including all their
objectives and all decisions taken since their entry into force, and the
options taken in respect of the development and strengthening of those
Communities and of the Union.

75

246.

247.

248.

249.

(8) It is an essential feature of the legal order introduced by the Treaties
establishing the European Communities and, at its entry into force, the
Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe that certain of their provisions
and certain acts adopted by the institutions are directly applicable, that the
law of the Union takes precedence over any national provisions which
might conflict with it, and that procedures exist for ensuring the uniform
interpretation of the law of the Union; accession to the European Union
implies recognition of the binding nature of these rules, observance of
which is indispensable to guarantee the effectiveness and unity of the law
of the Union.

Subsequent events

On 25 April 2005, the Member States of the EU signed the Accession Treaty with
Romania and Bulgaria (the “Accession Treaty”, Exh. R-27). The Treaty was to enter
into force on 1 January 2007 [i.e., this would be the date of accession]. However,
pursuant to Article 4(3), the institutions of the EU could adopt before accession
certain measures specified in the Protocol annexed to the Accession Treaty, which
set out the conditions and arrangements for admission. Annex VII to the Accession
Protocol (Exh. R-52, R-98), Section 4 on Competition Policy, subsection A on Fiscal
Aid, set out the transitional period with respect to the Profit Tax Incentive referred to
in the 2004 EU Common Position. With respect to the Stei-Nucet disfavored regions,
it stated that Romania could continue granting the Profit Tax Exemption until 31
December 2009, subject to certain state aid intensity requirements and other
conditions.

On 28 July 2005, the Claimants filed their Request for Arbitration.

On 4 March 2006, the EC issued the Guidelines on National Regional Aid for 2007-
2013 (Exh. C-298), which set out the principles according to which EU Member
States could grant regional aid to disadvantaged areas. With respect to operating
aid, the Guidelines provided:

Regional aid aimed at reducing a firm's current expenses (operating aid) is
normally prohibited. Exceptionally, however, such aid may be granted in
regions eligible under the derogation in Article 87(3)(a) provided that (i) it is
justified in terms of its contribution to regional development and its nature
and (ii) its level is proportional to the handicaps it seeks to alleviate (69). It
is for the Member State to demonstrate the existence and importance of
any handicaps (70). In addition, certain specific forms of operating aid can
be accepted in the low population density regions and the least populated
areas.

On 1 January 2007, the Accession Treaty entered into force and Romania became a
Member State of the EU.

76

251.

252.

254.

255.

SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

The purpose of this section is to provide an overview of the Parties’ positions. The
Parties’ detailed positions with respect to each claim are described in Section VI
below (Analysis of the Claimants’ Treaty Claims).

A. THE CLAIMANTS’ POSITION

The Claimants’ case has evolved over time. Although its core elements remain
unchanged, the focus of the Claimants’ arguments has shifted, as has the structure of
these arguments.

The Claimants contend that “[i]n the course of enacting, promoting and implementing
the EGO 24 regime, the Respondent made unambiguous and binding commitments
to foreign investors, the Micula brothers, that they would be granted a number of
incentives for a 10 year period in return for making certain large investments in one of
the poorest and least developed regions of Romania” (C-PHB, § 1). The Claimants
claim that, in specific reliance on these commitments, and in particular in reliance on
the expectation that the incentives would last through the entire 10 year period, the
Claimants invested massively in the $tei-Nucet-Draganesti area, one of Romania’s
most remote and disfavored regions.

In the latest formulation of their case, the Claimants argue that Romania entered into
these binding commitments through EGO 24; its implementing legislation, in particular
GD 194/1999; and the issuance of Permanent Investor Certificates (PICs) to the three
Corporate Claimants. The Claimants submit that these PICs certified that the
Claimants had the right to receive the incentives until 1 April 2009, which was also the
date in which Stei-Nucet-Draganesti would cease to be considered a disfavored
region.

The Claimants argue that Romania’s binding commitment to provide the incentives to
the Claimants until 1 April 2009 gave rise to a right to receive those incentives until
that date, or at least generated a legitimate expectation that they would benefit from
those incentives until that date. The Claimants contend that Romania’s revocation of
these incentives effective 22 February 2005 (approximately 4 years before they were
set to expire) breached that commitment or undermined that legitimate expectation.

The Claimants contend that Romania’s premature revocation of the incentives was
unfair and unlawful. While Romania argues that it was forced to revoke the incentives
to comply with EU requirements, the Claimants assert that the incentives were in fact
compatible with EU law, and no competent authority had issued a decision requiring
Romania to terminate the incentives. The Claimants also complain that Romania did
not attempt to negotiate with either the EU or the Claimants to find a solution that
would mitigate the adverse effects on their business of the premature revocation of
the incentives. The Claimants argue that, most egregiously, Romania revoked only
the provisions of EGO 24 that established the incentives, while retaining those that

77

257.

set out the Claimants’ obligations to remain invested in the Stei-Nucet-Draganesti
region for twice the time they received the incentives.

In view of the above, the Claimants argue that Romania has breached the Claimants’
rights under the Sweden-Romania BIT and under international law. Specifically, they
contend that the premature revocation of the EGO 24 incentives:

a. Breached a clear commitment undertaken by Romania vis-a-vis the Claimants,
and therefore breached the BIT’s umbrella clause contained in Article 2(4) of the
BIT;

b. Undermined the Claimants’ legitimate expectations, upset the stability of the
regulatory regime, lacked transparency and consistency, and was taken in bad
faith, and therefore breached Romania’s obligation under Article 2(3) of the BIT to
afford the Claimants fair and equitable treatment;

c. Impaired by unreasonable measures the management, maintenance, use,
enjoyment and disposal of the Claimants’ investments, and therefore breached
Article 2(3) of the BIT; and

d. Expropriated without compensation the Claimants’ right to receive the incentives
and substantially deprived their entire investment of value, and therefore
breached Article 4(1) of the BIT.

The Claimants claim that, because the early revocation of these incentives violated
an obligation entered into by Romania vis-a-vis the investors (and thus breached the
BIT’s umbrella clause), the revocation also undermined the Claimants’ legitimate
expectations (and consequently breached the BIT’s fair and equitable treatment
standard). However, in the Claimants’ view, even if the premature revocation of the
incentives does not breach the umbrella clause (e.g., because the promise allegedly
made by the Respondent does not rise to the level of an obligation protected by the
umbrella clause), the Tribunal could still find a violation of the fair and equitable
treatment standard because the revocation upset the Claimants’ legitimate
expectations (Tr., Day 12, 126:22-128:6 (Reed)).

The Claimants deny that the termination of the incentives was required under EU law.
The Claimants allege that, to the contrary, the incentives were one of the factors that
allowed Romania to accede to the EU in the first place. Indeed, the Claimants argue
that Romania desperately needed economic development, particularly in certain
distressed regions, to be able to join the EU. In their view, incentive programs such
as EGO 24 greatly contributed to this development.

The Claimants argue that Romania has failed to show how the EGO 24 incentives
conflicted with EU law and that Romania has not provided evidence that the EU
required the termination of the incentives in order to obtain accession.

The Claimants specific arguments with respect to the alleged treaty breaches are
discussed in Section VI below (Analysis of the Claimants’ Treaty Claims).

78

261. The Claimants argue that these breaches caused substantial damage to the
Claimants, as set out in Section VII below (Damages).

262. On the basis of the foregoing, the Claimants request the following relief:

The Claimants request an award be made granting the relief set out in
paragraphs 1 to 6 below.

Any damages payable, including interest and costs, should be awarded to
the individual Claimants, loan Micula and Viorel Micula, to be divided
between them on a 50:50 basis.

In the alternative, any damages payable, including interest and costs,
should be awarded to all five Claimants.

1. A declaration that Romania has violated the Sweden-Romania
Bilateral Investment Treaty (“Treaty”) and customary international law
by:

1.1 failing to ensure fair and equitable treatment of the Claimants’
investments (Article 2(3) of the Treaty) by treating the
Claimants’ investments in a manner that was inconsistent,
ambiguous, and not transparent;

1.2 failing to ensure fair and equitable treatment of the Claimants’
investments (Article 2(3) of the Treaty) by violating the
Claimants’ legitimate expectations regarding their investments;

1.3 impairing the Claimants’ investments through unreasonable and
discriminatory measures (Article 2(3) of the Treaty);

1.4 failing to observe obligations entered into with the Claimants
with regard to their investments (Article 2(4) of the Treaty); and

1.5 expropriating the Claimants’ investments without the payment of
prompt, adequate, and effective compensation (Article 4(1) of
the Treaty).

2. Damages for the following losses suffered by the Claimants:
A. Expectation losses

2.1 Losses suffered as a result of the increased cost of raw
materials following revocation of the incentives provided by
Emergency Government Ordinance 24/1998 (“Incentives”) and
the lost opportunity to build a sugar stockpile in 2009,
comprising:

(a) increased costs of sugar in the amount of RON 85.1
million;

(b) increased costs of PET in the amount of RON 6.3 million;

(c) increased costs of raw materials other than sugar and PET
in the amount of RON 17.5 million; and

(d) lost opportunity to stockpile sugar in 2009 in the amount of
RON 62.5 million.

79

2.2

2.3

24

25

26

Financial penalties incurred but not yet paid as a result of the
Claimants being financially constrained due to the losses
incurred as a result of the revocation of the Incentives in the
amount of RON 63.65 million as 30 September 2010 unless
these financial penalties are waived by the Respondent and a
declaration that the Respondent shall waive or reimburse all
additional financial penalties imposed or assessed until the date
of Romania's full and final satisfaction of the award.

Financial penalties paid by the Micula brothers’ companies in
the period 1 April 2005 to 30 September 2010 in the amount of
RON 40 million.

Lost profits on sales of finished goods following revocation of
the Incentives of no less than RON 427 million.

Lost profits on sales of Sugar Containing Products (“SCPs”)
following revocation of the Incentives in the amount of RON
492.3 million.

Lost profits incurred as a result of the Claimants’ inability to

complete their incremental investments following revocation of

the Incentives comprising:

(a) amalt plant in the amount of RON 28 million;

(b) a cogeneration [p]lant in the amount of RON 712.6 million;
and

(c) a canning [p]lant and subsequent sales of private label
beer in the amount of RON 720.4 million.

In the alternative to paragraphs 2.3, 2.4 and 2.5 above, lost

profits on sales of finished goods following revocation of the
Incentives in the amount of RON 2423.2 million.

Reliance losses

27

In the alternative to the losses described in paragraphs 2.1,
2.2A, and 2.3 to 2.6 above, but not 2.2, the amounts lost by the
Claimants as a result of investing in reliance on the Incentives
in the amount of RON 811 million.

An award of interest on the damages payable pursuant to paragraph 2
above calculated in the following manner:

3.1

3.2

3.3

For losses as described in paragraphs 2.1(a) to (c) above,
interest compounded on a quarterly basis at a rate of 3 month
ROBOR (Romanian Interbank Offer Rate) plus 5% from 1
March 2007 until the date of Romania’s full and final satisfaction
of the award.

For losses as described in paragraph 2.1(d) above, interest
compounded on a quarterly basis at a rate of 3 month ROBOR
plus 5% from 1 July 2010 until the date of Romania’s full and
final satisfaction of the award.

For penalties as described in paragraph 2.2A above, interest
compounded on a quarterly basis at a rate of 3 month ROBOR

80

plus 5% from 1 July 2007 until the date of Romania’s full and
final satisfaction of the award.

3.4 For losses as described in paragraph 2.3 above, interest
compounded on a quarterly basis at a rate of 3 month ROBOR
plus 5% from 1 May 2008 until the date of Romania’s full and
final satisfaction of the award.

3.5 For losses as described in paragraph 2.4 above, interest
compounded on a quarterly basis at a rate of 3 month ROBOR
plus 5% from 1 March 2007 until the date of Romania's full and
final satisfaction of the award.

3.6 For losses as described in paragraph 2.5 above, interest
compounded on a quarterly basis at a rate of 3 month ROBOR
plus 5% from 30 September 2009 until the date of Romania’s
full and final satisfaction of the award.

3.7. For losses as described in paragraph 2.6 above, interest
compounded on a quarterly basis at a rate of 3 month ROBOR
plus 5% from 15 August 2007 until the date of Romania's full
and final satisfaction of the award.

3.8 For the amounts lost by the Claimants as a result of investing in
reliance on the Incentives as described in paragraph 2.7 above,
interest to be applied compounded on a quarterly basis at a rate
of 3 month ROBOR plus 5% from 1 January 2002 until the date
of Romania’s full and final satisfaction of the award.

3.9 The ROBOR rate to be applied in relation to paragraphs 3.1 to
3.8 above is to be the average annual rate for each year or part
thereof.

4. The total amount of damages payable by the Respondent comprising
the amounts set out in paragraphs 2, 3 and 5 to be received net of any
tax obligations imposed by Romania on the proceeds.

5. All costs incurred by the Claimants in relation to these proceedings,
including but not limited to the Claimants’ lawyers’ fees and expenses,
experts’ fees and expenses, and all costs of ICSID and the Tribunal.

6. Any further relief that the Tribunal may deem fit and proper.

(Claimants’ Revised Request for Relief, footnotes omitted)
263. In addition, the Claimants request that the Tribunal:"*

Ll

b. provide in the Award that Romania is enjoined from any further tax
collection measures of any kind in respect of the Claimants and the
EFDC until such a time as the damages awarded by the Tribunal have
been paid in full, and include a pecuniary alternative in case of non-
performance;

'3 These additional requests were made in the context of the Respondent's application to revoke the
provisional measures recommended by the Tribunal. As noted in paragraph 111 above, the
determination of these matters was deferred to the final Award.

81

264.

265.

266.

267.

268.

269.

270.

c. issue a declaration that Romania is not entitled to set-off tax debts of
the EFDC against an Award in favor of Claimants;

d. order Romania to pay all of Claimants’ costs in responding to this
Application, including reasonable lawyers’ fees and other costs; and

e. grant any other relief that the Tribunal may deem fit and proper in
these proceedings.

(Claimants’ Rejoinder on the Respondent's Revocation Application, § 75).

B. THE RESPONDENT’S POSITION
The Respondent rejects each of the Claimants’ claims under the BIT.

The Respondent argues that the key question in this case is “who bore the risk of
regulatory change: the state or the investors who benefitted from the existing
regulatory regime” (R-Rejoinder, { 9).

The Respondent contends that the BIT does not require the Contracting States to
tailor their laws and regulations to the preference of foreign investors, nor does it
establish liability for every regulatory change that has a negative impact on the
foreign investors’ businesses. To the contrary, investment protection treaties accord
host states considerable deference in relation to regulatory policy. As a result, the
Respondent argues that where a state has exercised its sovereign powers to regulate
in a general, non-discriminatory way to advance public welfare (including by
legislative changes), such conduct is not an “expropriation”, “unfair and inequitable
treatment”, or otherwise in breach of the provisions of an investment protection treaty.
Absent a clear commitment from the state to stabilize a regulatory framework, states
are usually free to change their laws.

Indeed, the Respondent argues that businessmen know this, and factor regulatory
risk into their business plans. According to the Respondent, the Claimants did not do
so because they thought they had a special status that protected them from any
regulatory changes.

In the present case, the Respondent notes that it is undisputed that the modification
of the facilities that had been granted pursuant to EGO 24/1998 was a generally
applicable act. The Respondent also argues that it was compelled to curtail the
facilities as an essential precondition to accession to the EU. Accordingly, the
Tribunal should give deference to Romania’s action when applying the substantive
provisions of the BIT (R-CM, { 92).

Building on this fundamental premise, the Respondent makes four main arguments.

The Respondent's first line of argument is that three (and possibly four) of the
Claimants’ claims fail because the Claimants have not proven that Romania made a
binding promise to the Claimants that the facilities under EGO 24, either in their
totality or the Raw Materials Facility individually, would remain unchanged until 2009.
The Respondent argues that the Claimants’ ability to establish the existence, terms

82

271.

272.

273.

274.

275.

and duration of this promise is an essential condition for the following three claims
(although it is not a sufficient condition for the success of any of them) (Tr., Day 13,
60:2-65-7; 73:3-83-25 (Petrochilos)):

a. First, the existence of such a promise is the basis for the Claimants’ assertions
regarding their legitimate expectations, including their expectation of legal
stability, and is therefore necessary for proving this aspect of the Claimants’ fair
and equitable treatment claim.

b. Second, the existence of such a promise is necessary to establish the existence
and scope of an obligation under Romanian law, the breach of which could result
in the breach of the umbrella clause.

c. Third, the existence of such a promise is allegedly what gave rise to the
Claimants’ right to the facilities, which Claimants assert has been expropriated.

In addition, the Respondent contends that the Claimants’ claims relating to an
asserted lack of transparency and consistency in the regulatory regime are based on
the notion that the Claimants were entitled to receive some kind of an advance notice
or warning from Romania that the Raw Materials Incentive would change, because
Romania had allegedly promised that the incentive would remain in place until 2009.

The Respondent argues that the Claimants must prove two distinct components of
this promise: (i) that the EGO 24 facilities would remain unchanged until 2009, and (ii)
that the promise was contained in an instrument which either conferred individual
rights on them, or was otherwise one on which they could legitimately rely as securing
some form of entitlement that was specific to them and that would remain in place
even in the case of a general legislative or regulatory change.

The Respondent further contends that, to establish any of these claims, the Claimants
must prove that Romania’s promise was binding under Romanian law:

a. With respect to the fair and equitable treatment claim, the Respondent argues
that the Claimants must show that, after exercising due diligence, they
legitimately and reasonably relied on an instrument which a reasonable investor,
properly advised by Romanian lawyers, would have understood as an assurance
of the immutability of the EGO 24 facilities.

b. With respect to the umbrella clause and expropriation claims, the Respondent
argues that the Claimants must show that they had an actionable vested right
existing under Romanian law which was breached or expropriated.

According to the Respondent, the Claimants’ claims fail because they have failed to
establish the existence of a binding promise under Romanian law.

The Respondent's second line of argument is that, regardless of the existence of a

promise, either the Claimants did not rely on the existence of that promise to make
their investments, or any such reliance was unreasonable. The Respondent argues

83

276.

277.

278.

279.

281.

282.

that, given the lack of reliance, the Claimants’ fair and equitable treatment claim fails,
even if a promise existed. In this respect (and as noted below), the Respondent
argues that the Claimants’ case hinges on the credibility of their witnesses, and their
testimony is neither credible nor reliable (Tr., Day 13:19-43 (King)).

The Respondent's third line of argument is that the remaining claims (namely, the
Claimants’ other fair and equitable treatment claims and their claims that Romania
impaired the Claimants’ investments through unreasonable measures) fail because
Romania’s actions were reasonably related to a rational policy, which was EU
accession. The Respondent also argues that the actions giving rise to the Claimants’
assertions of lack of transparency and inconsistency in the regulatory regime were, in
fact, reasonable and consistent with the BIT.

The Respondent advances further arguments with respect to each of the Claimants’
claims, which will be addressed in the specific analysis of each of the Claimants’
claims in Chapter VI.

Finally, as discussed in Section VII below, the Respondent challenges the Claimants’
case on quantum.

In addition to these four main arguments, the Respondent challenges the credibility
and reliability of the Claimants’ witnesses. The Respondent argues that this lack of
credibility and reliability was exposed during the November 2010 hearing on the
merits, and that this is the reason why the Claimants shifted the focus of their case.
Specifically, the Respondent argues that while the Claimants originally focused on
their legitimate expectations claim (which requires proof of the Claimants’ subjective
reliance on their alleged expectations and of the reasonableness of that reliance),
after the hearing on the merits the Claimants shifted their focus to their claims related
to the umbrella clause, expropriation and transparency. According to the
Respondent, these are “claims that have nothing to do with the Claimants in
particular”, and the Claimants shifted their focus to them because they believe that
“these are claims that might survive without the need to rely on the doubtful words of
the Miculas and their employee witnesses” (Tr., Day 13, 30:21-31:2 (King)).

The Respondent has stated that its challenge to the credibility and reliability of the
Claimants’ witnesses extends to “all aspects that the Claimants have asserted” (Tr.,
Day 13, 62:6-8). However, given that the Respondent acknowledges that the
umbrella clause, expropriation and transparency claims are premised on objective
rather than subjective factors, it seems that the Respondent's challenge to the
credibility and reliability of the Claimants’ witnesses is directed principally to the
Claimants’ legitimate expectations claim and their damages case.

The Respondent also argues that, despite the Claimants’ shift in focus, this is not and
has never been a case about transparency; it has only become so because the
hearing undermined the Claimants’ previous case theory (Tr., Day 13, 19-43 (King)).

For the foregoing reasons, the Respondent requests the Tribunal to:

84

“(a) DISMISS the Claimants’ claims in their entirety; and

(b) ORDER the Claimants to pay in their entirety the costs of this
arbitration, including the fees and expenses of the Tribunal and the
Centre and the reasonable fees and expenses incurred by Romania in
defending against the Claimants’ claims.”

(Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, { 354).

283. In addition, the Respondent requests the Tribunal to:"*

“Lod

c. if any amount is awarded to any of the Claimants, whether as
damages, arbitration costs, or otherwise, explicitly provide in the
award that the amount awarded is subject to set-off against the tax
debts of all eleven EFDG companies, including lawful interest and
penalties;

d. grant any other relief the Tribunal considers just and proper.”

(Respondent's Reply regarding its Revocation Application, § 41)

"4 These additional requests were made in the context of the Respondent's application to revoke the
provisional measures recommended by the Tribunal. As noted in paragraph 111 above, the
determination of these matters was deferred to the final Award.

85

284.

285.

PRELIMINARY MATTERS

A. THE TRIBUNAL’S JURISDICTION

The Tribunal’s jurisdiction over this dispute was addressed in the Decision on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility, which makes integral part of this Award. In that
Decision, the Tribunal found that it had jurisdiction over the dispute submitted to it in
this arbitration and rejected any objections as to the admissibility of the claims
(Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, §] 170).

Specifically, in the Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility the Tribunal found that:

a. The Tribunal's jurisdiction is determined by Article 25 of the ICSID Convention
and Article 7 of the BIT.

b. Regarding jurisdiction ratione personae, the Tribunal rejected Romania's
argument that the Individual Claimants’ Swedish nationality could not be opposed
to Romania because of purported tenuous links with Sweden. Accordingly, the
Tribunal concluded that Messrs. Micula are and have been Swedish nationals at
all times relevant to the Tribunal's jurisdiction. As for the three Corporate
Claimants, the Tribunal resolved that they were held by nationals of another
Contracting State at the time of consent to arbitration, in accordance with the
requirements of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention and Article 7(3) of the
BIT.

c. Regarding jurisdiction ratione materiae, the Tribunal found that the investments
made by the Corporate Claimants qualified as such for the purposes of the ICSID
Convention. In the same vein, the Tribunal was satisfied that the shareholding of
Messrs. Micula qualified as an investment under the ICSID Convention. The
Tribunal also held that there was an investment for the purposes of the BIT.
Further, the Tribunal expressed no doubt that the dispute was of a legal nature,
arising directly out of an investment, for the purposes of Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention. Moreover, the Tribunal understood that the dispute was not merely
hypothetical and that the Claimants had made a prima facie case of entitlement.

d. Regarding jurisdiction ratione temporis, the Tribunal found that the dispute arose
after the entry into force of the BIT and therefore fell within the scope of
application of the BIT ratione temporis.

e. The Tribunal also rejected the Respondent's objection related to the remedy of

restitution sought by the Claimants, ruling that the Tribunal had powers to order
restitution both under the ICSID Convention and the BIT.

86

287.

288.

289.

290.

B. APPLICABLE LAW

Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention provides that:

The Tribunal shall decide a dispute in accordance with such rules of law as
may be agreed by the parties. In the absence of such agreement, the
Tribunal shall apply the law of the Contracting State party to the dispute
(including its rules on the conflict of laws) and such rules of international
law as may be applicable.

The Parties note that the BIT does not contain a choice of law clause (C-SoC, {| 170;
R-CM, {| 72; R-Rejoinder, §] 230). Accordingly, Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention
directs the Tribunal to apply the host state’s law (here, Romanian law) and “such
rules of international law as may be applicable.” The Parties agree that, in the case
of conflict between Romanian law and international law, international law should take
precedence (C-SoC, §§ 172; R-CM, § 72).'°

The Claimants submit that “where the basis of jurisdiction is a BIT and the claims put
forward are based on the BIT, it is established practice to accept the BIT's substantive
rules as the applicable law” (C-SoC, § 170). The Respondent appears to agree,
noting that “the interpretation of the BIT must be guided by relevant principles of
international law’, and adding that “[i]ts actual text is of course the starting point” (R-
CM,  73;). Indeed, the Respondent contends that the rule of international law of
primary significance to the Claimants’ case is Article 2(3) of the BIT (R-Rejoinder, {
230).

The Parties disagree however on the role of other rules of international law in this
dispute. The Claimants contend that no international law principle displaces the
terms of the BIT or otherwise excuses Romania’s treaty breaches. In turn, the
Respondent argues that the BIT must be interpreted in light of the context in which it
was concluded, and should be consistent with Romania’s and Sweden's other
relevant international law obligations, including in particular Romania's obligations
under the Europe Agreement and the EC Treaty. Romania argues that, in any event,
the Parties intended EU law to prevail.

The Tribunal addresses the Parties’ positions below, as well as comments made by
the European Commission in its capacity as amicus curiae.

"5 See, e.g., Compafiia de Desarrollo de Santa Elena SA v Republic of Costa Rica (ICSID Case No
ARB/96/1), Award, 17 February 2000 (hereinafter “Santa Elena v. Costa Rica’), J§ 64-65; LG&E
Energy Corp, LG&E Corp, LG&E International Inc. v Argentine Republic (I\CSID Case No ARB/02/1),
Decision on Liability, 3 October 2006 (hereinafter “LG&E v. Argentina” or “LG&E’), § 94; Amco Asia
Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia (ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1), Resubmission
Proceeding, Award, 5 June 1990, § 40.

87

291.

292.

293.

294.

The Claimants' position

The Claimants contend that EU law does not displace the terms of the BIT (C-Reply,
{9 515-555; ER of D. Caron; C-PHB, {| 86-95). The Claimants argue that there is no
conflict of treaties that could make EU law prevail over the BIT, but even if there were,
the BIT should prevail (Section (a) below). The Claimants further contend that the
Respondent’s attempts to interpret the BIT in accordance with EU law should be
rejected (Section (b) below). In any event, the Claimants contend that EU law
requirements would not justify or excuse breaches of the BIT (Section (c) below).

a. There is no conflict of treaties, and even if there were, the BIT should
prevail

The Claimants submit that there is no conflict of treaties in this case because the
Accession Treaty and the EC Treaty were not in force vis-a-vis Romania at the time it
entered into the BIT, or at the time when the breaches of the BIT occurred. Thus, the
Claimants assert that:

Everything here in this case is crystallised prior to the accession of
Romania to the EU. The BIT was entered in force before, the breach
predates the accession and hence the right to be compensated predates
accession. [...] [T]he only element which postdates accession is the
payment: the payment of a sum of money which represents the
consequences of the breach which predates accession (Tr., Day 12, 141
(Gaillard).

The Claimants also note that the Commission expressly concludes that the BIT has
been neither superseded nor terminated by Romania's accession to the EU pursuant
to Article 59 of the Vienna Convention.

In the Claimants’ view, the only treaty with which the BIT could be deemed to be in
conflict is the Europe Agreement. The Claimants deny that such a conflict exists, but
if such a conflict were deemed to exist, they submit that the BIT should prevail:

a. First, under the preservation of rights provision in Article 9(2) of the BIT, the BIT
prevails over external provisions, except to the extent that the latter would be
more favorable to the investor than the provisions of the BIT.

b. Second, the BIT prevails as /ex posterior pursuant to Article 30(3) of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties of 1969 (the "VCLT")"® because none of the
requirements for Article 30(3) to apply is met (in particular, the Europe Agreement
and the BIT were not entered into between the same parties, nor do they have
the same subject matter).

c. Third, the BIT prevails as lex specialis, because it is the treaty with a more
precisely delimited scope of application. In addition, the Claimants argue that

'8 article 30(3) of the VCLT provides: "When all the parties to the earlier treaty are parties also to the later
treaty but the earlier treaty is not terminated or suspended in operation under article 59, the earlier treaty
applies only to the extent that its provisions are compatible with those of the later treaty."

88

295.

297.

there is no evidence of Romania’s and Sweden’s common intention to give
precedence to EU law and subordinate the BIT to it. Indeed, the Claimants note
that, in the few instances where Romania has intended to give precedence over a
BIT to a particular source of law, it has done so expressly.

b. Romania’s interpretation of the provisions of the BIT is flawed

The Claimants further argue that Romania misapplies Article 31(3)(c) of the VCLT in
an attempt to supplant the BIT with EU law. Article 31(3)(c) of the VCLT provides:
“There shall be taken into account, together with the context: [...] (c) any relevant
rules of international law applicable in the relations between the parties.” According
to the Claimants, Romania’s attempt to “interpret” the BIT by taking into account EU
law as part of the “relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations
between the parties” is an improper attempt to displace the BIT and apply EU law
instead. Relying on Prof. Caron’s expert opinion, the Claimants argue that:

a. An “interpretation” cannot be construed to abrogate express language in the BIT;

b. The meaning of the terms “shall be taken into account” should be understood to
mean that an interpreter of the treaty has the discretion to consider relevant rules
of international law, not that such rules must be incorporated into the treaty, and

c. The “relevant rules of international law” are only those that are in place at the
time of the violation.

As a result, the Claimants argue that, for purposes of Article 31(3)(c) of the VCLT, the
Tribunal could “take into account” the Europe Agreement, which existed at the time
the BIT entered into force and at the time Romania breached the BIT’s provisions
(subject to the additional requirement of the Europe Agreement being “between the
parties”, which the Claimants deny). However, the Tribunal cannot take into account
the Accession Agreement or the EC Treaty, as Romania had not entered into either at
the time it concluded the BIT. Therefore, in the view of the Claimants, if the Tribunal
seeks to determine the relevant state aid requirements that applied to Romania, the
Tribunal should refer to the regime existing under the Europe Agreement, rather than
the post-accession regime.

c. EU law requirements would not justify or excuse breaches of the BIT or
international law

The Claimants submit that even if Romania was required by EU law to repeal the
EGO 24 incentives prior to their planned expiration in 2009, this would not justify or
excuse breaches of the BIT and international law.

The Claimants note that, according to Art. 12 of the ILC Articles on State
Responsibility (the “ILC Articles”),"’ “[t]here is a breach of an international obligation

'” Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts adopted by the International
Law Commission (ILC) in 2001. The Tribunal notes that the Claimants have included a complete
version of the ILC Articles, with commentaries, at Exh. C-592 (ILC Articles on State Responsibility,

89

300.

301.

302.

by a State when an act of that State is not in conformity with what is required of it by
that obligation, regardless of its origin or character.” In the Claimants’ submission,
the relevant international obligations here are those contained in the BIT. Romania
would breach those obligations even if its actions were required by EU law. Pursuant
to Article 31(1) of the ILC Articles, “[t]he responsible State is under an obligation to
make full reparation for the injury caused by the internationally wrongful act.”

The Claimants submit that, for all of their claims except their fair and equitable
treatment claim, the obligation to compensate arises irrespective of the rationale for
the adoption of the internationally wrongful act. In their view, Romania’s reasons for
adopting the measure could only be relevant if Romania were trying to avail itself of
one of the circumstances precluding wrongfulness described in Chapter V of the ILC
Articles, i.e., force majeure (Article 23), duress (Article 24), or necessity (Article 25).
Thus, for their expropriation and umbrella clause claims, the Claimants argue that
Romania’s “EU law defense” should be assessed after the Tribunal has decided
whether there is liability under the BIT, to determine if the reasons for Romania's
actions qualify as a circumstance precluding wrongfulness.

The Claimants note that Romania has not expressly invoked Articles 23-25 of the ILC
Articles, but in any event the Claimants submit that none of them applies. In
particular, Romania has not proven the “necessity” of its alleged compliance with its
EU law obligations in the terms of Article 25.

Even if the doctrine of “necessity” applied, the Claimants contend that Romania would
still be required to compensate them. Article 25 only provides an excuse for an act by
a state; it does not affect a state’s obligation to pay compensation for damages
caused by that act (even if excused). Indeed, according to the Claimants ILC Article
27(b) leaves open whether a state relying on a circumstance precluding wrongfulness
should nonetheless be expected to make good any material loss suffered.

In contrast, the Claimants submit that Romania’s EU law defense is relevant to the
determination of whether Romania has breached the fair and equitable treatment
standard. As explained in further detail below, the Claimants argue that EU law is
part of the factual matrix against which the Tribunal must determine whether the
Claimants’ expectations were legitimate and, specifically, whether they were
reasonable (Tr., Day 1, 159-164, 170-177 (Gaillard)). Thus, the Tribunal must assess
Romania’s EU law defense during the Tribunal’s analysis of whether Romania has
breached the fair and equitable treatment standard.

 

Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of Its Fifty-third Session, UN GAOR, 56th
Sess., Supp. No. 10, at 43, UN Doc. A/56/10 (2001), and that the Respondent has done the same at
Exh. RL-8 (International Law Commission, “Draft Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally
Wrongful Acts with commentaries”, [2001-II(2)] Yearbook of the International Law Commission 59).
The Tribunal understands that all of these versions are identical and will use them indistinctly. The
Tribunal further notes that, by Resolution 53/83 of 12 December 2001, the UN General Assembly took
note of the ILC Articles and “commendf[ed] them to the attention of Governments without prejudice to
the question of their future adoption or other appropriate action.” All references to the ILC Articles
themselves in this Award are to the version to which the UN General Assembly referred in Resolution
53/83. All references to the commentary to the Articles are to the version adopted by the ILC.

90

303.

304.

305.

306.

The Respondent's position

The Respondent argues that the BIT must be interpreted in light of the context in
which it was concluded, and should be consistent with Romania’s and Sweden’s
other relevant international law obligations, including in particular Romania's
obligations under the Europe Agreement and the EC Treaty. Romania argues that, in
any event, the Parties intended EU law to prevail (R-CM, | 72-84; R-Rejoinder,
226-258; Tr. Day 13, 50:18-51:24 (King)).

a. The BIT must be interpreted consistently with EU law

As noted above, the Respondent does not dispute that the substantive rules of
international law applicable to this dispute are those contained in the BIT. However, it
argues that the BIT cannot be interpreted in a vacuum. Citing AAPL v. Sri Lanka, the
Respondent argues that an investment protection treaty “is not a self-contained
closed legal system limited to provide for substantive material rules of direct
applicability, but it has to be envisaged within a wider juridical context [...].”"° In this
respect, the Respondent argues that the BIT must be interpreted in light of the
context in which it was negotiated and concluded between Romania and Sweden. In
Romania’s submission, this context should take into account the purpose for which it
was concluded (Article 31(1) of the VLCT), as well as the circumstances of its
conclusion (Article 32 of the VCLT). Romania argues that the conclusion of the BIT
was a direct consequence of the Europe Agreement, in the context of Romania's
accession to the EU and adoption of the acquis.

The Respondent also argues that, pursuant to Article 31(3)(c) of the VCLT, when
interpreting a treaty, the “relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations
between the parties” must also be taken into account. According to Romania, this
includes the rules of international law existing at the time the BIT is being interpreted
(that is, today). Thus, in Romania’s submission, the Europe Agreement and the EC
Treaty fall under the category of relevant rules of international law that should be
considered when construing the BIT. In this respect, Romania notes that the ILC has
stated that “[i]t is a generally accepted principle that when several norms bear on a
single issue they should, to the extent possible, be interpreted so as to give rise to a
single set of compatible obligations.”'®

Specifically, Romania claims that "the BIT should be interpreted as part of a
harmonious set of treaty obligations that Romania and Sweden have entered into,
starting with the 1993 Europe Agreement and continuing, all pursuant to that same
initial instrument with the BIT and the accession treaty [...] [T]he Europe Agreement
indeed called on Romania to negotiate BITs with EU countries" (Tr., Day 13, 51
(King)). The Respondent submits that, if the BIT is construed in that light, no conflict
between the various instruments arises.

'8 Asian Agricultural Products Limited v. Republic of Sri Lanka (ICSID Case No. ARB/87/3), Award, 27
June 1990 (hereinafter “AAPL v. Sri Lanka’), 4 21.

' International Law Commission, “Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of its 58th
Session”, UN Doc A/61/10 (2006), Exh. RL-187, p 408.

91

307.

308.

309.

310.

311.

312.

Romania contends that, in the present case, such a “systemic” interpretation of the
BIT is of special importance. It submits that the treatment of foreign investors that
Sweden and Romania intended to mandate through the BIT cannot be divorced from
Romania’s obligations under the Europe Agreement and the EC Treaty. The
Respondent argues that Sweden, together with the other EU Member States,
expected Romania to take all reasonable measures to comply with the EU treaties,
and in particular expected Romania to abolish EGO 24.

In view of the above, the Respondent contends that all substantive obligations
contained in the BIT must be interpreted in a manner consistent with EU law. This
includes in particular Article 64 of the Europe Agreement and Article 87 of the EC
Treaty.

b. In any event, the Contracting Parties to the BIT intended European law to
prevail

The Respondent further submits that, in the unlikely event that the Tribunal should
find Romania’s obligations under EU law and the BIT impossible to reconcile, any
conflict ought to be resolved in favor of EU law.

In this respect, the Respondent argues that where conflicts arise between competing
rules of international law which cannot be resolved by systemic interpretation, the
intention of the relevant States determines which of the competing rules takes
precedence. According to the Respondent, in the present case the common intention
of Romania and Sweden is clear: they intended the BIT to be subordinated to EU law.
As EU law contains more specific rules on state aid, EU law should prevail by
application of the principle lex specialis derogat generali.

In addition, the Respondent argues that it concluded the BIT with Sweden precisely in
furtherance of its obligations to the EU and the EU Member States. It would thus be
irrational to suppose that Sweden and Romania intended the BIT to circumvent or
otherwise weaken EU law. Indeed, for Sweden this would mean breaching the EC
Treaty.

Finally, the Respondent notes that the European Court of Justice ("ECU") has ruled

that EU law takes precedence over all pre-accession bilateral treaties concluded
between Member States (Exh. RL-197 to RL-200).

92

313.

314.

315.

316.

317.

318.

c. EU lawis relevant to the determination of wrongfulness

The Respondent asserts that, contrary to the Claimants’ contentions, EU law is
relevant to the determination of whether it breached the BIT.

Specifically, Romania argues that the rights and obligations of Romania and Sweden
under the Europe Agreement and, eventually, the Accession Treaty, are not only
rules of international law that the Tribunal should take into account when interpreting
the BIT, but are relevant in at least three ways: (i) as the factual motivation for the
change in Romanian law that is the basis of the Claimants’ allegations; (ii) as binding
rules of Romanian law, having been incorporated into Romanian law, and (iii) as
factual circumstances to take into account as part of the consideration of what would
have constituted fair and equitable treatment (R-Rejoinder, § 227).

The Respondent further submits that it was indeed “necessary” for Romania to repeal
EGO 98 in order to either comply with EU law or accede to the EU. However, the
Respondent submits that “necessity” is not the test; the question is whether
Romania’s course of action was reasonable (R-Rejoinder, § 99). The Tribunal
understands Romania’s position to be that the requirements of EU law play a role in
determining whether Romania breached the standards of the BIT that require the
state to act reasonably, in particular, the fair and equitable treatment obligation and
the obligation not to impair the Claimants’ investments by unreasonable or
discriminatory measures. The Tribunal also understands that Romania is not
invoking Articles 23, 24 or 25 of the ILC Articles to plead that there are circumstances
precluding wrongfulness that would excuse any liability under the BIT.

The Commission’s position

In its capacity as amicus curiae, the European Commission submitted comments on
the law applicable to this dispute.

The Commission's position in this respect is similar to that of the Respondent. The
Commission submits that the interpretation of the BIT should take into account the
BIT’s European context and origin. It notes that the ECJ has recommended
interpreting intra-EU BITs in the light of EU law (ECJ Case 26/62, Van Gend en Loos
[1963], ECR 3). The Commission also submits that the parties to the Europe
Agreement intended that any future BIT should subscribe to the same logic regarding
state aid law. Therefore, the Tribunal should take into account the EU's state aid
rules when interpreting specific BIT provisions. The Commission further contends
that Article 30(3) of the VCLT directs the Tribunal to apply the EU's state aid law
rather than provisions of the BIT that would prove incompatible with the EC Treaty.

The Tribunal's analysis
There is no dispute among the Parties that the primary source of law for this Tribunal
is the BIT itself. The disagreements lie in the role of other rules of international law, in

particular rules arising from treaties established under EU law to which Romania and
Sweden are parties.

93

319.

320.

321.

322.

323.

324.

As a first step, the Tribunal notes that there is no real conflict of treaties. In the time
period relevant to this dispute, the relevant rules of international law applicable to
Romania and Sweden were the Europe Agreement (which entered into force on 1
February 1995) and the BIT (which entered into force on 1 April 2003). The
Accession Treaty was not signed until 25 April 2005, and entered into force on 1
January 2007 (date on which the EC Treaty also entered into force with respect to
Romania) (ER of F. Jacobs, § 12). Thus, from 1 February 1995 to 1 January 2007,
Romania was in a negotiating phase during which it declared that it accepted the
acquis but it was not properly subject to EU law, with the exception of its international
obligations under the Europe Agreement itself. As a result, EU law was not directly
applicable to Romania.

The relevant question then becomes whether EU law plays a role in the interpretation
of the BIT. To answer that question, the Tribunal needs to address three points.

First, the Tribunal notes that the BIT does not contain any reference to EU accession
or to the EU. Further, the Accession Treaty did not contain any references to the BIT,
let alone seek to modify any of the BIT’s provisions. To recall, the Europe Agreement
entered into force on 1 February 1995, the BIT entered into force on 1 April 2003, and
the Accession Treaty was signed on 25 April 2005, and entered into force on 1
January 2007 (on which date the EC Treaty also entered into force with respect to
Romania). The Tribunal cannot therefore assume that by virtue of entering into the
Accession Treaty or by virtue of Romania’s accession to the EU, either Romania, or
Sweden, or the EU sought to amend, modify or otherwise detract from the application
of the BIT.

Second, Article 31(1) of the VCLT provides that “[a] treaty shall be interpreted in good
faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in
their context and in the light of its object and purpose.” Article 31(2) expressly notes
that such context comprises, inter alia, the text of the treaty, including its preamble
and annexes. The Preamble of the BIT states that the Contracting Parties have
agreed on the terms of the BIT:

desiring to intensify economic cooperation to the mutual benefit of both
States and to maintain fair and equitable conditions for investments by
investors of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting
Party,

recognizing that the promotion and protection of such investments favour
the expansion of the economic relations between the two Contracting
Parties and stimulate investment initiatives [...]

The Tribunal must interpret the BIT in light of these overarching goals, which the
Parties do not dispute.

Likewise, it is undisputed that one of the goals of the Europe Agreement, which
predated the BIT, was to promote economic cooperation between Romania and the
EC Member States. In this context, Article 74 of the Europe Agreement on
investment promotion and protection provided:

94

325.

326.

327.

328.

329.

330.

Article 74 - Investment promotion and protection

1. Cooperation shall aim to establish a favourable climate for private
investment, both domestic and foreign, which is essential to the
economic and industrial reconstruction of Romania.

2. The particular aims of the cooperation shall be:

for Romania to establish and improve a legal framework which
favours and protects investment;

the conclusion by the Member States and Romania of Agreements
for the promotion and protection of investment [...]

This suggests that the BIT was part of Romania’s strategy to develop economically in
order to obtain accession.

That being said (and this is the third point), the Tribunal will interpret each of the
various applicable treaties having due regard to the other applicable treaties,
assuming that the parties entered into each of those treaties in full awareness of their
legal obligations under all of them. In other words, there is no reason to assume that
Sweden and Romania had any intent to defeat their obligations under any of the
applicable treaties when they entered into each of them and the Tribunal must
interpret each treaty — in particular, the BIT — according to that intent of the parties.

The Tribunal finds that, factually, the general context of EU accession must be taken
into account when interpreting the BIT. In particular, the overall circumstances of EU
accession may play a role in determining whether the Respondent has breached
some of its obligations under the BIT.

The Tribunal notes in this regard that the Parties appear to agree that EU law forms
part of the “factual matrix” of the case. In particular, the Parties agree that the
question of EU law may be relevant to determining whether Romania acted fairly and
equitably with respect to the Claimants’ investments in accordance with Article 2(3) of
the BIT. The Tribunal concurs. The overall context of EU accession in general and
the pertinent provisions of EU law in particular may be relevant to the determination of
whether, inter alia, Romania’s actions were reasonable in light of all the
circumstances, or whether Claimants’ expectations were legitimate.

The Tribunal also sees merit in the Claimants’ suggestion that, in theory, EU law
could also possibly come into play as a circumstance precluding wrongfulness under
ILC Articles 23, 24 or 25. However, as noted above, the Respondent has not put
forth a case of force majeure, duress or necessity. Accordingly, the Tribunal does not
address the relevance of EU law in this context.

C. THE ENFORCEMENT OF THE ARBITRAL AWARD AND EU LAw
The Respondent and the Commission contend that any payment of compensation

arising out of this Award would constitute illegal state aid under EU law and render
the Award unenforceable within the EU. Prior to determining whether it is useful for

95

331.

332.

333.

334.

335.

the Tribunal to decide this question (Section 4 below), the Tribunal will set out the
Parties’ positions. As this point was first raised by the Respondent and second by the
Commission, the Tribunal will address the Respondent's position first (Section 1
below), then the Commission's position (Section 2 below), and finally the Claimants’
position (Section 3 below).

The Respondent's position

The Respondent contends that an award of damages in the present case would
constitute impermissible state aid (R-CM, § 78 (note 142); First ER of R. Streinz, 4
29-34; Second ER of R. Streinz, {| 21-24; ER of F. Jacobs, {[{ 45-49; 50(4) and (5);
Respondent's observations on Commission’s Submission, § 3).

Relying on Professor Streinz’s expert opinion, the Respondent argues that an award
of damages for the abolition of the EGO 24 regime would amount to the granting of
new state aid by Romania to the Claimants. For such new state aid to be granted,
Romania must first seek and obtain prior approval from the Commission, which in the
Opinion of the expert would most likely be denied.

Professor Jacobs, another of the Respondent's experts, confirms that the payment of
compensation in lieu of aid must be regarded as equivalent to a payment of the
relevant aid itself. Such a payment in this case would amount to a payment of new
state aid and could not be made without the European Commission being informed
pursuant to Article 88(3) of the EC Treaty. Prof. Jacobs also states that, as a matter
of EU law, an award of compensation in lieu of aid in respect of the period 2007-2009,
and possibly in respect of earlier years as well, may be denied enforcement in the EU
on grounds of public policy.

The European Commission's position

The Commission submits that "[i]f the Tribunal rendered an award that is contrary to
obligations binding on Romania as an EU Member State, such award could not be
implemented in Romania by virtue of the supremacy of EC law, and in particular State
aid rules" (Commission’s Written Submission, {| 125(4)).

In particular, the Commission submits that “any award requiring Romania to
reestablish investment schemes which have been found incompatible with the internal
market during accession negotiations, is subject to EU State aid rules”, and “[t]he
execution of such award can thus not take place if it would contradict the rules of EU
State aid policy.” The Commission notes that in the Eco Swiss case,”° the ECJ held
that the competition rules of the EC Treaty are part of the public order which national
courts must take into account when they review the legality of arbitral awards under
the public policy exception recognized by the 1958 New York Convention on the
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (Commission’s Written
Submission, § 121).

2° ECJ, Case C-126/97 Eco Swiss v. Benetton ECR [1999] 1-3055, 9] 35-41.

96

336.

337.

338.

339.

340.

The Commission acknowledges that Article 54(1) of the ICSID Convention provides
that each Contracting State shall automatically recognize and enforce an ICSID
award within its territory as if it were a final judgment of a court in that State.
However, it contends that if a national court in the EU were asked to enforce an
ICSID award that is contrary to EU law and EU state aid policy rules, the proceedings
would have to be stayed under the conditions of Article 234 of the EC Treaty so that
the ECJ may decide on the applicability of Article 54 of the ICSID Convention, as
transposed into the national law of the referring judge. The Commission notes that
“the ICSID Convention is not binding on the EC under Article 300(7) EC, as the terms
of the Convention do not allow the EC to become a Contracting Party to it” and
concludes that, “[a]ccordingly, the ICSID Convention does not form part of the EC
legal order.” However, the Commission adds that it “sincerely believes that such a
conflict between the BIT, the ICSID Convention, and EC law can be avoided through
a contextual interpretation of the BIT or the application of Article 30(3) of the Vienna
Convention, as the case may be” (Commission’s Written Submission, J 122-124).

The Claimants' position

The Claimants argue that issues regarding enforcement of an award are irrelevant to
the Tribunal's decision on the substance of the Claimants’ claims. In particular, the
Claimants deny that considerations relating to the enforcement of the Award should
affect the interpretation of the BIT or the Tribunal's decision as to whether Romania
has breached certain provisions of the BIT (Claimants' comments on the
Commission’s submission, J] 167-170; C-PHB, {{ 270-278; ER of A. Dashwood, {I
92-100).

In any event, the Claimants submit that, contrary to the Respondent's and the
Commission’s contention, an award of damages in the present arbitration could not
be characterized as a grant of state aid, since the payment of damages would result
from the Tribunal's determination that Romania breached the BIT. The Claimants rely
on the opinion of Prof. Dashwood, who asserts that an award of damages cannot be
equated with the granting of state aid and consequently would not involve any conflict
between Romania’s obligations under the BIT and its present obligations as a
Member State of the EU.

The Claimants further contend that Romania was not bound by EU state aid laws
when it breached the BIT. The purpose of any award of damages would be to
compensate the Claimants for the harm resulting from the Respondent's unlawful
conduct, which occurred before Romania joined the EU and became bound by EU
law. According to the Claimants, a payment for a breach that predates Romania's EU
accession cannot violate EU law.

The Tribunal’s analysis
The Tribunal finds that it is not desirable to embark on predictions as to the possible

conduct of various persons and authorities after the Award has been rendered,
especially but not exclusively when it comes to enforcement matters. It is thus

97

341.

inappropriate for the Tribunal to base its decisions in this case on matters of EU law
that may come to apply after the Award has been rendered. It will thus not address
the Parties’ and the Commission’s arguments on enforceability of the Award.

That being said, the Tribunal notes that Articles 53 and 54 of the ICSID Convention,
which are reproduced below, apply in any event to the Award:

Article 53

(1) The award shall be binding on the parties and shall not be subject to
any appeal or to any other remedy except those provided for in this
Convention. Each party shall abide by and comply with the terms of
the award except to the extent that enforcement shall have been
stayed pursuant to the relevant provisions of this Convention.

8

For the purposes of this Section, "award" shall include any decision
interpreting, revising or annulling such award pursuant to Articles 50,
51 or 52.

Article 54

(1) Each Contracting State shall recognize an award rendered pursuant
to this Convention as binding and enforce the pecuniary obligations
imposed by that award within its territories as if it were a final
judgment of a court in that State. A Contracting State with a federal
constitution may enforce such an award in or through its federal courts
and may provide that such courts shall treat the award as if it were a
final judgment of the courts of a constituent state.

(2) A party seeking recognition or enforcement in the territories of a
Contracting State shall furnish to a competent court or other authority
which such State shall have designated for this purpose a copy of the
award certified by the Secretary-General. Each Contracting State shall
notify the Secretary-General of the designation of the competent court
or other authority for this purpose and of any subsequent change in
such designation.

Ss

Execution of the award shall be governed by the laws concerning the
execution of judgments in force in the State in whose territories such
execution is sought.

98

Vi.

342.

343.

344.

345.

346.

ANALYSIS OF THE CLAIMANTS’ TREATY CLAIMS

In the latest presentation of their argument, the Claimants contend in the first place
that, by revoking the EGO 24 incentives before they were due to expire, Romania
violated an obligation entered into by Romania vis-a-vis the Claimants and thus
breached the BIT’s umbrella clause. However, even if the premature revocation of
the incentives does not breach the umbrella clause (e.g., because the promise
allegedly made by the Respondent does not rise to the level of an obligation
protected by the umbrella clause), the Claimants argue that the Tribunal could still
find a violation of the fair and equitable treatment standard because the revocation
undermined the Claimants’ legitimate expectations (Tr., Day 12, 126:22-128:6
(Reed)). In view of this alternative argument, the Tribunal will first address the
Claimants’ umbrella clause claim. If necessary, it will then move on to the Claimants’
remaining claims.

A. UMBRELLA CLAUSE

Article 2(4) of the BIT provides in relevant part:

Each Contracting Party shall observe any obligation it has entered into with
an investor of the other Contracting Party with regard to his or her
investment.

The Claimants’ position

The Claimants contend that through the EGO 24 framework and the related PICs,
Romania entered into an obligation with the Claimants with regard to their investment.
As a result, they argue that, by revoking the Raw Materials Incentive before it was
due to expire, the Respondent breached the BIT’s umbrella clause, contained in
Article 2(4) of the BIT.

Section (a) below addresses the Claimants’ position with respect to the nature and
scope of the BIT’s umbrella clause. Section (b) sets out the Claimants’ position with
respect to the existence of a specific obligation vis-a-vis the Claimants. Section (c)
sets out the Claimants’ arguments with respect to the Respondent's alleged breach of
that umbrella clause.

a. Nature and scope of the BIT’s umbrella clause

The Claimants submit that the purpose of umbrella clauses (such as Article 2(4) of
the BIT, also called “undertakings clauses”) is to put the host state’s compliance with
commitments assumed vis-a-vis investors under the protective “umbrella” of the
relevant treaty. This protection is extended to the state’s commitments vis-a-vis the
investor independently of whether a violation of the other provisions of the treaty has
occurred, with the result that any violation of an assurance given by the host state
becomes a violation of the treaty. As a result, claims raised under an umbrella clause
are additional to and independent of claims based on unfair and inequitable

99

treatment, unreasonable or discriminatory measures, treatment less favorable than
required by international law and expropriation (C-SoC, § 286).

347. The Claimants submit that, unless a treaty expressly provides otherwise, an umbrella
clause is not limited to contractual obligations or undertakings, but may cover
unilateral undertakings by the host state, including obligations arising from legislation
and regulations (C-SoC, 4 289-299; C-Reply, 461-468; C-PHB, {{ 6-14).

348. In support of this contention, the Claimants argue that there is no justification to
interpret Art. 2(4) of the BIT narrowly. First, pursuant to Article 31(1) of the VCLT,
treaty provisions are to be interpreted in accordance to their ordinary meaning.
Relying on SGS v. Philippines®’, Eureko v. Poland”, CMS v. Argentina’, LG&E v.
Argentina and Enron v. Argentina®, the Claimants contend that the ordinary meaning
of the relevant terms supports the binding nature of the clause, as well as its
comprehensive scope. The Claimants rely in particular on Eureko v. Poland, where
the language of the umbrella clause at issue was very similar to the umbrella clause
in the Sweden-Romania BIT (“Each Contracting Party shall observe any obligation it
may have entered into with regard to investments of investors of the other Contracting
Party”). In that case, the tribunal held that:

The plain meaning—the “ordinary meaning’—of a provision prescribing
that a State “shall observe any obligations it may have entered into” with
regard to certain foreign investments is not obscure. The phrase “shall
observe” is imperative and categorical. “Any” obligations is capacious; it
means not only obligations of a certain type, but “any’—that is to say, all—
obligations entered into with regard to investments of investors of the other
Contracting Party.°

349. In addition, the Claimants note that the tribunal in Enron v. Argentina held that
“[ujnder its ordinary meaning the phrase ‘any obligation’ refers to obligations
regardless of their nature”, noting that “[t]ribunals interpreting this expression have
found it to cover both contractual obligations such as payment as well as obligations
assumed through law or regulation.””°

350. The Claimants argue that this is all the more so when the legislation or regulations
are specifically designed to induce investors to invest in reliance on those
assurances. The Claimants point out that the tribunal in LG&E v. Argentina found

' Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/6),
Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction, 29 January 2004 (hereinafter “SGS v.
Philippines’).

? Eureko B.V. v. Republic of Poland, Partial Award, 19 August 2005 (hereinafter “Eureko v. Poland’).
3 CMS Gas Transmission Company v Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No ARB/01/8), Award, 12 May
2005 (hereinafter “CMS v. Argentina’).

* Enron Creditors Recovery Corporation (formerly Enron Corporation) and Ponderosa Assets, L.P,
(ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3), Award, 22 May 2007 (hereinafter “Enron v. Argentina’).

°5 Eureko v. Poland, § 246.

°8 Enron v. Argentina, § 274, (citing Fedax N.V. v. Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/96/3),
Award, 9 March 1998, § 29; SGS v. Philippines, {§ 127-128; Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v.
Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/13), Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to
Jurisdiction, 6 August 2003, § 166; LG&E v. Argentina, § 175).

100

351.

352.

353.

354.

355.

that laws and regulations that targeted foreign investors and applied specifically to
their investments gave rise to “obligations” under the meaning of the relevant treaty’s
umbrella clause.””

In addition, the Claimants contend that the Contracting States could have chosen to
draft the BIT’s umbrella clause more restrictively (for example, limiting it to contractual
obligations), and chose not to do so.

The Claimants deny that the wording of Article 2(4) makes it a particularly narrow
umbrella clause, to the extent that it requires that an obligation be “entered into with
an investor of the other Contracting Party’. In the Claimants’ view, this language
does not set it apart from other umbrella clauses, as all umbrella clauses require that
there be a party to whom the obligation is owed (i.e., the investor). Similarly, the
Claimants argue that there is no real distinction between the term “obligations” and
“undertakings” for these purposes: when someone undertakes to do something, he or
she becomes obliged to do that thing.

Second, the Claimants argue that the umbrella clause must be interpreted in a
manner that gives it substantive meaning. Relying on Eureko v. Poland, they contend
that

It is a cardinal rule of the interpretation of treaties that each and every
operative clause of a treaty is to be interpreted as meaningful rather than
meaningless. It is equally well established in the jurisprudence of
international law, particularly that of the Permanent Court of International
Justice and the International Court of Justice, that treaties, and hence their
clauses, are to be interpreted so as to render them effective rather than
ineffective.

It follows that the effect of Article 3.5 [the umbrella clause] in this
proceeding cannot be overlooked, or equated with the Treaty’s provisions
for fair and equitable treatment, national treatment, most-favored-nation
treatment, deprivation of investments, and full protection and security. On
the contrary, Article 3.5 must be interpreted to mean something in itself. 8

Third, the Claimants also argue that the binding force of obligations unilaterally
assumed by the host State is supported by the binding nature of the consent to
international arbitration granted by host states through their national legislation, and is
in accordance with the treatment of unilateral undertakings in customary international
law (citing the Nuclear Tests Cases”).

Finally, the Claimants argue that there is no way in which EU law can limit the breadth
of this umbrella clause. EU law is only part of the factual matrix of the case, and thus
the only role it could play in relation to an umbrella clause claim is when any factors
precluding wrongfulness come to be examined.

°7 | G&E v. Argentina, 4 175.
°8 Eureko v. Poland, 4 248-249.

®° Nuclear Tests Cases (Australia/New Zealand v. France), Judgment, 20 December 1974, ICJ
Reports 1974 (hereinafter “The Nuclear Tests Cases’).

101

356.

357.

358.

359.

In response to the Respondent's arguments, the Claimants acknowledge that there is
no dispute that umbrella clauses only protect specific obligations. However, as
explained below, the Claimants submit that Romania entered into a specific obligation
with the Claimants.

b. The EGO 24 regime gave rise to a specific obligation vis-a-vis the
Claimants

The Claimants contend that, through the EGO 24 regime, Romania entered into a
specific obligation vis-a-vis the Claimants, which consisted of Romania's undertaking
with respect to the Claimants to maintain the incentives in the Stei-Nucet disfavored
region for the full 10-year period provided by GD 194/1999, which the Claimants
argue was stabilized for 10 years (C-SoC, § 300; C-Reply, 1 467-468; C-PHB, 9 6-
24; Tr., Day 12, 70-91 (Reed), 163-164 (Gaillard).

Although the Claimants acknowledge that, taken on its own, EGO 24 is a general and
non-specific piece of legislation, they argue that “the regime as a whole and its
specific application to the Claimants gives rise to a specific obligation” (C-PHB, 4
15).°

In the Claimants’ view, this specific obligation arises primarily from the content of
EGO 24 and its implementing legislation. The Claimants claim that, properly
construed, EGO 24, read in conjunction with the implementing measures (in
particular, GD 194/1999, the Methodological Norms and the PICs), contained a clear
and unequivocal undertaking to provide PIC holders such as the Corporate Claimants
with the Raw Materials Incentive until 1 April 2009. According to the Claimants, this
undertaking arises from the following features of the EGO 24 regime:

a. EGO 24 was specifically targeted to persons who invested and conducted
business within specific disfavored regions. To benefit from the incentives
offered by EGO 24, investors had to be headquartered and conduct business in
the disfavored area and had to create new jobs there for the unemployed (EGO
24, Articles 6 and 8).

b. These disfavored regions were created by government decisions (such as GD
194/1999 and GD 1199/2000), which set out a specific geographic scope and a
specific period for which that region would be considered disfavored, as well as
the incentives that would be made available in that area and the types of
investments that could benefit from them (EGO 24, Articles 3 and 4).

*° The Claimants had initially argued that Romania had entered into obligations towards foreign
investors, including the Claimants, when it granted the incentives on the basis of EGO 24, GD 194 and
GD 1199, and that these were the obligations protected under the umbrella clause (C-SoC, § 300).
The Claimants have since clarified that the obligations allegedly breached by the Respondent do not
arise solely from provisions of a general legislative framework; they arise also from specific
commitments and obligations undertaken by Romania in the form of the PICs granted to each of the
Corporate Claimants (C-Reply, § 466).

102

360.

361.

362.

363.

c. To take advantage of the incentives, investors were required to make a specific
application for an investor certificate (either temporary or permanent), which
required them to submit a detailed investment plan. If they wished to undertake
new investments or activities, they needed to submit a new investment plan.

d. Investors were awarded a PIC that set out the period for which it was valid and
the fields of activity for which it was valid. PICs were required for investors to
obtain the incentives, and had to be presented to the Romanian authorities every
single time that investors wished to take advantage of the incentives.

e. Investors assumed obligations in exchange for the incentives. In particular, they
were required to employ persons living in the disfavored area (EGO 24, Article 8);
they were required to undertake investments prior to obtaining the PIC and, after
receiving the PIC, they had to maintain their investments in the disfavored region
for twice the period of time they enjoyed the incentives (EGO 24, Articles 7 and
9).

In addition, the Claimants argue that the existence of Romania’s specific obligation
was evidenced by Romania’s conduct, in particular its promotion of the EGO 24
regime and the extensive monitoring that PIC holders were subjected to throughout
the period during which they received the incentives.

In view of the above, the Claimants contend that “the entire EGO 24 regime was far
more than a general legislative scheme. Instead it was a specific scheme targeted to
specific investors in specific regions for specific periods of time. Further the rights
granted were given in exchange for investors undertaking specific obligations,
carrying out investments specified in investment plans and receiving specific PICs by
which the investors’ rights were granted (and conversely from which the
Respondent's obligations arose)” (C-PHB, § 16). Relying on the testimony of Mr.
Neculai Liviu Marcu, the Claimants add that “[t]he specific purpose of that regime was
to entice investors to invest in the least developed areas of Romania; areas in which
they would not otherwise invest” (/d. See also WS of N. Marcu, 9 31-32; Tr., Day 7,
51-53).

The Claimants argue that the fact that Romania's undertaking is not contained in one
particular document is irrelevant. It is plain from EGO 24 itself that it did not stand
alone; it required and expressly provided for implementing measures to be taken by
the Romanian Government. Articles 3 and 4 of EGO 24 required government
decisions to declare and delineate disfavored areas, determine the period of time for
which each disfavored zone is to be declared, and determine the eligible investments
and the incentives which would be granted to investors. In addition, Article 15
required methodological norms to be established by government decision.

Nonetheless, the Claimants contend that the basic scheme of the incentives program
was set out in EGO 24 (Exh. R-68). Disfavored areas had to satisfy the conditions
set out in Article 1. They could be declared for a period of between 3 and 10 years at
the discretion of the government authorities. The incentives that could be granted

103

364.

365.

366.

367.

368.

were set out in Article 6, but it was the government decision for each disfavored area
that would determine which incentives were available in that area. In turn, Article 8
provided that, to benefit from the incentives, companies had to be headquartered and
conduct business in the disfavored area and had to create new jobs there for the
unemployed. Articles 7 and 9 provided that investors would have to refund the
incentives if the investments were not maintained in the disfavored area for twice the
period during which they had been eligible to receive the incentives.

Although the Claimants concede that EGO 24 did not spell out that the incentives
available within the disfavored area would be maintained for the entire period for
which the disfavored area had been declared disfavored, this is, in the Claimants’
submission, the only sensible interpretation of EGO 24. Indeed, they argue that it is
also the way it was interpreted by the Romanian Government, as evidenced by the
government decisions that implemented EGO 24.

The Claimants rely in particular on GD 194/1999 (Exh. C-280, also C-31), which is the
government decision that declared S$tei-Nucet a deprived zone (Article 1). Article 3
provides that the period for which Stei-Nucet shall be declared a deprived zone is 10
years. Article 4 then states that “[dJuring the period of existence of the deprived zone
[...] there shall be granted the facilities provided in Annex No. 2.” In turn, Annex No.
2, which forms part of GD 194/1999, sets out that investors shall benefit from all of
the facilities provided for in Article 6 of EGO 24. As a result, the Claimants argue that
Article 4 of GD 194/1999 explicitly ties the period during which the incentives are
granted to the period of existence of the deprived zone.

The Claimants find additional support in the fact that the language of Article 4 in 37 of
the 38 government decisions which declared disfavored areas between 1998 and
2003 is either identical or virtually the same as the language of Article 4 of GD
194/1999 (Table contained at Tab 5 of Vol. 1 of the Claimants’ documents for the
closing hearing (Shearman & Sterling)). They note that 20 of these 37 government
decisions, including GD 194/1999, were signed by Mr. Nicolae Staiculescu, who
testified that the incentives were to be offered for the entire period during which the
area was a disfavored region (WS of N. Staiculescu, J 21-22).

The Claimants also note that Mr. Marcu, who was the president of the National
Agency for Regional Development, submitted similar testimony:

We interpreted Article 4 as a firm pledge, commitment on behalf of the
government to maintain the zone for a ten-year period in order to persuade
investors that we were meaning what we were saying and to give them
incentives to invest bigger sums of money in those areas to fulfil the needs
of those regions, for example. This created employment, provided social
protection through income and also social protection for the families of the
miners. (Tr., Day 7, 15:2-9 (Marcu))

The Claimants argue that neither Mr. Staiculescu nor Mr. Marcu’s testimony was
challenged at the hearing on that point.

104

369.

370.

371.

372.

373.

The Claimants find further support in the Methodological Norms issued through GD
728/2001 (Exh. R-35, R-69), which define the period in which companies are deemed
to have benefitted from the incentives for purposes of the obligation to repay the
incentives if they are voluntarily liquidated or cease operations under Articles 7 and 9
of EGO 24, as “the period between the moment when the certificate of investor in the
disfavored area was obtained and the moment when the disfavored area ceases to
exist” (Article 1(f) of GD 728/2001, as translated in Exh. R-69). In the case of
temporary investor certificates, “followed by the procurement of the certificate of
investor in disfavored area, the period is calculated from the moment the provisional
certificate of investor is obtained until the disfavored area ceases to exist” (/d.).
Further, Article 5 of GD 728/2001 (as translated in Exh. R-35) confirms this when it
states that “[t]he business entities which obtained the certificate of investor in the
disfavored area and which perform activities from fields of interest other than those
provided under annex no. 1 shall continue to benefit from facilities under the law, until
the expiry of the period for which the disfavored area was declared.”

According to the Claimants, it is thus clear from EGO 24, read in conjunction with the
methodological norms, that the incentives were to be granted for the entire period
between the date of the granting of the investment certificate (temporary or
permanent), and the expiry of the disfavored area, which in the case of Stei-Nucet
was 1 April 2009. This was further evidenced by the PICs issued to the Corporate
Claimants, which expressly stated that the certificate holder benefitted from the
incentives under GD 194/1999 and that the certificate was valid until 1 April 2009.

The Claimants also submit that this interpretation is the only one that makes sense
from a teleological standpoint. According to the Claimants, if the incentives could
have been revoked at any time, they would have been ineffective in incentivizing
investment, because investors would have lacked the certainty that they would have
needed to commit funds.

Contrary to the Respondent’s contentions, the Claimants submit that the
implementing measures (such as GD 194/1999 and the PICs) did not go beyond what
was authorized in the primary legislation (EGO 24). They argue that the only sensible
interpretation of EGO 24 is that it authorized the grant by government decision of a
predetermined list of incentives for a period between 3 and 10 years. The Claimants
contend that this was confirmed by Prof. Baias, the Respondent's expert on
Romanian law, who testified that when GD 194/1999 was adopted, it was not in
conflict with EGO 24. Rather, his position was that it became in conflict with the
modified version of EGO 24 when the incentives were revoked, because GD
194/1999 was not modified accordingly (Tr., Day 5, 264:5-266-2 (Reed/Baias)).

According to the Claimants, Prof. Baias’s testimony confirms that, at the time when
GD 194/1999 was enacted, it provided that the incentives set out in Annex 2 were
being granted for the full period until 1 April 2009, and that it neither contradicted nor
added to EGO 24. This proves that, at the time that the investments were made, the
Claimants had a clear and unambiguous commitment from the Romanian State that
the incentives would be granted for 10 years. There was nothing unlawful or

105

374.

375.

376.

377.

improper in that commitment, and any contradiction only arose when the incentives
were repealed prematurely.

The Claimants also deny that the various amendments made to the EGO 24 regime
demonstrate the absence of such a commitment by the Romanian State. Even if
significant amendments were made to the EGO 24 regime to the investors’ detriment,
they were done in a way to protect existing investors’ rights, or in order to address
specific problems in relation to specific industries or in relation to Romania’s tax
regime.

The Claimants also argue that the absence of a stabilization clause did not mean that
Romania could renege on its commitment. Contrary to the Respondent’s contention,
the Parkerings v. Lithuania*’ case does not require a stabilization clause to prevent a
state from amending its legislation. In the Claimants’ view, the Parkerings tribunal
cites a stabilization clause as one (but not the only) type of measure pursuant to
which a state can promise to freeze or stabilize an existing regulatory framework.
The Claimants submit that an express promise enshrined in the legislation to keep a
particular regulatory framework in place for a defined period of time also constitutes
such an undertaking. In other words, the Claimants submit that, in agreeing to
provide certain incentives for ten years, the state in effect agrees not to change the
law before then. According to the Claimants, an additional promise that the state will
not renege on its earlier promise would be superfluous.

Finally, the Claimants contend that the Respondent's reliance on Decision 130/2003
of the Constitutional Court of Romania (Exh. RL-214) is misplaced, because it deals
with incentives granted under Law 35 and not the incentives granted under EGO 24.
It is thus a matter of pure speculation what the Constitutional Court would have found
if it had been dealing with EGO 24.

In particular, the Claimants reject Prof. Baias’ opinion that it is possible to extrapolate
from Decision 130/2003 what the Constitutional Court would have decided in a case
dealing with EGO 24. The Claimants argue that Prof. Baias based his opinion on the
premise that Law 35 and EGO 24 were “more or less identical” (Tr., Day 6, 27:9-10),
when in fact there are key differences between Law 35 and EGO 24 which according
to the Claimants go to the root of the Constitutional Court’s reasoning in Decision
130/2003. The Claimants contend that Law 35 provided positive discrimination in the
form of incentives for foreign investors investing anywhere in Romania, without
requiring the investor to fulfill any requirements. Unlike EGO 24, Law 35 did not
require the investor to invest in a disfavored area, nor did it require it to create any
particular number of new jobs or employ the unemployed. It was not even necessary
to obtain an investor certificate; all that was required was proof that the investor was
foreign. The Claimants argue that the Constitutional Court decided that the repeal of
Law 35 incentives did not breach the rule of law because it merely did away with

5 Parkerings-Compagniet AS v. Republic of Lithuania (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/8), Award, 11
September 2007 (hereinafter “Parkerings v. Lithuania” or “Parkerings’),

106

378.

379.

380.

381.

382.

positive discrimination and put foreign investors on a level playing field with domestic
competition.

To the contrary, the Claimants argue that, to qualify for the incentives under EGO 24,
the investor was required to show that it had met its side of the bargain. This
included fulfilling all the obligations mentioned above, in addition to submitting an
investment plan, undergoing an on-site inspection and various monitoring procedures
during the lifetime of the investments. Thus, in the Claimants’ submission, Decision
130/2000 is of no assistance and of no relevance to an analysis of EGO 24.

c. Romania breached the BIT’s umbrella clause

In view of the above, the Claimants contend that, by revoking the Raw Materials
Incentive effective 22 February 2005, Romania breached a specific obligation it had
entered into with respect to the Claimants’ investments, and as such violated the
BIT’s umbrella clause.

The Respondent's position

The Respondent denies that it has breached the BIT’s umbrella clause. It contends
that the Claimants’ umbrella clause claim does not comport with the plain text of
Article 2(4) of the BIT, and is inconsistent with established jurisprudence on the
application of umbrella clauses. In particular, the Respondent argues that the
regulatory acts upon which the Claimants rely created no “obligation” enforceable
through Article 2(4). Thus, the necessary predicate of Article 2(4) — an enforceable
obligation under Romanian law — is absent. The Respondent argues that Romania
never “entered into” any obligation specifically with the Claimants, and nothing in the
relevant Romanian legal texts suggests that Romania undertook to freeze its
regulatory regime for ten years (R-CM, § 175-188; R-Rejoinder, {§ 37-38, R-PHB,
4 104-120, 203-206; Tr., Day 13, 75-134 (Petrochilos)).

Section (a) below addresses the Respondent's comments with respect to the nature
and scope of the BIT’s umbrella clause. Section (b) sets out its comments on the
existence of an obligation covered by the umbrella clause. Section (c) addresses its
arguments on the absence of a breach of the umbrella clause.

a. Nature and scope of the BIT’s umbrella clause

The Respondent contends that the umbrella clause contained in Article 2(4) of the
BIT is one of the narrowest used in investment treaties. According to the
Respondent, its formulation limits the scope of the provision in the following ways:

a. Itis limited to “obligations”, and does not cover “undertakings”.

b. The obligations must have been “entered into with an investor”. It is not open to
obligations or undertakings “related to an investment”, as do the majority of
umbrella clauses.

107

383.

384.

385.

386.

c. The obligations must be specific (i.e., entered into with a specific investor), and
thus it does not cover general obligations.

The Respondent notes that there is debate on whether umbrella clauses elevate
municipal law rights to the international law realm, or simply provide an international
remedy to enforce rights that remain in their essence and scope creations of national
law. However, it argues that the Claimants’ case fails under either proposition. This
is because, according to the Respondent, generally-applicable regulatory and
legislative acts, standing alone, do not give rise to the kind of obligations covered by
umbrella clauses (even under those more broadly formulated). In the Respondent's
view, umbrella clauses only protect contractual or quasi-contractual obligations.

The Respondent relies on the writings of Dr. F.A. Mann, Dr. Shihata, Prof. Dolzer and
Ms. Stevens, Prof. Gaillard and Prof. Schreuer, noting that in their view umbrella
clauses mainly or exclusively protect contractual commitments. The Respondent also
relies on Continental Casualty v. Argentina, where the tribunal, faced with an umbrella
clause broader than the present one (applying to obligations “with regard to
investments”), found that

It should be clear that this umbrella clause does not come into play when
the breach complained of concerns general obligations arising from the law
of the host State. ... Therefore, the provisions of the [disputed legislation]
cannot be a source of obligations that Argentina has assumed specifically
with regard to the Claimant's investment company and which are protected
under the BIT's umbrella clause. **

To the contrary, the Respondent contends that there is no authority for the Claimants’
position that legislative or regulatory acts, standing alone, can constitute “obligations”
enforceable through an umbrella clause. They note that most decisions applying
umbrella clauses have involved contractual obligations entered into by the state, and
in the few cases where tribunals have found a breach of provisions due to a
legislative change (such as LG&E v. Argentina), the state had provided separate and
specific commitments to investors in which it guaranteed that a particular legislative
regime would not change. Specifically, it argues that, in LG&E v. Argentina, the
tribunal’s determination that the dismantling of the regulatory regime in the gas-
transmission sector resulted in the breach of the (broadly-worded) umbrella clause
turned upon specific assurances that Argentina had given investors that the
regulatory environment would remain stable.

The Respondent further contends that the Claimants’ reliance on CMS v. Argentina is
misplaced, noting that the part of that award dealing with umbrella clauses was
subsequently annulled by an ICSID ad hoc committee. The Respondent argues that
the CMS v. Argentina annulment committee reversed the tribunal's findings with
respect to whether umbrella clauses can, as a matter of principle, extend to general
legislative acts, in the following terms:

* Continental Casualty Company v Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No ARB/03/9), Award, 5
September 2008 (hereinafter “Continental Casualty v. Argentina’), J§ 300 and 302.

108

387.

388.

389.

390.

391.

[I]t seems clear that Article II(2)(c) is concerned with consensual
obligations arising independently of the BIT itself (i.e. under the law of the
host State or possibly under international law). Further they must be
specific obligations concerning investment. They do not cover general
requirements imposed by the law of the host State.**

According to the Respondent, the drafting of the umbrella clause applicable in this
case reinforces the inadmissibility of a claim based upon regulatory acts. It argues
that, by limiting the scope of the provision to obligations “entered into with” qualifying
investors, the drafters of the BIT intended it to apply exclusively to contractual or
quasi-contractual obligations (e.g., those arising from an individual license granted by
the state), which are created and enforceable under domestic law. Unilateral
instruments such as laws and regulations, which are per se liable to change, cannot
be understood to have been “entered into” with anyone.

b. Romania did not enter into a specific obligation with the Claimants

Further, the Respondent argues that, whatever the scope of the BIT’s umbrella
clause, the claim fails because there is no “obligation” that may trigger the application
of the clause. The Respondent contends that, in order to be elevated to the
protection of the umbrella clause, this obligation must have given the Claimants an
actionable vested right under Romanian law.

Relying on SGS v. Philippines and Eureko v. Poland, the Respondent submits that
the obligation that is protected under the umbrella clause has a proper law (usually
domestic law), and its nature does not change by being enforced under the treaty.
Therefore, to be actionable under the treaty, the obligation must have been actionable
under domestic law. For this, the alleged obligation must have constituted a vested
right under domestic law, which the Respondent argues was the case in Enron v.
Argentina and LG&E v. Argentina. However, it argues that it is not the case here.

Contrary to the Claimants’ contentions, the Respondent argues that under Romanian
law the Romanian State was under no obligation to make all of the facilities available
to the Claimants for 10 years. The Claimants have identified no contractual or quasi-
contractual obligations of any kind that might have been entered into and owed to
them in relation to the facilities, nor have the Claimants alleged any assurances or
other unilateral undertakings by Romania directed to them specifically. As a result,
the Claimants had no vested right to the facilities.

The Respondent argues that the Claimants’ case as to the source of that alleged
obligation (and corresponding right) has changed over time, but all of those theories
fail. The Respondent also contends that if Romania had decided to bind itself to
regulatory stasis for ten years, it would have done so in one clear instrument, through
an appropriate organ, and that instrument would contain clear terms with respect to
the promise of stability and its duration. This obligation cannot be implied from a
patchwork of documents and a selection of surrounding circumstances.

33 CMS v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, 25 September 2007, § 95a.

109

392.

393.

394.

395.

396.

More specifically, the Respondent contends that none of the regulatory acts invoked
by the Claimants (EGO 24/1998, GD 194/1999 and GD 1199/2000), whether alone or
in conjunction with the PICs, created obligations “entered into” with the Claimants.

First, the source of the obligation could not have been EGO 24. The Respondent
concedes that “there is no doubt that EGO 24 set forth a generalized entitlement that
could be claimed by qualifying investors” (Tr., Day 13, 85:7-10 (Petrochilos)). Article
A(c) of EGO 24 stated that a government decision would determine the facilities
“provided by law” that would be granted to investors (which confirms that the source
of the entitlement is EGO 24). But it contained no promise as to the length of time the
facilities would remain available, nor any stabilization language (unlike its
predecessor, Law 35, which did contain express stabilization language). The
Respondent further argues that, under Romanian law, general laws such as EGO 24
do not confer individual vested rights (as was confirmed by the Romanian
Constitutional Court in Decision 130/2003).

Second, the Respondent notes that the Claimants’ latest theory seems to be that GD
194/1999, read together with the PICs, creates an obligation for the State. However,
according to the Respondent this is impossible as a matter of Romanian law. Relying
on the expert opinion of Prof. Baias, it argues that these were subsidiary normative or
administrative instruments issued to implement and administer EGO 24 and Law
20/1999, which could not modify or contradict the authority of a government
ordinance or a law, and as such could not have granted an entitlement beyond what
EGO 24 authorized. In particular, they could not have imposed significant, long-term
obligations on the State that the authorizing statute did not impose. As a result of the
hierarchy of Romanian laws, the Government, implementing the law through the
government decision, could not have bound the legislature not to change the law.
And once EGO 24 was modified, GD 194/1999 could not have had a broader field of
application than the modified EGO 24. Thus, no prudent investor in Romania could
have understood Annex 2 of GD 194/1999 as freezing the facilities there listed. For
the same reason, because EGO 24 created no vested right but only a general
entitlement, neither could GD 194/1999 or the PICs create such a vested right.

In any event, the Respondent argues that the Claimants’ theory has no support from
their Romanian law expert, Prof. Mihai. Considering that the nature of GD 194/1999
and the PICs has become the cornerstone of their expropriation, umbrella clause and
fair and equitable treatment cases, the Respondent considers it notable that Prof.
Mihai made no mention of either instrument in his expert report.

The Respondent also denies that the PICs could have been the source of an
investor's right to the EGO 24 incentives. For the Respondent, the correct
interpretation is that the PICs were merely administrative tools that certified the
holders’ eligibility to obtain the facilities; the source of the right was EGO 24.
Specifically, the Respondent argues that Article 5 of the GD 525/1999 published on 8
July 1999 (Exh. R-6),°* which approved the 1999 Methodological Norms for the

* The Respondent notes that GD 525/1999 replaced an earlier version of the methodological norms,
contained in GD 907 of 1998, published on 22 December 1998.

110

397.

398.

399.

401.

application of EGO 24, stated that the “incentives provided by the law shall be
granted pursuant to the certificate of the investor in a disadvantaged region”. Such a
certificate was to be issued by the relevant Regional Development Agency, upon an
investor's request. According to the Respondent, the language of Article 5 makes it
explicit that the PICs merely certified eligibility to “incentives provided by the law’.
That law was EGO 24, as approved by Law 20, neither of which contained any
provision concerning their duration nor any restriction on the government's ability to
amend or repeal them.

According to the Respondent, this conclusion was reaffirmed by a subsequent version
of the Methodological Norms, adopted by GD 728/2001 (Exh. R-35). Article 4(1) of
these Methodological Norms stated: “The facilities provided by the law are granted
based on the certificate of the investor in the disfavored area” (emphasis added by
the Respondent). According to the Respondent, this demonstrates that the content of
the facilities was established by law (i.e., EGO 24) and that PICs were an
administrative tool attesting to eligibility to access facilities available under EGO 24.

The Respondent contends that the language of the PICs themselves does not change
this conclusion. All the PICs stated was that the titleholder was the beneficiary of the
facilities granted under GD 194/1999, in accordance with the provisions of EGO 24
approved and amended by Law 20, and in accordance with the government decision
approving the methodological norms. Accordingly, all the PICs did was certify that
the titleholder was the beneficiary of the facilities granted by the law, whatever the law
determined that those facilities were at any point in time.

The Respondent further argues that the PICs did not list any individual facilities, let
alone purport to stabilize them for any particular period. The PICs only stated that
they were valid until a given date. That only meant that they certified eligibility to
whatever facilities were available under the law until that date.

The Respondent rejects the Claimants’ argument that the PICs were the source of the
right to the facilities because they had to present them every time that they wanted to
benefit from them. The PICs were needed so that administrators did not have to
evaluate eligibility on each occasion that a business applied for an exemption. This
conclusion is also supported by the fact that it was not necessary to obtain a new PIC
each time EGO 24 was amended; the PIC continued to certify eligibility to the
remaining facilities in EGO 24, as amended. This was confirmed by the Claimants’
expert, Prof. Mihai (Tr., Day 5, 215).

The Respondent also denies that the administrative process to qualify for a PIC was
equivalent to a contractual negotiation, or that the PICs were tantamount to contracts.
In the legal order in which that process occurred, the issuance of a PIC did not create
a-contract. Nor did the obligation to submit an investment plan amount to a bilateral
deal; the investment plan was merely a requirement for the government to establish
that investors met the qualifying criteria.

111

402.

404.

405.

407.

Similarly, the requirements to employ a certain number of unemployed persons and to
have made certain investments were part of the criteria for eligibility; they did not
establish the existence of a promise that the facilities would be available for a certain
duration. The Respondent adds that it is misleading to suggest that these
requirements show that EGO 24 was intended to foster capital intensive industries,
because there was no threshold of magnitude for a qualifying investment, the
employment requirement was met by employing ten persons, five of which had to be
unemployed, and the eligible sectors covered a wide range of activities.

The Respondent also denies that EGO 24 created an obligation for investors to
maintain their investments for twice as long as the investor is a recipient of the
incentives. The Respondent alleges that it “has repeatedly stated that the obligation
does not exist and that (therefore) it has no intention of enforcing it” (R-Rejoinder, {
118). In any event, it argues that the alleged obligation is of only theoretical interest,
because the Claimants have no desire to move the operations from Bihor county, and
thus the state has never had the occasion to enforce the alleged obligation.
However, it notes that Prof. Mihai did not address this matter in his expert opinion,
and the Claimants have not cited any instances in which any investor has been
subjected to the supposed obligation, or any Romanian court or agency has
interpreted it in that fashion.

The Respondent further contends that neither the monitoring process to which the
Claimants were submitted, nor the alleged promotion of the EGO 24 regime by
government officials, could have given rise to a promise that the facilities would
remain unchanged for any period of time.

Finally, the Respondent contends that the Romanian Constitutional Court disagrees
with the Claimants’ theory: when the profit tax exemption available under Law 35 of
1991 was repealed, the Constitutional Court found that the repeal of that exemption
could not be construed as the termination of a contract, nor as an infringement of the
right to property or of the investor's right to recover debt (Decision 130/2003). The
Respondent notes that Prof. Mihai called this decision ultra vires at the hearing but
did not discuss it in his expert report, while Prof. Baias confirmed the decision’s
relevance for this case. Thus, Romania submits that the Tribunal should afford this
decision great weight and conclude that GD 194/1999, alone or together with the
PICs, did not constitute a contractual or other obligation under Romanian law.

c. Even if the umbrella clause were applicable, Romania did not breach it

Even assuming that the regulatory acts relied upon by the Claimants could have
created “obligations entered into” with the Claimants, the Respondent argues that it
could not have failed to observe such obligations simply by modifying the facilities. If
the underlying obligation (properly construed under its governing law) has not been
breached, then there cannot be a breach of the umbrella clause.

Specifically, the Respondent argues that nothing in EGO 24 could be construed as a
guarantee to preserve EGO 24 unchanged for ten years. The only reference to

112

410.

duration is found in Article 5, which provides that “[a] geographical area can be
declared a disfavoured zone at least for three years but not for more than ten’.
Romania did not breach or amend this provision: both $tei-Nucet and Draganesti
retained their status of “disfavoured regions” until April 2009, as provided in GD
94/1999° and GD 1199/2000.

As to the availability of the facilities, the Respondent argues that there was nothing in
EGO 24 that prevented the Respondent from eliminating some of them (the
Respondent notes that the Profit Tax Incentive was maintained). Relying on
Parkerings v. Lithuania,** the Respondent contends that the mere existence of a law
or regulation in no way implies that the government will not amend its terms. EGO
24/1998 contained no “stabilization” element that could ensure that the facilities listed
therein would remain unchanged for ten years. Thus, Romania could not have
assumed any obligation to freeze the content of the facilities regime simply by
promulgating EGO 24/1998. To the contrary, the Respondent argues that by the time
the facilities were first extended under EGO 24/1998, Romanian law on state aid
(Exh. R-75) specifically provided that such measures were subject to possible repeal
at any time. In particular, Article 13 of the State Aid Law provided:

(1) The Competition Council and the Competition Office will supervise on a
permanent basis all the existent aids. If it is determined that an existent aid
distorts relevantly the normal competitive environment and affects the
proper enforcement of the international agreements in which Romania is a
party, the Competition Council will request the aid provider to adopt proper
measures in order to remove its incompatibility with this law. Such
measures may include a recommendation for cancellation or amendment
of the existent aid. Such recommendations will be submitted also to the
Competition Office achievement monitoring of the imposed measures.

(2) If the measures are not adopted by the aid provider, within the time
frame indicated in the request, the Competition Council may decide to stop
the granting of the existent aid or may impose conditions and obligations
which may insure the compatibility of the aid with this law's dispositions.
The decision will not have a retroactive effect and must allow the aid
provider a reasonable time period in order to comply with such decision.

Accordingly, the Respondent argues that as Romania was under no obligation to
make all of the facilities available to the Claimants for 10 years, failure to do so
cannot constitute a breach of the umbrella clause.

The Tribunal’s analysis

a. Interpretation of the BIT’s umbrella clause

Article 2(4) of the BIT provides that “[e]Jach Contracting Party shall observe any

obligation it has entered into with an investor of the other Contracting Party with
regard to his or her investment.”

5 The Tribunal understands that the Respondent refers to GD 194/1999.
%8 Parkerings v. Lithuania, § 332.

113

411. The Parties agree that, for the umbrella clause to apply, Romania must have entered
into an obligation with the Claimants with regard to their investment. The Parties
further agree that this obligation must be specific. The Parties dispute whether the
EGO 24 framework and the PICs did in fact give rise to such an obligation. The
Parties also dispute whether the repeal of the Raw Materials Facility constituted a
breach of any such obligation, to the extent it arose.

412. The first step in the Tribunal’s analysis is thus to determine whether the EGO 24
framework gave rise to an “obligation” in the meaning of Article 2(4) of the BIT.
Pursuant to Article 31(1) of the VCLT, “[a] treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in
accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their
context and in the light of its object and purpose.” The Tribunal sees no reason to
deviate from this rule.°” Accordingly, the Tribunal must first turn to the ordinary
meaning of the term “obligation”.

413. Relying on Enron v. Argentina, the Claimants argue that “[u]nder its ordinary meaning
the phrase ‘any obligation’ refers to obligations regardless of their nature”, noting that
“[tribunals interpreting this expression have found it to cover both contractual
obligations such as payment as well as obligations assumed through law or
regulation.”

414. The Respondent denies this. It argues that generally-applicable regulatory and
legislative acts, standing alone, do not give rise to the kind of obligations covered by
umbrella clauses (even under those more broadly formulated). In the Respondent's
view, umbrella clauses only protect contractual or quasi-contractual obligations.

415. The Tribunal agrees with the tribunal in Eureko v. Poland that the term “[aJny’
obligations is capacious; it means not only obligations of a certain type, but ‘any’ —
that is to say, all — obligations entered into with regard to investments of investors of
the other Contracting Party.”*° In addition, the BIT specifies that these obligations
must also be “entered into with an investor [...] with regard to his or her investment’.
This language suggests that the state must have committed with respect to a
particular investor with regard to his or her investments.“° Indeed, both sides agree

*7 In doing so, the Tribunal adopts the line followed by the tribunals in SGS v. Philippines, 4 114- 128
(although it partially based its decision on considerations extrinsic from the text); Eureko v. Poland, 1
244-260; Enron v. Argentina, § 273-277; SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of
Paraguay (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/29), Decision on Jurisdiction, 12 February 2010, 9 167-168;
Burlington Resources, Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador (\CSID Case No. ARB/08/5), Decision on Liability,
14 December 2012 (hereinafter “Burlington v. Ecuador’), § 212.

%8 Enron v. Argentina, § 274.

°° Eureko v. Poland, § 246.

” See, e.g., F.A. Mann, “British Treaties for the Promotion and Protection of Investments,” 52 British
Yearbook of International Law (1981), Exhibit RL-257, p 246 (explaining that an umbrella clause “only
covers an obligation arising from a particular commitment either of the Contracting Parties may have
entered into. [...] What is assumed is that the State has entered into a particular commitment which
imposes obligations. Such obligations may arise from contract with the State or from the terms of the
licence granted by it. It may be express or implied, it may be in writing or oral. But it must be clearly
ascertainable as an obligation of the State itself arising from its own commitments. No difficulty occurs
where the contract is made with the State itself - and the term may fairly be said to comprise its
instrumentalities, even if they are separate legal entities, as well as companies of which it is the sole

114

416.

417.

418.

that the obligation must be specific. Thus, the umbrella clause in this BIT covers
obligations of any nature, regardless of their source, provided that they are indeed
“obligations” entered into with a particular investor with regard to his or her
investment.

Having said this, for the umbrella clause to be triggered, there must be an obligation
in the first place. The BIT does not define "obligation", nor have the Parties attempted
to do so. The Claimants simply state that the term obligation is equivalent to an
“undertaking”, because when someone undertakes to do something, they become
obliged to do that thing. The Respondent, however, submits (and the Claimants do
not seem to dispute) that the determination of whether an obligation exists must be
done in accordance to domestic law. Specifically, the Respondent has argued that in
order to be elevated to the protection of the umbrella clause, the obligation must have
given the Claimants an actionable vested right under Romanian law.

In the Tribunal’s view, establishing whether an obligation exists is a question that
cannot be answered by turning solely to the interpretation of the meaning of this term
as stated in the BIT. The purpose of the umbrella clause is to cover or “elevate” to
the protection of the BIT an obligation of the state that is separate from, and
additional to, the treaty obligations that it has assumed under the BIT. As noted by
the Burlington v. Ecuador tribunal, this separate and additional obligation does not
exist in a vacuum; it is subject to its own proper law.*" In the words of the tribunal in
SGS v. Philippines, an umbrella clause

... does not convert non-binding domestic blandishments into binding
international obligations. It does not convert questions of contract law into
questions of treaty law. In particular it does not change the proper law of
the {relevant agreement] from the law of the Philippines to international
law.

This Tribunal concurs with this view. Thus, whether an obligation has arisen depends
on the law governing that obligation, and so the interpretation of the term “obligation”
for purposes of the umbrella clause would rely primarily on that law rather than on
international law. In other words, to be afforded the protection of the BIT, the
obligation must qualify as such under its governing law. In this case, the governing
law cannot be other than Romanian law and the Parties did not point to any other
possibly applicable law. The obligation to which the Claimants wish to extend the
protection of the BIT purportedly arose under EGO 24, its implementing legislation
and/or the granting of the PICs. Thus, the existence and content of that purported
obligation depends on Romanian law.

 

shareholder. But where the contract is made with a private person, then the provision only applies if
and in so far as an obligation of the State arising from its own particular commitment (as opposed to
existing general legislation) may be discerned. Thus if the law of the land provides that the State is
liable for the torts of its servants this is not an ‘obligation arising from a particular commitment’ the
State may have entered into and may be changed, though in certain circumstances this may become
subject to the provisions about expropriation.”).

*" Burlington v. Ecuador, § 214.

* SGS v. Philippines, 126.

115

419.

420.

421.

422.

423.

Accordingly, whether Romania was bound by an “obligation” to provide the incentives
to the Claimants until 31 March 2009 is a question to be determined by Romanian
law. The Tribunal will now address whether such an obligation arose.

b. Did Romania enter into a specific obligation with the Claimants?

The Claimants argue that, through the EGO 24 framework, Romania entered into a
specific obligation with the Claimants with regard to their investment, which consisted
of Romania’s undertaking with respect to the Claimants to maintain the EGO 24
incentives in the $tei-Nucet disfavored region for the full 10-year period provided by
GD 194/1999. The Respondent concedes that EGO 24 created a generalized
entitlement that could be claimed by qualifying investors, but denies that it promised
that the incentives would remain in place or unchanged for any specific period. It also
denies that this entitlement gives rise to an obligation on the part of Romania under
Romanian law.

The Tribunal will first address the content of the entitlement created by EGO 24
(Section (i)). It will then address whether it gives rise to a specific obligation for
Romania under Romanian law that may trigger the application of the umbrella clause
(Section (ii)).

i. Content of the Claimants’ entitlement

Having reviewed the evidence before it, the Tribunal’s conclusion is that EGO 24
created a general scheme of incentives available to investors who fulfilled certain
requirements, which were later “granted” to qualifying investors through a specific
administrative act (the PIC). In other words, the legislation created a generalized
entitlement that could be claimed by qualifying investors, but this general entitlement
later crystallized with respect to qualifying investors through the granting of the PICs,
becoming from that moment on a specific entitlement with respect to specific
investors. Therefore, the Tribunal does not need to decide whether a general
entitlement, in a law or regulation, could give rise to an obligation subject to the
umbrella clause; here the general obligation was converted into a_ specific
commitment.

In particular, EGO 24, as republished on 8 November 1999 (Exh. R-68) provided that
the Government could declare the creation of certain “disadvantaged areas”, at the
proposal of the National Council for Regional Development (Article 3). This
declaration would be made by means of a “government decision”, which would also
approve (a) the period for which a geographical area was declared a disadvantaged
region, (b) the fields of investments, and (c) “the required financing and advantages
provided by law, and granted to the investors” (Article 4). Article 5 provided that “[a]
geographical area may be declared a disadvantaged area for a period of at least 3
years, but for not more than 10 years, with possibility for extension, under the
conditions of this Emergency Ordinance.” Article 6(1) went on to say that investors
meeting certain requirements “will be granted the following advantages for their new

116

424.

425.

426.

investments in these regions”, and then listed those advantages (that is, the
incentives or facilities) (see paragraph 148 above).

It is thus clear that EGO 24 did not stand alone: by its own terms it required an
important part of its implementation to be carried out by way of a government decision
(including the determination of the disfavored area and of the incentives or facilities
that would be available for investors in that area). For the case of S$tei-Nucet, this
government decision was GD 194/1999 (Exh. C-31, C-280), later extended to
Draganesti by GD 1190/2000. The boundaries of the disfavored region were
extended to include Draganesti by means of GD 1190/2000 on 29 November 2000
(Exh. C-32).

The Respondent argues that, even if EGO 24 delegated certain aspects to a
government decision, because of the hierarchy of norms under Romanian law it was
legally impossible for GD 194/1999 or GD 1190/2000 to grant anything that EGO 24
did not authorize. This may be so, but based on the relevant laws and regulations
and the testimony of the Respondent's expert, Prof. Baias, the Tribunal concludes
that GD 194/1999 and GD 1190/2000 did exactly what was authorized by EGO 24:

a. GD 194/1999 determined that Stei-Nucet would be a disfavored region (Articles 1
and 2), established the time period for that (i.e., 10 years, Article 3), and provided
that, “during the existence of the disfavored region, established according to this
decision, the facilities under annex no. 2*) will be granted” (Article 4 of GD
194/1999). In turn, Annex 2 of GD 194/1999 listed all of the incentives provided
under Article 6(1) of EGO 24 (see paragraph 153 above). Article 5 of GD
194/1999 also provided that “[t]he domains of interest for the achievement of
investments in the zone shall be those provided for in Annex No. 3.” In turn,
Annex 3 provided that these domains of interest were agriculture and
“zootechny", production (except the manufacture of distilled alcoholic drinks and
manufacture of ethyl alcohol by fermentation), services (except public
alimentation not included in an investment in tourism), trade (except marketing of
products not made in activities performed in the zone) and environmental
protection and rehabilitation of natural sites. Article 6 of GD 194/1999 provided
that Annexes 1-3 would “be an integral part of the present decision.”

b. Similarly, GD 1190/2000 extended the boundaries of the disfavored region to
include Draganesti (Article |), confirmed that “the period for which the $tei-Nucet
region is established as a disfavored region shall end on 31 March 2009”, and
added that “[flor the commune of Draganesti, the facilities related to the
disfavored region shall be granted commencing with the date this decision is
published in the Official Gazette of Romania, Part |.” (Article I!)

Prof. Baias confirmed that GD 194/1999 was intra vires at the time it was issued and
until the time when EGO 24 was amended in 2004 by GO 94/2004 to revoke the
facilities, because, in Prof. Baias’s view, the subsidiary norm is automatically
restricted to the scope of the amended primary norm.** However, at the time of its

«6 Specifically, Prof. Baias testified:

117

427.

428.

issuance in 1999 and up until the facilities were revoked in November 2004 (or
February 2005, if we take the effective date), GD 194/1999 validly provided that
qualifying investors investing in the $tei-Nucet area (later expanded to include
Draganesti) would be granted the incentives listed in Annex 2 until the date in which
the region ceased to be disfavored (i.e., 1 April 2009). The same conclusion should
apply to GD 1190/2000.

Thus, EGO 24, GD 194/1999 and GD 1190/2000 by themselves do nothing more
than establish a general entitlement to qualifying investors in the $tei-Nucet
disfavored region. Standing alone, they do not give rise to a specific entitlement to a
specific investor. The rules for the actual granting of the incentives to investors were
established by the Methodological Norms (GD 525/1999, the “1999 Methodological
Norms”, and later by GD 728/2001, the “2001 Methodological Norms”). Pursuant to
these Methodological Norms, qualifying investors (only) became entitled to the
incentives once they received their PIC (or TIC, on a temporary basis).

Specifically, Article 5 of the 1999 Methodological Norms provided:

“(1) The incentives provided by the law shall be granted [in Romanian,
“se acorda’] pursuant to the certificate of investor in a disfavored
area, which is issued, upon the business entity's request, by the
Regional Development Agency under the jurisdiction of which the
head office of such business entity is located.

[1
Business entities requesting the issuance of the certificate of

investor in a disfavored area shall prove they meet the requirements
set forth by the [EGO].

S

s

Emerging business entities, unable to produce evidence regarding
the investment, the commissioning of the operations and the
creation of new jobs, may request the issuance of a temporary
certificate of investor in a disfavored area, for a maximum of 3
months. In case they do not bring, during this period, evidence of
having met the requirements set forth by the [EGO], they shall be
compelled to pay and return, respectively the equivalent value of all
the incentives they have benefited of.

 

Q. So are we agreed, then, that when the government decision was issued, the way in
which it should be interpreted is that in $tei-Nucet, the incentives granted, or
indicated in Annex 2, would be granted for the full duration of the time when Stei-
Nucet was declared a disfavoured zone; that was the position at that time?

At the very moment of the adoption of this government decision, | agree.

That was in conformity with EGO 24 at that time?

At that moment.

So your position is that because EGO 24 was subsequently changed, this
government decision became in contradiction with -- not EGO 24 as it was, but the
subsequent legislative position?

A. Yes. With the subsequent form of the EGO 24 as it was modified.

(Tr., Day 5, 265:11-266-2 (Reed/Baias)).

OoOropPr

118

429.

430.

431.

(5) The temporary certificate shall be issued pursuant to the business
entity's commitment regarding the investment and the creation of
new jobs.

Ler
(Emphasis added).

The substance of these requirements was repeated in Articles 4 and 5 of the 2001
version, which added two specifications:

a. Investors applying for a certificate of investor had to prove that they had “at least
10 employees with individual employment contracts for an indefinite term out of
which at least 5 should be employed from the unoccupied work” (Article 4(4)).

b. “The business entities which obtained the certificate of investor in the disfavoured
area and which perform activities from fields of interest other than those provided
under annex no. 1 shall continue to benefit from facilities under the law, until the
expiry of the period for which the disfavoured area was declared” (Article 5(3)).

Prof. Mihai testified in cross-examination that the correct translation of Article 5(1) of
GD 525/1999 should be ‘“[t]he facilities provided by the law shall be granted on the
basis of the certificate of investor’ (Tr., Day 5, 214:14-215:1). Although the
Respondent argues that the key words here are “provided by the law’, in the
Tribunal’s view the key words are rather that such facilities “shall be granted.” The
applicable regulation (EGO 24) “provided” or created certain incentives or facilities;
GD 194/1999 and GD 1190/2000 (by express delegation of the law) determined
which of these incentives would be available to investors in a particular disfavored
area and for what time period, and the Methodological Norms established the rules
under which these incentives would be granted to specific investors. But the actual
“granting”, “awarding” or “vesting” of the entitlement to the incentives occurred at the
moment of the issuance of the PICs. It is in this moment when the general
entitlement becomes a specific entitlement with respect to a particular investor.

In other words, the specific entitlement of a particular investor to the incentives
provided under the EGO 24 framework arises from an administrative act of specific
scope (i.e., directed to specific investors with respect to specific investments). This
administrative act is evidenced by the issuance of the PICs. In the Tribunal’s view, it
is irrelevant for purposes of determining the existence of a specific entitlement
whether the PIC merely certified eligibility to the incentives under generally applicable
legislation. The fact is that, without having been granted a PIC, an investor could not
benefit from the incentives offered by EGO 24, GD 194/1999 and GD 1190/2000. In
other words, the granting of the PIC was the moment in which a particular relationship
between the Government and the investor was “perfected": an investor could benefit
from the privileges offered by the legislative framework only after having applied for a
PIC, proved it fulfilled the requirements and received a favorable decision from the
government in the form of a PIC. Only thereafter did the investor have the actual
entitlement to the incentives, and only after that moment did it have the obligations
established under EGO 24.

119

432.

434.

435.

436.

437.

438.

439.

The question that follows is: did the regulatory framework provide that this specific
entitlement would last until 1 April 2009? The Tribunal finds that it did.

EGO 24 itself did not say anything with respect to the timing of the entitlement, but by
its own terms it delegated this determination to a government decision. For Stei-
Nucet, this government decision was GD 194/1999. Article 4 of GD 194/1999
provided that the facilities listed in Annex 2 “shall be granted” (“se acorda” in
Romanian) during the existence of the disfavored region. In turn, Article 3 provides
that Stei-Nucet is designated a disfavored region for a period of 10 years, starting on
1 April 1999. This was confirmed by GD 1199/2000 when the boundaries of the
region were extended to include Draganesti, which stated that the designation of the
region as disfavored would end on 31 March 2009.

This was further confirmed by Article 5(3) of the 2001 version of the Methodological
Norms (GD 728/2001, Exh. R-35), which provided that:

The business entities which obtained the certificate of investor in the
disfavoured area and which perform activities from fields of interest other
than those provided under annex no. 1 shall continue to benefit from
facilities under the law, until the expiry of the period for which the
disfavoured area was declared. (Emphasis added)

In addition, Article 1(f) of the 2001 Methodological Norms defined the period during
which it would be understood that an investor had benefitted from the incentives for
purposes of Article 7 and 9 of EGO 24 as the period “comprised between obtaining
the certificate of investor in [the] disfavored area and disappearance of the disfavored
area; in case of a temporary investor certificate, followed by obtaining an investor
certificate in the disfavored area, the period shall be calculated as of obtaining a
temporary investor certificate until the disfavored area ceases to exist.”

It is true that these provisions were added in the 2001 Methodological Norms, and not
in the 1999 version. However, they confirm an interpretation that was already
reasonable in light of the interplay of the legal provisions.

In addition, all three of the Corporate Claimants’ PICs provided that the certificate
(which certified that they were the beneficiaries of the facilities granted under EGO 24
and GD 194/1999) would be valid until 1 April 2009. Indeed, Romania concedes that
the PICs certified eligibility to the incentives until 1 April 2009, arguing however that
the PICs only entitled the Claimants to whatever incentives were available under the
general scheme from time to time.

Thus, the Tribunal concludes that the PICs, in the context of the EGO 24 regulatory
framework, provided (or, to use Respondent's words, entitled) that PIC holders would
be entitled to the incentives offered under EGO 24 until 1 April 2009.

The third question that arises is: did the legislative framework provide that the
Claimants would be entitled to the same incentives, or at least substantially the same
incentives, that were originally provided under GD 194/1999? The PICs merely state
that the investor is the “beneficiary” of the facilities provided under the general

120

440.

441.

scheme, as republished and amended. This seemingly supports Romania's
contention that they merely certified eligibility to whatever incentives were available
under the general scheme from time to time.

However, Article 4 of GD 194/1999 provides that the facilities listed in Annex 2 “shall
be granted” during the existence of the disfavored region, and that annex was
attached to GD 194/1999 and was deemed to form an “integral part” of that decision
(see paragraph 425.a). It could thus be argued that the facilities listed in that annex
are incorporated into the Government Decision and thus “stabilized” in some form by
the reference to a specific time period. It would be a difficult question to determine
whether the Government would thus unduly exceed its authority under Romanian law
and what the legal consequences would be under such law, but it is unnecessary to
make that determination.

In fact, the incentives underwent several amendments during the life of EGO 24,
which included the revocation of some of the facilities. Specifically:

a. On 16 June 2000 (effective 1 July 2000), Romania passed Emergency
Government Ordinance No. 75/2000 (“EGO 75/2000”, Exh. C-45, R-81).
Although the Competition Council had issued Decision 244/2000 a month before,
EGO 75/2000 ignored the Competition Council's recommendation to eliminate
the Raw Materials Incentive. Instead, it anended EGO 24 in the following ways:

i. It amended the Raw Materials Incentive by providing for an exemption
(rather than the refund) on customs duties, and excluded spare parts and
components from the customs duty exemption. Article 6(1)(b) of EGO 24
was replaced with the following text:

b) the exemption from the payment of customs duties for

imported raw material necessary for the own production in the
area.

ii. It amended the provisions regarding the award of funds under the Special
Development Fund.

b. On 7 November 2001, Romania passed Law No. 621/2001 (Exh. R-33, R-129),
which amended EGO 75/2000 by, among others, reinstating the customs duties
exemption on imported components. Article 6(1)(b) of EGO 24 was replaced with
the following text:

b) the exemption of customs duties for imported raw materials
and components required to perform the area’s own production.

c. On 1 June 2002, Romania passed Law No. 345/2002 (Exh. R-90), which
abolished the Machinery Incentive provided under Article 6(1)(a) of EGO 24 (both
with respect to customs duties and VAT).

121

442.

443.

444.

d. On 1 July 2002, Romania passed Law No. 414/2002 (Exh. C-48, R-34), which
repealed the Profit Tax Incentive but grandfathered it for investors who held a
PIC prior to the date on which this law entered into force (Articles 36(1)(d), 35(3)).

e. On 19 November 2002, Romania passed Law No. 678/2002 (Exh. C-49) which
amended the Raw Materials Incentive by excluding from the customs duties
exemption raw materials for the production, processing and preservation of meat.

f. In June 2004, Law 239/2004 (Exh. C-50) subjected the remaining facilities to a
requirement that they not exceed a threshold of maximum intensity of state aid.

g. On 31 August 2004, Romania passed EGO 94/2004 (Exh. R-94), which
abolished all the remaining incentives with the exception of the grandfathered
Profit Tax Incentive. EGO 94/2004 also provided that “[i]n calculating the
intensity of state aid, eligible costs related to investments made before 15
September 2004 shall be taken into account.”

Thus, from its enactment in 1998 and until its final revocation in 2004, EGO 24 was
amended several times, either to the benefit or to the detriment of PIC holders. The
Machinery Incentive was eliminated completely in 2002. The Profit Tax Incentive was
repealed in 2002, but grandfathered for PIC holders. The Raw Materials Incentive
survived, in some ways enhanced (it was transformed into an exemption instead of a
refund in 2000), but its scope of application was modified (it was eliminated for
components in 2000 and then reinstated in 2001, and later eliminated for meat
products in 2002). Only the Profit Tax Incentive was grandfathered for PIC holders.

This seems to confirm the Respondent's argument that the legislative framework only
provided that PIC holders would be entitled to whatever incentives were available
under the regime from time to time. However, the Claimants argue that these
amendments (at least until 2002) did not indicate in any way that the entire regime
would be brought to a premature conclusion. They argue that EGO 75/2000
strengthened the regime, even against the Competition Council’s recommendation,
noting that the Raw Materials Incentive was made into an exemption rather than a
refund, and that the components part of it was reinstated the following year. They
also argue that the amendments to the Machinery Incentive and the Profit Tax
Incentive were made in the context of other reforms (VAT laws, profit tax laws) and
did not target EGO 24 in the context of state aid. Finally, they argue that the
elimination of the Raw Materials Incentive with respect to raw materials for the
production, processing and preservation of meat was made to address problems
specific to the Romanian meat industry.

In the Tribunal’s view, Romania’s conduct cannot change the content of the
entitlement. That Romania did as a matter of fact amend or eliminate certain
incentives without grandfathering them does not mean that it was entitled to do so, at
least not if that amendment or elimination, in itself or in conjunction with other
amendments or eliminations, would amount to a repeal of the entitlement altogether,
more precisely of the entitlement based on PICs (or TICs). This does not contradict

122

445.

446.

447.

448.

the principle lex posterior derogat legi priori: it is undisputed that Romania may validly
amend its laws, and presumably GD 194/1999 could be validly amended by
subsequent legislation, but this is not the question.

The question is whether such an amendment could affect rights or entitlement
created by previous laws with respect to private parties. In this case, the question is
whether PIC holders continued to have the entitlement to the same incentives
specified in Annex 2 of GD 194/1999 despite the later amendments to the EGO 24
regime. This question is addressed in the following section.

ii. Does Romania’s undertaking qualify as an “obligation” under
Romanian law? If yes, did Romania breach it?

The Tribunal has found that the EGO 24 framework, once specified with respect to
the Claimants through the granting of the PICs, created for the Claimants a specific
entitlement to the EGO 24 incentives until 1 April 2009. Thus, under the EGO 24
framework Romania committed to provide the EGO 24 incentives until 1 April 2009.

However, for purposes of the umbrella clause, the Tribunal will determine whether
this commitment (or undertaking) amounts to an “obligation” under Romanian law. In
addition, the Tribunal must answer the question raised in the preceding section:
whether that undertaking, commitment or obligation consisted of providing the
Claimants the same incentives that were listed in Annex 2 of GD 194/1999 until
1 April 2009. Both questions are relevant. If there is no obligation under Romanian
law, the umbrella clause is not triggered. If an obligation under Romanian law exists
but its scope is limited to providing the Claimants with whatever incentives are
available under the regime from time to time, Romania discharges that obligation by
providing whatever incentives were in force in a particular time. If, on the other hand,
there is an obligation under Romanian law to maintain the same incentives through
1 April 2009 with respect to the Claimants, then Romania would be in violation of the
BIT’s umbrella clause.

The Tribunal considers two alternative approaches potentially relevant to that
analysis. Under the first approach, the answer to the questions above depends on
whether the EGO 24 framework provided the Claimants with a vested right to the
incentives listed in Annex 2 of GD 194/1999 until 1 April 2009. In other words, under
that approach, the Tribunal would need to decide whether the Claimants’ entitlement
qualifies as a “vested right’ under Romanian law, and whether Romania’s
corresponding undertaking qualifies as an “obligation” under Romanian law. In many
legal systems, the existence of a debtor’s obligation is inseparable from the existence
of the creditor's vested right to performance of the obligation and is a mirror view of
that right from the debtor's perspective. Thus, presumably, under this approach, in
order for Romania to be legally obligated to provide the Claimants with the incentives
listed in Annex 2 of GD 194/1999 until 1 April 2009 (or legally obligated to
compensate the Claimants if those incentives were eliminated or amended), the EGO
24 framework would have had to provide the Claimants with a vested right to receive
those very same incentives.

123

449.

451.

These are matters of Romanian law that the Tribunal cannot answer in the abstract or
with reference to comparative law. It is the Claimants’ burden to prove that
Romania’s undertaking amounts to an obligation under Romanian law, and that the
content of that obligation is such that Romania’s actions have breached it. The
Claimants have not addressed these issues convincingly. The Claimants’ legal
expert on Romanian law, Prof. Mihai, did not address whether the regulatory
framework created an obligation under Romanian law. In particular, he did not
address the nature of GD 194/1999 or of the PICs in his expert report, and only briefly
in his oral examination. Nor was this matter addressed by Romania's expert, Prof.
Baias. His report only referred to whether EGO 24, GD 194/1999 or the PICs created
contractual relations between the Claimants and the state (his answer was no) (ER of
F. Baias, 9 5.1-5.2).

Similarly, the Claimants have not addressed to the Tribunal’s satisfaction whether
their alleged right to the incentives might be lawfully withdrawn without compensation
under Romanian law. The Tribunal has paid particular attention to Decision 130/2003
of the Constitutional Court. The Respondent argues that this decision (which applied
to the incentives provided by Law 35 on Foreign Investment) proves that the EGO 24
framework did not give PIC holders a vested right to the incentives, and their
withdrawal did not give PIC holders a right to compensation. Decision 130/2003
specifically stated:

The Court finds that no contract was concluded between the Romanian
State and the potential investors by the adoption of this law, as the entity
raising the objection of unconstitutionality groundlessly claims, and no
ownership right or right to recover debt was created in their favor, but a
legal framework was created that could offer to the foreign investors an
attractive business climate, taking into account the requirements of the
transition from a State centralized economy to the market economy.
Therefore, the fact that the contested provisions provide for the cessation
of the applicability of such facilitations may not be construed as the
termination of a contract and the least as infringement of the ownership
right or of the investors; rights to recover debt, but the amendment of the
legal framework in connection with the business background. The measure
is not meant to harm foreign investors, as they must still carry out their
activity under the usual conditions of a market economy, without the
facilities that represented positive discriminations by comparison to the
other participants to the business circuit. (Exh. RL-214, p.4).

The Claimants contend that the findings of this decision cannot be extrapolated to
EGO 24 because the regimes created by Law 35 and EGO 24 were significantly
different (in particular, because Law 35 provided all foreign investors in Romania with
benefits, while EGO 24 only benefited investors who met certain specific criteria who
invested in disfavored regions and fulfilled other obligations), adding that the
testimony of the Respondent's expert, Prof. Baias, was based on the mistaken
premise that both regimes were substantially similar. During cross-examination it
became evident that Prof. Baias did not know the details of either incentive regime
(Tr., Day 6, 26-31), while the Claimants’ expert, Prof. Mihai, testified that there were
important differences between EGO 24 and Law 35 (Tr., Day 5, 252 (Mihai)). Prof.
Mihai (a former president of the Constitutional Court) also characterized Decision
130/2003 as “extremely infelicitous” and “ultra vires”, stating that the reasoning of the

124

452.

Constitutional Court was “inappropriate” and “not in line with the reality“ because “by
the repeal of [EGO] 24, damages were brought to the foreign investors, because that
repeal created [...] a worse legal and economic situation than before the repeal.” (Tr.,
Day 5, 231, 252 (Mihai)). In the circumstances, the Tribunal is far from certain that it
should revisit as such the validity of the Constitutional Court's decision, as opposed to
the extent of its possible application by way of extrapolation to EGO 24, but finds that
Decision 130/2003 is in any circumstance not decisive when interpreting the nature of
the EGO 24 incentives.

However, the fact that Decision 130/2003 may not be applicable to the EGO 24
incentives does not prove that the EGO 24 incentives gave rise to vested rights or a
right to compensation if they were withdrawn, and Prof. Mihai’s testimony was
insufficient to establish this. Prof. Mihai testified that the constitutional principle of the
rule of law set out in Article 1(3) of the Romanian Constitution“ “required the
Romanian state to maintain unchanged all facilities granted under prior regulations in
favour of holders of investment certificates, issued before [GO 94/2004] was
enforced”, or required GO 94/2004 to contain grandfathering provisions (ER of L.
Mihai, {{] 12.6-12.7). He also stated that, by failing to do so, GO 94/2004 was issued
in breach of the ECHR’s jurisprudence on legitimate expectations and legal
foreseeability, as well as the Romanian principles of vested/acquired rights (ER of L.
Mihai, 44 13.1-13.3) and non-retroactivity (Tr., Day 5, 207-208, 247 (Mihai)). But
Prof. Mihai refrained from going as far as stating that the EGO 24 framework gave
rise to vested rights. He did say, with respect to the Machinery Facility repealed in
2000, that “those who had already acquired this right on the basis of some laws which
were in effect at the moment when these rights had been acquired [...] could continue
to claim these tax exemptions” (Tr., Day 5, 210 (Mihai)). However, he accepted that
most of the changes made to EGO 24 during its life did not contain grandfathering
provisions (e.g., the revocation of the meat facility and the machinery facility),
although he did characterize these regulations as unconstitutional (Tr., Day 5, 212,
234-238 (Mihai)). In the Tribunal’s view, this is not sufficient to establish the
existence of a vested right to the incentives for the Claimants (and a corresponding
obligation for Romania), or a right to compensation if the incentives were withdrawn.

The Tribunal concurs with the Claimants in that the entitlement created by the EGO
24 framework and the PICs creates an appearance, perhaps even a distinct
appearance, of a vested right giving rise to the corresponding obligation. In
particular, as discussed in paragraph 457 below, the relationship between the
Claimants and the Romanian State included a certain quid pro quo. However, the
Claimants have not proved that Romanian law would characterize such an
appearance, even in the presence of such quid pro quo, as a vested right or
obligation, or afford it the same protection.

* article 4 paragraph (3) of the Romanian Constitution provides: "Romania is a democratic and social
state governed by the rule of law, in which human dignity, the citizens' rights and freedoms, the free
development of human personality, justice and political pluralism represent supreme values, in the
spirit of the Romanian people's democratic traditions and the ideals embodied by the December 1989
Revolution, and shall be guaranteed."

125

454.

455.

457.

Under this approach, therefore, the Tribunal lacks sufficient evidence on the content
of Romanian law to be able to ascertain whether the EGO 24 framework, including
after "crystallizing" through the issuance of a PIC, gave the Claimants a vested right
under Romanian law to the incentives listed in Annex 2 of GD 194/1999 until 1 April
2009. For the same reason, it cannot ascertain that the EGO 24 framework created
the corresponding obligation for Romania to provide those very incentives during that
period.“

Under the second approach, it is not necessary that the obligation be “vested” or
“actionable” in order to be considered an obligation covered by the umbrella clause.
Although the Respondent has argued that granting a “vested” or “actionable” right is a
prerequisite for an obligation to arise and to have binding legal effect under Romanian
law, its experts have not established that this is the case. Thus, to find an obligation it
would be sufficient to find that (i) Romania undertook a firm commitment vis-a-vis the
Claimants, and (ii) that the scope of that commitment was to provide substantially the
same incentives during a specific period of time.

The first question is whether Romania undertook a firm commitment vis-a-vis the
Claimants under Romanian law. Through its regulatory framework, which was
intended to promote investments and job creation in certain disadvantaged regions,
Romania made an offer to investors who would consider establishing their business in
those regions. The offer included granting the incentives and maintaining them
through 1 April 2009. The offer was however, conditional. Investors who accepted
the offer would only qualify if they met certain requirements and remained in
compliance with those requirements for a period twice as long as the period of the
incentives. Therefore, Romania’s offer and the Claimants’ acceptance of that offer
established a relationship of mutual rights and duties: Romania accepted to grant the
incentives and maintain them through 1 April 2009 and the Claimants committed to
comply with the requirements of the offer for the requisite period. To state it
differently, Romania had the right to insist that the Claimants carry out their business
activities in compliance with the requirements while the Claimants had the right to
receive the incentives. The investors were taking a firm commitment and the
regulatory framework required a firm commitment on the side of Romania. This
relationship was certified by the PICs, the wording of which confirms that analysis of
the regulatory framework. The offer and the acceptance thus included a quid pro quo
and, therefore, can be considered a relationship of mutual rights and obligations. If
such is the nature of the relationship, Romania must have undertaken an obligation to
maintain the incentives through 1 April 2009 and the Claimants must have the
corresponding right to the incentives during that period. Romania’s obligation, and
the Claimants’ corresponding rights, are by definition obligations and rights under
Romanian law because they were established through the regulatory framework that
created the incentives.

The second inquiry relates to the scope of Romania's undertaking. Romania has
argued that, even if an obligation existed (which it denies), the scope of the obligation

* arbitrators Lévy and Abi-Saab favor this approach.

126

was only to grant whatever incentives might be available under the EGO 24
framework from time to time. The question is thus whether Romania’s commitment to
provide the incentives contained an element of stabilization in the event of an
amendment of the laws governing the EGO 24 framework. The commitment to
maintain the incentives for a certain specific time period induced investors to take
advantage of the offer. Therefore, Romania cannot in good faith ignore the fact that
such a commitment would necessarily be understood as including a promise of
stabilization; that is, that the incentives would be maintained for the specified period.
Stated differently, because Romania promised certified investors that it would
maintain the incentives through a certain date, that promise could not be understood
otherwise than as including the undertaking that the incentives would not be
withdrawn earlier. Thus, while Romania did not make a commitment not to amend its
laws as a general matter, certified investors understood that they would benefit from
the incentives through 1 April 2009. For example, if Romania promised to waive
customs duties on the imports of certain raw materials for a certain period of time with
respect to a certified investor, that promise would be understood as remaining valid
regardless of whether Romania amends its general legal framework to impose higher
or lower duties on the same raw materials during the specified period. Therefore, the
certified investors were offered (and accepted as part of the quid pro quo) a
guarantee of some stability of the legal regime within the scope of the incentives, as
described in the PICs, for a specific time period.

Under both aspects of the second approach, therefore, the Tribunal would find that a
legal obligation by Romania with respect to the Claimants exists. The mirror image of
that legal obligation would be the Claimants’ right to the incentives through 1 April
2009.*

The Tribunal has considered carefully both approaches and is conscious of the fact
that their application would lead to different conclusions. The majority follows the first
approach and concludes that the burden of proof lies with the Claimants and that the
Claimants have not met that burden. The majority does not find that the Claimants
have provided sufficient evidence and legal arguments on the content of Romanian
law for the Tribunal to find the existence of an obligation protected by the umbrella
clause. The majority accordingly dismisses the Claimants’ umbrella clause claim, and
the Tribunal will now address the Claimants’ arguments in the context of their fair and
equitable treatment claim, which spans the same injuries alleged by the Claimants
under the umbrella clause.

“8 Arbitrator Alexandrov favors this approach.

127

460.

461.

462.

463.

464.

B. Fair AND EQUITABLE TREATMENT

Article 2(3) of the BIT provides:

Each Contracting Party shall at all times ensure fair and equitable
treatment of the investments by investors of the other Contracting Party
and shall not impair the management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or
disposal thereof, as well as the acquisition of goods and services or the
sale of their production, through unreasonable or discriminatory measures.

This section addresses the Claimants’ allegation that the Respondent has breached
its obligations under this provision by failing to afford to their investments fair and
equitable treatment.

To facilitate the discussion of the Parties’ arguments with respect to the Claimants’
fair and equitable treatment claim, the Tribunal will first set out a summary of the
Parties’ general positions (Section 1 below). It will then address the nature,
interpretation and content of the fair and equitable treatment standard (Section 2
below). Finally, it will address the Parties’ specific arguments with respect to each
alleged breach of the standard (Sections 3 to 6 below).

Summary of the Parties’ positions
a. The Claimants’ position

The Claimants argue that the fair and equitable treatment standard, which is
contained in Article 2(3) of the BIT, is an autonomous standard that is additional to
general international law, and is thus not restricted by the international minimum
standard contained in customary international law (C-SoC, {Qf 183-192, citing
scholarly opinion, an UNCTAD study and the practice of international tribunals, in
particular, Tecmed v. Mexico’’, Azurix v. Argentina®’). The Claimants also contend
that the fair and equitable treatment standard has a specific meaning, which is not to
be confused with a decision ex aequo et bono (citing ADF Group Inc. v. United
States”, 184).

According to the Claimants, the interpretation of the treaty provision containing the
fair and equitable treatment standard should start from the normal canons of treaty
interpretation as contained in Articles 31 and 32 of the VCLT, which include the
ordinary meaning of the treaty’s terms, their context, and the object and purpose of

Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed, S.A. v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/00/2), Award, 29 May 2003 (hereinafter “Tecmed v. Mexico” or “Tecmed’).
“8 Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12), Award, 14 July 2006 (hereinafter
“Azurix v. Argentina’).
“8 ADF Group Inc. v. United States of America (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/1), Award, 8 January
2003 (hereinafter “ADF Group Inc. United States” or “ADF Group’).

128

the treaty, the preamble being of particular importance (C-SoC, Jf 194-200, citing
Tecmed v. Mexico, MTD v. Chile®, Azurix v. Argentina, Siemens v. Argentina®’).

465. Starting with the text of the provision, the Claimants note that the Oxford Dictionary
defines “fair” as “free from bias, fraud or injustice; equitably legitimate”; the word
“equitable” as “characterized by equity or fairness”; and the word “equity” as “the
quality of being equal or fair; impartiality; even-handed dealing [...] that which is fair
and right” (C-SoC, | 200, Exh. C-83).

466. With respect to the context of the provision, the Claimants argue that a comparison of
the fair and equitable treatment standard with other standards of the BIT shows that,
as opposed to standards that are relative (such as the national treatment or most-
favored nation treatment standards), the fair and equitable treatment standard is an
absolute standard that provides a fixed reference point. As a result, it is not a valid
defense for Romania to argue that investors of Romanian nationality or investors from
third countries were also adversely affected by the revocation of tax exemptions or
other incentives (C-SoC, 9 201-203).

467. In addition, the Claimants submit that the fair and equitable treatment standard should
be interpreted in the light of the object and purpose of the BIT as reflected in its
Preamble. As a result, any interpretation of the fair and equitable treatment
standard should be generally favorable to the intensification of economic cooperation
between the two countries, help promote and protect investments, be conducive to
expanding the economic relations between the two countries and_ stimulate
investment initiatives. In this regard, the Claimants argue that attracting investors
through tax exemptions and other incentives that are promised for a certain period of
time, and withdrawing these incentives unilaterally, is not conducive to the
intensification of economic cooperation nor the stimulation of investment initiatives (C-
SoC, {J 205-206).

468. As discussed in Section V(B) on Applicable Law, the Claimants deny that the
interpretation of the BIT must take into consideration EU law (see 291 above et seq.).

469. The Claimants endorse the definitions of the fair and equitable treatment standard
made by several international tribunals (including, among others, Waste Management
v. Mexico II, MTD v. Chile, and Saluka v. Czech Republic™). Relying in particular

°° MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile (I\CSID Case No. 01/7), Award, 25
May 2004 (hereinafter “MTD v. Chile”).

5 Siemens A.G. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8), Award, 6 February 2007
(hereinafter “Siemens v. Argentina” or “Siemens’).

* The Claimants note that the Preamble expresses the Parties’ desire “to intensify economic
cooperation to the mutual benefit of both States and to maintain fair and equitable conditions for
investments by investors of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party” and
recognizes “that the promotion and protection of such investments favour the expansion of the
economic relations between the two Contracting Parties and stimulate investment initiatives...” (BIT,
Preamble).

°83 Waste Management Inc. v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3), Award, 30 April
2004 (hereinafter “Waste Management v. Mexico II” or “Waste Management II’).

129

470.

471.

472.

on Saluka v. Czech Republic, the Claimants submit that the fair and equitable
treatment standard “prohibits at least six different types of host state misconduct [...],
including: (1) a government's violation of an investor's legitimate expectations; (2)
inconsistent treatment of an investment by different organs or officials of the same
government; (3) a lack of transparency that hampers the ability of an investor to
operate its investment or understand what is required by the government in order for
an investment to succeed; (4) failure by a government to provide adequate advance
notice of measures that will negatively impact an investment; (5) governmental
treatment of an investment that is in bad faith; and (6) discriminatory conduct” (C-
Reply, 94 367; 374). In later submissions the Claimants group categories (2), (3) and
(4) into one single category covering lack of transparency (C-PHB, {/f 51-62). The
Claimants also seem to suggest that the fair and equitable treatment standard
requires the state to ensure a stable and predictable legal and business environment
beyond the protection of an investor's legitimate expectations (C-SoC, § 211, C-
Reply, {4 424-430).

The Claimants contend that Romania's treatment of the Claimants’ investments fell
below the standard of treatment required by the fair and equitable treatment
obligation of the BIT. Specifically, the Claimants submit that Romania (i) failed to
provide a stable and predictable legal framework and violated the Claimants’
legitimate expectations, (ii) failed to act transparently with respect to the Claimants’
investments, and (iii) acted in bad faith with respect to those investments.

First, the Claimants contend that Romania breached the fair and equitable treatment
standard by failing to provide a stable and predictable legal and business
environment for the investment, and in particular by violating the Claimants’ legitimate
expectations with respect to that regulatory framework.

The Claimants submit that the core element of the fair and equitable obligation is to
ensure a consistent and stable legal environment (C-SoC, {ff 211-225; C-Reply, 9
424-430; C-PHB, {| 40-41). Numerous tribunals concur with this interpretation of the
obligation (Metalclad v. Mexico, Tecmed v. Mexico, CMS v. Argentina, Eureko v.
Poland, Bayindir v. Pakistan®®, LG&E v. Argentina, Duke Energy v. Ecuador*’, PSEG
v. Turkey®, Enron v. Argentina). The fair and equitable treatment standard extends
to regulation in matters of taxation (Occidental v. Ecuador®’). For this obligation to be

 

°4 Saluka Investments BV (the Netherlands) v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award, 17 March
2006 (hereinafter “Saluka v. Czech Republic” or “Saluka’).

55 Metalclad Corporation v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1), Award, 30 August
2000 (hereinafter “Metalclad v. Mexico” or “Metalclad’).

°8 Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/29), Decision on Jurisidiction, 14 November 2005 (hereinafter “Bayindir v. Pakistan).

°” Duke Energy Electroquil Partners and Electroquil S.A. v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No.
ARB/04/19, Award, 18 August 2008 (hereinafter “Duke Energy v. Ecuador’).

°8 PSEG Global Inc. and Konya ligin Elektrik Uretim ve Ticaret Limited Sirketi v. Republic of Turkey
(ICSID Case No ARB/02/5), Award, 19 January 2007 (hereinafter “PSEG v. Turkey’).

°° Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. The Republic of Ecuador, LCIA Case No.
UN3467, Final Award, 1 July 2004 (hereinafter “Occidental v. Ecuador’).

130

473.

474.

475.

breached, investors do not need to have a contract with the state containing a
stabilization clause.

In particular, the Claimants argue that the fair and equitable treatment standard
requires the state to protect the investor's legitimate expectations based on the legal
framework at the time of the investment and on any undertakings and representations
made explicitly or implicitly by the host state. The legal framework on which the
investor is entitled to rely consists of legislation and treaties, and assurances
contained in decrees, licenses and similar executive assurances, as well as in
contractual undertakings. Relying on a number of investment cases, the Claimants
argue that a state will violate the fair and equitable treatment standard if it reverses
assurances that have resulted in the investor's legitimate expectations (C-SoC, {{
211-228, citing Metalclad v. Mexico, Tecmed v. Mexico, CMS v. Argentina, Eureko v.
Poland, Bayindir v. Pakistan, LG&E v. Argentina, PSEG v. Turkey, and Occidental v.
Ecuador).

The Claimants contend that Romania failed to provide a stable and predictable legal
and business environment for their investment, and undermined their legitimate
expectations with respect to the regulatory framework. Specifically, they argue that
Romania created a special regulatory regime for disfavored regions that consisted of
certain tax exemptions and other incentives promised for a 10 year period. This
special regime instilled in the Claimants the legitimate expectation that the EGO 24
incentives would remain in place during the 10 year period that Stei-Nucet was
designated a disfavored region. The Claimants assert that this legitimate expectation
was an essential basis for their investment, and without it the Claimants would not
have invested in the manner that they did. Having enticed the Claimants to make
substantial investments in reliance on these incentives, in February 2005 Romania
changed its legislation and withdrew most of the EGO 24 incentives, four years before
they were scheduled to expire. The Claimants argue that, by prematurely revoking
the EGO 24 incentives, Romania failed to provide a predictable and stable legal
framework for the Claimants to plan their investments, and in particular violated their
legitimate expectation that these incentives would be in place for the promised 10-
year period.

The Claimants clarify that the obligation to accord fair and equitable treatment does
not mean that a state must completely freeze its regulatory regime (and the Claimants
acknowledge that a stabilization clause would be needed to obtain that result).
However, it does mean that, by entering into the BIT, Romania accepted limitations
on its power to fundamentally alter the regulatory framework of the investment,
particularly in ways that would be unfair, unreasonable and inequitable, including by
undermining an investor's legitimate expectations (C-PHB, § 40). As a result,
Romania could not, consistent with the BIT, simply dispense with the legal framework
it had put in place, but instead was required to meet its commitments with respect to
investors. Specifically, the Claimants concede that Romania was entitled to revoke
the incentives it had put in place if it grandfathered them for existing PIC holders (as it
did with the Profit Tax Incentive).

131

476.

477.

478.

479.

Second, the Claimants contend that Romania breached its obligation to accord them
fair and equitable treatment by acting in a manner that was not transparent.

The Claimants submit that the obligation to accord fair and equitable treatment
requires that the state’s conduct toward investors and its legal environment must be
transparent (i.e., free from ambiguity and uncertainty). The Claimants rely on
Metalclad v. Mexico, Tecmed v. Mexico, Waste Management v. Mexico II, Saluka v.
Czech Republic, Bayindir v. Pakistan, Occidental v. Ecuador, CMS v. Argentina,
LG&E v. Argentina, PSEG v. Turkey, and an UNCTAD study.® In particular, the
Tecmed tribunal held that a foreign investor “expects the host state to act in a
consistent manner, free from ambiguity and totally transparently in its relations with
the foreign investor, so that it may know beforehand any and all rules and regulations
that will govern its investments, as well as the goals of the relevant policies and
administrative practices or directives, to be able to plan its investment and comply
with such regulations.” (Tecmed, § 154). Similarly, the late Prof. Thomas WAalde
noted that transparency requires “that government administration has to make clear
what it wants from the investor and cannot hide behind ambiguity if it has created
such ambiguity and contradiction itself.”*"

The Claimants contend that Romania acted in a manner that was not transparent.
Specifically, they argue that Romania actively pursued two conflicting policies: on the
one hand, it promoted the EGO 24 incentives, and at the same time it negotiated their
revocation behind closed doors. In addition, they argue that Romania’s conduct with
respect to the validity of the EGO 24 incentives was contradictory and the manner in
which they were revoked created uncertainty.

Third, the Claimants argue that Romania acted in bad faith with respect to the
Claimants’ investments. The Claimants contend that the fair and equitable treatment
standard is breached if the host state acts in bad faith (C-SoC, 4 243, C-Reply 9
443-449). Although bad faith is not required for a violation of the standard to occur
(Tecmed v. Mexico, Mondev v. United States”, Loewen v. United States™, CMS v.
Argentina), the Claimants argue that host state measures taken in bad faith against
an investor violate the fair and equitable treatment standard (Waste Management v.
Mexico II, Tecmed v. Mexico, Bayindir v. Pakistan, Saluka v. Czech Republic).

Finally, the Claimants contend that Romania’s responsibility for violation of the fair
and equitable treatment standard arises regardless of its motives, and irrespective of
any showing of bad faith (although, as explained above the Claimants do argue that
Romania acted in bad faith). Consequently, the Claimants do not need to show that

®° UNCTAD Series on issues in international investment agreements, Fair and Equitable Treatment, p.
51 (1999) (Exh. C-74).

®' TW. Walde, Energy Charter Treaty-based Investment Arbitration, 5 The Journal of World
Investment 387 (2004), (Exh. C-94).

® Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of America (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2), Award, 11
October 2002 (hereinafter “Mondev v. United States” or “Mondev’).

°3 The Loewen Group, Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen v. United States of America (ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/98/3), Award, 26 June 2003 (hereinafter “Loewen v. United States’).

132

481.

482.

484.

Romania acted with an improper motive in order to establish violation of the fair and
equitable treatment standard. Conversely, a showing of good faith or legitimate
cause on Romania’s part does not excuse a violation of the fair and equitable
treatment standard (C-SoC, 9§ 242-252, citing, inter alia, Mondev v. United States;
Tecmed v. Mexico, Loewen v. United States, Occidental v. Ecuador, and PSEG v.
Turkey).

Accordingly, the Claimants submit that, no matter how laudable or justifiable
Romania’s motives might have been, they do not excuse the fact that Romania
breached the fair and equitable treatment standard. Whether Romania withdrew the
incentives for fiscal reasons, for reasons of international economic policy or for other
reasons of public interest, is irrelevant (C-SoC, § 252). In particular, as discussed in
Section V(B) above on Applicable Law, the Claimants contend that Romania’s “EU
law” defense does not immunize Romania from liability.

b. The Respondent’s position

With respect to the content of the fair and equitable treatment standard, the
Respondent does not dispute that many of the decisions cited by the Claimants can
provide useful guidance to the Tribunal, subject to the general interpretative principles
applicable to this dispute as explained in Section V(B) above on Applicable Law.
Indeed, the Respondent concedes that “[mJost of the general principles governing the
interpretation of the fair and equitable treatment standard form common ground
between the Parties” (R-CM, { 101). In particular, the Respondent does not dispute
that Article 2(3) of the BIT must be interpreted in accordance with Articles 31 and 32
of the VCLT, according to which the Tribunal must first look to the plain meaning or
the language of the provision, and in the event of ambiguity construe the relevant
provision in its context and in the light of the objective and purpose of the BIT (/d.).
However, the Respondent disputes Claimants’ actual interpretation of these terms.

With respect to the plain meaning of the provision, the Respondent accepts for
present purposes the Claimants’ definition of “fair and equitable” as “free from bias,
fraud or injustice” and “even-handed dealing.” The Respondent also concurs with the
Claimants’ reliance on Waste Management v. Mexico II, where the Tribunal
concluded that:

... fair and equitable treatment is infringed by conduct attributable to the
State and harmful to the claimant if the conduct is arbitrary, grossly unfair,
unjust or idiosyncratic, is discriminatory and exposes the claimant to
sectional or racial prejudice, or involves a lack of due process leading to an
outcome which offends judicial propriety ...

The Respondent agrees that the preamble of the BIT reflects the signatories’ goal of
intensifying economic cooperation between Romania and Sweden. However, the
BIT’s preamble does not in itself indicate what interpretation of “fair and equitable
treatment” is appropriate to achieve this goal. The proper approach depends upon
the state parties’ intentions with respect to the intensification of economic relations.
The Respondent submits that this intention was to intensify economic relations in the
context of Romania’s integration into the EU (R-CM, {| 108).

133

485.

487.

In this regard, the Respondent argues that the BIT was signed pursuant to Article 74
of the Europe Agreement (to which both Sweden and Romania were parties), which
calls for Romania to enter into investment protection agreements with EU Member
States. The goal of the Europe Agreement was to establish close and lasting
economic political integration between Romania and the EU, with the ultimate goal of
EU accession. For this, Romania undertook to harmonize Romanian law with EU law
(Articles 69 and 70 of the Europe Agreement). Accordingly, the Respondent submits
that “the fair and equitable treatment standard contained in the [BIT] must therefore
be interpreted consistently with any requirements for Romania’s integration into the
EU, including the elimination of impermissible State aid [...]"(R-CM, § 109).

The Respondent further contends that, under the Europe Agreement, the Accession
Agreement and the EC Treaty, Romania owed an obligation to Sweden to eliminate
all state aid that did not conform to EU law and that distorted competition in the
common market. As a result, Romania and Sweden could not have intended that
Romania’s obligation to afford fair and equitable treatment to Swedish investors
would require the preservation of non-conforming State aid. In other words, “the
object and purpose of the [BIT], and the context in which it was concluded as an
integral part of Romania’s integration into the EU, indicate that the [BIT] cannot be
construed to sanction as ‘unfair and inequitable’ the adjustment of the Facilities in
accordance with the requirements of the Europe Agreement and the acquis
communautaire’ (R-CM, J 109-110).

Referring to the Claimants’ division of the fair and equitable treatment standard into
different “strands”, the Respondent contends that the fair and equitable treatment
clause of the BIT is not a laundry list, and there is no claim under the BIT for violating
any particular “strand.” Citing Mondev v. United States, the Respondent submits that
whether a host state has treated an investment fairly and equitably must be assessed
in view of all of the facts and circumstances. However, for analytical organization, the
Respondent accepts that the Claimants’ allegations may be grouped into three
categories, corresponding to types of conduct where other international tribunals have
found breaches of the fair and equitable treatment standard (R-PHB, {J 15-16):

a. Cases in which the state’s action is alleged to have been substantively improper
(for example because it was unreasonable, arbitrary, or discriminatory);

b. Cases in which the state’s action is claimed to have violated a promise the state
made to the investor, thus upsetting the investor’s “legitimate expectations”, and

c. Cases in which a state’s action may be attacked as having been procedurally
unfair, as in cases of denial of justice or lack of due process, retroactive or secret
regulation, or inconsistent and non-transparent administration (although there are
very few awards finding a violation of fair and equitable treatment solely on the
basis of this class of allegations).

The Respondent denies having engaged in any of these types of conduct. It
contends that, given the factual circumstances surrounding the investment, the

134

491.

492.

Claimants could have had no reasonable expectation that the incentives (facilities)
would remain in force unchanged for ten years. The modification of the incentives
was wholly predictable and equitable, and Romania conducted itself as consistently
and transparently as possible given the historical context of economic transition and
EU accession (R-CM, § 100).

First, the Respondent denies having engaged in substantively improper conduct. The
Respondent contends that, where an investor challenges general legislation that
modifies existing general legislation, the question for an international tribunal is
whether that legislation is grounded in reason (rather than being arbitrary) and
enacted in pursuit of legitimate objectives (rather than for illicit purposes, such as
discrimination). Relying on Saluka v. Czech Republic, the Respondent argues that
for a state’s conduct to be reasonable it must “bear a reasonable relationship to some
rational policy” (Saluka, {§ 309 and 460). This requirement was further developed in
AES v. Hungary, where the Tribunal found that “two elements” must be analyzed in
judging whether a state acted reasonably: “the existence of a rational policy; and the
reasonableness of the act of the state in relation to the policy” (AES v. Hungary,
10.3.7). According to that Tribunal, a policy is rational when the state adopts it
“following a logical (good sense) explanation and with the aim of addressing a public
interest matter” (/d., § 10.3.8), and an action is reasonable when there is “an
appropriate correlation between the state’s public policy objective and the measure
adopted to achieve it” (/d., 10.3.9).

In addition, for there to be a breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard, the
state’s conduct must be manifestly unreasonable. A state does not breach the
standard merely by failing to adopt the optimal course of action. Citing Glamis Gold
v. United States,® the Respondent contends that it is Claimants’ burden to prove a
manifest lack of reasons for the legislation. (R-PHB, § 33, fn. 50).

However, as explained further below, the Respondent argues that the Claimants do
not allege that Romania engaged in any fraud, bias or discrimination, or that they
were denied justice with respect to the Facilities. Nor do the facts show “grossly
unfair, unjust or idiosyncratic” treatment (R-CM, §§ 102-103). To the contrary,
Romania argues that its conduct was fair and equitable under the circumstances.

Second, the Respondent denies having failed to provide regulatory stability or having
violated the Claimants’ legitimate expectations. The Respondent contends that the
BIT does not require the Contracting States to tailor their laws and regulations to the
preference of foreign investors, nor does it create liability for every regulatory change
that has a negative impact on the foreign investors’ businesses. To the contrary,
investment protection treaties accord host States considerable deference in relation

®* AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erémii Kft. v. Hungary (ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/22), Award, 23 September, 2010 (hereinafter “AES v. Hungary” or “AES’).

°5 Glamis Gold, Ltd. v. The United States of America, UNCITRAL, Award, 8 June 2009 (hereinafter
“Glamis Gold v. United States’)..

Id. $803.

135

494.

495.

to regulatory policy (E/ Paso v. Argentina; °’ S.D. Myers v. Canada;® Saluka v. Czech
Republic;®° Waste Management v. Mexico II; Parkerings v. Lithuania;”’ Genin v.
Estonia”; Methanex v. United States”). This is a reflection of the fundamental rule of
international law that a state’s regulatory sovereignty can only be subject to the
specific limitations that flow from the international legal obligations that it has
voluntarily assumed (relying on The Case of the S.S. Lotus (France v. Turkey)” (R-
CM, {9 85-90).

As a result, the Respondent argues that where a state has exercised its sovereign
powers to regulate in a general, non-discriminatory way to advance public welfare
(including by legislative changes), international law will not characterize such conduct
as “expropriation”, “unfair and inequitable treatment”, or otherwise in breach of the
provisions of an investment protection treaty. International law (and the BIT) does not
call for a regulatory standstill, and there is no warrant that a legal regime will remain
unaltered. Laws are inherently liable to change, even when the original legislative
intent was to create a permanent regime or a regime for a given period (Continental
Casualty v. Argentina, § 258). The Respondent concedes that international law will
require observance of specific commitments about the stability of legislation, but
contends that such commitments will not be lightly inferred, and are never to be found
in general legislative texts. Rather, they may be found in stabilization terms specially
bargained for with specific investors (R-CM, { 91).

In the present case, it is undisputed that the modification of the Facilities that had
been granted pursuant to EGO 24/1998 was a generally applicable act. Moreover,
Romania was compelled to curtail the Facilities as an essential precondition for
accession to the EU. Accordingly, in considering Romania’s compliance with the
substantive provisions of the BIT, Romania is entitled to the deference under
international law (R-CM, {| 92). The modification of the Facilities was fair under the
circumstances. In light of the plain meaning of Article 2(3), Romania argues that an
examination of the Claimants’ supposed expectations is unnecessary. In any event,
Romania contends that the Claimants had no legitimate expectations that were
undermined by the modification of the Facilities.

The Respondent agrees that the doctrine of legitimate expectations is part of the
general duty to afford fair and equitable treatment. However, under this doctrine a

®? El Paso Energy International Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/15),
Decision on Jurisdiction, 27 April 2006 (hereinafter “E/ Paso v. Argentina’), § 70.

® SD. Myers, Inc. v. Government of Canada, UNCITRAL, Partial Award, 13 November 2000
(hereinafter “S.D. Myers v .Canada’), J 263.

°° Saluka v. Czech Republic, § 305.
° Waste Management v. Mexico II, 4 94.
” Parkerings v. Lithuania, § 332.

” Alex Genin and others v. Republic of Estonia (ICSID Case No. ARB/99/2), Award, 25 June 2001
(hereinafter “Genin v. Estonia’), § 370.

3 Methanex Corporation v. United States of America, UNCITRAL, Final Award, 3 August 2005
(hereinafter “Methanex v. United States’), Part lV, Ch D, p 4, 9 7.

™ The Case of the S.S. “Lotus” (France v Turkey), PCld Series A No 10 (1927).

136

497.

state would only violate this duty if it exercised its regulatory sovereignty in such a
way as to create a legitimate expectation in an investor that the state will or will not
act in a certain way in the future. In this way, the state itself derogates from its right
and duty to change its regulations. Thus, the Respondent argues that an expectation
of regulatory stability must be based on some sort of promise or at the very least, a
proper representation made to the investor, on the part of the state. However, “if the
state has not committed itself to freeze a particular area of regulation, or to shield an
investor from regulatory change, the most an investor can legitimately expect is
regulatory rationality and absence of arbitrariness” (R-Rejoinder, § 169). The
Respondent relies on EDF v. Romania” and Parkerings v. Lithuania. The
Respondent's detailed position with respect to the standard of legitimate expectations
is addressed in Section 3(b) below.

Third, the Respondent asserts it acted transparently and consistently. The
Respondent appears to agree that transparency and consistency are a part of the fair
and equitable treatment standard. For the Respondent, this “strand” refers to whether
Romania complied with due process and fair administration. The Respondent notes
that the UNCTAD report cited by the Claimants states the following:

If laws, administrative decisions and other binding decisions are to be
imposed upon a foreign investor by a host State, then fairness requires that
the investor is informed about such decisions before they are imposed.”

According to the Respondent, this means that investors should be able to find out
what the rules are and how to comply with them, and the rules should be
administered in an even-handed and reasonably consistent fashion (R-PHB, {| 160).

In the present case, the Respondent argues, the Claimants do not contend that
Romania was unclear about the rules and procedures they had to follow, or that the
rules were applied inconsistently. Rather, the Claimants contend that they were not
given enough information about ongoing diplomatic negotiations. The Respondent
argues that there is no authority suggesting that international investment law requires
a state to disclose its assessment of the likely outcome of such negotiations. As a
result, the Respondent argues that “the Claimants’ contentions are not only irrelevant
as a matter of law but illogical as a matter of fact: if, as the Claimants seemed to
suggest at the hearing, Romania should have publicly announced at the earliest
possible date that it did not expect to obtain the EU’s agreement to continue the EGO
Facilities in force, the only possible difference is that the Claimants would have lost
the benefit of the Facilities sooner” (R-Rejoinder, { 161). Likewise, the Respondent
argues that there is no need to warn investors of legislative changes, in particular in
legal and political environments that are unpredictable and evolving (Parkerings, {{
341-342, 345).

8 EDF (Services) Limited v. Romania (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/13), Award, 8 October 2009
(hereinafter “EDF v. Romania’).

’8 “Fair and Equitable Treatment”, UNCTAD Series on Issues in International Investment Agreements
(1999) 3 UNCTAD/ITE/IT/11, Exh. C-527, quoted at § 433 of the Claimants’ Reply.

137

500.

501.

502.

503.

In view of the above, the Respondent submits that there are four propositions that the
Claimants must prove in order for their fair and equitable treatment claim to succeed,
and they have failed to prove them. These propositions are (Tr., Day 13, 45:1-20
(King)):

(i) First, the Claimants must prove that Romania's actions, and in particular the 31
August 2004 amendment of EGO 24, were manifestly unreasonable.

(ii

Second, the Claimants must prove that Romania promised them ten years of
stabilization of the EGO 24 facilities.

(ii

Third, the Claimants must prove that they made investments in reasonable
reliance on the legitimate expectation that the EGO 24 facilities would not change
until 2009.

(iv)

Fourth, the Claimants must prove that Romania acted in such a non-transparent
and inconsistent way as to violate the fair and equitable treatment clause.

The Respondent has clarified that these propositions are not cumulative except (ii)
and (iii). In other words, the Respondent's position is that the Tribunal could find a
breach if the Claimant can prove that either proposition (i), propositions (ii) and (iii)
jointly, or proposition (iv) are true (Tr., Day 13, 58:5-60:7).

In addition, as noted in paragraph 279 above, the Respondent argues as a general
matter that the Claimants’ case on fair and equitable treatment hinges on the
testimony of their witnesses, which the Respondent contends is neither credible nor
reliable. It also argues that, despite the Claimants’ shift in focus, this is not and has
never been a case about whether Romania acted transparently; it has only become
so because the hearing undermined the Claimants’ previous legal theories (Tr., Day
13, 19-43 (King)).

Nature, interpretation and content of the fair and equitable treatment standard

The Tribunal will now address the nature, interpretation and content of the fair and
equitable treatment standard.

a. Interpretation and general contours of the standard

The Parties seem to agree on the basics of the fair and equitable treatment standard,
with certain nuances. The Respondent does not contest the Claimants’ portrayal of
the standard as an autonomous one, different from the international minimum
standard. Nor does it contest that the standard has specific meaning. Likewise, both
Parties agree that the interpretation of Article 2(3) of the BIT should start from the
normal canons of treaty interpretation as contained in Articles 31 and 32 of the VCLT.
Romania is not a party to the VCLT, but it is common ground that the VCLT reflects

138

customary international law’’ and Romania relies on it as the appropriate method to
interpret the BIT.”®

504. To establish the content of the standard, the Tribunal must first turn to the plain
meaning of the terms “fair and equitable.” The plain meaning of these terms,
however, does not provide much assistance. As noted by the tribunal in MTD v.
Chile, “[iJn their ordinary meaning, the terms ‘fair’ and ‘equitable’ [...] mean ‘just’,
‘even-handed’, ‘unbiased’, ‘legitimate’.””? Similarly, the tribunal in S.D. Myers v.
Canada stated that unfair and inequitable treatment meant “treatment in such an
unjust or arbitrary manner that the treatment rises to the level that is unacceptable
from the international perspective.”® This Tribunal agrees with the Saluka tribunal in
that “[t]his is probably as far as one can get by looking at the ‘ordinary meaning’ of the
terms of Article 3.1 of the Treaty.”®"

505. The question is rather how those concepts should be applied to the facts. It is
undisputed that an analysis of whether a state’s conduct has been fair and equitable
requires an assessment of all the facts, context and circumstances of a particular
case. As stated in Mondev v. United States:

When a tribunal is faced with the claim by a foreign investor that the
investment has been unfairly or inequitably treated or not accorded full
protection and security, it is bound to pass upon that claim on the facts and
by application of any governing treaty provisions. A judgment of what is fair
and equitable cannot be reached in the abstract; it must depend on the
facts of the particular case.™

506. Similarly, the tribunal in Waste Management II said that “the standard is to some
extent a flexible one which must be adapted to the circumstances of each case.”®
This has been echoed by several tribunals, including in Lauder v. Czech Republic®™,
CMS v. Argentina, Noble Ventures v. Romania®, Saluka v. Czech Republic.

507. That being said, as the Claimants point out and the Respondent does not contest, the
content of the fair and equitable treatment standard does not depend on a tribunal’s

”” See, e.g., Case Concerning the Territorial Dispute (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya v Chad), [1994] ICJ
Reports 6, 41 (“The Court would recall that, in accordance with customary international law, reflected
in Article 31 of the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, a treaty must be interpreted in
good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to its terms in their context and in the
light of its object and purpose. Interpretation must be based above all upon the text of the treaty. As a
supplementary measure recourse may be had to means of interpretation such as the preparatory work
of the treaty and the circumstances of its conclusion.”)

”8 See, e.g., R-CM, IJ 73-75.

’8 MTD v. Chile, § 113.

59 S_D. Myers v. Canada, § 263.

5! Saluka v. Czech Republic, § 297.

® Mondev v. United States, § 118. See also M.C.I. Power Group L.C. and New Turbine, Inc. v.
Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/6), Award, 31 July 2007, § 370.

®3 Waste Management v. Mexico II, 4 99.

®4 Ronald S. Lauder v. The Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Final Award, 3 September 2001 (hereinafter,
“Lauder v. Czech Republic’).

®5 Noble Ventures, Inc. v. Romania (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/11), Award, 12 October 2005.

 

139

508.

509.

510.

511.

idiosyncratic interpretation of the standard but “must be disciplined by being based
upon state practice and judicial or arbitral case law or other sources of customary or
general international law” (C-SoC, § 193, citing ADF Group, § 184). The tribunal in
Saluka held:

This does not imply, however, that such standards as laid down in Article 3
of the Treaty would invite the Tribunal to decide the dispute in a way that
resembles a decision ex aequo et bono. This Tribunal is bound by Article 6
of the Treaty to decide the dispute on the basis of the law, including the
provisions of the Treaty. Even though Article 3 obviously leaves room for
judgment and appreciation by the Tribunal, it does not set out totally
subjective standards which would allow the Tribunal to substitute, with
regard to the Czech Republic’s conduct to be assessed in the present
case, its judgment on the choice of solutions for the Czech Republic’s. As
the tribunal in S.D. Myers has said, the “fair and equitable treatment”
standard does not create an “open-ended mandate to second-guess
government decision-making”. The standards formulated in Article 3 of the
Treaty, vague as they may be, are susceptible of specification through
judicial practice and do in fact have sufficient legal content to allow the
case to be decided on the basis of law. Over the last few years, a number
of awards have dealt with such standards yielding a fair amount of practice
that sheds light on their legal meaning.

In any event, it is established that the state’s conduct does not need to be egregious
to violate the standard (Mondev, ADF Group, Waste Management II — see paragraph
524 below).

Further, both Parties agree that the fair and equitable treatment standard should be
interpreted in the light of the object and purpose of the BIT as reflected in its
Preamble. This was also the approach taken by the Saluka tribunal, which noted that
“[t]he preamble thus links the ‘fair and equitable treatment’ standard directly to the
stimulation of foreign investments and to the economic development of both
Contracting Parties.” The Respondent further argues that the standard should be
interpreted in the broader context of EU accession.

The Preamble of the BIT states that the Contracting Parties have agreed on the terms
of the BIT:

desiring to intensify economic cooperation to the mutual benefit of both
States and to maintain fair and equitable conditions for investments by
investors of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting
Party,

recognizing that the promotion and protection of such investments favour
the expansion of the economic relations between the two Contracting
Parties and stimulate investment initiatives, [...]

The Parties agree that the Preamble reflects the BIT signatories’ goal of intensifying
economic cooperation between Romania and Sweden, but disagree on what
interpretation of “fair and equitable treatment” is appropriate to achieve this goal. The

%© Saluka v. Czech Republic, § 284.
®7 Id, 4 298.

140

512.

513.

514.

515.

516.

Claimants do not suggest a specific interpretation of the fair and equitable treatment
standard in this context, other than to argue that attracting investors through tax
exemptions and other incentives that are promised for a certain period of time, and
then withdrawing those incentives unilaterally, is not conducive to the intensification of
economic cooperation or to the stimulation of investment initiatives.

The Respondent for its part contends that the Contracting Parties’ intention was to
intensify economic relations in the context of Romania’s accession to the EU. The
Respondent argues that the BIT was signed pursuant to Article 74 of the Europe
Agreement, which prompted Romania to sign investment protection treaties with EU
member states. As the goal of the Europe Agreement was to integrate Romania and
the EU at a political level, which carried with it the obligation to harmonize Romanian
law to EU law, the goal of the BIT between Romania and Sweden must be interpreted
in this context. Therefore, Romania’s obligation to afford fair and equitable treatment
to Swedish investors must be interpreted in such a way that it is consistent with EU
law.

It is undisputed that the Europe Agreement predated the BIT and, indeed, promoted
the conclusion of BITs such as the Sweden-Romania BIT. Despite the lack of
express reference in the BIT to EU accession or the EU, the Tribunal has also found
that the general context of EU accession must be taken into account when
interpreting the BIT.

That being said, the Tribunal cannot conclude in the abstract (as Romania seems to
suggest) that the revocation of the incentives is fair and equitable solely because it
was undertaken pursuant to Romania’s obligation under the Europe Agreement to
harmonize its law with EU law. As previously stated, whether the state’s conduct is
unfair and inequitable must be assessed in view of all the facts and surrounding
circumstances.

The Tribunal must bear in mind that the goal of the BIT is the “intensification of]
economic cooperation to the mutual benefit of both States” and, in this context, “to
maintain fair and equitable conditions for investments by investors of one Contracting
Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party”, and that when the Contracting
States set this goal they recognized “that the promotion and protection of such
investments favour the expansion of the economic relations between the two
Contracting Parties and stimulate investment initiatives.” In this respect, the
Claimants argue that the objective of the BIT was to help Romania raise its level of
economic development so it could join the EU (Tr., Day 1, 181-184 (Gaillard).

In view of these considerations, the Tribunal favors a balanced view of the goals of
the BIT similar to that adopted by the Saluka tribunal:

This is a more subtle and balanced statement of the Treaty’s aims than is
sometimes appreciated. The protection of foreign investments is not the
sole aim of the Treaty, but rather a necessary element alongside the
overall aim of encouraging foreign investment and extending and
intensifying the parties’ economic relations. That in turn calls for a balanced
approach to the interpretation of the Treaty’s substantive provisions for the

144

517.

518.

519.

protection of investments, since an interpretation which exaggerates the
protection to be accorded to foreign investments may serve to dissuade
host States from admitting foreign investments and so undermine the
overall aim of extending and intensifying the parties’ mutual economic
relations.

Seen in this light, the “fair and equitable treatment” standard prescribed in
the Treaty should therefore be understood to be treatment which, if not
proactively stimulating the inflow of foreign investment capital, does at least
not deter foreign capital by providing disincentives to foreign investors. An
investor's decision to make an investment is based on an assessment of
the state of the law and the totality of the business environment at the tine
of the investment as well as on the investor's expectation that the conduct
of the host State subsequent to the investment will be fair and equitable.®*

Finally, the Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that the fair and equitable treatment
standard is not a laundry list of potential acts of misconduct. Whether a state has
treated an investor’s investments unfairly and inequitably defies abstract analysis or
definitions, and can only be assessed when looking at the totality of the state’s
conduct. As noted by the tribunal in Total S.A. v. Argentina,® “[s]ince this standard is
inherently flexible, it is difficult, if not impossible, ‘to anticipate in the abstract the
range of possible types of infringements upon the investor's legal position’.” °°
Nonetheless, as noted by Professors Dolzer and Schreuer, one way to “gauge the
meaning of an elusive concept such as FET” is “to identify typical factual situations to
which this principle has been applied. An examination of the practice of tribunals
demonstrates that several principles can be identified, which are embraced by the
standard of fair and equitable treatment.”°' As noted by the Total tribunal, “[o]n the
premise that a ‘judgement of what is fair and equitable cannot be reached in the
abstract; it must depend on the fact[s] of the particular case’ and that ‘the standard is
to some extent a flexible one which must be adapted to the circumstances of each
case’, tribunals have endeavoured to pinpoint some typical obligations that may be
included in the standard, as well as types of conduct that would breach the standard,
in order to be guided in their analysis of the issue before them.” °°

According to Dolzer and Schreuer, tribunal practice shows that the concepts of
transparency, stability and the protection of the investor's legitimate expectations play
a central role in defining the FET standard, and so does compliance with contractual
obligations, procedural propriety and due process, action in good faith and freedom

88 Saluka v. Czech Republic, {§ 304-309.

°° Total S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/04/01), Decision on Liability, 27 December
2010 (hereinafter “Total S.A. v. Argentina” or “Total’).

© Total S.A. v. Argentina, 107.
®*" R. Dolzer and C. Schreuer, Principles of International Investment Law, 2008, p. 133.
* Total S.A. v. Argentina, J 109.

142

from coercion and harassment.® Cases reflecting these conclusions include Bayindir

v. Pakistan™ and Total S.A. v. Argentina.°°

520. In this context, the Parties appear to agree that there are certain types of conduct that
are usually deemed to violate the fair and equitable treatment standard, bearing in
mind the facts of the particular case. For analytical purposes, the Tribunal will use
the Respondent’s distinction between (i) conduct that is substantively improper
(because it is arbitrary, unreasonable, discriminatory or in bad faith), (ii) conduct that
violates legitimate expectations relied upon by the investor (including here the
Claimants’ stability “strand”), and (iii) conduct that is procedurally improper. That
being said, the Tribunal is not persuaded that the Claimants’ claim that Romania
acted non-transparently and inconsistently is based on an assertion that the violation
is “procedural,” so the Tribunal will not use the Respondent's terminology for that
claim.

521. The Tribunal addresses the standard for substantively proper conduct in Section (b)
below, the standard for determining when a legitimate expectation has arisen in
Section (c) below, and the standard for transparency in Section (d) below.

b. Conduct that is substantively improper

522. There is no dispute that conduct that is substantively improper, whether because it is
arbitrary, manifestly unreasonable, discriminatory or in bad faith, will violate the fair
and equitable treatment standard. As stated by the Waste Management I! tribunal:

“[T]he minimum standard of treatment of fair and equitable treatment is
infringed by conduct attributable to the State and harmful to the claimant if
the conduct is arbitrary, grossly unfair, unjust or idiosyncratic, is
discriminatory and exposes the claimant to sectional or racial prejudice, or
involves a lack of due process leading to an outcome which offends judicial
propriety—as might be the case with a manifest failure of natural justice in

93 Iq

** Bayindir v. Pakistan, Award, 27 August 2009, § 178 (“The Tribunal agrees with Bayindir when it
identifies the different factors which emerge from decisions of investment tribunals as forming part of
the FET standard. These comprise the obligation to act transparently and grant due process
[Metalclad v. Mexico], to refrain from taking arbitrary or discriminatory measures [Waste Management
v. Mexico II, Lauder v. Czech Republic], from exercising coercion [Saluka v. Czech Republic] or from
frustrating the investor's reasonable expectations with respect to the legal framework affecting the
investment [Duke Energy v. Ecuador).”)

% Total S.A. v. Argentina, §§ 109 (“A breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard has been
found in respect of conduct characterized by ‘arbitrariness’ [ELS/ case] and of ‘acts showing a wilful
neglect of duty, an insufficiency of action falling far below international standards, or even subjective
bad faith’ [Genin v. Estonia]. It has been also held that the standard requires ‘treatment in an even-
handed and just manner, conducive to fostering the promotion of foreign investment’ [MTD v. Chile],
thereby condemning conduct that is arbitrary, grossly unfair, unjust or idiosyncratic or that ‘involves a
lack of due process leading to an outcome which offends judicial propriety — as might be the case with
a manifest failure of natural justice in judicial proceedings or a complete lack of transparency and
candour in administrative process’ [Waste Management v. Mexico If]. Awards have found a breach in
cases of discrimination against foreigners and ‘improper and discreditable’ or ‘unreasonable’ conduct.
[Saluka v. Czech Republic] This does not mean that bad faith is necessarily required in order to find a
breach: ’A State may treat foreign investment unfairly and inequitably without necessarily acting in bad
faith.’ [Mondev v. U.S.]”).

143

523.

524.

525.

judicial proceedings or a complete lack of transparency and candour in an
administrative process. In applying this standard it is relevant that the
treatment is in breach of representations made by the host State which
were reasonably relied on by the claimant.”*®

On this subject, the Sa/uka tribunal stated:

A foreign investor protected by the Treaty may in any case properly expect
that the Czech Republic implements its policies bona fide by conduct that
is, as far as it affects the investors’ investment, reasonably justifiable by
public policies and that such conduct does not manifestly violate the
requirements of consistency, transparency, even-handedness and
nondiscrimination. In particular, any differential treatment of a foreign
investor must not be based on unreasonable distinctions and demands,
and must be justified by showing that it bears a reasonable relationship to
rational policies not motivated by a preference for other investments over
the foreign-owned investment.”

That being said, it is well established that the state’s conduct need not be outrageous
to breach the fair and equitable treatment standard. In Mondev v. United States, the
tribunal held that “[t]lo the modern eye, what is unfair or inequitable need not equate
with the outrageous or the egregious. In particular, a state may treat foreign
investment unfairly and inequitably without necessarily acting in bad faith.” This
finding was echoed by the tribunal in Waste Management v. Mexico II:

Both the Mondev and ADF tribunals rejected any suggestion that the
standard of treatment of a foreign investment set by NAFTA is confined to
the kind of outrageous treatment referred to in the Neer case, i.e. to
treatment amounting to an “outrage, to bad faith, to wilful neglect of duty, or
to an in insufficiency of governmental action so far short of international
standards that every reasonable and impartial man would readily recognize
its insufficiency.”

With respect to the meaning of the term “unreasonable”, both Parties appear to agree
that “unreasonable” means lacking in justification or not grounded in reason (i.e.,
arbitrary), or not enacted in pursuit of legitimate objectives (C-Reply, 454; R-PHB, §
33). The Respondent also proposes the formulation used by the Saluka tribunal: for a
state’s conduct to be reasonable, it must “bear a reasonable relationship to rational
policies [...].""° Although the definition is rather circular, the Tribunal finds it
appropriate, with the specification made by the AES tribunal, namely that the
determination of whether the state’s conduct is reasonable requires the analysis of
two elements: “the existence of a rational policy; and the reasonableness of the act of

°° Waste Management v. Mexico II, § 98. The Tribunal notes that, strictly speaking, this case refers to
the minimum standard of treatment contained in NAFTA Article 1105. However, both Parties have
relied on this definition in their submissions in this case, so the Tribunal understands that they accept
that it is relevant for the fair and equitable treatment standard under the BIT.

%” Saluka v. Czech Republic, § 307.

% Mondev v. U.S., $116.

°° Waste Management v. Mexico II, § 93. This paragraph has been cited by many different tribunals,
including Chemtura Corporation v. Government of Canada, UNCITRAL, Award, 2 August 2010
(hereinafter, “Chemtura v. Canada’), § 215. See Dolzer & Schreuer p. 129.

1° Saluka v. Czech Republic, J§ 309 and 460.

144

526.

527.

528.

529.

the state in relation to the policy” (AES v. Hungary, { 10.3.7). As noted by the AES
tribunal, a policy is rational when the state adopts it “following a logical (good sense)
explanation and with the aim of addressing a public interest matter” (/d., § 10.3.8),
and an action is reasonable when there is “an appropriate correlation between the
state’s public policy objective and the measure adopted to achieve it” (/d., § 10.3.9).
In other words, for a state’s conduct to be reasonable, it is not sufficient that it be
related to a rational policy; it is also necessary that, in the implementation of that
policy, the state’s acts have been appropriately tailored to the pursuit of that rational
policy with due regard for the consequences imposed on investors.

That is not to say that any conduct that is “reasonable” under this definition will be
“fair and equitable”. As stated above, the determination of what is fair and equitable
cannot be made in the abstract: it requires the assessment of all the factual and legal
circumstances surrounding both the state’s conduct and an investor's investments.
There are conceivably cases in which reasonable action by a state in pursuit of a
rational policy may nonetheless be unfair with respect to certain investors.

c. Regulatory stability and legitimate expectations

The Claimants argue that Romania’s obligation to afford them fair and equitable
treatment means that Romania must ensure a stable and predictable legal and
business environment, and must protect the Claimants’ legitimate expectations. In
turn, the Respondent submits that “[t]he default position in international law is that a
state is free to adopt, change, and repeal regulations as it sees fit — so long as its
actions are reasonably related to a legitimate public interest and are not
discriminatory” (R-Rejoinder, § 9). However, the Respondent concedes that its
regulatory sovereignty is limited by the legitimate expectations the state has validly
created in investors, provided that these expectations arise from specific assurances
entered into by the state, are reasonable, and were the predicate of the Claimants’
investments (R-CM, {J 111-135; R-Rejoinder, §§ 169-172, 191).

The tribunal in LG&E v. Argentina stated that “the stability of the legal and business
framework in the state party is an essential element in the standard of what is fair and
equitable treatment’, and found that it “was an emerging standard of fair and
equitable treatment in international law.”'*' This Tribunal agrees as a general matter.

However, the fair and equitable treatment obligation is not an unqualified guarantee
that regulations will never change. Investors must expect that the legislation will
change from time to time, absent a stabilization clause or other specific assurances
giving rise to a legitimate expectation of stabilization. The BIT’s protection of the
stability of the legal and business environment cannot be interpreted as the
equivalent of a stabilization clause. In the Tribunal’s view, the correct position is that
the state may always change its legislation, being aware and thus taking into
consideration that: (i) an investor's legitimate expectations must be protected; (ii) the
state’s conduct must be substantively proper (e.g., not arbitrary or discriminatory);

1°! | G&E v. Argentina, 4 125.

145

530.

531.

532.

533.

and (iii) the state’s conduct must be procedurally proper (e.g., in compliance with due
process and fair administration). If a change in legislation fails to meet these
requirements, while the legislation may be validly amended as a matter of domestic
law, the state may incur international liability.

d. ‘Transparency / Consistency

Professors Dolzer and Schreuer submit that “[t]ransparency means that the legal
framework for the investor's operations is readily apparent and that any decisions
affecting the investor can be traced to that legal framework.” '” They also state that
by now the requirement of transparency is “firmly rooted in arbitral practice. '°

This was also the view adopted by the tribunal in Metalclad v. Mexico, which stated
as follows:

The Tribunal understands [transparency] to include the idea that all
relevant legal requirements for the purpose of initiating, completing and
successfully operating investments made, or intended to be made, under
the Agreement should be capable of being readily known to all affected
investors of another Party. There should be no room for doubt or
uncertainty on such matters. Once the authorities of the central
government of any Party (whose international responsibility in such matters
has been identified in the preceding section) become aware of any scope
for misunderstanding or confusion in this connection, it is their duty to
ensure that the correct position is promptly determined and clearly stated
so that investors can proceed with all appropriate expedition in the
confident belief that they are acting in accordance with all relevant laws. '*

The Tribunal is also mindful that, when defining fair and equitable treatment, the
Tecmed tribunal stated that:

The foreign investor expects the host State to act in a consistent manner,
free from ambiguity and totally transparently in its relations with the foreign
investor, so that it may know beforehand any and all rules and regulations
that will govern its investments, as well as the goals of the relevant policies
and administrative practices or directives, to be able to plan its investment
and comply with such regulations. Any and all State actions conforming to
such criteria should relate not only to the guidelines, directives or
requirements issued, or the resolutions approved thereunder, but also to
the goals underlying such regulations. "°°

The Tribunal agrees with the general thrust of these statements. However, as noted
by the Saluka tribunal, such propositions must be considered in the proper context;
“taken too literally, they would impose upon host States obligations which would be
inappropriate and unrealistic.”"°° Whether a state has been unfair and inequitable by
failing to be transparent with respect to its laws and regulations, or being ambiguous

1° Dolzer & Schreuer, pp. 133-134 (citing the UNCTAD Series on Issues in International Investment
Agreements, Fair and Equitable Treatment (1991) p. 51).

103 Ig,

104 Metalclad v. Mexico, | 76.
1°5 Tecmed v. Mexico, 154.
1°8 Saluka v. Czech Republic, § 304.

146

534.

535.

536.

537.

and inconsistent in their application, must be assessed in light of all of the factual
circumstances surrounding such conduct. For example, it would be unrealistic to
require Romania to be totally transparent with the general public in the context of
diplomatic negotiations. The question before the Tribunal is thus not whether
Romania has failed to make full disclosure of or grant full access to sensitive
information; it is whether, in the event that Romania failed to do so, Romania acted
unfairly and inequitably with respect to the Claimants. The same applies to
consistency: the question is not merely whether Romania has acted inconsistently; it
is whether, in acting inconsistently, it has been unfair and inequitable with respect to
the Claimants. This is a question that cannot be answered in a vacuum; it is highly
dependent on the factual circumstances.

Whether a state acted in an ambiguous or inconsistent manner is also assessed
taking into consideration that state’s past conduct which is part of the context. As
stated by the Tecmed tribunal, “[t]he foreign investor also expects the host State to
act consistently, i.e. without arbitrarily revoking any preexisting decisions or permits
issued by the State that were relied upon by the investor to assume its commitments
as well as to plan and launch its commercial and business activities [...].”""” It also
found that “the Claimant was entitled to expect that the government's actions would
be free from any ambiguity that might affect the early assessment made by the
foreign investor of its real legal situation or the situation affecting its investment and
the actions the investor should take to act accordingly.”"°® Consequently, the tribunal
found that the investor’s legitimate expectations were frustrated by the contradiction
and uncertainty in Mexico’s conduct, “which [were] prejudicial to the investor in terms
of its advance assessment of the legal situation surrounding its investment and the
planning of its business activity and its adjustment to preserve its rights.” '°°

Following this reasoning, the Tribunal will thus now assess the Claimants’ claims that
Romania acted unfairly and inequitably.

Did Romania fail to provide a predictable and stable legal framework for the
Claimants’ investments? In particular, did it violate the Claimants’ legitimate
expectations of regulatory stability?

a. The Claimants’ position

The Claimants contend that, by prematurely revoking the EGO 24 incentives,
Romania failed to provide a predictable and stable legal framework for the Claimants
to plan their investments. In particular, they argue that Romania violated their
legitimate expectation that these incentives would be in place for the promised 10-
year period (C-SoC, ff 211-228; C-Reply, {| 359-430; C-PHB, {{] 36-50).

The Claimants address the stability and legitimate expectations “strands” of their fair
and equitable treatment claim together in their Statement of Claim and Post-Hearing

1°” Tecmed v. Mexico, § 154 (Emphasis added).
10° id, 4 167.
109 Id, 99 172-173.

147

538.

539.

540.

541.

542.

Brief, but treated the individual claims separately in their Reply. As discussed above,
the Tribunal finds that the Claimants’ arguments with respect to these two “strands”
are closely interlinked, and will thus address them jointly. Indeed, as noted by the
tribunal in Duke v. Ecuador, “[t]he stability of the legal and business environment is
directly linked to the investor's justified expectations.”'"°

i. The standard for determining whether there has been a breach of
legitimate expectations

The Claimants argue that the threshold legal question is how a Tribunal should
determine whether it was reasonable for an investor to rely on a particular expectation
in a particular context. The Claimants rely on Parkerings v. Lithuania (at 4 331),
where the Tribunal held that an investor's expectation is legitimate if:

a. The investor received an explicit promise or guarantee as to particular legal or
regulatory provisions;

b. The investor received implicit promises or guarantees to that effect that it then
took into account in making its investment; or

c. Absent such assurances or representations, the circumstances surrounding the
investment were such as to give rise to a legitimate expectation.

Contrary to the Respondent's allegations, the Claimants contend that explicit
assurances or specific representations from the host state are not required to
generate legitimate expectations (C-PHB, {| 38). The Claimants’ argue this was the
position adopted by the tribunals in Saluka v. Czech Republic, Occidental v. Ecuador,
MTD v. Chile, and PSEG v. Turkey).

According to the Claimants, in determining whether an expectation was legitimate, the
Tribunal must also consider whether the Claimants conducted due diligence and
whether the expectations were reasonable in light of the circumstances (Parkerings, 4
333). Furthermore, according to the Claimants, whether an expectation was
legitimate must be examined at the time the investment was made (EDF v. Romania,
941).

The Claimants submit that an investor's expectation must be legitimate at the time
when the promise or assurance was made, and when the investors relied on that
promise or assurance (Tr., Day 1, 176:3-8 (Gaillard)).

In this case, the Claimants argue that Romania made a promise or assurance to them
that gave rise to a legitimate expectation (Section (ii) below); the Claimants relied on
that assurance (Section (iii) below), and the Claimants' expectation was reasonable
(Section (iv) below). They also argue that Romania breached that legitimate
expectation when it revoked the EGO 24 incentives (Section (v) below).

"© Duke Energy v. Ecuador, § 340.

148

543.

544.

545.

546.

547.

ii. Romania made a promise or assurance to the Claimants that gave rise
to a legitimate expectation

The Claimants submit that Romania made a promise or assurance to the Claimants
(i.e., that the EGO 24 incentives would remain in place during the 10 year period that
$tei-Nucet was a disfavored region) that gave rise to a legitimate expectation (C-
Reply, {{] 411-423; C-PHB, {| 42). As explained in Section A above with respect to
the umbrella clause, the Claimants argue that EGO 24 and its implementing
legislation (in particular GD 194/1999) gave investors benefiting from that regime
through the issuance of a PIC, a right to receive all of the incentives created by EGO
24 until 1 April 2009. Furthermore, the Claimants argue, Romania had a
corresponding obligation to grant all of those incentives, substantially unchanged,
during that time period. In the event that the Tribunal finds that the legislation did not
give rise to an obligation stricto sensu, the Claimants argue that the legislation at
least constituted a representation or promise that gave rise to a legitimate expectation
that those incentives would remain in place until 1 April 2009.

The Claimants assert that their legitimate expectation arose “upon the granting to
them of their PIC, or in the case of European Food possibly at the time of the granting
of its temporary certificate” (Tr., Day 12, 91 (Reed)). In other words, it arose for
European Food at the earliest on 9 December 1999, and for Starmill and Multipack on
17 May 2002.

According to the Claimants, the promise or assurance that gives rise to their
legitimate expectation satisfies the Parkerings criteria.

First, as explained in Section A above, the Claimants contend that, through the
enactment of EGO 24 and its implementing legislation, and through the issuance of
investor-specific PICs, Romania explicitly committed to make the incentives available
to the Claimants in the Stei-Nucet disfavored region until 1 April 2009 (C-SoC, { 300;
C-Reply, 9§ 467-468; C-PHB, {ff 6-24; Tr., Day 12, 70-91 (Reed), 163-164
(Gaillard)).'"' This assurance was made to investors generally through EGO 24 and
its implementing legislation, and to the Claimants in particular by means of the
issuance of investor-specific PICs to each of the Corporate Claimants that explicitly
granted these particular Claimants the benefits of the EGO 24 incentives regime for a
period of 10 years. The Claimants argue that this assurance from the Respondent
was evident from the language of the relevant regulations and the PICs, and was
reinforced by Romania's conduct. The Claimants stress that these PICs constitute a
specific assurance that gives rise to a legitimate expectation, regardless of whether
the Tribunal finds that Romania did or did not enter into an obligation with the
Corporate Claimants.

Second, even absent the express language in EGO 24 and the investor-specific
commitments made in the PICs, the Claimants submit that Romania implicitly
committed to maintain the incentives for ten years. By offering, reaffirming and

'' This argument is also the core of the Claimants’ umbrella clause claim.

149

548.

549.

550.

551.

552.

maintaining for their designated durations various incentives to invest in
disadvantaged regions during the 1990s, Romania demonstrated the reasonableness
of relying on the stability of the EGO 24 incentives and the rights embodied in the
PICs. In addition, the fact that Romania offered the Raw Materials Incentive in 1998
— three years after it subjected itself to EU state aid requirements — reflected
Romania’s own belief that the incentive was permissible under those requirements
and its intent to maintain the incentives regime despite the ongoing EU accession
negotiations. Moreover, when the Romanian Competition Council issued its findings
in 2000 questioning the legality of the Raw Materials Incentive, the Government
disagreed with and opposed those findings, which were ultimately dismissed by
Romanian courts.

Third, the Claimants submit that the circumstances surrounding their investments
demonstrate Romania’s commitment to maintain the incentives for ten years. The
Claimants argue that “this is not a case of an investor taking advantage of a legal
regime that just happened to be in place at the time of investment, and then
complaining when the host state legislated a new regime. Rather, the regime was
specifically designed to attract investors like Claimants, so that they would spend
money and create jobs in Romania's disadvantaged regions” (C-Reply, § 421).

As a result, the Claimants submit that this interpretation is the only one that makes
sense from a teleological standpoint. According to the Claimants, if the incentives
could have been revoked at any time, they would have been ineffective in
incentivizing investment, because investors would have lacked the certainty that they
would have needed to commit funds.

The Claimants argue that Romania was successful in attracting investors, but
revoked the incentives before the Claimants could achieve the benefits that had been
used to attract them. In this context, Romania violated the Claimants’ legitimate
expectation of basic regulatory stability with respect to the incentives regime.

iii. The Claimants relied upon that promise or assurance

The Claimants argue that they relied upon Romania’s promise or assurance when
deciding to invest on the scale and at the speed they did in the $tei-Nucet disfavored
region. In particular, they allege that they had a ten-year plan for European Food to
capitalize on the EGO 24 benefits. Although the Claimants acknowledge that Messrs.
Micula’s initial investments in Bihor County were made in reliance on previous
incentive regimes (specifically, Law 35 and GD 27) (C-Reply, 62-124), they claim
that they would not have invested in the manner, scale and speed that they did if they
had not reasonably relied on the expectation that the EGO 24 incentives regime
would remain in place for the full 10-year period (C-Reply, {/{]/ 161-170; C-PHB, { 43;
Third WS of |. Micula, {| 44-64; WS of M. Ban, 4 38).

The Claimants allege that their investments in Bihor County only made economic

sense if they could count on the benefits of the Raw Materials’ Incentive for the 10-
year period. Absent that incentive, the Claimants would not have invested in the way

150

553.

554.

112

they did, and Romania would not have achieved the socioeconomic benefits in its
disadvantaged regions that it sought (C-Reply, { 422).

The Claimants contend that Romania is incorrect and misleading when it states that
EGO 24 was neither the predicate for the Miculas' initial investment decision, nor the
cause of any apparent change in their investment strategy (C-Reply, {| 62-68). The
Miculas allege that they did not invest in Bihor County because of legislative
“fluctuations” happening at the time (implying instability); rather, they relied on
legislative changes that promoted investment. Prior to the implementation of EGO
24, the Miculas relied on two predecessor state aid regimes, Law 35 and GO 27,
which illustrates the reasonableness of the Claimants’ reliance on other incentive
programs such as EGO 24. In any event, the Miculas did not create the fully
integrated and complex facilities that include today’s food production business until
after 1998, in reliance on EGO 24.'?

The Claimants argue that their reliance on the EGO 24 incentives is proven by the
following facts (C-Reply, {| 165-170, 197-204; C-PHB, {| 43):

a. The Claimants’ decision to invest in $tei-Nucet instead of Bucharest. In 1997,
the Miculas had planned to relocate from Bihor county to Bucharest, which would
have meant considerable cost savings (given its location within Romania’s largest
market and proximity to the port of Constanta). They had already purchased two
companies and land in Bucharest in 1997 and had entered into a contract for
bottling lines to be installed in Bucharest in January 1998. However, after
learning of the EGO 24 incentives, the Miculas changed their mind and remained
in Bihor County. On the understanding that the incentives would last for the full
10 years, they determined that the incentives outweighed the costs of investing in
such a remote region (Third WS of I. Micula, {| 31-36; Third WS of V. Micula, {J
28-29; Tr., Day 2:211, Day 3:133,141,145-150, Day 4:72-73 (|. Micula); WS of M.
Ban, 38; Exh. C-439; C-346; C-679; C-676-678).

b. The Corporate Claimants were created specifically to benefit from the incentives.
The Articles of Incorporation of European Food state that the company was
created “in accordance with the provisions of Law 20/15.01.1999 regarding the
approval of EGO 24/1998...” (Exh. HEC-1). The Miculas used European Food to
import the majority of the raw materials used by the business to take advantage
of customs duties exemptions. Starmill was incorporated to establish integrated
in-house grain milling facilities, which would also take advantage of the Raw
Materials Incentive and create cost efficiencies. Multipack was incorporated to
establish the packaging and labeling for nearly all of the companies’ products,
and also relied heavily on the Raw Materials Incentive. (Third WS of I. Micula, 14
47, 55, 59-67; WS of M. Halbac, {| 17-19; Exh. C-385).

The Claimants note that Romania's timeline of the Claimants’ investments in Romania (R-CM,

Figure 1, page 7) shows the dates in which the relevant companies were incorporated, rather than the
dates in which Messrs. Micula acquired the shares in the preexisting companies created by others.
The Claimants include a “correct timeline” at C-Reply, page 25.

151

555.

The scale of the investments, the integration of the Claimants’ business model
and the Claimants’ expansion into new markets such as food and beer, only
made economic sense if the incentives were to last for the full 10-year period.
The Claimants allege that their business strategy depended on taking advantage
of the incentives to achieve long-term profitability through the vertical integration
of their facilities and the construction of cost-saving and revenue-generating
capital projects. This would allow them to achieve economies of scale and
reduce costs, which would allow them to maintain successful businesses after the
expiration of the incentives. However, for this strategy to be successful, they
needed sufficient time (and the cash savings provided by the incentives) to
integrate their existing operations and construct these additional capital projects,
as well as time to penetrate domestic and foreign markets. As explained in
Section IIl.C.2 above, this business strategy contemplated two phases, each of
which depended on the availability of the Raw Materials Incentive. The first
phase consisted in penetrating the Romanian market with fast-moving consumer
products. This would generate quick cash flows, which together with the
incentive savings, would allow the companies to integrate vertically and achieve
economies of scale, allowing them to save on operational costs and minimize
waste and energy consumption. The second phase was to build a brewery and
the so-called “Incremental Investments” (malt plant, canning plant and co-
generation plant). The Claimants thus planned to use the EGO 24 incentives to
expand their production facilities so that they would no longer be dependent on
the incentives after their expiration on 2009 (Third WS of |. Micula, 19 44-46; 99
59--64, 83-84; Third WS of V. Micula, 4 33, 51-52).

The fact that the obligations were to last for twice the period that the investors
benefitted from the incentives. As the obligations imposed by EGO 24 would last
for twice the period that the Claimants benefitted from the incentives, the
Claimants argue that they had to invest up-front so as to take advantage of the
incentives to develop an integrated business that would be competitive and
successful in the long term (Third WS of |. Micula, 9 59-64; Third WS of V.
Micula, 9 33, 51-52).

The availability of funding. Due to the higher debt/equity ratio that would have
existed but for the incentives, the Claimants argue that, without the promise that
the incentives would last 10 years, it is unlikely that sufficient funding would have
been available for the Claimants to invest the way they did (Second ER of C.
Osborne, {| 7.18-7.21).

The Claimants argue that the lack of written business plans reflecting their reliance on
Romania’s assurances is irrelevant. They contend that family businesses such as the
Miculas’ do not generally prepare all the types of written documents that the
Respondent claims should exist. Instead, the Tribunal must consider the actual
evidence before it, which shows that the Miculas carefully considered the impact of
the incentives, how they could take advantage of those incentives, and how the
incentives could be weighed against the disadvantages of investing in a disfavored

152

556.

557.

558.

559.

560.

region that lacked basic infrastructure and skilled workers, which ultimately led to their
decision to invest (C-PHB, ff 44-45).

The Claimants contend that it is likewise irrelevant that the Claimants may have
adapted their plans over time to respond to changes in the market; what matters is
that the Miculas made specific investment decisions in reliance on the expectation
that the incentives would remain in place for 10 years (C-PHB, {{ 46).

iv. The Claimants’ reliance was reasonable

The Claimants’ argue that their reliance on the expectation that the EGO 24
incentives would last for the entire 10-year period was reasonable. According to the
Claimants, the reasonableness of this expectation is proven by (a) the content of
EGO 24 and of its enacting legislation; (b) the content of the PICs; (c) Romania's
intimate involvement in the granting and monitoring of the EGO 24 incentives
program; (d) Romania’s promotion and support of the EGO 24 regime and previous
incentive regimes, and (e) Romania’s interaction with the Competition Council. In
addition, the Claimants argue that, contrary to Romania’s contentions, the Claimants’
reliance was reasonable in light of Romania’s impending accession to the EU.

(a) The purpose and content of EGO 24 and its enacting legislation

The Claimants submit that the very purpose and content of EGO 24 — and of its
enacting legislation — gave rise to a legitimate expectation that the facilities would
remain in place until 31 March 2009 (C-Reply, 211-221).

First, the Claimants argue that the language of EGO 24 and its implementing
legislation were clear, and it was legitimate for the Claimants to rely on that language.
In particular, Article 3 of GD 194/1999 declared S$tei-Nucet a disfavored region for a
period of 10 years, while Article 4 stated that the incentives were available to
investors during the existence of that disfavored region. GD 1199/2000, which
amended GD 194/1999, increased the size of the disfavored region to include
Draganesti, confirmed that the region would be declared disfavored for 10 years, and
did not amend Article 4 of GD 194/1999. GD 728/2001, which established the
Methodological Norms for EGO 24, also stated that investors who had obtained a PIC
would continue to benefit from the incentives until the lapse of the period during which
the region was declared disfavored (Art. 5(3) of GD 728). Law 20, which enacted
EGO 24, allowed this period to be extended (Art. I(5) of Law 20). In the light of these
provisions, it was reasonable for the Claimants to believe that the incentives would be
granted for the full 10 year period.

The Claimants further argue that EGO 24 was designed to induce long-term
investments. To this end, Article 9 of EGO 24 required investors to continue to
operate in the disfavored regions for twice the period for which they received the
incentives, or they would have to repay the amounts they had received and/or saved.
This meant that the Claimants had to ensure that their investments lasted for twenty
years. Thus, the reciprocal nature of the obligations demonstrated the existence of a

153

561.

562.

563.

564.

quid pro quo between the investors and the state and instilled in the Claimants the
reasonable expectation that both parties would comply with their obligations.

In addition, because the benefits applied only to new investments, any investor
wishing to take advantage of them would either need to make a greenfield investment
or reform an outdated facility. The Claimants also had to build their own utility
support, which was nonexistent in the region. All of this necessitated significant
commitments of capital which only made economic sense if the promised benefits
were to last their full, 10-year term.

The Claimants further argue that the amendments made to the EGO 24 regime in the
following years were made for a variety of reasons and did not give rise to an
expectation that the regime would come to an end in early 2005 (C-Reply, {| 230-
238). For example, EGO 75/2000 solved certain practical problems in the application
of the incentives and even made some of them more readily available to investors.
Although EGO 75/2000 repealed the “Components Facility’, Law 625/2001 reinstated
it. GD 1199/2000 extended the disfavored region to include Draganesti. Law
345/2002 repealed the exemption from customs duties and VAT provided in Art. 6(1)
of EGO 24, but did so in the context of a general taxation reform, not for the purpose
of regulating state aid. Law 414/2002 repealed the profit tax exemption, but that
exemption remained in place for investors (such as the Claimants) who had received
PICs prior to 1 July 2002. Although another set of amendments passed in 2002
targeted the Raw Materials Incentive, it was clear from parliamentary debates and
other contemporaneous sources that their purpose was to address problems in the
meat industry, not the harmonization of Romania’s law with EU law.

(b) The issuance and content of the PICs

The Claimants argue that the issuance and content of the PICs further enhanced their
legitimate expectations that the facilities would remain in place for the entire period
(C-Reply, ¥§ 239-245). All of the Corporate Claimants’ PICs expressly stated that
they would be valid until 1 April 2009. The granting of the PICs and the fact that the
Government allowed the Claimants to use them repeatedly to receive the benefits
confirmed this belief. Further, the PICs confirmed all of the activities for which the
Claimants could receive incentives (C-Reply, ] 156, 159).'? Thus, the PICs
explicitly and implicitly confirmed that the Claimants were entitled to benefit from the
incentives until 1 April 2009.

According to the Claimants, Romania’s attempts to minimize the importance of
investor-specific PICs based on the language granting the incentives “in accordance
with the provisions of EGO 24/1998” are unconvincing. That language merely reflects
that EGO 24 had been amended prior to the date the PIC was granted. In any event,
Multipack’s PIC does not contain that language. Further, the PICs do not contain any
language contemplating potential revocation of the incentives.

"8 The reference seems to be to Exh. C-638, which contains various versions of the PICs and a list of
investment activities, but it is unclear to the Tribunal if this list was attached to the original PICs.

154

565.

566.

567.

568.

(c) Romania’s intimate involvement in the granting of the EGO 24
incentives

The Claimants further submit that the reasonableness of their expectations was
reinforced by the state’s intimate involvement in the EGO 24 regime and close
monitoring of the Claimants’ receipt of the EGO 24 benefits (C-Reply, 9 171-196;
260-272).

In this regard, the Claimants allege that they underwent lengthy and detailed approval
processes with different government agencies, which kept the Government fully
apprised of the Claimants’ investment plans and actual investments. Specifically, to
obtain their Temporary Investment Certificates they needed to file and secure
approval of their investment plan with the NW-RDA (e.g., European Food’s
investment plan of December 1999 is found at Exh. C-385). Each time they planned
a new investment, they had to file updated versions of the investment plans for
approval and obtain new, modified PICs that reflected the newly-approved
investments. Similarly, to obtain their PICs, the Claimants had to undergo another
approval process, including an on-site visit from the NW-RDA to verify that the
companies qualified for EGO 24 benefits. In addition, to actually benefit from the
incentives, the Corporate Claimants had to obtain approval from different regulatory
bodies to verify that they met their EGO 24 requirements. Indeed, each time
European Food wanted to import equipment or raw materials it had to submit very
specific information regarding the machinery or raw materials it wished to import, as
well as the investment purpose.

In addition to monitoring and regulating Claimants’ activities via the PICs, the NW-
RDA and the Oradea Customs Department closely supervised and controlled the
Claimants’ activities on a day-to-day basis via the continuous approvals processes in
relation to the importation of equipment and raw materials. The Claimants’
investments were also reviewed outside the approvals process, e.g., through audits,
biannual reviews, information obligations, and other monitoring activities.

The Claimants thus argue that, through the key role the Romanian authorities played
at all levels of the EGO 24 incentives regime, these authorities provided explicit as
well as implicit assurances to Claimants that the EGO 24 incentives would be
available for their full term. These approval processes allowed the Government to
track the amount and type of incentives the Claimants received under the EGO 24
program and ensured that the Claimants received incentives only for those business
purposes for which they had obtained approval under their Temporary or Permanent
Investor Certificates. Each approval by the Government agencies solidified the
Claimants’ expectation that the Government had every intention of complying with its
obligations under EGO 24, which in turn encouraged the Claimants to continue with
their investments.

155

569.

570.

571.

114

(d) Romania’s promotion and support of the EGO 24 regime and
previous incentive regimes

The Claimants argue that the legitimacy of their expectations and the reasonableness
of their reliance was further enhanced by Romania’s contemporaneous statements
and conduct with respect to the EGO 24 regime and previous incentive regimes.

The Claimants first allege that the Government actively promoted the EGO 24
incentives regime in order to induce investments in disfavored areas, and gave
assurances as to its 10 year duration (C-Reply, {| 222-229). The Claimants cite,
inter alia:

a. Presentations by Mr. Neculai Liviu Marcu, then President of the NARD, in which
he explained the EGO 24 regime and its benefits for investors. In his witness
statement submitted in this arbitration, Mr. Marcu states that “[o]n all of the
occasions where | presented in disfavoured regions that had been declared as
such for a 10 year period | explained that the benefits of the regime would last for
the full 10 years” (WS of N. Marcu, § 32);

b. Meetings with potential investors run by the NW-RDA and local government
representatives (WS of M. Ban, 9 32-37);

c. The NW-RDA’s annual reports (Exh. C-393, C-458);

d. The preparation of a CD-ROM for international promotion (“Romania — Your
Business Partner 1999/2000” (Exh. C-563)).

e. Media reports of government initiatives (Exh. C-568 and C-630). In particular, the
Claimants allege that the Government's June 2003 press release'’* noted the
success of the EGO 24 program and, according to the Claimants, assured that
the EGO 24 incentives would continue to be in place at least until Romania joined
the EU (Exh. C-489).

f. Romania's National Program for Joining the EU, where the Claimants allege that
the Government stated that the laws in force at the time would continue to be in
place."

Further, the Claimants contend that the success of the EGO 24 program — and
Romania’s public acknowledgement of this fact — reinforced the Claimants’ legitimate
expectation that the regime would remain in place for the stated term (C-Reply, 9
273-278). The EGO 24 program was enacted as part of Romania’s attempts to
address significant economic problems related to regional development and to further
Romania’s accession aspirations. The Claimants allege that the program was
extremely successful in attracting investors to areas in need of capital, and this

The Claimants refer to June 2002, but the date on Exh. C-489 is 18 June 2003.

"5 The Claimants mistakenly cite Exh. C-489. The correct reference appears to be Exh. HEC-7,
which states at page 147 that “[t]he provisions of the normative acts on facilities granted for “D areas”
will be maintained till the moment of Romania's accession to the European Union.”

156

572.

573.

574.

575.

success was recognized and hailed by the Government. Romania continued to
reaffirm the need for investment and reduction of unemployment in the disfavored
regions, and continued to issue PICs and promote the EGO 24 scheme. In this
context, it was reasonable for the Claimants to believe that Romania would remain
committed to the EGO 24 program.

The Claimants also argue that it was reasonable for them to rely on the EGO 24
incentive program and its stated duration because Romania had previously offered
and maintained other incentive regimes similar to the EGO 24 regime, including Law
35 and GO 27 (both of which had been implemented in the context of the Europe
Agreement and were never challenged by the European Commission or the
Government). The Government never revoked the incentives granted under these
programs, and when Law 35 ended the incentives were “grandfathered” so that
existing investors were able to benefit from them until their original expiration date.
The Claimants thus argue that Romania’s consistent pattern of conduct and the
Miculas’ successful experience with these previous incentive programs created a
course of dealing between Romania and the Claimants that made it reasonable for
the Claimants to expect that Romania would maintain the EGO 24 incentive program
for its full stated term or at least grandfather its benefits.

In addition, the Claimants contend that, under Romanian law, the government was
not allowed to revoke the incentives without grandfathering the provisions or
compensating the investors. Relying on the testimony of Prof. Mihai, the Claimants
argue that new legislation cannot affect acquired rights (Tr., Day 5:207-208, 210, 247
(Mihai)).

Finally, the Claimants contend that Romania never suggested to investors that
reliance on the EGO 24 regime was inappropriate (C-Reply, {| 279-280). Romania
argues that the Claimants should have somehow known that the EGO 24 regime
would come to a premature end. However, until its revocation, the Claimants aver
that the Government never suggested to, let alone informed, investors that the regime
would not remain in place for the full ten-year period (Tr., Day 9, 21-23
(Juratowitch/Ban)). Instead, the Government continued to promote, apply and support
the EGO 24 regime. When Romania finally started to indicate that the incentives
could be terminated, Romania did not clearly state the timing and effects of that
termination. In fact, Romania suggested that investors that relied on that regime
would be protected or compensated.

(e) Romania's interaction with the Competition Council

The Claimants further argue that their expectation that the EGO 24 incentives would
remain in place for the entire 10 year period was solidified by Romania’s reaction to
Decision 244 of the Competition Council (C-Reply, 1 246-259). In Decision 244 of
15 May 2000 (Exh. R-78), the Competition Council recommended alterations to EGO
24 (including the Raw Materials Incentive and the Machinery Incentive) after finding
that the incentives distorted competition. However, the Government ignored Decision
244 and instead adopted EGO 75/2000, which did not implement the

157

576.

577.

578.

579.

recommendations of Decision 244. The Claimants argue that this suggests that the
Government disagreed with Decision 244. Indeed, the Claimants submit that
Romania’s comments to the Commission’s Written Submission in this arbitration
suggest that Romania still considered the EGO 24 incentives to be compatible with
state aid at that time (C-Reply, 60, citing Romania’s letter of 16 November 2009).

The Claimants argue that the Government was right to disagree with Decision 244 for
a number of reasons, in particular because it was flawed and was not based on EU
competition law considerations. As explained by Prof. Dashwood, its findings were
not supported by evidence and were not based on facts relating to the Claimants or
their business. The Decision made no reference to the EU or the requirement for
Romania to harmonize its laws with those of the EU, nor did it state that EGO 24 was
incompatible with EU law. Decision 244 was also silent on whether EGO 24 fell
under Article 87(3) of the EU Treaty, which exempts certain forms of state aid,
especially aid designed to alleviate under-developed regions, from a general
prohibition of aid that distorts competition (ER of A. Dashwood).

This disagreement generated a public debate between the Government and the
Competition Council, which later led to a lawsuit brought by the Competition Council
against the Government. The Government prevailed both in the first instance before
the Bucharest Court of Appeal and on appeal before the High Court of Cassation and
Justice (Exh. C-528 and C-643; ER of L. Mihai). In both instances the courts held
that the Competition Council did not have the authority to challenge emergency
government ordinances such as EGO 24, which are legislative acts.

According to the Claimants, the Romanian courts’ decisions highlighted the
Competition Council's lack of authority regarding EGO 24. The Claimants argue that
under Law 143/1999 (Exh. R-18) the Competition Council was not authorized to
scrutinize all state aid or order government agencies to stop granting aid. With
respect to existing state aid (such as the EGO 24 incentives), the Competition Council
was only authorized to request the aid provider to remove the incompatibility of the
measures with the law, including through a recommendation for cancellation or
amendment. But as shown by the Court decisions, the Government was not required
to comply, and the Competition Council had no ability to challenge the legislation in
court. Indeed, the Government did not comply with the Council's recommendation.
This strengthened the Claimants’ reasonable belief that the Government was
committed to the EGO 24 program. This belief was confirmed by the fact that
European Food was granted its PIC on 1 June 2000, only a few weeks after Decision
244 was rendered, and Starmill and Multipack were granted their PICs soon after the
Supreme Court Decision was granted.

The Claimants further submit that the Government's support of the EGO 24 regime in
the face of the opposition of the Competition Council was a strong indicator that the
Government considered the EGO 24 regime to be lawful, and made the Claimants’
reliance on that regime all the more reasonable. They argue that investors are
entitled to assume that the government is acting lawfully, and if the government was
acting as if EGO 24 was lawful, the Claimants were entitled to rely on that.

158

580.

581.

582.

583.

In addition, the Claimants conducted sufficient due diligence prior to investing.
According to the Claimants, investors cannot be required to conduct a higher
standard of due diligence than the government itself: it would be unreasonable to
require the investors to know whether Romania would accede to the EU and what
effect that would have on EGO 24, if Romania itself did not know that.

(f) | The Claimants’ expectations were reasonable in light of Romania's
impending accession to the EU

As discussed in Section V.B on Applicable Law, in the Claimants’ view EU law plays a
different role with respect to the analysis of the Claimants’ fair and equitable
treatment claim than with respect to its expropriation and umbrella clause claims.
With respect to these latter two claims, the Claimants argue that Romania’s EU law
defense can only be analyzed as a circumstance precluding wrongfulness, and thus
should be assessed after the Tribunal has decided whether there is liability under the
BIT. In contrast, the Claimants submit that with respect to the fair and equitable
treatment claim, Romania’s EU law defense is relevant to the determination of the
wrongfulness itself; in other words, it is relevant to determining whether Romania has
breached the fair and equitable treatment standard. Thus, Romania’s EU law
defense must be assessed during the Tribunal’s analysis of whether the fair and
equitable treatment standard has been breached (Tr., Day 1, 159-164, 170-174
(Gaillard).

Specifically, the Claimants argue that EU law is part of the factual matrix against
which the Tribunal must determine whether the Claimants’ expectations were
legitimate and, specifically, whether they were reasonable (Tr., Day 1, 176-177
(Gaillard)). The Claimants deny that, as argued by the Respondent, Romania’s
impending accession to the EU made their reliance unreasonable. To the contrary,
the Claimants contend that their expectation that the Raw Materials Incentive would
be afforded to them for 10 years was reasonable despite Romania’s accession
process. The Claimants stress that this analysis must consider the state of EU law
and Romania’s relationship with the EU at the time that the expectation arose and at
the time the Claimants made their investments in reliance on this expectation (Tr.,
Day 1, 167 (Gaillard)).

First, the Claimants argue that, from a substantive standpoint, the incentives were
compatible with EU law. At the very least, it would have been reasonable (from the
time in which EGO 24 was enacted and until the incentives were revoked) for an
investor to believe that the incentives were compatible with EU law. With the support
of their expert in EU law, Prof. Dashwood, the Claimants assert that the incentives
could have fallen within the scope of a valid exception to the EC Treaty’s prohibition
on state aid as provided in Article 87(3)(a) of the EC Treaty (formerly Article 92 of the
Treaty establishing the European Economic Community, and incorporated into the
Europe Agreement regime by Article 64 of the Europe Agreement), and could have
validly constituted regional operating aid under the EU Guidelines on Regional Aid
(ER of A. Dashwood, {{ 43-55).

159

584.

585.

586.

587.

The “Implementing Rules” for the application of Article 64 of the Europe Agreement
were adopted on 10 April 2001 through Decision 4/2000 of the EU-Romania
Association Council (Exh. R-65; C-579).''® Article 2(1) of the Implementing Rules
provided that “[t]he assessment of compatibility of individual aid awards and
programmes with the Europe Agreement, as provided for in Article 1 of these Rules,
shall be made on the basis of the criteria arising from the application of the rules of
Article 87 of the Treaty establishing the European Community [...].”

According to Prof. Dashwood, “the criteria applicable in respect of regional aid
granted by the Romanian authorities under the regime of the [Europe Agreement]
were those of the 1998 Guidelines [on Regional Aid] relating to areas covered by the
Article 83(3)(a) derogation” (ER of A. Dashwood, {[ 22). Prof. Dashwood explained
that the Guidelines on Regional Aid distinguished between various types of state aid,
and described the circumstances under which certain state aid could be granted.
These circumstances included cases where the economic situation was extremely
unfavorable in relation to the European Community as a whole, and the Guidelines
specified the types of aid that could be granted as tax exemptions. In addition,
although Prof. Dashwood acknowledges that while “operating aid aimed at reducing a
firm’s current expenditure is normally prohibited, the Guidelines recognise that,
exceptionally, such aid may be granted in regions eligible under the derogation in
Article 87(3)(a), subject to certain conditions” (ER of A. Dashwood, 4 11). Relying on
Prof. Dashwood’s expert opinion, the Claimants argue that EGO 24 incentives met all
of the criteria for state aid permitted by Art. 87(3)(a). Accordingly, the Claimants
argue that the EGO 24 incentives could have qualified under the Art. 87(3)(a)
exemption.

Indeed, the Claimants argue that Romania itself appears to have believed that, at the
time EGO 24 was enacted, the incentives were compatible with EU state aid
requirements, noting that Romania itself has acknowledged this point in its
submissions in this arbitration (see R-CM, § 29; Respondent’s Comments to the
Commission’s Written Submission, 16 Nov. 2009, 4 1(b)). Thus, the Claimants argue
that any reasonable investor would have relied on Romania's own position that EGO
24 was compatible with EU law, and would have had no reason to expect the
incentives to be prematurely revoked.

The Claimants reject Romania’s suggestion that the Implementing Rules effective
2001 (Exh. R-65; C-579) explain why it viewed the incentives compatible with EU law
in 1998, but incompatible in 2004 (R-CM, {| 20). According to the Claimants, there is
nothing in the Implementing Rules to suggest this. Instead, the Implementing Rules
clarified that “the procedural rules to ensure effective application of the criteria

"6 Article 4(1) of the Implementing Rules also extended the time period in which Romania would be
considered an underdeveloped area pursuant to Article 64(4)(a) of the Europe Agreement:

In accordance with and within the limits of Article 64(4)(a) of the Europe
Agreement, Romania shall be regarded as an area identical to those areas
of the Community referred to in Article 87(3)(a) of the Treaty establishing
the European Community. (Article 4(1) of Decision 4/2000).

160

588.

589.

590.

591.

governing the compatibility of aid granted in Romania with the proper functioning of
the [Europe] Agreement were left to be determined exclusively as a matter of
Romanian law.” (ER of A. Dashwood, {| 25). Given that Romania had entered into the
Europe Agreement in 1993, it was well aware by 1998 which kinds of state aid it could
provide. It is thus inappropriate for Romania to rely on the issuance of the 2001
Implementing Rules to try to argue that in 1998 there was little specific guidance as to
whether particular incentive regimes would be permissible under EC state aid rules.

According to the Claimants, nothing after the issuance of EGO 24 affects this
conclusion. The EC never requested that Romania repeal the EGO 24 incentives,
and there was never a determination (by the EC) that the incentives did not qualify for
an exemption of Art. 87(3)(a). The only body that examined whether the incentives in
EGO 24 were compatible with EU law was the Romanian Competition Council
through Decision 244 in 2001. In any event, the Competition Council's complaint
against the Government for failure to apply Decision 244 was dismissed by Romanian
courts.

Indeed, the Claimants contend that, as late as 2003, the EU was giving signals that it
would accept existing aid schemes and would only require that the rules be changed
for new entrants. In its Common Position of May 2003, the EU invited Romania to:

[...] provide information on individual benefits granted in the free zones and
the disadvantaged areas and on any other individual tax benefits that have
already been granted and which provide for tax benefits beyond Romania's
target date for accession. The EU urges Romania to close incompatible aid
schemes for new entrants with immediate effect. (EU Common Position,
May 2003, Exh. EC-8, p. 5).

According to the Claimants, this document shows that, even at that late point in time,
the EU was only requiring Romania to change the rules for new entrants, but it had no
problem with grandfathering vested rights of existing investors (Tr., Day 1, 180:13-25
(Gaillard)).

So even at that late point in time, the EU is saying: hey, change the rules
for the new entrants. Frankly, | take issue with what | call the
Commission's brief in this matter, because they fail to quote that. They
quote the rest of the document but they forget conveniently this reference
to the new entrants. So it was pretty clear, even at that late point in time,
that the EU had no problem with granting -- grandfathering vested rights to
existing entrants, existing investors, and that they would maybe insist that
the rules are changed going forwards for the new entrants, as they should,
because, frankly, the rule of law should mean something, even in Europe.
(Tr., Day 1, 180:13-25 (Gaillard))

Second, the Claimants contend that, from a procedural standpoint, only Romania
(and not the European Commission) had the competence to determine which forms of
state aid qualified as permissible state aid. This is because during the relevant time
Romania was a pre-accession regime, where the only applicable law was Romanian
law. As opposed to a post-accession regime, where there is a duality of functions
between the State’s legal order and the European Commission, in pre-accession

161

592.

593.

594.

595.

Romania the European Commission and EU law played no role (Tr., Day 1, 178-179
(Gaillard); ER of A. Dashwood, 25).

Specifically, Prof. Dashwood states that the Europe Agreement said nothing about
the procedural aspects of disciplining state aid. The Implementing Rules merely
established rules for cooperation, consultation and problem solving between the
European Commission and the Romanian monitoring authority (which was the
Romanian Competition Office and Competition Council). Thus, Prof. Dashwood
concludes that “[w]hat emerges clearly is that in the State aid regime of the [Europe
Agreement] the procedural rules to ensure effective application of the criteria
governing the compatibility of aid granted in Romania with the proper functioning of
the Agreement were to be left to be determined exclusively as a matter of Romanian
law” (ER of A. Dashwood, {[ 25).

Prof. Dashwood further asserts that the substantive rules regarding State aid (in
particular, Article 87 of the EC Treaty) cannot apply independently of the procedural
rules in Articles 88 and 89 of the EC Treaty: “There has to be a concrete finding, by
way of an individual Commission decision or legislation, that a particular aid, or aid of
a certain type, is or is not compatible with the common market. It follows that the
granting of the disputed aid could only be rendered unlawful under the [Europe
Agreement] regime by a ruling compliant with the procedural requirements of that
regime, finding that the aid satisfied all four of the criteria in Article 87 (1) [of the EC
Treaty], while not qualifying as an exemption under Article 87(3)(a)” (ER of A.
Dashwood, {J 32-33).]

Fourth, the Claimants contend that Romania contradicts itself when it asserts that the
Miculas should have known that the incentives would disappear with Romania’s
accession to the EU. Indeed, Romania’s acknowledged that it enacted the incentives
legislation in order to advance its accession prospects. According to the Claimants,
Romania admits (at R-CM, § 29'"”) that EGO 24 was not incompatible with the
Europe Agreement’s provisions and Romania’s accession obligations, and was, in
fact, necessary for accession (C-Reply, 210).

The Claimants argue that there is a similar “element of schizophrenia” in the
Commission’s position. On the one hand, the EU urged Romania to take the
measures necessary to improve Romania’s economic and legal status, including
negotiating BITs, so that it would be in a position to join the EU. Romania’s economic
situation at the conclusion of the Europe Agreement was so dire that the EU
expressly stated that the whole of Romania should be considered an underdeveloped
area for purposes of State aid (Art. 64(4)(a) of the Europe Agreement). Accordingly,

'” “Especially given Romania's status as an ‘underdeveloped area’ within the meaning of Article
87(3)(a) of the EC Treaty, the government could reasonably conclude at the time that the EGO
24/1998 regime was not incompatible with the Europe Agreement'’s provisions. Furthermore, given the
economic dislocation that existed at the time, measures to ameliorate conditions in the disfavoured
regions were necessary. Romania was not alone among EU candidate States in making the policy
choice to implement new economic-assistance measures based upon such an assessment of the legal
position. For example, Poland passed similar legislation authorizing State aid for underdeveloped
regions in 1994, while it was a candidate for EU admission” (R-CM, § 29).

162

596.

to “establish and improve a legal framework which favours and protects investment”
and with the higher aim of achieving EU accession, the EU promoted the conclusion
of bilateral investment treaties between Romania and EU member states (Art. 74(2)
of the Europe Agreement), including the BIT that is the basis of the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction. However, under the EC’s argument, once Romania had achieved the
necessary economic development for accession, and once the Claimants had made
their investments under the BIT, Romania then had to renege on its BIT obligations
because revocation of the incentives was allegedly needed to obtain EU accession.
As stated by the Claimants:

Now, the last thing | will say about the European attitude is that if you were
to believe them at face value and take at face value what they say
regarding the alleged EU requirements which would oblige countries to
renege on their commitments when they join the EU, even if you were to
take that at face value, and | don't think you should because, frankly, it's an
argument for the purposes of litigation, it's nothing which remotely
resembles the true goals of the EU, and that's fortunate -- but even if you
were to take that at face value, you would notice a certain element of
schizophrenia in the EU position.

Because, and this is the last thing | would like you to look at in my table,
back on page 1 and page 2, and you will see that an element of the Europe
agreement of February, which came into force in February 1995; an
element is what? Look at page 2 of my chart, Article 74(2). You see that in
plain words the EU is promoting what? Promoting the conclusion of
bilateral investment treaties.

They say, in plain words, the particular aims of the cooperation will be: "
for Romania ..." That's entered into with Romania, it's specific to Romania:
"... for Romania to establish and improve a legal framework which favours
and protects investment, the conclusion by the Member States and
Romania of agreements for the promotion and protection of investment."

 

So the very BIT which is the basis of your jurisdiction has been blessed,
promoted by Europe itself. They told Romania: you are a very disfavoured
region; the whole of Romania would qualify in terms of state aids for an
exemption, the whole thing, because you are so way behind because of
the history you suffered, you are so behind that you qualify all together.
Please enter into BITs because that will help you catch up.

Now, that is exactly what Romania has done. They entered into the BIT,
which does protect the investment. So | am saying that if you were to give
any credence to the current litigation argument of the Commission, which
is: well, they shouldn't be liable because they had to give up all this after
the fact; that would be in direct contradiction with what the EU at the time
was requesting Romania to do. So if you were to follow that type of
argument, | would say -- frankly, it's an argument which is pretty
shocking because it means: well, thank you for having invested,
thank you for having helped Romania to catch up and to be able to
join in the first place the EU, but now that it has joined, we don't need
you any more, so we can dump you, and the state should renege and
should renege without compensation on its promises. There is no
problem whatsoever.

(Tr., Day 1, 181:1-183:6 (Gaillard)) (Emphasis added)

The Claimants argue that the Commission’s position is wrong on four counts:

163

597.

598.

599.

It's wrong from a timing standpoint, because EU law has nothing to say
before the accession; all these representations on the right side of the
paper are compatible with our case.

It's wrong from an EC law standpoint, because EC law is not that bad.

It's wrong from a policy standpoint, because if that were true, no one could
ever carry [sic] any policy, because if you were to listen to the EU litigation
paper, you would have to say that investors, if they are in their right mind
when representations are made to them, when they are given certificates,
when they are given incentives, they shouldn't believe that that's valid; they
should ignore that and invest elsewhere, in countries where they respect
the rule of law | guess, and they should not invest in the places they are
told to invest in, because EU law would somehow permit states to change
their mind without carrying any consequence of that change.

So that's wrong under EU law, but | would say for you the only thing which
matters is that it's wrong from an international law standpoint: look at
Articles 25 and 27 of the ILC Articles; and | would add just for the sake of
the record that | find it wrong morally as well.

(Tr., Day 1, 183:8-184:6 (Gaillard)).

In sum, the Claimants argue that:

At the very least, it was reasonable for Claimants to expect, based on
Romania’s promulgation of the incentives regime in 1998 and its awarding
the Corporate Claimants PICs in 2000 and 2002, that even assuming
Romania entered the EU before April 1, 2009 (which was highly uncertain
at the time), the Government would (1) wait for an official EC decision
demanding the revocation of the Raw Materials Incentive before revoking
it; (2) attempt to negotiate with the EC a disadvantaged-regions exception
for the Raw Materials Incentive under Article 87(3) of the Europe Treaty; or
(3) compensate Claimants or otherwise help to mitigate their damages as a
result of revocation of the Raw Materials Incentive, perhaps by
promulgating a new regulatory regime designed to meet EU requirements.
But Romania did none of these things. Instead, having achieved the
desired economic benefits from Claimants’ investments in the country’s
disadvantaged regions and of EU membership, it unilaterally shifted all of
the risks associated with EU accession to investors like Claimants. (C-
Reply 4 419)

v. Romania violated this legitimate expectation

The Claimants argue that all the factors described above instilled in them the
legitimate expectation that the EGO 24 incentives would remain in place for 10 years.
The Claimants allege that, by prematurely revoking these incentives 5 years before
they were due to expire, Romania violated that legitimate expectation, and
consequently breached its obligation under the treaty to afford the Claimants fair and
equitable treatment.

The Claimants acknowledge that not all incentives were revoked — indeed, the Profit
Tax Incentive remained in place for the Claimants until the expiration of their PICs in
April 2009. Nonetheless, they argue that the revocation of the Raw Materials
Incentive was sufficient to constitute a breach of the BIT (C-PHB, § 49). The
Claimants also argue that leaving the Profit Tax Exemption in place until 2009

164

600.

601.

602.

enabled Romania to keep the Claimants’ obligations to maintain their investments in
the disfavored region of eight years longer than if they had simply revoked all of the
incentives (Tr., Day 12, 41-43 (Fleuriet)).

The Claimants contend that Romania’s revocation of the incentives was unfair and
inequitable, because:

a. Romania failed to provide alternatives or otherwise mitigate the effects of the
revocation on investors through transitional periods or grandfathering the
incentives for existing PIC holders. Nor did Romania provide any evidence that it
attempted to negotiate any alternatives or transitional periods with the EU.

b. Romania failed to show how the incentives conflicted with EU law.
c. The Claimants’ obligations under EGO 24 remain in place.

d. Romania failed to grandfather the incentives, in breach of Romanian Law.
According to the Claimants, under Romanian law, grandfathering provisions are
mandatory in all cases where an enactment of a new law affects legal relations
established under an earlier statute and these relations are still in operation at the
time the new law is enacted. (ER of L. Mihai, { 6.1).

The Claimants summarize their legitimate expectations claim as follows:

At its core, Claimants’ story is a simple one: Romania attracted substantial
investments from them on the basis of a Raw Materials Incentive granted
to them through domestic legislation (EGO 24 and GD 194) and individual
PICs until 2009; did so after subjecting itself to EU requirements, thereby
representing to investors that the incentive was consistent with those
requirements; successfully opposed its own Competition Council's
determination to the contrary; achieved the desired benefits accruing from
both Claimants’ investments and EU accession; and then revoked the Raw
Materials Incentive without waiting for an official demand from the EC,
without attempting to negotiate an exception or transition period, and after
it was too late for Claimants to modify their incentive-based business
strategy pursuant to which they had invested hundreds of millions of dollars
in the disadvantaged regions of northwestern Romania. As a result,
Claimants have suffered significant damages that Romania has made no
attempt to mitigate. When compared to leading BIT cases like MTD (in
which the Tribunal found that the investor had failed to conduct proper due
diligence) and Saluka (in which the Czech Government specifically refused
to assure the investor of State aid), this case presents a classic instance of
the violation of investors’ legitimate expectations of minimal regulatory
stability. (C-Reply, § 423).

b. The Respondent’s position

The Respondent denies that it has breached any legitimate expectation of the
Claimants. It contends that the Claimants have not met any of the requirements
necessary for the doctrine of legitimate expectations to apply. First, the Claimants
received no assurance that could have created a legitimate expectation that the
Facilities would remain in place for 10 years. Second, the Claimants did not invest in

165

reliance on that expectation. Finally, even if that had been the case, any such
reliance would not have been objectively reasonable.

i. The standard for determining if a measure has undermined legitimate
expectations

603. The Respondent agrees with the Claimants that the appropriate standard to evaluate
whether a measure has undermined legitimate expectations is that set out in
Parkerings v. Lithuania (R-PHB, § 101). On the basis of this and other awards, the
Respondent contends that for a legitimate expectation of regulatory stability to be
protected, the following requirements must be met (R-CM, 9 111-135; R-Rejoinder,
{4 170-173; R-PHB, {| 99-159):

i. There must be a contract, or at least a promise or specific representation that the
law will remain unchanged, that created a subjective expectation.

ii. The expectation (or the reliance on that expectation) must have been objectively
reasonable.'® In particular, the investor must anticipate that the law may
change, especially if the general legislative climate is in a state of flux (Glamis
Gold v. United States, 767).

iii. The investor must have relied on that subjective expectation when it made its
investment.

604. With respect to the first requirement, the Respondent submits that any claim based
on the frustration of legitimate expectations requires the claimant to prove that the
state created or reinforced the expectations through its own affirmative acts.'"® The
practice of international tribunals shows that legitimate expectations may only be
frustrated where the state has made “specific commitments” that particular laws or
regulations would remain in place."° These specific commitments or assurances
cannot be generated by inaction or generally applicable regulation. In addition, these
specific commitments must be valid under domestic law.

605. Further, the Respondent contends that it is well established that a regulatory regime
does not carry with it any promise that the law will remain unchanged indefinitely.
Citing Parkerings v. Lithuania, the Respondent argues that “[a] State has the right to
enact, modify or cancel a law at its own discretion”, and “save for the existence of an
agreement in the form of a stabilisation clause or otherwise, there is nothing

"® In some briefs, the Respondent focuses on the reasonableness of the expectation, whilst in others
on the reasonableness of the reliance. The Tribunal considers this to be the same argument, which
goes to the legitimacy of the expectation.

"9 Gami Investments, Inc. v. The Government of the United Mexican States, UNCITRAL, Final Award,
15 November 2004 (hereinafter, “GAM/ v. Mexico”), §§ 90-110; International Thunderbird Gaming
Corporation v. The United Mexican States, UNCITRAL, Arbitral Award, 26 January 2006 (hereinafter,
“International Thunderbird v. Mexico’), § 196; CMS v. Argentina), {| 78-82; CME Czech Republic B.V.
v. The Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award, 13 September 2001 (hereinafter “CME v. Czech
Republic’), {§ 610-611; MTD v. Chile, § 167; Tecmed v. Mexico, § 154.

"0 CMS v. Argentina (Award), §§ 127-166; Tecmed v. Mexico, § 154; Metalclad v. Mexico, 87:
Marvin Roy Feldman Karpa v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/1), Award, 16
December 2012 (hereinafter “Feldman v. Mexico’), § 111.

166

606.

607.

608.

objectionable about the amendment brought to the regulatory framework existing at
the time an investor made its investment” (Parkerings v. Lithuania, § 332).'*'

Similarly, the Respondent notes that in AES v. Hungary the tribunal found that,
absent a specific representation to the investor, such as a stabilization clause, an
investor cannot have a legitimate expectation of legislative stasis, and any general
entitlement to regulatory stability does not preclude legislative changes that are
significant and even surprising (AES v. Hungary, J{ 9.3.17-9.3.34). In the AES case,
the investor did have a contract with the state. Although in that case the tribunal
found that the state did not have a rational policy in modifying or eliminating its own
contractual obligations, “this does not mean that the state cannot exercise it[s]
governmental powers, including its legislative function, with the consequence that
private interests — such as the investor's contractual rights — are affected. But that
effect would have to be a consequence of a measure based on public policy that was
not aimed only at those contractual rights” (AES v. Hungary, J 10.3.13). Romania
concludes that, a fortiori, where the investor has no contract with the state, it can
have no legitimate expectation that generally applicable legislation will not affect it.

Second, the Respondent submits that, for an expectation to be legitimate and
therefore protected under international law, it must be reasonable and justified in the
circumstances.’ According to the Respondent, it is well established that foreign
investors must accept the conditions of the host state as they find them (The Oscar
Chinn Case"*’). An investor cannot complain if its business suffers economically from
laws or practices that were in place at the time of the investment (MTD v. Chile,
204). The investor must conduct its business in a reasonable manner, which includes
undertaking due diligence with respect to the regulatory environment in which it
operates and the likelihood that it may change and evolve (Parkerings v. Lithuania,
333). Indeed, investors are required to seek relevant professional advice in
assessing the risks inherent in a particular host state (Feldman v. Mexico, { 114,
132). An investor who fails to conduct such due diligence cannot invoke any
legitimate expectations (ECJ jurisprudence). Citing Maffezini v. Spain’, the
Respondent submits that BITs “are not insurance policies against bad business
judgments (Maffezini v. Spain, { 64).

The Respondent adds that regulatory change must be anticipated all the more in
regulatory environments where there is public and continuous scrutiny of the actions

"1 The Respondent cites, inter alia, PSEG v. Turkey, § 241 (“Legitimate expectations by definition
require a promise of the administration ...”); Metalpar S.A. and Buen Aire S.A. v. Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No ARB/03/5), Award, 6 June 2008 (hereinafter “Metalpar v. Argentina’), 4 186 (“There
was no bid, license, permit or contract of any kind between Argentina and Claimants”); Plama
Consortium Ltd v Republic of Bulgaria (ICSID Case No ARB/03/24), Award, 27 August 2008
(hereinafter, “Plama v. Bulgaria’), § 219 (“It does not appear that Bulgaria made any promises or other
representations to freeze its legislation on environmental law to the Claimant or at all”).

"22 Parkerings, § 333; Saluka v. Czech Republic, § 304 and 309; Mondev v. U.S., § 118; Waste
Management v. Mexico II, 4§ 98-99; Lauder v. Czech Republic, § 292.

"3 The Oscar Chinn Case, PClJ Series A/B No 63 (1934), p. 25.

"4 Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. The Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7), Award, 13
November 2000 (hereinafter, “Maffezini v. Spain’).

167

609.

610.

611.

612.

613.

of the state (e.g., Methanex v. United States, Part IV D, § 10, Glamis Gold v. United
States, Chemtura v. Canada), and in transition or otherwise unstable economies
(Olguin v. Paraguay, § 65(b),"*° Generation Ukraine v. Ukraine, § 20.37,"
Parkerings v. Lithuania, J{ 335-338).

The Respondent asserts that, even if an expectation is reasonable, it will not be
protected absent specific assurances to the investor. As stated by the tribunal in
Glamis Gold v. United States, the inquiry is not whether the expectations were
reasonable, but whether the State has made specific assurances to the investor in
order to induce the investor's investment (Glamis Gold v. United States, J§ 810-811).

Third, the Respondent argues that for a breach of legitimate expectations to violate
the fair and equitable treatment standard, the investor must have relied on that
expectation when it made the investment. The Respondent submits that “a legitimate
expectation is protected only if, and to the extent that, it was the predicate upon which
an investment was made. If an expectation, however legitimate, was not the predicate
of an investment, there is nothing inequitable in the state’s acting against it’ (R-
Rejoinder, 191). Specifically, “[w]here an investor claims that it was induced by a
particular regulatory measure, it must demonstrate that the existing regulatory
framework was the crucial factor in determining whether or not to invest in the host
state and that, absent that measure, the investor would not have made the
investment” (/d., relying on CMS v. Argentina, | 275).

In this case, the Respondent contends that it did not make a promise or assurance
that could have created a subjective expectation that the Facilities would not change
for 10 years (Section (ii) below); any expectation of regulatory stability would have
been unreasonable (Section (iii) below), and the Claimants have not proven that they
relied on a subjective expectation (Section (iv) below).

ii. Romania did not make a promise or assurance that could have
created a subjective expectation

The Respondent contends that the Claimants have not proven that Romania made a
promise or assurance that could have created a subjective expectation that the EGO
24 Facilities would remain unchanged for ten years. Romania never represented to
the Claimants, or to anyone else, that the Facilities would be available to them for the
entire 10 year period indicated in the PICs (R-CM, ff 113-117; R-Rejoinder, 94 169-
189; R-PHB, § 104-120).

As discussed in Section A above (umbrella clause), the Respondent denies that the
EGO 24 framework gave rise to an actionable vested right to the Facilities for any
particular period.'” The Respondent also denies that it made a promise or assurance

"5 Eudoro Armando Olguin v. Republic of Paraguay, (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/5), Award, 26 July
2001 (hereinafter “Olguin v. Paraguay’).

"6 Generation Ukraine, Inc. v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/9), Award, 16 September 2003
(hereinafter “Generation Ukraine v. Ukraine’).

'? The Respondent focused on this argument in the context of the Claimants’ umbrella clause claim,
but it is also relevant to its defense to the Claimants’ legitimate expectations case.

168

614.

615.

616.

that could constitute the basis for a legitimate expectation, through the EGO 24
framework or elsewhere.

First, the Respondent argues that the Claimants have not proven that the State made
a promise specifically to them. There is no evidence that any state organ made such
a promise or representation to the Claimants. Nor do the Claimants or their
witnesses claim to have received such an assurance from a State official. Mr. Ban’s
testimony (Tr., Day 9, 22-23 (Juratowitch/Ban)) only serves to highlight this: rather
than admit that no one ever told him that the Facilities would be stabilized for 10
years, he stated that no one had explicitly warned him that the Facilities might not last
that long. However, relying on Parkerings v. Lithuania, the Respondent argues that a
state has no duty to warn investors that the law might change.'* Even when a
legislative change is sudden and radical, an investor has no claim for a lack of
transparency or predictability unless there has been an “active inducement of a quasi-
contractual expectation” (Glamis Gold v. United States, § 799).

Similarly, the Respondent notes that Mr. Marcu never said he or anyone else ever
spoke to any of the Claimants about EGO 24. In fact, his testimony about the
NARD’s general efforts to promote investment in disfavored areas showed that those
efforts began after the Claimants’ supposed decision to invest in the S$tei-Nucet
region, rather than in Bucharest (Tr., Day 7, 49 (Marcu)). The two promotional
activities he mentioned in 2000 were not attended by the Claimants, so anything Mr.
Marcu may have said there is irrelevant. In any event, Mr. Marcu admitted that EGO
24 had been amended a number of times and that by the time of his presentations the
Competition Council had already issued Decision 244. On this basis, the Respondent
argues that it is difficult to see how Mr. Marcu could have said in his presentations
that every EGO 24 Facility was locked in for 10 years.

Second, the Respondent contends that the Claimants have not proven that, through
the EGO 24 framework or the issuance of the PICs, the State made a promise to
investors in general. As discussed above, the Respondent argues that general
regulation cannot generate a specific commitment of the kind needed to create a
legitimate expectation. The Respondent argues:

The Claimants contend that their legitimate expectation arose from
unilateral acts taken by Romania which were general in scope, rather than
specific assurances to the Claimants. Also, the Claimants’ case relies
extremely heavily on the PICs that the Corporate Claimants received in
2000 and 2002 — but they acknowledge that these were not individually
negotiated documents. They were standard administrative certifications of
eligibility that were received by thousands of beneficiaries of the EGO
24/1998 state aid scheme. The Claimants depend on the same
government actions that any of those beneficiaries could cite, such as the
terms of executive instruments implementing EGO 24/1998, which as we
have seen (Chapter Il) were necessarily subject to amendments to EGO
24/1998 itself. Overwhelmingly consistent authority suggests that it must
be an extremely rare case when such general legislative acts, and

"8 Parkerings v. Lithuania, § 345 (“The acts and omissions of the Municipality of Vilnius, in particular
any failure to advise or warn the claimant of likely or possible changes to Lithuanian law, may be
breaches of the Agreement but that does not mean they are inconsistent with the Treaty”).

169

617.

618.

619.

620.

129

implementing regulations, can generate legitimate expectations that those
acts will not be amended in future. (Rejoinder, § 170).

In any event, as explained in Section A with respect to the umbrella clause, the
Respondent argues that the relevant regulations did not promise that the Facilities
would remain unchanged for a period of 10 years.

The Respondent also contends that, if Romania had decided to bind itself to
regulatory stasis for 10 years, it would have done so in one clear instrument, through
an appropriate organ, and that instrument would contain clear terms with respect to
the promise of stability and its duration. However, the Claimants have not identified
which regulation would embody this promise. It cannot be EGO 24, because that
regulation lays out a general scheme and makes no reference to a 10 year time
period. The Respondent concedes that “there is no doubt that EGO 24 set forth a
generalized entitlement that could be claimed by qualifying investors” (Tr., Day 13,
85:7-10 (Petrochilos)). Article 4(c) of EGO 24 stated that a government decision
would determine the facilities “provided by law” that would be granted to investors
(which confirms that the source of the entitlement is EGO 24). But it contained no
promise as to the length of time the facilities would remain available, nor any
stabilization language (unlike its predecessor, Law 35, which did contain express
stabilization language). The Respondent further argues that, under Romanian law,
general laws such as EGO 24 do not confer individual vested rights (as was
confirmed by the Romanian Constitutional Court in Decision 130/2003).

The Respondent notes that the Claimants appear to rely on GD 194/1999 and the
PICs, which are lower ranking documents issued to implement and administer EGO
24 and Law 20/1999.'° However, relying on the expert opinion of Prof. Baias, it
argues that these were subsidiary normative or administrative instruments issued to
implement and administer EGO 24 and Law 20/1999, which could not modify or
contradict the authority of a government ordinance or a law, and as such could not
have granted an entitlement beyond what EGO 24 authorized. In particular, they
could not have imposed significant, long-term obligations on the state that the
authorizing statute did not impose. As a result of the hierarchy of Romanian laws, the
Government, implementing the law through the government decision, could not have
bound the legislature not to change the law. And once EGO 24 was modified, GD
194/1999 could not have had a broader field of application than the modified EGO 24.
Thus, no prudent investor in Romania could have understood that Annex 2 of GD
194/1999 as freezing the facilities there listed. For the same reason, because EGO
24 created no vested right but only a general entitlement, neither could GD 194/1999
or the PICs create such a vested right.

The Respondent also denies that the PICs could have been the source of an
investor's right to the EGO 24 incentives. The Respondent argues that the PICs were

The Respondent finds it notable that, considering that the nature of GD 194/1999 and the PICs has

become the cornerstone of their expropriation, umbrella clause and fair and equitable treatment cases,
Prof. Mihai (the Claimants’ own expert in Romanian law) made no mention of either instrument in his
expert report. Thus, the Respondent argues that the Claimants are left with no evidence to support an
allegation that, under Romanian law, they had a right to the Raw Materials Facility until 2009.

170

621.

622.

623.

624.

625.

merely administrative tools that certified the holders’ eligibility to obtain the Facilities;
the source of the right was EGO 24. Specifically, the Respondent argues that Article
5 of the GD 525/1999 published on 8 July 1999 (Exh. R-6),'*° which approved the
1999 Methodological Norms for the application of EGO 24, provided that the
“incentives provided by the law shall be granted pursuant to the certificate of the
investor in a disadvantaged region” (emphasis added). Such a certificate was to be
issued by the relevant Regional Development Agency, upon an investor’s request.
According to the Respondent, the language of Article 5 makes it explicit that the PICs
merely certified eligibility to “incentives provided by the law.” That law was EGO 24,
as approved by Law 20, neither of which contained any provision concerning their
duration nor any restriction on the government's ability to amend or repeal them.

The Respondent contends that this conclusion was reaffirmed by a subsequent
version of the Methodological Norms, adopted by GD 728/2001 (Exh. R-9). Article
4(1) of these Methodological Norms stated: “The facilities provided by the law are
granted based on the certificate of the investor in the disfavoured area” (emphasis
added). According to the Respondent, this demonstrates that the content of the
facilities was established by law (i.e., EGO 24) and that PICs were an administrative
tool attesting to eligibility to access facilities available under EGO 24.

In the Respondent's view, the language of the PICs themselves does not change this
conclusion. All the PICs stated was that the titleholder was the beneficiary of the
facilities granted under GD 194/1999, in accordance with the provisions of EGO 24
approved and amended by Law 20, and in accordance with the government decision
approving the methodological norms. Accordingly, all the PICs did was certify that
the titleholder was the beneficiary of the facilities granted by the law, whatever the law
determined that those facilities were at any point in time.

The Respondent further argues that the PICs did not list any individual facilities, let
alone purport to stabilize them for any particular period. The PICs only stated that
they were valid until a given date. That only meant that they certified eligibility to
whatever facilities were available under the law until that date.

The Respondent rejects the Claimants’ argument that the PICs were the source of the
right to the facilities because they had to present them every time that they wanted to
benefit from them. The PICs were needed so that administrators did not have to
evaluate eligibility on each occasion that a business applied for an exemption. This
conclusion is also supported by the fact that it was not necessary to obtain a new PIC
each time EGO 24 was amended; the PIC continued to certify eligibility to the
remaining facilities in EGO 24, as amended. This was confirmed by the Claimants’
expert, Prof. Mihai (Tr., Day 5, 215).

The Respondent also denies that the administrative process to qualify for a PIC was
equivalent to a contractual negotiation, or that the PICs were tantamount to contracts.
In the legal order in which that process occurred, the issuance of a PIC did not create

'8° The Respondent notes that GD 525/1999 replaced an earlier version of the Methodological Norms,
contained in GD 907 of 1998, published on 22 December 1998.

171

626.

627.

628.

629.

acontract. Nor did the obligation to submit an investment plan amount to a bilateral
deal; the investment plan was merely a requirement for the government to establish
that investors met the qualifying criteria.

Similarly, the requirement to employ a certain number of unemployed persons and to
have made certain investments were part of the criteria for eligibility; they do not
establish the existence of a promise that the facilities would be available for a certain
duration. The Respondent adds that it is misleading to suggest that these
requirements show that EGO 24 was intended to foster capital intensive industries,
because there was no threshold of magnitude for a qualifying investment, the
employment requirement was met by employing ten persons, five of which had to be
unemployed, and the eligible sectors covered a wide range of activities.

The Respondent also denies that EGO 24 created an obligation for investors to
maintain their investments for twice as long as the investor is a recipient of the
incentives. The Respondent alleges that it “has repeatedly stated that the obligation
does not exist and that (therefore) it has no intention of enforcing it” (R-Rejoinder, {
118). In any event, it argues that the alleged obligation is of only theoretical interest,
because the Claimants have no desire to move the operations from Bihor county, and
thus the State has never had the occasion to enforce the alleged obligation.
However, it notes that Prof. Mihai did not address this matter in his expert opinion,
and the Claimants have not cited any instances in which any investor has been
subjected to the supposed obligation, or any Romanian court or agency has
interpreted it in that fashion.

The Respondent further contends that neither the monitoring process to which the
Claimants were submitted, nor the alleged promotion of the EGO 24 regime by
government officials, could have given rise to a promise that the facilities would
remain unchanged for any period of time.

Finally, the Respondent contends that the Romanian Constitutional Court disagrees
with the Claimants’ theory: when the profit tax exemption available under Law 35 of
1991 was repealed, the Constitutional Court found that the repeal of that exemption
could not be construed as the termination of a contract, nor as an infringement of the
right to property or of the investor's right to recover debt (Decision 130/2003). The
Respondent notes that Prof. Mihai called this decision ultra vires at the hearing but
did not discuss it in his expert report, while Prof. Baias confirmed the decision’s
relevance for this case. Thus, Romania submits that the Tribunal should afford this
decision great weight and conclude that GD 194/1999, alone or together with the
PICs, did not constitute a contractual or other obligation under Romanian law.

Finally, the Respondent argues that not only did Romania not make any specific
commitments or representations that the Facilities would remain unchanged during
the 10 year period indicated in the PICs, but:

[T]he only indications that Romania offered were to the contrary. Six

months before EGO 24/1998 was adopted, Romania publicly committed to
harmonize its national law with the acquis, including competition law. This

172

was consistent with the binding provisions of the Europe Agreement, to
which Romania had been a party since 1995. Before any PICs were ever
issued to the Corporate Claimants, Romania adopted Law 143/1999 on
State aid, which expressly indicated that incentives like the Facilities
(defined as “Existing Aid”) could be subject to nullification or modification at
any time. Within months after Law 143/1999 came into force, the
responsible regulatory authority, the Competition Council, challenged the
Facilities’ validity in a public decision and, later, in the Romanian courts.
Again, this public challenge was underway and reported in the Romanian
media before European Drinks received a PIC in June 2000. The
Claimants concede that by July 2000, the government had already begun
restricting the Facilities, which in itself put all beneficiaries on notice that
further modifications could be forthcoming. When Starmill and Multipack
were established and obtained PICs in 2002, the European Commission
was actively pursuing calls for the abolition of Romania's State aid
programs, including specifically the EGO 24/1998 regime, and the
dismantling of the Facilities was continuing apace. The PICs clearly
reflected the evolution that was underway, and the lack of any undertaking
by Romania to stop it: the benefits to be granted under the Facilities
expressly depended in part upon the terms of EGO 24/1998 as amended.
(R-CM, § 116).

631. In any event, Romania's actions did not create a legitimate expectation that EGO 24
would not be amended, even substantially amended, before 2009 (Rejoinder, {4 173-
188). According to the Respondent:

173. The doctrine of legitimate expectations is objective: the question is
whether, in all the circumstances, the investor’s claimed expectation is
reasonable. To answer this, however, one first must know what the
supposed subjective expectation was. In their Reply, the Claimants say
they expected that “the Raw Materials Incentive would remain in place until
2009”. However, in their Statement of Claim, the Claimants had asserted
that it was the entire suite of EGO 24/1998 state aid that they legitimately
expected would remain in force until 2009.

174. Indeed, that is what they must show: there is no logical or evidentiary
basis for a supposed expectation that while all other Facilities were subject
to change or repeal, the one Facility that the Claimants say they actually
cared about had a special reason to remain unchanged. If the Claimants
expected one EGO 24/1998 facility to last until 2009, there is no reason
why they, and every other beneficiary, could not have expected all of the
existing EGO 24/1998 facilities to have remained unchanged. There is no
distinction between the Raw Materials Facility and the other Facilities, in
terms of the state’s conduct or statements with respect to each Facility,
that would create a different regime of legitimate expectations.

175. In sum, the position is this. The Claimants are challenging a general
legislative programme; if they are right, the repeal of any EGO 24/1998
facility was unfair and inequitable to every actual or prospective
beneficiary. The Claimants must show, therefore, that there was a
commitment or representation by Romania, binding on future Parliaments,
that EGO 24/1998 would not be amended at all.

(R-Rejoinder, § 173-175)

173

632.

633.

634.

635.

637.

iii. Any expectation of regulatory stability would have been unreasonable

In the Respondent's view, even if the Claimants had actually believed that the
Facilities would remain unchanged for ten years (which the Respondent argues has
not been proved), such an expectation would have been unreasonable, and thus
irrelevant to the assessment of the fairness of Romania’s conduct (R-CM, {{ 118-
126; R-Rejoinder, 44 176-189; R-PHB, {J 136-159).

As a preliminary matter, the Respondent contends that there is no reliable evidence
of Messrs. Micula’s reasoning. There are no documents, contemporaneous or
otherwise, explaining the Claimants’ reasoning at the time. The only evidence is the
testimony of Messrs. Micula, which is unreliable. In any event, this testimony does
not evidence reasonable reliance, but rather unreasonable expectations with no
legitimate basis and reckless business conduct.

The Respondent's main argument is that any expectation that the Facilities would
remain unchanged for ten years would have been unreasonable taking into
consideration the regulatory framework in which the Facilities were granted, both from
a Romanian law and an EU law perspective.

The Respondent argues that, as a general matter, the Miculas’ alleged trust in the
stability of Romanian law was misplaced. Ordinarily, an investor must take into
account that the legislation will change. There were no representations or
assurances that made this case an exception. Nor do the circumstances and context
invoked by the Claimants change this basic principle.

In the context of EU accession, the Respondent argues that this alleged trust in the
stability of Romanian law was even more misplaced. By 2000, it was public
knowledge that the target date for EU accession was 1 January 2007 (as evidenced
in Romania's first Position Paper on competition policy of August 2000, Exh. EC-1).
As noted above, the Respondent submits that regulatory change must be anticipated
all the more in regulatory environments where there is public and continuous scrutiny
of the actions of the state, and in transition or otherwise unstable economies. In this
case, the Claimants chose to invest in a transitional economy, and were fully aware of
the risks associated with such a choice. Indeed, Mr. loan Micula testified that he and
his brother were drawn to invest in Romania precisely because they sought to benefit
from the rapid changes taking place in the local economy and regulatory system
(Second WS of I. Micula, | 7; Tr. Jur., Day 2, 53-54; 183). Messrs. Micula began to
invest in Romania in 1991, and were fully aware of the risks of doing business in
Romania during the transition period.

The Respondent rejects the Claimants’ portrayal of themselves as ingénues who
were oblivious to what was happening around them. Businessmen with substantial
activity in Romania like the Miculas can have no excuse for their purported ignorance.
It was public knowledge that Romania was undergoing significant regulatory changes
to align itself with the acquis. Three reports shown during the hearing (Exh. HEC-6,
HEC-7 and HER-1) show that over 100 draft laws were initiated (R-PHB, § 144 and

174

638.

639.

640.

641.

642.

Annex A). The Respondent contends that “[t]he fact that EU-accession changes
would likely include Romania’s state aid schemes was a fact readily knowable by
anyone who cared to conduct even the most cursory research” (R-Rejoinder, {| 178).

With respect to the Facilities in particular, the Respondent contends that it would have
been impossible for a rational investor not to perceive the risk that they could change
or be withdrawn. Not only had they been changing since they were first enacted, but
their continuing viability was seriously in doubt. Even the most optimistic business
person would have known that the Facilities’ continued existence was the subject of
fierce political battle. Indeed, the Respondent submits that “[g]iven the political and
economic environment in 2000 and 2002, when the Claimants obtained their PICs, it
would have been impossible for a reasonable investor to expect any particular form of
state aid to remain in place and unchanged. The only way one could entertain such
an expectation is if the Competition Council or the European Commission had
specifically approved EGO 24/1998. Both institutions, however, expressed views that
were squarely contrary to any expectation of preservation of the Raw Materials
Facility” (R-Rejoinder, {| 179).

In particular, the Respondent argues that Decision 244/2000 of the RCC was a clear
warning signal that the Facilities were incompatible with Romania’s current
obligations under the Europe Agreement and future obligations under the EC Treaty.
Although the Claimants try to characterize this decision as referring only to the pig
farming industry, the Respondent asserts that it refers to the same Raw Materials
Incentive and declared the entire aid scheme illegal.

The Respondent argues that, if the Claimants had conducted any legal due diligence,
any competent lawyer would have advised them that EU accession would likely affect
the Facilities. However, it notes that although the Claimants have alleged that they
had a legal department of over 30 persons that was allegedly monitoring legislative
changes (Third WS of |. Micula, § 37), they have been unable to produce any
evidence of contemporaneous due diligence on the subject.

The Respondent contends that, instead, the Miculas recklessly ignored obvious signs
that the Facilities could change or be withdrawn. They paid no heed to the 2000
PWC Business Plan section on “Political Risk”, which highlighted the possibility of
legislative or regulatory change, or to all the PWC plans’ note that Romania was
“clamping down on incentives” even as early as 2000. Their attention and belief in
the press was selective: when the reports were unfavorable, they simply did not
believe them.

The Respondent also rejects the Claimants’ suggestions that a particular statement in
a government report, standing alone, could have led them to believe that the Facilities
would be maintained until or after accession. First, as the Claimants profess
ignorance of anything written or published about the future of the Facilities, any such
statement is irrelevant, because they did not rely on it. But even if the Claimants had
reviewed it, the Respondent contends that a diligent and prudent investor would not
have been misled by that statement, because a diligent investor would have known

175

643.

644.

645.

646.

647.

that each country had an independent monitoring authority (R-PHB, 4] 156; Tr., Day 6,
127-8 (Petersen/Smith)). Even in the absence of EU requirements, under Romanian
law it would have been unreasonable to expect that the Facilities would remain
unchanged for any particular period of time. Contrary to the Claimants’ allegations,
the content and nature of EGO 24 did not make the Claimants’ expectation of
regulatory stability reasonable. Nor does the content of the PICs or the manner in
which they were issued support that alleged expectation. As noted above, the
Respondent argues that the PICs were administrative tools certifying eligibility to
access facilities available under EGO 24. The source of the facilities was thus EGO
24, not the PICs. The PICs could not reasonably be read as anything more than
confirmation that their holder was eligible for the EGO 24 Facilities, whatever those
Facilities might happen to be at any particular time. EGO 24 had no stabilization
clause or other clause of similar effect (unlike Law 35 which, as amended by Law
57/1993, promised that the changes would only affect investors if they were more
favorable). The Claimants argue that there was no possibility of bargaining for a
stabilization clause, suggesting that they were not at fault for failing to obtain one, but
this cannot mean that the State is therefore impeded from amending its regulations.

In any event, the Respondent argues that the Claimants repeatedly contradict
themselves as to the nature and significance of the PICs. At some points the
Claimants assert that the PICs are the allegedly expropriated investment; at other
times they state that the PICs “enhance” an expectation that has already arisen, while
at others they are the instrument creating the expectation. The Claimants also state
at that the PICs are administrative documents not subject to a bargain and whose
terms were unilaterally imposed, while at other times describing them as akin to
contracts. The Respondent submits that ‘“{i]t is a claimant's burden to set out a
coherent claim and then to prove it” (R-Rejoinder, {| 183).

The Respondent rejects the Claimants’ remaining arguments with respect to the
reasonableness of their expectation.

First, the Respondent argues that the Claimants’ trust in the stability of the regulatory
framework, based on the alleged stability of previous incentive schemes, was
misplaced. Previous incentive regimes had been anything but stable. Indeed, the
Claimants’ trust seems to stem from the fact that they were not bothered by
amendments to previous legislation. However, the Respondent argues that
international law does not enshrine an investor’s supposed faith that new legislation
will always benefit him because he has had good fortune in the past.

Second, it was unreasonable for the Claimants to believe that if the Facilities were
repealed they would get special treatment from the government in the form of
grandfathering of benefits.

Third, the Respondent contends that the contemporaneous statements and actions

by the Government or its officials are not sufficient to make their alleged expectation
reasonable. In particular, the Respondent avers that:

176

The Government's Development Plan for 1998-2000 (Exh. C-567) does not
mention tax customs or customs duty exemptions; it merely places Romania’s
regional development strategy within the country’s general economic reform (the
major objective of which was EU accession).

Although Mr. Marcu, then President of the body charged with administering EGO
24/1998, would have presumably been knowledgeable about EGO 24/1998, he
had no authority to commit Parliament not to amend the law, and thus his
statements would not have made the Claimants’ alleged expectation reasonable.
In addition, his remarks were so informal that there is no contemporaneous
evidence of them. In the context of the public debates over the future of the
Facilities, no reasonable investor could have taken Mr. Marcu’s alleged oral
statements as authority committing the state to leave the Facilities in place.

Although Mr. Ban alleges that he attended meetings hosted by government
officials, he did not testify that those officials said specifically that all of the EGO
24/1998 facilities would remain unchanged, nor did he testify that he held any
bilateral discussions with government officials in this regard or received particular
assurances. In addition, there is no contemporaneous record of what any official
purportedly did say in Mr. Ban’s presence, whether at a meeting or otherwise.

The generic investment promotion materials cited by the Claimants (e.g. CD-
ROM prepared by ANEIR, a non-governmental trade organization, Exh. C-563)
do not highlight EGO 24/1998, nor do they make any representations as to its
legislative future.

The two media reports (Exh. C-568 and C-630) cited by the Claimants are not
attributable to the government, and it is not clear whether the reporters’ words are
direct quotations or narrative reporting.

The June 2002 government press release (Exh. C-489) was issued well after the
Claimants’ legitimate expectations are said to have arisen, their PICs obtained,
and their supposed 10-year plan put into motion. In any event, the press release
says the opposite of what the Claimants say it does:

With view to joining the European Union, we are concerned with making
the legislation of the disfavoured areas compatible as concerns the state
aid ... . The project for a norm to modify the Emergency Ordinance of the
Government No. 24/1998 regarding the system of the disfavoured areas

[1

The positive assessments of the incentive regime and their businesses by
Government officials were not assurances that the Facilities would stay in place.
The fact that the withdrawal of the Facilities could have negative social
consequences for the region is not a reason to believe they would not be
withdrawn. If there were policy reasons for adopting and maintaining the
Facilities, a reasonable investor would also have considered that there may be
other equally legitimate policies militating against them (e.g., pro-competition
policies).

177

648.

649.

651.

652.

654.

In any event, relying on Saluka v. Czech Republic, the Respondent contends that
undocumented and informal remarks by government officials cannot generate
legitimate expectations. Nor can road shows or general pronouncements create
legitimate expectations on their own: citing CMS v. Argentina, the Respondent argues
that, at best, such statements are confirmatory evidence of a legitimate expectation
created by other, authoritative state actions.

Finally, the Respondent submits that the reasonableness of the Claimants’ strategy
(making decisions based on how to best run ahead of competitors with respect to
customs duties) as the basis of a 20-year business plan is questionable.

In sum, considering all the circumstances, the Respondent argues that it would have
been unreasonable for the Claimants to believe that they were guaranteed anti-
competitive advantages until 2009. “In a legal system where everything was
changing, sometimes dramatically, they adopted a fragile business model that
depended on the stability of a customs policy and on state aid whose legality was
publicly challenged and reported to be the subject of a fierce political battle. That
things did not turn out as the Claimants would have wished does not give them a
claim under the [BIT]" (R-PHB, 159).

iv. The Claimants have not proven that they relied on a subjective
expectation that the facilities would not change for 10 years

Citing CMS v. Argentina, the Respondent argues that “[w]here a foreign investor
claims that it was induced by a particular regulatory measure, it must normally
demonstrate that the existing regulatory framework was the crucial factor in
determining whether or not to invest in the host state and that, absent that measure,
the investor would not have made the investment.” It adds that “a legitimate
expectation is protected only if, and to the extent that, it was the predicate upon which
an investment was made. If an expectation, however legitimate, was not the predicate
of an investment, there is nothing inequitable in the state’s acting against it” (R-
Rejoinder, 4 191).

The Respondent points out that the Claimants are not arguing that, had they known
that EGO 24 would change over time, they would not have invested in Romania.
Rather, they argue that they would have invested elsewhere in Romania, or in
different sectors (R-Rejoinder, {| 192).

Nonetheless, the premise of the Claimants’ case is that when they made the relevant
investments, they expected the facilities to remain unchanged at least until 2009.
Thus, the Respondent argues that they must prove that they had this subjective
expectation at the time of the investments. It is insufficient to establish that they
“relied on” the facilities that existed at the moment of any particular investment, in the
sense that they took advantage of the tax and duty exemptions that were then
available.

The Respondent contends that there is no evidence of that reliance. To the contrary,
the evidence available suggests that the Claimants’ business decisions had nothing

178

655.

656.

657.

658.

659.

660.

to do with the facilities or their duration. Indeed, the Respondent alleges that there is
no contemporaneous record of the Claimants’ supposed subjective belief that the
EGO 24 facilities would remain in place and unchanged (R-CM, {ff 128-135; R-
Rejoinder, ¥{ 177, 190-217; R-PHB, 4 121-135).

First, had the Claimants acted in reliance on any legitimate expectation, there would
have been abundant contemporaneous evidence of such reliance in the form of
business plans, possible press statements, legal advice about duration of the
facilities, and decisions of the Corporate Claimants’ Boards of Directors. Messrs.
Micula’s unsubstantiated and self-serving witness statements are not sufficient to
prove reliance.

In particular, there is not a single contemporaneous record of the alleged “10-year
business plan” to capitalize on the EGO 24 incentives. This is telling given that the
Claimants’ claim to have had many discussions with their management team and the
shareholders and several analyses of market demand and the customs implications
of different raw materials. The lack of contemporaneous evidence is also striking
given the level of detail of the Claimants’ alleged 10-year plan (supposedly consisting
of two phases, beginning with food production and moving to “core capital
expenditures”, including a brewery, a malt plant, a canning plant and a co-generation
plant).

The only “business plans” submitted by the Claimants do not prove reliance. None of
the “feasibility studies” for the financing of the proposed investments mentions EGO
24. The 3 PWC business plans for 2000, 2002 and 2003 do not say that the
incentives were stabilized for 10 years. To the contrary, they all noted that the
government was “clamping down... on tax incentives”) (Exh. R-215; R-204; R-214).
The Miculas’ explanation for these plans (that they were valuations prepared for a
potential sale of all or part of EFDG) does not make sense: on one hand, it
undermines the claim of a 10-year business plan, and on the other, if they truly were
prepared for potential sale, the valuations would have included the existence of a 10-
year guarantee of the facilities.

Indeed, according to the Respondent, the record suggests that the Miculas made
decisions on an ad hoc basis, identifying good opportunities for short-term profit (Tr.,
Day 3, 37; Day 4, 161-163, 174; Day 5, 10 (I. Micula); Day 4, 214 (V. Micula)).
Taking immediate advantage of whatever incentives happen to be available does not
constitute reliance on a guarantee that those incentives will remain in place and
unchanged for 10 years.

Significantly, the Respondent notes that Viorel Micula confirmed at the hearing that it
was not true that the EFDG made sense only if they could count on the benefits of the
Raw Materials Incentive for 10 years (Tr., Day 6, 279 (Petrochilos/V. Micula)).

Second, the Claimants’ decision to base their businesses in Romania was motivated

by their familiarity with their home country and their desire to profit from the rapid
evolution of Romania’s economic and regulatory system, not by the facilities (Tr. Jur.,

179

661.

662.

663.

Day 2, 23, 32-33, 53-55). Indeed, Messrs. Micula began to develop their food and
drinks business in Bihor County in 1991, long before EGO 24 was introduced, long
before any of the Corporate Claimants were established, and long before any of the
Corporate Claimants had obtained a PIC. When the Claimants invested in the 1990s,
they did not even rely on the then-available incentives. Even considering that under
Law 35/1991 they could have invested anywhere in Romania, from 1991 to 1998 they
chose Bihor County for other reasons.

In fact, had the Claimants really wanted to establish businesses in Bucharest, as they
claim they did, they could have taken advantage of the EGO 24 facilities there as
well: there were a half-dozen disfavored areas far closer to Bucharest and the port of
Constanta."*’ Whatever led the Miculas to install new lines in the same place where
they had always located their businesses, it was not EGO 24. If the cost savings of
moving closer to their consumers were so significant, the Miculas could have gone to
any of three disfavored areas within 90 km of Bucharest and enjoyed both those cost
savings and the facilities.

Third, the timing of the investments confirms that these investments were not made in
reliance of the facilities. The Claimants’ investments made prior to the enactment of
EGO 24 and the issuance of the PICs could not have been made in reliance on any
expectation allegedly generated by the PICs. Starmill and Multipack were only
incorporated in 2002, after Romania had begun to limit the facilities (a fact that the
Claimants acknowledge, see SoC, §§ 104-109). In addition, all three Corporate
Claimants increased their investment activity after 2003, by which time Romania had
already restricted or eliminated the Components Facility, the Machinery Facility, the
Meat-Related Facility, and the Subsidies. More significantly, the Claimants continued
to make substantial investments in Bihor County even after the revocation of the Raw
Materials Facility; indeed, the Claimants invested a total of €182 million after the Raw
Materials Facility was repealed (Second ER of D. Lessard, § 128; Tr. Day 8, 69
(Lessard)). Each of the Corporate Claimants allegedly invested millions of Euro in
2005, and continued to invest more in 2007, allegedly pursuing the regional
expansion of the EFDG. According to the Respondent, the Claimants continue to
expand their economic activity today, boasting of increased turnover in 2006, 2007
and 2008.

Finally, there is no evidence that the Claimants relied on the specific document that
they now claim incorporates a 10-year stabilization clause: GD 194. Indeed, the
Miculas themselves always refer to EGO 24, which does not specify a period (R-PHB,
q 134).

'S' The Respondent argues that the Miculas could have invested in the following regions that were
closer to Bucharest and Constanta than Bihor and had been granted disfavored region status for ten
years: Comanesti, Bacau County (Exh. C-412); Baraolt, Covasna County (see Exh. C-414); Filipesti,
Prahova County (Exh. C-410); Ceptura, Prahova County (Exh. C-411); Altan Tepe, Tulcea County
(Exh. C-415); and Motru-Rovinari, Gorj County (Exh. C-399); Zimnicea, Teleorman County (Exh. C-
416) (R-Rejoinder, fn. 345).

180

664. According to the Respondent, “[a]ll of this belies any suggestion that Messrs Micula
made investment decisions relying upon a belief that the facilities would remain
unchanged until 2009. Indeed, the investment expansions in 2005 and thereafter
cannot possibly assist the Claimants’ legitimate expectations arguments: they
espoused, rather than avoided, Romania’s regulatory framework” (R-CM, § 131).

c. The Tribunal’s analysis

i. The standard to determine whether a legitimate expectation has been
breached

665. As the Respondent puts it, the key issue before the Tribunal is “who bore the risk of
regulatory change: the state or the investors who benefitted from the existing
regulatory regime” (R-Rejoinder, { 9).

666. In the Tribunal’s view, the fair and equitable treatment standard does not give a right
to regulatory stability per se. The state has a right to regulate, and investors must
expect that the legislation will change, absent a stabilization clause or other specific
assurance giving rise to a legitimate expectation of stability. Thus, the Claimants’
“regulatory stability” argument must be analyzed in the context of the protection of an
investor's legitimate expectations.

667. Cases supporting the doctrine of legitimate expectations are numerous. As noted by
Dolzer and Schreuer, the protection of legitimate expectations is by now “firmly rooted
in arbitral practice.”'** Although the question of whether these legitimate expectations
were breached is a factual one, an overwhelming majority of cases supports the
contention that, where the investor has acquired rights, or where the state has acted
in such a way so as to generate a legitimate expectation in the investor and that
investor has relied on that expectation to make its investment, action by the state that
reverses or destroys those legitimate expectations will be in breach of the fair and
equitable treatment standard and thus give rise to compensation. '**

"82 Dolzer & Schreuer, p. 134.

"83 See, e.g., Saluka v. Czech Republic, J] 302 (The standard of “fair and equitable treatment” is
therefore closely tied to the notion of legitimate expectations which is the dominant element of that
standard. By virtue of the “fair and equitable treatment” standard included in Article 3.1 the Czech
Republic must therefore be regarded as having assumed an obligation to treat foreign investors so as
to avoid the frustration of investors’ legitimate and reasonable expectations”); Tecmed v. Mexico, J
154 (where the tribunal found that the obligation to provide “fair and equitable treatment” meant “to
provide to international investments treatment that does not affect the basic expectations that were
taken into account by the foreign investor to make the investment”); CME v. Czech Republic, § 611
(where the tribunal concluded that the Czech authority “breached its obligation of fair and equitable
treatment by evisceration of the arrangements in reliance upon with the foreign investor was induced
to invest’); Waste Management v. Mexico II, § 98 (“In applying [the ‘fair and equitable treatment]
standard it is relevant that the treatment is in breach of representations made by the host State which
were reasonably relied on by the claimant.”); International Thunderbird v. Mexico, § 147 (“[t]he concept
of ‘legitimate expectations’ relates, within the context of the NAFTA framework, to a situation where a
Contracting Party’s conduct creates reasonable and justifiable expectations on the part of an investor
(or investment) to act in reliance on said conduct, such that a failure by the NAFTA Party to honour
those expectations could cause the investor (or investment) to suffer damages”)

181

668. The Parties agree that, in order to establish a breach of the fair and equitable
treatment obligation based on an allegation that Romania undermined the Claimants’
legitimate expectations, the Claimants must establish that (a) Romania made a
promise or assurance, (b) the Claimants relied on that promise or assurance as a
matter of fact, and (c) such reliance (and expectation) was reasonable.'** This test is
consistent with the elements considered by other international tribunals. °°

669. In the Tribunal’s view, elements (a) and (c) are related. There must be a promise,
assurance or representation attributable to a competent organ or representative of the
state, which may be explicit or implicit. The crucial point is whether the state, through
statements or conduct, has contributed to the creation of a reasonable expectation, in
this case, a representation of regulatory stability. It is irrelevant whether the state in
fact wished to commit itself; it is sufficient that it acted in a manner that would
reasonably be understood to create such an appearance. The element of
reasonableness cannot be separated from the promise, assurance or representation,
in particular if the promise is not contained in a contract or is otherwise stated
explicitly. Whether a state has created a legitimate expectation in an investor is thus
a factual assessment which must be undertaken in consideration of all the
surrounding circumstances.

670. In this regard, the Tribunal subscribes to the view of the tribunal in Duke Energy v.
Ecuador (quoted in Bayindir v. Pakistan, § 179):

The stability of the legal and business environment is directly linked to the
investor's justified expectations. The Tribunal acknowledges that such
expectations are an important element of fair and equitable treatment. At
the same time, it is mindful of their limitations. To be protected, the
investor's expectations must be legitimate and reasonable at the time when
the investor makes the investment [Tecmed, § 154; Occidental, { 185;
LG&E, § 127]. The assessment of the reasonableness or legitimacy must
take into account all circumstances, including not only the facts
surrounding the investment, but also the political, socioeconomic, cultural
and historical conditions prevailing in the host State. In addition, such
expectations must arise from the conditions that the State offered the
investor and the latter must have relied upon them when deciding to invest
[SPP v. Egypt’, 1 82; LG&E, 9 127-130; Tecmed, ¥ 154].'°”

14 In their final briefs, both Parties refer to the reasonableness of the reliance, although Romania at
first had focused on the reasonableness of the expectation. In the Tribunal’s view, both must be
reasonable, but in particular the expectation itself.

"5 For example, the late Prof. Thomas Walde explained that a claim of legitimate expectations
required “an expectation of the investor to be caused by and attributed to the government, backed-up
by investment relying on such expectation, requiring the legitimacy of the expectation in terms of the
competency of the officials responsible for it and the procedure for issuing it and the reasonableness
of the investor in relying on the expectation” (International Thunderbird v. Mexico, Separate Opinion of
Thomas Walde, 1 December 2005, § 1). It must be noted that Prof. Walde did not dissent on the
standard, but rather on the application of that to the facts of the case).

"88 Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No.
ARB/84/3), Award, 20 May 1992 (hereinafter “SPP v. Egypt’).

'8” Duke Energy v. Ecuador, § 340. See also Generation Ukraine v. Ukraine, J 20.37 ("it is relevant to
consider the vicissitudes of the economy of the state that is host to the investment in determining the
investor's legitimate expectations").

182

671.

672.

673.

674.

This promise, assurance or representation may have been issued generally or
specifically, but it must have created a specific and reasonable expectation in the
investor. That is not to say that a subjective expectation will suffice; that subjective
expectation must also have been objectively reasonable. As stated by the Saluka
tribunal, “the scope of the Treaty’s protection of foreign investment against unfair and
inequitable treatment cannot exclusively be determined by foreign investors’
subjective motivations and considerations. Their expectations, in order for them to be
protected, must rise to the level of legitimacy and reasonableness in light of the
circumstances.”'%°

The Claimants must also have relied on that expectation when they made their
investments. However, it is not necessary for the entire investment to have been
predicated solely on such expectation. Businessmen do not invest on the basis of
one single consideration, no matter how important. In the Tribunal’s view, that
expectation must be a determining factor in an investor's decision to invest, or in the
manner or magnitude of its investments.

When the alleged legitimate expectation is one of regulatory stability, the
reasonableness of the expectation must take into account the underlying presumption
that, absent an assurance to the contrary, a state cannot be expected to freeze its
laws and regulations. As noted by the Saluka tribunal, “[nJo investor may reasonably
expect that the circumstances prevailing at the time the investment is made remain
totally unchanged. In order to determine whether frustration of the foreign investor's
expectations was justified and reasonable, the host state’s legitimate right
subsequently to regulate domestic matters in the public interest must be taken into
consideration as well”? Accordingly, for a state to violate the fair and equitable
treatment standard by changing the regulatory framework, the investor must have
received a legitimate assurance that the relevant laws and regulations would not be
changed in his or her respect. By legitimate assurance, the Tribunal refers to the
considerations identified in paragraph 669 above.

ii. Did Romania make a promise or assurance that gave rise to a
legitimate expectation?

In Section A on the umbrella clause, the Tribunal found that the EGO 24 framework,
in conjunction with the PICs, created a specific entitlement for the Claimants,
according to which they were entitled to receive the incentives until 1 April 2009. To
recall, the Tribunal found that EGO 24 created a general scheme of incentives
available to investors who fulfilled certain requirements, which were later “granted” to
qualifying investors through a specific administrative act (the PIC). In other words,
the legislation created a generalized entitlement that could be claimed by qualifying
investors, but this general entitlement was later crystallized with respect to qualifying
investors through the granting of the PICs, becoming from that moment on a specified
entitlement with respect to specified investors.

188 Saluka v. Czech Republic, § 304.
189 id, $305.

183

675.

676.

677.

678.

Although the majority of the Tribunal found that it had insufficient evidence as to
whether that entitlement gave rise to a legal obligation for purposes of the umbrella
clause, it stated that the same set of facts could give rise to a breach of the fair and
equitable treatment standard, if it found that the EGO 24 framework, in conjunction
with the PICs, provided the Claimants with the legitimate expectation that they would
be entitled to receive the incentives until 1 April 2009.

Another question remained open in the majority's analysis of the umbrella clause:
whether there was an element of stabilization in the EGO 24 framework (in other
words, whether PIC holders (including the Claimants) were entitled to receive the
incentives in the same form (or substantially the same form) as when they were first
given their PICs during the entire period, regardless of changes in the Romanian
legislation). Although the majority of the Tribunal was not able to answer that
question as a matter of Romanian law, it will do so now as a matter of fair and
equitable treatment.

After a review of all of the facts and circumstances surrounding the Claimants’
investment and Romania’s enactment of EGO 24 and related legislation, the Tribunal
(again by majority'*°) answers both questions in the affirmative. For the reasons set
out below, it finds that, even from an objective standpoint the legislative framework in
Romania between the years 1998-2002 (taking into consideration EU law, as it
applied to Romania at the time), together with the PICs, instilled in the Claimants a
legitimate expectation that they would be entitled to the EGO 24 incentives, in
substantially the same form as when they received their PICs, until 1 April 2009.
Specifically, the Tribunal finds that, through an interplay of the purpose behind the
EGO 24 regime, the legal norms, the PICs, and Romania's conduct, Romania made a
representation that created a legitimate expectation that the EGO 24 incentives would
be available substantially in the same form as they were initially offered.

First, the purpose behind the EGO 24 regime was to attract investment in the
disadvantaged areas, preferably long-term investment that created employment. In
the context in which this legislation was passed, it is evident that Romania was eager
to attract investment in order to boost its economy and work towards EU accession.
If Romania had spelled out that it retained the right to eliminate the incentives at its
discretion, despite the stated duration term for the incentives, Romania likely would
not have achieved its objective of attracting investment. Investors require legal
certainty, and Romania knew this full well, otherwise it would not have specified in
several different documents that the incentives would be available during the period in
which Stei-Nucet was declared a disadvantaged area. Indeed, it is evident from
Romania’s conduct that it intended for the regime to remain in place until 1 April 2009
and, absent the EU’s intervention, this is what would have happened, as discussed
further below.

"4° Arbitrator Abi-Saab does not concur with this view, as expressed in his separate opinion.

184

679.

681.

Second, the regime required a certain quid pro quo from the investors. As specified
in EGO 24 itself and in the Methodological Norms, investors had to fulfill certain
requirements to obtain their PIC, and undertook certain obligations:

a. Investors were required to create employment. The 2001 Methodological Norms
required 10 employees, 5 of which must have been previously unemployed
(Article 4(4) of the 2001 Methodological Norms).

b. Investors were required to create new investments. In this regard, Article 6(1) of
EGO 24 provided that the facilities would be granted to qualifying investors “for
their new investments in [the disfavoured] regions.” Only three of the Claimants’
companies benefitted from the EGO 24 incentives, but the Claimants have
argued (and Romania has not disputed) that for each new investment they had to
submit an investment plan and amend their PIC.

c. PIC holders had to undergo substantial monitoring to continue receiving the
incentives under their PICs (Articles 14 and 16 of the 1999 Methodological
Norms, Articles 6, 8, 14 and 15 of the 2001 Methodological Norms). Indeed, the
Claimants’ witnesses have described audits and monitoring procedures that
seem to go beyond what is provided in the Methodological Norms, but it is not
surprising that actual administrative procedures were more detailed than the
relevant norms set out. The Respondent has not challenged these descriptions.

d. Investors were required to maintain their investments in the disadvantaged area
for at least twice the time they benefitted from the incentives (Articles 7 and 9 of
EGO 24).

This last obligation was set out in Articles 7 and 9 of EGO 24, as follows:

Art. 7. - If an investment which is benefiting from the provisions of the
present Emergency Ordinance is voluntarily liquidated in a period of
time shorter than twice the period of time in which they enjoyed the
advantages granted through the Government Decision to create the
underprivileged area, the liquidator(s) is/are obligated first to pay the
funds related to the advantages granted in accordance with the
provisions of the present Emergency Ordinance, to the State Budget, the
State Social Insurance Budget and the Special Funds Budgets from the
funds resulting from the liquidation procedure.

Art. 9. - Businesses established in a disadvantaged area may voluntarily
cease to operate in the respective area, and those opening subsidiaries
as legal entities in such an area may close them or move the location of
their headquarters out of the disadvantaged area in a period shorter
than the one provided in Art. 7 only if they pay the funds they owe to
the State Budget, the State Social Insurance Budget and the Special
Funds Budgets related to the advantages granted in accordance with the
provisions of the present Emergency Ordinance. (Emphasis added)

Thus, Articles 7 and 9 of EGO 24 put investors on notice that, if they planned to
benefit from the incentives for the full period they were offered, they had to be
prepared to make long-term commitments and investments in the region, and make

185

682.

683.

684.

685.

686.

sure that their investments would continue to be profitable without the incentives
when the incentives were no longer available.

Third, the Respondent did not merely “trim down” the incentives, as the Respondent
contends. It is true that the incentives were amended several times, and that by 2002
the Machinery Incentive had been eliminated and the Raw Materials Incentive could
not apply to raw materials for the production, processing and preservation of meat.
(The Profit Tax Incentive had also been eliminated but grandfathered for existing PIC
holders). However, three of the original six incentives remained (four counting the
grandfathered Profit Tax Incentive). These three remaining incentives (other than the
Profit Tax Incentive) were eliminated by EGO 94/2004. Therefore, the incentives
were virtually eliminated rather than simply modified or amended.

Specifically, Chapter II, Section 3, Article VI(2) of EGO 94/2004 provided (Exh. R-94):

Art. VI. - Emergency Government Ordinance no. 24/1998 on Less-
Favoured Areas, republished in the Official Gazette of Romania, Part |,
Issue 545 of 8 November 1999, as subsequently amended and
supplemented, shall be amended and supplemented as follows:

1. After paragraph (1) of Article 14 insert a new paragraph, paragraph
(1') with the following content:

"(1') In calculating the intensity of State aid, eligible costs related to
investments made before 15 September 2004 shall be taken into
account."

2. Article 6(1)b)d) and e) shall be repealed within 90 days from the date
of entry into force of this Ordinance.”

As can be seen from the text of EGO 94/2004, the amendment eliminated the
incentives and added rules for the calculation of the intensity of state aid. In turn, it
left in place all remaining provisions of the regime, including its obligations, which is
however disputed. In turn, this stripped EGO 24 of most of its practical content and
reduced almost to nothing its advantages given that the purpose of the regime for
disadvantaged areas was to attract investment in exchange for certain tax benefits.
After EGO 94/2004, the only tax benefit that remained was the Profit Tax Incentive,
and only for existing PIC holders. This is not a “trimming down” of the incentives. It
was an outright termination.

The Tribunal thus finds that Romania’s representation that the EGO 24 incentives
would be available to PIC holders until 1 April 2009 meant that the Claimants would
continue to benefit from substantially the same incentives that were available when
the Claimants obtained their PIC.

As stated above, the Tribunal considers that, in determining whether the Claimants
had a legitimate expectation, it must take account of the accepted principle that
Romania is free to amend its laws and regulations absent an assurance to the
contrary. However, in this case the Tribunal finds that Romania’s conduct had
included an element of inducement that required Romania to stand by its statements
and its conduct. Romania launched a program directed to attract investors to the

186

687.

688.

690.

disfavored regions. To obtain that investment, it offered certain tax benefits for a
certain amount of time. In other words, Romania created the appearance of a ten-
year tax holiday for investors who decided to invest in the disadvantaged area (and
this appearance conformed to what Romania did in fact wish to enact). The Tribunal
has noted in particular that the former president of the NARD, Mr. Neculai Liviu
Marcu, testified that the incentives were to be understood to be granted for the full
duration of the disadvantaged area (WS of Mr. N. Marcu, 9 28, 32; Tr., Day 7, 15:2-9
(Marcu)). In the Tribunal’s view, Romania thereby made a representation that gave
rise to the PIC holders’ legitimate expectation that during this tax holiday they would
receive substantially the same benefits they were offered when they committed their
investments.

What is at stake is not Romania's regulatory sovereignty, which is not to be
questioned. However, it cannot be fair and equitable for a state to offer advantages
to investors with the purpose of attracting investment in an otherwise unattractive
region, require these investors to maintain their investments in that region for twice
the period they receive the investments, and then maintain the formal shell of the
regime but eviscerate it of all (or substantially all) content.

The record shows that Romania itself shared that belief. It did all it could to preserve
the incentives regime through its accession negotiations (see Section 4 below).
Whether or not it felt committed to existing PIC holders, it certainly wished to maintain
the regime for as long as possible and publicly stated so. Romania thereby created
the legitimate expectation that the regime would not be repealed or fundamentally
altered during the duration of each PIC.

Romanian officials also stated that investors would be compensated if the regime
were repealed or fundamentally altered. In particular, in his interview in May 2004
(Exh. C-652), Prime Minister Nastase indicated that during its negotiations with the
European Union, Romania would see if it was “able to obtain some transition periods”
for PIC holders, as well as “some compensation packages, established during direct
negotiations.” The Prime Minister also stated that the government would talk to the
investors, and “based on the conclusions of the negotiations of the Competition
Chapter, we will negotiate with those who initially obtained these fiscal incentives”
(Exh. C-652, pp. 7-9 of translation). These statements confirm that Romania itself
understood that the EGO 24 regime was to last for 10 years, and that in repealing it
prematurely Romania was undermining PIC holders’ legitimate expectations and
causing them to suffer damages.

iii. Was this expectation reasonable?
In broad terms, the Tribunal will analyze the reasonableness of the Claimants’
expectation from two perspectives: (i) the legitimacy of the expectation in the context

of Romania’s accession to the EU, and (ii) the legitimacy of the expectation under
Romanian law.

187

691.

692.

693.

694.

(a) Reasonableness in the context of Romania’s Accession to the EU

After a careful review of the record, the Tribunal has come to the conclusion that
between 1998 and late 2003 it was reasonable for the Claimants to believe that the
EGO 24 incentives were compatible with EU law. The Tribunal agrees with Prof.
Dashwood’s conclusion that “a strong case can be made that the Romanian
authorities were justified in treating the disputed aid as a valid regional operating aid,
up until the moment when they abolished it” (ER of A. Dashwood { 55).

There seems to be no dispute that, throughout the period during which the Claimants
received the EGO 24 incentives (that is, from receipt of European Food’s TIC in 1999
until the incentives were abolished in February 2005), the EGO 24 scheme was
subject to the state aid regime of the Europe Agreement (which was the operative
pre-accession treaty; ER of A. Dashwood, {[ 31). As explained by Prof. Dashwood
(with no convincing rebuttal by Romania’s experts), under the Europe Agreement
regime, the substantive rules to assess the compatibility of the EGO 24 incentives
with the common market were the substantive rules of the EU state aid regime
contained in Article 87 of the EC Treaty (through the operation of Article 64(2) of the
Europe Agreement), as amplified by case law and Commission practice, and as
subsequently clarified by the Implementing Rules that were annexed to Decision
4/2000 of the Romania-EU Association Committee (Exh. R-65; C-579).

Article 64 of the Europe Agreement provides in relevant part:

1. The following are incompatible with the proper functioning of this
Agreement, in so far as they may affect trade between the Community
and Romania: [...] (iii) any public aid which distorts or threatens to
distort competition by favouring certain undertakings or the production
of certain goods.

2. Any practices contrary to this Article shall be assessed on the basis of
criteria arising from the application of the rules of Articles 85, 86, and
92 of the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community.

3. The Association Council shall, within three years of the entry into force
of the Agreement, adopt the necessary rules for the implementation of
paragraphes 1 and 2.

4. (a) For the purposes of applying the provisions of paragraph 1, point
(ili), the Parties recognize that during the first five years after the entry
into force of the Agreement, any public aid granted by Romania shall
be assessed taking into account the fact that Romania shall be
regarded as an area identical to those areas of the Community
described in Article 92(3)(a) of the Treaty establishing the European
Economic Community. The Association Council shall, taking into
account the economic situation of Romania, decide whether that
period should be extended by further periods of five years. [...]

Article 64 of the Europe Agreement incorporated Article 87 of the EC Treaty, which is
the primary source of the EU’s substantive rules on state aid. Article 87(1) of the EC
Treaty contains the general principle that “any aid granted by a Member State or
through state resources in any form whatsoever which distorts or threatens to distort
competition by favouring certain undertakings or the production of certain goods shall,

188

695.

696.

697.

698.

in so far as it affects trade between Member States, be incompatible with the common
market.” However, Article 87(3)(a) (which replaced Article 92(3)(a) of the Treaty
establishing the European Economic Community) expressly permitted “aid to promote
the economic development of areas where the standard of living is abnormally low or
where there is serious underemployment.”

In turn, Art. 64(4)(a) of the Europe Agreement expressly stated that all of Romania
would be considered an underdeveloped area for purposes of Article 87(3)(a) of the
EC Treaty for the first five years after the entry into force of the Europe Agreement:

For the purposes of applying the provisions of paragraph 1, point (iii), the
Parties recognize that during the first five years after the entry into force of
the Agreement, any public aid granted by Romania shall be assessed
taking into account the fact that Romania shall be regarded as an area
identical to those areas of the Community described in Article 92(3)(a) of
the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community. The
Association Council shall, taking into account the economic situation of
Romania, decide whether that period should be extended by further
periods of five years. [...] (Art. 64(4)(a) of the Europe Agreement).

Article 64(3) of the Europe Agreement provided that “[t]he Association Council shall,
within three years of the entry into force of the Agreement, adopt the necessary rules
for the implementation of paragraphes 1 and 2.” With some delay, on 10 April 2001,
the EU-Romania Association Council adopted Decision 4/2000 which contained these
“Implementing Rules”, Exh. R-65; C-579), which prescribed the manner in which
Article 64 of the Europe Agreement would be implemented by Romania. '*'

Article 2(1) of the Implementing Rules provided that “[t]he assessment of compatibility
of individual aid awards and programmes with the Europe Agreement, as provided for
in Article 1 of these Rules, shall be made on the basis of the criteria arising from the
application of the rules of Article 87 of the Treaty establishing the European
Community, including the present and future secondary legislation, frameworks,
guidelines and other relevant administrative acts in force in the Community, as well as
the case law of the Court of First Instance and the Court of Justice of the European
Communities and any decision taken by the Association Council pursuant to Article
4(3).”

The criteria applied by the European Commission when examining the Article 87(3)(a)
exception were set down in the 1998 Guidelines on Regional Aid (first published in
1998 (Exh. RJ-9) and since replaced by a revised version for the years 2007-2013)
(Exh. C-298).

'* article 4(1) of the Implementing Rules also extended the time period in which Romania would be
considered an underdeveloped area pursuant to Article 64(4)(a) of the Europe Agreement:

In accordance with and within the limits of Article 64(4)(a) of the Europe
Agreement, Romania shall be regarded as an area identical to those areas
of the Community referred to in Article 87(3)(a) of the Treaty establishing
the European Community. (Article 4(1) of Decision 4/2000).

189

699.

701.

702.

The Guidelines on Regional Aid distinguished between various types of state aid, and
described the circumstances under which certain state aid could be granted, including
where the economic situation was extremely unfavorable in relation to the Community
as a whole. In such cases, the aid could be granted as tax exemptions. In addition,
although operating aid aimed at reducing a firm’s current expenses is normally
prohibited, the Guidelines recognize that, exceptionally, such aid may be granted in
regions eligible under the derogation in Article 87(3)(a), subject to certain conditions.
Specifically, the 1998 EU Guidelines on Regional Aid (RJ-9) provided:

Operating aid

4.15. Regional aid aimed at reducing a firm's current expenses (operating
aid) is normally prohibited. Exceptionally, however, such aid may be
granted in regions eligible under the derogation in Article 92(3)(a)
provided that (i) it is justified in terms of its contribution to regional
development and its nature and (ii) its level is proportional to the
handicaps it seeks to alleviate (36). It is for the Member State to
demonstrate the existence of any handicaps and gauge their
importance.

4.16. In the outermost regions qualifying for exemption under Article
92(3)(a) and (c), and in the regions of low population density
qualifying either for exemption under Article 92(3)(a) or under
92(3)(c) on the basis of the population density test referred to at
point 3.10.4, aid intended partly to offset additional transport costs
(37) may be authorised under special conditions (38). It is up to the
Member State to prove that such additional costs exist and to
determine their amount.

4.17. With the exception of the cases mentioned in point 4.16, operating
aid must be both limited in time and progressively reduced. In
addition, operating aid intended to promote exports (39) between
Member States is ruled out.

The Tribunal agrees with Prof. Dashwood that the EGO 24 incentives appeared to
meet most of the criteria for regional operating aid set forth in the 1998 Guidelines
(ER of A. Dashwood, {| 52-53). Specifically:

a. EGO 24/1998 was created to contribute to regional development, and there is
evidence that it did in fact contribute to such development.

b. The level of disputed aid appears to have been proportional to the handicaps of
the disadvantaged areas that the aid was designed to alleviate, and the
Romanian government could have been able to demonstrate this.

The only unsatisfied criterion would be its “non-degressive character” (i.e., the fact
that the EGO 24 incentives were not meant to be progressive, as mandated by Article
4.17 of the 1998 Guidelines). However, given the level of unemployment in the Stei-
Nucet-Draganesti area Prof. Dashwood did not consider it a determinative factor (ER
of A. Dashwood, { 54).

Neither the Respondent nor its experts contested Prof. Dashwood’s conclusions
persuasively, and the Tribunal finds Prof. Dashwood’s assessment reasonable.

190

704.

705.

706.

As a result, the Tribunal concludes that the EGO 24 incentives could have reasonably
been thought (both by the Romanian government and the Claimants) to be valid
regional operating aid under EU law. Indeed, Romania itself appears to have
believed that, at the time EGO 24 was enacted, the incentives were compatible with
EU state aid requirements. In its Counter-Memorial, Romania stated:

Especially given Romania's status as an ‘underdeveloped area’ within the
meaning of Article 87(3)(a) of the EC Treaty, the government could
reasonably conclude at the time that the EGO 24/1998 regime was not
incompatible with the Europe Agreement’s provisions. Furthermore, given
the economic dislocation that existed at the time, measures to ameliorate
conditions in the disfavoured regions were necessary. Romania was not
alone among EU candidate States in making the policy choice to
implement new economic-assistance measures based upon such an
assessment of the legal position. For example, Poland passed similar
legislation authorizing State aid for underdeveloped regions in 1994, while
it was a candidate for EU admission (R-CM, § 29).

Similarly, in its comments to the Commission’s Written Submission, Romania
acknowledged that:

The facilities in EGO 24/1998 appeared to be regional aid for economically
disadvantaged areas. Thus, EGO 24/1998 was reasonably considered as
falling within the exceptions in Article 87(3)(a) and 87(3)(c) EC Treaty.
(Respondent's Comments to the Commission’s Written Submission, 16
Nov. 2009, § 2).

Romania’s expert, Prof. Rudolf Streinz confirms the reasonableness of that position:

In my opinion, in 1998 and particularly in the absence of effective State aid
control and support from the European Commission, Romania could, in the
exercise of its discretion, reasonably have considered that the EGO
24/1998 regime fell under one of the State aid exceptions of the EC Treaty
[...]. For example, Romania, having been designated in its entirety in Article
64(4) of the Europe Agreement as underdeveloped within the meaning of
Article 87(3)(a) of the EC Treaty, could have considered itself permitted to
enact EGO 24/1998. EGO 24/1998 provided for State aid to foster
economic development of areas — i.e. the whole of Romania — where the
standard of living was abnormally low or where there was serious
underemployment. Alternatively, Romania might have considered that the
State aid granted pursuant to EGO 24/1998 was exempt under Article
87(3)(c), because the regime amounted to assistance of regions which are
disadvantaged compared to the national average, based on national
criteria (First ER of R. Streinz, § 19).

As expressly acknowledged by Romania, many government officials maintained this
“sincere belief” until after the Competition Council issued Decision 244 in 2000, and
the Respondent’s expert Mr. Petersen acknowledged that “Romanian politicians and
Officials who thought that EGO 24 was legal were incorrect, but they were not
unreasonable, and they acted in good faith” (R-PHB, § 174, Tr., Day 6, 111, 178).
The Tribunal does not believe that investors should be held to a higher standard than
the government. Investors are entitled to believe that the government is acting
legally.

191

707.

708.

709.

710.

711.

The question is when should the Claimants have realized that the incentives were (or
became) vulnerable because they contravened EU law and, as a consequence, at
what time they might be phased out. As late as June 2002, Romania’s “National
Programme for Accession of Romania to the European Union” (Exh. HEC-7) stated
that “[t]he provisions of the normative acts on facilities granted for ‘D areas’ will be
maintained till the moment of Romania’s accession to the European Union” (p. 148).
Mr. Orban testified that this was Romania’s intention, and that it “battled a lot with the
Commission to get this” (Tr., Day 8, 219-220 (Orban)). Indeed, when asked when it
should have been clear to the public that the facilities would not survive, Mr. Orban
testified that it could have been as late as April/May 2004 (Tr., Day 8, 12-14 (Orban)).

(b) | Reasonableness under Romanian law

Determining whether the Claimants’ expectations were reasonable under Romanian
law is less straightforward. On the one hand, the Claimants argue that the purpose of
EGO 24 and its enacting legislation, as well as the issuance and content of the PICs,
made their expectations reasonable. Romania argues that, to the contrary, nothing in
the regulation and the PICs themselves assured the Claimants that the incentives
would remain in place for 10 years. However, the Tribunal has already found that the
content of the legislation and the PICs themselves gave rise to a legitimate
expectation that the incentives would last until 1 April 2009.

On the other hand, Romania argues that the regulatory framework as it existed at the
time of the Claimants’ alleged investment in reliance on Romania’s assurances (from
2000 to 2004, if the issuance of European Food’s PIC is taken as starting point)
contemplated the possibility that the incentives could be subject to repeal. Romania
argues that the incentives could have been revoked as a matter of general
administrative law, or because in 1999, prior to the issuance of the PICs, Romania
passed the Competition Law, which allowed the Competition Council to determine
whether any existing aid was compatible with the Europe Agreement and, if it was not
compatible, to recommend cancellation of such aid and request its repayment
(Articles 12-13 of the Competition Law). In Romania’s submission, the fact that
Romanian legislation allowed the Competition Council to recommend the revocation
of the incentives undermines the reasonableness of any expectation that these
incentives would remain unchanged for 10 years. Indeed, Romania argues that this
is exactly what the Competition Council did with Decision 244/2000.

In the Tribunal’s view, two distinct but related issues must be analyzed: (i) the
possibility that the incentives would be found incompatible with Romanian law, and (ii)
Romania’s interaction with the Competition Council with respect to Decision
244/2000.

With respect to the first point, the Respondent argues that, under the existing
regulatory framework, the incentives were inherently subject to the Competition
Council’s review and possible cancellation. Thus, the fact that the fate of all existing
legal aid could depend on a decision by the Competition Council weakens any
reasonable belief that any incentives would remain unchanged for any particular

192

712.

713.

714.

715.

716.

period of time. In other words, the Claimants should have known, when they obtained
the PICs, that the incentives could be at any time declared by the Competition
Council to be incompatible with Romanian law.

This proposition cannot be sustained. Any piece of legislation must comply with
higher ranking norms. That does not change the fact that enacted rules are
supposed to be valid and enforceable for so long as they have not been repealed or
annulled. Law-abiding actors may not violate enacted laws or regulations because
they question their validity or legality: they may know that such validity or legality is
debatable, and seek appropriate relief in court or otherwise, but, in the meantime,
they must obey the law. Romania has not argued that the incentives were illegal or
that there were any doubts as to their legality. In other words, the possibility of
cancellation of the incentives by order of the Competition Council is in itself not a valid
argument.

With respect to the second point, on 15 May 2000, the Competition Council issued
Decision 244/2000, which recommended that the Raw Materials Incentive be
abolished. However, the Romanian Government (with the approval of the judiciary)
overruled this decision, and thus confirmed the incentives’ legality under Romanian
law.

The Claimants’ expectation that the incentives were compatible with Romanian law
was particularly reasonable given the sequence of events with respect to the process
surrounding Decision 244 and the granting of the Claimants’ PICs. Decision 244 was
rendered on 15 May 2000, European Food’s PIC was issued on 1 June 2000, and
EGO 75/2000 (which amended EGO 24 but maintained the Raw Materials Incentive)
was enacted on 16 June 2000. The Competition Council brought a law suit against
the Government, which the High Court of Cassation dismissed on admissibility
grounds on 19 February 2002. Multipack and Starmill’s PICs were issued on 17 May
2002.

In the Tribunal’s view, given that the Government, in this case through Parliament, did
not follow the Competition Council’s recommendation to abolish the incentives, and
decided instead to confirm them via new legislation (EGO 75/2000), and immediately
afterwards issued the Claimants PICs confirming their eligibility for the questioned
incentives, it was reasonable for the Claimants to believe that the Government
considered that such incentives were legitimate and intended to maintain them for the
stated period. The fact that the Competition Council sought to enforce Decision 244
in Romanian courts and that its action was dismissed by the original and appellate
courts, further enhances the notion that the Government (at its legislative and judicial
level) endorsed the legitimacy of the incentives. In other words, the Government
implicitly confirmed the incentives’ legality under Romanian law.

The fact that the court action was dismissed on admissibility grounds does not
change this conclusion. Indeed, by determining that the Competition Council did not
have the power to challenge legislative acts, the courts merely confirmed that, as a
matter of Romanian law, the existence and legitimacy of the incentives depended on

193

717.

718.

719.

Parliament, not on the Competition Council. And as a matter of Romanian law, the
Claimants were entitled to rely on the assumption that the incentives were legal. The
fact that Starmill and Multipack received their PICs after the challenge was dismissed
further confirms that it was reasonable for the Claimants to believe that the incentives
were legitimate.

In conclusion, the Tribunal finds that it was reasonable for the Claimants to believe
that the incentives were legal under Romanian law and would be maintained for the
full 10 year period.

iv. Did the Claimants in fact rely on that expectation?

There is no dispute that the Claimants invested in Bihor County, and that they made
use of the incentives. However, it is also evident from the record that their initial
investments were not made in reliance on the EGO 24 incentives, because they
began to invest in the early 90s, before these incentives were created. Indeed, the
Claimants concede that their initial investments were made in reliance on previous
incentive regimes (R-Reply, {| 62-124). The Claimants have also stated that their
expectation that the Raw Materials Incentive would be available for 10 years arose
when the PICs (or TIC, in the case of European Food) were granted (Tr., Day 12, 91
(Reed)). In the Tribunal’s view, a legitimate expectation could only have been
crystallized at the time when the Corporate Claimants were granted their permanent
investor certificates, not temporary certificates. A temporary certificate is, by its own
nature, granted only for a limited time and does not necessarily guarantee that a
permanent certificate will be issued. A TIC can give rise to an expectation that its
beneficiary is temporarily entitled to some benefits but not that the permanent
certificate will actually be issued as the beneficiary will have to prove that, in the
meantime, it has satisfied some conditions. Thus, the only investments that could
have been made in reliance on that expectation are those made after European Food
obtained its PIC in June 2000, and after Starmill and Multipack obtained theirs in May
2002. Whether the Claimants relied on previous incentive programs neither proves
their reliance on the EGO 24 incentives nor strengthens their reliance argument.

In addition, there is evidence that, further to the EGO 24 incentives, there were other
reasons why the Miculas invested in Bihor County. The Tribunal recalls that,
according to Mr. Viorel Micula's cross-examination, there were other reasons for the
Claimants’ investment in Bihor apart from the availability of the Raw Materials Facility
for the planned 10 year period until 2009. Mr. Viorel Micula testified as follows:

Q. Mr Micula, let’s not beat around the bush. | will read out a proposition
to you and you tell me if you agree. Your investment in Bihor in the
European Food and Drinks Group only made economic sense if you
could count on the benefits of the raw materials facility for the planned
ten-year period until 2009, is that correct? Is it true to say that your
investment makes economic sense only if you have the raw materials
facility?

A. It is wrong, Mr Petrochilos. | think no one, either myself or my brother

who knew about this leverage had made such a mistake. That would
have been a big mistake. Maybe you made that mistake.

194

720.

721.

722.

723.

724.

(Tr., Day 6, 279 (Petrochilos/V. Micula)).

In addition, the Micula brothers were born in Bihor County and loan Micula conceded
that that there was “a very emotional drive” behind their business initiative (Tr. Jur.,
Day 2, 23). However, he also stated that “it was not just a question of us being born
there, it was also a question of long-standing facilities and exemptions that have been
there for a very long time and many of them are still there” (Tr. Jur., Day 2, 54).

Taking all of this into consideration, it is clear that (i) not all of the Claimants’
investments were predicated on the EGO 24 incentives; and (ii) even when the
Claimants’ took the EGO 24 incentives into account in making investment decisions,
other factors also influenced the Claimants’ decisions. However, the Tribunal is
satisfied that a significant part of the Claimants’ investments (from 2000 to 2004)
were made in reliance on the incentives. In particular, the Tribunal is satisfied that
the existence of the incentives was one of the reasons for the scale and manner of
those investments. It is evident from the record that the Claimants built a large and
complex platform for the production of food and drink products, and that its profits
depended largely on the reduction of their operating costs resulting from the Raw
Materials Incentive (Third WS of I. Micula, {| 44-67, 83-84; Third WS of V. Micula,
33, 51-52; WS of M. Ban § 38; WS of M. Halbac, 9 12-61; First ER of D. Lessard,
32-42; ER of R. Boulton, Sections 4 and 5; ER of C. Osborne, §{ 1.11-1.15; Section
4; Exh. C-385, C-987). Accordingly, the Tribunal is satisfied that the Claimants in fact
relied on the incentives to build and develop their investment in the manner in which it
stood at the date of the revocation of those incentives.

It goes without saying that the BIT only protects investments made in reliance on
legitimate expectations (see paragraphs 667 to 673 above). It does not protect
investments made after such an expectation has been destroyed. The Tribunal has
found that the Claimants’ expectations arose in June 2000, with the granting of
European Food’s PIC. This expectation was shattered once it became clear that
Romania would revoke the incentives without compensation, which, as discussed
further below, occurred on 31 August 2004, with the issuance of GO 94/2004.
Although Prime Minister Nastase publicly announced the termination of the regime for
the first time in January 2004, it was still uncertain at that time whether PIC holders
would be compensated (see Section 4 below). Accordingly, the BIT can only protect
the Claimants’ investments made between 1 June 2000 and 31 August 2004.

The Tribunal does not ignore the fact that the Respondent has challenged the
credibility and reliability of the Claimants’ witnesses, in particular with respect to the
question of whether, in making their investment decisions, the Claimants’ relied on an
expectation that the incentives would remain in place for 10 years, and with respect to
their damages case.

The Tribunal will address the Respondent's arguments with respect to damages in
due course. With respect to Claimants’ legitimate expectations, however, the
Tribunal is not persuaded that the testimony of the Claimants and their witnesses is
unreliable. The key issue before the Tribunal is whether and to what extent the

195

725.

726.

727.

728.

729.

Claimants relied on the EGO 24 incentives to make and develop their investments,
and if that reliance was reasonable. It is evident from the documentary record that
the Claimants did in fact rely on the EGO 24 regime to expand their business (see
paragraph 721 above). The Tribunal has also found that the Claimants’ expectation
that the EGO 24 regime would be in place for 10 years was objectively reasonable. It
was also reasonable to rely, at least until 31 August 2004, on the survival of that
regime.

For the reasons set out above, the majority of the Tribunal finds that Romania
violated the Claimants’ legitimate expectations with respect to the availability of the
EGO 24 incentives.

Although the majority of the Tribunal has found a breach of legitimate expectations, in
order to provide a complete ruling on Romania’s compliance with its obligation to
provide fair and equitable treatment, the Tribunal will address the Parties’ remaining
arguments with respect to this standard. The Tribunal will next address Romania's
defense that it acted reasonably (Section 4 below). It will then address whether
Romania acted in bad faith (Section 5 below). Finally, it will address the Claimants’
argument that Romania failed to act transparently and consistently (Section 6 below).

Did Romania act unreasonably?

The Respondent's main defense with respect to the Claimants’ fair and equitable
treatment and unreasonableness claims is that it acted reasonably when it terminated
the EGO 24 incentives regime. It thus argues that it did not engage in what it has
called “substantively improper conduct”, and it should not be made to compensate for
reasonable general regulation. Although the Respondent has acknowledged that the
Tribunal may find a breach of the BIT if it finds that Romania promised that the
incentives would remain unchanged for ten years and the Claimants reasonably relied
on that expectation (see paragraph 500 above, Tr., Day 13, 19-43 (King)), the
Respondent devoted considerable time and effort to establishing that it acted
reasonably.

The Claimants have not addressed this defense directly in the context of their fair and
equitable treatment claim, other than to argue that Romania’s subjective motivation is
irrelevant to determine if it has breached the fair and equitable treatment standard.
However, in the context of their claim for “impairment by unreasonable or
discriminatory measures” under the second section of Article 2(3) of the BIT (the
“impairment clause”), the Claimants also argue that Romania acted unreasonably
when it repealed the EGO 24 incentives. When discussing unreasonableness in the
context of fair and equitable treatment, the Tribunal will thus refer to the arguments
made by the Claimants on that issue in the context of the impairment clause.

a. The Claimants’ position

The Claimants argue that Romania acted unreasonably by:

196

730.

731.

a. Actively promoting and extending the EGO 24 regime and encouraging investors
to participate in that scheme (at least until 2003), despite the fact that behind
closed doors it was negotiating for the scheme’s early termination.

b. Revoking the incentives regime prematurely without being required to do so by
any competent legal authority, without attempting to negotiate with the EU or the
Claimants to mitigate the damages caused by the revocation, and in contradiction
of its repeated statements over the years that the regime was legal and satisfied
EU requirements.

c. Revoking the benefits of the incentives regime while maintaining the investors’
obligations under that regime (in particular the obligation to maintain the
investments for 20 years). In the Claimants’ view, “a government’s decision
unilaterally to continue to reap the full benefits of a deal with investors while
denying those investors the originally-promised benefits is a textbook example of
unreasonableness” (C-Reply, {| 459-460; C-PHB, 9 65-66).

In terms of the relevant case authority, the Claimants argue that Romania deprived
the Claimants of their legitimate rights under circumstances that are contrary to the
rule of law (relying on the ICJ’s decision in ELS/™). They further contend that there
was no factual justification for the withdrawal of the tax exemptions and incentives
(Lauder v. Czech Republic). \In addition, they argue that the reversal of Romania's
position upon which the Claimants had relied was not merely surprising but
outrageous (Pope & Talbot'**). Finally, they argue that the measures affecting the
Claimants’ position were not based on rational decision-making or any consideration
of the effects on foreign investments, and did not balance the interests of the state
with the burden imposed on Claimants’ investments (LG&E).

b. The Respondent’s position

The Respondent submits that the central question in this case is whether Romania
acted reasonably in amending EGO 24 in August 2004. The Respondent argues that
where an investor challenges general legislation that modifies existing general
legislation, the question for an international tribunal is whether that legislation is
grounded in reason (rather than being arbitrary) and enacted in pursuit of legitimate
objectives (rather than for illicit purposes, such as discrimination). The Claimants
have not argued that Romania acted in a discriminatory fashion; the question is thus
whether Romania acted unreasonably. The Respondent contends that, to show that
Romania acted unreasonably, the test is to determine whether, in light of all of the
surrounding circumstances, what Romania did was reasonably connected to a
rational policy (R-CM, {ff 167-174; R-Rejoinder, {§ 108-117; R-PHB, 9 33-98; Tr.,
Day 13, 45-50 (King).

"2 Case Concerning Elettronica Sicula SpA (ELSI) (United States of America v Italy), 20 July 1989
(hereinafter “ELS/’), [1989] ICJ Reports 15.

“3 Pope & Tablot Inc v. The Government of Canada, UNCITRAL, Award in Respect of Darnages, 31
May 2002, 41 ILM 1347 (2002), ¢ 64.

197

732.

734.

735.

737.

The Respondent argues that it is the Claimants’ burden to prove that Romania's
action in withdrawing the facilities was manifestly unreasonable (as stated in AES v.
Hungary). The Respondent submits that the Claimants have not met that burden.
Rather, the Claimants speculate about possible transitional measures or possibly
delaying the withdrawal of the facilities, and other things Romania might have done.
In the Respondent's view, such speculation is not sufficient to prove that Romania’s
actions were manifestly unreasonable. The Respondent submits that the Claimants’
burden is to prove, not merely that Romania could have made better decisions, but
rather that the decisions that it did make were so poor and so arbitrary, that they
lacked any reasonable relationship to a rational policy goal.

In any event, according to the Respondent the record shows that Romania, over a 4
year period of negotiations with the EU, did endeavor to salvage what it could of the
EGO 24 facilities. However, the Member States were adamant about the need to
eliminate nonconforming state aid, not just by the date of accession but before the
negotiations on Chapter 6 (the competition policy chapter of the EU accession
negotiations) could be closed and the accession treaty signed. This was especially
true of operating aid, and aid that would have been inconsistent with the rules of the
customs union, which is what the raw materials exemption would have been.

More specifically, the Respondent argues that (i) its motivation in amending EGO 24
was to comply with EU accession; (ii) it acted reasonably in pursuit of conflicting
policies, and (ii) none of the Claimants’ contentions about what Romania could or
should have done differently proves that Romania acted unreasonably.

i. The Respondent’s motivation in amending EGO 24 was to comply with
EU accession

The Respondent argues that its subjective motivation in amending EGO 24 was to
address the EC’s concerns over state aid. Romania alleges that it gradually repealed
the facilities, not irrationally or unreasonably, but in response to increasing pressure
from the Commission and the Member States, and in pursuit of the universally
accepted national policy priority of joining the EU. According to the Respondent, the
facts “indicate that the measures were based upon a rational decision-making
process, related directly to the dual (and competing) policy goals of support for
disadvantaged regions and admission to the EU” (R-CM, § 173).

Specifically, the Respondent alleges that in 2000, Romania announced that the target
for EU accession was 2007, and that was public knowledge. During the next three
years, Romania, the Commission and the Member States talked with each other
about state aid. The Respondent argues that there was a particular focus on EGO
24, especially once the EU was informed that in May 2000 Romania's Competition
Council had found certain facilities to be incompatible with the acquis on state aid.

The Respondent contends that, as a result, Romania began to “chip away” at the

customs duty exemptions. In 2002, it eliminated the Machinery Facility, and then the
meat-related Raw Materials Facility. Also in 2002, it repealed the Profit Tax

198

740.

741.

Exemption but grandfathered it for existing PIC holders. Ultimately Romania managed
to persuade the EU to accept the grandfathering of the Profit Tax Exemption.

The Respondent argues that, by 2004, time was running out if it was to meet its
longstanding 1 January 2007 target date for accession. For that to happen,
negotiations had to be closed in 2004 and the Accession Treaty had to be signed in
2005. So in June 2004 Romania placed maximum intensity caps on the EGO 24
facilities, but that was not enough for the EU. Finally, in August 2004 the Romanian
Parliament passed GO 94/2004, withdrawing the remaining facilities. Romania
communicated this fact to the EU in November 2004, and the very next month
Chapter 6 was provisionally closed. The revocation of the EGO 24 facilities took
effect on 22 February 2005, and two months later Romania and Bulgaria signed the
Accession Treaty with the existing member states. Even then, the Accession Treaty
imposed on Romania a probationary period regarding state aid, which it did not
impose on Bulgaria.

The Respondent contends that the EU’s position was clear: the EGO 24 incentives
had to be terminated and, as confirmed by the Commission representatives during
the hearing, the Commission and the Member States were inflexible on this point.
According to the Respondent, the documentary record demonstrates that the EU
insisted on the revocation of the Raw Materials Incentive and other types of illegal
state aid. It argues that the Claimants’ attempt to read the EU documents as leaving
room for Romania to maintain the EGO 24 facilities ignores the structure of the
accession negotiations. The Respondent points out that in its first Position Paper on
competition policy of August 2000, Romania confirmed that it accepted the
competition acquis in full. In light of Decision 244/2000 of the Competition Council in
May 2000, this could not have been reasonably interpreted to mean that Romania
believed that EGO 24 complied with the acquis. Nor does the fact that the EU did not
expressly object to EGO 24 at that time mean that the EU accepted the regime; it
merely meant that the EU did not yet know all the details of EGO 24.

In particular, the Respondent argues that in its Common Position of 2003 (Exh. EC-8)
the EU invited Romania to “bring all incompatible aid measures in line with the acquis
without delay and to continue to provide information on the progress made towards
this goal.” The Respondent argues that, despite the “diplomatic language” used by
the EU, the message was strong: Romania must repeal the facilities as promptly as
possible. Likewise, the EU’s request that Romania “close incompatible aid schemes
for new entrants with immediate effect” cannot negate other statements that made
clear that such schemes must be removed for all beneficiaries. The Commission
representatives confirmed at the hearing that EGO 24 had to be terminated
immediately both for existing and new entrants.

In this respect, the Respondent argues that EU law is particularly hostile to operating
aid in the form of customs duty exemptions. This is because operating aid reduces
the recipient's operating costs, creating an artificial (even if temporary) ability to
undersell competitors as long as the aid continues to flow. Romania asserts that this
was confirmed by the Commission at the hearing (Tr., Day 5, 157-157 (Commission)).

199

742.

743.

744,

745.

746.

747.

In addition, the Respondent argues that the Raw Materials Facility is, by its very
nature, contrary to the Customs Union, as it would create a hole in the metaphorical
wall around the EU created by the Common Customs Tariff. This is illustrated by the
Claimants’ business model: taking advantage of the Raw Materials Facility enabled
the Claimants to purchase their raw materials for a price substantially lower than their
competitors outside the disfavored regions. This did not simply lower the cost of
operations in the disadvantaged region; it gave the Claimants a chance to become
sugar dealers (at least if the Claimants’ quantum case is to be believed) by importing
far more duty-free sugar than needed for their own operations, minimally processing
it, and then selling it outside the disfavored region. According to the Respondent, this
is exactly the type of situation that the EU’s policies against operating aid are trying to
prevent.

ii. Romania reasonably balanced conflicting policies

The Respondent contends that it reasonably balanced conflicting policies when
negotiating the state aid aspects of Chapter 6. Romania states that “[t]he
government, including a majority of Parliament, favoured the policy underlying
subsidies for disadvantaged areas. But EU accession was also a crucial policy
supported across the government (and among the Romanian people). As the conflict
between those two policies became increasingly apparent, Romania had to balance
conflicting policy objectives, as must any democratic state in which diverse
constituencies pursue divergent interests” (R-PHB, 40). This balancing was made
difficult by the differing and sometimes opposing views of various state organs and
officials, as exemplified by the differing positions of Mr. Marcu (who was president of
the NARD) and Mr. Orban (who was negotiating EU accession).

Even once the legal and political difficulties surrounding EGO 24 had become
evident, Romania contends that it actively sought to maintain the facilities. Indeed, it
argues that many of its actions during the accession negotiations can be explained by
its intention to prolong the facilities as long as possible. According to Mr. Orban, this
is why Romania was sometimes slow in providing information to the EU about the
EGO 24 regime (Tr., Day 8, 205 (Orban)). This is also why Parliament refused to
comply with the Competition Council's decision and why it gradually repealed the
facilities in response to new demands by the EU.

The Respondent argues that whether Romania accurately assessed the EU’s position
is irrelevant. As Mr. Orban confirmed, Romania acted on the basis of its good-faith
understanding of the EU’s demands.

The Respondent further argues that it could not bargain with the EU from a position of
strength. It contends that in EU accession negotiations, candidate countries had very
little bargaining power, and that this was particularly true of competition policy.

Nonetheless, Romania notes that it obtained substantial concessions from the EU to

the benefit of investors in the disfavored areas. Specifically, Romania was able to
obtain (i) the grandfathering of the Profit Tax Exemption (for a maximum period of

200

748.

749.

751.

752.

three years after accession); (ii) a delay of the repeal of the Raw Materials Facility
until February 2005; and (iii) a favorable formula to calculate the maximum state aid
intensity that investors could receive, which excluded from the cap aid received prior
to 1 January 2001. The Respondent asserts that all of these concessions were very
real and useful solutions for many companies.

iii. None of the Claimants’ contentions about what Romania could or
should have done differently prove that Romania acted unreasonably

The Respondent denies that Romania could have obtained concessions from the
Commission and EU Member States that would have allowed the incentives to remain
in place. According to the Respondent, the Claimants must prove that Romania’s
actions were not reasonably related to its rational policy objectives; it is irrelevant
whether Romania got the best possible deal. In the Respondent’s view, none of the
Claimants’ contentions about what Romania could or should have done differently
prove that Romania acted unreasonably.

First, the Respondent contends that the Claimants have not proven that Romania
could have maintained the Raw Materials Facility after EU accession. Indeed, the
Claimants have not proven that the Raw Materials Facility was legal under Article
87(3) of the EC Treaty. Nor is there any plausible basis to believe that the EU would
have granted derogation, and the Claimants have not cited a single comparable
instance in which this has happened.

Second, the Respondent argues that none of the alternatives to maintaining the Raw
Materials Facility suggested by the Claimants (i.e., a delay in the repeal of the Raw
Materials Facility, the grandfathering of the Raw Materials Facility, or the payment of
compensation to PIC holders) were feasible. The Respondent contends that
Romania kept the Raw Materials Facility in place for as long as possible without
delaying accession. Mr. Orban testified that the Commission was very displeased
when Parliament delayed the repeal of the Raw Materials Facility to February 2005.

Similarly, the Respondent argues that Romania could not have persuaded the EU to
agree to grandfather the Raw Materials Facility or agree to other transitional
arrangements. Because the Raw Materials Facility constituted incompatible state aid,
Romania could not have included it in the list of aid it wished to continue after
accession. The Respondent concedes that in its 2001 Common Position the EU
invited Romania to submit “a list of those existing aid measures which the
Competition Council considers as compatible with the acquis”, stating that “Romania
may continue to operate any aid which is included in the list and against which the
Commission has not objected for the period for which the aid was approved by the
Competition Council.” However, Romania argues that by definition it could only
include measures that the Competition Council considered compatible, which was not
the case for the Raw Materials Facility.

The Commission confirmed at the hearing that to operate incompatible state aid
beyond accession, Romania would have needed a special provision in the Accession

201

754.

755.

756.

757.

Treaty (Tr., Day 5, 90-91 (Gaillard/Commission)). Because the Raw Materials Facility
involved an exemption from certain customs duties, grandfathering would have
created a hole in the “wall” around the Customs Union. Relying on the Commission's
testimony, the Respondent contends that, because of the characteristics of the EGO
24 scheme, grandfathering any facility other than the Profit Tax Exemption “would not
have been agreed in the context of accession negotiations” (Tr., Day 5, 174
(Commission)). An exception was made for the Profit Tax Exemption because it
constituted investment aid rather than operating aid.

Finally, the Respondent contends that the Claimants have not proven that Romania
could (let alone, should) have paid compensation to all PIC holders. As Mr. Orban
and the Commission testified, any compensation paid to the beneficiaries of the
incentives would have been seen as incompatible state aid, and the Commission
would have requested reimbursement (Tr., Day 5, 45-46 (Commission); Day 8, 216-
217 (Orban)). Thus, the Commission and Member States would not have agreed to
the payment of compensation to PIC holders.

Even if the Claimants could prove that Romania could have implemented these
alternatives, the Respondent contends that that would not establish a breach of the
BIT. For a breach to be established, the Respondent argues that the Claimants must
show that the judgments made by Romania were not reasonably related to a
legitimate policy, i.e., that Romania’s judgment of how to balance the policies and
interests at stake in the accession process was not merely incorrect, but
unreasonable. The Respondent denies that the Claimants have proven this.

c. The Tribunal’s analysis

Before addressing the Parties’ arguments, the Tribunal will first summarize the
relevant facts to establish whether Romania did indeed act in pursuit of a rational
policy, as it asserts (Section (i) below). It will then turn to the question of whether
Romania acted reasonably in pursuit of that policy and will review the Claimants’
specific allegations of unreasonable conduct (Section (ii) below).

i. Did Romania act in pursuit of a rational policy?

As discussed in paragraphs 691 to 707 above, the Tribunal has found that, given
Romania’s status as an “underdeveloped area” within the meaning of Article 87(3)(a)
of the EC Treaty, it was reasonable for Romania to believe that the EGO 24
incentives could qualify under the operating aid exception contemplated in the 1998
Community Guidelines on Regional Aid.

Romania’s conduct suggests that, during the first years of the accession negotiations,
this was indeed the belief of a significant part of the Romanian Government. The
evolution of the government views on the compatibility of EGO 24 with EU law is
described by Romania as follows:

In August 2000, when Romania submitted its first position paper on
competition issues to the EU, most officials (outside the Competition

202

758.

759.

760.

761.

762.

Council) apparently still believed that EGO 24 was legal. When Romania
received the Member States’ response in October 2000, more Romanian
officials began to realise that EGO 24 might be incompatible with EU state
aid rules. Even then, there was considerable support for the EGO 24
Facilities outside the Competition Council and the negotiating team. For
example, after the Court of Appeal rejected the Competition Council's
litigation against EGO 75/2000, Parliament reinstated the one Facility that
EGO 75/2000 had eliminated. (R-PHB, § 175).

The exchange of position papers between Romania and the EU suggests that there
may have been an initial miscommunication as to the nature of the EGO 24 regime.

In its first Position Paper 6 (Competition Policy) dated August 2000 (Exh. EC-1).
Romania stated that it “accepts the entire acquis communautaire in force on 31
December 1999, does not request transition periods or derogations and declares that
it will be able to entirely implement it upon accession.” However, it also stated that:

Regarding the state aid rules and agreeing to the principles provided for in
Art. 87 and 88 of the Treaty establishing the European Community, it is
necessary to grant state aids to the sensitive sectors of economy and
the deprived areas due to the difficulties confronting the Romanian
economy during the transition to a market economy.

It is also obvious that, after accession, Romania's development level will
not exceed the EU average, and, consequently, the whole territory of
Romania will comply with the conditions laid down in Art. 87(3) of the
Treaty establishing the European Community.

(Emphasis added).

In that same Position Paper, Romania provided a description of EGO 24, as amended
by EGO 75/2000. However, it did not mention Decision 244/2000 of the Competition
Council, which had recommended the revocation of the Raw Materials Incentive.

This suggests that in 2000 Romania believed that the EGO 24 regime was compatible
with the acquis, or at least that Romania hoped to be able to negotiate to maintain the
EGO 24 aid after accession. It may very well be that the “full acceptance” of the
acquis was a Classic formula, as Mr. Orban testified (Tr., Day 8, 188-189 (Orban)),
but Romania still appears to have been stating that it nonetheless required state aid
for deprived areas to continue its economic development, and that it understood that
Romania was considered underdeveloped for this purpose. In other words, Romania
appeared to have been saying that it believed it fell into the Article 87(3)(a) exception.
This conclusion was confirmed by Mr. Orban, who testified that, at the time Romania
submitted its first position paper, the Government believed that the EGO 24 facilities
were permissible state aid consistent with Romania’s obligations under the acquis,
and thus believed no derogations from the acquis would be needed (Tr., Day 8, 188-
189; 196-197 (Orban)).

Romania argues that, because of the Competition Council’s decision in 2000,
Romania’s acceptance of the acquis cannot be reasonably interpreted to mean that
Romania believed that the EGO 24 regime complied with the acquis. The Tribunal
disagrees. First, Romania expressly acknowledges that many government officials

203

763.

764.

765.

maintained the “sincere belief” that the EGO 24 regime complied with acquis even
after the Competition Council issued Decision 244 in 2000 (R-PHB, {| 174). Second,
Mr. Orban testified that the Government believed that the EGO 24 regime complied
with the acquis. Thus, if that belief was unreasonable, then Romania was being
unreasonable. Third, the fact that the legislature refused to follow the Competition
Council’s recommendation and instead confirmed the EGO 24 incentives via new
legislation (EGO 75/2000) suggests that the Government (at least as a body even if
some of its members possibly disagreed) verily believed that these incentives were
compatible with the acquis.

Moreover, Romania omitted any mention of the Competition Council's decision in its
first Position Paper. This suggests, as one alternative, that Romania did not see the
link between the Competition Council decision and EU state aid law (indeed, the
decision made no mention of EU state aid rules). Another possible reason was that
Romania did not believe it needed to inform the EU of this decision, perhaps because
it considered that under domestic law Parliament had overruled that decision. The
omission of any mention of the Competition Council’s decision could also suggest that
Romania preferred not to raise thorny issues with the EU, because it wanted to
maintain the incentives. Any of these interpretations suggests that Romania believed
that the EGO 24 incentives were compatible with the acquis, or at least that it might
be able to negotiate to maintain them.

The EU did not immediately ask Romania to revoke the EGO 24 regime. In its first
Common Position (‘EU Common Position 2000”, Exh. EC-2), it underlined that “the
‘acquis’ under chapter 6, in accordance with the Europe Agreement, has to be applied
by Romania already now.” However, it also invited Romania to “provide details
regarding existing aid measures”, and “provide a more detailed analysis of the aid
facilities in the so-called D-areas”, in particular “what action, in light of the Community
Guidelines on Regional Aid, the Competition Council has taken with regard to the
Government Ordinances providing for these aid facilities.”

In February 2001, Romania issued a Complementary Position Paper on Chapter 6
(Competition Policy) (Exh. EC-3). In this position paper, Romania provided further
information with respect to EGO 24, but, as confirmed by Mr. Orban, not the detailed
analysis that the EU had requested (according to Mr. Orban, this detailed analysis
was not made until 2004 (Tr., Day 8, 203-204)). Romania also provided a brief
summary with respect to the Competition Council’s decision of 244/2000 of 8 May
2000, noting that it had been “overlooked” by EGO 75/2000, but did not explain
whether the Competition Council had assessed EGO 24 in light of the Community
Guidelines on Regional Aid. It appears that no such study was ever undertaken
(there is none in the record).

In its next common position (the “2001 EU Common Position”, Exh. EC-5), the EU’s
language became stronger:
The EU further notes that there are a number of existing as well as new

incompatible aid schemes which have not been brought into line with the
acquis. The EU notes that such schemes include in particular [...] facilities

204

767.

768.

769.

provided under Emergency Ordinances no. 24/1998 and 75/2000 in the so-
called "D-areas". The EU urges Romania to align the existing incompatible
aid schemes without delay. (2001 EU Common Position, p. 4)

The Claimants argue that this request to “align” EGO 24 did not imply that EGO 24
necessarily had to be terminated. They further note that the 2001 EU Common
Position also invited Romania to draw up a list of existing aid measures that it wished
to operate beyond accession. Specifically, the EU stated that:

With regard to aid which Romania wishes to operate beyond the date of
accession, the EU invites Romania to draw up a list of those existing aid
measures which the Competition Council considers as compatible with the
acquis. The EU invites Romania to transmit this list to the Commission;
Romania may continue to operate any aid which is included in the list and
against which the Commission has not objected for the period for which the
aid was approved by the Competition Council. A reference to the existing
aid list and to the procedure for its establishment will be included in the
Accession Treaty. (2001 EU Common Position, p. 4)

In view of these statements, it is not evident to the Tribunal that the EU was
requesting the revocation of the EGO 24 incentives, and the record shows that it was
not evident to Romania either. Mr. Orban testified that it was not necessary for the
EU to expressly say that EGO 24 had to be eliminated, because in his opinion “the
first position paper of the Union was very clear: every scheme incompatible with the
acquis has to be eliminated immediately”, but “it was the duty of the national authority
in the competition policy to exactly define” what schemes were compatible with the
acquis and which were not (Tr., Day 8, 212 (Orban)). However, he also confirmed
that the Romanian Government continued to enact legislation and regulations that
maintained the EGO 24 regime, because the Government still believed it to be a
compatible scheme (Tr., Day 8, 213 (Orban)). Mr. Orban also testified that “it was a
gradual process of learning” for the Romanian Government, that “a significant number
of members of the government were not aware about the requirements of the
[accession] process”, that there was a “lack of expertise” within the Government, but
also “a certain confidence that Romania would be able to get [...] a lot from the
accession process, which finally proved to be wishful thinking” (Tr., Day 8, 208-209
(Orban)).

By June 2002, however, Romania apparently understood that the EGO 24 regime
constituted incompatible aid, but believed that it could “align” it with the acquis by
converting it into compatible aid. The Romanian Government's “Report on the
progress in preparing for the accession to the European Union September 2001-May
2002”, dated June 2002 (Exh. HEC-6) stated that:

All existing State aid measures will be assessed, establishing their
compatibility with the acquis in order to suggest measures eliminating or
transforming the incompatible ones in compatibles aids, taking into account
the legal and economic implication of the modification of any incompatible
schemes on the already granted specific allocations.

This approach will be made according to the European Commission

recommendation and will take into consideration following three steps: (i)
closing the incompatibles schemes in order to stop potential future

205

770.

771.

772.

773.

allocations; (ii) the modification of these scheme[s] to reach the
compatibility with the acquis; (iii) the identification of the solutions for the
economic agents that received the State aid under the present schemes
(e.g. Free areas, deprived areas etc). [...] (p. 132)

More specifically with respect to EGO 24, it stated that:

Regarding the “D areas”, the State aid granted in the present must to [sic]
be converted into a compatible State aid. The Ministry of Development
and Prognosis started the technical debates with the beneficiary
associations in order to identify solutions and to make, in 2 months,
proposals for alteration of the present system of facilities. (p. 133.
Emphasis added).

At the same time, Romania's “National Programme for Accession of Romania to the
European Union” dated June 2002 (Exh. HEC-7) stated that “[t]he provisions of the
normative acts on facilities granted for ‘D areas’ will be maintained till the moment of
Romania’s accession to the European Union” (p. 148). Mr. Orban testified that this
was Romania's intention, and that it “battled a lot with the Commission to get this”
(Tr., Day 8, 219-220 (Orban)).

In November 2002, Romania provided the Commission with Additional Information on
Chapter 6 — Competition Policy (Exh. EC-6). With respect to EGO 24, Romania
merely informed the Commission that state aid for the D-areas was regulated by Law
621/2001, which approved EGO 75/2000, and explained the amendment to the VAT
and the repeal of the profit tax incentive (noting that it had been grandfathered for PIC
holders) (see paragraph 232 above).

On 7 April 2003, the Mission of Romania to the EU sent a communication to the
Romanian Minister for European Integration and other state officials, including Mr.
Orban and Mr. Berinde (Communication No. 1480, Exh. R-93). It stated:

Community officials stated clearly that the negotiations on this chapter
may be closed if, and only if, the following conditions (relating
primarily to State aid, which was found to have the highest potential to
distort the Internal Market) are met: new aid must comply strictly with the
acquis, existing aid must be aligned or in the process of being aligned
(including in terms of duration; the granting of transition periods may be
considered depending on the outcomes of discussions between the
competent institutions in' Romania and the relevant operators), and ALL
cases of non-notified State aid must be analysed and resolved.

Ll

The Commission stated that it had asked all of the candidate countries to
bring their tax breaks into line with the acquis communautaire, including
those granted in Free Zones or Less Favoured Areas, which entails either
their withdrawal or their conversion into compatible aid. In the latter case,
negotiations with a view to converting them into compatible schemes
must be pursued directly by the Competition Council with the
economic operators concerned. Only once this has occurred can the
companies for which transition periods may be negotiated with the EU be
identified.

(Emphasis added)

206

774. Inits Common Position dated 28 May 2003 (EC-8), the EU’s language also became
stronger:

The EU recalls that all fiscal aid provisions, (for example those included in
the VAT Law; the Law on customs duties exemptions - including
benefits for transactions undertaken by firms located in industrial parks,
free zones and disadvantaged areas [...]) should be subject to the
approval by the Competition Council. In cases where the Competition
Council the spectit to be i il with
the State aid rules, the EU invites Romania to either end the measures
or to align them with the acquis.

 

The EU invites Romania to bring all incompatible aid measures in line with
the acquis without delay and to continue to provide information on the
progress made towards this goal. [...]

 

The EU moreover invites Romania to provide information on individual
benefits granted in the free zones and the disadvantaged areas and on any
other individual tax benefits that have already been granted and which
provide for tax benefits beyond Romania's target date for accession. The
EU urges Romania to close incompatible aid schemes for new
entrants with immediate effect.

In this context Romania is further invited to present a plan outlining how
it intends to convert the benefits that are incompatible with the acquis
and to hold further technical consultations with the Commission to explore
the possibilities for this conversion.

Ll

With regard to aid which Romania wishes to operate beyond the date of
accession, the EU recalls it's invitation to Romania to draw up a list of
those existing aid measures which the Competition Council considers as
compatible with the acquis and to transmit this list to the Commission. The
EU recalls that Romania may continue to operate any aid which is included
in the list and against which the Commission has not objected for the
period for which the aid was approved by the Competition Council. A
reference to the existing aid list and to the procedure for its establishment
will be included in the Accession Treaty.

 

The EU recalls that the existing aid measures are subject in accordance
with Article 88(1) of the EC Treaty to the appropriate measures
procedure, under which the Commission can, in cooperation with the
(future) Member State, propose changes to an aid measure for the future.
To the extent that Romania wishes to benefit from this mechanism, the EU
invites Romania to present the following to the Commission, every six
months as from 1 January 2002, and up until the date of accession:

(a) a list of all existing aid measures (both schemes and ad hoc aid) (i)
which have been assessed by the Competition Council and (ii) which it
found to be compatible with the acquis; (b) any other information which is
essential for the assessment of the compatibility of the aid measures
referred to under (a).

Details on the precise format for this reporting have been provided by the
Commission.

The EU underlines that all aid measures in Romania which are considered
State aid according to the acquis and which are not included in this list

207

775.

776.

777.

778.

779.

780.

shall be considered as new aid upon Romania's accession. After that date,
application of such an aid measure will be conditional upon Romania's
notification of it pursuant to Article 88 of the EC Treaty, and a decision of
the Commission that the aid measure in question is compatible with the
Common Market. As regards individual aid, no measures which continue to
have effects after accession and which are incompatible will be acceptable.

(Emphasis added)

The Claimants argue that at this point the EU was still inviting Romania to “align”
incompatible aid schemes, and the request for immediate termination was only for
new entrants. They also argue that Romania could have included the EGO 24
scheme in the list of aid it wished to operate beyond accession.

The Respondent rejects these interpretations, arguing that, despite the “diplomatic
language” used by the EU, the message was strong: Romania had to repeal the
facilities as promptly as possible. Likewise, the EU’s request that Romania “close
incompatible aid schemes for new entrants with immediate effect” cannot negate
other statements that made clear that such schemes had to be removed for all
beneficiaries.

Although the EU had not expressly ordered, in so many words, that the EGO 24
scheme had to be terminated, at that point the message was clear for Romania. It
appears that Romania interpreted that message to be diplomatic in language and
adamant in substance. Mr. Orban testified that, from the technical consultations in
2003 “it was absolutely obvious [...] that for Custom duties exemptions there will be
no, not at all, any chance to get, not only a transition period, but we were obliged to
stop as soon as possible”, and that “it was absolutely clear that for such kind of
facilities, there is no room for manoeuvre” (Tr., Day 8, 229-230 (Orban)).

Nor could the revocation have been delayed until accession. Asked whether it would
have been possible to keep the Raw Materials Facility until the entry into force of the
Accession Treaty, Mr. Orban replied “[m]y clear answer is no. It was a very clear
condition formulated by the Commission to stop, to repeal these facilities, the
Customs duties exemptions, before the conclusion of the accession negotiation
process” (Tr., Day 8, 232:6-9 (Orban)).

The Commission representatives confirmed during the hearing that the Commission's
message was that the EGO 24 incentives had to be terminated:

During the accession negotiations with Romania, the EU [...] made clear
through a number of common positions and other documents which we
have submitted to this Tribunal that Ordinance No. 24/1998 involved
illegal state aid and therefore would have to be revoked prior to
accession. In its reaction to this unambiguous position of the EU, Romania
proceeded with the successive abolition of the incentives foreseen in the
ordinance. (Tr., Day 5, 45 (Commission); Emphasis added)

Indeed, despite the difference in language in the EU’s 2003 Common Position, the

Commission representatives confirmed at the hearing that EGO 24 had to be
terminated immediately both for existing and new entrants:

208

So the EU does two things. It says, first of all: end your incompatible aid
schemes, and that of course mean{s] also for existing entrants; but then
the EU also says: stop them with immediate effect for new entrants,
because of course allowing new entrants then creates further problems,
deepens further the distortions of competition which arise from the scheme.

So there are, in fact, several exhortations here. Now, this may all not seem
very structured or logical; it's a diplomatic document which set out a
number of desiderata that the Union had to formulate at the time towards
Romania in the context of the accession negotiation. But | think the overall
thrust is quite clear: the EU wanted that the aid scheme for disadvantaged
areas be terminated. (Tr., Day 5, 156-157 (Commission))

781. Notwithstanding Mr. Orban’s testimony, the record suggests that in early 2004
Romania was still attempting to prolong the incentives until the date of accession or
negotiate transitional periods. In particular, in an interview on national television on
12 January 2004 (Exh. C-651), Prime Minister Nastase announced that the EGO 24
regime would be terminated due to EU requirements. However, he also stated that
the Government was examining whether some of the incentives would remain in
place until 2007, noting that the Government had negotiated some transition periods
with the EU and that they were trying to find “elegant solutions.”. When asked to
confirm if certain investors could benefit from the program until 2007, Minister
Nastase stated that they would try to negotiate an agreement on that point. When
asked what would happen to investors who had invested significant sums, the
Minister stated that the Government was negotiating with each investor.

782. Notably, in its Complementary Position Paper Ill on Chapter 6 — Competition Policy
dated 24 March 2004 (Exh. EC-9), Romania did not state that the EGO 24 regime
would be terminated. Instead, it stated that PIC holders would be subject to
maximum permitted intensity thresholds. Romania also highlighted that the EGO 24
incentives had been “significantly diminished” by the elimination of the Raw Materials
Facility for the production, processing and preservation of meat. It also stated that
investors who had obtained a PIC prior to 1 July 2003 would benefit from the Profit
Tax Incentive, which would be grandfathered for the entire duration of the deprived
area.’ This suggests a final attempt by Romania to convince the EU that the EGO

“4 Specifically, Romania’s Complementary Position Paper Ill on Chapter 6 — Competition Policy dated

24 March 2004 (Exh. EC-9) stated: “The Ministry of Administration and Interior elaborated a draft law
for completing the Government Emergency Ordinance no. 24/1998 on the regime of deprived areas.
The draft provides that the facilities the undertakings that have an investor certificate and operate in
deprived areas benefit from, will be granted below the maximum admitted intensity foreseen in the
Regulation on regional aid. At present, the draft normative act is under inter-ministerial endorsement
procedure.

By entering into force of the Fiscal Code, the fiscal facilities have been significantly diminished. In fact,
the undertakings with investor certificate in the deprived areas will benefit from the exemption from the
payment of the taxes perceived for changing the destination or removing from the agrarian circuit of
certain fields designated to achieving the investment as well as the exemption from the custom duties
payment for raw materials and imported components, excepting the import of the raw material for meat
production, processing and preserving. Also the undertakings that obtained before 1 July 2003 the
permanent certificate of investor in the deprived area, will benefit from exemption from the profit tax
payment related to the new investment, during the whole existing duration of the deprived area”
(Emphasis added).

209

784.

785.

24 incentives could be aligned with the acquis without outright termination, or at least
that the incentives could be prolonged until the date of accession.

Prime Minister Nastase confirmed this view in public statements. In an interview in
Oradea, Bihor County in May 2004 (Exh. C-652), Prime Minister Nastase indicated
that “[sJubsequent to 2007, when we want to be accepted in the European Union,
these disfavored areas will no longer exist in Romania” (emphasis added). When
asked about compensation to investors in those areas, the Prime Minister answered
that Romania would discuss these matters during its negotiations with the European
Union and they would see if Romania was “able to obtain some transition periods for
them.” The Prime Minister specified that “there will be no fiscal incentives, there will
be some compensation packages, established during direct negotiations.” The Prime
Minister also stated that the Government would talk to the investors, and “based on
the conclusions of the negotiations of the Competition Chapter, we will negotiate with
those who initially obtained these fiscal incentives” (Exh. C-652, pp. 7-9 of
translation).

However, by August 2004 Romania must have understood that no transitional periods
or compensation packages were possible. On 31 August 2004, through GO 94/2004
(Exh. R-94), Romania repealed Article 6(1)(b)(d) and (e) of EGO 24/1998, thus
revoking the incentives provided under EGO 24/1998, including the Raw Materials
Incentive, with the exception of the Profit Tax Exemption. The repeal was originally to
become effective 90 days from the date of entry into force of GO 94/2004 (that is, on
3 December 2004). However, the date of repeal was subsequently extended to 22
February 2005 by means of Law No. 507/2004 of 22 November 2004 (Exh. C-52),
which approved and amended GO 94/2004.

Despite this strict position, Romania obtained certain concessions from the EU to the
benefit of investors in the D-areas. Specifically, as previously mentioned, Romania
was able to obtain (i) the grandfathering of the Profit Tax Exemption (for a maximum
period of three years after accession), (ii) a delay of the repeal of the Raw Materials
Facility until February 2005, and (iii) a favourable formula to calculate the maximum
state aid intensity that investors could receive, which excluded from the cap aid
received prior to 1 January 2001.

From the documentary and oral evidence described above, the Tribunal draws two
broad conclusions. First, at the beginning of the accession negotiations Romania
believed that the EGO 24 incentives were compatible state aid. This belief must have
ended at least by 2002, when the Romanian government acknowledged in its report
on the progress for accession that the EGO 24 regime constituted incompatible state
aid and had to be converted into compatible state aid. However, only in mid-2003 did
it become clear to Romania that the incentives must be revoked (see paragraph 777
above). That being said, it appears that by as late as May 2004 Romania still
believed that it could negotiate transitional periods or compensation packages.

210

787.

788.

789.

790.

As acknowledged by Romania’s expert in EU competition law, Mr. Petersen,
Romania's belief that the EGO 24 regime constituted compatible state aid was
incorrect, but it was not unreasonable:

Q. [D]o you have any opinion on whether Romania thought as of 1999

that EGO 24 was fully compliant with its obligations under the Europe
agreement?

A. | have no knowledge about it. But | could understand that they have a
certain good faith, I’m not doubting the good faith, because they were
pursuing an objective which was definitely in line with the European
Community's cohesion objective.

Q. Do you think that view of the Romanian Government as of that time
would have been reasonable?

A. As to that policy, yes [...].

(Tr., Day 6, 111 (Smith/Petersen)).

 

Second, it is plain that Romania revoked the incentives in order to comply with EU
competition regulations and, in particular, to obtain EU accession. Romania would
not have been able to sign the Accession Treaty in 2005 if it had not brought the
incentives into compliance with EU competition law. Although it is true that there
does not appear to have been an official determination from the European
Commission that the incentives constituted incompatible state aid, by mid-2003 it
should have been quite clear to the Romanian government that the EGO 24
incentives were impermissible state aid under EU standards.

The EU did not explicitly order the revocation of the incentives in the Common
Positions; rather, it requested the alignment of incompatible state aid regimes (such
as EGO 24). However, Mr. Orban testified that in 2003 it became absolutely clear
that this was the EU’s position, and this was confirmed by the Commission. Indeed,
the Commission confirmed during the hearing that, in its view, EGO 24 constituted
incompatible state aid:

Emergency Ordinance 24/1998 involved state aid which was not
compatible with EU rules on regional aid. In particular, the various
measures did not respect the basic EU rules on eligible costs, which
exclude in particular that mere operating costs may not be compensated.
Moreover, the limits on maximum aid intensities were not respected either.
(Tr., Day 5, 45:10-16 (Commission)).

The Commission representatives also explained at the hearing that, because the Raw
Materials Incentive constituted operating rather than investment aid, it could not have
been transformed into compatible aid without substantially changing their nature. In
response to questions from the Tribunal, the Commission testified as follows:

THE PRESIDENT: [...] Is there any way to read EGO 24/1998 specifically

with respect to the raw material duty, Customs duty exemption which would

make it compatible with EU law now?

A. (By PROFESSOR MARTENCZUK) | find that somewhat difficult to see.

There are, of course, various grounds in EU law which allow state aid to be

ai

declared compatible. These grounds are contained in Articles -- today they
are Article 107, paragraphs 2 and 3, of the Treaty on the Function of the
European Union; at the material time, they were paragraphs 2 and 3 of 87
of the EC treaty.

Essentially you need to have a legitimate objective. Such a legitimate
objective could, of course, be, for instance, to further regional
development. The EU has rules under which member states can grant aid
to help the regional development of certain defined particularly
disadvantaged regions. And presumably many of the regions in Romania
that are at issue here qualify as such areas; that's not contested.

However, in general the EU, as a matter of competition policy, has
formulated limits to that. One of these limits is, for instance, that regional
aid should always be granted in the form of investment aid. The reason for
that is that it is felt that aid towards investment creates a more durable
effect in the development of the underdeveloped region than aid which
purely goes towards operating cost. It alleviates an undertaking which
otherwise may already be there, and operating maybe inefficiently, of its
normal running costs.

It would seem to me that one of the problems precisely with the
exemptions that were at issue here is that they essentially are operating
aid: they alleviate the undertaking from operating costs. And therefore |
think it would have been very difficult to find a ground on which to find
these aids compatible, and that is -- and that also doesn't seem to have
been, in the end, pursued in the accession negotiations.

THE PRESIDENT: | just want to make clear. You said it would have been
very difficult, and | will come back to that question, but much later.

My question right now is: right now, would it be possible, if the Romanian
State just for any reason was to enact right now EGO 24/1998, which
would be called EGO something/2010, would there be any way to read it
which would make it compatible with the EU law now?

A. (By PROFESSOR MARTENCZUK) Unfortunately | am not here in the
company of our competition law experts from DG Competition who might
be able to provide more direct expertise on that. But my tentative response
would be: probably not.

(Tr., Day 5, 158-160 (Tribunal/Commission)).

791. In response to further questions, the Commission added:

THE PRESIDENT: [...] Taking Professor Alexandrov's question [on the
possibility of redress for investors], what would have been your answer if --
if it had been possible to consider that the goal of the investment was
compatible? That is the contrary, | think he said incompatible, and really
what | was also interested in is knowing: what if it had been compatible?

A. (By PROFESSOR MARTENCZUK) Well, if the aid scheme by its nature
had been such that it was compatible with — or capable of being compatible
with EU law, then the correct approach for Romania would have been to
include it in the list of compatible existing aid schemes which were adopted
at the time of the accession treaty, and which in fact constitutes, if you like,
the list of grandfathered existing aid schemes which the Commission
sometimes under a number of conditions allows, and which may continue
to be applied by Romania without requiring any further -- a new approval
by the Commission which would otherwise be necessary.

212

792.

793.

794.

Now, however, because of the characteristics of the aid scheme, and with
the exception of the profit tax exemption, Romania made no -- as far as |
am aware, at least, made no such request, and that's why — and probably if
it had made such a request, given the characteristics of the scheme, it
would not have been agreed in the context of the accession negotiations.

And that's why, if you like, these aid schemes did not find themselves on
the positive list unless [recte: unlike] other schemes.

THE PRESIDENT: Such kind of incentive as the Customs duties
exemption on the import of raw material, is it totally incompatible with
European law, even if it's for disfavoured areas and for a limited duration?

A. (By PROFESSOR MARTENCZUK) | would believe that it would be, I'm
at least not aware of any examples of such types of aid. There may be --
there may be specific rules, but | would -- that is something | would have to
verify for -- there are some more specific regimes for what is called the
ultra-peripheral regions of the European Union. This is for instance the
DOM-TOM frangais, and so forth. For ultra-peripheral regions --

THE PRESIDENT: Angola?

A. (By PROFESSOR MARTENCZUK) For those regions, there are in fact
possibilities to grant under more lenient conditions operating aid. | have a
suspicion that you might find things there. But that's really just for those
specific regions, and the regions that we are talking about here in Romania
don't fall under any specific category.

(Tr., Day 5, 173-175 (Tribunal/Commission)).

Other than these last comments, neither in its submission nor at the hearing did the
Commission explain why the EGO 24 incentives could not have been covered by an
exception to operating aid requirements under the 1998 Community Guidelines on
Regional Aid (Exh. RJ-9). As noted above, both sides’ experts agree that, as an
underdeveloped region in meaning of Article 87(3)(a) of the EC Treaty, Romania
could have been exceptionally allowed to grant operating aid.

The Tribunal cannot speculate as to why the Commission refused to consider the
EGO 24 regime as permissible operating aid under the 1998 Community Guidelines
on Regional Aid. The fact is that the EU (in particular, the Commission) wanted the
EGO 24 regime terminated, and this termination was made a pre-condition for
accession.

It also seems clear that Romania could not have included the EGO 24 incentives in
the list of aid it wished to operate beyond accession. In its 2001 Common Position
the EU invited Romania to submit “a list of those existing aid measures which the
Competition Council considers as compatible with the acquis”, stating that “Romania
may continue to operate any aid which is included in the list and against which the
Commission has not objected for the period for which the aid was approved by the
Competition Council.” It then reiterated this invitation in its 2003 Common Position.
However, as is evident from the language of that invitation, for any state aid to be
included in this list, it had to be approved by the Competition Council, and such
approval was not given for the Raw Materials Incentive. The Commission confirmed

213

795.

797.

798.

799.

800.

that this was probably the reason why Romania had not made this request (Tr., Day
5, 174 (Commission)).

Finally, the Tribunal notes that the Substantiation Note accompanying the repeal of
the EGO 24 incentives stated that

In order to meet the criteria in the Community rules on state aid, and also
to complete the negotiations under Chapter No. 6 — Policy it is necessary
to eliminate all forms of State aid in national legislation incompatible with
the acquis communautaire in this area and, in this respect, it is proposed to
repeal [...] the provisions of Article 6 paragraph (1), letter (b), letter (d) and
letter (e) of the Emergency Government Ordinance no. 24/1998 on the
disadvantaged areas [...]

(Substantiation Report accompanying EGO 94/2004, 26 August 2004, Exh.
R-95, pp. 12-13).

Under those circumstances, it is clear that Romania was under considerable pressure
from the EU to terminate the EGO 24 regime. Thus, there is no doubt in the
Tribunal’s mind that Romania’s repeal of the EGO 24 incentives was motivated by the
EU’s demands.

ii. The Claimants’ specific allegations of unreasonable conduct

The Tribunal will now turn to the question of whether, in pursuit of its objective to join
the EU, Romania acted reasonably and, in that context, will address the Claimants’
specific allegations of unreasonable conduct.

(a) The Claimants’ allegation that Romania actively promoted and
extended the EGO 24 regime, while at the same time negotiating for
the scheme’s early termination

The Claimants first argue that Romania acted unreasonably by actively promoting
and extending the EGO 24 regime, and (at least until 2003) encouraging investors to
participate in that scheme, while at the same time it was negotiating for the scheme’s
early termination.

The Tribunal rejects this argument. As discussed above the record shows that, until
mid-2003, Romania believed that the incentives were compatible with EU law and
believed they could be maintained after accession. The record suggests that, after
realizing that the incentives were incompatible aid, Romania tried to maintain the
incentives for as long as possible, but there is no evidence to suggest that during that
period after mid-2003 it actively promoted the regime. Romania has not been able to
establish clearly when or how it began to inform stakeholders that the incentives
would be terminated, but Mr. Orban confirmed that the public should have known at
least by May 2004. This is consistent with the fact that Prime Minister Nastase
announced the termination of the scheme in January and May 2004.

Accordingly, the record shows that Romania did not at the same time promote the

EGO 24 regime and seek its early termination. During the time it promoted the
regime, it sought to maintain the incentives. After it became clear that this would not

214

801.

802.

803.

804.

be acceptable to the EU, it announced that the incentives would be revoked. Thus,
the factual basis for the Claimants’ allegation is incorrect.

(b) The Claimants’ allegation that Romania revoked the incentives
regime prematurely, without being required to do so by any
competent legal authority and without attempting to mitigate
damages

The Claimants also argue that it was unreasonable for Romania to revoke the
incentives regime prematurely without being required to do so by any competent legal
authority, without attempting to negotiate with the EU or the Claimants to mitigate the
damages caused by the revocation, and in contradiction of its repeated statements
over the years that the regime was legal and satisfied EU requirements.

The Tribunal rejects this argument. Applying the standard enunciated in paragraph
525 above, the Tribunal does not find that Romania acted unreasonably. Romania
did not act arbitrarily; to the contrary: it is evident that Romania’s repeal of the EGO
24 incentives was done in response to conditions imposed by the EU for accession.
It is true that the EU did not explicitly order the revocation of the incentives; rather, it
requested the alignment of incompatible state aid regimes (such as EGO 24) with the
acquis. However, as discussed above, the EU’s demand must be interpreted as a
request for termination of the incentives as a pre-condition for accession, and
Romania understood that sometime in 2003. Thus, the repeal of the EGO 24
incentives was reasonably related to a rational public policy objective (i.e., EU
accession), and there was an appropriate correlation between that objective and the
measure adopted to achieve it (i.e., the repeal of the EGO 24 incentives). However,
as will be seen, it does not follow of necessity that such repeal was fair and equitable
to the Claimants.

As to the Claimants’ argument that this termination was not ordered by a “competent
legal authority”, the demands were issued by the Commission on the behalf of the EU
itself during accession negotiations. Given Romania’s goal of accession, it was not
unreasonable for Romania to comply with the EU’s demands, even if such demands
were not formally issued by a “competent legal authority” if that should have been the
case. Even if the Claimants were correct as a matter of law that the termination was
not ordered by a competent legal authority, it is not for this Tribunal to decide whether
Romania properly understood the point at the time or whether it would have been
opportune for Romania to raise the point in its negotiations with the EU.

Indeed, the “competent legal authority’ appears to have been the Romanian
Competition Council, which did in fact recommend the revocation of the Raw
Materials Incentive in Decision 244/2000. The Claimants (relying on Prof. Dashwood)
have argued that, from a procedural standpoint, during the pre-accession regime only
Romania (and not the European Commission) had the competence to determine
which forms of state aid qualified as permissible state aid (Tr., Day 1, 178-179
(Gaillard); ER of A. Dashwood, {| 25). This appears also to have been the position of
the EU, which in its Common Positions repeatedly stated that the determination of
whether aid was compatible with the acquis depended on the local Competition

215

805.

806.

807.

808.

Council. It is unclear whether Decision 244/2000 was premised on EGO 24’s
incompatibility with EU law (indeed, the decision makes no mention of EU law at all).
However, to the extent that the Claimants argue that Romania eliminated the Raw
Materials Incentive without a finding by a “competent legal authority”, they may be
technically incorrect.

What matters, however, is that, both at the EU and Romanian levels, there was some
exhortation to end the EGO 24 scheme because of its capacity to distort competition.
This, in addition to the fact that revocation of the Raw Materials Incentive was a pre-
condition for accession, shows that Romania’s decision to repeal the EGO 24
incentives was not irrational, arbitrary, or based on preference. It was a decision
logically related to, narrowly tailored, and necessary for, the pursuit of a legitimate
and rational policy.

The Claimants also contend that it was unreasonable for Romania to revoke the
incentives without attempting to negotiate with the EU or the Claimants to mitigate the
damages caused by the revocation. It is true that there is no convincing evidence
that Romania tried to negotiate alternative solutions with the EU, such as a delay in
the revocation date, a transition period, or payment of compensation. However, as
became abundantly clear at the hearing, it would have been extremely difficult
(perhaps even impossible) to obtain agreement from the EU on any of these
alternative solutions.

First, the EU would not have allowed the revocation to be delayed until the date of
accession. The Commission representatives testified that the Commission's
unambiguous message was that “Ordinance No. 24/1998 involved illegal state aid
and therefore would have to be revoked prior to accession” (Tr., Day 5, 45
(Commission), emphasis added). As mentioned above, when he was asked whether
it would have been possible to keep the Raw Materials Facility in place until the entry
into force of the Accession Treaty, Mr. Orban replied “[m]y clear answer is no. It was
a very clear condition formulated by the Commission to stop, to repeal these facilities,
the Customs duties exemptions, before the conclusion of the accession negotiation
process” (Tr., Day 8, 232 (Orban)). He also testified that the Commission was very
displeased when Parliament delayed the repeal of the Raw Materials Facility to
February 2005 (/d.).

Second, the EU would not have accepted a transitional period or grandfathering for
the Raw Materials Incentive. The Commission confirmed at the hearing that to
operate incompatible state aid beyond accession, Romania would have required a
special provision in the Accession Treaty itself (Tr. Day 5, 90-91
(Gaillard/Commission)). The Commission also confirmed that, because of the
characteristics of the EGO 24 scheme, grandfathering any facility other than the Profit
Tax Exemption “would not have been agreed in the context of accession negotiations”
(Tr., Day 5, 174 (Commission)). As noted above, Mr. Orban testified that, from the
technical consultations in 2003 “it was absolutely obvious [...] that for Custom duties
exemptions there will be no, not at all, any chance to get, not only a transition period,
but we were obliged to stop as soon as possible”, and that “it was absolutely clear

216

809.

810.

811.

812.

813.

814.

that for such kind of facilities, there is no room for manoeuvre” (Tr., Day 8, 229-230
(Orban)).

There is some logic to the Commission's inflexibility, at least with respect to transition
periods beyond accession. The Respondent is right in that, because of the very
nature of the Raw Materials Facility, grandfathering it would have created a “hole in
the wall” around the Customs Union. This would only have been the case after
accession, not before. However, the Tribunal is not assessing whether the
Commission was being reasonable when it imposed these conditions; the Tribunal’s
mandate is to determine whether Romania acted reasonably in the factual context in
which it found itself.

Third, Mr. Orban and the Commission confirmed very clearly that any compensation
paid to PIC holders would have been seen as incompatible state aid, and the
Commission would have requested its reimbursement (Tr., Day 5, 45-46
(Commission); Day 8, 216-217 (Orban)). Thus, the Commission and Member States
would not have agreed to the payment of compensation to PIC holders.

Given Romania's uncertain chances to obtain any of these alternative arrangements,
its lack or, at least, weakness of bargaining power before the Commission, and the
Commission’s inflexible stance, the Tribunal does not find that it was unreasonable
for Romania to revoke the incentives without making more efforts to maintain them.
In addition, a negotiation involves many considerations and trade-offs. It is not for a
Tribunal subsequently to second-guess decisions which are within the realm of
diplomatic bargaining if there are no objective circumstances allowing and requiring
such an evaluation.

Finally, the Tribunal finds that any contradiction in Romania’s statements as to the
legitimacy of the EGO 24 regime or its compatibility with EU state aid regulations in
the earlier years of the accession process was based on a good faith lack of
knowledge and an overly optimistic initial assessment of its bargaining power vis-a-vis
the EU.

(c) The Claimants’ allegation that Romania revoked the benefits of the
incentives regime for investors, while maintaining the investors’
obligations under that regime

The Claimants argue that it was unreasonable for Romania to revoke the benefits of
the incentives regime for investors like the Claimants, while preserving the investors’
obligations under that regime, in particular the obligation to maintain the investments
for twenty years.

There is some dispute among the parties as to the content and length of this
obligation. The Claimants argue that under Articles 7 and 9 of EGO 24 (republished
version of November 1999, Exh. R-68) investors were required to maintain their
investments for twice the period during which they benefitted from the incentives
provided under EGO 24. However, relying on Article 1(f) of the 2001 Methodological
Norms (GD 728/2001, Exh. R-69), the Claimants argue that the period in which an

217

815.

816.

817.

818.

819.

investor is deemed to have benefitted from the incentives, for purposes of Articles 7
and 9 of EGO 24, is calculated as “the period between the moment when the
certificate of investor in the disfavoured area was obtained and the moment when the
disfavoured area ceases to exist.”

Because Articles 7 and 9 of EGO 24 have not been repealed, and because the
revocation did not affect the Profit Tax Exemption, the Claimants argue that European
Food must maintain its investments until 2018. They argue that this was confirmed
by both Prof. Baias and Prof. Mihai. In this respect, the Claimants argue that
“Romania has acted like it did [the Claimants] a big favour by leaving the profit tax
exemption in place until 2009, but in reality that was what enabled Romania to keep
the obligations on [the Claimants] in place for eight years longer than they would have
been otherwise if Romania had simply revoked all the incentives in early 2005.” As a
result, the Claimants “are effectively hostage in the [Stei-Nucet-Draganesti] region
and they will be until 2018 or until they go bankrupt” (Tr., Day 12, 41-43 (Fleuriet)).

The Claimants further allege that Romania is still monitoring their compliance with
EGO 24 to this day, and “still carrying out audits and inspections to make sure that
Romania gets its benefit from its side of the bargain in terms of employment” (Tr., Day
12, 43 (Fleuriet)). In any event, the Claimants argue that, due to the nature of their
investments, they cannot simply move them to another area of Romania (Tr., Day 12,
40-44).

In its Post-Hearing Brief, Romania argued that it “has repeatedly stated that the
obligation does not exist and that (therefore) it has no intention of enforcing it.” As the
alleged 20-year obligation is non-existent, Romania argues that there is no merit to
the Claimants’ assertion of unfairness (R-PHB, {| 120).

However, Romania took a different position in its closing argument. First, it argued
that the Claimants are not hostages in the $tei-Nucet-Draganesti region; they can
leave whenever they wish. It explained that “the obligation is to repay the value of
exemptions that have been received if a decision is made by an investor voluntarily to
leave the deprived area”, and that “[t]he state is not empowered to force a business to
stay in the deprived area, nor does it wish to do so.” Thus, “[t]his a business decision
to be made by an individual investor’; “[i]t is just a money decision” (Tr., Day 13, 128-
129 (Petrochilos)).

Second, relying on Prof. Baias, Romania argued the period for which the investments
must be maintained is twice the period in which the investor actually enjoyed the
facility, not twice the period between the issuance of the investment certificate and
the termination of the designation of the region as disfavored. In this respect, the
Respondent noted that the Claimants have conceded that they stopped receiving the
Profit Tax Exemption in 2006 (ref. to Tr., Day 12, 42 (Fleuriet)). In any event, the
Respondent argued that Claimants’ arguments are irrelevant, because the Claimants
have never sought to leave Bihor county (as confirmed by Mr. Ban, Tr., Day 9, 13),
and thus they have never been threatened by an obligation to repay the benefits they
have received (Tr., Day 13, 131-2 (Petrochilos)).

218

820.

821.

822.

823.

824.

The Parties agree that the obligations set forth in Articles 7 and 9 of EGO 24 have not
been repealed. Despite Romania’s initial allegation that the obligation does not exist,
Prof. Baias confirmed at the hearing that some form of obligation to maintain
investments did indeed exist. His position was that the period for which investors
were obliged to stay in the disfavored area was twice the period during which they
had actually benefitted from the program (Tr., Day 5, 267-273).

Articles 7 and 9 of EGO 24 provide:
ART. 7

In the situation in which an investment that benefits [sic] from the
provisions under the present expeditious ordinance jis voluntarily
liquidated in a period smaller than double the period in which it had
enjoyed the facilities granted by the Government decision for the setting
up of the deprived zone, the liquidator/liquidators shall compulsorily
pay, with priority, to the state budget, to the state social insurance budget
and to the special funds budgets the amounts of money relating to the
facilities granted in accordance with the provisions under the present
expeditious ordinance, from the amounts of money resulting from the
liquidation.

ART. 9

The trading companies set up in a deprived zone may voluntarily cease
their activity in the respective zone, and those that open branches with
legal personality in such a zone may liquidate them or change their head-
office from the deprived zone, in a shorter period than the one provided
under Art. 7, only under the sanction of paying the debts to the state
budget, state social insurance budget and special funds budgets, relating
to the facilities granted in accordance with the provisions of the present
expeditious ordinance.

(Emphasis added)

In turn, Article 1(f) of the 2001 Methodological Norms (GD 728/2001, Exh. R-69)
defines:

f) the period in which it benefited from the facilitations granted by the
Government Decision designating the area as disfavored, as specified
under Art. 7 and 9 of the ordinance - the period between the moment when
the certificate of investor in the disfavored area was obtained and the
moment when the disfavored area ceases to exist; in the case of the
provisional certificate of investor, followed by the procurement of the
certificate of investor in disfavored area, the period is calculated from the
moment the provisional certificate of investor is obtained until the
disfavored area ceases to exist;

Prof. Baias insisted that Article 1(f) of the 2001 Methodological Norms contradicted
the higher norm, which was Article 7 of EGO 24, and thus in his opinion the 2001
Methodological Norms should be ignored on this point.

The Tribunal does not find that the duration of the Claimants’ obligation makes in

itself a difference for purposes of assessing the reasonableness of Romania’s
conduct. The point is that Romania repealed the Raw Materials Incentive while at the

219

825.

826.

827.

same time maintaining all of the Claimants’ obligations under the scheme, including
the obligation to maintain their investments for twice the period they received the
incentives, or twice the period between the issuance of the certificate and the end of
period in which the region is designated as disfavored, depending on the
interpretation. The Tribunal finds that either scenario is unreasonable. The obligation
to maintain investments had no rational justification after the incentives were
terminated. The survival of the Profit Tax Exemption is not sufficient justification for
the maintenance of investments made in reliance on the legitimate expectation that
customs duties exemptions such as the Raw Materials Incentive would be available,
just as the Profit Tax Exemption would not have been sufficiently attractive on its own
to encourage investment in the disfavored region. Indeed, the maintenance of the
Profit Tax Exemption ensured that, despite the absence of the Raw Materials
Incentive, the Claimants would continue to be tied to the EGO 24 regime for as long
as they made a profit. And, as the Claimants argue, the Profit Tax Exemption would
have been useless for companies not making a profit, which could easily have been
the case for businesses premised on the existence of operating aid such as the Raw
Materials Incentive.

iii. Conclusion

For the reasons stated above, the Tribunal finds that, with one exception, Romania
did not act unreasonably. Romania’s decision to revoke the incentives was
reasonably tailored to the pursuit of a rational policy (specifically, EU accession), and
there was an appropriate correlation between that objective and the measure adopted
to achieve it (i.e., the repeal of the EGO 24 incentives). The question is whether
Romania could have negotiated a transition period for the incentives or their
conversion into compatible aid. However, even if it could have done more, but failed
to do so, objectively speaking the Tribunal does not find that it acted unreasonably.
Even if Romania could have done more to maintain the incentives, its failure to
negotiate transitional periods or compensation was not arbitrary, but appears justified
under the specific circumstances of the accession negotiations.

The exception to this conclusion was Romania's decision to maintain the investors’
obligations despite the repeal of the incentives. It is not for this Tribunal to say what
would have been the right decision (i.e., possibly shortening the period or diminishing
in other ways the obligations imposed upon the investors), but it was not reasonable
for Romania to maintain as a whole the investors’ obligations while at the same time
eliminating virtually all of their benefits.

In other words, with the exception noted in the preceding paragraph, Romania’s
repeal of the incentives was a reasonable action in pursuit of a rational policy. That
being said, this conclusion does not detract from the Tribunal’s holding in Section 3(c)
above that Romania undermined the Claimants’ legitimate expectations with respect
to the continued availability of the incentives until 1 April 2009. As a result,
Romania’s actions, although for the most part appropriately and narrowly tailored in
pursuit of a rational policy, were unfair or inequitable vis-a-vis the Claimants. In

220

828.

829.

830.

831.

832.

addition, the Tribunal finds that Romania could have been more transparent with PIC
holders, as discussed in Section 6 below.

Did Romania act in bad faith?
The Tribunal now turns to the Claimants’ arguments on bad faith.
a. The Parties’ positions

The Claimants argue that Romania breached its fair and equitable treatment
obligation by acting in bad faith when it repealed the EGO 24 incentives. Specifically,
the Claimants argue that “Romania acted in bad faith by (1) reneging on its oft-
repeated defense of the legality of the incentives regime within the EU accession
framework by ultimately revoking the incentives prematurely without a decision from
any competent legal authority requiring it to do so; (2) neglecting to negotiate with the
EU in order to secure an exception to any potentially-violated State aid rules; (3)
failing to negotiate with Claimants in order to protect them from premature revocation
of the incentives regime via measures that would be acceptable to the EU; and (4)
reaping the benefits from Claimants’ investments in the Stei-Nucet-Draganesti
disadvantaged region, and in particular accepting fulfillment of Claimants’ various
obligations under the incentives program as described above, before revoking the
incentives four years before the promised date, refusing to compensate Claimants,
and thereby failing to fulfill its own obligations under the program” (C-Reply, {| 449).

The Respondent does not directly address the Claimants’ arguments on bad faith.
However, the Tribunal presumes that the Respondent's arguments as to the
reasonableness of its actions (as discussed in Section 4 above) are applicable.

b. The Tribunal’s analysis

Good faith is a standard that is flexible. A requirement of good faith is prevalent in all
fields of the law and will arise in various matters, such as the interpretation of treaties
(Article 31 of the VLCT), the prohibition to abuse rights, and the protection of
legitimate expectations. As such, it eludes any strict definition. However, as a
minimum, good faith would require that any party would not consciously conduct itself
in such a way that should contradict the implications of that party's earlier behavior, a
concept akin to the prohibition of estoppel.

The concept of bad faith is likewise difficult to define with precision. Black’s Law
Dictionary defines bad faith as “dishonesty of belief or purpose.”"“® The commentary
to Section 205 of the American Law Institute’s Restatement (Second) of Contracts
(1981) states with respect to good faith in the performance of an obligation:

d. Good faith performance. Subterfuges and evasions violate the obligation
of good faith in performance even though the actor believes his conduct to
be justified. But the obligation goes further: bad faith may be overt or may
consist of inaction, and fair dealing may require more than honesty. A

"5 Black's Law Dictionary, Ninth Edition (2009), p. 159.

221

complete catalogue of types of bad faith is impossible, but the following
types are among those which have been recognized in judicial decisions:
evasion of the spirit of the bargain, lack of diligence and slacking off, willful
rendering of imperfect performance, abuse of a power to specify terms,
and interference with or failure to cooperate in the other party's
performance. “°

833. In the treaty context, Bin Cheng notes that “[t]he principle that treaty obligations
should be fulfilled in good faith and not merely in accordance with the letter of the
treaty has long been recognised by international tribunals and is reaffirmed by the
United Nations as an ‘act of faith.”"*” Similarly, citing a string of investment
arbitration cases, the Europe Cement tribunal noted that “it is well accepted in
investment arbitrations that the principle of good faith is a principle of international law
applicable to the interpretation and application of obligations under international
investment agreements.”"®

834. According to Bin Cheng, “[p]erformance of a treaty obligation in good faith means
carrying out the substance of this mutual understanding honestly and loyally.”'*°
International investment tribunals confirm this interpretation. For instance, in Canfor
and Terminal Forest v. USA, the tribunal stated that “a fundamental principle of
international law that States Party to a treaty must perform treaty obligations in good
faith and, therefore, would not intentionally take steps that would undermine
performance of those obligations.” Similarly, the Waste Management II tribunal
held that “[a] basic obligation of the State under Article 1105(1) [which sets out
NAFTA’s minimum standard of treatment] is to act in good faith and form, and not
deliberately to set out to destroy or frustrate the investment by improper means.”'*!

835. The Tribunal notes that the Claimants’ allegations of bad faith are virtually identical to
their arguments with respect to Romania’s allegedly unreasonable conduct. The
Tribunal understands that the difference between both sets of allegations is that the
Claimants are arguing here that not only was Romania’s conduct unreasonable (i.e.,
not justified by the reasonably tailored pursuit of a rational objective), but that it was
intentional or at least conscious in its unreasonableness.

836. The Tribunal has already found that Romania’s conduct was, with one exception, a
reasonable action in pursuit of a rational policy. But even with respect to that one

"46 Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 205 cmt. d (1981).
'4” Bin Cheng, General Principles of Law as Applied by International Courts Tribunals (1953, 2006), p.
114.

"8 Europe Cement Investment & Trade S.A. v. Republic of Turkey (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/07/2),
Award, 13 August 2009 (hereinafter “Europe Cement v. Turkey” or “Europe Cement’), § 171, citing
Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia (ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1), Award, 20
November 1984; Plama v. Bulgaria; Inceysa Vallisoletana S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador (ICSID Case
No. ARB/03/26), Award, 2 August 2006; Phoenix Action Ltd v. Czech Republic (I\CSID Case No.
ARB/06/5), Award, 15 April 2009.

8 Bin Cheng, p. 115.

‘8° Canfor Corporation v. United States of America, Tembec Inc. et. al. v. United States of America
and Terminal Forest Products Ltd. v. United States of America, UNCITRAL, Decision of on Preliminary
Question, 6 June 2006.

‘8! Waste Management v. Mexico Il, § 138.

222

837.

838.

839.

840.

841.

exception (maintaining investors’ obligations after terminating the incentives), the
record does not include any indication that Romania acted in bad faith. Accordingly,
the Tribunal rejects this argument.

Did Romania fail to act transparently or consistently?

The Tribunal now turns to the Claimants’ allegation that Romania failed to act
transparently or consistently.

a. The Claimants’ position

In addition to failing to provide stability of the legal framework and violating their
legitimate expectations, the Claimants argue that Romania breached its obligation to
accord fair and equitable treatment by acting in a manner that was not transparent or
consistent (C-SoC, ff 229-241; C-Reply, {| 440-442; C-PHB, {J 51-62). The
Claimants argue that this was acknowledged by Romania’s own witness, Mr. Orban
(Tr., Day 8, 208-209, 221 (Orban)).

Specifically, the Claimants contend that Romania acted in a manner that was not
transparent by actively pursuing two conflicting policies: on one hand, it promoted the
EGO 24 incentives, and at the same time it negotiated their revocation behind closed
doors. The Claimants allege that, at least until 2003, Romania actively promoted and
supported the EGO 24 regime (as evidenced by the Government and Parliament's
disagreement with the Competition Council on Decision 244 and the adoption of the
Methodological Norms). However, at the same time Romania was secretly
negotiating the revocation of these incentives. The Claimants also assert that there is
no evidence that the government met with the Claimants to inform them that the
incentives were likely to be prematurely revoked.

The Claimants further submit that Romania acted inconsistently when it repeatedly
proclaimed that the incentives were compatible with the requirements of the acquis,
but ultimately decided to revoke them prematurely based on their alleged
incompatibility with those same requirements. The Claimants also allege that officials
within the Romanian government took inconsistent positions with respect to the
compatibility of EGO 24 with EU law. According to the Claimants, as explained above
the evidence suggests that until 2004 Romania thought that EGO 24 was permissible
state aid under EU law.

In addition, the Claimants argue that the manner in which Romania revoked the
incentives created uncertainty. The Claimants state that the incentives were subject
to a string of contradictory measures that repealed some of the incentives, partially
reintroduced some of them, and then repealed them again. In particular, the
Claimants note that Romania repealed the incentives from EGO 24, but it did not
amend GD 194/1999, which states that investors in the Stei-Nucet-Draganesti region
will benefit from the incentives for ten years. The Claimants argue that this led to
insecurity and confusion, and as a result the investors could not plan their business in
a rational way.

223

842.

843.

844.

845.

846.

847.

In any event, the Claimants contend that Romania did not align its measures with the
various goals and policies behind EGO 24 and similar incentives programs granted to
investors over the years (which pursued the goals of attracting capital, reducing
unemployment, etc). In that context, the Claimants invoke Tecmed, as quoted in
paragraph 534 above.

b. The Respondent’s position

The Respondent denies that Romania treated the Claimants’ investments in an
inconsistent and non-transparent manner (R-PHB, {{f 160-184).

As noted above, the Respondent understands that the transparency and consistency
“strand” of the fair and equitable treatment standard requires Romania to comply with
due process and fair administration. In particular, it means that Romania should
conduct itself in such a way that investors are able to find out what the rules are and
how to comply with them, and the rules should be administered in an even handed
and reasonably consistent fashion.

However, the Respondent argues that the situation here is different. The Claimants
do not contend that Romania was unclear about the rules and procedures they had to
follow, or that the rules were applied inconsistently. Rather, the Claimants contend
that they were not given enough information about ongoing diplomatic negotiations.
According to the Respondent, international investment law does not require a state to
disclose its assessment of the likely outcome of such negotiations. As a result, the
Respondent argues that “the Claimants’ contentions are not only irrelevant as a
matter of law but illogical as a matter of fact: if, as the Claimants seemed to suggest
at the hearing, Romania should have publicly announced at the earliest possible date
that it did not expect to obtain the EU’s agreement to continue the EGO Facilities in
force, the only possible difference is that the Claimants would have lost the benefit of
the Facilities sooner” (R-Rejoinder, § 161). Likewise, the Respondent argues that
there is no need to warn investors of legislative changes (Parkerings, § 345).

The Respondent also contends that the Claimants’ consistency and transparency
allegations fail on the evidence. It asserts that Romania’s conduct “was entirely fair
and reasonable, particularly in a context in which its negotiating partners insisted on a
degree of confidentiality and there were—legitimately and unsurprisingly—differing
views among different government officials and constituencies as to the best
approaches and the most likely outcomes” (R-PHB, § 162). In any case, the
Respondent argues that the Claimants knew or should have known (given their duty
to conduct due diligence, and given their alleged strong political connections) that the
future of the facilities was uncertain. The Respondent also denies that the Claimants
were in fact misled by any of the supposedly inconsistent or non-transparent
Government statements or omissions.

More specifically, Romania argues that (i) its balancing of confidentiality and

openness was reasonable, (ii) it complied with any standard of consistency or
transparency that could reasonably be imposed in the context of complex or politically

224

848.

849.

850.

851.

sensitive legislation and negotiation, and (iii) it was common knowledge that the
facilities were vulnerable.

i. Romania’s balancing of confidentiality and openness was reasonable

Romania asserts that some measure of confidentiality and discretion was necessary
during the accession negotiations. Romania alleges that this discretion was important
“if Romania was to have any hope of obtaining transitional provisions or delayed
repeal of the Facilities’, but also to comply with confidentiality conditions imposed by
the EU. In this regard, Mr. Orban testified that

We tried to inform as much as possible, but in a discreet way, because we
were bound by the clear conditions of conducting accession negotiation
process not to express publicly some of the conclusions which were
already derived at that time from the negotiations with the Union (Tr., Day
8, 233 (Orban)).

Despite the confidentiality constraints imposed by the EU and the need to protect its
bargaining position, Romania argues that it pursued a policy of openness. It asserts
that the government disseminated information about its progress through
governmental websites, the Official Gazette and national media, including detailed
reports on the country’s progress towards accession. Although the Claimants may
criticize the way Romania made information available, Romania contends that the
legislative process need not be perfect nor perfectly transparent (AES v. Hungary, {
9.3.73).

Relying on Mr. Orban's testimony, the Respondent argues that “from the technical
consultations in 2003, it was absolutely clear that for such kind of facilities [customs
duty exemptions] there is no room for manoeuvre” (Tr., Day 8, 229-230 (Orban)).
This conclusion was announced gradually rather than immediately to different
stakeholders (mainly through non-public discussions) because Romania was “not in a
position to make a public statement” (Tr., Day 8, 230 (Orban)). Romania argues that,
as the EU's opposition to the facilities became increasingly apparent, Romania
“sought to convey this information to stakeholders in a way that would not undermine
its negotiating position with the Commission and Member States" (Tr., Day 8, 223-224
(Orban)).

In particular, the Respondent asserts that the Competition Council organized
extensive discussions with stakeholders and provided them with copies of state aid
documents, such as the EU guidelines on regional aid. With respect to the Claimants’
suggestion that the Miculas had not been included in these discussions, Romania
argues that it is implausible that businessmen with the Miculas’ level of political
access and experience could have been deprived of information made available to
smaller stakeholders, or that they would not have insisted on being privy to that
information. The Respondent notes that the Miculas have boasted about their
political connections, and argues that the Romanian government has been
responsive to the Miculas’ concerns in the past (citing as an example the Parmalat
affair, where it alleges that the Miculas were able to use their political influence to
overturn a court judgment that was against their interests). Indeed, given the

225

852.

853.

854.

855.

856.

Claimants own testimony about frequent contacts with government officials, Romania
argues that the Claimants cannot prove that they were excluded from the consultative
process. In any event, Romania argues that this information was public.

 

ii. F i plied with any d of i Icy or p y
that could r ly be ime in the of IK or

politically sensitive legislation and negotiation

 

The Respondent contends that it complied with any standard of consistency or
transparency that could reasonably be imposed in the context of complex or politically
sensitive legislation and negotiation.

The Respondent asserts that “various agencies and individuals connected to the
Government held differing views about the Facilities’ future”, which it argues “is
normal for any state, and it certainly is to be expected of a state undergoing massive
changes in its legal and political culture” (R-PHB, § 173). The Respondent first
highlights Romanian officials’ lack of expertise in the enactment of EGO 24, noting
that Mr. Orban described the EGO 24 program as a “non-professional” attempt by
Romania to achieve its objective of regional development, passed “with an incredible
lack of expertise in terms of how the regional policy is developed at the European
Union level” (Tr., Day 8, 178-180 (Orban)).

In addition, the Respondent acknowledges that, at the time of EGO 24’s enactment
and even after the Competition Council issued Decision 244, a significant part of the
government believed that the EGO 24 facilities were legal. Citing Mr. Marcu’s
testimony at the hearing, the Respondent alleges that “it was this sincere belief that
motivated Romania to enact EGO 75/2000, which only partially implemented the
Competition Council’s decision” (R-PHB, § 175, citing Tr., Day 7; 20-21(Marcu)).
Relying on Mr. Petersen’s testimony, the Respondent argues that “Romanian
politicians and officials who thought that EGO 24 was legal were incorrect, but they
were not unreasonable, and they acted in good faith” (R-PHB, § 174, Tr., Day 6, 111,
178).

The Respondent argues that it was in this environment that Romania promulgated the
2001 Methodological Norms (GD 728/2001). This was the document on which Mr.
Orban was being cross-examined when he admitted that Romania was not being
particularly transparent to investors and was also acting inconsistently in terms of the
availability of EGO 24 (Tr., Day 8, 208-209 (Smith/Orban)). However, the
Respondent contends that when this document was promulgated, “the Government
was publicly at odds with the Competition Council regarding the legality of several of
the EGO 24 Facilities’, and “[aJs Mr. Orban explained, any inconsistency in the
position taken by different agencies resulted from different levels of knowledge and
sophistication and different assessments (or even ‘wishful thinking’) of what might be
obtained”, which “is natural and unavoidable in any state” (R-PHB, | 177).

In any event, the Respondent argues that the 2001 Methodological Norms did not say
that any particular Facility would stay in place for any period of time. Rather, Article 5

226

857.

858.

of GD 728/2001 provided that PIC holders “shall continue to benefit from facilities
under the law, until the expiry of the period for which the disfavored area was
declared.” The Respondent points out that the Claimants and other PIC holders did
indeed continue to benefit from the facilities under EGO 24 [as amended] until 2009.

Similarly, any ambiguity in reports to the public regarding Romania’s progress
towards accession (Exh. HEC-6 and HEC-7) “can be explained by the quandary in
which Romania found itself.” (R-PHB, § 178). Relying on Mr. Orban's testimony,
Romania argues that single statements in the reports (such as statements saying that
the provisions on the facilities granted in the D-areas would be maintained until the
moment of Romania’s accession) should not be taken at face value, but rather
interpreted in context with other sections stating that the issue of state aid was a
sensible subject in the negotiating process. For instance, the Respondent cites to the
following testimony by Mr. Orban:

Q. And in this public document in June 2002, anyone who took the time
to read this would have been told by the government that the
provisions on the facilities granted in the D-areas would be maintained
until the moment of Romania's accession; correct?

A. Yes, this was the intention, and this is why we battled a lot with the
Commission to get this.

Q. So any investor reading this report in June 2002 would be led to
believe that these facilities under EGO 24 would be in place for -- the
shortest period of time would be 2007; correct?

A. No. Because -- once again, | don't want to repeat my previous answer,
but at that time it was clear that this is a subject, a delicate subject in
the accession negotiation process with not a very clear ending.

Q. What's unclear about “will be maintained until the moment of
accession"?

A. No, you have to read all the documents, not only this sentence.
Because it was clear, you mentioned the previous document, the
report, where it is mentioned clearly at page -- so it's 9, okay, it's the
negotiation on state aid control on Romania focused, pages 132, on
the following sensible topics concerning the assessment of the fiscal
aid.

So it was clearly mentioned that this is a sensible subject in the
accession negotiation process.

(Tr., Day 8, 219:21-220:21 (Smith/Orban)).

The Respondent also contends that the June 2002 programme (Exh. HEC-7) was
equivocal about the facilities’ future, as confirmed by Mr. Orban:

Q. [...] You were looking at page 148. You were directed to go to the
second highlighted passage at the beginning. It says:

"The provisions of the normative acts on facilities granted for 'D areas'

will be maintained till the moment of Romania's accession to the
European Union."

227

859.

860.

You were asked about this, you were asked about the import of this
statement and what one would make of it. | think in fairness | want
you to read the next two sentences, where it is said:

"In conformity with the commitment assumed within the
Complementary Position Paper of Chapter 6 ‘Competition Policy’, the
Ministry of Development and Prognosis worked out a study analysing
the activities carried out in D-areas since July 1999 till June 2001. This
study showed that the facilities within deprived areas might be
maintained."

| wanted to read out this passage and direct your attention to it, so
that | can elicit your comment.

A. So, as | told you, | haven't seen this study. So it clearly shows that the
study was made by the Ministry of Development and Prognosis. But
here the formulation is not -- how to say? -- has presented some
doubts about the possibility of preserving these facilities until the end
of the -- until before the accession to the European Union.

(Tr., Day 8, 240:13-241:13 (Petrochilos/Orban)).]

The Respondent also denies the Claimants’ accusation of deliberate adoption of
contradictory positions, arguing that it is unsupported by the evidence. The
Respondent contends that “[t]he state may be a unitary entity for purposes of
international law, but in judging allegations of bad faith and intentional action, reality
must prevail.” The Respondent argues that “[d]ifferent officials—in any state—have
different roles, different expertise, different levels of legal sophistication, and different
opinions”, and that “[i]n a period of transition, the diversity of knowledge and views is
inevitably greater” (R-PHB, §| 179). Citing authors Newcombe and Paradell, the
Respondent submits that “[i]In the case of a large investment that involves the
jurisdiction of several government ministries and agencies and multiple levels of
government, a host state cannot be held to a standard of strict or absolute liability
whereby any degree of inconsistency, ambiguity or lack of transparency breaches fair
and equitable treatment.”

According to the Respondent, the only conclusion that can be reached from the
record is that the Romanian Government was unsure what would happen with the
facilities. It submits that, “[o]n the totality of the record, no reasonable investor could
have concluded that the Government was certain that the facilities would remain
intact until accession, let alone until 2009. There was doubt, and there is nothing
illegal about that, particularly in the context of a state making the transition to EU
membership. Investors may choose to invest in conditions of greater uncertainty, in
search of greater returns—but also taking on, knowingly, the greater risk that comes
with it” (R-PHB, § 180).

‘82 A Newcombe, L. Paradell, Law and Practice of Investment Treaties: Standards of Treatment
(2009), Exh. RL-365, p 294.

228

iii. It was common knowledge that the facilities were vulnerable

861. As explained in detail in Section 3 above, the Respondent argues that it was common
knowledge that the facilities would be scaled back or withdrawn, and the Miculas
knew or should have known of that risk. The Respondent contends that the fair and
equitable treatment standard does not require more than that. Relying on Parkerings
v. Lithuania,'®® the Respondent argues that it was not required to advise the
Claimants of future modifications of the law. Referring to the four points addressed
by the Parkerings tribunal, the Respondent contends that (R-PHB, § 182):

a. The record does not show that Romania “deliberately neglected to advise the
Claimant[s] of the possible amendment of the law’. There was a diversity of
views among Romanian officials at different times about what was likely to
happen and what was desirable. Particularly at the time when the Claimants say
that they committed themselves to a 10- or 20-year investment program (circa
1988-2000) it would be highly unrealistic to say that the Romanian state “knew”
that the facilities would be withdrawn before 2009. There is no evidence that this
information was intentionally withheld from the Claimants; to the contrary, the
evidence is that the Claimants were in frequent contact with many different
officials, including the chief negotiator in the accession negotiations.

b. Moreover, “the political environment was changing at the time... and the
Claimant[s] should have known that the legal framework was unpredictable and
could evolve.”

c. The fact that Romanian officials knew that the facilities might have to be changed
or withdrawn does not mean that they knew exactly what was going to happen or
when, particularly at the times relevant to the Claimants’ case.

d. The Claimants and their legal advisors were entirely capable of perceiving that
the facilities were “in play” and there was a significant chance of amendment or
repeal before 2009.

862. In addition, the Parkerings tribunal held that, while the municipality of Vilnius might
well have breached a contractual obligation of disclosure, that would not amount to a

'88 Parkerings v. Lithuania, J 341-342: “[T]he City of Vilnius was in possession of information, prior to
the conclusion of the Agreement, concerning possible modifications of the Law on Self-Government
and omitted to advise the Claimant ...

However, first, the record does not show that the Respondent deliberately neglected to advise the
Claimant of the possible amendment of the law. Second, as described above, the political environment
was changing at the time of the negotiation of the Agreement and the Claimant should have known
that the legal framework was unpredictable and could evolve. Third, the fact that the City of Vilnius
knew the intention of the legislator to modify certain laws, does not mean that the City of Vilnius knew
the substance of the modification. Indeed, the record does not show that the City of Vilnius was in
possession of any specific information which indicated that the Agreement would be affected by a
modification of the law. Fourth, the Claimant failed to demonstrate that any investor or at least a
qualified law firm was unable to get the information about the amendment process. Therefore, the
Tribunal sees no reason why, in the circumstances, the alleged contractual obligation of the
Municipality to inform BP of the future modification of the law is constitutive of a legitimate expectation
for the Claimant.”

229

863.

864.

865.

866.

breach of the relevant BIT. The Respondent notes that here there is no question of a
contractual or other municipal law obligation requiring the Government to disclose to
the Claimants the details of the accession negotiations or warn them that the law
might change.

In view of the above, the Respondent argues that “[t]he Claimants’ allegations about
transparency and consistency are red herrings. The plain fact is that, no matter what
calumnies the Claimants wish to direct at Romania’s conduct, the Claimants could not
reasonably have believed that the facilities were guaranteed to remain in place and
unchanged until 2009. There is no evidence that they were in fact duped or misled by
anything the Government said (or failed to say)—because they were not” (R-PHB, {
184).

c. The Tribunal’s analysis

It is evident from the record that, as the Respondent itself puts it, Romania was in a
quandary whilst trying to balance two conflicting policies, i.e., first, the continuation of
the facilities regime and the protection of the interests of PIC holders in the disfavored
regions, and, second, EU accession. The Tribunal has already found that Romania’s
actions, including its choice to terminate the EGO 24 regime in order to obtain EU
accession, were not undertaken in bad faith. However, it finds that the manner in
which Romania carried out that termination was not sufficiently transparent to meet
the fair and equitable treatment standard.

The Tribunal cannot fail to note that the Respondent's own witness, Mr. Orban, who
was Romania’s Deputy Chief Negotiator for EU accession from 2001 to 2004,
conceded that Romania acted inconsistently, non-transparently and ambiguously in
terms of the availability of the EGO 24 program and the information given to PIC
holders as late as 2002 (Tr., Day 8, 208-209, 221 (Orban)). For example, Romania’s
official reports regarding its progress towards EU accession were ambiguous (and
perhaps even misleading, even if unintentionally) with respect to the duration of the
EGO 24 regime. Specifically, Romania’s “National Programme for Accession of
Romania to the European Union” (Exh. HEC-7) stated that “[t]he provisions of the
normative acts on facilities granted for ‘D areas’ will be maintained till the moment of
Romania’s accession to the European Union” (Exh. HEC-7, p. 148). Mr. Orban’s
protests that this document should not be interpreted literally (Tr., Day 8, 219:21-
220:21 (Smith/Orban), cited above at paragraph 857) are unpersuasive: an ordinary
reader would not have understood that, because the assessment of fiscal aid was a
“delicate subject” in the accession negotiations, these statements should not be taken
literally.

The Tribunal has already found that, until sometime in 2003, any inconsistencies in
Romania’s statements as to the compatibility of the EGO 24 regime with EU state aid
regulations were based on a good faith lack of knowledge and an overly optimistic
initial assessment of its bargaining power vis-a-vis the EU (see Section 4 above). In
addition, although for purposes of attribution the state is one single entity, when it
comes to assessing transparency one cannot ignore the reality that the state is made

230

867.

868.

869.

of different departments which may hold conflicting views as to how to implement a
particular policy. However, once it became clear to Romania that the incentives
would have to be abolished (sometime in 2003, according to Mr. Orban), Romania
should have made PIC holders aware of this fact. This was the position taken by the
tribunal in Metalclad:

The Tribunal understands [transparency] to include the idea that all
relevant legal requirements for the purpose of initiating, completing and
successfully operating investments made, or intended to be made, under
the Agreement should be capable of being readily known to all affected
investors of another Party. There should be no room for doubt or
uncertainty on such matters. Once the authorities of the central
government of any Party (whose international responsibility in such
matters has been identified in the preceding section) become aware of
any scope for misunderstanding or confusion in this connection, it is
their duty to ensure that the correct position is promptly determined
and clearly stated so that investors can proceed with all appropriate
expedition in the confident belief that they are acting in accordance
with all relevant laws.'™* (Emphasis added)

Romania argues that it was bound by confidentiality obligations imposed by the EU.
However, there is no evidence of such requirements, other than Mr. Orban’s
testimony. While the Tribunal does not discount this testimony (and finds Mr. Orban
generally to be a credible witness), it seems unlikely that the EU would object to
Romania informing affected parties of steps taken by Romania in order to align
incompatible aid with the acquis, when such alignment was exactly what the EU was
requesting Romania to do since the conclusion of the Europe Agreement. Even if
confidentiality was required, or Romania preferred to keep the negotiations with the
EU confidential for other reasons, Romania then had to make a choice and accept the
consequences of maintaining such confidentiality.

Moreover, the Tribunal finds Romania’s argument that it had to keep the negotiations
confidential to maintain its “bargaining position” with the EU unconvincing. If,
according to Mr. Orban, “from the technical consultations in 2003, it was absolutely
clear that for such kind of facilities [customs duty exemptions] there is no room for
manoeuvre” (Tr., Day 8, 229-230 (Orban)), then Romania had no bargaining position
to speak of. Romania could be referring to negotiations to obtain transitional periods
on the EGO 24 incentives, but there is no evidence whatsoever that Romania even
attempted to negotiate transitional periods for the customs duty exemptions.

Thus, the Tribunal finds that Romania should have alerted PIC holders reasonably
soon after it became clear that the EGO 24 incentives would be abolished. The
statements made by Prime Minister Nastase on national television in January and
May of 2004 were of a general nature (as befitting their context), and thus insufficient.
Given the importance of the EGO 24 program and how intensely it was discussed in
the context of Romania’s EU accession, it was reasonable to expect that the
Government would have given to the participants a formal advance notice of the
program’s anticipated termination. Prime Minister Nastase had also stated that the

184 Metalclad v. Mexico, § 76 (Emphasis added).

231

870.

871.

872.

incentives would be in place until the date of accession, ®* and that the government
would try to negotiate transitional periods or that there would be compensation
packages for PIC holders (see paragraph 689 above), so the actual situation was
unclear to PIC holders. Nor has the Respondent pointed to any evidence of
discussions with stakeholders organized by the Competition Council or other
government agencies.

As a result, the Tribunal finds that the Respondent breached the fair and equitable
treatment obligation by failing to inform PIC holders in a timely manner that the EGO
24 regime would be ended prior to its stated date of expiry (1 April 2009).

The Tribunal finds the Claimants’ remaining claims on lack of transparency or
inconsistency unsubstantiated. Although perhaps the manner in which Romania
offered, amended and then finally revoked the incentives could give rise to some
confusion, it did not rise to the level of a breach of the fair and equitable treatment
obligation. The fact that the Government repealed the incentives from EGO 24 but
made no amendment to GD 194/1999 (which states that investors in the $tei-Nucet-
Draganesti region will benefit from the incentives for ten years) likewise could not
have created the level of uncertainty that could rise to the level of a breach of the fair
and equitable treatment standard.

The Tribunal concludes that, by repealing the EGO 24 incentives prior to 1 April 2009,
Romania did not act unreasonably or in bad faith (except that the Respondent acted
unreasonably by maintaining investors’ obligations after terminating the incentives).
The Tribunal, however, concludes by majority that Romania violated the Claimants’
legitimate expectations that those incentives would be available, in substantially the
same form, until 1 April 2009. Romania also failed to act transparently by failing to
inform the Claimants in a timely manner that the regime would be terminated prior to
its stated date of expiration. As a result, the Tribunal finds that Romania failed to
“ensure fair and equitable treatment of the investments” of the Claimants in the
meaning of Article 2(3) of the BIT.

‘8° In an interview in Oradea, Bihor County in May 2004 (Exh. C-652), Prime Minister Nastase
indicated that “[sJubsequent to 2007, when we want to be accepted in the European Union, these
disfavored areas will no longer exist in Romania” (Emphasis added).

232

873.

874.

c. THE CLAIMANTS’ REMAINING CLAIMS

In addition to their claims under the umbrella clause and their fair and equitable
treatment claims, the Claimants assert that the Respondent has breached the second
part of Article 2(3) of the BIT by impairing the management, maintenance, use,
enjoyment and disposal of their investments through unreasonable or discriminatory
measures; and Article 4(1) of the BIT by expropriating their right to receive the
incentives (as well as their entire investment) without compensation.

In light of the Tribunal’s conclusion that, by prematurely revoking the EGO 24
incentives in the manner that it did, the Respondent breached its obligation to treat
the Claimants’ investments fairly and equitably, the Tribunal does not need to address
the Claimants’ remaining claims. Indeed, each of those claims arises from the same
facts as the fair and equitable treatment claim, and the Claimants claim the same
compensation in each instance (see Section VII below). Thus, even if the Tribunal
were to find in favor of the Claimants with respect to these claims, this would not
impact the Tribunal’s calculation of damages. As a result, any legal findings on these
matters are unnecessary.

233

Vil.

875.

876.

877.

878.

879.

DAMAGES

Having found a breach of the BIT, the Tribunal now turns to the Claimants’ requests
for reparation.

During the hearing on the merits, the Respondent argued that the Claimants had
amended their case on damages. As a result, the Tribunal directed the Claimants to
clarify their final request for relief, which they did on 20 December 2013 with their
Revised Request for Relief and later confirmed in their Post-Hearing Brief and closing
arguments. The Respondent had several opportunities to comment on this Revised
Request for Relief, and submitted its own prayers for relief in response. The Tribunal
has focused exclusively on the Parties’ formal prayers for relief, namely the
Claimants’ prayers for relief as set out in their Revised Request for Relief," and the
Respondent's response in its Post-Hearing Brief.’ The Tribunal has also
considered that the Parties’ additional requests for relief made in the context of their
submissions on provisional measures fall under the category of formal prayers for
relief. All arguments have been considered, but the Tribunal sees no need to decide
on some of the arguments the Parties have made during the course of the
proceedings where they are not necessary to the Tribunal’s decisions on the actual
requests themselves.

The Tribunal will first provide an overview of the Claimants’ damages case and the
Respondent's position in this respect (Section A below). It will then address certain
preliminary matters (Section B below), before analyzing the Claimants’ specific claims
for damages (Section C below). The Tribunal will turn next to the Respondent's
defense that EU accession benefitted the Claimants (Section D below), followed by
the Claimants’ request that damages be awarded net of taxes (Section E below).
Finally, the Tribunal will address the question of who should be the beneficiaries of
the Award (Section F below).

A. OVERVIEW

Overview of the Claimants’ damages case

The Claimants’ damages case has evolved over time, as described below.
a. The Claimants’ original damages case

In their Statement of Claim, relying on ILC Articles 34 to 36, the Claimants articulated
their damages case as follows:

‘88 At the end of their Post-Hearing Brief, the Claimants “request an award granting them the relief set
out in the Revised Request” (C-PHB, § 279).

157

At the end of its Post-Hearing Brief, the Respondent requests that the Tribunal “(a) DISMISS the

Claimants’ claim in their entirety; and (b) ORDER the Claimants to pay in their entirety the costs of this
arbitration [...] (R-PHB, § 354). Although the Respondent submitted a Supplementary Post-Hearing
Brief commenting on the Claimants’ Revised Request for Relief, it did not articulate a formal prayer for
relief in that submission.

234

880.

881.

882.

“378. [...] Claimants are entitled to restitution of the legal framework that
would have prevailed had Romania not withdrawn the tax
exemptions and other incentives. In addition, Claimants are entitled
to consequential damages arising as a consequence of Romania's
illegal acts.

379. In the alternative, if the Tribunal finds that restitution is impossible or
constitutes a disproportionate burden, the Claimants are entitled to
full damages for the loss suffered as a consequence of Romania's
illegal acts. This includes damages for the direct loss suffered as a
consequence of the impermissible withdrawal of the tax exemptions
and other incentives. It also includes consequential damages for the
loss suffered as a consequence of the loss of the cash flow and loss
of opportunity.”

(C-SoC, J 378-379)
On this basis, the Claimants requested the following:

a. ‘“[R]estitution of the legal framework as in force at the time of the approval of the
EGO 24/1998, alternatively adequate compensation for the losses suffered up to
the amount of EUR 450,000,000; plus lost profits and any further losses suffered
by Claimants as a consequence of Respondent's actions described above. The
exact amount will be specified at an appropriate point during the proceedings” (C-
SoC, § 381).

b. “[R]eimbursement of their costs and expenses including the costs of the present
proceedings” (C-SoC, § 382), and

c.  “[I]nterest compounded quarterly on all monetary claims with the precise rate of
interest to be specified at an appropriate time during the proceedings” (C-SoC, ¥
383).

b. The Claimants’ damages case in their Reply

In their Reply, the Claimants abandoned their request for restitution (C-Reply, 1 583,
666, fn. 960). From this point forward, their case focused on compensation.

The Claimants submit that, to determine the compensation owed by Romania for its
breaches of the BIT, the Tribunal should apply, in the first instance, any /ex specialis
in the BIT. In the absence of any /ex specialis, the Tribunal must apply the rules of
customary international law. The Claimants note that the only /ex specialis found in
the BIT with respect to compensation is in Article 4, which sets out the standard of
compensation for a “lawful” expropriation (i.e., an expropriation that meets the
requirements of Article 4). However, the BIT is silent with respect to the standard of
compensation for “unlawful” expropriations and other breaches of the BIT’s
substantive protections, such as those alleged by the Claimants in this arbitration. In
these cases, the Claimants contend that the appropriate standard for compensation
under customary international law is the principle of “full compensation”, as articulated
by the Permanent Court of International Justice (PClJ) in the Factory at Chorzow

235

883.

884.

885.

case.'®® According to the Claimants, this principle is supported by the ILC Articles
and by an overwhelming majority of cases and authorities. The Claimants add that
the generally accepted view is that they are entitled to be fully compensated
irrespective of the breach or breaches of the BIT that the Tribunal may find (C-Reply,
491 575-588).

The Claimants argue that they can only be fully compensated by being placed in the
position in which they would have been had Romania not breached the BIT. This
includes in particular the lost profits that the Claimants would have made had the Raw
Materials Incentive not been repealed. The Claimants further submit that the Tribunal
has wide discretion in calculating damages (C-Reply, {{] 589-609).

In their Reply, the Claimants requested an award of compensation for the damages
described in Professor Lessard’s First Expert Report, in the amount of €613.7 million
for the following categories of damages (R-Reply, 9 611-655):

a. Increased costs for imported raw materials;

b. Lost sales of products containing sugar free of customs tax;

c. Financial penalties incurred to the state for delays in tax payments and that could
have been avoided with cash available from the incentives and the lost product

sales;

d. Lost opportunities to complete or initiate incremental investments (malt, can and
cogeneration plants) that would have created cost savings and _ incentive
payments for green energy; and

e. Lost incremental sales of private-label beer that would have been profitable with
completion of the cost-saving investments.

The damages sought were broken down as follows (C-Reply, {] 653):

"88 Case Concerning Factory at Chorzéw (Germany v. Poland), Judgment 13, Permanent Court of
International Justice, 13 Sept. 1928 (hereinafter “Factory at Chorzow” or “Chérzow Factory’) (1928
PClJ, Series A. No. 17).

236

Summary of Damages Including Incremental Sales
(Present Value at September 30, 2009 in Millions of RON unless Otherwise Noted)

 

 

 

Damage Grossed-Up For Tax on Award
(Million RON) (Million RON) (Million EUR)
Increased Costs on Raw Materials 139.8 166.4 39.6
Lost Sales of SCPs to Industrial Users 524.4 624.3 148.7
Incremental Margin from Lost Sales of Finished Goods 98.5 117.3 27.9
Penalties Avoided 46.9 55.8 13.3
Malt Plant 28.0 333 79
Cogeneration Plant 5918 704.5 167.8
Can Plant 734.9 874.8 208.4
Total 2,164.3 2,576.5 613.7
886. The Claimants added that, in any event, their injury could not be found to be inferior

887.

888.

889.

to the amount that they invested in reliance upon Romania’s undertaking to provide
the incentives for a period of 10 years. The Claimants provided an “evaluation of that
amount” in the expert reports of Chris Osborne of (FTI) (C-Reply, {| 655). Specifically,
Mr. Osborne calculated this amount to be RON 811 million. ‘°°

In addition to the damages sought, the Claimants requested post-award compound
interest (C-Reply, {| 657-665), and costs and expenses associated with this
arbitration proceeding, including attorneys’ fees (C-Reply, {| 656).

c. The Claimants’ revised request for relief

On 20 December 2010, the Claimants submitted a revised request for relief
(“Claimants’ Revised Request for Relief”). In their Post-Hearing Brief submitted on 13
May 2011, the Claimants explained this Revised Request in detail, and set out three
alternative methods (Methods A through C) according to which the Tribunal could
calculate the damages sought. They stressed however that “it is not their contention
that the three methods listed below, or the itemized injuries that comprise the
elements of the three methods, must be strictly adhered to in the ultimate calculation
of an award” (C-PHB, 96).

The Claimants explain that Methods A and B are “alternative expectation scenarios
that are offered to demonstrate the value of the integrated and flexible factory
platform that the Claimants could have expected to derive had the Incentives not
been revoked” (C-PHB, {| 97).

'° In his second expert Report, Mr. Osborne places the value of the Claimants’ pre-EGO 24 business
in “a valuation range of approximately Euro 340 million to Euro 450 million” ({ 7.60), settling for a final
estimation of Euro 400 million (§ 1.38); see also C-PHB, § 228. However, Mr. Osborne then deducts
€100 million to take into account factors other than revocation that may have affected the Claimants’
financial situation, arriving to a final estimation of €300 million (at the time, RON 811 million) (Second
ER of C. Osborne, § 1.43).

237

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

890. According to the Claimants, Method A “represents the expected returns from
continuation of the ten year plan that Claimants undertook in reliance on the
Incentives, a plan intended to both capitalize on the Incentives themselves during
their duration, and to complete a platform that would have performed profitably after
the Incentives statutorily expired” (C-PHB, § 97).

891. Specifically, in Method A the Claimants request an award of RON 2,655.35 million
(before interest) (at the date of this Award, approximately €597 million) representing
the total of each of the following itemized injuries: '®°

No. Claim Amount claimed before Approximate Interest applies
interest (RON) equivalent in Euro rom
1. Increased cost of sugar RON 85.1 million € 19.1 million 1 March 2007
2. Increased cost of PET RON 6.3 million € 1.4 million 1 March 2007
3. Increased cost of raw RON 17.5 million € 3.9 million 1 March 2007
materials other than sugar and
PET
4. Lost opportunity to stockpile RON 62.5 million € 14 million 1 July 2010
sugar in 2009
Subtotal RON 171.4M €38.5M
5. Financial penalties incurred RON 63.65 million € 14.3 million N/A
but not yet paid (unless waived by
Respondent)
6. Financial penalties paid RON 40 million €9 million 1 July 2007
between 1 April 2005 and 30
September 2010
7. | Lost profits on sales of finished | No less than ROM 427 € 96 million’ 1 May 2008
goods million
8. | Lost profits on sales of SCPs_ | RON 492.3 million € 110.7 million 1 July 2007'%
9. Lost profits from inability to RON 28 million € 6.3 million 30 Sept. 2009
complete a malt plant
10. | Lost profits from inability to RON 720.4 million € 161.9 million 30 Sept. 2009
complete a canning plant
11. | Lost profits from inability to RON 712.6 million € 160.2 million 30 Sept. 2009
complete a co-generation plant
TOTAL RON 2,655.35 M €597M

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

*©° Claimants’ Revised Request for Relief, {2.1 to 2.5. The tables set out in this section are based on
the tables included in pages 42-43 of the Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief. As the Parties have done in
some of their respective submissions, the Tribunal has added, for indicative purposes only, the Euro
equivalent of the amounts claimed rounded up to the nearest hundred thousand at the exchange rate
of 9 December 2013 of 4.4482 RON/EUR, source: European Central Bank.

‘6! Mr. Boulton’s valuation was originally made in Euro, for an amount of “in excess of €100 million”
(ER of R. Boulton, 5.99).

18 In his expert reports, Mr. Osborne had proposed that interest be computed as of 1 March 2007.
However, during the hearing on closing arguments, the Claimants circulated a letter from Mr. Osborne
dated 7 June 2011 in which he made an adjustment to the calculation of this claim in order to take into
account working capital needs (Tr., Day 13, 6-7, 293 (Schwartz)). This adjustment involved a delay of
120 days for computing interest, which meant that interest should be computed from 1 July 2007
(Letter from Mr. Osborne dated 7 June 2011).

238

892.

As an alternative to Method A, the Claimants propose Method B, which they argue
“represents the expected returns from the platform that the Claimants actually
constructed, had the Claimants been able to maintain their respective market shares
in their existing and proven product lines.” The Claimants argue that they “have a
proven track record of constructing flexible, cost-efficient, and integrated factories,
and of successfully and profitably penetrating markets and building market share.”
They further contend that “[g]iven this track record, and the Claimants’ known reliance
on state investment incentives in building this track record, it was reasonably
foreseeable to the Respondent that revocation of the Incentives at issue here would
result in the losses reflected by either Methods A or B” (C-PHB, {| 97).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

893. Specifically, in Method B the Claimants request an award of RON 2,698.25 million
(before interest) (at the date of this Award, approximately €606.5 million)
representing the total of each of the following itemized injuries:

No. Claim Amount claimed before Approximate Interest applies
interest equivalent in from
(RON) Euro'™*
1. The subtotal of items 1 through | RON 275.05 million € 61.8 million N/A
6 of Method A
2. | Lost profits on sales of finished | RON 2,423.20 million’® | € 544.7 million 15 Aug. 2007
goods as calculated by BCG
TOTAL RON 2,698.25 M € 606.5 M

894. In the alternative to the expectation losses set out in Methods A and B, the Claimants
have proposed Method C, a reliance damages calculation. According to the
Claimants, Method C “is a means by which the Tribunal can measure the
consequences of the Respondent's unlawful act by calculating the value of the
investment actually made by the Claimants in reliance on the promised, ten-year
duration of the Incentives, and which has been lost” (C-PHB, { 98).

895. Specifically, in Method C the Claimants request an award of RON 874.65 million

163

(before interest) (at the date of this Award, approximately €196.6 million),

representing each of the following itemized injuries:'*

Claimants’ Revised Request for Relief, 2.6.

*®4 at the exchange rate of 9 December 2013 of 4.4482 RON/EUR, source: European Central Bank.
'85 Although the Claimants’ final prayer for relief is made in RON, the Parties have also expressed this
claim in different Euro amounts. These differences appear to stem from the fact that BCG’s
calculations were done in Euros, while the Claimants have expressed their claims in RON, and the
fluctuations in the exchange rate since the submission of the BCG report have affected the Euro
amount at which the Parties have referred to this claim. Specifically, BCG’s second report calculates
the lost profits at €722 million (Second ER of BCG, p. 17), while in its Supplementary Post-Hearing
Brief the Respondent values this claim at €590 million (R-SPHB, p. 15).

188 Claimants’ Revised Request for Relief, § 2.7.

239

 

Claim Amount claimed Equivalent in Interest applies
(before interest) from

 

Financial penalties incurred RON 63.65 million € 14.3 million N/A
but not yet paid (unless waived by
Respondent)

 

Loss of value incurred in RON 811 million'®* € 182.3 million 1 Jan. 2002
investing in reliance on the
Incentives

 

 

 

 

TOTAL RON 874.65 M € 196.6 M

 

 

 

 

896.

897.

898.

899.

900.

The Claimants further request interest and costs (Revised Request for Relief, 1 3
and 5), as described in Sections VIII and X below. The Claimants also request that
“[t]he total amount of damages payable by the Respondent comprising the amounts
set out in paragraphs 2, 3 and 5 [that is, all damages, interest and costs requested] to
be received net of any tax obligations imposed by Romania on the proceeds”
(Claimants’ Revised Request for Relief, { 4).

In addition, the Claimants have requested that “[alny damages payable, including
interest and costs, should be awarded to the individual Claimants, loan Micula and
Viorel Micula, to be divided between them on a 50:50 basis. In the alternative, any
damages payable, including interest and costs, should be awarded to all five
Claimants” (Revised Request for Relief, p. 1). This request was later confirmed in the
Claimants’ prayer for relief included at the end of their Post-Hearing Brief: “the
Claimants request an award granting them the relief set out in the Revised Request”
(C-PHB, § 279).

Finally, in the context of their applications for provisional measures, the Claimants
have also requested post-award injunctive relief, as described in Section IX.B below,
as well as a declaration that the Respondent is not allowed to set off any damages
awarded to the Claimants against the EFDG’s tax debts (as described in Section IX.A
below).

Overview of the Respondent’s position

The Respondent argues that the Claimants’ damages case is speculative and
unsupported (R-Rejoinder, 9 259-288, R-PHB §{ 207-210; R-SPHB, §f 1-6; Tr., Day
1, 191; Day 2, 137-138).

The Respondent contends that the Claimants’ quantum case has changed
substantially over the course of the proceedings. It notes that this claim began as an

*®7 at the exchange rate of 9 December 2013 of 4.4482 RON/EUR, source: European Central Bank.
188 Mr. Osborne's final valuation for the reliance claim was €300 million (at the time, RON 811 million)
(Second ER of C. Osborne, § 1.43). In line with this final valuation, in their Revised Request for Relief
and in their Post-Hearing Brief, the Claimants requested RON 811 million for this claim (Revised
Request for Relief, 2.7; C-PHB, {J 228-231). Although in their Closing Statements the Claimants
stated that they disagree with this discount and therefore the claim remained within the range between
€350-400 million (Tr., Day 12, 123-125 (Reed)), the Tribunal will disregard this latest argument. It is far
from certain that the Claimants could purport to amend their sought relief at this late juncture and
actually did.

240

901.

902.

903.

904.

905.

unparticularized claim for €450 million “plus lost profits and any further losses”, but
was transformed substantially when the Claimants submitted their Reply. From that
point forward, the Claimants’ case has centered on direct losses for approximately
€33 million, which they have “snowballed” into indirect losses for approximately €600
million. Specifically, the Claimants allege that the loss of the Raw Materials Incentive
caused them to lose cash flows totaling approximately €33 million (mostly related to
the higher cost of purchasing sugar), which have allegedly prevented the Claimants
from pursuing a purported “10-year plan”, causing the Claimants to forgo hundreds of
million Euro in hypothetical lost profits (most of them relating to investments they
never made or businesses they never developed). The Respondent also notes that
the Claimants blame this “cash crunch” and their subsequent inability to expand for
having prevented them from paying Romanian taxes in a timely manner, resulting in
interest and penalties which they now claim as losses.

The Respondent also complains that the Claimants have instructed an army of
experts, made conflicting damages calculations and constantly changed positions.
For example, until the hearing their damages claims were mostly supported by Prof.
Lessard’s expert reports; however, in their Post-Hearing Brief the Claimants rely on
Mr. Osborne's calculations. The Claimants have also advanced an alternative
reliance losses claim on the basis of Mr. Osborne’s expert reports. The Respondent
also complains that the Claimants submitted expert reports from Mr. Juhasz of BCG
and Mr. Boulton of LECG, and that the status and relevance of these reports
remained unclear to Respondent even after the hearing. However, the Claimants rely
on both of these reports in their Revised Request for Relief.

The Respondent further argues that the Claimants’ damages case is fundamentally
flawed, and should be dismissed, for the following reasons.

First, the Respondent argues that all of the claimed categories of damages are barred
by legal standards. The Respondent does not dispute the general applicability of the
Chorzéw Factory standard of compensation under international law, upon which the
Claimants rely. However, it argues that “the ‘full compensation’ principle does not
create an entitlement to collect a windfall based on damages not suffered, not proven,
and not causally connected with a violation of a treaty obligation’, which in the
Respondent's view is what the Claimants seek here (R-Rejoinder, 277).

More specifically, the Respondent argues that the Claimants (i) have not met their
burden of proof, in particular with respect to claims of lost profits, and (ii) have failed
to prove causation.

With respect to burden of proof, the Respondent argues that the Claimants bear the
burden of proving every element of their claim, and have failed to do so. Even with
respect to heads of damages where there is some evidence, the Respondent submits
that it is incomplete and insufficient. The Respondent thus argues that the Tribunal
should dismiss the Claimants’ claims on this basis (R-PHB, § 216).'® In addition, the

‘8° The Respondent's specific comments as to the lack of evidence of each head of claim are provided
in Section C below.

241

906.

907.

908.

909.

Respondent contends that the Claimants must also meet the specific legal standard
with respect to lost profits (discussed in Section VII.C.3 below), which it argues they
have not done (R-PHB, § 217-221, R-Rejoinder, {{/ 297-300).

With respect to causation, the Respondent submits that a state’s actions must be the
direct and proximate cause of the damages suffered (R-Rejoinder, J 316-321). The
Claimants must prove that breaches of the BIT by Romania were the “underlying” or
“dominant” cause of each head of damage claimed. The causal connection must not
be too remote, and there can be no intervening causes breaking the chain of
causation.

In the Respondent's view, this rule disposes of the Claimants’ entire damages claim,
leaving only the claim for alleged direct losses for payments of customs duties. The
Respondent argues that all but the direct losses claim are premised on the theory that
the Claimants had insufficient funds (or cash flows) to undertake other activities
because of the repeal of the Raw Materials Facility. If the Tribunal were to consider
that this “cash crunch” had other causes, or that the Claimants might have obtained
alternative funds from other sources, then the chain of causation has been broken.
As explained further below, Romania argues that the hearing exposed the Claimants’
rapidly deteriorating financial position before repeal of the Raw Materials Facility and
their own business decisions as the real causes of the Claimants’ alleged losses,
severing the causal link between repeal of the Raw Materials Facility and the claimed
damages. The Respondent adds that, if the Claimants really had been able to
convert €30 million of cash flow into more than €600 million, there would have been
no shortage of lenders and equity investors ready to provide the funding.

In addition, the Respondent contends that the Claimants must also establish the
causal link between each alleged breach of the BIT and the specific damages caused
by such breach. The Respondent notes that the Claimants have consistently refused
to do so, including in the Revised Request for Relief. As a result, the Respondent
contends that no assumptions can or should be made about which damages flow
from each alleged treaty breach. It would be wrong to expect the Tribunal to simply
assume that all of the heads of damages claimed flow directly from all of the alleged
treaty breaches. In particular, the Respondent argues that it would be wrong to
assume that the same damages would flow from an expropriation than from a breach
of other treaty standards. In this respect, the Respondent argues that the Claimants
have not even purported to identify the fair market value of the assets expropriated
(their alleged vested right to enjoy the Raw Materials Facility).

Second, the Respondent argues that every category of the Claimants’ quantum case
(with the exception of the direct losses claim) is based on two assumptions for which
there is no evidentiary support:'”°

a. That the Claimants had a “10-year plan” that they would have implemented but
for the withdrawal of the Raw Materials Facility, and

"° The Respondent's arguments on the assumptions identified above (including arguments on
evidence) are addressed in the analysis of each of the Claimants’ claims in Section C below.

242

910.

911.

912.

913.

914.

915.

916.

b. That, but for that withdrawal, the Claimants would have started selling SCPs to
industrial customers (at about the time of revocation) and would have cornered
the Romanian sugar market, thereby generating the cash flows necessary to
undertake the Incremental Investments.

In addition, the Respondent argues that no award of damages can be made in
respect to losses incurred by non-Claimant companies, nor for the diminution in value
of the Individual Claimants’ direct or indirect shareholdings in such companies,
because they fall outside the jurisdiction of this Tribunal. In this regard, it argues that
the Tribunal accepted jurisdiction over the Claimants’ shareholdings only over the
Corporate Claimants (R-PHB, 314).

Further, the Respondent opposes the Claimants’ request that all damages be
awarded to the Individual Claimants.

In view of the above, at the end of its Post-Hearing Brief the Respondent requests the
Tribunal to award the following relief:"”'

“(a) DISMISS the Claimants’ claim in their entirety; and

(b) ORDER the Claimants to pay in their entirety the costs of this arbitration
[..-] (R-PHB, 354).

Finally, in the context of its application for the revocation of provisional measures, the
Respondent requested the Tribunal to “explicitly provide in the Award that any
amount awarded to any of the Claimants, whether as damages, arbitration costs, or
otherwise, is subject to set-off by Romania against the tax debts of all eleven EFDG
companies, including lawful interest and penalties” (Respondent's Revocation
Application, § 87(c)).

B. PRELIMINARY MATTERS

Before turning to the Claimants’ specific claims for damages, the Tribunal will address
certain preliminary matters, in particular legal standards (Section 1 below), and the
Respondent's claim that certain of the Claimants’ claims fall outside of the jurisdiction
of this Tribunal (Section 2 below).

Legal Standards

A substantial part of the Respondent's arguments on quantum relates to the legal
standards applicable to an award of damages. Accordingly, before addressing the
quantification of the Claimants’ claims, the Tribunal will address these standards.

The basis for the Claimants’ expectations damages claims is the principle of full
reparation enshrined in Article 31 of the ILC Articles, '” which provides:

'" Although the Respondent submitted a Supplementary Post-Hearing Brief commenting on the
Claimants’ Revised Request for Relief, it did not articulate a prayer for relief in that submission.

243

Article 31. Reparation

1. The responsible State is under an obligation to make full reparation for
the injury caused by the internationally wrongful act.

2. Injury includes any damage, whether material or moral, caused by the
internationally wrongful act of a State.

917. As articulated by the PClJ in the Factory at Chorzow case, “reparation must, as far as
possible, wipe out all the consequences of the illegal act and reestablish the situation
which would, in all probability, have existed if that act had not been committed.”'”°
This principle has been generally understood to mean that the claimant must be
placed back in the position it would have been “in all probability’ but for the
international wrong. In most cases, this involves the payment of compensation (ILC
Articles 34 and 36).'

918. The Respondent does not dispute the principle of full reparation. Rather, it contends
that the Claimants have not met their burden of proof with respect to the damage
suffered, and have failed to prove that the damages alleged were caused by
Romania’s breaches of the BIT.

919. The Respondent also argues that the Claimants must prove both the existence of the
damage for which they request compensation, as well as the existence of a causal
link between the breaches of the BIT found by the Tribunal and the damage alleged.

920. Article 36(2) of the ILC Articles provides that “compensation shall cover any
financially assessable damage including loss of profits insofar as it is established.”
The Parties do not dispute the general principles on burden and standard of proof,
except when they relate to lost profits. The Tribunal addresses the standard for an
award of lost profits together with the analysis of the Claimants’ specific claims for lost
profits in Section C.3 below.

 

'? The Tribunal is aware that Part Two of the ILC Articles, which sets out the legal consequences of
internationally wrongful acts, may not apply, at least directly, to cases involving persons or entities
other than States, such as in investment disputes as is the case here. In particular, it is aware that
Comment (3) to Article 28 states that “[...] while Part One applies to all the cases in which an
internationally wrongful act may be committed by a State, Part Two has a more limited scope. It does
not apply to obligations of reparation to the extent that these arise towards or are invoked by a person
or entity other than a State. In other words, the provisions of Part Two are without prejudice to any
right, arising from the international responsibility of a State, which may accrue directly to any person or
entity other than a State, and article 33 makes this clear.” That being said, the ILC Articles reflect
customary international law in the matter of state responsibility, and to the extent that a matter is not
ruled by the treaties applicable to this case and that there are no circumstances commanding
otherwise, the Tribunal will turn to the ILC Articles for guidance. The Tribunal further notes that the
Claimants have cited to the ILC Articles and the Respondent has not objected.

8 Factory at Chorzow, p. 47.

4 article 34 of the ILC Articles (forms of reparation) provides that “[flull reparation for the injury
caused by the internationally wrongful act shall take the form of restitution, compensation and
satisfaction, either singly or in combination, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.”

Article 36 of the ILC Articles (compensation) provides: “1. The State responsible for an internationally
wrongful act is under an obligation to compensate for the damage caused thereby, insofar as such
damage is not made good by restitution. 2. The compensation shall cover any financially assessable
damage including loss of profits insofar as it is established.”

244

921.

922.

923.

924.

With respect to causation, the Respondent argues that the Claimants must not only
prove causality in fact (which has been defined by the Biwater v. Tanzania tribunal as
“the sufficient link between the wrongful act and the damages in question”'’’), but
must establish that causation is proximate (i.e., not too remote or inconsequential).
According to the Respondent, to prove proximate causation, it would not be enough
for the Claimants to demonstrate that the repeal of the Raw Materials Facility had a
detrimental impact on their business activities; they must also prove that the breaches
of the Treaty were the “underlying” or “dominant” cause of each element of
compensation that they seek. The Respondent relies (among others) on the ELS/
case, where the International Court of Justice found that, despite the fact that there
were several causes that led to the ELSI disaster, “the underlying cause was ELSI's
headlong course towards insolvency,”'”® and on GAMI v. Mexico, where the tribunal
found that the damages suffered by the claimant had been largely the result of market
forces'”” (R-Rejoinder, {] 317-320). In addition, the Respondent contends that the
Claimants must show a direct causal link between each violation of the BIT and the
specific damages caused (see paragraph 908 above). Finally, relying on Lauder v.
Czech Republic,'”® the Respondent argues that there must be no intervening cause
for the damage (R-Rejoinder, § 319).

The Claimants do not dispute the principles on causation described by the
Respondent. Citing Biwater v. Tanzania,'’° the Claimants simply assert that “for each
item of damage claimed, there is a ‘sufficient link between the wrongful act and the
damage in question”, and that “the Respondent’s actions were the ‘underlying’ or
‘dominant’ cause of the Claimants’ losses” (C-PHB, § 100). The Claimants provide
further details on these alleged causal links in the description of each claim.

The ILC Articles emphasize the need for a causal link between the internationally
wrongful act and the injury for which compensation is due. Article 31(1) provides that
“[t]he responsible State is under an obligation to make full reparation for the injury
caused by the internationally wrongful act.” Article 31(2) goes on to say that “[i]njury
includes any damage, whether material or moral, caused by the internationally
wrongful act of a State.” Commentary (9) to Article 31 explains that

“It is only ‘[iJnjury ... caused by the internationally wrongful act of a State’
for which full reparation must be made. This phrase is used to make clear
that the subject matter of reparation is, globally, the injury resulting from
and ascribable to the wrongful act, rather than any and all consequences
flowing from an internationally wrongful act.”

Commentary (10) adds that “[t]he allocation of injury or loss to a wrongful act is, in
principle, a legal and not only a historical or causal process”, and that “causality in
fact is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for reparation. There is a further

"S Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Limited v. United Republic of Tanzania (ICSID Case No ARB/05/22),
Award, 24 July 2008 (hereinafter “Biwater v. Tanzania’), J 785.

7% E1 SI, ¥§ 100 and 101.

‘77 GAMI v. Mexico, § 85.

8 | auder v. Czech Republic, {§ 234-235.
178 Biwater v. Tanzania, § 785.

245

925.

926.

927.

928.

element, associated with the exclusion of injury that is too ‘remote’ or ‘consequential’
to be the subject of reparation.” The commentary explains that “in international as in
national law, the question of remoteness of damage ‘is not a part of the law which can
be satisfactorily solved by search for a single verbal formula”, but notes that
international tribunals have used the criteria of directness, foreseeability or proximity
to establish this, and that other factors may also be relevant.

With respect to the concept of directness, the Tribunal notes that under the ILC
Articles not every event subsequent to the wrongful act and antecedent to the
occurrence of the injury will necessarily break the chain of causation and qualify as an
intervening cause. Indeed, the commentary to the ILC Articles explains that, in cases
where “the injury in question was effectively caused by a combination of factors, only
one of which is to be ascribed to the responsible State, international practice and the
decisions of international tribunals do not support the reduction or attenuation of
reparation for concurrent causes, except in cases of contributory fault” (Comment 12
to Article 31 of the ILC Articles). The only other exception seems to be cases “where
an identifiable element of injury can properly be allocated to one of several
concurrently operating causes alone”, “[bJut unless some part of the injury can be
shown to be severable in causal terms from that attributed to the responsible State,
the latter is held responsible for all the consequences, not being too remote, of its
wrongful conduct” (Commentary 13 to Article 31 of the ILC Articles. Emphasis added).

Thus, an intervening event will only release the State from liability when that
intervening event is (i) the cause of a specific, severable part of the damage, or (ii)
makes the original wrongful conduct of the State become too remote. Unless they fall
under either of these categories, cases of contributory fault by the injured party
appear to warrant solely a reduction in the amount of compensation. '°

Therefore, the question seems to be whether the intervening event is so compelling
that it interrupts the causal link, thus making the initial event too remote. Accordingly,
when assessing the impact of an intervening cause, the Tribunal will first focus on
whether the damage can be properly attributed to the cause cited by the Claimants,
or rather to the intervening cause.

Finally, the Respondent has argued that the Claimants must show a direct causal link
between each violation of the BIT and the specific damages caused. In this particular
case, however, all of the violations of the BIT alleged by the Claimants arise from the
same fact: the premature revocation of the incentives or in direct connection with that
premature revocation. Even if the Respondent’s argument were correct, the
damages claimed by the Claimants arise from one and the same set of facts,
irrespective of the specific treaty breach alleged.

189 Article 39 of the ILC Articles provides that “in the determination of reparation, account shall be
taken of the contribution to the injury by willful or negligent action or omission” of the injured party.
Commentary 5 to Article 39 explains that the phrase “account shall be taken” “indicates that the article
deals with factors that are capable of affecting the form or reducing the amount of reparation in the
appropriate case”.

246

929.

930.

931.

932.

Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction over claims for damages relating to the non-
claimant companies of the EFDG?

During the course of this arbitration, it has become evident that all of the damages
calculations provided by the Claimants (be it under Methods A, B or C) refer to the
damages suffered by the entire EFDG."®' In the Claimants’ view, the Individual
Claimants are entitled to all of the damages suffered by all of the companies in the
EFDG because they assert that “all of the main companies [in the EFDG] are 100%
owned, or virtually 100% owned, by the Micula brothers” (Tr., Day 11, 105 (Reed)).

The Respondent argues that no award of damages can be made with respect to
losses incurred by non-Claimant companies, nor for the diminution in value of the
Individual Claimants’ direct or indirect shareholdings in such companies, because
they fall outside the jurisdiction of this Tribunal. In this regard, they argue that the
Tribunal accepted jurisdiction over the Claimants’ shareholdings only over the
Corporate Claimants (R-PHB, § 314).

The Tribunal makes two observations in that regard. FFirst, in its Decision on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility, the Tribunal found that it had jurisdiction “over the
dispute submitted to it in this arbitration” (Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility,
170), after having found that it had jurisdiction ratione personae, ratione materiae,
and ratione temporis over the Claimants’ claims.'®* The Tribunal did not state that it
accepted jurisdiction only with respect to the Individual Claimants’ shareholdings over
the three Corporate Claimants. The Tribunal noted that, at that juncture, “it need only
determine whether there is an investment for the purpose of Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention and Article 7 of the BIT” (Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility,
123). The Tribunal was satisfied that the investments made by the Corporate
Claimants, as well as the shareholding of Messrs. Micula in the Corporate Claimants,
qualified as investments (Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, § 125.) However,
the Tribunal did not exhaustively determine what the Claimants’ investments were nor
hold that those were the only investments out of which the dispute arose. For
example, the Tribunal concluded that it did “not need to establish at this stage
whether the incentives as such are considered investments capable of expropriation”
(Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, § 128).

Further, in their Statement of Claim, the Claimants stated that this dispute arose “out
of investments made by Claimants in the Romanian areas Stei-Nucet and Draganesti
village”, adding that “[t}hese investments comprise various facilities for the production
of food and related services” (SoC, {{] 32-33). The Claimants did not specify that all
of those facilities were owned directly by the Individual Claimants or the Corporate
Claimants, although they did suggest in a fashion (see SoC, J§ 45-168). During the

'8! See, e.g., First ER of D. Lessard, { 72-73; Tr., Day 8, 118-121 (Lessard); First ER of C. Osborne,
fn. 1 and Appendix 2 (definition of “Companies”); ER of R. Boulton, p. i (definition of “Companies”);
Second ER of BCG, p. 2; Tr., Day 10, 88-89 (Osborne).

18 In particular, the Tribunal found that the Corporate Claimants’ physical assets and the Individual
Claimants’ shares in the Corporate Claimants qualified as investments for purposes of the ICSID
Convention and for purposes of the BIT (Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, {| 124-128).

247

933.

934.

935.

936.

course of the arbitration, the Claimants have explained that their food production
facilities are owned and operated through a group of Romanian companies, the
EFDG, which they allege is ultimately owned by the Individual Claimants. The fact
that part of the Claimants’ business is channeled through Romanian companies that
may be owned by the Individual Claimants, which was not brought to the Tribunal’s
(or the Respondent's) attention during the jurisdictional phase, does not negate the
Parties’ consent to ICSID arbitration, nor the Tribunal’s competence and the Centre’s
jurisdiction over the dispute. Finally, it is not disputed that the claims related to the
investments in non-claimant companies of the EFDG, which are within the
competence of the Tribunal, were made in a timely fashion as they were raised at the
latest in the Claimants’ Reply.

Second, in the Tribunal’s view, the question whether an award of damages can be
made in respect to losses incurred by non-Claimant companies owned by the
Individual Claimants is not a question of jurisdiction, that is, whether the Parties have
consented to this Tribunal and to ICSID as the appropriate forum to adjudicate the
dispute. The question is rather whether it is permissible for the Individual Claimants
to seek remedy for losses suffered by companies owned by them but that are not
claimants in this arbitration. Thus, the issue is whether the Individual Claimants are
entitled to a remedy if neither of them personally suffered the prejudice directly
suffered by corporations in which they are shareholders but which are not claimants
in this arbitration.

In their Statement of Claim, the Claimants requested “adequate compensation for the
losses suffered up to the amount of EUR 450,000,000; plus lost profits and any
further losses suffered by Claimants as a consequence of Respondent's actions”, the
exact amount to be specified at an appropriate point during the proceedings (SoC, {
381). The Claimants did not at that stage specify that the Individual Claimants’ losses
stemmed exclusively from their investment in the Corporate Claimants. The
Respondent does not dispute that the Individual Claimants have standing to bring
claims related to their investments in shares of corporations. '®*

Thus, to the extent that the Individual Claimants can prove their ownership of the
other (Romanian) companies in the EFDG and can prove that they have been
affected in this regard by the Respondent’s breaches of the BIT, the Tribunal finds
that claims for losses suffered by the Individual Claimants through those other
companies are within the scope of permissible damages claims.

Although the Claimants provided surprisingly little documentary evidence of the
Individual Claimants’ ownership of the non-claimant companies of the EFDG, the
evidence in the record (most of it provided by the Respondent) confirms that the

183 Indeed, the Respondent does not dispute that the Individual Claimants could have chosen to bring
a case by themselves, without joining the Corporate Claimants. That being said, the Respondent
contends that, had the Individual Claimants done so, “they would have been entitled (assuming
liability) only to damages they had suffered” (R-PHB, § 338). This is a different issue which the
Tribunal addresses in Section VII.F below.

248

937.

938.

Individual Claimants are jointly the owners of at least 99.96% of the companies in the
EFDG that have allegedly suffered the losses claimed in this arbitration.

Mr. Osborne identified the following companies as part of the EFDG (Second ER of
C. Osborne, § 10.3, Figure 64): the Corporate Claimants (European Food, Multipack
and Starmill), European Drinks S.A. (“European Drinks”), EDRI Trading S.R.L. (“EDRI
Trading”), Original Prod S.R.L. (“Original Prod”), Rieni Drinks S.A. (“Rieni Drinks”),
Scandic Distilleries S.A. (“Scandic Distilleries”), Transilvania General Import-Export
S.R.L. (“TGIE”), Tonical Trading S.R.L. (“Tonical Trading”), West Leasing S.R.L
(‘West Leasing”). Mr. Osborne also provided a diagram of the ownership structure of
these companies with an indication at Figure 3 of his First Expert Report (p. 57).
However, he did not cite the source of the information shown. Figure 3 is reproduced
below, together with Mr. Osborne’s explanations:

The Miculas are majority shareholders in most of the Companies, and the remainder
are controlled by companies that are in turn owned by the Miculas. The diagram
below shows the ownership structure of the 11 companies plus Limerock holdings, a
Cypriot entity that owns Original Prod, and General Transilvania Exim. Some minor
shareholdings have been omitted from the diagram for the sake of clarity, but
shareholders not included are primarily other family members including Mrs Eeva
Micula and Mrs Doina Micula.

Figure 3: The Companies’ Major Shareholdings

 

loan and Viorel Micula

 

 

 

European Food ‘Muttipack ‘Starmitt ‘Scandic Distieries [Rien Drinks Limerock Holdings
Preteen
Food poducs and Packaging mater a ‘Nesta dens poston ant yt ony
secant oa
| ox
European Drinks Original Prod
Manutacuneg ana ox Recyaing of sears
inet ‘snd pining of|
waar an om ‘ering
a ™ ax
20%
Key ad
‘Tonieal Trading
cemraeval Rertat of fund assets
*
20%
[i
Company 2

  

 

 

 

As recorded in the Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, during the jurisdictional
phase the Claimants provided evidence of their shareholdings in the Corporate
Claimants in 2008, as follows:

249

939.

940.

941.

a. “Claimant 3 [European Food] is a Romanian joint stock company established on
30 November 1989. Respondent does not dispute that Claimant 3 was held on 1
February 2007 (Exh. C-25) at more than 93% by Messrs. Micula. The rest of the
shares were held by Rieni Drinks SA, a Romanian company (6.5%). The excerpt
from the Register of the Ministry of Justice dated 27 May 2005 (Exh. C-7) shows
that the Miculas each held 46.7289% and Rieni Drinks 6.5415%” (Decision on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 112).

b. “Claimants 4 [Starmill] and 5 [Multipack] were established as Romanian limited
liability companies on 21 February 2002. Claimants 1 and 2 each hold 50% of the
shares (Exh. C-7, dated 27 May 2005)” (/d., ¥ 113).

c. “On 31 July 2008 Counsel for Mr. loan Micula and the Corporate Claimants
submitted, for each of the three Corporate Claimants, excerpts from the
Romanian commercial registry showing the status of each of these three
companies as of 25 June 2008, as well as their corporate biographies from 1 July
2005 on. These documents confirm the above conclusions” (/d., {| 113).

The Claimants did not provide updated information of the Individual Claimants’
shareholdings in the Corporate Claimants during the merits phase. However, the
Respondent has not disputed these shareholdings or suggested that there has been
any change in them. In addition, an excerpt from the Bihor Trade Registry dated 9
December 2008 provided by the Respondent (Exh. R-60) shows that loan Micula
holds 50.65% of Rieni Drinks, while Viorel Micula holds 49.34%, which would put their
joint shareholding at 99.99%. Mr. Osborne confirmed this in Figure 3 of his First
Expert Report, which showed Rieni Drinks as 99% owned by the Individual Claimants
(although he did not cite the source for this affirmation). Accordingly, the Tribunal
deems that all three Corporate Claimants are virtually 100% owned by the Individual
Claimants, whether directly or indirectly.

By contrast, the Claimants have provided no documentary evidence of their
shareholding in the remaining companies of the EFDG. They simply assert that most
of the companies in the EFDG are “directly or indirectly wholly owned by the Micula
brothers”, with the exception of Original Prod, Tonical Trading, and EDRI Trading.
However, with respect to those three companies, they also state that “[nJone of these
companies has any real claim to any of the damages claimed in this case” (Tr., Day 1,
146 (Reed)). Accordingly, the Tribunal will disregard the three companies named
above for purposes of its damages analysis. However, this statement also suggests
that, in addition to the Corporate Claimants, there are five other companies within the
EFDG (namely, European Drinks, Rieni Drinks, Scandic Distilleries, TGIE and West
Leasing) that have suffered part of the damages claimed in this case. As a result, the
Tribunal must determine whether they are indeed owned by the Individual Claimants.

The Tribunal shares the Respondent's frustration at the lack of evidence submitted by
the Claimants. As noted by Mr. Ellison, it is difficult to understand why the Individual
Claimants did not, of their own initiative, provide evidence of their shareholdings in
the EFDG. It is the Individual Claimants’ burden to prove that they are the owners of

250

942.

943.

the companies they assert they own and that have suffered the damages they now
claim. It is not fair to impose upon the Respondent (or, for that matter, the Tribunal)
the burden of searching through the Romanian Registry of Commerce in order to
assess whether the Claimants’ assertions are true. Like Mr. Ellison, the Tribunal
cannot help but to find the Claimants’ approach to this matter “bizarre” (Tr., Day 11,
100-105 (Reed/Ellison)).

That being said, the evidence submitted by the Respondent (in particular, an excerpt
from the Bihor Trade Registry dated 9 December 2008 (Exh. R-60) and from the
Orbis Commercial Database (Exh. R-61, date unclear), indicates that, at the date the
information was collected, the shareholding of the remaining EFDG companies was
as follows: "®*

a. Rieni Drinks: loan Micula with 50.65%, Viorel Micula with 49.34%, European
Drinks with 0.001%, and Intermark S.R.L. with 0.00002%. In other words, Rieni
Drinks is 99.99% owned directly by the Individual Claimants.

b. TGIE: loan Micula with 47.50%, Viorel Micula with 47.50%, and Rieni Drinks 5%.
Considering that Rieni Drinks is 99.99% owned directly by the Micula brothers,
the Tribunal deems this company owned 99.99% by the Individual Claimants.

c. European Drinks: loan Micula with 39.94%, Viorel Micula with 39.94%, and
TGIE with 20.05%, Rieni Drinks with 0.05% and Edri Trading with 0.02%.
Considering that, with the exception of Edri Trading, all the companies that have
shareholdings are 99.99% owned directly by the Micula brothers, the Tribunal
deems that European Drinks is 99.98% owned by the Individual Claimants.

d. Scandic Distilleries: loan Micula with 48.12%, Viorel Micula with 48.12%, Rieni
Drinks with 0.05%, Intermark S.R.L. with 0.05%, European Drinks with 0.05%,
and World Brands Production S.A. with 3.61%. Considering that, with the
exception of Intermark and World Brand Productions S.A., all the companies that
have shareholdings are at least 99.98% owned by the Micula brothers, the
Tribunal deems that European Drinks is 99.96% owned by the Individual
Claimants.

e. West Leasing: loan Micula with 21.25%, Viorel Micula with 21.25%, and TGIE
with 57.50%. Considering that TGIE is 99.99% owned by the Micula brothers,
the Tribunal deems this company owned 99.99% by the Individual Claimants.

These shareholdings are roughly consistent with the shareholdings shown by Mr.
Osborne in Figure 3 of his First Report. Accordingly, although the evidence reviewed
by the Tribunal is from December 2008, the Tribunal accepts Mr. Osborne’s
assertions and deems that the companies in the EFDG identified above are at least
99.96% owned by the Individual Claimants. Accordingly, the Individual Claimants can
claim for damages that they have suffered by virtue of the harm to those companies
as well as the harm to the Corporate Claimants.

'®4 Numbers have been rounded up to the nearest hundredth.

251

944.

945.

946.

947.

185

c. ANALYSIS OF THE CLAIMANTS’ DAMAGES CLAIMS
General comments

As discussed above, the Claimants have advanced two expectation damages
computations (Methods A and B) and one reliance damages computation (Method C).
Method A quantifies the increased costs and lost profits that the Claimants would
have made had they been allowed to develop their business the way they allege they
had planned to do, in particular by implementing the Incremental Investments and the
sale of SCPs to third parties. Method B quantifies the increased costs and lost profits
that the Claimants would have made had they continued operating their existing
platform. Method C presents a reliance damages scenario, which quantifies the value
of the losses incurred by the Claimants in investing in reliance on their expectation
that the incentives would remain in place for ten years. The Claimants have
emphasized that the Tribunal need not adhere strictly to either of these three methods
or the injuries itemized therein in order to make an award (C-PHB,  96).'®

For the reasons set out below, the Tribunal will focus its attention on Method A.

First, Method A is the Claimants’ primary expectation damages scenario. The
Claimants have devoted most of their efforts to Method A and have identified
Methods B and C as “alternative” damages scenarios. In their Reply, the Claimants
focused almost exclusively on the damages listed in Method A, as calculated by Prof.
Lessard (and partly on the reports of Dr. Fry and Prof. Steenkamp). In their Revised
Request for Relief, the Claimants continue to rely heavily on Method A, although
some of the claims are now calculated by Mr. Osborne and Mr. Boulton.

Second, the Tribunal rejects Method B, for the following principal reasons:

 

a. Compared to Method A, the BCG Report (which quantifies the main head of claim
under Method B) was subject to much less rigorous scrutiny in the proceedings.
The Respondent repeatedly requested clarification as to the role of that report in
the Claimants’ quantum case, but this was only made clear with the Claimants’
Revised Request for Relief. Although the Respondent had an opportunity to
comment on that Revised Request (the Tribunal allowed it to submit a
Supplementary Post-Hearing Brief), the Tribunal finds that it has a less complete
and less well tested record as to Method B than Method A.

b. The Tribunal has serious concerns regarding the methodology used by BCG.
The flaws in BCG’s First Report seem to have caused concern to the Claimants
themselves, who requested Mr. Boulton to assist BCG and supervise the
preparation of BCG’s Second Report. However, as the Respondent pointed out,
despite the changes in methodology and assumptions, the quantification of the

The Claimants stated expressly: “Claimants’ Revised Request for Relief submitted on 20 December

2010 is summarized below. Claimants wish to stress, however, that it is not their contention that the
three methods listed below, or the itemized injuries that comprise the elements of the three methods,
must be strictly adhered to in the ultimate calculation of an award” (C-PHB, {| 96).

252

Claimants’ losses proposed by BCG’s Second Report (€722 million present value
of EBITDA, Second ER of BCG, p. 17) does not differ greatly from that proposed
in its First Report (between €757-796 million present value of EBITDA, First ER
of BCG, p. 14).

c. The BCG Report purports to quantify lost profits for sales of finished goods that
the Claimants would have allegedly earned but for the revocation on the basis of
the Claimants’ existing production platform at the time of the revocation. But
despite the fact that Claimants’ platform at that time did not have the benefit of
the Incremental Investments, BCG’s calculations yield a higher result for only the
sales of finished goods (quantified by the Claimants as RON 2,423 million) than
all of the lost profits claims included in Method A combined (i.e., lost profits
deriving from sales of finished goods calculated by Mr. Boulton, lost profits
deriving from the sale of SCPs and lost profits deriving from the Incremental
Investments, which combined amount to RON 2,380 million). In stark contrast to
BCG’s calculations, Mr. Boulton (on whose report the Claimants rely under
Method A) quantified lost sales of finished goods at €100 million. Although part
of the difference in their results can be attributed to the fact that Mr. Boulton
excluded export markets in his calculations, the Tribunal finds that this further
calls into question the credibility of the assumptions and methodology used by
BCG. Accordingly, as explained in Section 3(b) below, the Tribunal relies on Mr.
Boulton’s analysis of lost profits on sales of finished goods rather than the
analysis of BCG.

d. Although the Claimants specify that certain amounts calculated by Mr. Osborne in
relation with Claims 1-4 of Method A (specifically, section 4 of Mr. Osborne's First
Report and in section 3 of Mr. Osborne’s Second Report) must be subtracted
from the amount calculated by BCG (C-PHB, {ff 204), the Claimants do not
provide a final calculation that takes into account this subtraction. Indeed, the
RON number claimed by the Claimants does not appear to consider any
deductions at all, since BCG’s valuation of the losses at € 722 million has simply
been claimed in RON (see C-PHB, {| 206, note 305, where the Claimants simply
state that “RON 2,423.2 million is the [sic] RON €722 million’).

e. Finally, the Tribunal notes that the Claimants devote a mere three paragraphs to
the BCG Report in their Post-Hearing Brief (C-PHB, 204-206). The least that
can be said is thus that the Claimants did not build the core of their arguments
and claims on the BCG Report.

Third, the Tribunal rejects Method C. Method C provides an alternative reliance
approach to the calculation of the Claimants’ losses, in which Mr. Osborne attempts
to “value the business absent the investments made in reliance on the Incentives” (C-
PHB, § 332; Tr., Day 10, 36-37 (Osborne)). The Tribunal does not see any reason to
deviate from the Claimants’ primary expectation damages approach which, in the
Claimants’ own submission, should place them in the position that they would have
been but for Romania’s breach of the BIT, and is thus consistent with the full
compensation principle articulated in the Chérzow Factory case.

253

949.

950.

951.

952.

953.

954.

The Claimants’ claims under Method A are summarized in paragraph 891 above. For
purposes of the analysis, the Tribunal will divide them into three main groups: the
Claimants’ claims for actual / realized losses (damnum emergens) as a result of the
increased cost of raw materials (addressed in Section 2 below), the Claimants’ claims
for lost profits (addressed in Section 3 below), and the Claimants’ claims for tax
penalties (addressed in Section 4 below).

Increased cost of raw materials

The Claimants had previously presented this claim as a single claim, but in their Post-
Hearing Brief they divided it up into claims for increased costs of sugar, PET, other
raw materials and sugar stockpile. Each sub-claim is addressed below.

a. Increased cost of sugar

The Claimants claim losses for the increased cost of sugar in the amount of RON
81.5 million, based on:

a. The calculations contained in section 4 of Mr. Osborne's first report, and
paragraphs 4.9 to 4.16 and 4.23 to 4.24 in particular;

b. The calculations contained in section 3 of Mr. Osborne’s second report, and
paragraphs 3.1 to 3.28 in particular; and

c. The evidence referred to in those sections, including exhibits CO-1.18, CO-1.19,
CO-2.1 and CO-9.1 (C-PHB, {f 101-110).

Although in their Post-Hearing Brief the Claimants rely on Mr. Osborne’s figures, they
submit that the differences with the calculations made by Prof. Lessard (on whose
report they relied on for this same claim prior to the hearing) are minimal. In
particular, they argue that working capital does not impact the calculation of these
damages. Mr. Osborne explains that the reason for the nominal differences between
both calculations is the different approaches to estimating the volume weighted actual
transport premium (Second ER of C. Osborne, § 3.21).

For the reasons set out below, the Tribunal accepts this claim. Both the existence of
the damage and the causal link between the revocation of the incentives and the
damage suffered have been adequately proved. There is no dispute that, as a result
of the revocation of the Raw Materials Incentive, the Claimants were required to pay
an increased amount for the sugar they purchased after February 2005. The
Respondent's expert, Mr. Ellison, accepts that this is the case, subject to certain
criticisms and exclusions (First ER of J. Ellison, § 6.2.24), as discussed further below.

The Tribunal is also satisfied with the quantification of this claim, which is based on
reliable documentary evidence. In his second report, Mr. Osborne reconciled the
sugar purchase data used by him and Prof. Lessard, and reconciled his work with the
raw material audit work carried out by BDO. Mr. Ellison recognized and accepted
these reconciliations, noting that “the reconciliation now appears valid” (Second ER of

254

955.

956.

957.

958.

J. Ellison, § 2.2.16). Mr. Ellison also confirmed that BDO checked all 2,586 sugar
invoices in the process of conducting their audit (Tr., Day 11, 96-97 (Ellison/Reed)).

Mr. Ellison contends that these damages should exclude sugar purchases by non-
Claimant EFDG companies after revocation of the incentives (RON 64.7 million,
approximately €14.9 million, about 75% of the losses claimed) (First ER of J. Ellison,
qf] 6.2.9-6.2.12; Second ER of J. Ellison, {J 5.1.4, 5.3.1-5.3.5). Mr. Ellison notes that,
before revocation, European Food was making substantially all the sugar imports for
the entire group and selling it to its affiliates; however, after revocation, each EFDG
company started importing its own needs for sugar. The Claimants and their experts
argue that this exclusion is perverse: after the revocation, there was no incentive for
the sugar purchases to be channeled through the Claimant companies, because they
no longer had a right to the customs duty exemption and thus there was no cost
advantage for them or their affiliates that are not parties in this arbitration. Had the
incentives remained in place, the Claimants would have continued to purchase sugar
through European Food (Second ER of C. Osborne, {{ 1.3, 3.13-3.17; Second ER of
D. Lessard, { 138). The Respondent argues that this is irrelevant, because there is
no legal basis upon which the Corporate Claimants could be compensated for an
outlay from someone else’s pocket (R-PHB, 313).

The Tribunal has difficulty with the Respondent’s argument. European Food lost the
opportunity to buy cheaper sugar, and as a result the Claimants were forced to buy
more expensive sugar, incurring an additional cost. That this more expensive sugar
was bought by a different company of the group does not eliminate the loss to the
Individual Claimants, who the Tribunal has confirmed are the ultimate shareholders of
the entire group.

As previously noted, the Respondent also argues that no award of damages can be
made with respect to losses incurred by non-Claimant companies, nor for the
diminution in value of the Individual Claimants’ direct or indirect shareholdings in such
companies, because they fall outside the jurisdiction of this Tribunal. As discussed in
Section B.2 above, the Tribunal rejects this argument: this argument does not turn on
jurisdiction, but rather whether it is permissible for the Individual Claimants to seek
remedy for losses suffered by companies 99.96% owned by them that are not
claimants in this arbitration. As set out in paragraph 943 above, the Tribunal has
found that claims for losses suffered by the Individual Claimants through those other
companies are within the scope of permissible damages claims.

Mr. Ellison also excludes the loss of the benefit to European Food of the arm's-length
transactions by which it sold intermediate sugar products to European Drinks and
Rieni Drinks. The documentary evidence appears to confirm (and Mr. Ellison
conceded at the hearing) that the transactions were indeed at arm’s length (Tr., Day
11, 59-63 (Ellison/Schwartz). The Tribunal understands the Claimants to be saying
that, prior to the revocation, European Food bought the sugar duty-free and then sold
the intermediate products to other EFDG companies at the same price it would have
sold them to third party companies. The Claimants’ argument seems to be that

255

959.

960.

961.

962.

963.

European Food lost that “business” as a result of the revocation. The Tribunal sees
no reason to exclude this loss from the calculation.

Finally, the Respondent argues that, because the Claimants cannot establish that
they would have been entitled to import sugar duty free after 1 January 2007, no
damages should be awarded for that period. Mr. Caspari, the Respondent’s sugar
expert, testified that the Claimants could not possibly have imported duty free sugar
into the EU after accession (even absent the repeal), as such activity would have
fundamentally undermined the EU sugar regime and threatened the stability of the EU
sugar market (ER of C. Caspari, { 26; Tr., Day 11, 261 (Caspari)). According to the
Respondent, this warrants a reduction of RON 18.1 million (or 19.4 million, if adjusted
to account for Mr. Osborne’s approach) (R-PHB, {[ 320, fn. 703).

The Claimants’ sugar expert, Dr. Fry, seemed to recognize this problem but assumed
that Romania would have negotiated with the European Commission a specific
derogation allowing the Claimants to import duty free sugar into the EU. However, he
conceded that he had no evidentiary basis for this assumption, and that such a
derogation would have been unprecedented in EU history (Tr., Day 11, 234-236
(Fry).

The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that it is uncertain whether the Claimants
could have imported sugar duty free after Romania’s accession to the EU, even if the
facilities had remained in place. However, the Respondent has not established that
the Claimants could not have done so. The Claimants argue that the EU could have
granted exemptions if Romania had negotiated such exemptions, and there is no
evidence that Romania even tried to negotiate such exemptions. The Tribunal has
found that Romania breached the Claimants’ legitimate expectation to benefit from
the Raw Materials Incentive until 31 March 2009. In these circumstances, the
Tribunal considers that the Claimants are entitled to all losses regarding increased
cost of sugar until that date.

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal accepts the Claimants’ claim for increased
cost of sugar, for a total amount of RON 85.1 million.

b. Increased cost of PET

The Claimants claim losses caused by the increased cost of PET in the amount of
RON 6.3 million, based on:

a. The calculations contained in section 4 of Mr. Osborne's first report, and
paragraphs 4.17 to 4.24 in particular;

b. The calculations contained in section 3 of Mr. Osborne’s second report, and
paragraphs 3.29 to 3.35 in particular; and

c. The evidence referred to in those sections, including the witness statement of Mr.

Halbac dated 22 December 2009 and exhibits CO-1.18, CO-1.19, CO-2.1 and
CO-9.1 (C-PHB, 9 111-115).

256

964.

965.

966.

967.

The Tribunal rejects this claim. It is undisputed that the Claimants never benefitted
from the Raw Materials Facility in respect of PET imports because their PET
equipment was not located in the Stei-Nucet region (R-PHB, 318; C-PHB, § 112;
First WS of M. Halbac, § 42; First ER of D. Lessard, 4 83, Exh. C-681, C-686).
Although Mr. Halbac testified that the Claimants did have PET equipment in
Draganesti as far back as 2002, it is unclear whether they benefitted from the
incentives. The Claimants do not expressly say so, and Mr. Ellison testified that he
found invoices for PET in 2002 that had duty on them (See C-PHB, {ff 112-115;
Second WS of M. Halbac, fn. 53; C-680; Tr., Day 10, 195 (Ellison)).

In fact, the Claimants’ claim for PET is based on their alleged intention to relocate
their PET equipment in late 2004 or early 2005 to the disfavored region precisely for
the purpose of taking advantage of the incentives. As the Respondent states, “[i]n
effect, this claim is for a hypothetical future lost opportunity to save money on the
purchase of raw materials, rather than any claim for actual losses” (R-PHB, § 318).
The claim is thus not for actual losses, but for future losses. The Tribunal agrees with
the Respondent: the Claimants have not met their burden to prove the existence of a
lost opportunity; therefore, they cannot claim a loss for increased cost of PET if the
repeal of the Raw Materials Facility did not in fact cause them to incur greater costs in
purchasing PET.

In addition, the Claimants have not proven that they would have indeed relocated
their PET equipment to the disfavored region. This claim appears to rely entirely on
Mr. Halbac’s oral testimony, which the Tribunal did not find convincing in this respect.
Although he cites some contemporaneous documents (Exh. C-681, C-686), Mr.
Osborne appears not to have considered them in his report (Tr., Day 11, 147-148). In
any event, these documents are not sufficient to prove that alleged intention:

a. Exh. C-681 is an invoice dated 1 September 2004 cited as evidence for moving
Husky PET Equipment from Rieni to Draganesti. However, the document merely
appears to list “Works of wiring within Draganesti Complex, Hall 11, Plugs
Machine - HUSKY, as per the work status due to May 2004” with respect to an
“AGREEMENT 748/15th of July 2002”. This does not clearly evidence a
purported move of that equipment. In addition, the agreement that appears to
serve as basis for those works was signed in July 2002, but it is undisputed that
the equipment had not been moved by the time the incentives were repealed in
February 2005. This raises questions with respect to the intent to move that
equipment and the timing of that alleged move, as discussed further below.

b. Exh. C-686 is a drawing of a layout of the Multipack facilities showing where PET
equipment would allegedly be installed. However, the Tribunal has no way of
knowing when this drawing was made, how concrete of a project it embodied and
what its intended use would have been.

In addition, the modest scale of the cost and effort allegedly required to move the

equipment undermines the credibility of the claim. Mr. Halbac stated that the move
would have cost only 250,000 RON (approx. €50,000) and taken approximately only 2

257

968.

969.

970.

971.

972.

973.

months to complete (see First WS of M. Halbac, {| 42). In these circumstances, and
considering that Exh. C-681 cites an agreement dated July 2002, it is unclear why the
Claimants had not moved that equipment before the date of the revocation of the
incentives.

For all these reasons, the Tribunal rejects the Claimants’ claim for increased cost of
PET.

c. Increased cost of other raw materials

The Claimants claim losses caused by the increased cost of raw materials other than
sugar or PET in the amount of RON 17.5 million, based on:

a. The calculations contained in section 4 of Mr. Osborne's first report, and
paragraphs 4.17 to 4.24 in particular; and

b. The evidence referred to in that section, including exhibits CO-1.18, CO-1.19 and
CO-2.1 (C-PHB, 9 116-120).

The Claimants base their claim on Mr. Osborne’s calculations, but note that the
differences with Prof. Lessard’s results are nominal (Prof. Lessard calculates RON
17.37 million). They thus state that the Tribunal may choose either calculation.

The Tribunal accepts this claim, as calculated by Mr. Osborne. As in the case of
sugar, it is undisputed that following the revocation of the incentives, the Claimants
were required to pay more for the other raw materials they purchased, including
tomato paste, juice concentrates, wheat and corn flower, vegetable fats, and potato
flakes and granules. The Respondent's expert, Mr. Ellison concedes that losses from
these higher costs were incurred by the Claimants, and does not dispute the prices
used by their experts (which the Claimants argue are conservative and understated,
because they switched to cheaper products, and because the experts were unable to
find benchmark prices to estimate but for prices).

That being said, Mr. Ellison argues that the total loss should be discounted to RON
14.5 million (or RON 11.2 million if one counts only damages suffered until the date of
accession) for two reasons: first, that only 20% of the amount claimed is supported by
documentary evidence, and second, that much of these increased costs were paid by
non-Claimant companies within the EFDG (First ER of J. Ellison, § 6.3.1-6.3.5;
Appendix JMHE-4C).

The Tribunal dismisses Mr. Ellison’s second argument for the reasons set out in
paragraphs 956 to 958 above. With respect to Mr. Ellison’s first argument, the
Tribunal understands that the documentary evidence cited by the Claimants (Exh. C-
166, C-167, C-218, C-220 and C-222, which contain between them 43 customs
declaration forms with customs duties amounting to RON 3.6 million) is a sample.
Given the nature of the Claimants’ business, the Tribunal does not expect the
Claimants to provide an invoice for every item they ever imported, and thus accepts
that a sample of customs declaration forms is an appropriate evidentiary means. In

258

974.

975.

976.

977.

addition, the Respondent has given no compelling reasons why that sample is not
representative of the total. As a result, the Tribunal rejects Mr. Ellison’s first
argument.

For the reasons stated above, the Tribunal accepts this claim for a total of RON 17.5
million.

d. Lost opportunity to stockpile sugar

The Claimants claim losses for the lost opportunity to stockpile sugar in the amount of
RON 62.5 million, based on:

a. The calculations contained in section 4 of Mr. Osborne's first report, and
paragraphs 4.13 to 4.16 in particular;

b. The calculations contained in section 4 of Mr. Osborne’s second report;

c. The calculations contained in the expert reports of Dr. Fry of December 2009 and
July 2010; and

d. The evidence referred to in the abovementioned sections, including the witness
statements of Mr. Balog dated 22 December 2009 and 30 July 2010 (C-PHB, 9
121-130).

The Claimants argue that, because the incentives were going to end in 2009, they
planned to buy large quantities of sugar ahead of that and thus avoid paying higher
sugar prices for some months. The stockpile would thus help them to maintain the
effects of the incentives for a longer period of time. The Claimants assert that, in late
2004/early 2005, after they heard that the incentives would be revoked, they
stockpiled what they could, but not as much as they would have liked to do.

Mr. Osborne includes this claim in his calculation of increased cost of raw materials,
as follows:

“4.1 The early termination of the EGO 24/1998 incentives has had a clearly
detrimental effect on the Claimants. That effect comes in part from an
impact on their costs — and therefore on their ability to earn a
satisfactory return on the investments that they have made. [...]

4.2 The first impact on the Claimants arises because of the increase in the
effective cost of raw materials purchased for their own use — including
sugar, fruit and tomato concentrates, and potato products. This
applies both in respect of purchases that the Companies have made
and purchases that the Companies would have made in creating
a stockpile of sugar in 2009 to extend the period in which it could
benefit from reduced sugar costs.

4.3 In the latter case, the reason for including the effect of stockpiling in
2009 is that the Companies would, had the EGO 24/1998 incentives
continued, have undoubtedly sought to create a stockpile of sugar in
2009 — in essentially the same way as was actually done in
2004/2005. On that basis it seems reasonable also to assume that
equivalent amounts would or should have been negotiated by way of

259

978.

979.

980.

981.

982.

compensation in the alternative scenario in which the EGO 24/1998
incentives continued only to the point of EU accession. To ensure
symmetry, the calculations treat the beneficial effects of the stockpile
actually created in 2005 as reducing the losses suffered by the
Claimants.” (First ER of C. Osborne, J§ 4.1-4.3, emphasis added).

In preparing his calculations, Mr. Osborne assumed that, if the Claimants had time to
properly organize and prepare for the termination of the incentives, they would have
built an optimal stockpile, based on, among other things, sugar price forecasts,
storage costs, the cost of capital and the EFDG companies’ sugar consumption (First
ER of C. Osborne, § 4.10). According to Mr. Osborne, this optimal stockpile would
have been around 75,000 tonnes. The Claimants argue that they were prevented
from amassing this optimal stockpile because (i) they did not have enough time to
properly plan for the optimal stockpile, and (ii) in 2004/2005 they had not put funds
aside for this purpose. Instead, they amassed around 30,000 tonnes. Mr. Osborne
calculates damages based on the optimal stockpile, not the actual stockpile amassed
by the Claimants.

The Respondent argues that including any stockpiling in the direct damages claim is
impermissibly speculative, transforming this part of the case into yet another “lost
opportunity” claim. The Respondent contends that there is no way of knowing what
the Claimants would have done in 2009 had the Raw Materials Facility remained in
place. In particular, would they have had the funds to purchase and store vast
quantities of sugar? Would it have been permissible to stockpile at that time? The
Respondent also notes that Prof. Lessard did not incorporate a stockpile in his
original calculations (R-PHB, {J 315-316).

That being said, Mr. Ellison appears to accept this claim from an economic
perspective, subject to proof that (i) the large quantities purchased in late 2004 and
early 2005 were indeed a stockpile, and not, e.g., a period of intensified production or
a seasonal issue, and (ii) that this stockpiling activity was a direct response in
anticipation of revocation (and in this respect differed from the increased purchasing
in 2003) and not, e.g., EFDG taking advantage of a particularly good price (beyond
the discount provided by the incentives) and/or the replenishment of previously run-
down stock levels and/or seasonal issues (Second ER of J. Ellison, 9 6.2.22-6.2.21).

The Tribunal concludes that it is established that the Claimants did in fact stockpile
30,000 tonnes in 2004/2005. Mr. Balog testified and Mr. Gamecho confirmed that the
Claimants had purchased enough duty-free sugar to delay the economic effect of the
repeal until the second half of 2006 (First WS of C. Balog, § 7; Tr., Day 4, 28
(Gamecho)). Mr. Ellison accepts that large quantities of sugar were purchased in late
2004 and early 2005, although as described above he questions whether these
purchases were meant to create a stockpile.

In contrast, evidence of the Claimants’ intention to stockpile in the future is limited:
a. The Claimants contend that “Mr Balog has given clear and unchallenged

evidence that upon hearing about the revocation of the Raw Materials Incentive
in 2004, the Claimants set about building as large a sugar stockpile as possible

260

983.

984.

985.

[WS of C. Balog dated 30 July 2010, | 12]. It is safe then to assume that had the
incentives lasted for the promised 10 year period, at the end of that period the
Claimants would have built a sugar stockpile, and in fact, Mr. Ellison has
accepted that a sugar stockpile would have been made at that time [Tr., Day 10,
196]. The real issue in dispute is therefore over the size of the stockpile that
would have been built” (C-PHB, 123). However, the Respondent points out that
Mr. Balog’s testimony purports to describe what the Claimants did in response to
the announcement of the repeal of the Raw Materials Facility, and that it does not
directly support the suggestion that the Claimants ever intended to (or could
have) stockpiled vast amounts of sugar in 2009 (R-SPHB, 12-13).

b. Mr. Osborne also relies on Mr. Viorel Micula’s assertion that “we had planned to
purchase and stock-pile a large amount of sugar on a customs duty free basis
prior to the incentives coming to an end” (Third WS of V. Micula, {| 68; First ER of
C. Osborne, § 4.10, third bullet point).

Despite the absence of hard evidence on the Claimants’ future intentions, the
Tribunal considers that the Claimants’ established past practice of stockpiling
provides sufficient certainty that, but for the revocation, the Claimants would have
stockpiled sugar in early 2008 in anticipation of the expiry of the incentives. In 2004,
the stockpiling was organized as a reaction to the allegedly unforeseen occurrence of
the early termination of the incentives. Indeed, the stockpiling was to be planned and
organized closer to the scheduled expiry of the incentives and in preparation for such
expiry, so there was no need for such stockpiling before the latter became looming.
Other than Mr. Viorel Micula’s testimony, the record does not show that the Claimants
had planned for either event. However, this is understandable as the need for the
actual stockpiling appears to have caught the Claimants off guard, and the scheduled
expiry of the incentives was to occur almost 4 years after the revocation. In view of
these considerations, the Tribunal finds that it is sufficiently certain that the Claimants
would have acted in 2008/2009 as they actually did in 2004/2005. Indeed, Mr. Ellison
conceded that, “on the basis that in early 2008, the claimants would probably have
started preparing a stockpile, knowing that [...] expiry was coming along” (Tr., Day 10,
196).

The Tribunal is also satisfied that there is a sufficient causal link between the damage
asserted and the revocation of the incentives. The Respondent has not provided a
plausible alternative explanation as to why the Claimants would have stockpiled sugar
in late 2004/2005 if it was not in anticipation of the revocation of the incentives.
Having accepted the causal link in 2004/2005, the Tribunal is satisfied that the same
causal link would apply in 2008/2009 with respect to the scheduled expiry of the
incentives.

However, the Tribunal agrees with Mr. Ellison that this loss should be circumscribed
to the volumes actually stockpiled in 2004/2005. The “optimal stockpile” calculated by
Mr. Osborne must be rejected because the size of such an optimal stockpile is too
speculative. As Mr. Ellison points out, “the way [Mr. Osborne’s] formula works is that
he has used 2009 prices and forecasts to work out what would have been the best

261

986.

987.

988.

989.

stockpile to create in 2008. And the way commodities work, of course, you don't
normally have that advantage of being able to look a year ahead and see actual
prices” (Tr., Day 10, 197 (Ellison)).

Instead, it is more reasonable to use as counterfactual data the 30,000 tonnes that
were actually stockpiled in 2004/2005 (Tr., Day 10, 196 (Ellison)). Using these
volumes, Mr. Ellison recalculates the loss at RON 18,133,229 (approximately €4.3
million at the exchange rate of 30 September 2009 used by Mr. Ellison), '®° as follows:

“6.2.20 | have recalculated the potential loss resulting from a higher price
for white sugar. | have assumed a stockpile of 30,000 tonnes
would have been assembled over the period 1 April 2008 to 31
March 2009, in line with the stockpiled volume possibly amassed in
2004 and 2005 (see paragraph 6.2.17 above). (Although whether
there was any stockpiling in 2004/2005 is not entirely clear). In the
absence of any contemporaneous documentation establishing the
decision process undertaken by EFDG in 2004 and 2005 (or,
indeed, any contemporaneous evidence that the volumes
purchased were in fact a stockpile), this is a more reasonable
approach than to pick an optimal stockpile with the benefit of
hindsight.

6.2.21 | therefore calculate the impact of allowing for a delay in the
(assumed) stockpiling patterns until 2008/2009, but at the volumes
asserted to have been stockpiled in 2004/2005. My calculation of
the loss for the Sub-Head of Claim relating to sugar therefore
increases by approximately €4.3 million.”

(Second ER of J. Ellison, J 6.2.20-6.2.21)

The Tribunal agrees with Mr. Ellison’s methodology and calculations. As a result, the
Tribunal accepts the Claimants’ claim with Mr. Ellison’s reductions (i.e., for RON
18,133,229).

By contrast, the Tribunal rejects Mr. Ellison’s alternative calculation on the basis of
the assumption that the incentives would only have been available until the date of
accession, for the reasons set out in paragraph 961 above.

The Claimants’ claims for lost profits

The Claimants advance five claims for lost profits under Method A. The Tribunal has
grouped them into three categories: the Claimants’ claim for lost profits on the sale of
finished goods (Section (b) below); the Claimants’ claim for lost profits on the sale of
sugar-containing products (SCPs) (Section (c) below), and the Claimants’ claim for
lost profits due to the inability to complete the Incremental Investments (Section (d)
below). Before addressing each of these claims, the Tribunal will address the
standard for an award of lost profits (Section (a) below).

186 Appendix JMHE-4C.

262

990.

991.

992.

993.

994.

a. Standard for an award of lost profits

As noted above, Article 36(2) of the ILC Articles provides that “compensation shall
cover any financially assessable damage including loss of profits insofar as it is
established.” The Respondent argues that the standard of proof for an award of lost
profits is more restrictive than for an award of other losses, and the Claimant has
responded to these arguments. As a result, the Tribunal will first address the
Respondent's position, and will then turn to the Claimants’ comments.

i. The Respondent’s position

The Respondent contends that, for their claims for lost profits to succeed, the
Claimants must meet a specific legal standard with respect to lost profits (R-PHB, {ff
217-221, R-Rejoinder, { 297-300). '®”

Specifically, the Respondent argues that international law requires a claimant to
demonstrate lost profits with “reasonable” or “sufficient” certainty. The Respondent
contends that a claimant must adduce probative evidence that lost profits are
“probable” and not “merely possible”.'® If there is no proof that the alleged profit-
making activity would have been undertaken at all, the standard has not been met.
According to the Respondent, this disposes of the Claimants’ claim in respect of the
Incremental Investments and the alleged SCP opportunity, which together amount to
more than €450 million.

Indeed, the Respondent argues that most of the Claimants’ alleged lost profits claims
(in particular the claims related to the Incremental Investments and sale of SCPs)
constitute claims of lost opportunities, rather than lost profits. As none of these
activities were ever undertaken in fact, the Claimants seek compensation for the loss
of a hypothetical chance to profit, not for the loss of profit itself. According to the
Respondent, in these circumstances international law does not recognize an
entitlement to compensation for mere opportunities. The only circumstances in which
international tribunals have accepted claims for lost opportunities are situations in
which the lost opportunities had intrinsic value, which the Respondent argues is not
the case here (R-Rejoinder, {j 278-288, citing S.D. Myers v. Canada, Merrill & Ring
v. Canada", Sapphire v. NIOC'™).

But even where there is no doubt that an investment would have been undertaken,
the Respondent submits that the reasonable certainty standard cannot be satisfied in
the absence of a going concern and a proven record of profitability. Citing a string of
cases including Aucoven v. Venezuela’’', PSEG v. Turkey, Metalclad v. Mexico and

'8 This is in addition to a causal link between the international wrong and the profits allegedly lost.
The Respondent's position on causation is addressed in the context of each specific claim.

188 MM. Whiteman, Damages in International Law, Vol. 3 (1937), Exh. RL-313, p. 1837.

"8° Merrill & Ring Forestry L.P. v. The Government of Canada, UNCITRAL, Award, 31 March 2010.

'8° Sapphire International Petroleum Ltd v National Iranian Oil Company, Award, 15 March 1963
(hereinafter “Sapphire v. NIOC’).

'S" Autopista Concesionada de Venezuela, CA v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No
ARB/00/5), Award, 23 September 2003 (hereinafter “Aucoven v. Venezuela’).

263

995.

996.

997.

AAPL v. Sri Lanka, the Respondent contends that arbitral tribunals have consistently
rejected lost profits claims where such a record of profitability could not be proven,
noting that any compensation awarded in such circumstances has generally been
limited to proven investment expenditures.

In this respect, the Respondent argues that international law precludes any award of
prospective damages for projects that have not commenced. The Respondent
submits that “no tribunal adjudicating an investment treaty dispute has ever awarded
lost profits where, as here, the claiming party had not made the investment that
allegedly would have generated the profits” (R-Rejoinder, § 290). The Respondent
cites Aucoven v Venezuela, where the Tribunal refused to award lost profits for the
operation of a bridge that was never built or put into operation, despite the fact that it
was undisputed that the bridge would have been built and would have been a
profitable venture. '** This tribunal also noted that “ICSID tribunals are reluctant to
award lost profits for a beginning industry and unperformed work”, adding that this
reluctance is confirmed by the practice of the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal.'®? Romania
also cites Himpurnia California Energy Ltd. v. PLN, where the tribunal held that “it
would be intolerable ... to uphold claims for lost profits from investment not yet
incurred”.

Similarly, the Respondent argues that mere projections of future profits made by
investors or draft contracts that were never finalized are insufficient to prove lost
profits. In particular, the tribunal in PSEG v. Turkey held that “[rjelying on cash flow
tables that were a part of proposals that did not materialize does not offer a solid
basis for calculating future profits.”"®°

In addition, the Respondent argues that “even claims for the lost future profits of
existing investments have been disallowed where the investment had no track record
of profit generation. An award to the contrary would be inherently speculative, and
therefore contrary to the dictates of international law’ (R-Rejoinder, 4 290). The
Respondent cites a string of cases where tribunals have rejected such claims,
notably:

a. AAPL v. Sri Lanka, where the tribunal found, in connection with a newly formed
company that had no record of profits and was undercapitalized, that neither the
"goodwill" of the company nor its "future profitability’ [...] could be reasonably
established with a sufficient degree of certainty".'%

b. Metalclad v. Mexico, where the tribunal held that "where the enterprise has not
operated for a sufficiently long time to establish a performance record or where it

12 Id. 4 357, cited with approval in PSEG v. Turkey, § 310.

198 id., ¢ 360.

184 Himpurnia California Energy Ltd v PLN, UNCITRAL, Final Award, 4 May 1999, § 330.
"5 PSEG v. Turkey, 4313.

196 AAPL v. Sri Lanka, § 106.

264

has failed to make a profit, future profits cannot be used to determine going
concern or fair market value.”'®”

c. PSEG v. Turkey, where the tribunal found that compensation for lost profits “is
normally reserved for the compensation of investments that have been
substantially made and have a record of profits, and refused when such profits
offer no certainty.”'%°

d. Several decisions of the Iran—US Claims Tribunal (see R-Rejoinder, fn. 446).

998. The Respondent argues that in such circumstances, international tribunals have
“repeatedly held that damages should be limited to proven, net out-of-pocket
expenditures (or “sunk costs”) that the claimant has incurred in advancing the project”
(R-Rejoinder, 291). For example, in Biloune v. Ghana, the tribunal concluded that
“[gliven the nature of the project, and its early interruption by the respondents (...),
the most appropriate method for valuing the damages to be paid [for expropriation]
will be to return to Mr. Biloune the amounts he invested”. '®°

999. The Respondent argues that, in the Claimants’ case, there was no going concern with
respect to the Incremental Investments or the sale of SCPs to third parties, and thus
no proven record of profitability. As a result, the Respondent submits that the
Tribunal need not even consider the evidence submitted with respect to the alleged
lost opportunities. Even if the Tribunal were convinced of the Claimants’ intention to
“complete” the Incremental Investments and to engage in the sale of SCPs to third
party industrial customers, it is undisputed that none of these ventures was ever
launched, let alone earned profit (See, e.g, Tr., Day 8,33-38 and 45-46 (Lessard);
Tr., Day 8, 10:66-67 (Osborne)). Thus, the Respondent argues that no award of
damages for the Incremental Investments or the sale of SCPs to third parties can be
contemplated in the present case as a matter of law. The Respondent's specific
comments on the evidence submitted with respect to the sale of SCPs and the
Incremental Investments is set out in Sections (c) and (d) below.

ii. The Claimants’ position

1000. The Claimants do not contest the standard offered by the Respondent for an award of
lost profits (that is, that the claim must have “sufficient certainty”) (C-PHB, § 145).2°
However, they offer a different interpretation of how this “sufficient certainty” must be
established (C-PHB, {| 145-150; C-Reply, { 604-609).

187 Metalclad v. Mexico, § 120.

"8 BSEG v. Turkey, 1310.

Biloune & Marine Drive Complex Ltd v Government of Ghana, UNCITRAL, Award, 30 June 1990
(hereinafter “Biloune v. Ghana’), pp. 228 and 229.

200 Indeed, the Claimants concede that tribunals have traditionally been less willing to award
compensation for lost profits than for other losses due to the inherently speculative nature of a lost
profits claim. However, relying on the ILC Articles and an article by Prof. John Gotanda, they contend
that such damages should be awarded where the claim for them has sufficient certainty. (See ILC
Articles, Art. 36, and John Y Gotanda, Recovering Lost Profits in International Disputes, 36
Georgetown Journal of International Law 61, 111 (2004), Exh. C-603).

199

265

1001. Citing Gemplus and Talsud v. Mexico, the Claimants contend that the concept of
certainty is both “relative and reasonable in its application’. The Claimants argue
that, in that case, the tribunal rejected the argument that the claimants had failed to
prove their lost profits claims because their quantification was uncertain or difficult.
The tribunal also emphasized that the assessment of a claim of lost profits was not an
exercise in certainty but in “sufficient certainty”, noting that “[iJt is not always possible
for a claimant to prove that a future event could or could not happen with certainty;
and a tribunal can only evaluate the chances of such a future event happening.””"'
The Gemplus and Talsud tribunal was also more lenient with respect to the claimants
burden of proof, having concluded first that “the Claimant’s evidential difficulties in
proving their claim for loss of future profits [were] directly caused by the breaches of
the BITs by the Respondent responsible for such loss.”*” The Claimants also rely on
Sapphire v. NIOC,”° SPP v. Egypt°* and Lemire v. Ukraine*®® for the proposition
that the uncertainty in the amount of damages should not be an obstacle to an award
of lost profits.

1002. The Claimants argue that, in the present case, the fact of injury from revocation of the
incentives is not disputed; only the amount of the injury is in dispute. The Claimants
also contend that the legal wrong giving rise to those injuries has been established
beyond question. Relying on the cases cited above, the Claimants argue that the
Respondent is therefore not entitled to invoke an unattainable burden of proof as to
the amount of compensation for the Claimants’ losses that would compound the
Respondent's wrongs and unfairly defeat the Claimants’ claim for compensation.

1003. With respect to the Respondent's arguments regarding the need for a proven record
of profitability, citing Sapphire v. NIOC, SPP v. Egypt and Lemire v. Ukraine, the
Claimants argue that tribunals have awarded damages to un-established businesses
or businesses still in their infancy (C-PHB, {| 149). The Claimants note that in these
cases the tribunals awarded damages despite the fact that the claimant was unable to

°°' Gemplus S.A., SLP S.A. and Gemplus Industrial S.A. de C.V. v. United Mexican States and Talsud,
S.A. v. United Mexican States (Conjoined ICSID Cases Nos. ARB (AF)/04/3 and ARB(AF)/04/4),
Award, 16 June 2010 (hereinafter “Gemplus and Talsud v. Mexico” or “Gemplus and Talsud’), J 13-
91.

202 Id., 913-92.

293 Sapphire v. NIOC, pp. 187-188, (“It is not necessary to prove the exact damage suffered in order to
award damages. On the contrary, when such proof is impossible, particularly as a result of the
behaviour of the author of the damage, it is enough for the judge to be able to admit with sufficient
probability the existence and extent of the damage.”).

204 SPP v. Egypt, § 215 (where the tribunal held that the inability to assess damages with certainty is
not alone a reason not to award them when a loss has been suffered).

205 Joseph C. Lemire v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/18), Award, 28 March 2011 (hereinafter
“Lemire v. Ukraine’), § 246 (‘The Tribunal agrees that it is a commonly accepted standard for
awarding forward looking compensation that damages must not be speculative or uncertain, but
proved with reasonable certainty; the level of certainty is unlikely, however, to be the same with
respect to the conclusion that damages have been caused, and the precise quantification of such
damages. Once causation has been established, and it has been proven that the in bonis party has
indeed suffered a loss, less certainty is required in proof of the actual amount of damages; for this
latter determination Claimant only needs to provide a basis upon which the Tribunal can, with
reasonable confidence, estimate the extent of the loss.”).

266

1004.

1005.

1006.

1007.

1008.

1009.

prove the exact amount of damage suffered. However, these cases do not
specifically address the situation where the claimant has not made the investment
that would have allegedly generated the profits.

In any event, the Claimants contend that the successes enjoyed by the Miculas’
businesses from the early 1990s until the time of revocation of the incentives should
satisfy the Tribunal to the requisite degree of certainty that, had the incentives
remained in place, those successes would have continued. The Claimants
emphasize that their business was not in its infancy; to the contrary, it was a very
successful drinks and food business with large market shares at the time the
incentives were revoked (C-PHB, {| 149).

Accordingly, the Claimants argue that the Tribunal should have no hesitation in
accepting the Claimants’ claims for lost profits, and awarding them full compensation
so as to put them in the position they would have been in had Romania not breached
the BIT by prematurely terminating the incentives.

iii. The Tribunal’s analysis

Article 36(2) of the ILC Articles provides that “compensation shall cover any
financially assessable damage including loss of profits insofar as it is established.”
As discussed above, the Respondent submits that lost profits must be proved with
“sufficient certainty”. The Respondent argues that this means that they must at least
be “probable”, and “not merely possible.”

The Claimants do not dispute that lost profits must be established with sufficient
certainty, but rather argue that the Tribunal must be more lenient in determining
whether that standard has been met. In particular, the Claimants submit that once
the fact of damage has been established, a claimant should not be required to prove
its exact quantification. They argue that this is especially true where the conduct of
the author of the damage has made that proof difficult or impossible.

The Tribunal understands that any future damage is difficult to prove and is willing to
take that into account. There remains nevertheless a requirement to show sufficient
certainty as speculation is not the same as prediction. Indeed, the cases cited by the
Claimants call for leniency in the assessment of the amount of damage, not of its
existence. The Tribunal agrees with the tribunal in Lemire v. Ukraine when it states
that “[o]nce causation has been established, and it has been proven that the in bonis
party has indeed suffered a loss, less certainty is required in proof of the actual
amount of damages; for this latter determination Claimant only needs to provide a
basis upon which the Tribunal can, with reasonable confidence, estimate the extent of
the loss.”7°°

The Tribunal also notes that the commentary to the ILC Articles limits compensation
to “damage actually suffered as a result of the internationally wrongful act, and
excludes damage which is indirect or too remote” (Comment 5 to Article 34 of the ILC

208 | emire v. Ukraine, J 246.

267

1010.

1011.

1012.

Articles). In the case of lost profits, this can only mean that the claimant must have
been deprived of profits that would have actually been earned but for the
internationally wrongful act. Accordingly, before they are entitled to request a more
lenient application of the standard of proof, the Claimants must first prove that they
would have actually suffered lost profits, ie., that they have been deprived of profits
that would have actually been earned. In the Tribunal’s view, this requires proving (i)
that the Claimants were engaged in a profit-making activity (or, at the very least, that
there is sufficient certainty that they had engaged or would have engaged in a profit-
making activity but for the revocation of the incentives), and (ii) that that activity would
have indeed been profitable (at the very least, that such profitability was probable).

In the Tribunal’s view, the sufficient certainty standard is usually quite difficult to meet
in the absence of a going concern and a proven record of profitability. But it places
the emphasis on the word “usually.” Depending on the circumstances of the case,
there may be instances where a claimant can prove with sufficient certainty that it
would have made future profits but for the international wrong. This might be the
case, for example, where the claimant benefitted from a long-term contract or
concession that guaranteed a certain level of profits or where, as here, there is a
track record of similar sales. This must be assessed on a case by case basis, in light
of all the factual circumstances of the case. That is what the Tribunal will now do with
respect to the Claimants’ specific claims for lost profits.

b. Lost profits on sales of finished goods

The Claimants claim no less than RON 427 million (originally calculated by Mr.
Boulton as an amount “in excess of €100 million’, ER of R. Boulton, § 5.99) for lost
profits on sales of finished goods, based on:

a. The calculations contained in section 5 of Mr. Boulton’s report dated 30 July 2010
and paragraphs 5.24 to 5.70 and 5.95 to 5.99 in particular; and

b. The evidence referred to in the abovementioned section, including exhibits RB-2
and RB-4 (C-PHB, 9 151-161).

Mr. Boulton carries out a very specific lost profits analysis: he focuses on the impact
of the increased cost of raw materials on sales of the EFDG companies’ branded
goods, and that consequent impact on profits.” Mr. Boulton’s analysis starts from
the premise that the revocation of the incentives caused an increase in the cost of the
Claimants’ products, which in turn caused the Claimants to raise their prices. That
price increase in turn caused the Claimants to lose market share, preventing them
from making sales they otherwise would have made. This in turn caused a loss in
profits.

297 In his Expert Report, Mr. Boulton also makes comments on the expert reports submitted by the
Respondent's experts Dr. Robinson (on the effect of Romania’s accession to the EU on the Claimants)
and Mr. Ellison (on quantum in general). He also comments on the First Expert Report submitted by
BCG on behalf of the Claimants and provides his own calculation of the impact of price increases on
the Claimants’ sales of branded products in Romania. It is on this latter analysis that the Claimants
rely for this claim.

268

1013. Mr. Boulton’s empirical analysis focuses on the relationship between increased prices
and loss of market share. Mr. Boulton does not carry out an empirical analysis of the
first two causal links (that revocation caused an increase in costs, and that this
increase in costs caused the Claimants to raise their prices), but rather appears to
accept them through a combination of reliance on evidence rendered by the
Claimants (including Mr. V. Micula’s Witness Statement) and of conclusions based on
his experience (i.e., his expert opinion) as explained in more detail below.

1014. Mr. Boulton’s calculation overlaps with:

a.

Prof. Lessard’s quantification of lost profits for the EFDG’s incremental sales at
RON 97.3 million, which on 30 September 2009 was approximately €28 million
when grossed up for taxes (Prof. Lessard’s Updated Summary of Damages
distributed at the merits hearing), and

BCG’s quantification of the EFDG’s lost profits on sales of finished goods at RON
2,423.20 million, which at the date of BCG’s Reply Report (30 July 2010) was
approximately €722 million (Second ER of BCG , p. 17).

1015. Mr. Boulton’s methodology and conclusions can be summarized as follows:

a.

b.

Mr. Boulton focused on the relationship between price and market share (ER of
R. Boulton, 9 5.25-5.70; Appendix 5.1). He first identified eleven factors that
may have an impact on market share.°° Out of these, he identified six that could
have been affected by revocation (including cost structure and price decisions).
Mr. Boulton stated that the factor with “most obvious” impact on market share
was cost structure,” but testified that he had only quantified the effect of price
decisions, because it was the only one for which he had sufficient empirical data:

“[A]t a high level, what | did was say: is there a relationship between price
and market share? And the answer to that is statistically "yes". | then
cross-checked that statistics to make sure it made sense with what third-
party research shows, which it does. | then sought to identify what price
rises were made in response to revocation. And having done that, |
quantified: what was the impact of those price rises on sales? And then [...]
having identified the lost sales, you identify how much margin was lost and
what profits have been lost.” (Tr., Day 9, 159 (Boulton))

Mr. Boulton’s empirical analysis only focused on lost sales for the Claimants’
“own branded soft drinks products”. Mr. Boulton identified five products within
this larger “soft drinks” category: carbonated sugar drinks (CSDs), mineral water,

208 These eleven factors were: macroeconomic factors, market structure, barriers to entry, competitive
behavior, price decisions, cost structure, existing knowledge of the market, an established distribution
network, market share of other products, marketing and availability of working capital (ER of R.
Boulton, § 5.24).

209

With respect to cost structure, Mr. Boulton explained: “Of course, if the price of sugar goes up, then

that changes the cost structure of the claimants’ businesses for CSDs. That in turn is likely to affect
price decisions and/or the ability to respond to competitive behaviour. It’s much harder to maintain a
price positioning below most of your competitors if you've lost your cost advantage.” (Tr., Day 9, 157-
158 (Boulton)).

269

still drinks,?"° nectars and juices. Of these five products, he then narrowed the
analysis down to three: CSDs, nectars and juices. According to his testimony,
these were the only products for which he was able to obtain sufficiently reliable
and detailed price and market share data (relying on AC Nielsen data which the
expert found trustworthy). In particular, Mr. Boulton excluded from his
calculations losses related to mineral water where, in his submission, there is an
element of government control that impacts price, as well as losses related to still
drinks (i.e., soft drinks other than those identified above, for which he had
insufficient historical price data)*"' (ER of R. Boulton, 4 5.36-5.70; Tr., Day 9,
167-168).

Mr. Boulton calculated that, over the period 2004-2009, lost profits for loss of
market share for CSDs, juices and nectars amounted to €88 million. After netting
out the effect of the higher margin obtained from raising prices, Mr. Boulton
concluded that the net effect on the Claimants was a loss of €28 million (RON
119.3 million at the time of his report) (ER of R. Boulton, {| 5.36-5.70, Tr. Day 9,
168).712

To do this, Mr. Boulton calculated a “but for’ market share: as he explained it, he
used “the results of [his] regression analysis to say: if the price increases hadn't
been made, what sales would have been achieved -- they would have been
higher -- and then putting that back in as what would they then have been as a
proportion of the total market.” His conclusion was that “the claimants’ market
share would have declined more slowly over the period, converging when the
sugar stockpile ran out in 2011. So | have assumed that there is no benefit after
2011.” For this calculation, he assumed that the Claimants would have had the
advantage of a sugar stockpile that would have allowed the Claimants to continue
without increasing their prices (about 18 months) (Tr., Day 9, 169-171 (Boulton)).

Mr. Boulton then extrapolated the profits lost with respect to the Claimants’ soft
drinks business (€28 million) to all the EFDG companies’ products, using a ratio
based on what percentage soft drinks sales had in the total group’s sales (in Mr.
Boulton’s submission, soft drinks accounted for 42% of the total value of sales
made by the EFDG?"*). The exact result of this extrapolation would have been
€66 million, but he rounded it down to €60 million (RON 255.7 million), because
not all the products have the same sugar inputs (he stated that he did not have
the data to make an exact calculation). This number is based solely on sales of

710 In some places, Mr. Boulton refers to still drinks simply as “soft drinks”, which may lead to
confusion (see, e.g., Mr. Boulton’s Presentation at the Merits Hearing, Slide 19). In this section the
Tribunal refers to them as “still drinks”, which was the terminology used by Mr. Boulton in his expert

*"! For these last two categories, Mr. Boulton stated that “price rises may still have been made in
response to the Revocation, but | have not included any losses as a result in my calculations” (Mr.
Boulton’s Presentation at the Merits Hearing, Slide 19). See also Tr., Day 9, 218-219, where Mr.
Boulton repeats that he has quantified no loss for mineral water.

2"2 This reflects the corrected figures submitted by Mr. Boulton on 17 August 2010 (Letter from the
Claimants to the Tribunal of 18 August 2010 and attachments).

213 Mr. Boulton refers to Appendix 5-1 of his report.

270

1016.

1017.

1018.

the Claimants’ products within Romania, and based only on the effect of price
increases (ER of R. Boulton, { 5.70; Appendix 5.1; Tr., Day 9, 177 (Boulton)).

f. After arriving at this €60 million number, Mr. Boulton’s overall conclusion (which
he acknowledged was his subjective “expert opinion”) was that the Claimants
suffered a loss “in excess of €100 million” (ER of R. Boulton, § 5.99; Tr., Day 9,
177 (Boulton)). He justified this increase because in the original calculation:

i. He did not take into account the impact of revocation on other factors that
could affect market share, such as marketing, market share of other
products, and the availability of working capital.

ii. He used data from AC Nielsen, a well known global marketing company,
which “almost certainly understates the size of the whole market”, making his
calculations “very conservative”.

iii. He ignored export markets, which were included in the much higher BCG
calculation (Tr., Day 9, 178 (Boulton)).

g. The €100 million refers to losses over the period running from January 2005
through mid-2011. Mr. Boulton explained that ‘“[iJt's certainly a convergence
period post when the incentives would have ended, but on the assumption that
there would have been a significant stockpile of sugar and prices would have
come down and converged. But the vast majority of those losses are 2005-2009”
(Tr., Day 9, 221-222).

As a general matter, the Tribunal agrees with Mr. Boulton’s analysis, if not with his full
calculation. It seems difficult to dispute that the increased cost of raw materials
caused by the revocation of the incentives would have an impact on the prices of the
Claimants’ products, thereby probably leading to a decrease in market share and lost
sales, and consequently lost profits. As explained below, on the facts, the Tribunal
finds that this has indeed been the case.

First, this claim focuses on profits deriving from a business that the Claimants were
actually engaged in, and is calculated on the basis of profits actually made in the
past. The Claimants had a proven record of profitability regarding the sale of their
own branded goods.

The Respondent's main criticism has rather to do with causation. Romania argues
that Mr. Boulton’s report is premised on the assumption that the repeal of the Raw
Materials Facility caused the Claimants to raise the prices of their finished goods,
which in turn caused them to lose market share. But this, according to Romania, is
false.

a. First, Romania argues that the prices of EFDG products were rising as early as
January 2004, long before revocation (which took place in February 2005), so
there could be no causal link with revocation (R-PHB, { 300). Mr. Boulton
accepts that the rise in prices predated revocation (starting in 2004), but states

271

1019.

1020.

that his “understanding is the price decisions made in 2004 were a response to
first of all the rumours and then the announcement of revocation” (Tr., Day 9,
200). Romania argues that Mr. Boulton admitted that this assumption was based
entirely on the Claimants’ witness evidence, which Romania argues is unreliable,
but this is not entirely accurate. Mr. Boulton did not state that he relied
exclusively on the Claimants’ witness evidence; he also drew a conclusion (or an
inference) from the evidential pattern and timing of the price increase. In
addition, he noted that the loss of market share was not due only to an increase
in prices in 2004, but to an inability to reverse them after revocation (Tr., Day 9,
200, 210-212 (Rubins/Boulton)).

b. Second, Romania argues that price increases in 2004 could not have been a
response to rumors or announcements of revocation, because the Miculas
testified that in January 2004 they still did not believe that the incentives would be
revoked. In fact, loan Micula testified that he first became concerned with the
revocation at the beginning of 2004 after Prime Minister Nastase’s interview on
TV in January 2004, so the timing of the price increase is not inconsistent with his
testimony (Tr., Day 2, 220 (I. Micula)). It is true however that Viorel Micula
testified that he was not certain that the incentives would be withdrawn until the
fall of 2004 (Tr., Day 4, 199 (V. Micula)).

c. Third, Romania argues that the price increases in 2004 could not have been a
response to rumors or announcements of revocation because Mr. Balog testified
and Mr. Gamecho confirmed that the Claimants had purchased enough duty-free
sugar to delay the economic effect of the repeal until the second half of 2006 (see
First WS of C. Balog, § 7, Tr., Day 4, 28 (Gamecho)). Romania is correct: the
witnesses did say that, and Mr. Boulton accepted that, if that was correct it “must
follow” that the actual cost of sugar to the claimants wouldn't have risen until the
end of 2006 (Tr., Day 9, 195-196).

The Tribunal has considered Romania’s arguments on causation. But absent
another, more plausible explanation for this increase in prices, the Tribunal has
difficulty rejecting the causation sequence used by Mr. Boulton. It is undisputed that
the revocation of the incentives had an impact on the Claimants’ costs. It cannot be
seriously disputed that this cost increase eventually would have had an impact on
their prices. The increase in the Claimants’ prices started in January 2004, which
coincides with Prime Minister Nastase’s announcement of the revocation. Even if the
Claimants had a stockpile that lasted them through 2006, they may have increased
their prices to anticipate future losses or smooth out the rise of their prices. In any
event, as Mr. Boulton testified, the issue is not just the increase in prices in 2004, but
the Claimants’ inability to lower them in the future. In any event, while this is a
different question, Mr. Boulton only quantified damages after revocation (to be
accurate, from January 2005) (Tr., Day 9, 196-197 (Rubins/ Boulton)).

As a result, the Tribunal finds that, with respect to this particular claim, the Claimants
have proved with sufficient certainty that, as a result of the revocation of the

272

1021.

1022.

incentives, they were deprived of profits that they would otherwise have earned. The
question that remains is: what is the value of this loss?

The Tribunal accepts Mr. Boulton’s first step in the quantification of this claim, that is,
his quantification of lost profits related to lost sales of soft drinks for €28 million. It
finds Mr. Boulton's methodology and conclusions reliable and conservative to this
point. In particular:

a. Mr. Boulton did not conclude that, but for revocation, the Claimants would have
maintained their entire market share. Mr. Boulton conceded that there has been
a significant fall in market share over the last five years.2"* As a result he
concluded that “about half of that is referable to revocation, and about half of it is
referable to all of the other competitive forces in the market and would have
happened anyway” (Tr., Day 9, 155 (Boulton)).

b. Although he looked at prices that increased in 2004, he did not quantify damages
prior to 1 January 2005. Indeed, he rejected the suggestion that he should have
calculated damages since 2004 (when revocation was almost certain), stating:

“Yes, | think my clients would fairly put to me that | am being overly
cautious. They would believe that a greater magnitude of the price
increases were their response to revocation. | am seeking always to try to
maintain, where things are uncertain, as much caution in my figures as |
can.” (Tr., Day 9, 167)

c. Mr. Boulton used AC Nielsen data, which was lower than the Claimants’ figures
and the Euromonitor figures relied upon by BCG, and which may have
understated the size of the market. This was because, in his view, AC Nielsen
was the only data provider that gave him a full data set of the Claimants’ sales
and prices and their competitors, and to be rigorous he had to use this data
consistently. However, he stated that this had a significant impact on his
calculations: according to Mr. Boulton, if he had used Euromonitor, his calculation
would have been more than €10 million higher every year (Tr., Day 9, 175-176
(Boulton)).

d. Mr. Boulton ignored export markets in preparing his calculations, which the
Tribunal finds appropriate considering that it is difficult to predict how the
Claimants’ products would have fared in export markets after EU accession.

The Tribunal also finds Romania's additional criticisms of Mr. Boulton’s report, to the
extent that they refer to the first step of his analysis, unfounded. In particular,
Romania argues that “even if there had been an anti-temporal causal link between
repeal in 2005 and increased prices in 2004, Mr Boulton’s analysis would still be
deeply flawed”, because he assumed that EFDG’s entire loss of market share
resulted from rising prices, and ignored the other 10 factors he identified that could

2"4 Mir. Boulton testified that the fall in market share started in 2004, not in 2002 (Tr., Day 9, 164
(Boulton)). The Tribunal thus understands that, when Mr. Boulton states that market share has fallen
“over the last five years”, he is referring to the period 2004-2009.

273

1023.

1024.

1025.

1026.

affect market share” (R-PHB, § 303). Mr. Boulton admitted that he has only quantified
the effect of price increases, but denied that he has ignored the other factors or that
this makes his quantification inaccurate. Specifically, Mr. Boulton explained: “What |
have done is calculate by how much the fall in market share was attributable to the
relative price increases, and that is the pink line. Therefore, | am not ignoring, as has
been suggested, all of the other factors that affect market share, because they are all
in that line. They are all in the actual line and they are also all in my adjusted actual.
All | have done is adjust for the effect of price increases” (Tr., Day 9, 169, referring to
slide 15 of his presentation). The Tribunal is satisfied with Mr. Boulton’s response.

The second and third steps of Mr. Boulton’s analysis are however less
straightforward.

To recall, Mr. Boulton’s second step in the analysis was to extrapolate the profits lost
with respect to the Claimants’ soft drinks business (€28 million) to all the EFDG
companies’ products, using a ratio based on what percentage soft drinks sales had in
the total group’s sales (42%). The exact result of this extrapolation would have been
€66 million, but Mr. Boulton rounded it down to €60 million (RON 255.7 million),
because not all the products have the same sugar inputs (he stated that he did not
have the data to make an exact calculation) (Tr., Day 9, 177 (Boulton)).

After arriving at this number, Mr. Boulton went a step further, and concluded that the
Claimants actually suffered a loss of at least €100 million. Mr. Boulton justified this
increase in the original calculation (which he acknowledged was his subjective “expert
opinion”) because in the original calculation:

a. He did not take into account the impact of revocation on other factors that could
affect market share, such as marketing, market share of other products, and the
availability of working capital.

b. He used AC Nielsen data, which “almost certainly understates the size of the
whole market”, making his calculations “very conservative”.

c. He ignored export markets, which were included in the much higher BCG
calculation (Tr., Day 9, 178 (Boulton)).

The Respondent criticizes both of these steps. First, Romania argues that Mr.
Boulton extrapolated his estimate of €28 million for soft drinks across the EFDG’s
entire business, arriving at €60 million, but in so doing he included products (such as
beer) which use no sugar. Mr. Boulton defended his position as follows:

“Q. Given that discussion we've just had, isn't it fair to say that €60
million extrapolated by a direct ratio, even rounded down, is
bound to be an overstatement within the bounds of this
calculation?

A. Well, | think that's a fair question to put, because it's something |

have worried about in thinking about how to get to those
numbers.

274

1027.

1028.

1029.

The reason that | was comfortable with the conclusion | came to
is partly because my five products include some for which | found
nil effect. So if you like, if you look at my slide 18, the bottom-left
quadrant includes big categories like alcohol and beer where the
incentives would not have a big effect. But my top-left box from
which | am extrapolating includes mineral water. So | haven't just
chosen the products that are affected, like CSDs and
extrapolated to all products; | have chosen a mix of products,
including mineral water, for which I've quantified no loss, and
extrapolated that across all products.

So it's not, | think, as open to criticism as you are suggesting. It is
uncertain; | tried to say that. It's why | round it down.

The other factor is, of course, the price increases may have been
put through on other products, even where there wasn't the direct
raw material cost impact coming through. Essentially pricing
decisions were made in response to revocation, even where
there wasn't that raw material impact.

So could | argue that 60 million was definitely a better number
than 50 million? No. Am | comfortable that | considered the
relevant factors in coming to my conclusion? Yes.

Q. When you say "comfortable", you think it's probable that that's the
right number, that is the amount, €60 million?

A. That would be my best estimate of what the loss was across
these 14 categories, before taking into account the other factors
that | look at about total size of the market and other impacts of
revocation on market share.”

(Tr., Day 9, 218-219)

Romania also argues that Mr. Boulton “inflated” his €60 million figure to a level in
excess of €100 million “without any support or explanation” (R-PHB, {| 304), adding
that this €100 million figure is a “guess, based on no calculations whatsoever” (R-
PHB, 214).

The Tribunal has duly noted Romania’s objections. However, it is evident to the
Tribunal that the Claimants’ losses under this claim are not limited to €28 million lost
in relation to soft drinks. It is undisputed that the Claimants sold other products that
did contain sugar, whose prices would have been affected by the increased cost of
sugar. As noted in paragraph 1008 above, once the fact of damage has been
established, the Tribunal has wide discretion to establish its exact amount, provided
that the Claimants have provided a basis for that calculation.

In the absence of exact data related to other sugar-containing products, the Tribunal
accepts that an extrapolation may be appropriate. However, Mr. Boulton’s analysis is
premised on the assumption that an increased cost of sugar caused an increase in
prices of certain products. It is thus not reasonable to extrapolate the profits lost on
soft drinks containing sugar to products that do not contain sugar. The Tribunal is not
fully satisfied with Mr. Boulton’s explanation, cited above, as to why that extrapolation
was reasonable. For the same reason, the Tribunal cannot agree with Mr. Boulton’s

275

conclusion that €28 million accurately reflects the losses related to an increased cost
of sugar for 42% of the Claimants’ total sales, because that 42% includes mineral
water, which does not contain sugar.*"° According to the table provided on page 5 of
Appendix 5-1 to Mr. Boulton’s report, sugar-containing soft drinks (that is, CSDs,
other soft drinks and juices/nectars) account for 32.76% of the Claimants’ total sales
over the period 2004-2008).”"° The Tribunal therefore rejects the specific calculations
in the extrapolation carried out by Mr. Boulton.

1030. Instead, and in the exercise of its discretion in the calculation of damages, the
Tribunal will extrapolate the Claimants’ losses in sugar-containing soft drinks to the
Claimants’ other sugar-containing products. In the absence of an exact breakdown of
what products contain sugar, the Tribunal has assumed that the following categories
of products identified in Table A5-1.1 of Appendix 5-1 of Mr. Boulton’s report contain
sugar in some measure: soft drinks, juices and nectars, alcoholic drinks, biscuits,
tomato sauce/ketchup, co-extruded products, breakfast cereals, and sticks. Based on
the information provided in Table A5-1.1 of Mr. Boulton’s report, the Tribunal has
concluded that sugar-containing soft drinks account for approximately 54% of the
EFDG’s total sales in sugar-containing products (which amount to approximately 850
million over a period between 2004 and 2008). If the losses calculated by Mr. Boulton
for sugar-containing soft drinks (i.e., €28 million) are then extrapolated to the
remaining sugar-containing product line, the result is €51.6 million.”

1031. The Tribunal now turns to Mr. Boulton’s third step, in which he concludes that the
Claimants actually suffered a loss of at least €100 million. Mr. Boulton conceded that
he was unable to quantify this step, which is testimony to his professional integrity;
however, the Tribunal is not prepared to accept an increase of €40 million (equivalent
to 67% of the amount he arrives to for the entire product line) solely on the basis of
Mr. Boulton’s “subjective expert opinion” (Tr., Day 9, 177 (Boulton)). In addition, the
Tribunal finds that the arguments advanced by Mr. Boulton in order to reach this
number are not satisfactory for the following reasons:

a. The fact that Mr. Boulton used conservative data, such as AC Nielsen data,
should not be used as a reason to inflate the results by 67%. If the use of
conservative figures is deemed warranted and justified, this approach should not
be reversed subsequently, especially on the basis of assumptions, even where —
as in this case — the assumptions are based on the expert's professional
experience.

*15 The Tribunal understands that Claimants’ entire soft drinks business (including the five categories

identified by Mr. Boulton in para. 1018(b) above) account for 42% of the Claimants’ total sales. See
Table A5-1.1 in Appendix 5-1 of Mr. Boulton’s report, p. 5.

2'6 The Tribunal notes that this table does not distinguish between CSDs and still drinks, so it assumes
they both categories fall under the label “soft drinks”.

"7 The Tribunal will not set out in detail its calculations. It suffices to say that the results of the
Tribunal’s calculations are confirmed by the fact that 54% (i.e., the percentage of sugar-containing soft
drinks in the EFDG’s total sales of sugar containing products) of €51.6 million (the Tribunal’s
calculation of overall losses in sugar-containing products) is €28 million (Mr. Boulton’s calculation of
losses in sugar-containing soft-drinks).

276

1032.

1033.

1034.

b. Similarly, Mr. Boulton himself stated that he was unable to quantify exactly the
impact of the revocation on other factors that could affect market share, such as
marketing, market share of other products, and the availability of working capital.
In these circumstances, there is no sufficient factual basis for Mr. Boulton’s final
number, and an increase of 67% appears unjustified.

c. Given the uncertainties that the Claimants’ business would have faced after
Romania entered the EU, the Tribunal does not believe that it would be
appropriate to consider export markets in its calculation of damages.

That being said, although Mr. Boulton has failed to prove that the Claimants have
suffered a loss of €100 million, the factors outlined in the preceding paragraph suffice
to convince the Tribunal that the Claimants have lost profits in excess of €51.6 million
as a result of lost sales of finished goods. In particular, the Tribunal is satisfied that
the revocation of the incentives must have had an impact on other factors that could
affect market share, such as marketing, market share of other products and the
availability of working capital, an impact which Mr. Boulton was unable to quantify.
The Tribunal is not well-positioned to quantify the economic impact of factors that the
expert himself was unable to quantify, however, it is satisfied that an additional
damage was indeed suffered. Having reached that conclusion, and in the exercise of
its discretion to quantify damages, the Tribunal is prepared to return to the initial
figure proposed by Mr. Boulton in his second step, that is, €60 million.

For these reasons, the Tribunal values the lost profits suffered by the Claimants for
lost sales of finished goods at €60 million. In his report, Mr. Boulton calculates this to
be equivalent to RON 255.7 million at the exchange rate of the date of his report (ER
of R. Boulton, 4 5.70).?"° The Claimants have made their claims in RON; as a result,
the Tribunal finds that it would be improper to use a different exchange rate and will in
particular derive the consequences from this finding when it comes to compute the
interest on the claims. Thus, the Tribunal values the lost profits suffered by the
Claimants for lost sales of finished goods in RON, namely at RON 255.7 million.

c. Lost profits on sales of sugar containing products (SCPs)

In addition to their claim for lost profits on sales of finished goods, the Claimants claim
lost profits on sales of sugar containing products (“SCPs”) following the revocation of
the incentives, in the amount of RON 492.3 million (C-PHB, {{ 162-170). This claim is
cumulatively based on:

a. The calculations contained in section 4 of Mr. Osborne’s first report and
paragraphs 4.25 and 4.31 in particular;

218 Indeed, although Mr. Boulton quantifies the claim in Euro, his model was principally denominated in
RON. Mr. Boulton explains that “[w]ith the exception of transportation and distribution costs, my model
is denominated in RON. | have converted the RON values into Euros on a monthly basis in my model.
However, for illustrative purposes here, | have used the 30 July 2010 €:RON exchange rate
[equivalent to 1:4.26179, as noted in § 5.69] to convert my Euro denominated calculations back into
RON” (ER of R. Boulton, fn. 125, p. 54).

277

1035.

1036.

1037.

1038.

b. The calculations contained in section 5 of Mr. Osborne’s second report;

c. The calculations contained in Dr. Fry’s reports of December 2009 and July 2010;
and

d. The evidence referred to in the abovementioned sections and reports, including
paragraph 69 of Mr. Viorel Micula’s witness statement dated 22 December 2009,
paragraphs 82 and 124 of Mr. Halbac’s witness statement dated 22 December
2009, paragraph 17 of Mr. Halbac’s witness statement dated 30 July 2010, and
exhibits CO-1.19 and CO-13.1.

This claim can be summarized as follows. Relying on the evidence cited above, the
Claimants assert that, from 2005, they planned on manufacturing SCPs and selling
those SCPs to industrial third parties. They further assert that, as a result of the
revocation of the incentives, they were unable to do so. As a result, they now claim
for the lost profits they would have allegedly made had they been able to sell SCPs to
third parties.

For the quantification of this claim, the Claimants rely on the expert reports prepared
by Dr. Fry (of LMC International) and Mr. Osborne (of FTI). In fact, the quantification
analysis is carried out by Dr. Fry; Mr. Osborne has adopted his estimates, added
interest and grossed-up for taxes (First ER of C. Osborne, { 4.31; Second ER of C.
Osborne, { 5.3, 1.19).

Specifically, Dr. Fry asserts that the SCP opportunity would have been worth €131
million to the Claimants had they been able to take advantage of it (Second ER of J.
Fry, p. 5). Dr. Fry’s quantification is based on the following main assumptions (some
of which are the result of his own expert opinion):

a. That, with the price advantage the Raw Materials Incentive would have given the
Claimants, they would have been able to capture 90% of the Romanian SCP
market (excluding sales of SCPs from domestic sugar beet production, with about
half of the market captured in 2005). The Claimants argue that Dr. Fry has
successfully responded to all criticisms leveled at this conclusion (see C-PHB, ¥
164).

b. That the Claimants, in taking advantage of the SCP opportunity, would not have
undermined or come into conflict with the EU’s sugar regime. This is because
the EU’s sugar regime defends a reference price and in so doing provides the
Commission with mechanisms to deal with all kinds of events (see C-PHB, §
165).

In addition, the Claimants assert that “[a]t no stage of the proceedings has the
Respondent ever alleged that sales of SCPs to industrial third parties would have
been unlawful under Romanian law or outside what was permitted pursuant to the
EGO 24 regime” (C-PHB, { 168).

278

1039.

1040.

1041.

1042.

Finally, the Claimants argue that “the additional capacity to enable the Claimants to
engage in sales of SCPs would have attracted a premium in the valuation of the
European Food and Drinks Companies prior to Revocation. This capacity gave the
Claimants an option to generate incremental cash from a structural cost advantage
relative to other sugar suppliers in the market and as such, would definitely have had
a value” (C-PHB, § 170). However, they do not attempt to give a value to this
premium.

The Respondent criticizes this claim for the following reasons (R-PHB, {/f 244-254; R-
SPHB, {| 19-23):

a. First, the Respondent argues that there is no evidentiary support for this claim. It
notes that, in the five years during which the Claimants had access to the Raw
Materials Incentive, no SCPs were ever marketed or sold to an industrial third
party. Likewise, the Respondent notes that there is no contemporaneous
evidence in the record reflecting the alleged intention to pursue the SCP
opportunity. The Respondent argues that this claim is premised solely on Mr.
Viorel Micula’s and Mr. Halbac’s testimony, which it characterizes as unreliable.

b. Second, for this same reason, the Respondent argues that there is no evidence
of the scale upon which the SCP opportunity would have allegedly been pursued.

c. Third, the Respondent argues that the assumptions that underlie Dr. Fry’s
calculations are unreasonable. In particular, the Respondent contends that it is
unreasonable to assume that the EFDG would have captured 90% of the
Romanian market, on the further assumption that the EFDG’s competitors
(including Coca-Cola) would have been willing to purchase SCPs from EFDG and
that all sugar producers capable of producing SCPs would have allowed their
businesses to be wiped out (with the exception of sugar beet producers, who
would have been able to survive on break-even margins). The Respondent also
argues that it is unreasonable to assume that this strategy would have been legal
as a matter of Romanian and EU law, or that Romania would have been able to
maintain the customs duty exemption until March 2009 (R-PHB, § 247).

After analyzing the evidence before it, the Tribunal rejects this claim. In particular, it
finds that the Claimants have not proved with sufficient certainty that, but for the
revocation, they would have earned profits as a result of sales of SCPs to industrial
third parties. First, it is undisputed that the Claimants never sold SCPs to industrial
third parties (Section (i) below). Second, the Claimants have not proven that they
would have in fact engaged in the business of selling SCPs to industrial third parties
(Section (ii) below). The Tribunal therefore does not need to address the quantum of
the alleged lost profits.

i. The Claimants never sold SCPs to industrial third parties

It is uncontested that the Claimants never sold SCPs to industrial third parties. Mr.
Osborne stated in his first report and confirmed at the hearing that “[t]he opportunity
to sell sugar-based products is not one that was ever pursued. The objective of the

279

1043.

Micula brothers had rather been to build higher value-added businesses including
manufacturing finished goods” (First ER of C. Osborne, { 4.26; Tr., Day 10, 66-67
(Osborne)).

In this respect, Mr. Halbac and Mr. Osborne both acknowledged that European Food
only sold SCPs to other members of the EFDG. Specifically:

a.

Mr. Osborne states that “[p]rior to revocation, European Food was processing
sugar and selling intermediate sugar products to industrial users, in the way
posited by LMC, although primarily to European Drinks” (Second ER of C.
Osborne § 5.5). Mr. Osborne cites Exh. CO-19.1, but this exhibit only reflects
sales of SCPs from European Food to other EFDG companies (specifically,
European Drinks and Original Prod SRL).

Mr. Halbac states that “European Food has been selling intermediate sugar
products to industrial users since 2000, when it first began selling sugar syrup”
(Second WS of M. Halbac, § 3), but then he clarifies that “[w]hile many of
European Food’s customer’s [sic] were EFDG related companies, this does not
change the fact that European Food was well versed in selling intermediate
products. Further, European Food had been selling these products to unrelated
third party customers for some time before revocation, contrary to Romania’s
position” (/d., note 3). But Mr. Halbac does not say that European Food sold
SCPs to industrial third party customers.

Indeed, Mr. Halbac was not able to cite to a single invoice clearly reflecting sales
of SCPs to industrial third party customers. All invoices cited refer either to sales
of SCPs to other EFDG companies, or sales of other intermediate products (not
SCPs) to third parties. Specifically:

i. Exh. C-840, C-841, C-842 and C-839 contain invoices for sugar syrup sales
from European Food to European Drinks from 2002 to 2005.

ii. Exh. C-954 to C-958 are all bulk sales invoices for wafers, cocoa, and other
sugar products from European Food to TGIE (another member of the EFDG)
from 2002 to 2005.

iii. Mr. Halbac cites one invoice that could refer to sales to third parties, but the
names are illegible and no translation was provided (Exh. C-959). In any
event, most of the products may not be SCPs (e.g., tomato paste, ketchup,
mustard, cereals), although there appears to be some reference to products
containing cocoa, which presumably could involve SCPs. Importantly, there
appears to be no mention of sugar syrup. The Tribunal cannot confirm,
especially as the document is in Romanian.

1044. Given that no sales of SCPs to industrial third parties were proven to have been
made, it also was not proven that the Claimants ever earned profits as a result of this
activity. Thus, there is no proven record of profitability to support the Claimants’ lost
profits claim. As stated at paragraph 1010 above, the absence of a proven record of

280

1045.

1046.

1047.

1048.

1049.

profitability need not necessarily be fatal to a lost profits claim. However, in this
particular case the Claimants have not met their burden of proving that they would
have in fact engaged in the business of selling SCPs to industrial third parties, as
discussed below.

ii. The Claimants have not proven that they would have in fact engaged
in the business of selling SCPs to industrial third parties

The evidence in the record does not support, with the requisite degree of certainty, a
finding that the Claimants would have in fact pursued the SCP opportunity. None of
the Claimants’ experts could identify any contemporaneous evidence of an intention
to pursue the SCP opportunity (Tr., Day 8, 46 (Lessard); Tr., Day 10, 66-70
(Osborne); Tr., Day 11, 224-225 (Fry)). The Claimants rely heavily on witness
evidence, in particular by Mr. Viorel Micula and Mr. Halbac, but the Tribunal finds this
evidence unconvincing.

Mr. Viorel Micula simply asserts that “[f]rom 2005, we had planned on manufacturing
from raw sugar, sugar-based products such as sugar syrup, and then selling these
sugar-based products to industrial third-parties” (Third WS of V. Micula, 4 69). Mr.
Viorel Micula does not cite any documentary evidence.

In his second witness Statement, Mr. Halbac testifies that the Claimants intended to
sell SCPs to third party industrial consumers (Second WS of M. Halbac, ff 23-24). In
that statement, he links the expansion of the chocolate cream line, done in December
2004 (although according to him it was planned since 2002) to an increased capacity
to process sugar and produce SCPs, thus allegedly allowing for sales of SCPs. He
also suggests that EFDG was already selling SCPs to industrial consumers (Second
WS of M. Halbac, 9 3-7), but as stated above, this only referred to customers within
the EFDG. Mr. Halbac also testifies that EFDG had the capacity to produce, sell and
distribute SCPs to third parties (Second WS of M. Halbac, {J 25-55).

The Tribunal has several comments on Mr. Halbac’s statements. First, it is puzzling
that Mr. Halbac did not mention sales of SCPs to third parties in his First Witness
Statement. There Mr. Halbac referred only to the internal use of SCPs by EFDG
companies (First WS of M. Halbac, 9] 14-17; 81-120). Mr. Halbac did make one
statement at paragraph 118 of his First Witness Statement that could potentially have
referred to sales of SCPs (specifically, chocolate cream) to third parties, but this is
unclear.?'° In any event, in his First Witness Statement he makes no mention of
sugar syrup, which is a crucial aspect of the Claimants’ SCP claim.

Second, Mr. Halbac’s statements do not prove that the Claimants had the capacity to
sell SCPs to third parties at the scale assumed by Dr. Fry, Prof. Lessard and Mr.
Osborne. Indeed, although Mr. Halbac’s statements could support the assertion that

ate Specifically, Mr. Halbac stated that “[w]hen we extended the chocolate cream line, we were
planning for future developments such as the chocolate tablet line, the cream filled biscuit line, and the
bulk delivery of chocolate cream for patisseries or other food producers. However, these projects were
never realized due to the fact that we lost the EGO raw materials incentive” (First WS of M. Halbac,

118).

281

the December 2004 expansion of the chocolate cream line was sufficient to sell
chocolate cream to industrial third parties, it does not support the conclusion that this
expansion gave the Claimants sufficient capacity to sell powdered sugar or sugar
syrup to industrial customers.

a.

With respect to sugar syrup, Mr. Halbac states that “[b]efore the December 2004
expansion, we did not have the capacity to sell powdered sugar to industrial
consumers. To prepare for these sales, we expanded our handling system with
additional Reimelt and Wiener equipment. This equipment is identified in the
attached diagram” (Second WS of M. Halbac, {| 23). However, the “attached
diagram” (Exh. C-848) is an unsigned diagram in English, dated 09.04.03, that
does not prove that the equipment was actually bought and installed.

Similarly, neither Mr. Halbac’s statements nor the evidence cited prove that the
Claimants had the capacity to sell sugar syrup to third party industrial customers.
Mr. Halbac merely states that “[i]n addition to powdered sugar products and
chocolate cream, EFDG planned to extend its sale of sugar syrup to third party
industrial consumers. As previously stated, European Food was already selling
significant amounts of sugar syrup to European Drinks for the soft drink
production. These sales were processed just as they would be if European Food
sold sugar syrup to a completely unrelated company, and each sale was
invoiced.” (Second WS of M. Halbac, {| 24). There is no reference to how the
2004 expansion of the chocolate cream line could have impacted the production
of sugar syrup. Perhaps the implication is that the Claimants already had that
capacity. However, as stated above, European Food never did sell sugar syrup
to industrial third parties. If this was such a profitable venture and the Claimants
already had the capacity to do so, it is difficult to understand why they did not
pursue this opportunity before. There is no credible contemporaneous evidence
that the Claimants contemplated or made any preparatory work for the sale of
sugar syrup or significant quantities of SCPs to third-party industrial users, be it in
or outside Romania. One would for instance have expected some internal
correspondence or exchanges of memos as to the abandonment or alteration of
such plans in relation to the repeal of the incentives.

1050. In turn, Mr. Osborne’s position seems to be that the SCP opportunity was possible
and valuable for the Claimants, and given their financial constraints he concludes that
they would have “undoubtedly” pursued it. Specifically, Mr. Osborne makes the
following statements:

a.

“With the EGO 24/1998 raw materials incentive in place, the Claimant Companies
could have made additional sales of sugar-based products to industrial users of
sugar outside of the Companies controlled by the individual Claimants, in the
same way that it does to Companies that are controlled by the Claimants. Post
revocation of the raw materials incentive however, its cost advantage in the
purchase of sugar for processing into such products had been removed.” (First
ER of C. Osborne, { 4.25, emphasis added)

282

1051.

b. “The opportunity to sell sugar-based products is not one that was ever pursued.
The objective of the Micula brothers had rather been to build higher value-added
businesses including manufacturing finished goods. Given the financial
constraints that the Companies are now under, however, the opportunity would
have been valuable, and would undoubtedly have been exploited’ (First ER
of C. Osborne, | 4.26; emphasis added).

c. “Selling intermediate sugar products to industrial customers that were not under
common ownership was not the brothers’ primary strategy from the outset of the
EGO 24/1998 investment programme. However, it was an obvious potential
source of significant incremental cash flow should the risks they were taking
in investing in new businesses and new facilities crystallise on the downside, as
they did” (First ER of C. Osborne, §/ 5.1, emphasis added).

d. “During 2004 when the EBITDA contribution of European Food and soft drinks
declined, and the import duty on refined sugar was doubled to 90%, the brothers
were preparing to process and sell intermediate sugar products in large quantities
to third parties. The brothers believed that this would allow them to avoid
financial constraints within the corporate Claimants, and any negative effects
on the other companies they owned” (Second ER of C. Osborne, § 5.2. Mr.
Osborne relies here on the Third WS of V. Micula, 69, emphasis added).

e. “Given the value of the opportunity, as set out by LMC, it appears to me that the
natural assumption is that the opportunity would have been pursued, at
least at the point at which it became important to the financial well-being of the
Companies” (Second ER of C. Osborne, § 5.6).

f. “The EGO 24/1998 incentives allowed the corporate Claimants to sell
intermediate sugar products to industrial customers. In fact sales of such
products were only ever made to companies under common ownership, but there
was scope to sell to third parties had the need arisen. This could have been
highly cash generative, especially towards the end of the original incentives
period after Romania’s accession to the EU” (Second ER of C. Osborne, { 7.28).

The Tribunal cannot accept Mr. Halbac’s or Mr. Osborne's statements as proof with
sufficient certainty that the Claimants would have in fact sold SCPs to third parties.
Even if the Claimants had the capacity to do so, capacity alone does not provide
sufficient certainty that an opportunity would have been pursued and that it would
have been profitable. Nor can Mr. Osborne's assertions as to the reasonableness of
this plan establish with sufficient certainty that the Claimants would have in fact
pursued the SCP opportunity. Reasonable and viable as it may have been, Mr.
Osborne is only speculating. In the Tribunal’s view, this does not meet the standard
of sufficient certainty. Excellent prospects of profitability may contribute to prove that
an opportunity would have existed, especially from the vantage point of retrospective
view rather than actual prediction, but this is still a far cry from demonstrating that this
opportunity could and would have been availed of.

283

1052.

1053.

1054.

The Tribunal is likewise not persuaded by the Claimants’ explanations for the lack of
documentary evidence. Relying on Mr. Boulton, the Claimants argue that it is
“completely unrealistic” to treat the EFDG companies as though they are quoted
public companies with documents prepared for every single decision, plan and aspect
of the business. Although this may be true, this does not dispense with the
requirement of proving their lost profits case with sufficient certainty. The Claimants
also quote Prof. Lessard, who stated that “as an economic matter, the fact that
Claimants invested to develop this capacity and the related product standards and
permits is stronger evidence of their intent than would be internal memoranda,
corporate resolutions, or other formalities” (Second ER of D. Lessard, § 57). The
Tribunal also accepts that in theory this could be true. However, it has found no
convincing evidence that the Claimants indeed invested specifically with the purpose
of developing this capacity. Although there is evidence that they invested to expand
the chocolate cream line, it is unclear whether this gave them the capacity to sell
SCPs (especially sugar syrup and powdered sugar) to industrial third parties at the
scale that they allege. And even if they had this capacity, this is not in itself proof that
they intended to produce different types of SCPs in large quantities to sell to industrial
third parties.

The Tribunal is also troubled by the fact the timing of the alleged SCP opportunity. In
particular, if this opportunity was so attractive, why did the Claimants not pursue it
earlier?

The Claimants argue that there are “proper explanations as to why the SCP
opportunity was not pursued prior to the unlawful premature revocation of the
Incentives” (C-PHB, {| 167). According to the Claimants:

a. The evidence shows, and both Professor Lessard and Mr. Osborne explained
during the course of the hearing, that the reason why the SCP opportunity
became attractive at the start of 2005 is that the customs duties on sugar doubled
at about that time (Exh. C-805; Tr., Day 8, 22 (Lessard); Tr., Day 10, 67
(Osborne); Second ER of D. Lessard, Exhibit A).

b. As explained by Mr. Osborne, the SCP opportunity, being reliant on the Raw
Materials Incentive, was not a long-term business proposition but instead was
helpful for cash generation. The suggestion seems to be that it was not
necessary to pursue it before the Claimants became cash constrained (Tr., Day
10, 67-68 (Osborne)).

c. Mr Osborne also explained that as the financial ratios of the European Food and
Drinks Companies were starting to decline by 2005 (though they were not poor),
the SCP opportunity and its ability to be highly cash generative became more
attractive (Second ER of C. Osborne, 5.2).

d. Additionally, it was only after the expansion of the Claimants’ sugar production
facilities was completed in December 2004 that the Claimants had sufficient

284

capacity to produce and sell SCPs to industrial third parties in addition to selling
their private label goods (Second WS of M. Halbac, {[ 23).

1055. The Tribunal has the following comments:

a.

First, if the SCP opportunity only became attractive in 2005 because of an
increase in customs duties, it can hardly have been part of the Claimants’ original
plan. Thus, there was no ongoing investment plan that was frustrated by
revocation.

Second, by 2005 revocation had already been announced. Thus, the SCP
opportunity cannot be said to have properly existed pre-revocation.

Third, the expansion of the chocolate cream line (which purports to serve as
intention of pursuing this opportunity) was made in December 2004. If the SPC
opportunity only became attractive in 2005 because of an increase in customs
duties in 2005, the purpose of the chocolate cream line expansion must have
been other than pursuing the SCP opportunity. Indeed, Mr. Halbac asserts that
this had been planned as early as 2002 (see Second WS of M. Halbac, fn. 8 at J
19).

1056. In view of the above, there does not appear to be in the record sufficient evidence of
existing and concrete plans rather than, in the most favorable hypothesis for the
Claimants, some general speculations that the Claimants might have gone into such
sales if certain events would have materialized. In addition, at best, this opportunity
appears to have been thought of when the revocation became imminent, as a life
saver of sorts to help the Claimants out of financial distress, a mitigating measure to
obtain cash flows in times of financial constraint. Indeed, Mr. Osborne’s comments
cited at paragraph 1050 above seem to suggest this. This is also confirmed by the
following statements by Mr. Osborne:

“1.13 My own view remains that the Claimants had the motive, the
means and the opportunity to generate significant profits from
expanding the sales of intermediate sugar products. As | have said,
the existence of the opportunity does not appear to me to be
contested; and Professor Lessard has dealt with the question of
whether the Claimants had the means to take advantage of that
opportunity.

1.14 The fact that the Claimants had not done so, prior to revocation,
goes in my view to the question of motive. Mr Ellison suggests that it
is odd that the “quasi-arbitrage opportunity” was not pursued, prior to
revocation, given the high profits apparently available and the low
associated risk.

1.15 | do not find it odd: nothing in the history of the Claimants’ operations
in Romania suggests to me that the Claimants were motivated to
maximise either short-term profitability or personal gain; and all of
the interactions that | have had during the course of multiple site
visits have suggested the reverse — that they were motivated
primarily to build a long term, sustainable business.

285

1057.

1058.

1059.

1.16 For much of the period up to revocation, that motivation would not
have been compatible with the exploitation of the opportunity to
expand sales of intermediate sugar products. Once the
Claimants started to become financially constrained, however, the
motivations would have been precisely aligned, since the survival of
the underlying and potentially sustainable business would have been
at stake.

1.17. To repeat a point that | have made before, it appears to me that the
natural assumption is that the Claimants would have taken
advantage of the opportunity, as soon as it became expedient
or necessary to do so. As | demonstrate in Section 6 of this report,
it did indeed become necessary, for reasons connected with the
scale of the investments undertaken by the Claimants.”

(Second ER of C. Osborne, § 1.13-1.17).

The Tribunal cannot accept Mr. Osborne’s conclusions as sufficient evidence of intent
to pursue the SCP opportunity. Even if the Claimants had the motive, the means and
the opportunity to generate profits from expanding the sales of SCPs to third parties,
this does not provide sufficient certainty that, but for the revocation, the Claimants
would in fact have engaged in the sale of SCPs to third parties. Absent other
convincing evidence in this respect, the Tribunal dismisses this claim.

d. Lost profits incurred as a result of the Claimants’ inability to complete the
Incremental Investments

i. Overview of the Parties’ positions

The Claimants’ primary expectation damages case (Method A) is premised on the
existence of an alleged ten-year plan to capitalize on the incentives and to complete
an expanded manufacturing platform that would have performed profitably after the
incentives expired (C-PHB, § 97). This platform allegedly included a malt
manufacturing plant, a can manufacturing plant, and a co-generation plant (which the
Claimants collectively call the “Incremental Investments”). As part of Method A, the
Claimants claim the profits that these Incremental Investments would have generated
but for the revocation.

There is no dispute that the Claimants never implemented the Incremental
Investments. The Claimants are requesting, in their own words, “damages for lost
cash flows that Claimants expected to receive from certain projects that they intended
to implement as part of their business plan, and would have implemented, but for the
premature revocation of the incentives” (C-Reply, §| 595, emphasis in original).
Specifically, the Claimants claim:

a. RON 28 million in lost profits from the inability to complete a malt manufacturing
plant. They base this claim on Prof. Lessard’s first and second reports (First ER
of D. Lessard, § 97-99, Fig. 22, Table 7; Second ER of D. Lessard, {{{ 99-103,
113-122, Fig. 16), the evidence cited in those reports, including Mr. Halbac’s two
witness statements, and the figures contained in Updated Summary of Damages
Separating Interest (in RON), Tab 2 of Mr. Schwartz's Opening Presentation;

286

1060.

1061.

1062.

1063.

b. RON 720.4 million in lost profits from inability to complete a can manufacturing
plant. The Claimants base this claim on Prof. Lessard’s first and second reports
(First ER of D. Lessard, {| 105-110, Fig. 23, Table 9 and 10; Second ER of D.
Lessard, {] 104-107, 113-122); Prof. Steenkamp’s Expert Report, including
Table 15; the evidence cited in those reports, including Mr. Halbac’s two witness
statements, and the figures contained in Updated Summary of Damages
Separating Interest (in RON), Tab 2 of Mr. Schwartz's Opening Presentation.

c. RON 712.6 million from the inability to complete a co-generation plant. They
base this claim on Prof. Lessard’s first and second expert reports (First ER of D.
Lessard, §§ 100-104 Table 4; Second ER of D. Lessard, { 108-111); the
evidence cited in those reports, including Mr. Baciu’s witness statement, and
figures contained in Updated Summary of Damages Separating Interest (in
RON), Tab 2 of Mr. Schwartz’s Opening Presentation.

The Claimants assert that they had planned to implement the Incremental
Investments, and had in fact taken steps towards their implementation, but the
revocation of the incentives deprived them of both the cash and financing leverage
necessary to “complete” these Incremental Investments. Relying on the principle of
full reparation enshrined in Article 31 of the ILC Articles, as articulated by the PClJ in
the Factory at Chorzow case, the Claimants’ argument is that, but for the revocation,
they would have implemented the Incremental Investments; consequently, to put
them back in the position they would have been but for the revocation, the Tribunal
should award them the future net cash flows that these plants would have generated.

The Respondent contends that the Claimants have failed to prove with reasonable or
sufficient certainty their claims for lost profits related to the Incremental Investments.

First, the Respondent argues that there is no proof that the Incremental Investments
would have been undertaken at all. The Respondent notes that Prof. Lessard,
despite multiple site visits, meetings with the Claimants’ employees, and having relied
on much of the information provided by the Claimants, testified that he considered the
Incremental Investments to be merely “plausible” (by which he appeared to mean that
they would have made “economic sense”), but was unwilling to characterize them as
“probable” (Tr., Day 8, 40-2), which the Respondent argues is the minimal standard
under international law. Contrary to the Claimants’ suggestion, the Respondent
denies that all that remained was to “complete” the Incremental Investments. The
Respondent argues that to make this assertion the Claimants have mischaracterized
the documentary evidence and manipulated witness testimony.

Second, even if there was no doubt that the Incremental Investments would have
been undertaken, the Respondent submits that the Claimants cannot meet the
sufficient certainty standard to establish that they would have been profitable, or what
would have been the level of such projected profits, because the Incremental
Investments were not going concerns and had no proven record of profitability. As
noted above, the Respondent submits that international law precludes any award of
prospective damages for projects that have not commenced, and that the reasonable

287

1064.

1065.

1066.

1067.

certainty standard cannot be satisfied in the absence of a going concern and a proven
record of profitability.

In addition, the Respondent argues that the Claimants have failed to prove that the
revocation of the incentives was the dominant or proximate cause of their failure to
implement the Incremental Investments. The Respondent argues that the financial
distress that allegedly prevented the Claimants from implementing the Incremental
Investments is attributable to causes other than the revocation of the incentives.

ii. The Tribunal’s analysis

For the reasons set out below, the Tribunal rejects the Claimants’ claims for lost
profits allegedly incurred as a result of their inability to complete the Incremental
Investments. It is undisputed that none of the facilities that would have allegedly
generated the lost profits claimed (i.e., the malt plant, the canning plant and the co-
generation plant) existed in their complete, revenue-generating form at the time of
revocation. Instead, the Claimants claim that they intended to build these facilities,
and that these facilities were at various stages of completion. The Claimants also
argue that the Incremental Investments were consistent with their integrated business
model, and submit this as further proof of their intention to complete these facilities.
However, after an analysis of the record, the Tribunal finds that the Claimants have
failed to prove with sufficient certainty that they would have indeed implemented the
Incremental Investments that serve as the basis for this lost profits claim.

In the following sections, the Tribunal addresses the evidence and arguments
submitted by the Claimants with respect to each of the Incremental Investments, as
well as their general arguments with respect to their integrated business model and
advance planning for the Incremental Investments.

(a) The Claimants’ integrated business model — Advance planning for
the Incremental Investments

In support of their intention to implement the Incremental Investments, the Claimants
contend that the Incremental Investments were necessary to the success of the
Claimants’ overall business model, which they argue was designed to take advantage
of the incentives’ ten-year duration to build out a manufacturing platform that would
be sustainable upon the expiry of the incentives in 2009. The Claimants argue that
the Incremental Investments were tied to the brewery, which they claim was also an
integral part of their plan for retaining profitability beyond the expiry of the incentives
in 2009, because beer was not as dependent on the incentives as their soft drinks or
food business. Specifically, they argue that:

a. The malt manufacturing plant would have improved the cost effectiveness of the
brewery, improving the Claimants’ competitiveness in the beer market;

b. The can manufacturing plant would have permitted the Claimants to competitively
expand their beer sales into the private label market; and

288

1068.

1069.

1070.

1071.

c. The co-generation plant would have capitalized on the brewery’s waste products
to reduce the Claimants’ overall energy costs and improve the Claimants’ cost
and price competitiveness. It would have also provided revenue from the sale of
energy and green certificates to third parties.

(C-PHB, 4 171; Second ER of D. Lessard, {{ 7-8; First and Second WS of S. Baciu).

The Claimants contend that their model was driven by both the ten-year term of the
incentives and the 20-year obligation to continue operations in the disfavored region
imposed by EGO 24 (C-PHB, §f 172-173). This assertion is supported mainly by:

a. Mr. loan Micula’s oral testimony, where he states that their strategy after 1999
was “to use the temporary facilities for ten years to turn them into permanent
advantages. [...] By way of these temporary facilities, we tried in fact to turn them
into permanent standing facilities by building up those components of the
equipment that could be used after termination of the facilities” (Tr., Day 3, 33-35
(I. Micula)).

b. Prof. Lessard’s description of the Claimants’ business model, which he explains
“involved a high degree of commitment [...] because the Claimants had to build
factories and produce successful products well within the ten-year period that the
Incentives were available in order to create a base that would sustain their
activities for the ten years they were obligated to remain in business after the
Incentives expired” (First ER of D. Lessard, § 39).

The Claimants argue that these facilities made economic sense in the context of their
integrated platform and would have been easy to “plug in” to that platform. Through
the witness testimony of Mr. Halbac (and to a lesser extent, Mr. Baciu), the Claimants
claim that their infrastructure was engineered in such a way that new production
facilities could be easily connected to it.

Mr. Halbac explained (and the Respondent did not dispute) that the region in which
the Claimants invested did not have the infrastructure in place to support large
production facilities. As a result, it was necessary to invest heavily in basic utilities
such as reliable electricity, gas, and water supply to support each of the production
sites (First WS of M. Halbac, { 45). Mr. Halbac asserted that the basic utilities were
built on a larger scale than the companies needed at that time due to the obligation
under the EGO 24 to maintain the investment for 20 years, and because the
Claimants wanted to make use of the networks for future projects. As a result, the
infrastructure was engineered in such a way that it could be easily connected to new
production facilities (First WS of M. Halbac, {| 46).

In his First Witness Statement, Mr. Halbac included diagrams showing the integration
of the different facilities. He stated that the dashed lines in the diagrams “represent
investments that EFDG has not completed, but that could have been easily integrated
into EFDG’s existing utility connections, had early revocation of the EGO 24
incentives not constrained our cash” (First WS of M. Halbac, § 50). He also testified
that “[t]he ability of EFDG to engineer and construct utility networks was absolutely

289

1072.

1073.

1074.

critical, since the State did not provide these utilities for us. We planned ahead and
built these networks so that they could support additional production capacities, and
as a result, we have been able to expand our facilities fairly easily. This also means
that the projects we have been unable to complete could be easily added to our
existing network. Thus, EFDG’s initial planning for the shared infrastructure has
saved considerable amounts of money, because the infrastructure does not have to
be duplicated at each site. These cost savings have been invested in the expansion
and integration of the business” (First WS of M. Halbac, 60-61).

On the basis of Mr. Halbac’s testimony and other evidence in the record, the Tribunal
has no reason to doubt that the Claimants built a highly integrated platform that
allowed them to save costs if they decided to insert new product lines or plants.
However, this does not provide sufficient certainty that the Claimants would have in
fact built a malt plant, a can manufacturing plant and/or a co-generation plant. This
finding is in line with the general pattern of conduct evinced by the Individual
Claimants and the EFDG: they built up and expanded their businesses with foresight,
with the intent always to preserve as many options as possible and keep flexible in
order to be able to seize those opportunities which would actually materialize at the
right time depending on market conditions and financial possibilities, among other
considerations. This speaks for the fact that the two Individual Claimants are savvy
and experienced business people, which their very success also establishes, but it
does not prove that they would actually have embarked on all of the options that they
had envisaged at one point or another.

Indeed, there is virtually no contemporaneous evidence of advance planning for any
of the Incremental investments. There are no specific feasibility plans for any of the
plants, nor is there any record of them in the 2000, 2002 or 2003 PWC business
plans (Exh. R-204, R-214 and R-215). Other than a few quotes and invoices, the
Claimants have not been able to point to any internal documents, such as budget,
memos or correspondence evidencing their intention to build these plants. This is
particularly surprising considering that Mr. Halbac testified that EFDG had a
“development department” specifically created to reduce costs associated with future
investments (First WS of M. Halbac, | 20-34). According to Mr. Halbac, this
development department consisted of a group of engineers that “cover virtually every
aspect of any investment, including mechanical engineers, architectural engineers,
electric engineers, civil engineers, structural engineers, and even engineers who
focus solely on plumbing” (First WS of M. Halbac, 21). Mr. Halbac also testified that
for each new project, this department organized a team of project managers
responsible for the optimum realization of the investments, starting from the initial
contracts. Mr. Halbac even included a diagram titled “EFG Plant Building” (First WS
of M. Halbac, p. 13) illustrating “EFDG’s planning and implementation process for
new investments”. However, despite the existence of this team of engineers and
highly organized and structured process, there is not a single internal plan, memo or
email documenting the Claimants’ intention to pursue the Incremental Investments.

As discussed in detail in the sections that follow, the documentary evidence in the
record refers mainly to correspondence with and quotations from third parties for

290

1075.

1076.

1077.

equipment necessary to develop these projects. Although it does evidence an
interest in these projects as potential investments, it does not prove that the
Claimants would have in fact invested in them.

Despite this lack of evidence of advance planning, the Claimants contend that they in
fact took steps to materialize the Incremental Investments, which in their view shows
that they intended to pursue them (indeed, they argue that only final steps were
needed to complete them). The Claimants argue that they were a family-run
business that took decisions verbally and did not usually operate on the basis of
written plans. They submit that the development of the brewery is evidence of this,
because it was built despite the absence of written plans and despite the fact that it
was not mentioned in the 2000 or 2003 PWC business plans. Indeed, they point out
that according to the 2003 PWC business plan, no major capital investment was
planned or needed over the period 2003 to 2007, and despite that statement, the
Claimants’ heaviest capital investments occurred from 2003 to 2007 (including the
expansion of the brewery) (C-PHB, § 179). The Tribunal has duly considered this
argument. However, as discussed below, it finds that the steps identified by the
Claimants as evidence of their intention to implement the Incremental Investments do
not show with sufficient certainty that these investments would in fact have been
undertaken.

(b) The malt manufacturing plant

Mr. Halbac testified that, because malt is one of the main ingredients used in beer
production, “we had been exploring options for building a malt plant ever since we
considered building the brewery. This is because we knew that we could realize
significant cost savings if we produced our own malt instead of importing or buying it
on the domestic market” (First WS of M. Halbac, 4 145).

However, in his Second Witness Statement Mr. Halbac clarified that the plans to
construct or complete the malt plan were not immediate. Although he stated that the
Claimants always considered the malt plant as a portion of their brewery, he clarified
that they “would complete [it] at a critical point in time to increase the brewery’s
overall efficiency” (Second WS of M. Halbac, {| 57). He also stated that at the time
that the Claimants constructed the initial stages of the brewery (and later its
expansion), it was “unnecessary for [the Claimants] to construct a complete malt
plant.” This was because they were still benefitting from EGO 24 and could import
malt without paying customs duties. However, he added that “we knew that these
Incentives would not last forever, and that it would be important for us to make
preparations for the malt plant so that we could eventually control our malt production
and not rely on outside sources for the main ingredient to one of our most successful
products — beer” (Second WS of M. Halbac, § 60). This suggests that the Claimants
may have been considering the construction of a malt plant from early on, but they did
not specifically plan to build one at any particular time until the expiry of the incentives
was near.

291

1078.

1079.

1080.

1081.

220

The documentary evidence suggests that the possibility of building a malt plant was
indeed considered by the Claimants from at least 2002. There is evidence of
correspondence with Buhler and Schmidt-Seeger for the construction of a malt plant
during 2002,” including quotations for malt plants of various capacities (Exh. C-335;
C-659; C-628; C-658; C-336”"'). However, the Claimants do not appear to have acted
upon these quotations.

Mr. Halbac testified that, at the time of the revocation, the Claimants already had
many of the necessary components for a malt plant, including equipment for barley
reception, silos for barley, transport, conveying, and cleaning systems for barley,
utilities including steam supply, water, water treatment, compressed air, electrical,
and cooling systems, malt transport, cleaning, and silos for storing malt (First WS of
M. Halbac, {§ 146-151, Second WS of M. Halbac, {{/ 57-65; Tr., Day 7, 141-144).
According to Mr. Halbac, this accounted for 60% of the malt plant (Second WS of M.
Halbac, § 61). Mr. Halbac testified that the only missing elements were the
germination equipment, construction of the actual building and final connection of
utilities to finish the integration into the brewery (Second WS of M. Halbac, 9 61-65;
Tr., Day 7, 143-144). He also testified that Claimants had taken steps to acquire
these missing elements, including the finalization of a contract to purchase the
germination machine and negotiations with the EBRD for the necessary financing.

The Respondent denies that the malt manufacturing plant was nearly finished, as the
Claimants claim. It notes that the Claimants never bought a germination machine,
which was the central component of the malt plant (R-PHB, § 259). The Respondent
also argues that the Claimants have sought to pass off infrastructure and equipment
used for other manufacturing processes as specifically meant for the malt plant. In
particular, the Respondent argues that the empty silo that Mr. Halbac testified was
reserved for barley was in fact constructed before EGO 24 (Mr. Halbac testified it was
built before 2000) and could have been used for other purposes than storing grains
for a malt plant (R-PHB, {| 260 and Tr., Day 7, 169 (Halbac)). The Respondent also
asserts that Mr. Halbac®”? admitted that the transportation system for malt was in fact
used for malt purchased from third parties (R-PHB, § 260 and Tr., Day 7, 148
(Halbac)).

The Tribunal’s review of the documentary evidence confirms that, at the time of the
revocation of the incentives, the Claimants did indeed have the components identified
by Mr. Halbac. However, the Claimants have not established that any of those

Although Mr. Halbac testified that their “first offer for equipment came from Seeger in 1997”, that

offer was not submitted.

1 Exh. C-335 is a quotation dated 19 March 2002 from Schmidt-Seeger for a malt plant with a
capacity of 23,000 tons; Exh. C-659 is an email from Buhler dated 19 March 2002 with an attached
quotation for a malt plant with a capacity of 35,000 tons; Exh. C-628 is an email from Buhler dated 22
April 2002 mentioning the layout (sent by a previous email) for a malt plant with a capacity of 35,000
tons; Exh. C-658 is an email from Buhler dated 2 August 2002 attaching a revised quotation for a
capacity of 22,960 tons worth over €3,9 million but with the possibility of extension to 34,440 tons; and
Exh. C-336 is a quotation from Schmidt-Seeger dated 4 November 2002 for the establishment
components of a malt plant with a capacity of 37,000 — 50,000 tons.

722 The Respondent refers to Mr. Baciu, but the citation is to Mr. Halbac’s testimony.

292

components were purchased exclusively for a malt plant. Indeed, many of them
appear to have been for the brewery’s normal operation. In particular:

a. The Claimants appear to have bought malt handling equipment, including silos
and conveyor systems in 2004 (Exh. C-970 contains invoices dated November
2002 from Schmidt-Seeger), and invoices dated November 2004 from Privé and
Denis (Exh. C-967-968))."° However, it is unclear whether this equipment was
bought in connection with a malt manufacturing plant, rather than malt handling
related to a brewery. As the Respondent notes, Mr. Halbac testified at the
hearing that the silos and conveying systems were also used for other grains,
although the silo reserved for barley was empty (Tr., Day 7, 145-148). Mr.
Halbac also stated that the transportation system could be used for both malt and
barley, but he also testified that the transportation system “was conceived to fit
the malt plant”, and in the absence of the malt plant to process the barley it was
being used to transport malt only (Tr., Day 7, 146-148 (Halbac)).

b. With respect to utilities, Mr. Halbac testified that when the Claimants built the
brewery they constructed a steam pipeline with sufficient capacity to supply both
the brewery in its expanded form (which would account for 50% of the pipeline’s
capacity), and the malt and can manufacturing plants (which would account for
the remaining 50% of the pipeline’s capacity) (Tr., Day 7, 149-153 (Halbac); Exh.
C-647, a certificate of completion of the steam pipe).

1082. Even if this equipment had been intended exclusively for the malt plant (which the
Tribunal finds has not been established), it is undisputed that the Claimants were
missing key elements for a malt plant, in particular the germination machine and the
building. Although there is evidence in the record to support the Claimants’ assertion
that they intended to buy a germination machine and construct the building to house
the malt plant, most of this evidence post-dates the revocation of the incentives. In
particular:

a. Mr. Halbac testified that the Claimants had purchased land in 2000-2001 with an
estimated value of €1 million, which they set aside for the malt plant (Second WS
of M. Halbac, 62), and that the Claimants had “gained approval from the State
to construct the building” (Second WS of M. Halbac, 4 62). Indeed, the Claimants
submitted an Urban Planning Certificate that certifies that the land it refers to may
be used to build a malt plant (Exh. C-976), but this certificate was issued on 5
Dec. 2005 (i.e., post-revocation). The certificate also states that it is not in lieu of
the relevant building permit.

b. Mr. Halbac referred to a geotechnical study conducted by the Claimants for the
malt plant (Second WS of M. Halbac, {| 62). This study is indeed in the record
(Exh. C-978), but it is dated “2005”, which means it was carried out after the
announcement of the revocation in November 2004.

23 Exh. C-970 contains invoices dated November 2002 from Schmidt-Seeger), and Exh. C-967-968
contain invoices dated November 2004 from Privé and Denis.

293

1083.

1084.

224

c. Mr. Halbac also testified that the Claimants had ordered the structural building
design to the Romanian company IPROLAN (Second WS of M. Halbac, {| 63).
However, the engineering design contract with IPROLAN (Exh. C-704) is dated
19 June 2006, more than a year after the revocation.

d. Mr. Halbac also testified that the Claimants had a contract in place with
Lausmann GmbH for the germination machine (Tr., Day 7, 149 (Halbac); Exh. C-
478). At the hearing, the Claimants stated that the document only concerned a
germination machine (Tr., Day 7, 172 (Fleuriet)). However, this contract appears
to involve more than just a germination machine, as Article 1.1 of the contract
mentions a “complete malt producing plant, spare parts, wear parts and
accessories as described in the Appendix 1”, which in turn includes, among
others, steeping, cleaning, kilning and transport equipment. In addition, the
contract post-dates the revocation (Exh. C-478).

e. Finally, the record confirms that in the Claimants’ negotiations with the EBRD for
a potential loan referred to financing for the “potential acquisition, installation and
operation of a malt processing plant with a capacity of 30,000 tons” (Exh. C-744,
C-745, C-746).” However, these documents are from 2006, and therefore post-
date the revocation.

The Tribunal’s conclusion from the available evidence is that the Claimants
contemplated the possibility of building a malt plant from at least 2002, and invested
in certain cost efficiencies that they added to the brewery. They also planned ahead
with respect to utilities, making sure that the steam pipe could service the brewery as
well as future plants. However, they did not plan to build a complete malt
manufacturing plant (i.e., a plant that could process barley into malt rather than
handle ready-made malt) until close to the expiry of the incentives, presumably
because prior to that it was cheaper for them to import duty-free malt. This would
explain why their more serious efforts to set up this plant (financing with the EBRD,
geotechnical study, contract for germination and other equipment) came in 2005 and
2006, after the early revocation of the incentives.

In the Tribunal’s view, this means that, although there is evidence of the Claimants’
intention to build a malt manufacturing plant sometime in the future, the Claimants
have not proven with sufficient certainty that they planned to build it prior to expiry of
the incentives (whether by their early revocation in 2005 or their scheduled expiry in
2009). Nor is it accurate to say that at the date of the revocation the Claimants had
built 60% of a malt manufacturing plant. At the date of the revocation, the Claimants
could only boast certain minor equipment and cost efficiencies that would have made
it relatively easy and less expensive to construct and operate a malt manufacturing
plant. What they had was a highly integrated platform to which a malt plant could

On its front page, the contract is dated 6 July 2005, but the final price appears to have been

negotiated in December 2006 (the date “19.12.2006” is handwritten in Appendix 1 next to the final
negotiated price (€ 4.425 million)

5 although the Claimants argue that negotiations with EBRD involved financing of a “germination
machine”, the EBRD documents refer to a full “malt processing plant”.

294

1085.

1086.

1087.

1088.

easily have been added. This would prove again that the Claimants are savvy
business people. This does not provide sufficient certainty that, but for the revocation
of the incentives, they would have built a malt manufacturing plant.

(c) The can manufacturing plant

With respect to their intention to build a can manufacturing plant, the Claimants again
rely heavily on Mr. Halbac’s testimony.

Mr. Halbac testified that it is very expensive to buy and transport aluminum cans,
while it is much cheaper to transport the raw materials needed to produce the cans.
He further testified that EFDG had always understood that they would save money by
importing raw materials to make their own cans. “Thus, ever since we started
considering a brewery, we planned to construct a nearby can making facility.” (First
WS of M. Halbac, {/{ 156-157).

Mr. Halbac also testified that “[t]here is a significant canned beer market in both the
Romanian and export markets”, and that while the Claimants were building the
brewery, they “became even more interested in the prospect of having [their] own can
plant” (First WS of M. Halbac, 4 162). In addition, Mr. Halbac stated that by reducing
the can costs, they could reduce the price for which they sold their canned beer to
about the same price as their PET bottled-beer, which would have made them more
competitive in both the domestic and export beer markets by increasing their shelf
space, which would have in turn increased sales to consumers (First WS of M.
Halbac, § 168). Mr. Halbac also testified that canned beer has a better shelf life than
PET bottled beer and is cheaper to transport, which is why it was their preferred
method of bottling for their export beer (First WS of M. Halbac, {| 169).

The evidence in the record suggests that the Claimants did begin to consider building
acan plant as early as 1998. Specifically, Mr. Halbac testified that in 1997/1998, the
Claimants contacted various American companies to investigate the relevant
technologies and visited a trade show in Denver and production facilities (First WS of
M. Halbac, § 158). The correspondence submitted as Exh. C-844-846 refers to
meetings with Mr. Halbac in 1998 at the vendors’ respective booths at “Cannex ‘98” in
Denver, Colorado. Mr. Halbac testified that the Claimants “continued to receive and
study vendor proposals” (First WS of M. Halbac, § 162), and indeed, the record
includes correspondence and quotations related to, inter alia, a turn-key canning plant
and can manufacturing equipment and accessories (Exh. C-337, C-844, C-845, C-
856, C-847).2

226 Exh. C-337 contains a proposal from Pac International to Rieni Drinks, dated 20 May 1998. The
detailed quotation concerns a turn-key canning plant offered for a price of over $2.6 million. Exh. C-
844 is a letter of 18 May 1998 from Cambridge Applied Systems, Inc. (US), to Mr. Halbac concerning
requested information on viscometers. Exh. C-845 is a letter 5 June 1998 from Kerry (UK) to Mr.
Halbac with an offer for a “Kerry Seam Plus Station”. Exh. C-846 is a letter of 30 June 1998 from
Chemetall (Sweden) to Mr. Halbac concerning, i.a., can washer treatments. Exh. C-847 is a letter of 9
July 1998 from Omnitech International, Inc. (US), to Mr. Halbac with an offer for can manufacturing
equipment and accessories offered at a price of $19.2 million.

295

1089.

1090.

1091.

1092.

1093.

1094.

Efforts to find suppliers appear to have continued in the following years. Mr. Halbac
testified that “[t]o determine whether the can plant was a viable option, our engineers
attended a variety of symposiums and expositions. For instance, in 2002, we visited
the Metpak exhibition in Essen, Germany to find possible suppliers for the can plant.
After this exhibition, we decided we would construct the can plant after the brewery
was complete.” (First WS of M. Halbac, § 162).

The Claimants also refer to Exh. C-388, C-339 and C-343, which are quotations from
2006-2008 in relation to a can manufacturing plant. In particular, the Claimants
appear to have engaged in negotiations with TG Can which included the possibility of
financing of supply credit (Exh. C-339; Tr., Day 7, 168 (Halbac)).

In addition to the documents cited above, the Claimants argue that their intention to
build a can manufacturing plant is supported by the fact that they took certain steps
and made investments in preparation for this plant. At the hearing, Mr. Halbac
testified that about 50% of the can manufacturing plant had been either built or
purchased (Tr., Day 7, 166). Using as an example an offer from PAC International for
a turnkey can manufacturing facility (Exh. C-337), Mr. Halbac testified that the
Claimants had already completed the following elements of the plant: support
systems equipment area, warehousing, utility and steam supply systems,
demineralization system, cooling and hot water systems, compressed air system,
waste water treatment, electrical shop and quality control lab equipment, chemical
storage, machine shop, and specialized can printing and labeling equipment (Tr., Day
7, 156-159 (Halbac)). According to the Claimants, the only missing elements to
complete the can plant were the building (Tr., Day 7, 157 (Halbac)), and the can
manufacturing machines for producing the aluminum cans (Tr., Day 7, 165 (Halbac)).

As with the malt plant, the Respondent denies that any of these alleged steps or
investments support the Claimants’ intention to build a can plant. The Respondent
argues that the Claimants have sought to pass equipment used for other
manufacturing processes as evidence of a nearly completed can plant, although the
most basic components of the plant were missing (R-PHB, {J 262-264).

In the Tribunal’s view, although there is evidence suggesting that the Claimants
indeed contemplated the possibility of building a can manufacturing plant, the
evidence of concrete plans or specific steps taken to materialize this project is weak.
The documentation cited above shows that the Claimants had an interest in
purchasing elements for a can manufacturing plant, but it does not prove that they
seriously planned to purchase them, in particular considering that this interest did not
materialize within an almost 10-year span.

Similarly, while there is evidence to support Mr. Halbac’s assertions that the
Claimants already had many components necessary for building a can plant, most of
these components appear to refer to shared utilities, land or facilities. Specifically:

a. As mentioned above for the malt plant, Mr. Halbac testified that the steam pipe
was built with an expanded capacity, so that 50% was reserved for the can and

296

malt facilities (C-PHB, § 196 and Tr., Day 7, 152-153 (Halbac); Exh. C-649). In
other words, it was not built specifically for the can plant.

Mr. Halbac also testified that, in late 1999, the Claimants set aside approximately
50,000 square meters of land for a can factory (Second WS of M. Halbac, § 80).
There is little evidence in the record of this land other than a photograph that was
shown during the 2010 hearing. It is also unclear whether this land was
purchased especially for the can plant. In his first witness statement Mr. Halbac
had testified that the Claimants had available land located next to the brewery in
Draganesti West, which made sense because it would have allowed the canning
plant to utilize EDFG’s existing infrastructure and become integrated with the rest
of the plants, and they would use a significant number of the cans to bottle beer
from the brewery (First WS of M. Halbac, § 164). The timing of this step and the
absence of purchase documentation suggests that reserve land was indeed
available but not that specific investments were made to acquire the land in
connection with the can plant.

1095. That being said, some equipment appears to have been bought with the can plant in
mind, although again it is unclear if the equipment could also be used in other
manufacturing processes. Specifically:

a.

Mr. Halbac testified that the grinding machine at the repair shop was purchased
in 2002 especially for the can manufacturing plant (Tr., Day 7, 161-163).
However, it is unclear why this machine was bought in 2002 if no can plant
existed at the time. It is also unclear whether it was also used in other
manufacturing processes.

Mr. Halbac testified that “one of the most difficult processes in can making is the
design and production of the printing plates — which they have been able to do
since 2000.” (Second WS of M. Halbac, § 90). For this purpose, the Claimants
argue that they invested heavily in can printing plates and production equipment
as well as film printing machines for the labeling of cans (C-PHB, § 196). The
Claimants submitted invoices to support this (Exh. C-951, C-946, C-942). Some
of these invoices are from 1998 and pre-date the construction of the brewery, so
it seems unlikely that the equipment related to beer cans. The Respondent also
argues that machinery used to manufacture and wash printing plates could be
used to print on cans, but was acquired and used in the Claimants’ business to
produce other types of packages (R-PHB, {| 262). However, Mr. Halbac testified
that “[o]ne of the machines is equipped so as to be able to produce special plates
for cans....So we bought that type of machinery instead of the cylindric one in
order to be able to manufacture plates for the cans as well” (Tr., Day 7, 171
(Halbac)). Mr. Halbac also testified that no one sold unprinted cans, so they
could not have used the plates to print on purchased cans as suggested by the
Respondent (Tr. Day 7, 171-172 (Halbac)).

Mr. Halbac also testified that in 2003, allegedly anticipating a can making line
being constructed in Draganesti, EFDG invested €128,000 in the relocation of its

297

1096.

1097.

1098.

1099.

1100.

1101.

can filling line to Draganesti. An offer from Krones for new can conveyor
equipment offered at a price of €120,000 was apparently accepted in this regard
(Exh. C-644).

Despite the purchase of this equipment, the Tribunal is not persuaded that the can
plant project was 50% complete, as the Claimants assert, or that it was seriously
planned by the Claimants. Even if this equipment was purchased with a possible can
plant in mind, the Claimants were also using it for other purposes. In addition, the
relocation of the can filling line does not necessarily imply that a can making line will
be subsequently built. More importantly, it is undisputed that the Claimants never
purchased the can manufacturing machines for producing the aluminum cans. As a
result, the Tribunal finds that the Claimants have not proved with sufficient certainty
that but for the revocation they would have built the can manufacturing plant.

(d) The co-generation plant

Mr. Baciu and Mr. Halbac testified that from early on EFDG intended to build a co-
generation plant to reduce internal operational costs. The co-generation plant would
accomplish this by reducing EFDG’s dependence on outside fuel, reducing energy
costs, and using waste from the company’s production processes (First WS of S.
Baciu, § 18; First WS of M. Halbac, §{ 56-59). Mr. Baciu also testified that after
Romania passed renewable energy laws in 2004, EFDG’s intention was to produce
energy to sell electricity to the wholesale market, as well as green certificates (First
WS of S. Baciu, J 15, 24-29). As a result, the profits that the co-generation plant
would have allegedly made rested on both savings on operational costs and the sale
of electricity/green certificates to third parties. The Respondent alleges, and Prof.
Lessard confirmed at the hearing, that the green certificates accounted for 72% of the
value that Prof. Lessard attributed to the project (Tr., Day 7, 109; Tr., Day 8, 95-96).

According to Mr. Baciu, EFDG planned to construct a 20 MW electricity co-generation
plant. The estimated cost to build the plant was €20 million (including equipment and
connection) (First WS of S. Baciu, 7 16, 30-32).

After reviewing the evidence, the Tribunal finds that the Claimants have failed to
prove with sufficient certainty that they would have built a co-generation plant.
Although there is some evidence that the Claimants considered the option of building
a co-generation plant in the future, the evidence of advance planning or specific steps
in the implementation of such a plant is inconclusive at best.

According to Mr. Baciu, the co-generation plant was part of EFDG’s plans from its
early days. He testified that the Claimants began contemplating co-generation in the
late 1990s, when they considered establishing beverage production lines in
Bucharest, and continued with this plan when they established their food business in
Bihor after the passage of GD 194/1999.

The record confirms that the Claimants had an interest in building a co-generation

plant as early as 1998, and contacted several manufacturers for this purpose. The
record includes several offers or quotations for a co-generation plant between 1998

298

1102.

and 1999 (Exh. C-821, C-822, C-823).”” The Claimants appear to have started to
consider co-generation more seriously in 2002:

a. In 2002, the Claimants contracted with ABB to implement switch-gear technology
in the substation, which would allow them to reverse the flow of electricity from a
future co-generation source into the national distribution network (Exh. C-480).

b. Also in 2002, the Claimants contracted with Biothane International (Biothane) for
the construction of their waste water treatment plant. Mr. Baciu explains that they
also discussed the possibility of using the by-products of this facility as possible
renewable energy sources. These discussions evolved into discussions for the
construction of a co-generation plant (First WS of S. Baciu, 9 19-22).
However, there seems to have been no follow-up to this correspondence, and the
Biothane co-generation project did not materialize. Indeed, in 2003 the
Claimants initiated correspondence with Schmidt for biomass testing (Exh. C-
712), and made inquiries with General Electric for turbines (Exh. C-708")
(Second WS of S. Baciu, 44).

The Claimants’ interest in a co-generation plant seems to have grown when Romania
passed renewable energy laws. Although the laws were not passed until 2004, Mr.
Baciu testified that around 2002 they already anticipated that these laws would be
passed (First WS of S. Baciu, § 23). According to Mr. Baciu, “[t]his probability of co-
generation as a revenue generator gave us another reason to seriously consider
construction of our own co-generation facility. Thus, we knew that we could produce
energy for our facilities at a lower cost than what we were currently paying in
electricity from the State's distribution network, and we knew that any additional
energy we produced had the potential to be sold” (/d.). When Romania did pass the
renewable energy laws in 2004, their attractiveness was enhanced by the possibility
of trading green certificates. However, as a result of the revocation of the incentives,

27 Exh. C-821 is an offer/quotation from ABB dated 4 February 1999; Exh. C-822 is a preliminary
proposal from Hyundai dated 3 November 1998, and Exh. C-823 is a quotation from Mannesman
dated 19 February 1999.

°8 The record includes:

Meeting Minutes from 16 April 2002 (Exh. C-483) between European Food and Biothane
anticipating potential construction of a co-generation plant, where equipment and next steps
were discussed;

An email from Biothane to European Drinks, 2 May 2002 (Exh, C-484), documenting
European Food Group’s May 2002 delivery of a sample dried material (DDGS) to determine
composition and biodegradability for fuel component testing.

An email from Christian Flora of EFDG to Biothane dated 27 May 2002 (Exh. C-484, second
page), referring to various “problems” related to the “project”. Among other matters, Mr. Flora
requested the final lay-out drawings, asked about the correct foundation they should build for
tanks, requested an offer for tanks and engineering for the boiler, and a time schedule.
However, given that the subject line contains the initials “wwtp”, this appears to refer to the
waste water treatment plant rather than the co-generation plant.

An email from Biothane to European Drinks, 20 August 2002 (Exh. C-482), referencing a
quotation for the construction of a co-generation plant.

22° Exh. C-708 is an undated presentation from General Electric regarding turbines suitable for co-
generation

299

1103.

1104.

1105.

Mr. Baciu states that “we were unable to continue with our planned expansion and
integration (First WS of S. Baciu, § 25). Mr. Baciu explains that this came at a great
detriment to their company, because subsequent changes in Romania’s renewable
energy laws would have enabled them to earn more green certificates than under the
original law (specifically, three instead of one per MWh produced), and they would
have been entitled to sell these green certificates at a higher value (First WS of S.
Baciu, § 26).

The Claimants continued to receive quotations for a co-generation plant after
revocation. The Claimants submitted two offers from Siemens dated November 2005
and July 2006 for a turbine and generator and other equipment (Exh. C-687, C-708).
Mr. Baciu also testified that in 2009 they received a quotation for a 20 MW co-
generation plant from Bio-Energieanlagen, which estimated the project at less than
€20 million (First WS of S. Baciu, 4 43).

The Claimants’ continued interest in a co-generation plant is also evidenced by the
EBRD loan negotiation documents. As discussed above, during 2005 and 2006 the
Claimants carried out negotiations with the EBRD regarding possible development
financing. In addition to the malt plant, the early documents related to those
negotiations mentioned the construction of a co-generation plant. Specifically, the co-
generation plant was mentioned in the EBRD Environmental Questionnaire dated 12
March 2005 (Exh. C-743) and the first draft Loan Agreement dated 16 June 2006
(Exh. C-745). However, it is not mentioned in either the Term Sheet dated 4 March
2006 (Exh. C-744) or the last draft Loan Agreement dated 2 November 2006 (Exh. C-
746). Thus, it would appear that the project either was dropped entirely or at least
that by 2 November 2006 (over 20 months after the revocation) it had not yet reached
a level of concrete planning.

However, despite the evidence of the Claimants’ continuing interest in building a co-
generation plant (which spans several years), other than Mr. Baciu’s testimony, there
is no documentary evidence of concrete internal planning of such a project:

a. Mr. Baciu asserts that when the Claimants developed the lay-out of their
factories, they “kept in mind” where an optimal place for the co-generation plant
would be, and bought 20 hectares of land for this purpose (Second WS of S.
Baciu, {| 3-5). However, there is no record of this advance planning in internal
plans for the factories, nor documentary evidence of the purchase of land.

b. There is no feasibility study or other preliminary study. The Respondent pointed
out during the cross-examination of Mr. Baciu that the Claimants had carried out
a feasibility study for a corn mill valued at €4.8 million, and found it surprising that
the Claimants had not carried out a similar feasibility study for a co-generation
plant that would cost approximately €20 million. Mr. Baciu admitted that in the
case of the co-generation plant, “no feasibility study was made; only some
calculations, engineering calculations” (Tr., Day 7, 120 (Baciu)). However, Mr.
Baciu was not able to point to any documentary evidence of these alleged
calculations. He stated that they “just calculated internally” for themselves, and

300

“never kept the figures”. He added that these were not financial calculations, only
simple calculations involving “the rough cost of the raw materials involved” and
“the availability of [these] raw materials”, that these calculations were “very easy
to do” and that this was “not the kind of document that you save and keep” (Tr.,
Day 7, 120 (Baciu)).

Mr. Baciu submitted for the purposes of this arbitration a diagram showing an
overview of the co-generation project at page 5 of his second witness statement
showing how the different components fit in, but no such diagram or plan is found
among the Claimants’ contemporaneous evidence.

1106. Irrespective of the available documentation, the Claimants argue that their intention to
build a co-generation plant is evidenced by the steps they took to complete it.
Indeed, Mr. Baciu testified that at the date of the revocation of the incentives they had
acquired or constructed most of the components of a co-generation plant, as
discussed in sub-paragraphs (a) through (g) below. However, although the existence
of these components appears to be undisputed, the Tribunal is not persuaded that
these components were acquired or constructed specifically with the co-generation
plant in mind, or that at the date of the revocation of the incentives the co-generation
plant was as near completion as the Claimants suggest. Specifically:

a.

Mr. Baciu testified that the Claimants had set aside 20 hectares of land, which
would be used for the plant itself and for biomass storage (First WS of S. Baciu,
{4 16, 38, 43; Second WS of S. Baciu, {5 and related photographs). However,
there is insufficient evidence showing when this land was acquired or with what
purpose.

Mr. Baciu testified that the Claimants had the biomass needed for co-generation,
which came from by-products or waste from the products used for food
production (Second WS of S. Baciu, 4 11-12; 18-23). According to Mr. Baciu,
this was “the most important component” of a co-generation facility (Tr., Day 7,
95, 99 (Baciu)). However, Mr. Baciu acknowledged that for the size of plant they
were considering (20 MW), they would need to purchase additional biomass (Tr.,
Day 7; 126 (Baciu)). Specifically, a 20 MW electricity co-generation plant would
need 160,000 metric tons of biomass, of which 90,000 to 110,000 metric tons
would come from internal sources. The remainder would have to be purchased
from third parties, but Mr. Baciu testified that the Claimants were well-positioned
to buy them at competitive rates and had a transportation system in place (First
WS of S. Baciu, Jf 33-38).

Mr. Baciu testified that the Claimants had acquired the equipment for the
preparation, conditioning, storing and handling of the biomass sources. Mr.
Baciu testified that the Claimants had “already built and already mastered the
process of collecting, storing, handling, and drying these types of biomass”
(Second WS of S. Baciu, {J 11; 24; Mr. Baciu also included several photographs
of existing biomass conditioning installations and storage areas, and explained
the process (Second WS of S. Baciu, pp. 6-21). With respect to conditioning, Mr.

301

Baciu testified that the Claimants had mincers for solid biomass, centrifuges for
humid biomass, and dryers (Tr., Day 7, 96-97 (Baciu)). With respect to storage
and handling, Mr. Baciu testified that the Claimants had silos, platforms,
transportation equipment and loading equipment (Tr., Day 7, 97 (Baciu)). This
appears to be undisputed, although it is unclear how much of this equipment was
purchased for the cogeneration plant.

Mr. Baciu also testified that the Claimants had biogas, produced at the Claimants’
wastewater treatment plant. The biogas would serve as catalyst in burning the
biomass to produce steam and electricity (Second WS of S. Baciu, 4 21-22).

Mr. Baciu further testified that the Claimants had built an electrical substation
precisely designed with plat space and additional electrical control capacity for
constructing and handling co-generation, including step-up transformation
capability and an installed switchgear that permits re-direction of co-generated
power directly into the State’s transmission lines (C-PHB, {| 202; Second WS of
S. Baciu, ¥§ 33-45). However, it is undisputed that the substation was not built
exclusively for the co-generation plant, but to provide electricity to the group’s
production facilities (First WS of S. Baciu, 3). The Tribunal does not doubt that
the substation was built with the capacity to eventually “plug in” a co-generation
plant: (i) both Mr. Baciu and Mr. Halbac testified that when they built the
substation, they also planned for the construction of a co-generation plant (First
WS of S. Baciu, {{ 4, 18; First WS of M. Halbac, § 56), and that “[mJany of the
features on the substation were placed there only because we had already
planned the construction of a co-generation plant” (First WS of M. Halbac, {| 56);
(ii) as noted above, Mr. Baciu testified that, with the co-generation plant in mind,
in 2002 the Claimants contracted with ABB to implement switch-gear technology
in the substation, which would allow them to reverse the flow of electricity into the
national distribution network; and (iii) the power plant appears to have been
found suitable for co-generation.”*' However, this only proves that the Claimants
designed their substation in a way that would allow them to easily plug in a co-
generation plant; it does not prove that they would have actually built such a
plant.

Mr. Baciu also testified that the Claimants built an electrical conversion plant to
raise the current from 20 kv to 110 kv power (Tr., Day 7, 99 (Baciu)). However, it
is unclear whether this was part of the electrical substation or was purchased
specifically for the co-generation plant.

28 The record includes a contract dated 2001-2002 with ABB for electric switchgear (Exh. C-480), but
from the English translation it is impossible to determine if the equipment was bought with co-
generation as the purpose.

Mr. Baciu testified that a state-owned electric company subordinated to the Ministry of Economy
acknowledged in 2010 that the “110/20kV power station European Drinks Sudrigiu has been such
designed and made to allow the beneficiary S.C. European Drinks to deliver in SEN its own electricity
(BIOMASS COGENERATION), by cell no. 3 and cell no. 20.” (Second WS of S. Baciu, § 45; Exh. C-

302

1107.

1108.

1109.

g. Finally, Mr. Baciu testified that the Claimants had a connection to the national
power grid, which allowed them to take power from the grid or supply power (Tr.,
Day 7, 99 (Baciu)). Mr. Baciu also qualified this as one of the most important
components for a co-generation plant, together with the biomass source (/d.).
Once again, for what that connection was specifically built beyond the Claimants'
ongoing operations remains unclear.

According to Mr. Baciu, the only missing components to complete a co-generation
plant were:

a. The turbine, which the Claimants would have to purchase, and for which they
received several quotations from suppliers (Tr., Day 7, 98 (Baciu); Second WS of
S. Baciu, § 35). Presumably Mr. Baciu refers to the quotations cited in
paragraphs 1101 and 1103 above.

b. A dedicated boiler for steam generation to run the turbine, which would have
been designed and largely manufactured in-house.

c. The building to house the plant.

The Respondent emphasizes that the most important (and missing) parts of the co-
generation plant were the boiler and turbine and not the biomass and connection to
the power grid as claimed by Mr. Baciu (R-PHB, § 256). The Tribunal must agree.
Mr. Baciu testified (both in his WS and in cross-examination) that although most of
the biomass would come from internal sources, they would need to purchase part of it
from third parties (First WS of S. Baciu, 4 36; Tr., Day 7, 126 (Rubins/Baciu). As the
Respondent points out, this shows that having one’s own source of biomass is not
essential to the operation of a co-generation plant, although it would of course mean
a cost advantage. With respect to the connection to the power grid, Mr. Baciu
clarified that by “important”, he meant “difficult to obtain.” In particular, the connection
to the national power grid was a huge advantage for them because it was very difficult
for other investors to obtain (Tr., Day 7, 102-104 (President Lévy/Baciu)). However, it
cannot be disputed that the boiler and the turbine are crucial elements of a co-
generation plant, without which no energy can be produced.

Mr. Baciu also testified that the Claimants had “all the necessary authorizations” to
operate a co-generation facility, but in cross-examination he was obliged to retract in
part. Mr. Baciu confirmed that they would have needed an authorization from the
water management authorities for the boiler, an environmental authorization, an
electricity generation license, and an electric supply license, none of which the
Claimants had yet obtained. However, with respect to generation he stressed that the
company had an authorization as a distributor and eligible consumer, and “most likely
would have obtained” the generation license and electric supply license as well. (Tr.,
Day 7, 123-126 (Rubins/Baciu)). The Respondent argues that Mr. Baciu testified
falsely on this point. However, while notable, Mr. Baciu’s contradictory statements
could have been the result of a misunderstanding during his oral examination: indeed,
Mr. Baciu clarified that when he responded to Mr. Fleuriet’s question in direct

303

1110.

1111.

1112.

232

examination, he “understood that his question referred to the 110 plant and the
connection to the national system” (Tr., Day 7, 123-124 (Rubins/Baciu)).”

Finally, Mr. Baciu testified that the Claimants had “mastered the technological
process for turning prepared biomass and biogas into steam and electricity”, as well
as considerable engineering expertise and experience designing boilers. In this
respect, Mr. Baciu testified that after revocation (around 2010) the Claimants built
three biomass boilers which are currently in operation (Second WS of S. Baciu, 1
25-31). Indeed, from Mr. Baciu’s testimony it appears that the Claimants are already
using biomass to produce energy. Specifically, Mr. Baciu states that “[i]n these
existing boilers, we burn our existing biomass and biogas, capture the steam
produced, and use it to run our factories. This reduces our heavy fuel oil costs and
the emission of carbon dioxide that results from burning heavy fuel oil” (Second WS
of S. Baciu, § 26). Mr. Baciu also testified that the operation of these boilers was
similar to that needed for the co-generation process, but they operated at lower
capacities and pressures (Tr., Day 7, 97 (Baciu)). Mr. Baciu also clarified that these
boilers started operating in May 2010 (Second WS of S. Baciu, § 31). Although this
shows the Claimants’ capacity to use biomass to produce energy, steam to be
precise, for their own consumption, it also shows that, without the turbine, they could
not claim to have a co-generation plant. In particular, without the turbine they could
not sell energy to third parties through green certificates, which is the main source of
the profits they claim.

The Tribunal’s conclusion from the evidence discussed above is that the Claimants
have not shown with sufficient certainty that they would have implemented a co-
generation plant. The record does suggest that, despite the absence of evidence with
respect to internal planning, the Claimants considered implementing ways to turn
biomass and biogas into steam and electricity. However, that does not show that
they would have built an actual co-generation plant. The Claimants requested
quotations as early as 1998, and continued to show interest in 2002 and 2003, but it
took them seven years from then to go into and to master the process of using their
own biomass and biogas for fuel, which they only started doing in 2010 (after the
revocation). In addition, the lack of a building, boiler and a turbine, along with the lack
of licenses and authorizations, indicates that at the time of the revocation of the
incentives the co-generation project was not as close to completion as the Claimants
contend.

(e) Conclusions

On the basis of the evidence analyzed above, the Tribunal finds that the Claimants
have not proven with sufficient certainty that, but for the revocation, they would have
implemented the Incremental Investments.

The Respondent also contends that Mr. Baciu was unable to specify which company (or

companies) was/were meant to make the investments required to build the co-generation plant (Tr.,
Day 7, 105-106 (Baciu)). However, this does not show much. Mr. Baciu was an engineer; it is not
likely that he was privy to the Claimants’ strategic corporate decisions with respect to the channeling of
investments.

304

1113.

1114.

1115.

1116.

With respect to their alleged intention to build these facilities, the Claimants rely
heavily on witness testimony. In fact, other than offers and quotes provided by third
party suppliers, there is surprisingly little contemporaneous evidence of advance
planning predating the revocation. There is not a single business plan, feasibility
study, internal memo or budget documenting the Claimants’ intention to build these
facilities. The construction of these plants thus seems to have been a desirable
possibility for the Claimants, which they investigated with third party suppliers, but
which never materialized into concrete plans.

The Tribunal does not doubt that the Incremental Investments were consistent with
the Claimants’ integration model, and would have complemented it very well. Mr.
Halbac and Mr. Baciu describe very persuasively the cost-efficiencies that the
Claimants could have achieved. As Prof. Lessard testified on cross-examination, the
investments were “plausible” (by which he seems to have meant that they made
economic sense). However, this does not prove with sufficient certainty that the
Claimants would have actually implemented those investments. After the fact, it is
always possible to say that one would have engaged into an activity which turns out
to have been potentially fruitful: this does not suffice, as it is necessary to prove with
sufficient certainty that an intention to do so would have materialized but for the
wrongful act. Contemporaneous evidence is not indispensable but, in this instance,
its absence does not help the Claimants.

The Tribunal has also given due consideration to the Claimants’ argument that, as a
family business, they did not make plans on paper, and that the best evidence of their
intentions are the steps they took to materialize these investments. However,
although there is some evidence of steps taken to further these investments, the
record shows that the Claimants had built or acquired almost exclusively equipment
that could be used with their existing platform (i.e., utilities, electric connections,
transportation, storage and handling systems). Some of this equipment created cost
efficiencies that would have made it easy to “plug in” the Incremental Investments, but
for each of the Incremental Investments the Claimants still had to purchase the key
equipment that would in fact allow them to operate these Incremental Investments as
separate profit-making activities. For instance, for the malt plant, they still needed to
purchase the germination machine; for the can manufacturing plant, they still needed
to purchase the can manufacturing machines, and for the co-generation plant, they
still needed to purchase the turbine and manufacture the boiler. As a result, the steps
taken by the Claimants do not show with sufficient certainty that the Incremental
Investments were projects at an advanced stage of completion, nor that the
Claimants clearly intended to carry them out in the near future. They have proved
that they had an option to build these Incremental Investments and that they were
contemplating them as a possibility, but not more.

The Tribunal does not believe that these conclusions would have been altered by
conducting a site visit as proposed by the Claimants. After a full review of the record,
the Tribunal confirms the views it expressed in its Procedural Order dated 20 January
2011. In particular, the Tribunal confirms that a site visit was not necessary nor
useful for the resolution of the dispute, as it would not have supplied further evidence

305

1117.

1118.

1119.

1120.

of the Claimants’ intention to pursue the Incremental Investments than that already in
the record. Due to the characteristics of a site visit, it could not have provided further
useful, certainly not documentary, evidence of advance planning of these
investments; rather, it would have allowed the Tribunal to see the size and
characteristics of the Claimants’ integrated platform and their ability to easily
implement the Incremental Investments, which is sufficiently confirmed by evidence in
the record (including the 17-minute video of the site and the Incremental Investments
attached as Exhibit C-987, as well as the witness statements of Mr. Halbac and Mr.
Baciu, which contain numerous color photographs and diagrams that explain the
characteristics and distribution of the site, their oral testimonies and the documentary
evidence they cite in their witness statements). However, the fact that the Tribunal
has found that Claimants’ platform was highly integrated and that they had made
certain investments that would have made it easy to add the Incremental Investments
does not provide sufficient certainty that, but for the revocation of the incentives, the
Claimants would have implemented these projects.

For the reasons stated above, the Tribunal finds that the Claimants have not proven
with sufficient certainty that they would have in fact engaged in the activity that they
claim would have earned the profits they were allegedly deprived of. In particular, the
Claimants have not established that the lost profits that they claim in relation to the
Incremental Investments “were reasonably anticipated; and that the profits anticipated
were probable and not merely possible.”***

For all these reasons, the Tribunal rejects all lost profits claims related to the
Incremental Investments.

Financial penalties for failure to pay taxes

a. Overview

It is undisputed that, following the revocation of the incentives, the Claimants have
failed to pay certain tax debts to Romania. The Claimants do not question these
debts, which they acknowledge are owed.

However, the Claimants argue that their failure to pay these tax debts has caused
them to incur substantial financial penalties, which are attributable to the
Respondent's conduct and thus require compensation. Indeed, the Claimants
contend that the tax penalties that they incurred post-revocation (from 2006 onwards),
were “a direct result of the financial constraints caused by Revocation”. Specifically,
the Claimants argue that if they had been able to benefit from the Raw Materials
Incentive until 2009, they would have been able to pay their tax debts to Romania
and, as a result, would not have incurred the substantial tax penalties that have
accrued since the revocation. Thus, to place them back in the position they would
have been but for the revocation, the Tribunal should award them these penalties (C-
PHB, if 132, 142).

233 Marjorie M. Whiteman, Damages in International Law, vol. II (1937), p. 1837 (emphasis in original);
AAPL v. Sri Lanka, 104.

306

1121.

1122.

1123.

1124.

1125.

The Claimants claim damages for two sets of financial penalties (C-PHB, {| 140,
144):

a. Financial penalties incurred but not yet paid as a result of the Claimants being
financially constrained due to the losses incurred as a result of the revocation, in
the amount of RON 63.65 million. The Claimants bring this claim unless
Romania waives such tax penalties and declares that it shall waive or reimburse
all additional financial penalties imposed or assessed until the date of Romania’s
full and final satisfaction of the award.

b. Financial penalties incurred and paid by the EFDG companies in the period 1
April 2005 to 30 September 2010, in the amount of RON 40 million.

The Claimants argue that, because the Respondent’s conduct caused the financial
penalties to accrue, the unpaid portion of those penalties should be awarded to the
Claimants (if not waived by Romania), and the portion of those penalties that the
Claimants have already paid should be awarded back to the Claimants (C-PHB, §
143).

Both claims are cumulatively based on the following evidence (C-PHB, 9 131 and
141):

a. The calculations contained in paragraphs 85 and 86 and Table 4 of Professor
Lessard’s first report, dated 22 December 2009;

b. The calculations contained in paragraphs 132 to 135 of Professor Lessard’s
second report, dated 30 July 2010;

c. The calculations contained in paragraph 3.25 and table 4 of Mr. Osborne’s first
report and the calculations contained in section 8 of Mr. Osborne’s second report;

d. Updated Summary of Damages from Penalties Avoided, Tab 51 from Mr.
Schwartz’s Opening Presentation;

e. Professor Lessard’s corrected tables handed out by counsel at the hearing on 16
November 2010, table 4, page 2;

f. The evidence referred to in the abovementioned sections, paragraphs and tables,
including Exh. CO-1.19 (“Workings for December 2009 report”) (submitted as an
exhibit to Mr. Osborne’s second report).

The two claims concern tax penalties incurred not only by the Corporate Claimants,
but also by other companies of the group which are not parties to this arbitration
(specifically, European Drinks, Edri Trading, Original Products, Rieni Drinks, Scandic
Distilleries, TGIE, Tonical Trading, and West Leasing).

The Respondent does not contest the calculations performed by Mr. Osborne or Prof.

Lessard. Rather, it contests the existence of a causal link between the revocation
and the accrual of the tax penalties, and criticizes the Claimants’ experts for simply

307

1126.

1127.

assuming that such a causal link existed. The Respondent argues that the Claimants’
experts did not conduct their own analysis of the evidence but simply assumed (or
“understood” or “believed”) it to be true and simply added up the figures. (R-SPHB,
16). The Respondent points to:

a. Professor Lessard’s assertion in his first report that “with revocation of the
incentives, EFDG entered a sustained cash crunch’;

b. Mr. Osborne’s assertion that “since the Companies became _ financially
constrained (2006) significant penalties have accrued on debts to the state”;

c. Professor Lessard’s “understand[ing] that penalties in earlier periods were in
some cases caused by unanticipated changes in Romanian tax or excise
regulations” and his “understand[ing]” that the terms of EFDG’s credit lines did
not permit the Claimants to pay down existing state debts (there being no
evidence supporting either “understanding”); and

d. Mr. Osborne’s “belief” that penalties “are likely to have arisen only because of the
financial constraints the Companies have been under since 2006”.

The Respondent argues that these assumptions are in turn based solely on Mr. loan
Micula’s assertion that “we suffered delays in making required tax payments to the
State because of the cash constraints caused by the State’s termination of the
incentives” (Third WS of I. Micula, § 95). The Respondent argues that this is not
evidence and stresses that “the Claimants must prove that they could not pay their
taxes because of repeal of the Facilities” (R-SPHB, | 17, emphasis in original). The
Respondent denies that the Claimants have proved this. To the contrary, it argues
that the evidence in the record in fact demonstrates that there is no causal link
between the revocation of the incentives and the incurred tax penalties.

In particular, the Respondent contends that the Claimants have not proven that they
could not pay their taxes, nor have they proved that this alleged inability to do so was
caused by the revocation of the incentives (R-SPHB, § 17). In particular, the
Respondent argues that:

a. The Claimants did indeed have access to funds, but chose to spend them
elsewhere. The Respondent notes that it is undisputed that the Claimants spent
€182 million on other projects and developments after the repeal of the Raw
Materials Facility, at the same time that the EFDG companies were not paying
their taxes and consequently incurring penalties.

b. The Claimants had access to financing at competitive interest rates after repeal,
and thus could have borrowed to cover their tax debts.

c. While the Claimants assert that they could not pay the taxes they owed because
of financial difficulties, Mr. Osborne accepted that those financial difficulties would
have occurred in any event, even without repeal of the Raw Materials Facility.
(Tr., Day 10, 137 (Osborne, acknowledging that “absent sales of SCPs, and

308

assuming all else equal, they would have been in trouble, if | can put it that
way.")).

EFDG’s financial statements show that the Claimants were in arrears on taxes
and incurred penalties in every year before the revocation of the incentives.***
According to the Respondent, there is not a single year, at any time in the
Corporate Claimants’ history, in which the Corporate Claimants did not incur
fresh penalties for non-payment of taxes. That includes the period in 2004-05 in
which the Claimants say they paid down their tax debts. The Respondent argues
that there is therefore no basis to infer that the Claimants would have paid their
taxes in and after 2006 if they had been able to, and hence no basis to infer that
their failure to do so proves that they could not (R-Rejoinder, §] 340; First ER of J.
Ellison, Section 9; Second ER of J. Ellison, Section 8).

EFDG entered into various tax-rescheduling agreements with Romania in 2001,
2002 and 2003, through which Romania forgave millions of Euro in tax penalties
due from the Claimants. The Respondent argues that “it thus appears that the
Claimants chose not to pay their taxes as part of a long-standing business
strategy, hoping to negotiate advantageous restructuring of their tax debts and to
use the funds that otherwise would have been paid to the state for other
purposes. That this gamble ultimately did not pay off is a far cry from a causal
link between the repeal of the facilities and the Claimants’ inability to pay taxes.
Indeed, it reveals the entire tax-penalty claim to be an unseemly perpetuation of
improper practices against Romania, which the Claimants ask this Tribunal to
endorse and continue” (R-Rejoinder, 341; Second ER of J. Ellison, Section 8).
The Respondent further notes (and the Claimants acknowledge) that these
rescheduling agreements (and forgiveness of debts granted by Romania) are the
main reason why the Claimants reduced their tax debts by 2005 (R-SPHB, fn. 27;
see J 1132 below).

1128. Finally, the Respondent stresses that the Claimants have failed to produce evidence
(other than witness testimony and experts relying on these witnesses) in support of
their claim (R-SPHB, {| 18). Specifically, according to the Respondent:

a.

234

There is no contemporaneous correspondence with the Romanian tax authorities
or internal documents explaining why they were not paying taxes;

There is no correspondence with banks refusing to grant loans due to financial
constraints;

There is no evidence of the “business necessities” on which they spent the €182
million that they acknowledge was spent after the revocation of the incentives to

The Respondent criticizes the Claimants’ experts for failing to mention this state of affairs. In

particular, the Respondent notes that the table of penalties paid to the State presented in Mr.
Osborne’s First Report (Table 4, p. 22) covers only 2006-2009, while his working papers include
payments as far back as 2002 (R-Rejoinder, § 340).

309

other ends. The only documentary evidence that Mr. Halbac could point out to
was for €5 million in relation to the brewery (Exh. C-306). (R-PHB, {| 627).

1129. The Respondent also points out that “the vast majority” of the taxes (and resulting
penalties) owed to Romania by the EFDG companies relates to VAT payments and
employee social security contributions. The Respondent thus argues that the
Claimants have improperly retained money that belongs to their customers and
employees. In other words, the Claimants have improperly used “other people’s
money” to finance their operations. The Respondent argues that this seriously
undermines their claim, in particular with respect to VAT, because the Claimants had
the cash on hand to remit the required amount of VAT, but failed to do so. This
failure cannot be attributed to reduced cash flows (R-PHB, § 295; Exh. A to F to the
Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures; Respondent's Rejoinder on
Provisional Measures, {| 18; Respondent’s Opposition to Provisional Measures, fn. 9).

1130. With respect to the availability of cash and post-revocation investments, the
Claimants acknowledge that they invested approximately €182 million post-
revocation, but contend that these investments were for business necessities in order
to continue the operation of the companies, comply with legal requirements and meet
contractual obligations (Second ER of D. Lessard, § 128; Tr., Day 8, 69 (Lessard);
Second WS of M. Halbac, 145-167).

1131. The Claimants deny that the Respondent’s additional arguments undermine their
claim for damages for tax penalties incurred after the revocation of the incentives (C-
PHB, {ff 132-139). First, the Claimants deny that the mere existence of penalties
prior to the revocation negates the causal link between the revocation and penalties
post-revocation. As Prof. Lessard explains: “If the penalties post Revocation could
have been avoided absent Revocation and not otherwise, then the fact of earlier
penalties does not change the impact on damages” (Second ER of D. Lessard, {
134).

1132. Second, the Claimants reject the Respondent's contention that they had a “strategy”
of not paying taxes:

a. The Claimants contend that the tax arrears and penalties that they incurred in the
years prior to the revocation were not due to any such business strategy, but
were caused by hyperinflation, regulatory changes and widespread economic
difficulties throughout Romania during that period. Romania has suggested that
this does not explain the Claimants’ situation because they could not have been
the only taxpayers affected by this (Second ER of J. Ellison, 8.2.3). The
Claimants agree but contend that Romania misses the point: the fact is that the
period of hyperinflation in Romania was widespread and recognized by the
government. Indeed, through the enactment of EGO 163/2000 and EGO
40/2002 (Exh. J and K to Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures),

285 In its Application to Revoke Provisional Measures, the Respondent alleges that VAT comprised
approximately 43% of the tax liabilities incurred by EFDG from January 2010 to February 2012 (R-
Application to Revoke PM, fn. 85; EFDG tax payment tables, RA-17).

310

Romania acknowledged “the great number of taxpayers recorded with
outstanding budget debts” as “the outcome of the economic environment”. These
two normative acts offered extensions to taxpayers in arrears and reductions or
eliminations of penalties under strict conditions, which the Claimants took
advantage of. The Claimants made the additional investments required by
Romania for the rescheduling of the debts, and the Claimants paid off
outstanding debts in advance of the deadline imposed by Romania under the
agreements. The Claimants note that the Respondent has not disputed those
facts (C-PHB, § 137).

The Claimants argue that they had fully paid off their tax arrears at the time of
Revocation, a fact that the Respondent does not dispute (C-PHB, § 138).

The Claimants deny that they are tax evaders, as they made partial payments on
their outstanding state debts after the revocation when they were financially able
to do so. For instance, the outstanding balance on state debts decreased from
the third quarter to the fourth quarter of 2007, as well as from the second quarter
to the third quarter of 2009. Thus, the Claimants reject any contention that they
have deliberately avoided paying taxes or have acted in any way other than in
good faith regarding their taxes (C-PHB, § 139).

The Claimants argue that their claim for penalties already paid to Romania is
further evidence that the Claimants have not altogether avoided paying their
outstanding tax debts (C-PHB, § 143).

1133. The Claimants do not deny that the unpaid taxes for which they are being charged
penalties include VAT. However, they dispute the Respondent's calculations of
EFDG’s tax payments submitted as Exh. RA-17, including VAT calculations
(Claimants’ Response to Romania's Application to Revoke PM, § 68). Specifically,
the Claimants argue that:

1134.

1135.

1136.

a.

At

The Respondent has erroneously duplicated European Food’s VAT liability and
payments and the figures in the section dealing with persons with disabilities, and

The Respondent has erroneously included interest and penalties on unpaid VAT
for European Food and Rieni Drinks.

Exh. CA-23 of their Response, the Claimants provide a “full analysis” of the

Respondent's Exh. RA-17. However, the Claimants do not explain what is the impact
of these recalculations on the amount and percentage of VAT owed.

b.

The Tribunal’s analysis

It is undisputed that the Claimants did not pay some of their taxes, and that, as a
result, they accrued significant financial penalties.

The key question to determine whether this damages claim has merit is whether the
Claimants have been able to establish a sufficient causal link between the repeal of

311

1137.

1138.

1139.

1140.

the EGO 24 incentives and their failure to pay their taxes. In essence, the Claimants
are arguing that, but for the revocation of the incentives, they would have paid their
taxes, but because of the revocation, they suffered financial constraints that
prevented them from doing so. Thus, the argument goes, to place them back in the
position in which they would have been but for the revocation, the Tribunal must
award them the penalties they have already paid and those which they will be forced
to pay (unless the Respondent waives the latter).

In the Tribunal’s view, to determine whether such a sufficient causal link exists
between the Respondent's breach of the BIT and the losses alleged, the Claimants
must prove:

a. First, that after the revocation of the incentives, the Claimants could not pay their
taxes. In other words, that they did not, as a matter of fact, have sufficient funds
to pay their taxes.

b. Second, that the dominant cause for this lack of sufficient funds (or the financial
constraints that prevented them from borrowing them) was the revocation of the
incentives.

c. Third, that but for that lack of sufficient funds, they would have paid their taxes.

The Tribunal has found it unnecessary to address points (b) and (c) because it has
come to the conclusion that the Claimants have not proved that, as a matter of fact,
they had insufficient funds to pay their taxes. In the view of the Tribunal, the relevant
question is whether the Claimants had sufficient funds to pay their taxes and to meet
the needs of their business, giving due deference to the business judgment of the
owners and managers of the business.

The Tribunal has first tried to establish from the information in the record what was
the amount of the EFDG companies’ principal tax debts, which they allegedly could
not pay after revocation. This information turned out to be difficult to locate in the
Claimants’ submissions on the merits, but additional information was provided in the
context of the Claimants’ various requests for provisional measures on which
Romania commented. The Tribunal has found in particular two useful sources: (i) the
table provided at paragraph 140 of the Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, and (ii) footnote
5 of the Claimants’ letter of 9 November 2012.

The table provided by the Claimants at paragraph 140 of the Claimants’ Post-Hearing

Brief shows the outstanding balance of the Claimants’ principal tax debt and penalties
from 1 January 2005 up to 30 September 2010, as follows:

312

EDFG State Debt and Penalties Outstanding Balances
160,000 7 -~-~------------------------------------7-------------------------

W State Debt Oustanding Balance

@ Penalties Oustandit

140,000

120,000

100,000

 

F

60,000

40,000

20,000

 

 

01-05 2-05 Q5.05 QE05 Q1-06 Q2-06 Q3.06 QE-06 QI-07 Q2-07 Q3.07 QF-07 QI-08 Q2-08 Q5-08 QE-08 QI-09 Q2-09 Q5.09 Q.09 QI-10 Q2-10 QB-10

Source: Data from EFDG Overdue State Debt and Penalties Expense xls produced as backup to December 22, 2009 Lessard Report, with updated data through
September 30, 2010.

1141. The Claimants provide the amounts in RON and on a quarterly basis. It would appear
from this table that, at the end of 2005, the outstanding balance of the Claimants’
principal tax debt was approximately RON 18 million (today approximately
€4 million”), and that by the end of 2006 this outstanding balance was less than
RON 5 million (today approximately €1.1 million), with minimal penalties. However,
by the end of 2007 the outstanding balance for the principal tax debt had risen to
approximately RON 30 million (today approximately €6.7 million). Even then, their tax
penalties were relatively minor. Since then there has been a steady rise, with its
highest point at the end of 2009, where the outstanding principal tax debt appears to
have been approximately RON 150 million (today approximately €33.7 million).

1142. These figures are roughly consistent with the Claimants’ assertion in footnote 5 of
their letter of 9 November 2012, where they stated that “[i]Jn March 2006, the EFDC
companies had virtually no outstanding tax debt [...]. By the end of 2006, as a result
of the premature revocation of the EGO 24 incentives, the EFDC companies
accumulated tax debts in the amount of €4.8 million. By 20 September 2012, as a
result of draconian interest and penalties imposed, the EFDC companies’ total
outstanding tax debt had increased to €104.1 million.” Indeed, the first quarter of
2007 shows a principal tax debt of approximately RON 20 million (today
approximately €4.5 million) and no accrued penalties.

°38 All Euro amounts in this section reflect the exchange rate of 9 December 2013 of 4.4482
RON/EUR. Source: European Central Bank.

313

1143.

1144.

1145.

1146.

1147.

From these numbers, the Tribunal concludes that, in 2007, the Claimants would have
needed approximately €5 million to completely pay off their tax debt.

The Tribunal now turns to the Parties’ arguments on the availability of cash or
financing for the payment of tax debts. The Respondent argues that the Claimants
(i) did indeed have cash on hand, but chose to spend it elsewhere, and (ii) had
access to financing from the EBRD and other banks, but chose not to use it.

With respect to the first point, it is undisputed that the Claimants spent €182 million on
other projects and developments after repeal of the Raw Materials Facility (Tr., Day 8,
69 (Lessard); Second ER of D. Lessard, { 128). The Respondent argues that these
funds would have been sufficient to satisfy the Claimants’ tax debts (and to fund the
Incremental Investments).

The Claimants defend their decision to spend money on other operations and
expenditures after the revocation of the incentives. Mr. Halbac testified that “[i]t was
determined that we would make investments in our business necessities, as a way of
remaining competitive with the business adventures that we did have, and conforming
to legal requirements imposed on food and beverage manufacturers” (Second WS of
M. Halbac, § 147). In particular, he testified that these expenditures were made to
maintain their existing manufacturing platform, preserve their existing market
positions, and comply with health and safety laws. According to Mr. Halbac, the
Claimants spent approximately €140 million in investments they considered to be
business necessities, and an additional €27 million in normal maintenance costs.
Although Mr. Halbac described these expenditures in some detail (including a
breakdown of the various costs), with one exception®®” he submitted no documentary
evidence in support of his assertions (Second WS of M. Halbac, J 145-167).

In turn, Prof. Lessard stated that “total investment by EFDG since 2005 has been
€182 million", noting that “[t]he majority of these investments were non-discretionary”
(Second ER of D. Lessard, f 127-128). According to Prof. Lessard, the Claimants
had identified five categories of investments: fiscal legal obligations, food safety
obligations, environmental legal obligations, investments to fulfill contracts signed
before the revocation of the incentives, and “business necessities”, as reflected in
Figure 17 of his Second Expert Report, copied below:

°37 That exception is a contract with Krones dated 10 May 2004 (Exh. 306) for € 5.2 million related to
the expansion of the brewery. [Mr. Halbac mistakenly refers to Exh. 305, and also mistakenly notes
the date as 10 May 2003.]

314

Millions of Euros

1148.

1149.

Figure 17— Damages from Revocation

 

 

Fiscal Legal Food Safety Legal Environment Legal _Pre-Existing Business
Obligations Obligations Obligations Contracts Necessities

Of these five categories, Prof. Lessard stated that only the first four categories were
effectively “non-discretionary investments”, which he defined as “amounts that EFDG
was required to spend to comply with legal or contractual obligations.” He stated that
these non-discretionary projects accounted for 60% of the investments made since
2005. The remaining 40% was invested in projects that the EFDG considered to be
“business necessities” (as shown in the table, these amounted to approximately €70
million). As examples of these “business necessities”, Prof. Lessard referred to
capital expenditures required to maintain the EFDG’s existing productive capacity, to
the purchase of beer dispensers and new coolers that allowed distribution of beer in
draft form, or to the installation of equipment that allowed the EFDG to produce 2.5
liter bottles for mineral water and soft drinks (Second ER of D. Lessard, 4 129-130).

The Respondent contests the sufficiency of the evidence provided by Mr. Halbac and
Prof. Lessard. The Claimants argue that the Respondent had ample opportunity to
cross-examine Mr. Halbac about these expenditures and their necessity, but chose
not to do so (C-PHB, {| 189). The Respondent in turn argues that there was no need
to cross-examine him, because (with the aforementioned exception) Mr. Halbac’s
assertions were unsupported by documentary evidence (R-PHB, § 627). In addition,
the Respondent points out that Prof. Lessard acknowledged that his understanding
with respect to the non-discretionary nature of the Claimants’ expenditures post-
revocation came from discussions with the Claimants and their personnel (in
particular Mr. Halbac), and could cite no documentary evidence in support of his
assertion (indeed, in cross-examination Prof. Lessard acknowledged he had not seen

315

any invoices justifying such “non-discretionary investments” or “business necessities”)
(Tr., Day 8, 70-71 (Lessard)).

1150. In view of the available evidence, the Tribunal cannot accept the Claimants’ assertion
that they did not have enough cash to pay their tax debts and, at the same time, meet
the needs of their business. The Tribunal reaches that conclusion taking into account
the need for the Claimants to be able to continue with their business operations and
to exercise managerial discretion in doing so. As noted above, the Claimants could
have paid off their outstanding tax debts in full by devoting a mere €5 million in 2007
for that purpose. But instead of paying these tax debts, the Claimants chose to spend
over €70 million in “business necessities”**, despite the fact that the payment of
taxes to the State qualifies as a non-discretionary expenditure required to comply with
fiscal legal obligations (indeed, Prof. Lessard includes fiscal legal obligations in his
description of non-discretionary expenditures). This evidences that the Claimants
had made a decision selectively to allocate their available funds among the five
categories of "investments" they have identified. Expressed otherwise, they had a
policy that they would pay taxes if that payment appeared to be sensible in view of
the circumstances. In fact, the Claimants do have an earlier history of not paying
their taxes, which corroborates that inference.

1151. The Tribunal does not doubt that the Claimants’ investments in these “business
necessities” were made with the underlying objective to maintain the competitive
nature of their business. However, paying taxes is a legal obligation, and not paying
them has legal and financial consequences attached to it. The fact of the matter is
that, assuming that Prof. Lessard is correct in saying that 60% of the Claimants’
expenditures since 2005 were non-discretionary, the Claimants still had
approximately €70 million that they chose to use in other investments or activities. In
other words, the Claimants made a conscious choice not to pay €5 million to
extinguish their tax debt in 2007, in favor of making other investments.

1152. This may have been a business decision, based on the hope that, by investing in
other business activities, the Claimants would have generated more cash than what
they would eventually have to pay in taxes and accrued penalties. Prof. Lessard
confirmed this at the hearing when, asked why the Claimants had chosen to invest in
business necessities instead of in the Incremental Investments, he stated that “the
only inference | can make is that the economics of those expenditures [the alleged
business necessities] were even better than the economics of these projects [the
Incremental Investments]” (Tr., Day 8, 71 (Lessard)). Prof. Lessard also stated that
the investments in business necessities “heavily leveraged Claimants’ existing assets,
and it is reasonable for Claimants to have assumed that they would provide high
incremental returns. Thus, Mr. Ellison’s suggestion that EFDG could or should have
diverted investment from these actual uses to alternative uses is incorrect” (Second
ER of D. Lessard, 4 130).

288 As shown in Figure 17 of Second ER of D. Lessard, cited above.

316

1153.

1154.

1155.

1156.

What Prof. Lessard seems to be implying is that, economically, it made more sense to
spend the available funds on the business necessities because it would have been
more profitable than paying taxes (or building the Incremental Investments). In the
case of tax payment (which is by definition not a profitable activity), the implication is
that the Claimants believed that the profits they would generate from these business
necessities would be higher than the penalties they would accrue by failing to pay
their tax debts. Indeed, Prof. Lessard accepted as much in cross-examination:

Q:  [...] The claimants had €182 million to invest after revocation; correct?
A. They spent that amount on various projects, yes.

Q. They chose not to spend any of that amount to pay down the
remaining tax debts; correct?

A. Which tells one that they had at least a 36% internal rate of return on
the projects they invested in, because that's the cost of the penalties.

Q. Okay. But they chose not to spend this amount to pay down their tax
debts; correct?

A. That's correct.

(Tr., Day 8, 85 (Rubins/Lessard)).

In other words, the Claimants’ decision not to pay their tax debts was a strategic
choice, which eventually proved to be the wrong one. The Claimants apparently
exercised their business judgment, analyzed the pros and cons, and decided to invest
in other projects rather than pay their taxes. But this does not mean that they did not
have sufficient funds to pay them and still carry on with their business. It is evident
from the record that they did have sufficient funds to pay their taxes, at least at a
given juncture, namely in 2007. In the Tribunal’s view, this fatally severs the chain of
causation. Romania cannot be held liable for the Claimants’ bad business decisions,
especially if such decisions may have implied failure to comply with certain legal
obligations, namely the payment of taxes.

As a result, the Tribunal does not need to address the remaining elements of proof
identified in paragraph 1137 above. Accordingly, the Tribunal dismisses this claim.

D. THE RESPONDENT'S DEFENSE THAT ACCESSION TO THE EU BENEFITED THE
CLAIMANTS

In addition to its specific defenses on each of the Claimants’ damages claims, the
Respondent argues that, even if the Claimants had to pay more for certain raw
materials as a result of the repeal of the incentives, this does not necessarily mean
that they were harmed overall. To the contrary, the Respondent contends that the
Claimants received economic benefits from EU accession that must be taken into
account when assessing what compensation is due (R-Rejoinder, f{ 415-421; R-
PHB, {| 329-331).

317

1157.

1158.

1159.

1160.

1161.

Relying on two expert reports by Dr. Bill Robinson of KPMG Forensic, the
Respondent contends that the EU accession process brought “price stability,
increased trade, FDI, reduced risk premia, strong institutions and a marked
acceleration in economic growth” (R-Rejoinder, { 417, First ER of B. Robinson,
sections 5.3 and 5.4). Specifically, the Respondent alleges that the Claimants
benefited from “increased domestic sales due to increased local expenditure on food
and beverages (over 42% between 2001 and 2008), an increase of sales abroad due
to an expanded export market (between 13% and 30% higher in each year between
2002 and 2008), and access to duty-free imports through the EU customs union” (R-
Rejoinder, § 418; First ER of B. Robinson, sections 6.2 and 6.3).

Using a macroeconomic approach, Dr. Robinson evaluated the tangible benefits of
EU accession on 1 January 2007 to the Claimants’ business. To quantify these
benefits, Dr. Robinson calculated the impact on the Claimants’ business of three
counterfactual situations (Romania joins the EU in 2009, Romania joins the EU in
2011, or Romania never joins the EU at all), using the following methodology:

For every percentage point reduction in Romanian GDP growth, the
evidence suggests a 0.77 percentage point reduction in growth of
expenditure of food and drink and hence (assuming a constant share of
Accession-driven growth) in EFDG's sales. By applying actual and
counterfactual rates of growth to variable costs and revenues shown in
EFDG's financial statements, | calculate the net present value of the effect
on EFDG’s profits of Romania’s Accession in 2007 compared with three
counterfactual scenarios [...]. (First ER of B. Robinson, § 8.1.8)

As explained by Dr. Robinson, he tried to assess the effect of a scenario in which the
Claimants had access to the incentives but did not have access to the other benefits
provided by the EU:

[...] in that world, where they can still have the import exemptions, | am
taking it as instructed that they would not have been in the EU, or that
accession would have been delayed for a couple of years, and in that
world, although they would have had these nice cheap sugar imports, they
wouldn't have sold so much soft drink. And my calculation tries to show, as
it were, [...] that net effect (Tr., Day 11, 184 (Robinson)).

Dr. Robinson concluded that:

a. Had EU accession been delayed by two years, the Claimants would have lost
€18.9 million in profits;

b. Had EU accession been delayed by an additional two years (i.e. four years in
total), the Claimants would have lost €34.4 million in profits, and

c. Had EU accession not happened at all, the Claimants would have lost €235
million (First ER of B. Robinson, { 8.1.8).

Dr. Robinson confirmed his conclusions in his second report, which responded to Mr.
Boulton’s criticisms. In particular, he noted that Mr. Boulton had not disputed

318

Romania’s growth in prosperity over the last decade, which in his opinion was largely
due to EU membership (Second ER of B. Robinson, {[ 3.6.1).

1162. As a result, the Respondent argues that “Romania’s EU accession resulted in
tangible financial benefits for the Claimants that offset any short-term disadvantages
from repeal of the Facilities’ (which in the Respondent's view are limited to the
Claimants’ direct losses claims), and that “[o]nce this adjustment has been made, the
Claimants’ direct losses are reduced to nil” (R-Rejoinder, {| 421).

1163. Relying on Metalpar v. Argentina®*? and GAMI v. Mexico," the Respondent contends
that in situations where state measures both harmed and benefited a claimant's
business activities, tribunals have taken the positive impact into account in assessing
what compensation is due. In its Rejoinder, the Respondent stated that “[s]ince the
advantages of EU membership would have been lost or at least delayed had
Romania maintained state aid (including the EGO 24/1998 facilities), these
advantages must be considered to be a benefit accruing to the Claimants as a result
of the repeal, to be deducted from any compensation assessed as a result of
Romania’s alleged breaches” (R-Rejoinder, § 416). However, in its Post-Hearing
Brief the Respondent clarified that it “is not making a counterclaim or seeking a set-off
against an award of damages”; it “simply asks the Tribunal to take into account the
important benefits to the Claimants arising out of EU accession in determining the
extent to which the Claimants were harmed as a result of Romania’s actions” (R-PHB,
{ 331; see also R-Rejoinder, { 415, and Tr., Day 2, 198-200 (Rubins)).

1164. In turn, the Claimants argue that Dr. Robinson’s analysis should be disregarded, both
with respect to expectation damages as well as reliance damages, as it is “entirely
unsupported by authority” (C-PHB, {| 230).

1165. More specific comments are provided by the Claimants’ expert, Mr. Boulton. Mr.
Boulton criticizes Dr. Robinson’s report as “deeply flawed” (ER of R. Boulton, § 2.2),
because:

a. “Dr Robinson applies a macroeconomic approach to what is essentially a
microeconomic question. In other words, Dr Robinson takes a top down
approach to estimating the effect of the EU accession on Romania as a whole,
and then simply assumes that the Claimants have benefitted pro rata to the
national economy” (/d.), and

b. “Dr Robinson does not consider whether there is any evidence that the Claimants
have in fact benefitted from EU accession and ignores those factors that might
have had a negative impact” (/d.).

1166. In particular, Mr. Boulton criticizes Dr. Robinson for failing to perform an analysis of
the Claimants’ financial statements to confirm that they have in fact benefitted from
EU accession (/d., § 3.10), for failing to take into account the impact of EU accession

289 Metalpar v. Argentina, [J 218-233.

240 GAMI v. Mexico, § 83-87.

319

1167.

1168.

1169.

on the level of competition faced by the Claimants (/d., J 3.17-3.22), and for ignoring
the potential effect of EU accession on the Claimants’ fixed costs, in particular with
respect to EU health and safety legislation (/d., {{ 3.26-3.28). As a result, in Mr.
Boulton’s opinion, Dr. Robinson fails to establish that the Claimants have in fact
benefitted at all from EU accession (/d., {| 2.3).

The Tribunal cannot accept the Respondent's defense. As a legal matter, it is unclear
whether EU accession, an act of general application in Romania which produced
effects on every single person, should be accepted as an act having specific effect
with respect to specific persons, such as the mitigation of a specific damage. Even if
that were possible (a question that the Tribunal does not need to answer), the
Tribunal rejects the Respondent's defense on its merits. The issue is what effect EU
accession had on the damages suffered by the Claimants. The Respondent contends
that EU accession had a mitigating effect on the Claimants’ damages, because
accession would have had the effect of increasing their sales and therefore their
profits. However, the Respondent has not provided a convincing quantification of this
effect: the Tribunal does not find that Dr. Robinson’s macroeconomic analysis proves
the extent, if any, of the benefits of EU accession to the Claimants in particular.

First, the Tribunal is not persuaded by Dr. Robinson’s methodology. It is theoretically
possible to attempt to quantify the benefits that accession brought the Claimants by
assessing the Claimants’ situation in a counterfactual world where accession was
delayed or did not happen at all; however, this evaluation must be made with a view
to the specific circumstances of the case and a global assessment is relevant only if it
is a means to ascertain the effects of accession in the specific case. As Mr. Boulton
states, it seems overly simplistic to extrapolate the macroeconomic impact of EU
accession on the Romanian economy as a whole to the microeconomic impact on the
Claimants (ER of R. Boulton, § 3.15). Although EU accession may have benefitted
the Romanian economy as a whole, the extent of the benefits (and the costs) of EU
accession will have varied greatly across different industries and companies. Indeed,
Dr. Robinson accepted in cross-examination that EU accession could have had
varying impacts on existing businesses in Romania (helping some and hurting others,
even in the same sector). He also accepted that the costs of EU accession could be
widely different for Romanian businesses in the same sector (Tr., Day 11, 184-185
(Fleuriet/Robinson)).

However, Dr. Robinson appears to have focused only on the benefits of EU
accession, but ignored the costs. For instance, he did not take into consideration in
his calculations that the EFDG’s labor costs could rise as a result of accession.
Although he stated that his underlying model considered increases in labor costs, he
“took the view that they would not change as a result of accession” (/d., 188
(Robinson)). Nor did he consider that the increased sales that he estimated as a
result of accession would have required an increase in the Claimants’ labor costs: “I
did not increase wage costs because | thought that additional volumes could be sold
with the same labour force, and my evidence for that is that volumes at the time were
lower than they had been, and | don't imagine the factory had shrunk” (Tr., Day 11,
203 (Robinson)).

320

1170. Similarly, Dr. Robinson did not consider that EU accession could have the effect of
decreasing the Claimants’ sales as a result of the increased costs and prices due to
the revocation of the incentives (a loss of a competitive edge):

Q. Now, you did not account for any lost sales that the claimants may
have experienced as a result of paying increased Customs taxes, or
as a result of them paying more domestically to avoid such taxes;
correct?

A. Correct.

Q. You have simply assumed -- just so we're clear, you have simply
assumed that EU accession only had the positive impact of
increased sales?

A. Yes, because Mr Ellison did the negatives.

(Tr., Day 11, 189 (Fleuriet/Robinson).

1171. Further, Dr. Robinson did not take into consideration the fixed costs and regulatory
burdens imposed by EU accession (e.g., in matters of health, safety or environment),
because in his opinion they had not changed (/d., 196-197). He acknowledged at the
hearing that such costs could have affected the Claimants’ performance, but decided
that they ultimately did not affect his conclusions. Specifically, when counsel for the
Claimants represented that the Claimants had incurred significant costs to comply
with EU requirements on wooden pallets, Dr. Robinson made the following
comments:

Q. [...] this is an example of one of the fixed costs that would have
increased as a result of EU accession that you don't consider in your
opinion; correct?

A. Yes.

Q. It's a pretty big omission, is it not, in your opinion, not to have
considered increases in fixed costs that were required by -- required of
our clients by virtue of the fact that Romania was acceding to the
European Union?

A. | don't think those are a very large sum in the general scheme of
things. | mean, | worried about it, obviously, because | can see there is
a case. | didn't worry about it too much, | mean, partly because, as |
say, it's a level playing field; the competitors have those increases as
well, so it doesn't mean they lose market share.

| sort of comforted myself with the thought that many other judgments
| had taken were really quite deliberately cautious. So the EU effect,
you know, is 1.5 to 2, and | used 1.5. The food and drink is 1.1.

Now, you might actually argue that the class of food and drink that
EFDG are in are rather more towards the luxury end, with the soft
drinks and so forth, so actually that would be a bigger number. But |
went with the smaller number, which includes the potatoes and all
those other very unelastic items.

321

1172.

1173.

1174.

1175.

1176.

So, yes, | haven't specifically allowed for these factors; | admit that.
But | don't think it affects my conclusion.

(Tr., Day 11, 198-199 (Fleuriet/Robinson)).

The Tribunal is aware that in re-direct examination Dr. Robinson clarified that, in the
two scenarios involving delayed accession, all of those additional fixed costs would
have happened to the Claimants anyway, it was just a question of when (Tr., Day 11,
209-210). However, that does not detract from the fact that EU accession brought a
“mixed bag of goods” to Romanian companies, which included varying costs and
benefits, all of which need to be assessed to understand the total impact of EU
accession on the Claimants.

The Tribunal thus finds that the Respondent has failed to prove the extent, if any, of
the benefits of EU accession to the Claimants. This does not mean that the Tribunal
is oblivious to the fact that EU accession may have had an effect (whether positive or
negative) on the Claimants’ investments. This raises a procedural question, namely
which party must bear the consequences of this uncertainty. It is the Claimants’
burden to prove their damage and the Tribunal has found to what extent such
damage has been proved. The Respondent has argued that the Claimants’ experts
have failed to take into consideration the effects of EU accession, and has
endeavored to quantify such effects, but — in the Tribunal’s view — unsuccessfully.
First, the effects of EU accession appear to be mixed, both potentially increasing or
decreasing the value of the investment. Second, it is legally difficult to see why an
alleged advantage, from which the Claimants should have benefitted in any
circumstances and which is available to their competitors, including those who are not
located in the distressed zones, should be taken into consideration to their detriment.

For these reasons, the Tribunal dismisses the Respondent’s defense to the extent
that it requests a diminution of the damages awarded to the Claimants.

E. THE CLAIMANTS’ REQUEST THAT DAMAGES BE AWARDED NET OF TAXES

In their Reply, the Claimants had requested that any damages and interest payable
be grossed up for taxes, as follows: “Claimants’ Permanent Investor Certificates, valid
until April 1, 2009, contained profit tax exemption provisions. Therefore, Romania
would not have taxed the additional profit arising from lower costs on raw materials
from the customs tax exemption. But-for cash flows after April 1, 2009, reflect the
16% profit tax. However, Professor Lessard assumes that an award in this
proceeding would be taxable. Therefore, in order for the Claimants to receive the full
amount of direct damages from the loss of the customs tax exemption, the damages
and interest through April 1, 2009, must be grossed up to reflect the tax payable on
the award” (C-Reply, § 652).

The Respondent had contended that there is no merit to the Claimants’ gross-up
claim (R-Rejoinder, {{/ 431-436). Citing Romanian law provisions, it had argued that
“[t]he Corporate Claimants might also be able to set off tax losses against any future
taxable profits (including a damages award). Moreover, to the extent that an award is

322

1177.

1178.

1179.

1180.

1181.

paid to the Micula brothers, Romanian law provides that damages awards are non-
taxable” (R-Rejoinder, q 434).°""

However, in their Revised Request for Relief the Claimants did not include their
request for gross-up, and instead requested, presumably for the same reasons, “[t]he
total amount of damages payable by the Respondent comprising the amounts set out
in paragraphs 2, 3 and 5 to be received net of any tax obligations imposed by
Romania on the proceeds” (Revised Request for Relief, 4).

In their Post-hearing Brief, the Claimants confirmed their primary position that the
total amount of damages awarded should be “received by the Claimants net of any
tax obligations imposed by the Respondent on the proceeds” (C-PHB, {| 268). In their
view, the position under Romanian law in relation to both the Individual Claimants and
the Corporate Claimants is unclear, but it would be possible for an award to be
taxable in both instances. That said, the Claimants asserted that they would maintain
their gross-up claim if the Respondent stated that in its view taxes would be payable
on an award. Otherwise, the Claimants stated that “[s]hould the Respondent state in
sufficiently clear terms that it will not tax any damages award in favour of the
Claimants, the Claimants will not seek that that award be grossed-up for taxes” (C-
PHB, { 269).

The Respondent opposed the Claimants’ request that the award be paid net of any
taxes, and requested the Tribunal not to add any language to that effect. Given the
EFDG companies’ outstanding tax debts, the Respondent argued that such request
“could well lead to unknown and unintended consequences”. The Respondent urged
the Tribunal to “be cautious about phrasing any award in terms that the EFDG
Companies might use in other proceedings”, adding that the language of the award
with respect to taxes that the Claimants request is not commonly used in investment
arbitration awards (R-PHB, {| 322).

The Tribunal sees no justification for providing that the amounts awarded be received
net of taxes. First, part of the damages awarded, for instance the damages for
increased cost of raw materials, are not profits at all, but a reimbursement of
increased costs, even if they may have effect on the profits.

Second, with respect to the part of the damages that does refer to lost profits, Mr.
Boulton (on whose calculations the Tribunal has relied) has used gross profit margins
for his calculations (ER of R. Boulton, 4 5.63). The Tribunal understands from this
that the profits calculated by Mr. Boulton are before tax, and thus absent the Profit
Tax Exemption would have been subject to tax. The Respondent does not contest
that, under EGO 24, until 1 April 2009 the Corporate Claimants were entitled to the
Profit Tax Exemption. However, the Tribunal understands that this exemption would
apply only to profits made by the Corporate Claimants, and the Claimants have not
shown which company within the EFDG would have made the profits that are being
awarded.

2 Romania relies on the Romanian Fiscal Code (Exh. R-200), Article 42(b), and the KPMG Damages
Report, § 13.3.2.

323

1182.

1183.

1184.

1185.

1186.

1187.

1188.

Finally, the Tribunal is indeed aware of the tax dispute between the Claimants and the
Respondent. Given this delicate situation which raises many questions of Romanian
law and in view of all circumstances, the Tribunal does not consider it appropriate to
use in the Award the language requested by the Claimants.

For the foregoing reasons, the Claimants’ request that any damages be awarded net
of taxes is dismissed.

F. To WHOM SHOULD THE AWARD BE MADE?
The Claimants’ request for a different allocation of damages

Up until the hearing on the merits, the Claimants did not specify to whom an award
should be made.

In their Reply, the Claimants requested “an award granting them the following relief”,
inter alia, “compensation to Claimants for all damages they have suffered, as set forth
herein and as may be further developed and quantified in the course of this
proceeding” (C-Reply, §] 666, second bullet point).

During the hearing on the merits, however, the Claimants stated that “as a matter of
investment treaty law, the Micula brothers are the foreign shareholders while the
[C]orporate [C]laimants are the vehicles for some of their investments. For this
reason, it's appropriate that any award granted by the Tribunal should be made only
to the foreign shareholders protected by the Sweden-Romania BIT, Viorel and loan
Micula, and [...] they are agreed that as between themselves, the damages should be
awarded on a 50/50 basis.” Citing Suez v. Argentina and PSEG v. Turkey, the
Claimants argued that this approach would be consistent with the approach taken in
other treaty cases (Tr., Day 1, 143-145 (Reed)).

The Claimants confirmed this position in their Revised Request for Relief submitted
on 20 December 2010, where they requested that “[a]Jny damages payable, including
interest and costs, should be awarded to the [I]ndividual Claimants, loan Micula and
Viorel Micula, to be divided between them on a 50:50 basis. In the alternative, any
damages payable, including interest and costs, should be awarded to all five
Claimants” (Revised Request for Relief, p. 1).

This request was later confirmed in the Claimants’ prayer for relief included at the end
of their Post-Hearing Brief, in which “the Claimants request an award granting them
the relief set out in the Revised Request” (C-PHB, § 279).* This was further

2 The Tribunal is aware that in the body of their Post-Hearing Brief, the Claimants argued that
“[s]hould the Tribunal not award damages to the Individual Claimants alone, the Claimants’ secondary
position is that any ‘reliance’ damages, or damages calculated on the basis of the fair market value
immediately before the alleged breach, awarded should be awarded to the Individual Claimants and
any other damages should be awarded to all of the Claimants”, and that “[t]heir tertiary position was
that “any award be made to each of the five Claimants” (C-PHB, 9] 258-259). However, these
arguments were not formulated as formal requests for relief and, as noted in paragraph 876 above, the
Tribunal has focused on the Parties’ formal requests for relief.

324

1189.

1190.

confirmed by the Claimants in their closing arguments during the hearing of June
2011.73 As a result, the Claimants have formally prayed for two alternatives:

a. That “[a]ny damages payable, including interest and costs, should be awarded to
the [I]ndividual Claimants, loan Micula and Viorel Micula, to be divided between
them on a 50:50 basis” (Revised Request for Relief, p. 1).

b. “In the alternative, any damages payable, including interest and costs, should be
awarded to all five Claimants’ (/d.).

In its Procedural Order of 6 April 2011, which addressed the Respondent's objections
to the Claimants’ Revised Request for Relief, the Tribunal found that “in requesting
that any damages be awarded to Mr. loan Micula and Mr. Viorel Micula (the
“Individual Claimants”) on a 50/50 basis (second sentence of the Revised Request),
and in the alternative that any damages be awarded to all five Claimants (third
sentence of the Revised Request), the Claimants have reformulated their damages
case.” The Tribunal also found that “this raises several issues of procedure and of
the merits” (P.O. of 6 April 2011, Section 3.3), and issued certain directions in this
regard. Specifically, at Section 4.5 of that same Procedural Order, the Tribunal
requested the Claimants to confirm that they wished to maintain their request (Section
4.5(a)). The Tribunal then directed the Parties to address the following matters in
their post-hearing briefs (Section 4.5(b)):

(i) Is it possible, as a matter of procedure and of the merits, for the claims
of the Individual Claimants to be designated as either sole or principal
claimants (as opposed to the Corporate Claimants, who would
become subsidiary claimants) at this stage of the proceedings? In
particular, would the Corporate Claimants need to waive their claims
in favor of the Individual Claimants, and would this waiver be possible
under Romanian and international law?

(ii) What are the consequences of this new distribution of damages (if
any) on the damages sought by the Claimants as pleaded to this date,
both with respect to the factual and legal basis for the sought
damages and their quantification?

In addition, by letter of 6 May 2011, the Tribunal formulated certain questions to be
addressed by the Parties with respect to the Claimants’ damages case. In particular,
the Tribunal requested the Claimants to address the following points in relation to
their new request for allocation of damages:

11 Ld

a. Please address the Tribunal’s questions under Section 4.5 of
the P.O. of 6 April 2011. In this context, please clarify what is
the exact status of the Corporate Claimants’ claims. Are they
subsidiary? Are they withdrawn? What are the consequences
of either alternative?

283 Ih particular, the Claimants did not contradict the President when he stated that he understood that
the first two paragraphs at the beginning of page 1 of the Revised Request attached to the Claimants’
letter of 20 December 2010 to be a prayer for relief (Tr., Day 12, 134-135 (President Lévy)).

325

1191.

2.

1192.

1193.

b. Please explain what is the legal basis on which the Tribunal
should decline to award damages to the three Claimant
Corporations and award damages only to the Individual
Claimants? Is there a waiver of some kind by the Corporate
Claimants?

c. Please address the exact evidence in the record of the harm
allegedly suffered by the Individual Claimants.

(Tribunal’s letter of 6 May 2011, Section III.A.1.1).
The Parties’ responses to these questions are set out in Section 2 below.
The Parties’ positions

a. The Individual Claimants’ right to claim damages in their capacity as
shareholders

Citing a string of cases, the Claimants submit that, as a matter of investment treaty
law, the Individual Claimants have the right to claim damages in their capacity as
shareholders (C-PHB, 9 232-238). According to the Claimants, it is well-established
that shareholders have standing to bring claims under investment treaties and may
submit claims independently from the corporate entities in which they hold shares
without the participation of those corporate entities. This is particularly so in this
case, where the BIT defines “investment” very broadly as “any kind of asset owned or
controlled invested directly or indirectly by an investor”. In the Claimants’ view, this
means that the BIT directly protects all the Individual Claimants’ rights in the entire
investment, including tangible assets and the PICs, rather than merely the individuals’
shares. Given that during the jurisdictional phase the Tribunal found that the
Individual Claimants were foreign investors covered by the BIT, it follows that they
could have brought the claims independently and without the participation of the
Corporate Claimants in relation to the entire investment. In the Claimants’ view, the
Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility did not limit the scope of the
Individual Claimants’ claims to those of the Corporate Claimants; to the contrary, the
Tribunal declined to determine every element of property over which it had
jurisdiction.

With respect to the damages that shareholders may claim as a result of an
investment treaty violation, the Claimants contend that shareholders do not need to
prove that they suffered harm directly and separately or independently from that
suffered by the entity in which they hold shares. According to the Claimants, there is
nothing in the BIT, the ICSID Convention or investment treaty law that would limit the
rights of shareholders in this respect. For example:

a. In Goetz v Burundi, the tribunal observed that “[...] prior ICSID case-law does not
restrict the capacity to act to only those legal persons that are directly affected by

326

the alleged breaching measures; it extends that capacity to cover the
shareholders in such legal persons, who are the actual investors.”*“

b. In Bogdanov v. Moldova, the tribunal stated that “[iJn the practice of investment
arbitration it is generally accepted that the shareholders may be awarded indirect
damages (SCHREUER. C. “Shareholder Protection in International Investment
Law”, cit, pp.18f.). The remedy that may be claimed by the Foreign Investor,
therefore, is not limited to the damage directly affecting his rights as shareholder
in the Local Investment Company, but extends to any losses affecting the assets
of the Local Investment Company, including also any reduction in value of the
assets due to any alleged breach of contract by the Respondent. The indirect
damage suffered by the Foreign Investor, therefore, corresponds to the loss of
the Local Investment Company [...].”24°

1194. The Claimants also assert that, in cases where claims have been brought by both
shareholders and the companies in which they hold shares, ICSID tribunals have
awarded damages directly to the shareholders alone and without the need for those
shareholders to quantify their losses separately from those of the companies. The
Claimants rely on the following cases, among others:

a. PSEG v. Turkey, where the Tribunal, after noting that the project company was
wholly owned by PSEG Global, decided to award all compensation to PSEG
Global.™“°

b. Eastern Sugar v. Czech Republic, where the tribunal awarded full damages to the
parent company for losses suffered by its subsidiary following the subsidiary’s
loss of its quota.”4”

c. Vivendi v. Argentina Il, where claims were brought by both the parent
shareholder (Vivendi) and its subsidiary, and the tribunal, after concluding that
Argentina had breached its treaty obligations to both Vivendi and its subsidiary,

24 Antoine Goetz and others v Republic of Burundi (ICSID Case No. ARB/95/3), Award Embodying
the Parties’ Settlement Agreement, 10 February 1999, § 89, as translated in S.A. Alexandrov, “The
‘Baby Boom’ of Treaty-Based Arbitrations and the Jurisdiction of ICSID Tribunals — Shareholders as
‘Investors’ under Investment Treaties”, Journal of World Investment & Trade, vol. 6, issue 3, June
2005, pages 393-398 (Exh. C-234).

248 Bogdanov v. Moldova (BIT Arbitration under the Rules of the Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm
Chamber of Commerce), Award, 22 September 2005, pp. 18-19.

248 PSEG v. Turkey, J 340.

47 Eastern Sugar B.V.(Netherlands) v. Czech Republic, SCC Case No. 088/2004, Partial Award, 27
March 2007 (hereinafter “Eastern Sugar v. Czech Republic’), § 367. (“The Arbitral Tribunal is aware
that the loss of quota was suffered primarily by Eastern Sugar Ceska Republika a.s. However, this is a
practically wholly-owned subsidiary of the Claimant Eastern Sugar B.V and the value of the subsidiary
is in the present circumstances in practical terms determined by the value of the quota allocated to it.
The Arbitral Tribunal deems it correct to award to the Claimant full damages for Eastern Sugar Ceska
Republika a.s.’ loss of quota attributable to the Third Sugar Decree.”)

327

stated that “[a]s its 94.4% de facto shareholder, Vivendi is entitled to a 94.4%
share of [the subsidiary's] damages”.*“*

1195. The Respondent argues that “[t]he Claimants have confounded two issues: the
Miculas’ standing to bring a claim and the quantum of damages to which they may be
entitled” (R-PHB, 4 340, R-SPHB, § 53). The Respondent submits that, “[w]hile the
Miculas’ jus standi is a matter of jurisdiction, the amount of damages they can be
awarded is a separate substantive legal issue.” The Respondent clarifies that it does
not contest the Individual Claimants’ standing to bring a claim in respect of their
identified investment (their shareholdings), and notes that the Tribunal accepted
jurisdiction over claims arising from that investment. However, the Respondent
emphasizes that that does not mean they are entitled to the same damages as the
Corporate Claimants (R-PHB, { 340).

1196. The Respondent contends that the cases cited by the Claimants do not support the
proposition that a shareholder can be compensated for the quantum of harm suffered
directly from the corporation (R-PHB, 9 343-345; R-SPHB, {{ 54-55). For instance,
in PSEG v. Turkey, a parent company was compensated for sunk costs that it had
itself invested. In AAPL v. Sri Lanka, the tribunal declined to award the claimant
damages for harm to the local company’s assets, and instead held that “[t]he scope of
the international law protection granted to the foreign investor in the present case is
limited to a single item: the value of his share-holding in the joint-venture entity
[...].°"° In Eastern Sugar v. Czech Republic, the Respondent did not contest the
payment of damages to the parent company rather than to the subsidiary, and the
claimant had presented a report calculating the loss of share value. In Vivendi v.
Argentina II, the tribunal awarded the investment value of the concession, measured
by the sunk costs that Vivendi had put into its local subsidiary.*°' In other cases cited
by the Claimants, tribunals have awarded damages to compensate shareholders for
the loss of value in their equity participation, measured differently from the damages
incurred by their subsidiaries (as was the case in Enron v. Argentina and CMS v.
Argentina), or lost dividends (as was the case in LG&E v. Argentina). As a result, the
Respondent contends that “[s]hareholder damages are limited to losses suffered by
the shareholder himself, such as any losses in the value of his shares or lost
dividends” (R-PHB, {If 343-345).

1197. Citing Nykomb v. Latvia’ and Gemplus and Talsud v. Mexico,?®* the Respondent
argues that “[u]nder principles of company law common to virtually all jurisdictions, it

248 Comparila de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v Argentine Republic, (\CSID
Case No. ARB/97/3, Award, 20 August 2007 (hereinafter “Vivendi v. Argentina II” or “Vivendi II’), 4.
8.3.20).

248 AAPL v. Sri Lanka, 4 95.

250 Eastern Sugar v. Czech Republic, J 358.

251 Vivendi v. Argentina Il, {| 8.3.12-8.3.19.

252 Nykomb Synergetics Technology Holding AB v. The Republic of Latvia, SCC Case No 118/2001,
Award, 16 December 2003 (hereinafter “Nykomb v. Latvia” or “Nykomb’), p 39. (“The Respondent has
argued, and the Arbitral Tribunal must agree, that the reduced flow of income into Windau obviously
does not cause an identical loss for Nykomb as an investor. [...] [I]t is clear that the higher payments
for electric power would not have flowed fully and directly through to Nykomb. The money would have

328

cannot be assumed that the harm suffered by even a 100% shareholder equates to
the harm suffered by a corporation” (R-PHB, 9 343-348; R-SPHB, 9 57-58). The
Respondent submits in this respect that “[t]his approach is clearly correct. As noted
by the Nykomb tribunal, a number of deductions may be made to a company’s
income before it can be distributed to shareholders as dividends. To ignore this is to
be blind to the legal and economic reality of equity ownership” (R-PHB, {| 346).

1198. In response to the Respondent's arguments, the Claimants submit, relying on
scholarly writings by Ripinsky and Williams, that “two factors appear to be
determinative of whether a shareholder can claim directly the losses of the underlying
business or whether a shareholder is restricted to its flow-through damages [...] first
the provisions of the relevant BIT; and second, whether the shareholders hold a
majority or a minority interest” (Tr., Day 12, 95 (Reed)). With respect to the first
factor, a BIT’s definition of investment will determine whether the protection to a
shareholder extends only to its direct investments or also to its indirect investments.
The Claimants argue that, if the definition of investment extends to a shareholder's
indirect investments (as is the case here), then shareholders would be entitled to
claim for harm to the assets of the underlying company. With respect to the second
factor, the Claimants contend that it would be all the more appropriate to treat the
underlying business unit as the protected investment when the shareholder owns a
majority interest in the underlying company. In this regard, citing Ripinsky and
Williams, they submit that “[i]f the business unit in its entirety is considered to be the
claimant’s protected investment, then all of the damages caused to the business must
be assumed to flow to the shareholder as the owner of the business, or part thereof,
directly without distortion” (Tr., Day 12, 102 (Reed)).?5*

1199. The Claimants argue that both of these factors were present in the cases cited by the
Claimants where tribunals awarded the parent company the damages suffered by the
subsidiary (Azurix v. Argentina, Vivendi II, Eastern Sugar v. Czech Republic). By
contrast, in all of the cases cited by the Respondent except one, at least one of the
factors was missing. Specifically, in AAPL v. Sri Lanka, the relevant BIT did not

 

been subject to Latvian taxes etc., would have been used to cover Windau’s costs and down
payments on Windau’s loans etc., and disbursements to the shareholder would be subject to
restrictions in Latvian company law on payment of dividends. An assessment of the Claimant’s loss on
or damage to its investment based directly on the reduced income flow into Windau is unfounded and
must be rejected.”)

253 Gemplus and Talsud v. Mexico, § 12-50 (“The Claimants’ claims for compensation derive only from
their status as investors with investments in the form of their respective minority shareholdings in the
Concessionaire, as distinct from any claim by the Concessionaire itself. Perhaps inevitably, the
Parties’ submissions occasionally elided this important distinction, effectively treating the valuation of
the Concessionaire’s future profits (if any) as the relevant exercise for the assessment of
compensation due to the Claimants. The exercise required of this Tribunal is, in contrast, the
valuation of the Claimants’ lost investments in the form of their shares in the Concessionaire and not,
as such, the lost profits incurred by the Concessionaire under the Concession Agreement. The latter
are not, of course, irrelevant; but they are not directly relevant as if the Claimants’ claims were made
by the Concessionaire itself.”)

°54 The Claimants do not provide a citation for this, but the Tribunal notes that the text roughly
corresponds to S. Ripinsky & K. Williams, Damages in International Investment Law (2008), pp. 149-
150.

329

1200.

1201.

1202.

1203.

protect indirect investments of shareholders and the claimant was a minority
shareholder, while in Gemplus and Talsud the claimants were minority shareholders
(Tr., Day 12, 99-103 (Reed)).

The Claimants concede that Nykomb v. Latvia, cited by the Respondent, does not
conform to Ripinsky’s and Williams’ theory. However, they submit that there is a third
factor that should be considered, namely “whether the company in which the
shareholder holds the shares was specifically set up for the purposes of carrying out
the investment, and that is therefore whether the local entity is simply a vehicle for the
investment, an investment vehicle” (Tr., Day 12, 105 (Reed)). The Claimants point
out that Nykomb had not incorporated the local entity, but had acquired the shares at
a subsequent point in time, when the dispute had already arisen, and submit that
these circumstances could have been a factor that led the tribunal to limit Nykomb’s
recovery to the value of its shares.

In view of the foregoing, the Claimants submit that all of the cases cited by the Parties
“can be reconciled with the following proposition: that where a foreign investors [sic]
incorporates an entity in the host state for the purposes of making an investment in
the host state, and where the investor owns 100% interest or at least a majority
interest in the entity thus created and controls it, and where the investment treaty
protects both the investor's indirect and direct interests, the local entity can properly
be viewed as a conduit or investment vehicle and the investor's protected interest is in
the underlying business and assets carried out through the investment vehicle, such
that the investor is entitled to claim the local entity's losses as its own” (Tr., Day 12,
107-108 (Reed)). The Tribunal understands that the Claimants’ position is that this is
the case here: (i) Article 1(1) of the BIT does not limit its protection to the Individual
Claimants’ direct investments (their shares), but extends to their indirect interest in
the underlying EFDG companies; (ii) the Individual Claimants own virtually 100% of
the shares of the EFDG, and (iii) the Corporate Claimants were created as investment
vehicles.

Despite these arguments, the Respondent contends that most of the cases cited by
the Claimants do not support the right of shareholders to compensation for the profits
lost by the underlying business of their company. For example, in Siemens the
Tribunal refused to award damages to the shareholder for its subsidiary's lost profits;
it only awarded Siemens the book value of the subsidiary itself. Similarly, it argues
that claims for lost profits were rejected in Vivendi I! and Azurix v. Argentina (Tr., Day
13, 249 (Rubins))

The Respondent further contends that, “as the present case shows, it would be
fundamentally unjust to ignore the fact that shareholders are last in line for corporate
assets. Those assets cannot go to shareholders if that means creditors cannot be
paid in full” (R-PHB, 4 346). More specifically, the Respondent argues:

a. “This is part of the basic bargain investors make when they choose to conduct
business through corporations rather than in their own names. [...] The Individual
Claimants [...] chose to run their food and drinks business through a complex

330

network of corporations because it was advantageous to do so. They cannot
now ignore the facts that the Corporate Claimants have separate legal
personality; that the Individual Claimants do not own the corporations’ assets; or
that the corporations’ creditors—including the state, through its undisputed
entitlement to overdue tax payments—have the first claim on those assets, if (as
the Claimants contend) the Corporate Claimants are incapable of paying their
debts” (R-PHB, {| 347).

b. “[O]ne of the most obvious scenarios in which harm to a corporation causes no
compensable harm to shareholders is when the corporation cannot pay its debts,
so that the shares have no value in any event. This highlights an important
reason for not diverting to the Individual Claimants damages actually suffered by
the Corporate Claimants: the risk of a fraudulent conveyance” (R-PHB, { 348).
Indeed, the Respondent argues the Claimants “acknowledge that the very reason
they have suddenly requested that all damages go to the Individual Claimants is
to avoid paying the Corporate Claimants’ tax obligations” (/d.).”°°

1204. In response to questions from the Tribunal regarding the protection of the Corporate
Claimants’ creditors (including Romania) in the case of an award to the Individual
Claimants,*°° the Claimants stated in their oral closing arguments:

[T]hose points are kind of answered in allowing shareholders to bring these
kind of claims. And the reason for that in investment law is they are the
real parties in interest in these matters, and creditors, including state
creditors, cannot think that they have a claim to these kinds of losses
because they know that shareholders have their own rights in international
law. So a creditor or the taxman has no expectation that they can recover
these taxes or whatever on the basis of amounts to be awarded in an
ICSID arbitration.

Ll

With respect to the position of the [Corporate [C]laimants and their
creditors and employees if the Tribunal were to make an award to the
shareholders, [...] in our view strictly as a legal matter, the answer is that
the BIT protects foreign investors and breaches of the foreign investors’
rights entitled them to compensation, and the foreign investors are the real
parties in interest, as has been decided in a number of cases. The fate of
the investment vehicle doesn't come into the balance, strictly legally
speaking, in our submission.

°55 The Respondent cites a letter from King and Spalding dated 15 April 2011 (Exh. R-242), in which
the Corporate Claimants state that they “certainly have no intention of avoiding their liabilities to
commercial creditors, in respect of whom they are not in default.” The Respondent concludes that
“they apparently do intend to avoid their liability for taxes that they admit are overdue” (R-PHB, {| 348).
258 Specifically, Dr. Alexandrov asked counsel for Claimants: “If the Tribunal decides to follow your
suggestion and order payment to the two individual claimants, wouldn't the Tribunal expose
respondent to a situation where respondent would not be able to collect principal due that is not
disputed? [...] [A]ssuming we agree with your legal proposition that the two individual claimants are
entitled to the damages of the group, and that the damages should be paid to them, if there are any
damages of course, the question then is [...] if the Tribunal wants to protect Romania and make sure
that Romania collects the debt that is owed by the corporate claimants, how do we reconcile that with
the legal proposition that you are advancing that the shareholders are entitled to be paid the amount of
damages?” (Tr., Day 12, 132-134).

331

1205.

1206.

As a more pragmatic matter it seems to us that if you were to make the
award that we urge, then my client -- Johnny Micula would have an award,
and an award is not money. There would be a negotiation with the state
and with the banks. Probably the banks would have to take a bit of a
haircut because these are basically more or less sound businesses but
crippled by debt. If the debt were relieved, things might be better. The state
might have to do something as well.

We see it more as an issue that arises after an award rather than in
arriving at the award, as a strict matter. | suppose if the parties can't agree,
it is of course plausible that the companies will go into bankruptcy. That
doesn't actually mean that people will lose jobs because the businesses
will presumably be sold, new investors will be found, they won't have to
carry those debts; they will remain with the bankrupt entities. The banks
will presumably lose money if the assets aren't sufficient to cover all the
debts. We think that's the proper view.

With that said, it does follow from some of the points that Professor
Alexandrov made that you may be in a position to make a distinction
between damages owed to the individual shareholders in their own right,
and notably in relation to the investments of the companies that are not the
corporate claimants, you may be able to take a view on the damages owed
to the corporate claimants. So whilst we think that is possible, we don't
actually think that is the right approach.

(Tr., Day 12, 133-140 (Reed))

In its closing statement, the Respondent strongly objected to the Claimants’
comments in this respect. According to the Respondent, the Claimants’ comments
suggest that “international law gives equity holders a right to take for themselves what
may be their company's largest asset, a claim against the state, and creditors be
damned”, which is a result that would be “contrary to basic corporate law” and could
not be expected either by the Corporate Claimants’ creditors or their employees (Tr.,
Day 13, 253 (Rubins)). Instead, the Respondent reiterates that “the assets of a
company, which includes all receivables, do not belong to the shareholders. The
[C]orporate [C]laimants have obligations to third parties that rank higher in priority
than dividends payments to shareholders: they need to pay corporate creditors, they
need to pay their employees' salaries and they need to pay Romania for the
undisputed taxes they owe. These are all ahead of them in line.” (Tr., Day 13, 252
(Rubins)).

The Respondent further criticized the Claimants’ suggestion that an award of
damages would be followed by a negotiation with the Romanian State and other
creditors, arguing that the Claimants’ position appeared to be that “international law
gives shareholders a stick with which to beat their creditors” and that it allows them to
“empty the company of its assets under the guise of a BIT and then strike a deal the
banks and the state can't refuse because they are holding all the cards” (Tr., Day 13,
254 (Rubins)).

332

b. Is it possible for the Individual Claimants to be designated as the sole or
principal claimants at this stage of the proceedings?

1207. The Claimants submit that ‘i]t is possible as a matter of both procedure and the
merits for the Individual Claimants to be designated as the sole or principal claimants
at this stage of the proceedings” (C-PHB, {f 239-243).

1208. The Claimants first argue that, as “the Individual Claimants could have brought their
claims independently without the participation of the Corporate Claimants in the first
instance [...] there is no legal basis why the Individual Claimants cannot become the
sole or principal claimants at this stage” (C-PHB, §/ 241). The Claimants rely on Suez
v. Argentina, where the tribunal allowed the proceedings brought by the local
company to be discontinued at the jurisdictional stage, noting that this discontinuance
“[...] does not affect the rights of the Shareholder Claimants to bring a claim in ICSID
arbitration under the two BITs in question. The Claimant Shareholders would have
had a right to bring such claims independently without the participation of the [local
company] in first instance.”*’ Although the Claimants acknowledge that in this case
no discontinuance is being sought, and the Claimants’ request for damages to be
awarded to the Individual Claimants was made at the merits stage rather than at the
jurisdictional stage, they argue that the tribunal’s reasoning in Suez v. Argentina is
equally applicable to the present case.

1209. In addition, the Claimants assert that “the claims for monetary damages in this case
have always related to the financial losses suffered by the individual shareholders.
The Corporate Claimants were primarily included as Claimants five years ago as a
result of the original alternative claim for restitution of the EGO 24 regime. Unlike
monetary damages, which have consistently been awarded to shareholder claimants
in BIT practice, restitution of a legal framework — essentially an order for specific
performance — could only be awarded to the Corporate Claimants. Regardless, that
claim for restitution was dropped at the beginning of the merits phase of this case.
There has never been any question that this case involved claims for monetary
damages, that the Micula brothers owned nearly 100% of the companies comprising
the European Food and Drinks Companies, or that the brothers, as shareholders,
were the Claimants who ultimately suffered the losses at issue in this dispute” (C-
PHB, { 242).

1210. In light of the case law cited in the preceding section, the Claimants contend that
awarding damages to the Individual Claimants is lawful under international law:

a. The Claimants emphasize that the investment vehicle in Suez v. Argentina was
entitled to lawfully withdraw its claim, leaving only the shareholders as claimants.
Similarly, the Claimants argue that “as a matter of principle, it must be that in
every case where both the shareholders and the local investment vehicle could
have brought proceedings but only the shareholders did, the local investment

57 Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua
S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17), Decision on Jurisdiction, 16 May 2006
(hereinafter “Suez v. Argentina’), 4 51.

333

vehicle ‘waived’ its rights to an award.” In addition, they contend that “had the
Individual Claimants commenced these proceedings alone, this issue would likely
never have arisen. Consequently, this is a non-issue about which the Tribunal
need not concern itself further” (C-PHB, {] 244-245).

The Claimants further submit that “[t]he approach in international investment law
is to award damages to the foreign investor, not to the investment vehicle
incorporated in the host state.” According to the Claimants, “[t]here are sound
policy reasons for this approach”, as the contrary “would entirely undermine the
protections afforded by investment treaties if states could breach their obligations
to foreign investors, impose draconian penalties on the local investment vehicle
and then demand that tribunals make payments only to the local investment
vehicle on the basis that otherwise the investment vehicle will get away with not
paying taxes and penalties (that it should never have incurred)” (C-PHB, 246).

1211. The Claimants further submit that awarding damages to the Individual Claimants is
lawful under Romanian law (although they clarify that, in their view, Romanian law is
irrelevant to this issue and the Tribunal should award damages in accordance with
international law). Specifically, the Claimants argue that:

a.

Pursuant to the “principle of availability’, Romanian law recognizes the right of
legal persons to exercise their civil rights as they see fit. According to the
Claimants, this principle allows legal persons to determine whether or not they
wish to commence legal proceedings, what claims or defenses to make in such
proceedings, whether to discontinue or settle such proceedings, and whether to
appeal or enforce any decision. The Claimants further submit that this principle
gives to legal persons the right to agree that any damages award to which they
are entitled be granted to other co-claimants with the same entitlement to such an
award. Thus, pursuant to this principle the Corporate Claimants would be entitled
to “waive” any rights they have to the award (C-PHB, { 249). In support of this
contention, the Claimants cite article 129(6) of the Romanian Procedural Civil
Code, which provides that “[i]n all cases, the judges shall decide only regarding
the request’s object in dispute.” According to the Claimants, “[a]s it is applied,
that provision supports the Claimants’ contention that they can decide amongst
themselves how the Tribunal is to award their damages. There is no requirement
that the Corporate Claimants formally waive their claims in order to apply that
principle” (C-PHB, fn. 364).

In addition, the Claimants submit that nothing in the Romanian Commercial Code
or laws regulating companies, including Law 31/1990, would prevent the
Corporate Claimants from assigning their rights to the award to the Individual
Claimants (C-PHB, {| 250).

1212. By contrast, the Respondent submits that the Individual Claimants cannot be
designated as sole or principal claimants at this stage without Romania’s consent or
without complying with certain legal requirements (R-PHB, {J 335-338, R-SPHB,
59-64).

334

1213.

1214.

1215.

1216.

1217.

258

The Respondent contends that, if the Individual Claimants were designated as sole
Claimants at this late stage with the consent of the Corporate Claimants, that would
constitute an abandonment of the Corporate Claimants’ claims that would amount to
a partial discontinuance of the proceeding. In that case, the Respondent argues that
it would be entitled to an award with res judicata effect against the Corporate
Claimants. The Respondent explains that the Corporate Claimants cannot
discontinue the proceeding without Romania’s consent under Rule 44 of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules, and that Romania will not consent to any resolution that would
permit the Corporate Claimants later to revive claims or requested relief that they
have pursued (or could have pursued) in this proceeding, or without compensation for
wasted costs.

Romania further contends that the Claimants’ reliance on Suez v. Argentina is
inapposite, because in that case the local company’s claims were withdrawn without
objection by the Respondent. Here Romania has objected expressly: “apart from the
substantive unfairness to the Corporate Claimants’ creditors, including Romania, of
the proposed waiver, a respondent that has been made to defend proceedings for five
years has a legitimate interest in both an award with res judicata effect and
reimbursement of its wasted costs as conditions of a discontinuance” (R-SPHB, { 61).

According to Romania, Romanian substantive and procedural law lead to the same
conclusion. Citing Romanian case law, the Respondent submits that “[a] court need
not accept a claimant’s withdrawal of claims over the respondent's objection; but if the
court does accept the withdrawal, it must render a judgment extinguishing the
underlying right and determining the costs consequences of the claimant’s waiver”***
(R-SPHB, { 61).

The Respondent adds that, in any event, Romanian civil and company laws prohibit
any action, including renunciation of claims, that could violate the rights of third
parties, including removing assets from a company’s patrimony to the detriment of
creditors.*° Given the value of the Corporate Claimants’ damages claims and the
Claimants’ assertion that the Corporate Claimants have zero equity value and cannot
pay their overdue debts, the Respondent argues that relinquishing those claims would
prejudice the rights of creditors. The Respondent notes that Romanian law permits
an interested party, such as a creditor, to move to nullify the waiver.*°° Romania,
which is a substantial creditor, opposes the waiver, but notes that the other creditors
of the Corporate Claimants may have no knowledge of a proposed waiver (R-SPHB,
462).

Even if the Corporate Claimants were to waive their own damages claims, the
Respondent argues that that would not be equivalent to assigning those claims to the
Individual Claimants (R-PHB, § 336). Only by assignment, and not by waiver, could

The Respondent cites Civil Decision 28/30 January 2008, Constanta Court of Appeal, Civil Section;

High Court of Justice and Appeal of Romania Decision 3519/26 November, 2008; Romanian Civil
Procedure Code, Article 247(1).

°5° The Respondent cites Law 31/1990, Article 237(3), Article 237(4), and Article 272 (1)(2).
260 The Respondent cites the Romanian Civil Code, Title Ill, Chapter Ill, Section II, Article 975.

335

the Individual Claimants receive compensation for harm to the Corporate Claimants.
However, the Respondent argues that “Romanian law does not permit a debtor to
give away an asset, receiving no payment in return, if that may frustrate creditors’
ability to recover what they are owed. When the debtor is a corporation or limited
liability company, the conditions are stricter, as such entities can only rarely make
gratuitous transfers (particularly to their own shareholders). To effect an assignment,
the Corporate Claimants and Individual Claimants would need to enter into an
assignment agreement, on an arm’s length basis — in other words, in which the
Individual Claimants paid market value for the assignment. Procedurally, the
assignment would have to be validly approved by a general meeting of shareholders,
and it would have to be publicised in a manner set out by Romanian law if it were to
have any effect against third parties — including, again, the Corporate Claimants’
creditors who are not represented here” (R-SPHB, § 63).”°' Here, the Respondent
points out that the Corporate Claimants have not assigned their claims to the
Individual Claimants, and it is highly unlikely that such an assignment could be made
without violating Romanian civil and criminal law (R-SPHB, {| 63-64).

1218. Without an assignment of the Corporate Claimants’ claims, the Respondent contends
that the Individual Claimants cannot receive compensation that they have not proven
to be their own. As explained in the previous section, the Respondent submits that, if
liability is proven, each Claimant would be entitled to compensation for harm to his or
its own investment, and damage to the Corporate Claimants’ assets cannot be
equated with damage to the Individual Claimants’ shares in the Corporate Claimants.
As a result, the Claimants cannot properly ask the Tribunal to award to the Individual
Claimants damages that would have been awarded to the Corporate Claimants had
they not stepped aside. Thus, the request for “all damages” to be paid to the
Individual Claimants cannot entitle them to anything more than compensation for
losses they have suffered (R-PHB, {§ 336-337).

1219. The Respondent contends that, “[flor the same reason, it is irrelevant that the
Individual Claimants could have chosen to bring a case by themselves, without joining
the Corporate Claimants. Had they done so, they would have been entitled
(assuming liability) only to damages they had suffered. [...] Whether the Corporate
Claimants withdraw now, had never been in the case, or continue to pursue their own
damages claims, the Individual Claimants would not be entitled to receive
compensation that they have not proven to be their own” (R-PHB, { 338).

c. The impact of the Claimants’ requested allocation on the factual or legal
bases for the claimed damages or their quantification

1220. The Claimants contend that “[alwarding damages to the Individual Claimants alone
does not have any consequences with respect to the factual or legal basis for the
claimed damages or the quantification of those damages” (C-PHB, {f 251-254). The
Claimants assert that the Individual Claimants own (directly or indirectly) virtually all of
the shares in each of the companies of the EFDG. As a result, had the Individual

?5' The Respondent cites Law 99/1999, Title VI, Chapter 1, Article 2(a) and Chapter 3, Article 29, as
well as Articles 1391 et seq. of the Romanian Civil Code.

336

1221.

1222.

1223.

262

Claimants commenced these proceedings on their own, as the Claimants argue that
they were entitled to do, they could have claimed and been entitled to all of the
damages being sought in these proceedings.

By contrast, the Respondent argues that the Individual Claimants are not entitled to
any damages, because they have not proven the quantum of any loss. Indeed, the
Respondent contends that there is no factual basis for any award of damages to the
Individual Claimants, whether or not the Corporate Claimants stay in the case,
because the Claimants have not assessed the damages incurred by the Individual
Claimants, whether as shareholders of the Corporate Claimants or in any other
capacity. The Respondent also argues that the Claimants have not justified their
request for a different damages allocation, and that this request at such a late stage
constitutes a change of position that should be taken into consideration when
determining costs (R-PHB, {| 332-350, R-SPHB, {If 53-65).

The Respondent contends that, because they have not proved damages that they
themselves have suffered (/.e., the diminution in value of their shares), the Individual
Claimants should receive nothing. The Respondent adds that “[t]his is the Individual
Claimants’ burden of proof, and they have not even attempted to quantify the loss in
value of their shareholdings in the Corporate Claimants. The Claimants have
consistently declined to instruct one of their many quantum experts to carry out such
a valuation. It would be fundamentally improper, and improper to Romania, to excuse
this willful failure of proof and guess at a damages figure for the Individual Claimants,
which is the only basis on which any damages could be awarded to them” (R-SPHB,
165).

Contrary to the Respondent's contentions, the Claimants argue that there is
significant evidence in the record showing that the Individual Claimants have suffered
harm as a result of the Respondent's unlawful actions (C-PHB, 255-257):

a. According to Mr. Osborne’s calculations, in 2001 the EFDG had retained
earnings of €152 million. The Claimants argue that this means that the EFDG
companies could have paid to their shareholders (the Individual Claimants) €152
million at that time. The Claimants further assert that today the EFDG’s retained
earnings are gone and as such, the Micula brothers, as shareholders, have lost
at least that €152 million (less the €17 million worth of dividends paid in the
interim period) (First ER of C. Osborne, {{f 3.27-3.30).

b. In his reliance damages analysis, Mr. Osborne valued the Claimants’ pre-EGO 24
businesses at €400 million.” According to the Claimants, had the Individual
Claimants sold their businesses at that time for that price, the Individual
Claimants, in their capacity as shareholders, would likely have received the vast
majority of this sale. Also relying on Mr. Osborne, the Claimants contend that, if

As noted in paragraph 886 above, the Tribunal understands that the Claimants’ final prayer on the

basis of Mr. Osborne's reliance damages analysis is RON 811 million, not €400 million. That being
said, as the Tribunal is not awarding any damages for this head of claim it is unnecessary to determine
whether the Claimants could have augmented this claim.

337

the Miculas were to sell their businesses today, they would likely recover not a
single lei. The Claimants argue that Mr. Ellison agreed that the value of the
shares prior to the revocation could have been as high as €350 million and that
the current value of the shares is likely to be nil or virtually nil (Tr., Day 12, 109-
110 (Reed); Tr., Day 10, 36-37 (Osborne)).

c. The Individual Claimants have suffered losses even from an expectation
damages perspective. The Claimants argue that, “[h]ad the Claimants been able
to make additional sales, due to the advantages of the Raw Materials Incentive
(including an ability to sell their products at lower relative prices than their
competitors to take advantage of the SCP opportunity) and by being able to
complete the Incremental Investments (again by being able to take advantage of
the incentives), the Claimants’ businesses would have been more profitable,
which would likely have led to increased dividends to the shareholders and/or the
Individual Claimants being able to sell the businesses for a considerable profit.

1224. With respect to the impact of their requested allocation on the quantum of damages,
in their closing statements the Claimants made the following comments (Tr., Day 12,
108-112 (Reed)):

a. “If the Tribunal considers that the Micula brothers’ protected investments in
Romania include the underlying business assets, then no separate damages
calculation is required: all the damages should be awarded to the brothers as
50/50 shareholders. There's no need for the [C]orporate [C]laimants to withdraw
from the case or to waive any claim, and the award would be binding upon them.”
(Tr., Day 12, 108-109 (Reed).

b. In the Claimants’ submission, the question of flow-through damages only arises if
the Tribunal takes the view that only the Individual Claimants’ shares constitute
protected investments. In this case, their damages would be limited to the impact
on the shares themselves, in particular to the loss of value of those shares. The
Claimants argue that this loss of share value has been calculated by Mr. Osborne
in his reliance damages analysis.*° As explained in the paragraph 1223.b
above, the Claimants submit that, based on this analysis, the loss of value of the
Individual Claimants’ shares is €400 million.

c. If, as in Nykomb, the Tribunal were inclined to take a stricter approach, and was
inclined to limit the damages to the shareholders to amounts that would have
been available to distribute as dividends, the Claimants submit that the Tribunal
would still be able to establish quantum in this case. The Claimants argue that
the Individual Claimants would have been entitled to take as dividends all of the
retained earnings built up in the EFDG companies over the preceding years. The
Claimants assert that the retained earnings of the EFDG companies over the
years 1999-2004 amount to €173 million, a number that is not controversial as it

°83 The Claimants refute the Respondent's suggestion that they did not instruct any of their experts to
carry out an evaluation of the loss of value of the shares of the Individual Claimants in the EFDG: they
argue that this evaluation was carried out by Mr. Osborne in his reliance damages analysis.

338

is taken directly from the accounts and does not require computation. The
Claimants argue that, because these amounts were earnings available for
distribution as dividends, they take into account all of the creditors (Tr., Day 12,
110-111 (Reed)). The Claimants further contend that, under the Nykomb
approach, the Individual Claimants would have been entitled to a proportion of
the EFDG companies’ future income (i.e. the Claimants’ claims for expectation
losses). The Nykomb tribunal assessed that the shareholders were entitled to
one-third of the underlying company’s losses, but the Claimants submit that
under normal circumstances a higher proportion would be appropriate (Tr., Day
12, 110-112 (Reed)).

1225. In turn, the Respondent denies that the Individual Claimants’ loss of shareholder
value can be quantified on the basis of Mr. Osborne’s reliance losses analysis:

264

a.

The Respondent acknowledges that Mr. Osborne attempted to quantify the
EFDG shareholder equity prior to the revocation by comparing EFDG to other
publicly traded companies in the same line of business. However, the
Respondent contends that the valuation date chosen by Mr. Osborne (2001) is
not a proper valuation date because it is neither the date of the breach nor the
date of the award. Rather, the Respondent argues that Mr. Osborne chose 2001
because it is the date of EFDG’s financial peak, the “year just before the straight-
line drop” in the financials, “so it's helpful to come up with a big number” (Tr., Day
13, 250 (Rubins)).

The Respondent also denies that Mr. Ellison confirmed a nil value for the EFDG
today. The Respondent asserts that Mr. Ellison said that the value could be nil,
but as he had not seen any audited financial statements for the EFDG since
2006, “he could say nothing about the state of EFDG's business today, and [the
Tribunal] can't know because of the absence of documentation” (Tr., Day 13, 250
(Rubins)). Indeed, the Respondent asserts that, in their closing statements, the
Claimants stated that the EFDG’s business had been improving in 20097 and
that this was also confirmed by a better EBITDA in the financials (Tr., Day 13,
250-251 (Rubins)).

The Respondent also notes that, according to Mr. Ellison, there was substantial
shareholder equity in the business according to the 2009 draft financial
statements, which suggests substantial remaining value for the Micula brothers.
Specifically, the Respondent states that “[a]ccording to the draft 2009 accounts,
shareholder equity was RON 461.7 million; [...] €109 million roughly. So by
assuming a zero value today, which is what Mr. Osborne does, he was asking
you to ignore that €109 million are there, and the claimants would be likely to
access that money on liquidation” (Tr., Day 13, 252 (Rubins)).

The Respondent notes that, in their closing statements, the Claimants admitted that “on operating

profits the company has actually performed better in 2009 than in 2008, although not well enough to
meet their debt repayment obligations” (Tr., Day 12, 119 (Reed), and that “[t]hese are basically more
or less sound businesses but crippled by debt. If the debt were relieved, things might be better” (Tr.,
Day 12, 139 (Reed)).

339

1226.

1227.

1228.

Instead, the Respondent argues that the proper way to value the Individual Claimants’
losses would have been “to perform a DCF valuation of the claimants’ business as it
was just before repeal and as it would have been with the €8 million per year in
facilities through 2009”, because this would have allowed the Tribunal to isolate the
effect of the revocation. The Respondent “infer[s] that the result of such conventional
modelling would have revealed the limited direct impact on equity value” (Tr., Day 13,
251-252 (Rubins)).

The Respondent concludes that, “[o]n this record, the only damages that have been
quantified are damages allegedly incurred by EFDG companies, not all of which are
claimants. The Tribunal should ensure that only damages proven to have been
incurred by each Corporate Claimant are awarded to the specific Corporate Claimant
that incurred them. [...] [DJamages allegedly incurred by other entities cannot be
recovered by any of the Claimants” (R-PHB, {| 350).

In response to questions from the Tribunal, the Claimants clarified that, if the Tribunal
were inclined to award damages to all five Claimants, the damages suffered by the
Individual Claimants may not be coextensive with those suffered by the Corporate
Claimants:

a. With respect to the reliance losses claim, the Corporate Claimants could not
make the same claim as the Individual Claimants, because the reliance loss is
calculated on the loss of value to all companies of the EFDG (Tr., Day 12, 129
(Reed)), not all of which are claimants here. Possibly somewhat contradictorily,
the Claimants have also argued that, should the Tribunal award reliance
damages, it would be inappropriate to award these damages to the Corporate
Claimants. This is because the reliance damages approach looks at the value
lost from the pre-EGO 24 businesses as a result of investing in reliance on the
incentives. As the Corporate Claimants were specifically created in order to
receive the incentives, had the Individual Claimants not invested in reliance on
the incentives, it is likely that the Corporate Claimants would have never been
created and thus would have never incurred a reliance loss (C-PHB, {| 253).

b. For similar reasons, should the Tribunal award damages by looking at the fair
market value of the investment immediately before the breach, the Claimants
contend that such an award ought to be made to the Individual Claimants to
compensate them for the loss in value of their business (C-PHB, {| 254).

c. With respect to expectation losses, counsel for the Claimants first stated that
“they would not be coextensive if much of the loss was suffered outside of the
three [C]orporate [C]laimants”, but then clarified that “they may be more or less
the same”, depending on which company had suffered most of the damages,
adding that in his understanding “most of the expectation damages would have
been suffered by European Food” (Tr., Day 12, 129-130 (Reed)).

340

1229.

1230.

1231.

1232.

1233.

The Tribunal’s analysis with respect to the requested allocation of damages

a. The Clai te that all be ded to the Individual
Claimants

 

The Tribunal rejects, for procedural reasons, the Claimants’ request that all damages
be awarded to the Individual Claimants.

Relying on Suez v. Argentina, the Claimants contend that, as “the Individual
Claimants could have brought their claims independently without the participation of
the Corporate Claimants in the first instance [...] there is no legal basis why the
Individual Claimants cannot become the sole or principal claimants at this stage” (C-
PHB, { 241).

That the Individual Claimants could have brought claims on a stand-alone basis is not
in dispute. However, the Tribunal disagrees with the consequences that the
Claimants purport to derive from that observation. It is true that in Suez v. Argentina
the tribunal, applying Rule 44 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules,” allowed the local
company to withdraw its claim leaving only the shareholders as claimants.?®
However, the local company in that case elected to pursue a very different route than
that followed by the Corporate Claimants in this case. First, the investment vehicle
expressly withdrew its claim and sought a discontinuance of the proceeding. Second,
upon Argentina's request, the local company supplied the minutes of their
shareholders meeting authorizing that discontinuance. Third, having received those
assurances, Argentina consented to the discontinuance.

Here the situation is quite different. The Corporate Claimants have not requested the
discontinuance of the proceedings with respect to their claims. Quite to the contrary,
the Corporate Claimants are still seeking alternative relief in case the Tribunal
decides not to grant all damages to the Individual Claimants. As a result, Rule 44 is
simply not applicable to the situation at hand.

Even if the Claimants’ request could be interpreted as an implied request for a
discontinuance with respect to the Corporate Claimants (quod non, because they
have expressly stated that they are not seeking a discontinuance), the conditions set
out by Rule 44 would not be satisfied because Romania has objected to such a
discontinuance. Indeed, Romania has expressly stated that it will not consent to any
resolution that would permit the Corporate Claimants to revive at a later date the
claims or the relief that they have pursued (or could have pursued) in this proceeding,
or without compensation for wasted costs.

265 ICSID Arbitration Rule 44 provides: “If a party requests the discontinuance of the proceeding, the
Tribunal, or the Secretary-General if the Tribunal has not yet been constituted, shall in an order fix a
time limit within which the other party may state whether it opposes the discontinuance. If no objection
is made in writing within the time limit, the other party shall be deemed to have acquiesced in the
discontinuance and the Tribunal, or if appropriate the Secretary-General, shall in an order take note of
the discontinuance of the proceeding. If objection is made, the proceeding shall continue.”

268 Suez v. Argentina, 451.

341

1234.

1235.

1236.

1237.

1238.

1239.

Rule 44 provides that if an objection is made, the “proceeding shall continue”,
regardless of the nature of the objection, or whether it is justified or not. In this case,
moreover, Romania’s objections are more than reasonable.

As the Corporate Claimants have not discontinued their claims, it follows that they are
not waiving their claims against Romania and, in fact, definitely maintain them in the
event that the Tribunal should not make the award fully payable to the Individual
Claimants. Moreover, there is nothing in the Claimants’ submissions that could
amount to a conditional waiver (that is, a waiver conditioned upon the Individual
Claimants obtaining the requested relief). Even if the Corporate Claimants had
indicated that they waived their claims against Romania, there is no evidence in the
record establishing that such waiver would be valid, in particular under Romanian law
(for instance, there are no shareholders’ minutes or board resolutions from the
Corporate Claimants or their shareholders authorizing such a waiver). In these
circumstances, the Tribunal agrees with Romania that it is entitled to an award with
res judicata effect against the Corporate Claimants.

In the Tribunal’s view, whether the Individual Claimants could have been entitled to
bring this case independently, without the participation of the Corporate Claimants, is
irrelevant. They did not choose to do so. The fact is that this arbitration was
commenced and pursued by five Claimants, all of whom have requested relief to this
Tribunal. The Corporate Claimants have sought the same relief as the Individual
Claimants and have not withdrawn their claims. The Tribunal must thus decide the
claims raised by the five Claimants and not only the claims raised by two of them.

All five Claimants have requested monetary relief. The Tribunal having found liability,
the Claimants’ request to have all damages awarded to the Individual Claimants
would thus deprive the Corporate Claimants of a right (credit or account payable) to
the relief requested. This would amount to the Corporate Claimants suffering a loss
in the amounts owed in favor of their shareholders, which is particularly serious
considering that the Claimants allege that the Corporate Claimants are unable to pay
their debts. The Corporate Claimants would have to give their valid consent to such a
conveyance, for instance, through an assignment of their claims to the Individual
Claimants, an assignment that would have to comply with the relevant provisions of
Romanian law. There is no evidence in the record that they have done so. Thus, as
things stand, the Tribunal cannot disregard the Corporate Claimants’ requests for
relief.

For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal rejects the Claimants’ request for all
damages to be awarded to the Individual Claimants.

b. Allocation of damages to all five Claimants

As previously explained, in calculating the total damages, the Tribunal has decided to
follow the Claimants’ primary damages methodology, which quantified expectation
damages for the entire EFDG. The Tribunal has found that the Claimants have
proven two groups of damages: (i) increased costs of raw materials (sugar, other raw
materials other than PET, and the sugar stockpile) for a total of RON 120,733,229

342

(Section VII.C.2), and (ii) lost profits of RON 255,700,000 on the sale of finished
goods (Section VII.C.3 above).

1240. The Tribunal still must consider whether, and how, the damages should be allocated
among the five Claimants. The Tribunal has carefully considered the arguments of
both sides. As discussed above, the Tribunal has concluded that (i) it cannot award
the entirety of the damages to the Individual Claimants. For the reasons set out
below, the Tribunal has also concluded that it cannot (ii) award the entirety of the
damages to the Corporate Claimants; (iii) allocate the damages to each of the five
Claimants; or (iv) without double counting, compensate the Corporate Claimants for
the direct harm they suffered and compensate the Individual Claimants for the indirect
harm they suffered. As a result, the Tribunal shall not allocate the damages but shall
award the entirety of the damages to the five Claimants collectively.

1241. First, for the reasons set out in Section (a) above, the Tribunal cannot award the
entirety of the damages to the Individual Claimants.

1242. Second, the Tribunal cannot award the entirety of the damages to the Corporate
Claimants, for the simple reason that a portion of the damages are associated with
other companies that the Individual Claimants own. The Corporate Claimants are not
entitled to compensation for such damages.

1243. Third, in Method A, the Claimants’ principal expectation damages scenario (which the
Tribunal has chosen to follow for the reasons set out in Section VII.C.1 above), the
Claimants have made no attempt to allocate the damages among the five Claimants
other than to request that the total damages be split evenly between the Individual
Claimants.”°’ In addition, it is evident from the reports prepared by the Claimants’
experts and from their oral testimony that, for each head of claim, they have
quantified the losses for the entire EFDG, including damages suffered by the non-
claimant companies.” While counsel for the Claimants asserted at the hearing on

°87 The Tribunal is aware that, at paragraph 258 of their Post-Hearing Brief, the Claimants stated that
their secondary position was that “any ‘reliance’ damages, or damages calculated on the basis of the
fair market value immediately before the alleged breach, awarded should be awarded to the Individual
Claimants and any other damages should be awarded to all of the Claimants” (C-PHB, § 258).
However, the Claimants have not made a formal prayer for this relief. Even if this statement could be
construed to be a prayer for relief, the Tribunal rejects it on the merits. First, the Tribunal has not
awarded any reliance damages nor damages based on the fair market value of the Claimants’
investments immediately before the breach. In addition to favoring the Claimants’ expectations
damages case (as discussed in Section VII.C.1 above), the Tribunal does not find that the record
contains a reliable quantification of the fair market value of the Claimants’ investments immediately
before the breach. The Tribunal understands that Mr. Osborne's analysis of reliance losses does not
attempt to quantify the fair market value of the Claimants’ business before the breach, but rather the
value of the Claimants’ pre-EGO 24 business, that is, money they could have invested elsewhere if
they had not invested in reliance on the incentives. Even if Mr. Osborne’s quantification could be
understood to be a proxy for the fair market value of the business before the breach, the Tribunal
cannot accept it, as the valuation date chosen by Mr. Osborne (2001) predates the revocation by over
three years. In any event, the Claimants have not demonstrated how these reliance damages would
be compatible with other damages, nor provided sufficient support for the allocation requested.

288 See, e.g., First ER of D. Lessard, § 72-73; Tr., Day 8, 118-121 (Lessard); First ER of C. Osborne,
fn. 1 and Appendix 2 (definition of “Companies”); ER of R. Boulton, p. i (definition of “Companies”);
Second ER of BCG, p. 2; Tr., Day 10, 88-89 (Osborne).

 

343

closing arguments that “most of the expectation damages would have been suffered
by European Food” (Tr., Day 12, 130 (Reed)) and Prof. Lessard testified along the
same lines during the merits hearing (Tr., Day 8, 118-121), neither the Claimants nor
their experts have provided a figure for the damages suffered by each Claimant, or
stated in what proportion these damages should be distributed. Nor does the record
contain clear elements that would allow the Tribunal to carry out such an allocation.
There is, therefore, no evidentiary basis for allocating the damages.

1244. The Respondent argues that the Claimants’ failure to quantify damages for each
Claimant is reason to deny the payment of some or all of the damages. According to
the Respondent, “the only damages that have been quantified are damages allegedly
incurred by EFDG companies, not all of which are claimants. The Tribunal should
ensure that only damages proven to have been incurred by each Corporate Claimant
are awarded to the specific Corporate Claimant that incurred them. [...] [Damages
allegedly incurred by other entities cannot be recovered by any of the Claimants” (R-
PHB, {| 350). The Respondent further argues that the Individual Claimants cannot be
awarded damages suffered by the EFDG companies, because “damage to the
Corporate Claimants’ assets cannot be equated with damage to the Individual
Claimants’ shares in the Corporate Claimants” (R-PHB, § 336). Instead, the
Respondent submits that “[s]hareholder damages are limited to losses suffered by the
shareholder himself, such as any losses in the value of his shares or lost dividends”
(R-PHB, $344).

1245. The Tribunal has found that the Claimants have quantified the damage suffered by
the entire EFDG, of which the Corporate Claimants are a part and of which the
Individual Claimants own at least 99.96%. In the circumstances of this case, the
Tribunal does not find that the Claimants’ failure to specify and prove the exact
quantum of damages suffered by each one of the five Claimants is sufficient reason
to deny the payment of the damages that have been quantified. The Tribunal is
satisfied that some or most of the damage was directly suffered by the Corporate
Claimants, and that virtually all of the damage was indirectly suffered by the Individual
Claimants. There is nothing inconsistent between those two conclusions. Indeed,
while the Tribunal will not enter into the discussion of whether shareholder damages
are equivalent to the damages suffered by the underlying company,” the Tribunal is
satisfied that, given the size of the Individual Claimants’ shareholding in the EFDG
companies, the Individual Claimants indirectly suffered at least a large part, if not
virtually all, of the damage suffered directly by the Corporate Claimants.
Furthermore, the Tribunal has already found that, provided that the Individual
Claimants can prove their ownership of the other companies in the EFDG and can
prove that they have been affected in this regard by the Respondent’s breaches of
the BIT, they can claim for losses they have suffered indirectly through those
companies (see Section VII.B.2 supra). The Tribunal has further found that the
Individual Claimants have met that burden and are, therefore, entitled to damages
suffered by the non-claimant EFDG entities as well. Having established that both the
Corporate and Individual Claimants were harmed, the Tribunal is not comfortable with

269 If the Tribunal had to address this matter, it would not do so unanimously.

344

1246.

1247.

1248.

declining to award damages to one group or the other simply because it lacks the
information needed to allocate the damages among them.

Fourth, on the current record, the Tribunal cannot separately award damages to the
Corporate Claimants for their direct damages, and damages to the Individual
Claimants for their indirect damages. In Method A, the Claimants have only
quantified the direct damages suffered by the entire EFDG. The Tribunal has no
basis to distinguish which part of those damages has been suffered directly by the
Corporate Claimants, and which part has been suffered indirectly by the Individual
Claimants as a result of their shareholdings in non-claimant companies of the EFDG.
Nor can the Tribunal award the Corporate Claimants all of the direct damages
quantified in Method A, and in addition award the Individual Claimants the reliance
damages quantified in Method C.?”° To do so would result in double recovery.

Given these constraints, the Tribunal concludes that the appropriate way forward is,
as the Claimants suggest, to award any damages, interest and costs to all five
Claimants collectively, without allocating the damages among them. The Tribunal
believes that this conclusion is particularly appropriate given that neither party has
actually prayed for a particular allocation of damages among the five Claimants. The
Claimants have requested that all damages be awarded to the Individual Claimants
or, alternatively, to all five Claimants. They have not proffered adequate evidence or
legal arguments to support a particular allocation. The Respondent also has not
sought any particular allocation, other than to oppose Claimants’ request that
damages be awarded to the Individual Claimants. This Award thus disposes of the
total amount that Romania has to pay fully to discharge its obligations and does not
deal with the specific entitlement of each Claimant individually.

A tribunal should not pass judgment on what has not been claimed. In particular, if
two or more claimants fail to request a specific allocation of damages and rather claim
for common entitlement, there is no reason for a tribunal to determine which claimant
is entitled to what, subject of course to counterclaims or defenses made by the
respondent in this regard.

270 In addition, the Tribunal has rejected Method C, for the reasons set out in Section C.1 and fn. 267

above.

345

Vill.

1249.

1250.

INTEREST

A. INTRODUCTION

Up until their Reply, the Claimants requested “post-award interest (until the date
Romania pays in full) at the highest possible lawful rate” (C-Reply, § 657).
Claimants further requested that this interest be compounded, arguing that compound
interest is the generally accepted standard in international investment arbitrations (C-

Reply, 9] 657-658).

However, in their Revised Request for Relief the Claimants requested “[a]n award of
interest on the damages payable pursuant to paragraph 2 above calculated in the

following manner:

3.1

3.2

3.3

3.4

3.5

3.6

3.7

3.8

For losses as described in paragraphs 2.1(a) to (c) above [i.e.,
increased cost of raw materials], interest compounded on a quarterly
basis at a rate of 3 month ROBOR (Romanian Interbank Offer Rate)
plus 5% from 1 March 2007 until the date of Romania's full and final
satisfaction of the award.

For losses as described in paragraph 2.1(d) above [i.e., lost
opportunity to stockpile sugar], interest compounded on a quarterly
basis at a rate of 3 month ROBOR plus 5% from 1 July 2010 until the
date of Romania’s full and final satisfaction of the award.

For penalties as described in paragraph 2.2A above [i.e., tax
penalties already paid by the Claimants], interest compounded on a
quarterly basis at a rate of 3 month ROBOR plus 5% from 1 July
2007 until the date of Romania’s full and final satisfaction of the
award.

For losses as described in paragraph 2.3 above [i.e., lost profits on
sales of finished goods], interest compounded on a quarterly basis at
arate of 3 month ROBOR plus 5% from 1 May 2008 until the date of
Romania's full and final satisfaction of the award.

For losses as described in paragraph 2.4 above [i.e., lost sales of
SCPs to third parties], interest compounded on a quarterly basis at a
rate of 3 month ROBOR plus 5% from 1 March 2007 until the date of
Romania's full and final satisfaction of the award.

For losses as described in paragraph 2.5 above [i.e., lost profits
incurred due to the Claimants’ inability to complete the Incremental
Investments], interest compounded on a quarterly basis at a rate of 3
month ROBOR plus 5% from 30 September 2009 until the date of
Romania's full and final satisfaction of the award.

For losses as described in paragraph 2.6 above [i.e., the Claimants’
alternative claim for lost sales on finished goods as calculated by
BCG], interest compounded on a quarterly basis at a rate of 3 month
ROBOR plus 5% from 15 August 2007 until the date of Romania's
full and final satisfaction of the award.

For the amounts lost by the Claimants as a result of investing in

reliance on the Incentives as described in paragraph 2.7 above [i.e.,
the Claimants’ alternative claim for reliance losses], interest to be

346

1251.

1252.

1253.

1254.

applied compounded on a quarterly basis at a rate of 3 month
ROBOR plus 5% from 1 January 2002 until the date of Romania’s full
and final satisfaction of the award.

3.9 The ROBOR rate to be applied in relation to paragraphs 3.1 to 3.8
above is to be the average annual rate for each year or part thereof.

The Respondent objected to the Claimants’ specified interest claim, but in its
Procedural Order of 6 April 2011, the Tribunal found that there had been “no
detrimental reformulation of the Claimants’ claim for interest” (P.O. of 6 April 2011,
3.2). The Tribunal does not see any good cause to change its view and, accordingly,
will address the Claimants’ request for interest as it was formulated in their Revised
Request for Relief, to the extent that it refers to the heads of claim for which the
Tribunal has decided to award damages.

B. THE CLAIMANTS’ POSITION

The Claimants request pre- and post-award interest at 3-month ROBOR plus 5%,
compounded on a quarterly basis (Revised Request for Relief, § 3; R-PHB, § 261).
The Claimants submit that this interest should be calculated from different starting
dates depending on the head of claim, and run until the date of Romania’s full and
final satisfaction of the award (Revised Request for Relief, { 3).

With respect to their request that interest be compounded, the Claimants argue that
compound interest is the generally accepted standard in international investment
arbitrations. In this respect, the Claimants note that since 2000, 16 out of 17 BIT
tribunals ruling on BIT cases have awarded compound interest®”' (C-Reply, ({] 657-
658).

The Claimants submit that there are three reasons for awarding compound interest.
First, the payment of compound interest “furthers the principle of full compensation
because it aids in restoring the claimant to the position where it would have been had
the respondent not committed the breach” (C-Reply, 4 662). They add that “[t]he role
of interest is to compensate a claimant fully for the delay between the date of harm
suffered and the award of damages. [...] [I]nterest awarded on a compound basis
more accurately reflects what the claimant would have been able to earn on the sums
owed if they had been paid in a timely manner” (C-Reply, § 663). Second, the
Claimants argue that an award of compound interest “prevents unjust enrichment of
the respondent by requiring it to pay compensation for the benefits received from
using the money it wrongfully withheld” (/d.) Third, the Claimants argue that awarding

2"! The Claimants cite, inter alia, Santa Elena v. Costa Rica, J 104; Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab
Republic of Egypt (I\CSID Case No. ARB/98/4), Award, 8 December 2000 (hereinafter “Wena Hotels v.
Egypt” or “Wena’), Vivendi v. Argentina Il, § 9.2.6; LG&E v. Argentina, Award, 25 July 2007, § 103;
Middle East Cement Shipping and Handling Co. S.A. v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No.
ARB/99/6), Award, 12 April 2002, § 174; ADC Affiliate Limited and ADC & ADMC Management Limited
v. Republic of Hungary (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/16), Award, 2 October 2006, § 522; Azurix v.
Argentina, § 440, PSEG v. Turkey, § 354; Enron v. Argentina, 4§ 451-52; CMS v. Argentina, § 471;
Waguih Elie George Siag and Clorinda Vecchi v. Arab Republic of Egypt (\CSID Case No.
ARB/05/15), Award, 1 June 2009, 598.

347

1255.

1256.

1257.

272

simple interest generally fails to compensate claimants fully, because the claimant is
in essence making interest-free loans to the respondent. This in turn creates an
incentive for respondents to delay the proceedings because they are able to profit
from the use of the claimant's money during the pendency of the arbitration (or
enforcement proceedings) (C-Reply, {{] 663-664). ?”

With respect to the requested rate (ROBOR + 5%), the Claimants argue that this is
the approximate rate at which they borrowed money during the relevant period. The
Claimants acknowledge that the 5% above ROBOR is higher than that at which
interest has been awarded in several other ICSID cases (which has tended to be 2%
above LIBOR). However, the Claimants argue that in those cases the claimants were
large, multinational companies, with greater access to funding, at lower rates, than
the Claimants, who are not international companies and cannot borrow at only 2
points above the interbank offer rate. Thus, the Claimants argue that a higher rate is
required in order to reflect the Claimants’ higher actual borrowing costs and ensure
that they are adequately compensated for the Respondent's breaches (C-PHB, 4
262).

In the Claimants’ view, the Respondent’s objections to an interest rate based on
ROBOR are unsustainable. They argue that “ROBOR is the rate at which banks lend
to each other, that is set by the market and which accurately reflects Romania's
underlying economic conditions. Therefore at times of high inflation, which occurred
in Romania in the period relevant to this dispute, it is logical that ROBOR rose
accordingly, including to 30% at one point. However, due to the manner in which
ROBOR is calculated and applied, it cannot sensibly be contended that it is not an
appropriate rate for the calculation of interest when a claimant borrows from
Romanian banks and/or borrows in RON” (C-PHB, { 263). The Claimants add that “in
the period 2005 to date (which is the period relevant to the Claimants’ expectation
damages claim), the average (mean) 3 month ROBOR rate was only approximately
8.9%, which is considerably below the 30% rate which the Respondent would have
the Tribunal believe was the norm. In fact, for extended periods since 2005 the 3
month ROBOR rate has been below 5%. Tellingly, as at 10 January 2011 (the date
of Freshfields’ letter objecting to the Detailed Request), the 3 month ROBOR rate was
only 5.16%” (C-PHB, { 264). Finally, the Claimants note that Romania has charged
the Claimants a penalty interest on unpaid taxes “at a consistent annual rate of 36.5%
(with an effective rate in excess of 40%)”, arguing that “[i]f anything, the Claimants’
use of ROBOR rates as the basis for their calculations is conservative when
juxtaposed to the punitive, draconian interest rates imposed on the Claimants by the
Respondent” (/d.).

With respect to the date from which interest must be calculated on the damages
awarded by the Tribunal, the Claimants argue that “each date is the approximate
midpoint between the time the relevant loss or damage began to be incurred and the

The Claimants cite Jeffrey Colén and Michael Knoll, Prejudgment Interest In International

Arbitration, Vol. 4, Issue 6, TRANSNATIONAL DISPUTE MANAGEMENT 10 (Nov. 2007), and John Y.
Gotanda, A Study of Interest, Villanova University School of Law Working Paper Series, Paper 83, at 4

(2007).

348

time when that loss or damage would have ceased to have been suffered” (C-Reply,
4/265). Specifically:

a. With respect to the claims for increased cost of sugar, PET and other raw
materials, the Claimants claim interest calculated from 1 March 2007. This date
is “approximately the midpoint between the time at which the Incentives were
prematurely revoked (22 February 2005) and the time when the Incentives were
due to come to an end (31 March 2009)” (C-Reply, § 265(a)).

b. With respect to the claim for the lost opportunity to stockpile sugar in 2009, the
Claimants request an award of interest calculated from 1 July 2010. According to
the Claimants, this is “the approximate midpoint between the time when the sugar
stockpile would have started being used (31 March 2009) and the time, based on
Mr Osborne’s calculations, when it would have all been used (31 August 2011)”
(C-Reply, | 265(b)).

c. With respect to their claim for lost profits on sales of finished goods, the
Claimants claim interest from 1 May 2008, which is the approximate midpoint of
the period for which Mr Boulton has calculated losses (1 January 2005 to 31
August 2011)” (C-Reply, 4 265(d)).

1258. According to the Claimants, “[t]he midpoint provides a sensible and practical date
from which the Tribunal may make its calculations” (C-Reply, § 266). It notes that this
approach has been adopted by other tribunals, such as the tribunals in PSEG v.
Turkey (where the tribunal chose the mean date of the seven year period during
which the relevant expenses were incurred’’*), and Nykomb v. Latvia (where the
tribunal awarded interest “from the mid point of the respective periods up to the time
of the award”?”’).

c. THE RESPONDENT’S POSITION

1259. The Respondent argues that the Claimants’ interest claim should be rejected with
respect to the interest rate, compounding and date of calculation (R-PHB, { 325-
328).

1260. With respect to the interest rate, the Respondent contends that the rate requested by
the Claimants (ROBOR + 5%) is far higher than that awarded by other investment
arbitration tribunals, and could end up yielding a rate as high as 30%. The
Respondent argues that this rate is at odds with the rates used by their own experts,
noting that Mr. Osborne used EFDG’s RON cost of debt for pre-award interest (about
11% according to Mr. Osborne, First Osborne Report, § 4.10), whereas Professor
Lessard applied ROBOR without any premium (First ER of D. Lessard, § 111). The
Respondent further argues that “the proposed rate is based on speculation as to what
the Claimants’ borrowing costs could be, rather than on their actual borrowing costs”

773 PSEG v. Turkey, 1 349-351.
274 Nykomb v. Latvia, p. 43.

349

1261.

1262.

1263.

1264.

(R-PHB, {| 326). According to the Respondent, the record on the EFDG’s borrowing
costs “reveals a rate of 5.88% for foreign currency and 10.75% for borrowings in
RON” (EFDG combined financial statements for the year 2006, 31 December 2006,
Exh. JMHE-8, p 27), which is consistent with Mr. Gamecho’s testimony that the
Claimants had access to financing at rates of less than 5.5% (Tr., Day 4, 54
(Gamecho)). The Respondent further contends that there is no justification for the
5% premium.

The Respondent also objects to a rate based on ROBOR. It argues that the fact the
Claimants’ claims are made in RON does not mean that the Tribunal must use a
RON-based interest rate for pre-award interest. The Respondent argues that the
Claimants had substantial loans in Euros and purchased many of their imports in
Euros. The Respondent contends that “the Claimants are subject to the inherent
currency risks of their business”, and thus “[iJt is not for Romania to subsidise that risk
through payment of a higher interest rate. Therefore, only a pre-award interest rate
that takes into account the fact that the Claimants can borrow in Euro would be
appropriate” (R-PHB, {| 327).

Further, the Respondent argues that any award of interest should be on a simple
rather than compound basis. The Respondent relies on the Commentary to ILC
Article 38, which states that “[t]he general view of courts and tribunals has been
against the award of compound interest, and this is true even of those tribunals which
hold claimants to be normally entitled to compensatory interest. [...] [G]iven the
present state of international law it cannot be said that an injured [party] has any
entitlement to compound interest, in the absence of special circumstances which
justify some element of compounding as an aspect of full reparation.”””> The
Respondent also relies on ADM v. Mexico,?”° Feldman v. Mexico,?’’ Biloune v.
Ghana,””* and Occidental v. Ecuador’”® (R-Rejoinder, § 351, fn. 560).

In view of the above, the Respondent submits that “the interest rate the Tribunal
should apply for pre-award interest (the purpose of which is compensatory) is 3-
month EURIBOR without any premium and on a simple basis” (R-PHB, § 327). The
Respondent further submits that “any post-award interest should be set a 3-month
ROBOR, without any premium, and on a simple basis.” The Respondent does not
make entirely clear the reasons for the difference in approach between pre- and post-
award interest, nor does it explain further or in more detail why it should be awarded
on a simple basis.

The Respondent further contends that the Claimants have manipulated the starting
dates for the calculation of interest in order to maximize their claim. It argues that
“[tlhe selection of a mid-point date inflates the claim in this case in circumstances

278 Commentary to ILC Article 38, 4 8-9.

278 Archer Daniels Midland Company and Tate & Lyle v United Mexican States (ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/04/05), Award, 21 November 2007, {§ 294-297.

277 Feldman v. Mexico, J 205, 206 and 211.

278 Biloune v. Ghana, pp 230 and 231.

278 Occidental v. Ecuador, § 211.

350

1265.

1266.

1267.

1268.

1269.

where the largest of the Claimants’ alleged losses occurred after this arbitrary point in
time. For example, selecting a mid-point start date in respect of sugar purchases
ignores the fact that most sugar purchases were actually made in later years” (R-
PHB, 4 328). The Respondent adds that “it would not have been difficult for the
Claimants to present interest calculations starting from the dates when losses were
allegedly suffered”, as Prof. Lessard did in his calculations (/d.).

D. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

Having found a breach of the BIT, the Tribunal must ensure that the Claimants are
restored to the position they would have been had the breach not occurred. This
includes awarding interest on the sums that the Claimants would have had if the
breach had not occurred in order to compensate for the cost of money until the full
payment of the Award. The Respondent does not dispute the principle that interest
must be awarded; rather, it objects to the rate, compounding and date of calculation
proposed by the Claimants.

Simple versus compound interest

The overwhelming trend among investment tribunals is to award compound rather
than simple interest. The reason is that an award of damages (including interest)
must place the claimant in the position it would have been had it never been injured.
As noted by the Wena tribunal, “almost all financing and investment vehicles involve
compound interest. [...] If the claimant could have received compound interest merely
by placing its money in a readily available and commonly used investment vehicle, it
is neither logical nor equitable to award the claimant only simple interest.”°° The
Commentary to ILC Article 38, on which the Respondent relies to object to compound
interest, does not reflect the recent tribunal practice, with which the Tribunal agrees.

The Tribunal will thus award compound interest, at the rate determined below.
Rate

The Claimants request the same treatment for both pre- and post-award interest (3-
month ROBOR plus 5%, compounded on a quarterly basis), starting from different
dates depending on the claim. The Respondent requests that (i) pre-award interest
be granted at a rate of 3-month EURIBOR without any premium and on a simple
basis, while (ii) post-award interest should be set at 3-month ROBOR, without any
premium, also on a simple basis.

As a preliminary matter, the Tribunal does not see why the cost of the deprivation of
money (which interest compensates) should be different before and after the Award,
and neither Party has convinced it otherwise. Both are awarded to compensate a
party for the deprivation of the use of its funds. The Tribunal will thus award pre- and
post-award interest at the same rate.

289 Wena Hotels v. Egypt, § 129 (citing John Y. Gotanda, Awarding Interest in International Arbitration,
90 Amer. J. Int'l L., 40, 61 (1996).

351

1270.

1271.

1272.

1273.

The Tribunal agrees with the Claimants that the appropriate rate is that which would
compensate them for their cost of borrowing money during the relevant period. In the
Tribunal’s view, the Corporate Claimants’ cost of debt should be assessed on the
basis of operations in RON: the Claimants are Romanian nationals with their principal
place of business in Romania, and the fact that they could borrow in Euro does not
detract that the currency in the place where they operate was and remains RON.

The Respondent objects to using a ROBOR-based rate, arguing that at times it has
risen as high as 30% (R-PHB, § 325). It has not provided any sufficient evidence for
this allegation, but the Claimants appear to accept that this in fact occurred at one
point in time (C-PHB, {| 263). In turn, the Claimants argue that in the period 2005 to
the date of their Post-Hearing Brief, the average (mean) 3-month ROBOR rate was
approximately 8.9%. This allegation is similarly insufficiently supported. This lack of
evidence on the actual ROBOR rates is, however, irrelevant: as the Claimants note,
the ROBOR rate is the rate at which Romanian banks lend to each other, and
commercial borrowing rates will usually thus be ROBOR plus a premium. It is thus
highly likely that any borrowing by the Claimants in Romania between 2005 and the
date of payment of the award would have been and will be subject to a ROBOR-
based interest rate plus a premium. In any event, the rates reflected in the record
(10.75% for RON-based operations for 2006, 13.8% for those operations in 2005,
according to the Corporate Claimants’ 2006 financials (Exh. JMHE-8, p. 27) and 11%
according to Mr. Osborne (First ER of C. Osborne, § 4.10)), are closer to the
Claimants’ allegation that the mean 3-month ROBOR rate during the relevant period
was 8.9%, than to the 30% rate alleged by the Respondent. Accordingly, the Tribunal
finds that a 3-month ROBOR plus a reasonable premium, compounded on a quarterly
basis, is reasonable, 3-month ROBOR being computed at an average annual rate to
be applied for each period of one year or part of a year.

The question that remains is what premium is reasonable. The Claimants request 5%
above the ROBOR rate. They argue that, because they are not international
companies, they cannot borrow at only 2 points above the interbank offer rate (which
is the premium that has been awarded by other investment tribunals). The Tribunal
finds this argument persuasive: the Claimants probably would not have obtained
better conditions. The Tribunal will thus award interest at 3-month ROBOR plus 5%,
compounded on a quarterly basis.

Date of calculation

Interest must be calculated from the date on which the loss was suffered. This is
usually the day on which the breach occurs. This cannot be the case or, at least, is
not easily practicable when the damage is suffered progressively after the date of the
breach, as has happened here. After the revocation of the incentives became
effective on 22 February 2005, the Claimants incurred their damages progressively:
they progressively purchased raw materials at a higher price, thus progressively
incurring higher costs, and they progressively lost profits that they could have earned
on the sales of their own finished goods. With respect to the lost opportunity to

352

1274.

1275.

1276.

stockpile sugar in 2009, because they were unable to stockpile sugar at that time,
they progressively bought sugar at a higher price.

Under the circumstances, the Tribunal finds that the midpoint approach proposed by
the Claimants is appropriate. Despite the Respondent's arguments, it would have
been difficult and next to impossible for the Claimants to point out to the exact date on
which this damage was suffered, while at the same time, damage has definitely been
proved to exist during that period. Indeed, a part of the damage may have been
suffered every day since the revocation. The Tribunal also notes that this midpoint
approach has been used by other investment tribunals.”*' And it does not seem that
there exist circumstances in this arbitration that should detract as a matter of principle
from this approach: for instance, the record does not point to a use of the stockpile
that should not have been evenly spread over the months concerned (in which case
the "midpoint approach" could lead to distortions).

Finally, with respect to lost profits, the Tribunal is aware that, according to the
Commentary to ILC Article 38, “[w]here a sum for loss of profits is included as part of
the compensation for the injury caused by a wrongful act, an award of interest will be
inappropriate if the injured State would thereby obtain double recovery”, because “[a]
capital sum cannot be earning interest and notionally employed in earning profits at
one and the same time” (Commentary to ILC Article 38, 4 11). However, the
Commentary goes on to say that “interest may be due on the profits which would
have been earned but which have been withheld from the original owner.” The
Tribunal understands that, by awarding interest on lost profits on sales of finished
goods as of the midpoint in which the total quantified would have been earned,
interest is only applied to amounts that would have been earned but were withheld
from the Claimants.

Accordingly, the Tribunal awards interest, at 3-month ROBOR, the ROBOR being
computed at an average annual rate to be applied for each period of one year or part
of a year, plus 5%, compounded on a quarterly basis, calculated from the following
dates until full payment of the award:

a. With respect to the claims for increased cost of sugar and other raw materials,
interest shall be calculated from 1 March 2007, which is the approximate midpoint
between the time at which the EGO 24 incentives were revoked (22 February
2005) and the time when the incentives were due to expire (31 March 2009).

b. With respect to the claim for the lost opportunity to stockpile sugar in 2009,
interest shall be calculated from 1 November 2009, which is the approximate
midpoint between the time when the sugar stockpile would have started being
used (31 March 2009) and the time, when it would have all been used (1 July
2010). The Tribunal is aware that, according to Mr. Osborne's calculations, the
Claimants’ optimal stockpile of 75,000 tonnes would have been used by 31
August 2011 (First ER of C. Osborne, 4.10). However, the Tribunal has

°8! See, e.g., PSEG v Turkey, § 349-351; Nykomb v. Latvia, p. 43.

353

awarded this claim on the basis of Mr. Ellison’s calculations, which account for a
smaller stockpile of 30,000 tonnes. The Tribunal has thus adjusted Mr.
Osborne’s timing forecast to this smaller amount.

With respect to the claim for lost profits on sales of finished goods, the interest
shall be calculated from 1 May 2008, which is the approximate midpoint of the
period for which Mr Boulton calculated losses (1 January 2005 to 31 August
2011) (C-Reply,  265(d)).

354

1277.

1278.

1279.

1280.

1281.

1282.

THE PARTIES’ OTHER REQUESTS FOR RELIEF

In the context of the Respondent's Application to Revoke Provisional Measures, both
sides requested other specific relief that was deferred for determination to the final
Award (see paragraph 111 above). These requests for relief concern (A) set-off of
the amounts awarded to the Claimants against the EFDG’s tax debts with Romania,
and (B) post-award injunctive relief, as explained below. 8

A. THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS CONCERNING SET-OFF OF THE AMOUNTS AWARDED
AGAINST THE EFDG’s Tax DEBTS

The Respondent's position

The Respondent argues that, because of the EFDG’s opaque intra-group finances
and the prejudice to Romania’s tax enforcement rights resulting from the Claimants’
manipulation of provisional measures, if there were to be any monetary award in favor
of any Claimant, the amount should be explicitly subject to set-off against all of the
EFDG companies’ tax debts (Respondent’s Revocation Application, { 8(b)).

In support of this request, the Respondent argues that, in its Supplemental Decision
on Provisional Measures, the Tribunal made a “straightforward recommendation” that
the Individual Claimants should allow any award to them to be set off against the
Corporate Claimants’ tax debts — a recommendation that has been ignored by the
Claimants (Respondent's Revocation Application, § 60(c)).

On this basis, the Respondent requests the Tribunal to “explicitly provide in the Award
that any amount awarded to any of the Claimants, whether as damages, arbitration
costs, or otherwise, is subject to set-off by Romania against the tax debts of all eleven
EFDG companies, including lawful interest and penalties” (Respondent's Revocation
Application, { 87(c)).

The Respondent maintained this request in its Reply on its Revocation Application
({9 2 and 41(c)), but did not provide further arguments or respond to the Claimants’
comments set out below.

The Claimants’ position

The Claimants argue that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to grant the Respondent's
set-off request, for three main reasons (Claimants’ Response, {ff 113- 116):

a. First, because it is procedurally improper: The Claimants contend that the
Respondent has not established, or even argued beyond a cursory request, that
it is entitled to a set-off. Such a new claim would have to be briefed and it is far
too late in the arbitral process for that. In any event, the Claimants assert that
such a set-off would be unnecessary because the Respondent has retained all of

282 All briefs cited in this section relate to the Respondent's Application to Revoke Provisional
Measures.

355

1283.

1284.

1285.

its rights to collect outstanding taxes from the EFDG (Claimants’ Response, {
114).

b. Second, because the parties against whom the set-off would be ordered (that is,
the Claimants) are not identical to the parties who owe the debts: The Claimants
argue that the Tribunal would thus lack the necessary jurisdiction. Relying on
Article 8.1 of the UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial Contracts, the
Claimants add that "[e]ligibility for set-off requires that the obligations be between
the same parties", which is an argument going to the merits (Claimants’
Response, § 115 and fn. 113).

c. Third, the Claimants argue that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction rationae materiae
because the Respondent's set-off request is not “a legal dispute arising directly
out of an investment” within the meaning of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention,
as it was not especially contracted for in an investment agreement and does not
arise directly out of an investment (Claimants’ Response, § 116).

In addition, the Claimants argue that, apart from any legal defense to the
Respondent's set-off request, it would be fundamentally unfair to provide for a set-off,
or for the Award (or at least a significant portion thereof, reflecting at least the value of
the retained earnings at the time the incentives were withdrawn) to be made out to
anyone but the Individual Claimants “on a 50/50 basis” (Claimants’ Response, {| 117).
The Claimants contend that they are entitled to full compensation for their significant
losses over the years due to the revocation of the EGO 24 incentives, and that
allowing set-off would be unfair in the light of these losses (Claimants’ Rejoinder,
67-72).

The Claimants add that a set-off would imply that the Individual Claimants should take
personal responsibility for the EFDG companies’ tax debts. In their view, this would
not only be unfair to the Individual Claimants, but would also imply that the Individual
Claimants, by paying further amounts to the ongoing business operations in Romania
or paying debts relating to those investments, would be making additional
investments, which are not reflected in the current damages claim and for which
compensation would be owed (Claimants’ Rejoinder, {{]/ 63-66).

The Claimants acknowledge that if the Award is made out to the Individual Claimants
alone, unless the Award is of a certain size, some creditors may not be paid in full,
including the Respondent. In that case, they note that the EFDG companies may no
longer be viable as going concerns. They argue that these are factors to consider in
determining how the Award should be drafted, but they should not be at the forefront
of the Tribunal’s considerations, as the ICSID Convention was put in place to protect
investors, not creditors (Claimants’ Response, § 118). The Claimants further note
that the Respondent did not respond substantively to their arguments, but merely
referenced the Tribunal’s recommendation. The Claimants argue that the Tribunal
recommended that the Parties were free to agree to a set-off, and the Parties did not
agree.

356

1286.

1287.

1288.

1289.

1290.

For the reasons set out above, the Claimants request the Tribunal to “issue a
declaration that Romania is not entitled to set-off tax debts of the companies against
an Award in favor of Claimants” (Claimants’ Response,  127(c)).

The Tribunal’s analysis

The Tribunal has carefully considered both sides’ prayers for relief with respect to set-
off, and dismisses them both.

First, both prayers have been made too late in the arbitral proceedings. To the extent
that both requests are for declaratory relief to be given in the Award, the requests
must be seen as ancillary claims covered by Article 46 of the ICSID Convention?*
and Rule 40 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. In particular, the Respondent has not
raised the issue of set-off as a defense to the Claimants’ claims: it has not requested
an acknowledgment of set-off, nor for set-off to be ordered; it is seeking a declaration
that any amounts awarded to any of the Claimants are subject to set-off by Romania
against the tax debts of the EFDG companies. The Claimants request a declaration
in the opposite sense. In this context, the Parties do not argue whether the legal
conditions for set-off are satisfied, but discuss rather whether set-off should be
allowed or not as a "modus" (qualification) added to any amount awarded. Such
requests for declaratory relief must be treated as ancillary claims subject to the time
limits set out in Rule 40 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

Pursuant to Rule 40 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules:

(1) Except as the parties otherwise agree, a party may present an
incidental or additional claim or counter-claim arising directly out of the
subject-matter of the dispute, provided that such ancillary claim is
within the scope of the consent of the parties and is otherwise within
the jurisdiction of the Centre.

(2) An incidental or additional claim shall be presented not later than in
the reply and a counter-claim no later than in the counter-memorial,
unless the Tribunal, upon justification by the party presenting the
ancillary claim and upon considering any objection of the other party,
authorizes the presentation of the claim at a later stage in the
proceeding.

(3) The Tribunal shall fix a time limit within which the party against which
an ancillary claim is presented may file its observations thereon.

Both Parties’ requests regarding set-off have been made considerably past the time
limits set out in Rule 40. The Respondent’s request was made in its Application to
Revoke Provisional Measures submitted on 1 August 2012, more than three years
after the submission of its Counter-Memorial. Similarly, the Claimants’ request was
made in their Response to the Respondent's Application to Revoke Provisional

283 Article 46 of the ICSID Convention provides: “Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal
shall, if requested by a party, determine any incidental or additional claims or counterclaims arising
directly out of the subject-matter of the dispute provided that they are within the scope of the consent
of the parties and are otherwise within the jurisdiction of the Centre.”

357

1291.

1292.

1293.

1294.

Measures, submitted on 28 September 2012, almost two years after the submission
of their Reply. The record does not evidence any good causes for such delay.

If the Tribunal had not dismissed these requests on procedural grounds, it would have
done so on the merits. Indeed, whether the Respondent has a right to set off the
Award against the EFDG’s tax debts would be (primarily at least) a matter of
Romanian law and of enforcement of this Award. Romanian law establishes the
conditions under which a set-off may be carried out and nothing the Tribunal says will
affect that. In certain jurisdictions, set-off may even operate as a matter of law (ijpso
jure) when strict conditions are met. Thus, as a matter of principle, the Tribunal is not
in a position to declare that Romania has a right to set-off the amounts awarded in
this arbitration against the EFDG’s tax debts. Whether Romania has a right to set-off
the amounts awarded against the Claimants or other companies of the EFDG will
depend on whether the conditions set out in Romanian law are fulfilled.

Even if the Tribunal were to state that, in principle, Romania has a right to set-off, it
would not be able to decide whether in this particular case such set-off is warranted.
The Respondent has not explained why the (Romanian law) conditions for set-off are
fulfilled in this case, what are the amounts to be set off, or which are the specific
parties involved. The only apposite mention of legal principles applicable to set-off
seems to be the Claimants’ reference to the UNIDROIT Principles (see paragraph
1282 above) rather than applicable Romanian law. In addition, for the reasons set
out in Section VII.F above, the Tribunal has declined to allocate the damages among
the Claimants, and is instead awarding the totality of the damages to all five
Claimants. Under the circumstances of the case itself, the Tribunal is simply not in a
position to declare whether Romania is or is not entitled to set off an award in favor of
the Claimants against the EFDG companies’ tax debts.

For these reasons, the Tribunal dismisses the Respondent's request that the Award
explicitly provide that any amount awarded to any of the Claimants is subject to set-
off by Romania against the tax debts of the EFDG companies, without prejudice to
the application of Romanian law, especially but not exclusively its dispositions for the
satisfaction of tax debts.

For the same reasons, the Tribunal dismisses the Claimants’ request for a declaration
that Romania is not entitled to set off tax debts of the EFDG companies against the
Award, again without prejudice to the application of Romanian law, including for the
satisfaction of tax debts.

358

1295.

1296.

1297.

1298.

1299.

1300.

B. THE CLAIMANTS’ REQUEST FOR PosT-AWARD INJUNCTIVE RELIEF
The Claimants’ position

Again in the context of the Respondent’s Application to Revoke Provisional
Measures, the Claimants request the Tribunal to provide in the Award that the
Respondent “is enjoined from any further tax collection measures of any kind in
respect of the Claimants and the EFDC until such a time as the damages awarded by
the Tribunal have been paid in full, and include a pecuniary alternative in case of non-
performance” (Claimants’ Rejoinder, | 75(b); see also Claimants’ Response, §
127(b)).

According to the Claimants, it is obvious that Romania intends to collect on the taxes
owed to it as soon as it can, by whatever means it can (Claimants’ Response, § 108).
The Claimants understand that the provisional measures recommended by the
Tribunal will come to an end upon issuance of the Award. They thus argue that for
any award in their favor to have any meaning, equivalent relief to that granted under
the provisional measures must be put in place in the Award until the Claimants are
compensated in full (Claimants’ Response, 119; Claimants’ Rejoinder, 4 58).

The Claimants argue that the Tribunal has the jurisdiction to order permanent
injunctive relief. They rely on Enron v. Argentina,‘ where the tribunal allegedly
asserted that it had such power (Claimants’ Response, § 122). The Claimants also
rely on writings by Prof. Schreuer, as well as the Decision on Jurisdiction rendered by
this very Tribunal (Claimants’ Rejoinder, 9 54-55).

The Claimants note that already in their First Application for Provisional Measures,
they requested

an Order preserving the status quo ante by instructing Respondent to
withdraw or otherwise cease and desist from enforcing the above-
described seizure orders, or from implementing any new such orders
against any of the EFDC prior to the Tribunal’s issuance of its final award
(and that the award itself deal with the matter as appropriate at that
time, such as by maintaining the Order in place until Romania has
satisfied the terms of the award in full) [...] (Claimants’ First Application
for Provisional Measures, § 43, emphasis added).

The Claimants recognize however that this relief has not been expressly requested,
but submit that the Tribunal is empowered to make such an order under paragraph 6
of Claimants’ Revised Request for Relief,”®° which seeks “[a]ny further relief that the
Tribunal may deem fit and proper’ (Claimants’ Response, {[f 120-121; Claimants’
Rejoinder, 4] 59).

In the alternative, if the Tribunal concludes that it cannot order relief on the basis of
the Revised Request for Relief as drafted, the Claimants request that the Tribunal

284 Enron v. Argentina (Decision on Jurisdiction), { 77-79.

28 The Claimants refer to their “Detailed Request for Relief’, which the Tribunal refers to throughout
this document as their “Revised Request for Relief”.

359

1301.

1302.

1303.

1304.

1305.

1306.

permit the Claimants to add a specific request for injunctive relief to their Request for
Relief pursuant to Rule 40 of the ICSID Rules (Claimants’ Response, § 123). The
Claimants argue that the Respondent has already had notice of the Claimants’
intentions and will suffer no prejudice as a result of the requested amendment to the
Request for Relief. Specifically, the Claimants assert that the cover letter enclosing
their Revised Request for Relief put Romania on notice that Claimants might seek to
amend the requested relief “[i]n the event that financial or operational circumstances
materially change to Claimants' detriment prior to the Tribunal's issuance of its award”
(Claimants’ Response, {If 124-125).

Even if the Tribunal were to conclude that Romania will suffer prejudice as a result of
the requested amendment of the Request for Relief, the Claimants contend that such
prejudice should be balanced against the greater harm that the Claimants would
suffer if the request is not granted. According to the Claimants, “it would be a
fundamental denial of justice to Claimants and an absurd result if Romania could
bankrupt the companies on the day after the Award was issued, prior to making
payment, the timing of which is solely within its control” (Claimants’ Response, § 125).

The Respondent’s position

The Respondent argues that the Claimants’ request must fail for the following
reasons.

First, the Respondent submits that Provisional Measures are temporary in nature and
cannot be upheld beyond the point where the proceedings come to an end. Relying
on writings by Prof. Schreuer, the Respondent contends that the Tribunal’s authority
to grant interim relief pursuant to Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 39 of
the ICSID Arbitration Rules only extends throughout the arbitration and any
provisional measure lapses automatically when a final award is rendered. According
to the Respondent, this cannot be circumvented by including the provisional
measures in the Award (Respondent's Reply, {| 36).

Second, the Respondent argues that it is irrelevant whether the Tribunal has the
power to grant injunctive relief, because the legitimacy of the collection of taxes has
never been subject matter of the proceedings leading to the Award. By contrast, in
Enron v. Argentina the request for permanent injunctive relief was linked to taxes that
were the basis for Enron's expropriation claim (Respondent’s Reply, | 37).

Third, the Respondent contends that the Claimants’ new attempt to amend their
Request for Relief is in fact a new claim submitted out of time. The Respondent
notes that, pursuant to Article 46 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 40(2) of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules, any incidental or additional claim must be presented no later
than in the reply. The Respondent adds that such a new claim would require further
written and oral proceedings, and the Claimants have failed to provide a justification
for it (Respondent's Reply, 4 38).

Fourth, the Respondent argues that the Claimants’ request to amend their Request
for Relief involves relief in favor of eight EFDG companies that are not parties to the

360

present arbitration, but Article 46 of the ICSID Convention does not permit extension
of the dispute ratione personae. The fact that the Claimants purported to reserve
their right to amend their Request for Relief is thus irrelevant, as the issues at stake in
the provisional measures are not part of the dispute which forms the subject matter of
the arbitration proceedings (Respondent's Reply, | 39).

3. The Tribunal’s analysis

1307. There is no dispute that the provisional measures recommended by the Tribunal in its
five decisions on Provisional Measures will laose upon the issuance of the Award.
The Tribunal concurs with Prof. Schreuer when he states that

The provisional nature of interim measures implies that they are
recommended only for the duration of the proceedings. [...] Provisional
measures will lapse automatically upon the rendering of the tribunal's
award. They will also lapse upon the discontinuance of the proceedings in
accordance with Arbitration Rules 43-45. Although neither Art. 47 nor
Arbitration Rule 39 say so explicitly, this is a consequence of their
provisional nature.7°

1308. However, the Claimants are neither requesting the extension of these provisional
measures beyond the Award, nor the recommendation of new provisional measures.
The Claimants frame their request as one for “permanent injunctive relief”. Thus, the
threshold question is whether the Tribunal has the authority to issue permanent (or
rather, definitive) injunctive relief in the Award, even if it is only temporary.

1309. In its Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility the Tribunal recognized its power to
grant non-pecuniary relief (Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, § 166).2°”7 An
ICSID tribunal’s powers derive from the nature and purpose of its mandate, which in
turn is defined by the parties’ consent. In this case, such consent is reflected in the
ICSID Convention, the BIT and the Claimants’ request for arbitration. From these
instruments it emerges that the Tribunal’s task is to resolve the legal disputes
between the Claimants and the Respondent arising directly out of the Claimants’
investments in the territory of the Respondent which have their origin in the
Respondent's breaches of the BIT. As none of the aforementioned instruments
expressis verbis defines the powers granted to a tribunal nor limits the remedies
available to the Claimants in the event of an internationally wrongful act,”® this

288 C_ Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2" edition (2009), pp. 774-775.

°87 At paragraph 166 of its Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, the Tribunal stated: “Under the
ICSID Convention, a tribunal has the power to order pecuniary or non-pecuniary remedies, including
restitution, i.e., re-establishing the situation which existed before a wrongful act was committed. As
Respondent itself admits, restitution is, in theory, a remedy that is available under the ICSID
Convention (Tr. p. 56). That admission essentially disposes of the objection as an objection to
jurisdiction and admissibility. The fact that restitution is a rarely ordered remedy is not relevant at this
stage of the proceedings. Similarly, and contrary to Respondent's argument, the fact that such a
remedy might not be enforceable pursuant to Article 54 of the ICSID Convention should not preclude a
tribunal from ordering it. Remedies and enforcement are two distinct concepts.”

288 The only remedy specified by the BIT is compensation in cases of expropriation (Article 4 of the
BIT). However, the BIT does not specify what remedies are available in cases of breaches of other
standards of protection.

361

Tribunal must conclude that its powers include all of those required to provide
effective remedy in order to redress the injuries suffered by the Claimants as a result
of such internationally wrongful acts, within the limits of the parties’ requests for relief
and provided that such relief is admissible under international law. In the Tribunal’s
view, such relief includes pecuniary and non-pecuniary relief.

1310. The Tribunal is aware that, although Article 54(1) of the ICSID Convention provides
that a state shall recognize an award as binding, it then proceeds to limit a state’s
obligation to enforce an award to the pecuniary obligations imposed by that award.*°
However, this should not be interpreted as limiting ICSID tribunals to awarding
pecuniary relief. As the Tribunal already stated, awarding remedies and enforcement
are two distinct concepts.” Moreover, the travaux préparatoires of the ICSID
Convention confirm that “the restriction in Article 54 to pecuniary obligations was
based on doubts concerning the feasibility of an enforcement of non-pecuniary
obligations and not on a desire to prohibit tribunals from imposing such
obligations.”*"" Indeed, the fact that Article 54 found it necessary to specify that only
pecuniary obligations could be enforced confirms that a tribunal has the power to
order non-pecuniary relief.7°

1311. In the Tribunal’s view, such non-pecuniary relief may take many forms, such as
restitution or specific performance.” It may also take the form of definitive (i.e., not
provisional) injunctive relief, if the Tribunal finds that such relief is necessary to
ensure that the breach will be redressed. To quote Prof. Schreuer:

There is a wide range of possibilities for non-pecuniary obligations that
awards might impose. [...] Possible obligations imposed upon the host
State would include the restitution of seized property [...] or desistance
from imposing unreasonable taxes. In the cases so far published, ICSID
tribunals have framed the obligations imposed by their awards in pecuniary
terms. This is not due to a belief that they lack the power to proceed
otherwise. Rather, the cases involved situations in which the investment
relationship had broken down and the claimants had defined their demands
in pecuniary terms. [...] It is likely that in the future more cases will arise,

89 ‘article 54(1) of the ICSID Convention provides in relevant part: “Each Contracting State shall
recognize an award rendered pursuant to this Convention as binding and enforce the pecuniary
obligations imposed by that award within its territories as if it were a final judgment of a court in that
State. [...].”

289 See Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, ] 166.

281 C. Schreuer, Non-Pecuniary Remedies in ICSID Arbitration, Arbitration International, Vol. 20, No. 4
(2004), pp. 325-326.

282 Indeed, Article 53(1) of the ICSID Convention, which deals with the binding nature of the award
rather than enforcement, provides that “[t]he award shall be binding on the parties” and that “[eJach
party shall abide by and comply with the terms of the award except to the extent that enforcement
shall have been stayed pursuant to the relevant provisions of this Convention”, without limiting such
binding nature to the non-pecuniary obligations imposed by the award.

°89 In the state-to-state sphere, the ILC Articles expressly recognize a tribunal's power to grant non-
pecuniary relief. Article 31 of the ILC Articles provides that “[tlhe responsible State is under an
obligation to make full reparation for the injury caused by the internationally wrongful act.” In turn,
Article 34 provides that “[flull reparation for the injury caused by the internationally wrongful act shall
take the form of restitution, compensation and satisfaction, either singly or in combination, in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.”

362

1312.

1313.

1314.

1315.

1316.

1317.

involving disputes stemming from ongoing relationships, in which awards
providing for specific performance or injunctions will become relevant.***

Finally, the power to award injunctive relief has been affirmed by ICSID tribunals. For
instance, in Enron v. Argentina the tribunal expressly concluded that “in addition to
declaratory powers, it has the power to order measures involving performance or
injunction of certain acts.”?%°

The Tribunal concludes that it has the power to grant injunctive relief in a final award.
This relief, however, must be definitive (i.e., not provisional, not meant to “preserve
the respective rights of either party” until final resolution of the dispute, which is the
objective of provisional measures pursuant to Article 47 of the ICSID Convention).
The Tribunal prefers the term “definitive” to “permanent”, as the relief granted may be
temporary (i.e., granted only until a certain date or until a certain condition is met).
However, as the Tribunal will become functus officio upon the rendering of the Award
(subject to a party filing a claim for rectification, supplementary decision, interpretation
or revision of the Award pursuant to Articles 49, 50 or 51 of the ICSID Convention),
the injunctive relief granted cannot be later reconsidered or lifted by the Tribunal, as
would be the case with provisional relief: such definitive injunctive relief would have
res judicata effect.

The Tribunal turns now to the Claimants’ specific request for post-award injunctive
relief.

The first question that arises is whether this request for relief is timely. As a request
for definitive relief in the Award, the request must be treated as an ancillary claim, and
thus the conditions set out in Rule 40 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules (cited at
paragraph 1289 above) apply.

The Claimants formally articulated their request for post-award injunctive relief in their
Response to the Respondent's Application to Revoke Provisional Measures,
submitted on 28 September 2012, which is considerably past the submission of their
Reply (submitted in December 2009). Although the Claimants had included a similar
request in their First Application for Provisional Measures, submitted on 3 November
2010 on the eve of the hearing on the merits (see paragraph 1298 above), that
request was also submitted after their Reply. In any event, as the Claimants
themselves acknowledge, this request was made in the context of a request for
provisional measures and was not formulated as a substantive request for relief in the
award.

The Claimants contend that their request is timely because the Tribunal is
empowered to award post-award injunctive relief as a result of their request for “[a]ny

24 ©. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2nd ed. (2009), pp. 1137-1138. Prof.
Schreuer adds that “[t]ribunals imposing such non pecuniary obligations should keep the impossibility
to enforce them in mind. Such awards should [...] provide for a pecuniary alternative in case of non-
performance such as liquidated damages, penalties or another obligation to pay a certain amount of
money.” (/d.)

285 Enron v. Argentina (Decision on Jurisdiction), § 81.

363

1318.

1319.

1320.

further relief that the Tribunal may deem fit and proper” (Revised Request for Relief,
46). A first question is whether, as a result of such a generic request, the Tribunal
has the power to order relief that has not been expressly requested. Assuming that
the Tribunal has the power and the discretion to make such an order (a matter that
the Tribunal does not need to address), in the particular circumstances of this case,
the Tribunal would not wish to exercise any such discretion to order definitive
injunctive relief such as the relief sought by the Claimants without having been
expressly requested to do so. In particular, the Tribunal would be loath to do so
because that would defeat one of the rationes legis of Article 40, namely afford the
Responding State the possibility fully to put its case in defense to a given relief before
the evidentiary hearing and take advantage of that hearing to bring forth the
correlative necessary evidence. The Respondent was not in a position at the time to
predict that Claimants would subsequently come up with the disputed prayers or that
the Tribunal would exercise its discretion, if it exists, in the way the Claimants are
suggesting now.

The Claimants’ request for definitive injunctive relief is thus untimely, and it falls to the
Tribunal to determine, upon justification by the Claimants and after considering the
Respondent's objections, whether it authorizes the presentation of the claim at a later
stage in the proceedings. After considering both Parties’ arguments, the Tribunal
finds that there is not a sufficient justification to authorize the presentation of this
claim at this stage of the proceedings. Nor was there sufficient justification to
authorize the presentation of this claim in September 2012, when the Claimants first
formulated their request for definitive injunctive relief. The Claimants submitted their
first application for provisional measures in November 2010. They thus had ample
time since the occurrence of the facts that gave rise to their alleged need for
injunctive relief to properly file for an ancillary claim for definitive relief in accordance
with Rule 40. The Claimants have not justified why such a claim could not have been
brought before September 2012. Accordingly, the Tribunal dismisses the Claimants’
request for definitive injunctive relief.

Had it not dismissed the claim on procedural grounds, the Tribunal would have done
so on the merits. The Tribunal has dismissed the Claimants’ argument that the
Respondent's wrongful act (the breach of the BIT) caused them to incur the tax debts
and penalties that are the basis for the Respondent's tax enforcement actions (see
Section VII.C.4 above). Thus, while during the pendency of these proceedings the
legitimacy of the tax penalties imposed upon the Claimants could be deemed to be
part of the subject matter of the dispute, the Claimants’ claims in that respect have
been dismissed on the merits. Similarly, now that the proceedings are finalized, the
Claimants have no independent right to the maintenance of a status quo or to a non-
aggravation of the dispute that could require preservation. There is thus no
justification for providing the requested additional and definitive injunctive relief in the
Award.

Finally, although the Tribunal has the power to grant additional definitive injunctive

relief in the Award, any such relief should be granted with the utmost caution. Once
the Award is issued and subject to potential requests for rectification, supplementary

364

1321.

1322.

decision, interpretation or revision, the Tribunal will become functus officio. It will not
be able to reconsider the injunctive relief granted, which would have res judicata
effect.

Under the circumstances, the Tribunal is not convinced that such additional relief is
warranted. In its decisions on provisional measures, the Tribunal repeatedly stated
that Romania must be allowed to collect the taxes due to it. While these proceedings
were pending and for their duration, the Tribunal afforded protection to the Claimants
in order, among other reasons, to maintain the status quo and prevent the
aggravation of the dispute. The Tribunal recognized the benefits of preventing the
Claimants’ bankruptcy and allowing the Claimants’ business to survive as a going
concern. However, the Tribunal cannot do so indefinitely. It trusts that the Parties will
find a way to pay their respective debts in a way that allows the Claimants’ investment
to continue contributing to the prosperity of Bihor County.

For these reasons, the Claimants’ request for post-award injunctive relief is
dismissed. Accordingly, all provisional measures recommended by the Tribunal will
cease to have effect as of the date of dispatch of this Award.

365

1323.

1324.

1325.

1326.

1327.

1328.

COSTS

Both sides request an award of costs in respect of the legal fees and expenses and
the costs of arbitration incurred in connection with this proceeding and have filed
submissions quantifying their fees and costs (Claimants’ Request for Costs, {{ 58-59;
Respondent’s Submission on Costs, { 49).

The Claimants’ legal fees and expenses amount to EUR 18,409,213 or RON
86,478,476. They have advanced USD 1,510,000 on account of the fees and
expenses of the Members of the Tribunal and the ICSID administrative fees and
expenses, including the lodging fee of USD 25,000. The Claimants seek an award of
the entirety of these costs and compound interest at a rate of 3-month ROBOR plus
5% until the date of payment.

The Respondent's legal fees and expenses amount to EUR 11,499,347.97. It has
advanced USD 1,485,000 to ICSID.

The Parties agree that the Tribunal has broad discretion to allocate all costs of the
arbitration, including legal fees and expenses, between the Parties as it deems
appropriate, pursuant to Article 61 of the ICSID Convention. Both sides argue that a
costs award is warranted because they should prevail in the arbitration and because
the other party has conducted the arbitration in a manner which has led to delay and
increased costs.

The Tribunal has considered all the circumstances of this case: the procedure
(including the jurisdictional phase, the Parties’ requests for production of documents,
the Claimants’ requests for provisional measures, the Respondent's request for
revocation of provisional measures, the Claimants’ request for a site visit, the merits
phase of the proceeding, the Claimants’ revised request for relief, and multiple
hearings) as well as the Parties’ substantive arguments on jurisdiction, admissibility
and the merits. As evidenced by Section II above, there were numerous procedural
issues and difficult legal questions involved in the jurisdictional and merits phases.
Many of these issues were far from clear-cut and involved meritorious arguments by
both Parties. The Claimants have prevailed on jurisdiction and have established a
breach of the fair and equitable standard under the BIT. They have, however, only
been partially successful in regard to their claims for damages, which evolved during
the proceedings.

In light of these factors, the Tribunal has concluded that it is fair overall that both
sides (that is, the five Claimants on one side and the Respondent on the other) bear
the costs of the arbitration (the fees and expenses of the Members of the Tribunal
and the charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre) in equal shares, and that
each side bears its own legal and other costs incurred in connection with this case.”°°

288 The Parties will receive a statement of the account from the ICSID Secretariat. Any remaining
balance will be reimbursed to the Parties.

366

XI.

1329.

DECISION

For the reasons stated in the body of this Award, the Tribunal makes the following
decision:

a.

The Claimants’ claim that the Respondent has violated Article 2(4) of the BIT by
failing to observe obligations entered into with the Claimants with regard to their
investments is dismissed by majority.

The Claimants’ claim that the Respondent has violated Article 2(3) of the BIT by
failing to ensure fair and equitable treatment of the Claimants’ investments is
upheld by majority. In view of this decision, the Tribunal does not need to
determine whether the Respondent has breached the BIT by impairing the
Claimants’ investments through unreasonable or discriminatory measures (Article
2(3) of the BIT, second part) or by expropriating the Claimants’ investments
without the payment of prompt, adequate, and effective compensation (Article
4(1) of the BIT).

As a result of the Respondent's breach of the BIT, the Claimants are awarded
and the Respondent is ordered to pay RON 376,433,229 as damages, broken
down as follows:

i. | RON 85,100,000 for increased costs of sugar;

ii. RON 17,500,000 for increased costs of raw materials other than sugar or
PET;

ii. RON 18,133,229 for the lost opportunity to stockpile sugar; and

iv. RON 255,700,000 for lost profits on sales of finished goods.

The Respondent is ordered to pay interest on the amount specified in sub-
paragraph (c) above, at 3-month ROBOR plus 5%, compounded on a quarterly

basis, calculated from the following dates until full payment of the Award:

i. With respect to the claims for increased cost of sugar and other raw
materials, interest shall be calculated from 1 March 2007.

ii. With respect to the claim for the lost opportunity to stockpile sugar, interest
shall be calculated from 1 November 2009.

iii. With respect to the claim for lost profits on sales of finished goods, interest
shall be calculated from 1 May 2008.

The Claimants on one side and the Respondent on the other shall bear the costs

of the arbitration in equal shares, and each Party shall bear its own legal and
other costs incurred in connection with this case.

367

f. All provisional measures recommended by the Tribunal will cease to have effect
as of the date of dispatch of this Award.

g. All other claims or prayers for relief are dismissed.

368

Be

Dr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov Prof. Georges Abi-Saab
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: 4 Durenuber 2013 Date SC beim her 20/3

 

 

    

 
  

Dr. Laurent Lévy
President of the Tribu

369

