INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

ITALBA CORPORATION
(APPLICANT)

ORIENTAL REPUBLIC OF URUGUAY
(RESPONDENT)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/9) - Annulment Proceeding

 

DECISION ON THE PROPOSAL TO DISQUALIFY MR. GABRIEL BOTTINI

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee

Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda, President
Prof. Ménica Pinto, Member

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Ms. Celeste E. Salinas Quero

29 October 2019

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Italba Corporation:

Mr. Alexander Yanos

Mr. Carlos Ramos-Mrosovsky
Ms. Kristen K. Bromberek
Mr. Rajat Rana

Alston & Bird LLP

90 Park Avenue

New York, NY 10016

United States of America

Representing the Oriental Republic of
Uruguay:

Mr. Rodolfo Nin Novoa

Ministro de Relaciones Exteriores de Uruguay
Colonia 1206, 6to Piso

Montevideo

Uruguay

and

Dr. Miguel Toma

Secretario de la Presidencia de Uruguay
Secretaria de Presidencia

Torre Ejecutiva, Plaza Independencia 710
CP 11000 Montevideo

Uruguay

and

HE. Carlos Gianelli Derois

Ambassador of Uruguay to the United States
Embassy of Uruguay, Washington, D.C.
1913 I Street NW

Washington D.C. 20006

United States of America

and

Mr. Paul S. Reichler

Ms. Clara Brillembourg

Mr. Ofilio Mayorga

Mr. José M. Garcia Rebolledo

Foley Hoag LLP

1717 K Street, N.W.

Washington D.C. 20006

United States of America

II.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

OVERVIEW 1
PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 1
THE PROPOSAL FOR DISQUALIFICATIO.

  
 

(D) The Applicant's position

 

 

 

(2) The Respondent's position 5
(3) Mr. Bottini’s Expl i 6
ANALYSIS OF THE COMMITTEE ........0..ccccccececeseee ees ceeeeeeeeeeeeeeieeeeeneees 8
CD) The legal Standard ...ceccccceccsccscsceccevesce cece cece ee ces ee ces eeeseeeseeseseeneseeieseenes 8
(2) The ground for disqualification 9
DECISION 12

 

OVERVIEW

This Decision resolves the Applicant’s proposal for disqualification of ad hoc
Committee Member Mr. Gabriel Bottini pursuant to Articles 14 and 57 of the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of
Other States (the “ICSID Convention”) and Articles 9 and 53 of the ICSID Rules of

Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”).

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 2 July 2019, Italba Corporation (the “Applicant” or “Italba”) filed with the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”)
an application for annulment of the Award rendered on 22 March 2019 in Italba
Corporation v. the Oriental Republic of Uruguay (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/9) (the
“Award”), accompanied by annexes | through 3 (the “Annulment Application”). The
Annulment Application included a request for stay of enforcement of the Award
pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 54 of the Arbitration Rules.
The Applicant requested the provisional stay of the enforcement of the Award, and that
the stay be maintained until a decision in that respect could be rendered by the ad hoc

Committee.

On 10 July 2019, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Annulment Application
and notified the Applicant and the Oriental Republic of Uruguay (the “Respondent,”
the “State,” or “Uruguay”) (and together with the Applicant, the “Parties”) that

enforcement of the Award was provisionally stayed pursuant to Arbitration Rule 54(2).

On 11 July 2019, Respondent notified ICSID of the names of the individuals and legal

advisers authorized to act on its behalf in the Annulment proceedings.

On | August 2019, the Secretary-General notified the parties of its intention to propose
to the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council the appointment to the ad hoc
Committee of Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda, a national of the Kingdom of Spain, as President
of the ad hoc Committee, Prof. Ménica Pinto, a national of the Argentine Republic, and

Mr. Gabriel Bottini, a national of the Argentine Republic, as Committee Members.

After an exchange of correspondence between the parties and the Secretariat,' the ad
hoc Committee (the “Committee”) was constituted on 27 August 2019, in accordance
with Article 52(3) of the ICSID Convention. All members were appointed by the
Chairman of the Administrative Council. In its letter of 27 August 2019, the Secretariat
informed the parties of the Committee’s appointment, that the annulment proceeding
was deemed to have commenced in accordance with Rules 6 and 53 of the Arbitration
Rules, and that Ms. Celeste E. Salinas Quero, Legal Counsel, ICSID, would serve as

Secretary of the Committee.

On 13 September 2019, Italba submitted a Proposal for Disqualification of ad hoc
Committee Member Mr. Gabriel Bottini (the “Proposal”). On the same date, the Centre
acknowledged receipt of the Applicant’s Proposal and informed the parties of the
suspension of the proceedings until a decision on the Proposal has been taken in

accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rules 9(6) and 53.

On 16 September 2019, the unchallenged Committee Members, through ICSID,
notified the parties of the procedural calendar to provide observations on Italba’s

Proposal.
On 23 September 2019, Respondent submitted a Reply to the Proposal (the “Reply”).

On 30 September 2019, Mr. Gabriel Bottini submitted explanations on the Proposal

(the “Explanations”).

On 7 October 2019, the parties simultaneously submitted observations on the

Explanations (the “Additional Observations”).

THE PROPOSAL FOR DISQUALIFICATION

The following sections summarize the parties’ arguments on the Proposal and the

Explanations furnished by Mr. Bottini.?

' See the Parties’ communications of 8 August 2019 and the Centre’s communications of 16 and 19 August 2019.

2 Mr. Bottini furnished his Explanations in Spanish.

() The Applicant’s position
13. The Applicant argues that the conduct displayed by Mr. Bottini following a prior
disqualification proposal made in another case shows his lack of candor, which is

inconsistent with the qualifications required by Article 14 of the ICSID Convention.

14. The Applicant refers to the disqualification proposed by the claimant in Saint-Gobain
Performance Plastics Europe v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No.
ARB/12/13) (“Saint-Gobain”), which the Applicant maintains was rejected on reliance
of Mr. Bottini’s representations that he (i) had left the Argentine government service;
(ii) was no longer acting for Argentina; and (iii) would inform the parties and the
Tribunal if those circumstances changed (the “Disqualification Decision”). Italba
contends that only after the Disqualification Decision was made, Mr. Bottini disclosed

his true role as Argentina’s advisor and advocate in other cases.°

15. The Applicant explains that the claimant in Saint-Gobain proposed to disqualify Mr.
Bottini on the basis, in part, that his role as Argentina’s advisor and counsel in
investment disputes made him unsuitable to render independent and impartial decisions
on issues very similar to those that he had argued as counsel. The Applicant notes that
in rejecting the proposal, the unchallenged arbitrators in Saint-Gobain stated that they
“ha[d] no present information that Mr. Bottini currently is advocating for or advising
Argentina in any way [...]””* and requested Mr. Bottini to complete a new declaration

under Rule 6 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.°

16. The Applicant notes that the Disqualification Decision was made on 27 February 2013.
Two days later, on 1 March 2013, Mr. Bottini disclosed that Argentina had asked him
to give advice on issues of international law. After the claimant requested further
clarifications, Mr. Bottini admitted that his advice to Argentina included advocacy; that
before the Disqualification Decision was issued he had been asked to act as lead counsel

in the case Impregilo S.p.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/17)

3 Proposal, p. 1.

+ Proposal, p. 1, citing Saint-Gobain Performance Plastics Europe v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID
Case No. ARB/12/13), Decision on Claimant's Proposal to Disqualify Mr. Gabriel Bottini from the Tribunal under
Article 57 of the ICSID Convention, 27 February 2013 (“Disqualification Decision”), § 85.

5 Proposal, p. 1.

20.

(“Impregilo”); and since then, he had been asked to perform advocacy work in other
hearings involving Argentina. Following further inquiries from the claimant, Mr.

Bottini admitted that he was receiving a monthly fee for his advice to Argentina.°

The Applicant also points to Mr. Bottini’s CV, indicating that he was external adviser
to Argentina at least until March 2016; and refers to published awards showing that he

acted as lead advocate in cases involving Argentina.’

The Applicant contends that Mr. Bottini’s Explanations in this case show that he
“tactically delayed disclosure of facts plainly material to the [Saint-Gobain]
challenge,” and allowed the Saint-Gobain challenge to be decided in ignorance of his
true role. Such conduct justifies the Applicant’s reasonable doubt as to whether it will

receive fair and independent treatment from Mr. Bottini.*
The Applicant points out that in his Explanations Mr. Bottini admits that:

- _ by the time the Disqualification Decision was made on 27 February 2013, Argentina
had already in early February 2013 asked him to provide advice, in circumstances
that the Disqualification Decision was explicitly made based on the incorrect

understanding that Mr. Bottini might provide future advice to Argentina.”

- he disclosed in April 2013, i.e. after the Disqualification Decision, that, since early
February 2013, i.e. before the Disqualification Decision, he had been engaged as

advocate for Argentina in Impregilo.
- he disclosed in June 2013 that he was receiving a monthly retainer from
Argentina.!°

The Applicant disagrees with Mr. Bottini’s Explanations that his disclosure of March
2013 simply confirmed the provision of services which he had expressly announced in

his explanations of December 2012. According to the Applicant, Mr. Bottini admitted

© Proposal, p. 2.

” Proposal, p. 3.

8 Applicant’s Additional Observations, pp. 1-3.

° Applicant’s Additional Observations, p. 1.

© Applicant’s Additional Observations, pp. 1, 2.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

that he had been advocating for or advising Argentina only after the Disqualification

Decision was made. !!

The Applicant also disagrees with the Explanations in that the claimant in Saint-Gobain
must have understood that the role of advisor can include that of presenting arguments
at hearings. The Applicant considers that Mr. Bottini used deliberately vague language
in the disclosures, and notes that while an advisor may well be an advocate also, one

does not imply the other.'?

The Applicant further contends that the fact that the claimant in Saint-Gobain did not
bring a renewed challenge is immaterial to the present Proposal. The Tribunal in Saint-
Gobain was on notice of Mr. Bottini’s associations with Argentina, and the award was
subject to annulment proceedings. Here, however, the ad-hoc Committee’s annulment
decision will not be subject to review. Therefore, the Applicant argues, conflicts should

be policed even more carefully.

The Applicant, thus, proposes to disqualify Mr. Bottini pursuant to Articles 14 and 57
of the ICSID Convention and Articles 9 and 53 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.
Alternatively, Mr. Bottini should resign and allow the Secretary-General to appoint a

replacement.!*

(2) _ The Respondent’s position

The Respondent argues that the Applicant fails to present any facts indicating Mr.
Bottini’s manifest lack of the qualities required by Article 14 of the ICSID Convention,
thereby, failing to meet the standard of Article 57 of the ICSID Convention. The
Proposal, the Respondent argues, is based on the subjective opinion of the Applicant’s
counsel, said to be derived from his counsel’s “direct personal experience,” in mounting

an unsuccessful challenge to Mr. Bottini in Saint-Gobain.'*

The Respondent indicates that the unchallenged arbitrators in Saint-Gobain rejected the

challenge, finding that “Claimant ha[d] presented no facts which cast ‘reasonable

1! Applicant’s Additional Observations, p. 3, citing Mr. Bottini’s Explanations.

'2 Applicant’s Additional Observations, p. 3.

3 Applicant’s Additional Observations

4 Reply, pp. 1, 2.

26.

27.

28.

29.

doubt’ on Mr. Bottini’s impartiality and independence, let alone facts which ‘make it
obvious and highly probable.’”'> The Respondent notes that Mr. Bottini’s subsequent
disclosures were satisfactory to the arbitrators who requested them, as Mr. Bottini

continued to serve on the Tribunal, which ultimately ruled in claimant’s favor.

The Respondent observes that “Mr. Bottini is an experienced arbitrator who has served
with distinction on numerous tribunals; and is unaware of any blemishes on his

admirable record. It sees no grounds for his disqualification here.”®

(3) ~~ Mr. Bottini’s Explanations

In his Explanations, Mr. Bottini gives an account of the events transpired in the Saint-
Gobain challenge, from the moment of his appointment as arbitrator on 4 October 2012,
the filing of the proposal on 29 October 2012, going through the explanations he
furnished and disclosures he made from December 2012, up to the Disqualification
Decision, and those made after the Disqualification Decision, from March 2013 through

August 2015.!7

Mr. Bottini explains that when the Saint-Gobain challenge was filed, he still was
National Director of International Affairs and Disputes of Argentina’s Treasury
Attorney-General’s Office; a position he left in January 2013. Mr. Bottini asserts that
in the explanations he furnished in Saint-Gobain on 11 December 2012, he clarified
that once he resigned, he expected to “continue working as an independent advisor,
assisting states, which may include Argentina, and investors, in cases unrelated to the

dispute at issue here.” [Committee’s translation]

Mr. Bottini indicates that on 21 December 2012, when the claimant in Saint-Gobain
commented on his December 2012 explanations, the claimant pointed out that Mr.
Bottini had confirmed that he would continue presenting arguments as advocate on

behalf of Argentina. Mr. Bottini considers that from those comments it can be inferred

'5 Reply, p. 2, citing Saint-Gobain Performance Plastics Europe v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case
No. ARB/12/13), Decision on Claimant’s Proposal to Disqualify Mr. Gabriel Bottini from the Tribunal under
Article 57 of the ICSID Convention, 27 February 2013, 478.

'6 Reply, p. 2.

"7 Explanations, pp. 1-4.

30.

31.

32.

33.

that it was clear for the claimant that Mr. Bottini’s role as advisor might include

advocacy at hearings.

Further, Mr. Bottini explains that his disclosure of 1 March 2013 was made
immediately after the lifting of the suspension in Saint-Gobain, to comply with the
request made in the Disqualification Decision. In his March 2013 disclosure, he
“confirm[ed] the provision of services [...] [he] had expressly announced was possible

when furnishing explanations on 11 December 2012.”'® [Committee’s translation]

Mr. Bottini indicates that, on 7 March 2013, when the claimant commented on his
March 2013 disclosure, the claimant asked him to notify any new mandates from
Argentina and reserved its right to file new objections against him; yet, the claimant
did not criticize the content or timeliness of the March 2013 disclosure.!? Mr. Bottini
notes that the claimant never requested a review of the Disqualification Decision or the

annulment of the Saint-Gobain award.”°

Mr. Bottini also explains, contrary to the Applicant’s assertion, that since he resigned
from his position as National Director, he has never been lead advocate in a hearing
involving Argentina, including the annulment hearing in Impregilo.?! He also refers to
the Applicant’s assertion that only in April 2013 he admitted that Argentina had asked
him to act in Impregilo before the Disqualification Decision was issued. However, Mr.
Bottini explains that already in his March 1, 2013 declaration he confirmed (using past
tense) that Argentina had requested his services, making specific reference to the

circumstances announced in his December 2012 explanations.?*

Mr. Bottini finally notes that when the Applicant objected to his appointment to this ad
hoc Committee, it did not mention any alleged lack of candor, nor did the Applicant

question his disclosures in other cases. The Applicant objected to the appointment of

'8 Explanations, p. 4.

!9 Explanations, p. 4.

20 Explanation:

  

2! Explanations, p. 5.

?2 Explanations, p. 5.

two Committee Members, one of them being Mr. Bottini, but expressly accepted the

possibility that either one of them be appointed.”*

IV. ANALYSIS OF THE COMMITTEE

() The legal standard
34. Article 57 of the ICSID Convention provides that:

“A party may propose to a Commission or Tribunal the
disqualification of any of its members on account of any fact
indicating a manifest lack of the qualities required by paragraph (1)
of Article 14. A party to arbitration proceedings may, in addition,
propose the disqualification of an arbitrator on the ground that he
was ineligible for appointment to the Tribunal under Section 2 of
Chapter IV.”

35. Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention provides that:

“Persons designated to serve on the Panels shall be persons of high

moral character and recognized competence in the fields of law,
commerce, industry or finance, who may be relied upon to exercise
independent judgment. Competence in the field of law shall be of
particular importance in the case of persons on the Panel of
Arbitrators.”

36. In accordance with these articles, the disqualification has to be based on “any fact” that
shows a “manifest lack” of the qualities required to be eligible for an appointment as
member of an ad hoc committee. Such qualities in turn relate to moral character,
competence in the field of law, among others, and reliability to exercise independent
judgment. Since the procedural languages of these proceedings may be in English and
Spanish, the unchallenged members consider opportune to note that the equally
authentic Spanish version of the ICSID Convention refers to impartiality rather than

independence in the exercise of judgment. These are two different concepts. >

?5 Explanations, p. 6.

4 “[_.] independence relates to the lack of relations with a party that might influence an arbitrator's decision.
Impartiality, on the other hand, concerns the absence of a bias or predisposition toward one of the parties.” Suez,
Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A. v. Argentine
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17) and Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and Vivendi

37.

38.

39.

Nonetheless, since both versions of the ICSID Convention are equally authentic, it is

accepted that members of an ad-hoc committee need to be impartial and independent.?>

The meaning of “manifest” has not been the subject of discussion between the parties.
The unchallenged members are aware that the term “manifest” has been interpreted to
mean “obvious” or relate to the “seriousness” of the allegations. The unchallenged
members coincide with the view of the unchallenged arbitrators in Saint-Gobain that
“there is no clear-cut guideline as to the degree to which the facts invoked by the
challenging party must substantiate the alleged lack of qualification.”°® A decision has
to be made on facts sufficiently proven for a reasonable person to be convinced that it
is possible that the challenged member manifestly lacks the qualities required by Article

14(1) of the ICSID Convention

(2) _ The ground for disqualification

As a first observation, the unchallenged members note that the Applicant has not raised
any ground for disqualification related to the impartiality, independence or candor of
Mr. Bottini based on facts occurred after the Saint-Gobain proceedings, including this

proceeding.

The Proposal is based on the alleged failure of Mr. Bottini to disclose facts in two
instances that might have been material to the Disqualification Decision in Saint-
Gobain. In both occasions, the Applicant alleges that Mr. Bottini’s disclosures were at
variance with the reality. In the first instance, at the time of the Disqualification
Decision, dated 27 February 2013, Mr. Bottini had already been requested by the
Attorney General of Argentina to advise on points of international law, but Mr. Bottini
declared to the unchallenged arbitrators that he had been asked to advise the Attorney

General in the future. In the second instance, since early February 2013 Mr. Bottini had

Universal S.A v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19), Decision on the Proposal for the
Disqualification of a Member of the Arbitral Tribunal, 22 October 2007 (“Suez v. Argentina”), J 29. See also
Disqualification Decision, J 56, referring, among others, to Suez v. Argentina: “Independence is characterized
by the absence of external control, in particular of relations between the arbitrator and a party which may
influence the arbitrator's decision. Impartiality, on the other hand, means the absence of bias or predisposition
towards one party and requires that the arbitrator hears the parties without any favor and bases his or her

decision only on factors related to the merits of the ca:

 

(Footnotes omitted)

 

°5 See Disqualification Decision, { 55 and case law referred therein.

26 Decision on Disqualification, {| 60.

40.

Al.

42.

advised Argentina in Jmpregilo, but did not disclose until 13 April 2013 that his role

included advocacy and not only advice.

The issue to be decided by the unchallenged members is whether the alleged lack of
candor of Mr. Bottini in the case of Saint-Gobain shows a manifest lack of the
qualifications required under Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention to be a member of
the ad-hoc Committee in the instant case. This question is different from the question
decided by the unchallenged arbitrators in Saint-Gobain. In that case, the allegations
related to concerns raised by the simultaneous role of advocate and arbitrator, a concern
not raised here. Although the issues are not germane, they are linked: the alleged lack

of candor arises from the disclosures of Mr. Bottini in Saint-Gobain.

The first question for the unchallenged members is whether the Proposal is based on
facts. The Respondent argues for dismissal of the Applicant’s Proposal because it is
based solely on the Applicant’s counsel’s subjective experience and not on objective
facts. The Proposal is based on the allegation that the unchallenged arbitrators in Saint-
Gobain were not aware of the professional services that Mr. Bottini was effectively
providing to Argentina at the time they decided to deny the disqualification proposal in

Saint-Gobain.

Mr. Bottini disputes that the claimant in Saint-Gobain was unaware that his role as
advisor included advocacy. Mr. Bottini states: “on 21 December 2012, Saint-Gobain
contended that, in the explanations furnished on 11 December 2012, I had confirmed
that I would continue arguing as an advocate on behalf of the Argentine Republic.”?"
[Committee’s translation] In the explanations of Mr. Bottini of December 11, 2012, he
stated that he would “continue working as an independent advisor, assisting states,
which may include Argentina and investors, in cases unrelated to the dispute at issue
here” [Committee’s translation]. While the Applicant and Mr. Bottini have exchanged
arguments based on the interpretation of Mr. Bottini’s disclosures, it remains
unexplained why the unchallenged arbitrators would not have been aware of the
meaning given now to the disclosures. Indeed, on the date of the Disqualification

Decision, the unchallenged arbitrators considered that the case Telekom Malaysia

27 Explanations, p. 4.

43.

44.

Behard could be distinguished from the case before them precisely because “the
Arbitral Tribunal has no present information that Mr. Bottini currently is advocating

for or advising Argentina in any way.” Evidently, the unchallenged arbitrators were

 

unaware of Mr. Bottini’s role in respect of Argentina. But Mr. Bottini continued to
make disclosures after the date of the Disqualification Decision, including the
disclosures made on which the Applicant’s Proposal relies; and the parties in Saint-
Gobain did not take any action based on them. Which raises the next question, what is

the relevance of this inaction from the parties in Saint-Gobain?

The Respondent assumes that the disclosures after the Disqualification Decision were
satisfactory to the unchallenged arbitrators who have called for them since Mr. Bottini
continued to serve on the tribunal.”? On the other hand, the Applicant has stated that it
is irrelevant that the claimant Saint-Gobain did not renew the disqualification proposal.
But the disqualification proposal in the instant case is based on events flowing from the
disqualification proposal made against the same arbitrator by a different party yet
represented by the same counsel. Hence, it is not as irrelevant as stated by the Applicant.
In fact, on the basis that the claimant in Saint-Gobain did not renew the proposal, the
unchallenged members of this Committee can reasonably conclude that the claimant in
Saint-Gobain had no further doubts about Mr. Bottini’s independence and impartiality
arising out of the disclosures made after the Disqualification Decision in that case. The
allegations made here on lack of candor could have been made on the basis of the same
facts in Saint-Gobain, but they were not. It is not for the unchallenged members to take
action on more than six-year old facts without more recent evidence to sustain the

disqualification and on which the party advised by the same counsel did not take action.

For these reasons, the unchallenged members conclude that the Applicant has not
shown Mr. Bottini’s manifest lack of qualities required by Article 14(1) of the ICSID

Convention.

28 Disqualification Decision, 85.

2° Reply, p. 2.

4S.

DECISION

Having considered the facts alleged and the arguments submitted by the Parties, and

for the reasons indicated above, the unchallenged members of the ad-hoc Committee:
(60) reject the Applicant’s Proposal for Disqualification of Mr. Bottini; and

(ii) request Mr. Bottini, as he has undertaken in his Declaration and required under
the ICSID Rules, to continue to inform about any circumstance which could

raise doubts about his ability to exercise independent and impartial judgment.

 

[Signature] [Signature]
Prof. Monica Pinto Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda
Member of the ad hoc Committee President of the ad hoc Committee

