INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Italba Corporation
v.

Oriental Republic of Uruguay

(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/9)

 

PROCEDURAL ORDER NO. 4
Decision on Respondent’s Document Production Request

Members of the Tribunal
Mr. John Beechey, Arbitrator
Prof. Zachary Douglas, Q.C., Arbitrator
Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno, President of the Tribunal

Assistant to the President of the Tribunal
Ms. Maria José Rojas

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Marisa Planells-Valero

 

May 31, 2017

Italba Corporation v. Oriental Republic of Uruguay
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/9)
Procedural Order No. 4

 

L PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

1. Pursuant to Section 16.5 of Procedural Order No. 1, on March 29, 2017, Uruguay submitted
a Redfern Schedule replying to the Claimant’s responses and objections to Uruguay’s
Document Production Request.

2. On April 11, 2017, the Tribunal invited the Parties to try to reach an agreement about the
following:

“1. Requests No. 64 and 65 of Uruguay’s Document Request.

2. The Confidentiality Agreement proposed by Uruguay, and on the basis
of this agreement, as to Requests No. 1, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 19,
20, 38, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 48, 50, 52, 56, 57, 58, 60, 62, and 66 of
Uruguay’s Document Request.”

3. On April 18, 2017, the Parties, inter alia, informed the Tribunal that they had been unable
to reach a confidentiality agreement.

4. On April 24, 2017, the Tribunal noted that, in view of the Parties’ communications of April
18, 2017, Uruguay’s Document Requests No. 21, 47, 64 and 65 had been satisfied and urged
the Parties:

“... to try to agree on a confidentiality agreement (not necessarily the one
proposed by the Respondent), and (ii) should they are able to agree on such
confidentiality agreement, to try to agree on Uruguay’s Documents
Requests No. 1, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 19, 20, 38, 40, 41, 42, 43,
44, 45, 46, 48, 50, 52, 56, 57, 58, 60, 62, and 66. The Parties are invited to
inform the Tribunal by May 1, 2017 of the agreement reached or of their
respective positions if they are unable to reach agreement.”

5. On May 3, 2017, the Parties informed the Tribunal that they had been unable to reach a
confidentiality agreement, proposed their own confidentiality texts, and requested the
Tribunal to consider the Parties’ respective positions and reach a decision on an appropriate
confidentiality agreement. The Parties noted, however, that they had been able to reach an

IL.

Italba Corporation v. Oriental Republic of Uruguay
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/9)

 

6.

7.

Procedural Order No. 4

agreement with regards to the definitions of “Confidential Information”! and “Authorized
Persons.” Such definitions are included in this Procedural Order.

THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

Italba proposed that all documents produced in this arbitration be treated as confidential and
that they may only be used for purposes of this arbitration.*

Italba also affirmed that:

“In addition, because Italba is a closely held corporation consisting solely
of Gustavo Alberelli and his wife, the usual concerns about confidentiality
of private documents are particularly salient here. Documents that Italba
produces in this arbitration are necessarily personal to Dr. Alberelli and his
wife. As a result, their dissemination to third parties or use for purposes
unrelated to this arbitration carries a higher risk of disclosure of personal or
private information, including information concerning the couple’s finances
or the relationship between husband and wife.”*

Uruguay stated that: “It is, to say the least, not typical in Investor-State disputes for all
documents to be given confidential treatment.”* Respondent also said “Moreover, just as
Uruguay entered into a binding commitment under the Uruguay-U.S.A. BIT to subject itself
to international arbitration, it also made a corresponding commitment to the United States
and [to] Uruguay’s own public to preserve transparency in these proceedings. Article 29
calls for greater transparency in arbitrations resulting from this Treaty, including making
documents available to the public and open hearings.”®

In addition, Uruguay stated: “The Uruguayan Penal Code imposes strict obligations on
public officials to report unlawful activity that comes to their attention. Uruguay’s officials
cannot agree to ignore these obligations. However, they can and will agree to treat
confidential documents as such in all other respects.”

' “Confidential” information in Uruguay’s proposed confidentiality agreement and “Highly Confidential” information

in Italba’s proposed confidentiality agreement; see Italba’s May 3, 2017 letter, pages 1-2; Uruguay’s May 3, 2017
letter, page 2.

‘Authorized Person” in Uruguay’s proposed confidentiality agreement and “Representatives” in Italba’s proposed
confidentiality agreement and; see Italba’s May 3, 2017 letter, pages 1-2; Uruguay’s May 3, 2017 letter, page 2.

3 Ttalba’s May 3, 2017 letter, page 2.

 

+ Ttalba’s May 3, 2017 letter, page 3.

May 3, 2017 letter; page 2.
May 3, 2017 letter; page 2.

7 Uruguay’s May 3, 2017 letter; page 3.

Italba Corporation v. Oriental Republic of Uruguay
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/9)

 

Il.

10.

IV.

Procedural Order No. 4

INTRODUCTION

The Tribunal is aware that a company may wish to preserve the confidentiality of certain
commercial, technical or other types of information. It also is aware of the need to consider
certain personal information as confidential, in order not to harm the owners of this type of
information.

However, in the Tribunal’s view, Article 29 of the Uruguay-U.S.A. BIT, which governs the
transparency of arbitration proceedings, defines which documents might be made public,
including those listed in Article 29(1) of said BIT.® For that reason, the Tribunal may not
order that all the documents filed in these proceedings be considered as confidential or of
limited access.

Therefore, only those documents that the Tribunal so orders, whether in the Redfern
Schedule or in any future procedural order, shall be treated as confidential.

DEFINITIONS

“Confidential Information” means any information, document, or material not in the public
domain, and any information derived therefrom, designated by a Producing Party as
confidential in accordance with this Order, on the grounds that it is:

a. so proprietary or competitively sensitive that its public disclosure is likely to cause
competitive injury, or material financial loss or gain, to a Party or a third party to
which it relates;

b. otherwise protected from disclosure under the applicable domestic law of the
disputing State party or the laws governing the entity in question; or

c. financial, commercial, scientific or technical information supplied by third parties
that has been consistently treated as confidential by those third parties, as indicated
by the existence of a confidentiality or non-disclosure agreement applicable to such
information.

“Authorized Persons” means:

a. the Tribunal, the Assistant to the President of the Tribunal, the Secretary of the
Tribunal and other ICSID staff assigned to the present arbitration;

8 Article 29(1) of the Uruguay-US BIT, states as follows: “Subject to paragraphs 2 and 4, the respondent shall, after
receiving the following documents, promptly transmit them to the non-disputing Party and make them available to the
public: (a) the notice of intent; (b) the notice of arbitration; (c) pleadings, memorials, and briefs submitted to the
tribunal by a disputing party and any written submissions submitted pursuant to Article 28(2) and (3) and Article 33;
(d) minutes or transcripts of hearings of the tribunal, where available; and (e) orders, awards, and decisions of the
tribunal.”

Italba Corporation v. Oriental Republic of Uruguay
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/9)

 

Procedural Order No. 4

b. each Receiving Party’s legal counsel and staff for the time being retained for the
purpose of representing the Receiving Party in this Arbitration (i.e., for Italba,
Hughes Hubbard & Reed LLP,’ and for Uruguay, Foley Hoag LLP);

c. experts and witnesses retained to assist the Receiving Party in connection with this
Arbitration;

d. the following employees and officers of Uruguay, who are actively engaged in the
defense of this arbitration: Dr. Carlos Gianelli, Mr. Rodolfo Nin Novoa and Dr.
Miguel Toma, and the following supporting individuals: Esc. Silvana Sena, Dra.
Ver6énica Duarte, Dra. Maria Inés Da Rosa, Dra. Sara IIha, Dra. Marianela Bruno.

e. any individuals listed as either a sender, author or recipient of the Confidential
Document, provided that any such individual executes an undertaking in the form
of Annex A annexed hereto, prior to the receipt of the Confidential Information;

f. other categories of personnel, which the Tribunal has agreed, after consultation with
the Parties, to treat as Authorized Personnel (any individuals falling within the
scope of this subparagraph shall execute an undertaking in the form of Annex A,
annexed hereto).

“Producing Party” means a Party to this arbitration or any third party producing documents
or any information contained therein in connection with this Arbitration.

“Receiving Party” means a Party to this arbitration, including such Party’s Authorized
Persons, to whom a Producing Party produced documents or any information contained

therein in connection with this Arbitration.

ORDER

For the purpose of the information labeled as confidential, the Tribunal orders the following:

The parties shall make good faith efforts to ensure that they do not unnecessarily designate
information as confidential under this Order.

Each Producing Party shall designate a document as “Confidential” by labeling the upper
right corner of each page of every Confidential Document with the words “Confidential,”
written in red and bold.

° Pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 18(1) and Section 9.1. of Procedural Order No. 1, the law firm Ferrere will be

included in the category of “Authorized Perso

” following receipt by the Tribunal of a power of attorney from the

 

Claimants authorizing this law firm to act as counsel of record for the Claimants in this case.

Italba Corporation v. Oriental Republic of Uruguay
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/9)

 

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

Procedural Order No. 4

Each Producing Party producing Confidential Documents shall submit, along with each
production of documents, a log listing the documents from that production designated as
Confidential Documents as well as a brief description stating the reason for the designation.

Unless the designation of a document as Confidential is challenged within 10 days of the
document’s production and designation, such designation shall be final and permanent.

If a Party objects in writing to the other Party’s designation of information as Confidential
Information within 10 days after the information was submitted, the following procedures
shall apply:

a. The Parties shall seek to reach agreement on the designation. If the Parties do not
reach agreement, then, no later than 10 days after the submitting Party receives the
written objection to the designation, the submitting Party may raise the issue in
writing with the Tribunal. In the event the submitting Party elects not to raise the
issue with the Tribunal, the information in question shall no longer be entitled to
confidential treatment.

b. The objecting Party shall have 10 days to respond in writing to the submitting
Party’s presentation to the Tribunal.

c. As promptly as possible after the matter is referred to it, the Tribunal shall decide
whether the information has been properly designated. While the matter is under
consideration by the Tribunal, the information in question shall be entitled to
confidential treatment.

If the Tribunal decides that the information was not properly designated as confidential, then
the information shall not be treated as confidential. The submitting Party shall have the
opportunity either to agree to withdraw the confidential information or resubmit the
documents, as specified in Article 29 of the Uruguay-US BIT.

Material inadvertently produced without the designation of “Confidential” may be so
designated subsequent to its production if the Producing Party provides replacement material
bearing appropriate designations and notifies the Receiving Party within 7 days of the
submission of the non-designated information.

The inadvertent production of any privileged or otherwise protected document or other
material shall not be deemed a waiver or impairment of any claim of privilege or protection,
including, but not limited to, the attorney-client privilege and the protection afforded to
work-product materials, or the subject matter thereof. On receiving notice from the
Producing Party that materials have been inadvertently produced pursuant to the terms in
paragraph 24, the Receiving Party shall promptly return all such materials to the Producing
Party and destroy all copies, extracts or summaries thereof. The return of any inadvertently
produced documents is without prejudice to the right to challenge any claim of privilege.

Italba Corporation v. Oriental Republic of Uruguay
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/9)

 

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

Procedural Order No. 4

Moreover, the inadvertent production of any such document shall not be deemed a waiver of
any privilege.

Pleadings containing Confidential Information shall be marked clearly on each page:
“Contains Confidential Information.” The Confidential Information shall be identified with
double brackets (“[[ . . ..]]’”).

If a Party submits a document containing Confidential Information, the submission
containing such information shall be made in accordance with the existing pleading
deadlines specified by the Tribunal. A redacted version of the submission shall also be made,
within 14 days thereafter, and will be marked with the designation “Confidential Information
Redacted.”

Authorized Persons shall not disclose or make available Confidential Information in whole
or in part to any third party, except with the express permission of the Tribunal.

Only Authorized Persons of a Receiving Party may have access to, possession, custody or
control of, or view, the Confidential Documents produced by the Producing Party.

A Receiving Party’s Authorized Persons shall not use, reproduce, transform, or store
Confidential Information of the Producing Party or transmit it in any form or by any means
whatsoever, except as expressly permitted by this Order.

A Receiving Party’s Authorized Persons may only review Confidential Information as part
of the Receiving Party’s preparation for this Arbitration. Authorized Persons may print,
reproduce, or make a hard or digital copy of Confidential Information only in connection
with the preparation of the Receiving Party’s submissions in this Arbitration. Save pursuant
to an order of the Tribunal, any document containing Confidential Information that is used
in this Arbitration shall not be disseminated to any person, agent, or party that is not an
Authorized Person as defined in this Order.

Any document submitted to the Tribunal in this Arbitration shall include an index
specifically identifying Confidential Information used or referenced within that document
and the page or paragraph number at which such Confidential Information appears.

During the hearings in this Arbitration, if either Party submits Confidential Information to
the Tribunal in its opening presentation or during the examination of a witness, all persons
(other than the witness) in attendance at the hearings, who are not authorized to receive
Confidential Information shall be excused from the hearing room.

In order to designate information as confidential information in the Award, a Party must,
within five (5) days from the receipt of the Award, notify the other Party and the Tribunal of
its intent to do so, and within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the Award, provide the other
Party and the Tribunal with an electronic copy of the Award, with the information that it
contends is confidential information appropriately identified and redacted. The Party’s

Italba Corporation v. Oriental Republic of Uruguay
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/9)

 

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

Al.

Procedural Order No. 4

Authorized Persons shall disclose only the redacted Award and shall use only the redacted
Award for any court filings necessary in connection with this Arbitration. If any court
requires an unredacted version of the Award to be filed in a legal proceeding related to this
Arbitration, that unredacted version of the Award shall be filed under seal or pursuant to
similar protective measures in the applicable jurisdiction.

At the conclusion of this Arbitration, the Receiving Party shall destroy the Confidential
Documents received from a Producing Party.

In the event that a Producing Party agrees to, or the Tribunal orders, an inspection of original
versions or copies of any Confidential Documents, such inspection shall be conducted by
the Receiving Party’s Authorized Persons on a date and at a time and in a manner to be
agreed upon by the Parties, or as ordered by the Tribunal.

The Producing Party reserves all rights in the Confidential Information produced by it. No
rights in respect of the Confidential Information produced by a Producing Party are granted
to the Receiving Party, and no obligations are imposed on the Producing Party in respect of
documents produced by it other than those expressly stated in this Order.

No Party shall disclose, or permit any person to disclose, the existence or content of this
Order, except as required by law or any governmental or regulatory authority, or any court
or other authority of competent jurisdiction.

No disputing party shall file any confidential information covered by the terms of this Order
in any Court without first bringing this Order to the Court and seeking directions from the
Court concerning the filing of such material in a manner that protects its confidentiality. A
disputing party shall notify the other disputing party and any affected parties prior to
requesting such direction from the Court.

Nothing in this Order shall prohibit a Party from disclosing Confidential Information as
required by and in conformity with domestic laws.

Upon consultation with the parties and for good cause, the Tribunal may at any time amend
this Order.

Signed on behalf of the Arbitral Tribunal

Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno
President of the Tribunal
Date: May 31, 2017

ANNEX A
ITALBA CORPORATION
v.

ORIENTAL REPUBLIC OF URUGUAY

ICSID Case No. ARB/16/9

I, [name], [title], hereby undertakes that

(a) I have read the Confidentiality Order in the above captioned arbitration,

(b) Iam a person encompassed by Paragraph 14 of the Order, and

(c) I will abide by all of the terms of the Order, including the obligation not to disclose or discuss

Confidential Information with any individual other than the Authorized Persons defined in

Paragraph 14 of the Order, and will utilize any Confidential Information solely in connection with

the above captioned arbitration.

Signature Date

Name (printed)

ANNEX B

ITALBA CORPORATION
v.

ORIENTAL REPUBLIC OF URUGUAY

ICSID Case No. ARB/16/9

REDFERN SCHEDULE

