INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between

ITALBA CORPORATION
Claimant

and
ORIENTAL REPUBLIC OF URUGUAY

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/16/9

 

DECISION
ON CLAIMANT’S APPLICATION FOR PROVISIONAL MEASURES AND
TEMPORARY RELIEF

 

Members of the Tribunal
Mr. John Beechey CBE, Arbitrator
Prof. Zachary Douglas, Q.C., Arbitrator
Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno, President

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Marisa Planells-Valero

Assistant to the President of the Tribunal
Ms. Maria Jose Rojas

Date of dispatch to the Parties: February 15,2017

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Claimant: Representing Respondent:
Mr. Alexander Yanos Dr. Miguel Toma
Ms. Fara Tabatabai Secretario de la Presidencia de Uruguay
Mr. Pavlos Petrovas Secretaria de Presidencia
Mr. Andreas Baum Torre Ejecutiva, Plaza Independencia 710
Ms. Rebeca Mosquera CP 11000 Montevideo, Uruguay
Hughes Hubbard & Reed LLP and
One Battery Park Plaza Dr. Nicolas Cendoya
New York, NY 10004 Director Unidad Reguladora de Servicios de
United States of America Comunicaciones de Uruguay (URSEC)
Uruguay 988
CP 10100 Montevideo, Uruguay
and

Mr. Rodolfo Nin Novoa
Ministro de Relaciones Exteriores de Uruguay
Colonia 1206, 6to Piso
Montevideo, Uruguay
and
Embassy of Uruguay, Washington, D.C.
1913 I Street NW
Washington D.C. 20006
United States of America
and
Mr. Paul S. Reichler
Ms. Clara Brillembourg
Ms. Patricia Cruz Trabanino
Ms. Melinda Kuritzky
Mr. Ofilio Mayorga
Mr. José Rebolledo
Foley Hoag LLP
1717 K Street, N.W.
Washington D.C. 20006
United States of America

Il.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY.

 

SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS .........c.ccscsscscssessesesssseeeseeeseeesneneseeneseensseeees

A. Claimant’s Position

 

(1) On the Request for Provisional Measures.........0.c.cccccceesseseseseees ce eseeeeeeneneneeeeee
(2) On the Request for Temporary Relief.........0...c ccc seseeeees cee cet eeeeeeneneeeeeeee

B. Respondent’s Position

 

(1) On the Request for Provisional Measures.........0.c.cccccceesseseseseees ce eseeeeeeneneneeeeee
(2) On the Request for Temporary Relief.........0...c ccc seseeeees cee cet eeeeeeneneeeeeeee
THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS
A. Legal Framework

 

 

B. Jurisdiction
C. Merits

(1) Italba’s request for Uruguay to end or suspend the investigation.......0000.cce

 

 

(2) Temporary Relief
DECISION

 

TABLE OF SELECTED ABBREVIATIONS/DEFINED TERMS

 

Arbitration Rules

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings 2006

 

 

 

C-[#] Claimant’s Exhibit
CL-[#] Claimant’s Legal Authority
Cl. Mem. Claimant’s Memorial, dated 16 September

2016

 

Cl. App. Prov. Meas.

Claimant’s Application on Provisional
Measures and Temporary Relief, dated 10
November 2016

 

Cl. Reply Prov. Meas.

Claimant’s Reply in Further Support of Its
Application for Provisional Measures and
Temporary Relief, dated 24 November 2016

 

ICSID Convention

Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Between States and Nationals of
Other States dated 18 March 1965

 

ICSID or the Centre

International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes

 

 

 

Investigation The investigation about alleged forgery / fraud
of certain documents related to this case
conducted by the Uruguayan authorities.

R-[#] Respondent’s Exhibit

RL-[#] Respondent’s Legal Authority

 

Resp. Res. Prov. Meas.

Respondent’s Response to Claimant’s
Application for Provisional Measures and
Temporary Relief, dated 21 November 2016

 

 

RfA Request for Arbitration, dated 16 February
2016
Tribunal Arbitral Tribunal constituted on 27 May 2016

 

 

Trigosul

 

Trigosul S.A.

 

iii

 

 

 

Treaty

Treaty Between the United States of America
and the Oriental Republic of Uruguay
Concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal
Protection of Investment, signed on 4
November 2005 and in force on 1 November
2006

 

URSEC

 

Unidad Reguladora de Servicios de
Comunicaciones (Regulatory Entitity of
Communications Services)

 

 

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

This case concerns a dispute submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) on the basis of the Treaty Between the
United States of America and the Oriental Republic of Uruguay Concerning the
Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investment, signed on 4 November 2005
and in force on 1 November 2006 (the “Treaty’”), and the Convention on the Settlement
of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States, which entered into

force on 14 October 1966 (the “ICSID Convention”).

The Claimant is Italba Corporation (“TItalba” or the “Claimant”), a company incorporated

under the laws of the State of Florida, United States of America.

The Respondent is the Oriental Republic of Uruguay (“Uruguay” or the “Respondent”.

The Claimant and the Respondent are collectively referred to as the “Parties.” The

Parties’ representatives and their addresses are listed above on page (i).

This decision concerns Claimant’s Application for Provisional Measures and Temporary

Relief, dated 10 November 2016.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 16 February 2016, ICSID received a Request for Arbitration dated 16 February 2016
from Italba against Uruguay (the “Request”). The Request was supplemented by
Claimant’s letters dated 10 and 20 March 2016.

On 24 March 2016, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request in accordance
with Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention and notified the Parties of the registration. In
the Notice of Registration, the Secretary-General invited the Parties to proceed to
constitute an arbitral tribunal as soon as possible, in accordance with Rule 7(d) of
ICSID’s Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration

Proceedings.

In accordance with Article 37(2)(a) of the ICSID Convention, and pursuant to the
provisions of the Treaty, the Tribunal was to be constituted by three arbitrators to be
appointed as follows: one by each Party and the third, the presiding arbitrator, by

agreement of the Parties.

The Tribunal was composed of Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno, a national of Costa Rica,
President, appointed by agreement of the Parties; Mr. John Beechey, a national of the
United Kingdom, appointed by Claimant; and Professor Zachary Douglas, a national of

Australia, appointed by Respondent.

On 27 May 2016, the Secretary-General, in accordance with Rule 6(1) of the ICSID
Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”), notified the
Parties that the three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal
was deemed constituted on that date. Ms. Marisa Planells-Valero, ICSID Legal Counsel,

was designated to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 13(1), the Tribunal held a first session with

the Parties on 26 July 2016, by teleconference.

Following the first session, on 29 July 2016, the President of the Tribunal issued
Procedural Order No. 1, recording the agreement of the Parties on procedural matters and
the decision of the Tribunal on disputed issues. Procedural Order No. | provided, inter
alia, that the applicable Arbitration Rules would be those in effect from 10 April 2006;
that the procedural languages would be English and Spanish; and that the place of the
proceeding would be Washington, DC. Procedural Order No. 1 also set out a schedule

for the proceeding.

On 28 July 2016, the Tribunal and the Parties were informed that the Secretary of the
Tribunal would be taking temporary leave, and that Ms. Luisa Fernanda Torres would

serve as Secretary of the Tribunal during her absence.

In accordance with Procedural Order No. 1, on 16 September 2016, Claimant filed a

Memorial on the Merits, together with witness statements by Mr. Gustavo Alberelli and

Mr. Luis Herb6n; an expert report by Mr. Santiago Dellepiane Avellaneda of Compass
Lexecon; Exhibits C-001 to C-136 and Legal Authorities CL-001 to CL-085.

15. On 14 October 2016, Respondent advised that it did not intend to request the bifurcation
of the proceeding, and that it would file its objections to jurisdiction with its Counter-

Memorial.

16. On 31 October 2016, Claimant informed the Tribunal that, one of its witnesses, Mr.
Herbon, had received a notice to appear before a criminal court in Montevideo, Uruguay,
in connection with the Investigation associated with his and Mr. Alberrelli’s testimony in
this arbitration. Claimant noted that it understood that the Investigation concerned an
allegation that certain documents submitted in this arbitration were not authentic, and
argued that the Investigation represented an “abuse of the filings in this arbitration and an

attempt to harass and intimidate’ its witnesses. Italba invited Respondent to confirm

that it would terminate these criminal proceedings.

17. On 8 November 2016, Respondent replied to Claimant’s communication of 31 October
2016. In that letter, inter alia, Uruguay expanded on the background facts underlying
the Investigation, and denied that its purpose was to attack the Claimant’s witnesses in
this arbitration. Respondent emphasized the separation of powers between the Executive
and Judicial branches in Uruguay, and defended the independence of its judiciary citing
reports by international organizations.? In summary, Uruguay explained that based on
inquiries made by officials in the Office of the President (including the Secretary of the
Presidency), there was “reason to believe that Mr. Herbén and/or Dr. Alberelli might
have committed the crime of forgery or fraud” in falsifying the signature of an individual
(Dr. Fernando Garcia) in two exhibits submitted in this arbitration (Ex. C-056 and C-
057).> Referring to obligations imposed on public officials by Article 177 of the Uruguay
Criminal Code,* Respondent added that the Office of the President had reported “what

could be a serious criminal offense” to “fulfil a well-established legal obligation to report

' Cl. Letter (31 October 2016) at. 2.

2 Resp. Letter (8 November 2016) at 1-2.
3 Id., at 3.

4 Id., at 2.

20.

21.

22.

23.

such circumstances to the appropriate authorities, and to avoid the commission of a
separate criminal offense by failing to do so.”> Respondent submitted that Uruguay could
not be precluded from its sovereign right of “evaluating, in good faith” evidence relevant
to the commission of a crime, when it had reason to believe that one might have been

committed in its territory.®

On 10 November 2016, Claimant filed an Application for Provisional Measures and
Temporary Relief (“Claimant’s Application”) pursuant to Article 47 of the ICSID
Convention and Rule 39(1) of the Arbitration Rules. The Claimant’s Application sought,
inter alia, to enjoin the criminal prosecution in Uruguay of Mr. Alberelli and Mr. Herbon
pending the resolution of this arbitration. In addition, Claimant requested temporary
relief to preserve the status quo while the Claimant’s Application was pending, noting
that Mr. Herbén was scheduled to appear for a hearing on 1 December 2016. Lastly,
Claimant invited the Tribunal to set a schedule for Respondent’s response and Claimant’s
reply, and to inform the Parties of its availability for a hearing on this issue in December
2016 or January 2017. The Claimant’s Application is further discussed at Section IIT

infra.

On 14 November 2016, the Tribunal invited Respondent to provide its observations on

Claimant’s Application by Thursday, 17 November 2016.

On that same day, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2, amending certain
requirements of Procedural Order No. | relating to the submission of hard copies of

pleadings and accompanying documents.

On 15 November 2016, Respondent applied to the Tribunal for an extension of time until

21 November 2016 to provide its observations on Claimant’s Application.
On 16 November 2016, the Tribunal granted the extension requested by Respondent.

On that same day, Claimant wrote to the Tribunal advising that, while it did not oppose

the extension granted to Respondent, it relied on that extension in order to renew its

5 Id., at 5.
6 ld., at.

request for temporary relief. Claimant argued, inter alia that “[g]ranting a temporary
order would allow the parties sufficient time to brief this issue fully and the Tribunal
sufficient time to deliberate and decide it without the deadline of Mr. Herbén’s hearing

on December 1, 2016 looming in the background.”

24. On 17 November 2016, Respondent replied to Claimant’s communication of 16
November 2016. It requested the Tribunal to decline Claimant’s request for temporary
relief, arguing that there was no urgency, as the next event in the Investigation in
Uruguay was not scheduled until 1 December 2016. Respondent indicated that no
developments were expected before then, let alone before the filing of Uruguay’s
observations due on 21 November 2016. The Respondent’s position is further

summarized at Section III infra.

25. On21 November 2016, Respondent submitted its Response to Claimant’s Application for
Provisional Measures and Temporary Relief (“Respondent’s Response”). The
Respondent’s position is summarized in Section III infra. As further discussed below, in
this response Uruguay stated inter alia that it was “prepared to guarantee that its
investigation into the circumstances of the apparently forged signatures and fraudulent
documents, regardless of its course, will not prevent either Dr. Alberelli or Mr. Herbon
from participating in the preparation or presentation of the remainder of Claimant’s

case.”

26. On 22 November 2016, the Tribunal invited Claimant to provide its observations on

Respondent’s Response by Thursday, 24 November 2016.

27. On 24 November 2016, Claimant submitted its Reply in Further Support of Its
Application for Provisional Measures and Temporary Relief (““Claimant’s Reply”). The

Claimant’s position is summarized in Section II infra.

28. On 25 November 2016, Respondent inquired whether the Tribunal would invite
Respondent’s further observations on Claimant’s Reply of 24 November 2016. On that

same day, the President of the Tribunal, on behalf of the Tribunal, responded that the

7 Resp. Res. Prov. Meas., | 6 and 54.

Tribunal considered that both Parties had had ample opportunity to present their views,

and announced that an additional communication from the Tribunal would follow shortly.

Thereafter, also on 25 November 2016, the President of the Tribunal sent the following

communication to the Parties, in Spanish, on behalf of the Tribunal:

“1. Independently from the eventual decision concerning the
Claimant’s pending application, the Tribunal understands that the
testimony of Messrs. Herbon and Alberelli are central to support
the Claimant’s claims and, therefore, their eventual detention
would be extremely prejudicial to the interests of that party.

2. During the briefing of this Application for Provisional Measures
and Temporary Relief, Respondent has put forward its view and, in
connection with the various matters in dispute, it has also stated:

“Uruguay recognizes that these witnesses might also be called upon
by Claimant to assist in the preparation of its Reply (due in April
2017) or testify at the oral hearings (expected in November 2017).
In that regard, and to avoid prejudice to Claimant, Uruguay is
prepared to guarantee that its investigation into the circumstances
of the apparently forged signatures and fraudulent documents,
regardless of its course, will not prevent either Dr. Alberelli or Mr.
Herbon from participating in the preparation or presentation of the
remainder of Claimant's case.”

3. In order to concretize the Respondent’s guarantee, the Tribunal
requests that, no later than 28 November 2016, Respondent
confirm such guarantee to the Tribunal and communicate the
concrete steps that it will take to provide certainty to Mr. Herbon
and Mr. Alberelli that they will not be detained in the criminal
investigation that [Respondent] is conducting, or in any other
proceeding that the Respondent might initiate. The Tribunal also
asks the Republic of Uruguay to ensure that it will not take any
measure that will prevent those gentlemen from freely providing,
without any limitation, the testimony that Claimant has requested.

Although in this proceeding, in normal circumstances, the
Tribunal’s communication with the Parties should be made through
the ICSID Secretariat, in light of the existing urgency, the Tribunal
decided to communicate directly with the Parties.” (Tribunal’s
translation.)

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

On 28 November 2016, Respondent filed observations in response to the President of the
Tribunal’s communication of 25 November 2016, confirming the above-mentioned

guarantee. This communication is further described at Section III infra.

On 30 November 2016, the Tribunal wrote to the Parties inviting Claimant to:

“[...] confirm, on or before Monday, 5 December 2016, whether or

not it accepts that the guarantees set out in the Respondent’s letter

of 28 November, 2016 are sufficient to protect its ability to present

witness evidence from Mr. Herbon and Mr. Alberelli in these

proceedings. If the Claimant does not accept the adequacy of these

guarantees, the Claimant is invited to provide reasons for the

same.”
On 5 December 2016, Claimant filed observations in response to the Tribunal’s
communication of 30 November 2016. In short, Claimant argued that the Respondent’s

“guarantee” was a “vague promise”, “inadequate” and “effectively worthless.” This

communication is further described at Section III infra.

On 6 December 2016, Respondent filed a further communication addressing certain
allegations in Claimant’s communication of 5 December 2016. On that same day,
Claimant sent a further communication in response. These communications are further

described at Section III infra.

On 9 December 2016, the President of the Tribunal wrote on behalf of the Tribunal,
inviting the Parties to provide an update on whether “Mr. Herbon had, in fact, appeared
before the Uruguayan Criminal Court [on 1 December 2016] and, if so, what were the

circumstances of his appearance.”

On 13 December 2016, Respondent informed the Tribunal that “Mr. Herbén did not
appear in court on 1 December 2016, as required by his summons” adding that “[nJo
reason for his failure to appear was given to the Court or the Prosecutor by Mr. Herbén or
his counsel.” Uruguay added, however, that “the guarantee that Uruguay has given — in

its Response to Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures (filed on 21 November

2016) and its correspondence with the Tribunal of 28 November 2016 — remains in

place.”®

36. Also on 13 December 2016, Claimant reported that “[b]ecause the Tribunal did not rule
on the application before the December | hearing date, Mr. Herb6n retained independent
counsel to assist him in the criminal proceedings [...]”, adding that such “[...] counsel
has now appeared for Mr. Herbén and was successful in rescheduling Mr. Herbdén’s
hearing date until February.” Claimant, however, while reporting that Mr. Herbdén’s
counsel had been able to reschedule his court appearance for a date in February 2017,
argued that “Mr. Herbon and Dr. Alberelli remain unable to return to Uruguay to gather
evidence and conduct business without the threat of pretrial incarceration.” Italba went
on to argue that “the investigation will continue to impede Italba’s ability to compile
evidence in support of its case and speak to witnesses who could testify on Italba’s
behalf’, and referred also to “Uruguay’s attempts to influence or coerce potential
witnesses in this arbitration into refusing to provide testimony for Italba.” Claimant

reiterated its request for provisional measures.

37. On 5 January 2017, the Tribunal and the Parties were informed that Ms. Marisa Planells-

Valero was reassuming her functions as Secretary of the Tribunal in this matter.

38. On 30 January 2017, in accordance with Procedural Order No. 1 as modified by
Procedural Order No. 2, Respondent filed a Counter-Memorial on the Merits and
Memorial on Jurisdiction, together with witness statements by Mr. Nicolas Cendoya, Ms.
Elena Grauert, Ms. Alicia Fernandez, Mr. Fernando Garcia Piriz, Mr. Fernando Pérez
Tabo, Mr. Gabriel Lombide, Mr. Juan Piaggio, and Mr. Leon Lev; expert reports by Prof.
Santiago Pereira Campos and by Daniel Flores and Ettore Comi of Econ One Research;

Exhibits R-008 to R-080 and Legal Authorities RL-024 to RL-119.

39. On 9 February 2017, Claimant filed a further communication informing the Tribunal that
Mr. Herbén hearing before the Uruguayan Criminal Court was now scheduled for 15

February 2017 and reiterating its request for provisional measures. On 14 February 2017,

® Resp. Letter (13 December 2016) at. 1.

Ill.

40.

A.

Al.

42.

43.

Respondent filed observations in response to this communication, confirming again the
above-mentioned guarantee. These communications are further described at Section IIT

infra.

SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

The Parties’ respective positions in connection with the present Application are briefly
outlined below. The Tribunal notes, however, that in deciding this matter it has
considered the full extent of the Parties’ arguments in their written submissions. To the
extent that arguments are not referred to expressly in the brief summary below, they

should be deemed to be subsumed into the Tribunal’s analysis.

Claimant’s Position

Claimant contends that Uruguay has initiated criminal proceedings against two of Italba’s
witnesses (Mr. Gustavo Alberelli and Mr. Luis Herbén), based solely on documents and
testimony submitted in this arbitration. According to Claimant, the proceedings concern
the (false) allegation that certain documents presented with Claimant’s Memorial are

forgeries.?

Italba remarks that these witnesses are the target of the Investigation based on a high-
ranking Government official’s accusation that “the forged document was submitted in
this arbitration for the purpose of defrauding this Tribunal and embarrassing Uruguay.”!°
According to Claimant, the Investigation “clearly arises out of and relates to conduct that

is within the jurisdiction and competence of this Tribunal.”!!

Claimant contends that these criminal proceedings “(a) thwart Italba’s ability to proceed
with this arbitration by incarcerating its principals and chilling assistance from relevant
witnesses; (b) aggravate the status quo; and (c) usurp the functions of this Tribunal.”!?

According to Italba, “Uruguay clearly hopes to litigate the authenticity of these

° Cl. App. Prov. Meas., {I 4-5.

wc,
"id,
Pel.

Reply Prov. Meas., | 7(b).
{1 7(b).
App. Prov. Meas., 9] | and 5.

44.

4S.

46.

Bid,

14 Id.
SC].
16 Td.
"Id.
18 Id.
CL.

documents in its home court, in the chilling context of a criminal prosecution, and present
to this Tribunal the ‘findings of fact’ that court renders as a fait accompli.” The
proceedings are, “[i]n essence, [...] an attempt by Uruguay to usurp the Tribunal’s fact-

finding role in evaluating the evidence before it.”'>

(1) On the Request for Provisional Measures

Claimant argues that it is entitled to provisional measures enjoining Respondent from
continuing with the criminal prosecution of Mr. Alberelli and Mr. Herbén.'* It explains
that “[it] does not seek to quash the criminal prosecution”, but rather “only a temporary

stay of the prosecution until the end of the arbitration [...].”!°

a. The Tribunal Has Prima Facie Jurisdiction to Grant Provisional Measures

Claimant argues that the Tribunal has prima facie jurisdiction and can grant the relief

requested.!° In particular, Italba posits that:

. “[T]here is no doctrine of jurisdictional restraint with respect to applications or
provisional measures, and tribunals have granted requests for such measures even
where they have yet to decide on jurisdictional objections raised by respondents.”!”

. In any event, the Memorial and accompanying evidence have already showed that
the Tribunal has prima facie jurisdiction “including because Italba is a U.S. national
and the owner of its Uruguayan subsidiary, Trigosul.”!*

According to Claimant, Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 39(1) of the

Arbitration Rules “specifically authorize ICSID tribunals to order provisional measures to

preserve the rights of the parties.”!°

15.

» STI (A)

. Reply Prov. Meas., 8.
» 136.

1, 135.

, 4.35 (citing Claimant’ s Memorial, {{{ 90, 93 n. 196).
. App. Prov. Meas., 19.

10

b. The Requirements for the Granting of Provisional Measures are Satisfied

47. Claimant notes that it is “widely accepted” that a petitioner seeking provisional measures
must show that “(a) it holds rights deserving protection, (b) those rights are in urgent
need of protection, (c) the requested provisional measures are necessary, and (d) the
requested provisional measures are proportional.”??  Italba contends that all four

requirements are satisfied in the present case.

48. Protected Rights. Italba argues that its rights to the procedural integrity of the arbitral
process, preservation of the status quo and non-aggravation of the dispute deserve
protection.2! Claimant maintains that the criminal prosecution against its witnesses

threatens and upsets those rights.?? In particular, Italba argues that:

. As the criminal proceedings against Mr. Alberelli and Mr. Herbon are based solely
on Claimant’s filings in this arbitration, it would undermine the integrity of this
arbitral proceeding, were the criminal investigation to be allowed to continue and to
take place concurrently with this arbitration.”

e The criminal investigation will “irremediably disrupt the arbitral process”, because
it will divert Claimant’s time, effort and resources from this arbitration whilst it
deals with the criminal proceedings; and it will have a chilling effect on Italba’s
witnesses.”

49. Urgency. Claimant contends that the measures are urgent by definition when the
procedural integrity of the arbitration is threatened or when, as it alleges is the case here,

a State has taken, or is threatening to take, measures aggravating the dispute. In

particular, Claimant argues that there is an urgent need for provisional relief in this case,

as the criminal proceedings have already begun, and they will likely continue and be

completed before a final award is rendered in this case.”°

2 Cl. App. Prov. Meas., 21.
2 Td., Wh 22-27.
2 Td., Wh 28-31.

50.

51.

52.

53.

During the briefing process, Claimant emphasized that Mr. Herb6n was scheduled to
appear before the criminal court on 1 December 2016. It noted that there was a
“significant risk” that at such time, or shortly thereafter, he might be indicted, arrested
and put in pre-trial detention, thereby destroying Italba’s access to one of its key
witnesses and compromising its ability to present its case.’ Italba argues that “pre-trial

detention is the norm for individuals charged with fraud.”?*

In Claimant’s Reply, Italba also took issue with Respondent’s contention that there was
no imminent harm to Claimant resulting from Mr. Herbén’s 1 December 2016 hearing,
because he could choose not to attend and the hearing would then be adjourned.”
Claimant referred to the serious consequences that might follow if Mr. Herbon failed to
appear, including a court order for detention on his return to Uruguay, or a court request
for Interpol assistance to arrest him. Italba further remarked that “if the judiciary in
Uruguay is indeed as ‘independent’ as Uruguay professes, Uruguay cannot guarantee that

Mr. Herb6n would not suffer such consequences.”??

Necessity. Italba notes that the measures requested must be necessary to avoid harm or
prejudice to the petitioner.*! Observing that tribunals have differed on the degree of harm
required, some requiring “substantial harm” and others requiring “irreparable harm” (i.e.
harm not reparable by an award of damages), Claimant argues that both standards would

be met in the present case.*”

According to Claimant, the testimony of Mr. Alberelli and Mr. Herbon is of “paramount
importance.” The criminal prosecution of either would cause irreparable harm as it

would obstruct Italba’s access to these witnesses and their documents, thereby hindering

27 Id., 433. See also, Cl. Reply Prov. Meas., {Mf 14, 19 and Cl. Letter (9 February 2017) at 2 (informing the Tribunal
that Mr. Herbén’s hearing before the Uruguayan Criminal Court was now scheduled for 15 February 2017 and
adding that “Counsel to Mr. Herbon has confirmed that if Mr. Herbén appears at the hearing, as he is required to do,

he will

likely be indicted and imprisoned pending a criminal trial.”)

28 Cl. Reply Prov. Meas., | 14. See also, id., { 7(c)-
2° Cl. Reply Prov. Meas., 13.

8 Cl. Reply Prov. Meas., 13.

31 Cl. App. Prov. Meas., 34.

21d. 135.

its ability to present its case.** Italba argues that Mr. Alberelli is unable to return to
Uruguay for fear of incarceration and cannot access his documents, while Mr. Herbén’s

documents would not be accessible if he was incarcerated pending trial.*4

54.  Italba has emphasized that, contrary to Uruguay’s contention, Mr. Herbén and Mr.
Alberelli are not simply “witnesses” in the Investigation, but rather the “targets” of the
Investigation.*> As such, Claimant argues, they “stand a very real risk of being indicted

and imprisoned while they await trial.”*°

55. Claimant states that (i) the criminal file indicates that Mr. Herb6n and Mr. Alberelli are
“summoned to appear before the court as ‘indagados’; that is persons placed under
investigation”; (ii) Mr. Herb6n’s summons recommends that he appear with counsel, a
direction only present when the individual is the subject of the Investigation; (iii) the file
contains a letter from the Secretary of the Presidency to the State Prosecutor indicating
the former’s belief that Mr. Herbén committed a criminal offense; (iv) Respondent’s 8
November 2016 letter itself indicates that the Investigation was initiated, because the
Secretary of the Presidency had reason to believe that Mr. Herbén and Mr. Alberelli
might have committed forgery or fraud; and, (v) after Mr. Herb6n had to reschedule his
first appearance before the criminal court, that court issued an order deeming him a flight

risk and requiring the police to escort him to the hearing.*”

56. For Claimant, Respondent’s promise (cited in para. 25 above) that this Investigation will
not prevent Mr. Herb6n or Mr. Alberelli from participating in this arbitration is

“empty”.*® In Italba’s view:

“Uruguay cannot guarantee that Mr. Herbon will not be indicted or
imprisoned while he awaits trial. Nor can it guarantee that, if Mr.
Herbon is placed in pre-trial detention, he will maintain the ability
to place and receive calls at will, travel to his home or office to

31d. 136.

4 Td. 436. See also, Cl. Reply Prov. Meas., {ff 15-16.
35 Cl. Reply Prov. Meas., $Mf 11-12.

86 Td., J 12.

71d, 411.

8 1d. 15.

collect relevant documents, or travel in and out of the country at his
discretion for meetings or hearings.”*?

57. Claimant reiterated this position in its communication of 5 December 2016. More

specifically, Claimant argued that:

“Uruguay’s vague promise that it will ‘honor its commitment to
respect Claimant’s rights in this arbitration’ in the event that
Uruguay’s criminal investigation of the Garcia contract is allowed
to continue is, on its face, inadequate and incapable of
guaranteeing that Italba: (a) will have sufficient access to its key
witnesses, Gustavo Alberelli and Luis Herbon ; or (b) will be able
to gather evidence in Uruguay and elsewhere to prepare and
present its case — including having access to other witnesses
whose willingness to openly cooperate with Italba has evaporated
since the advent of this investigation for fear of similar reprisals.”*°

58. Claimant argues that Uruguay’s “guarantee” is “effectively worthless” because Uruguay:

. “[...] has no control over the State Prosecutor in the case —and, therefore, the

prosecutor may seek an indictment irrespective of Uruguay’s ‘guarantee;’”4!

. “[...] has no control over the judge in this case, who could order Italba’s witnesses
to stand trial and, at the same time, incarcerate them pending that trial;"4?_ and
“should the Uruguayan courts decide to imprison Mr. Herb6n or Dr. Alberelli
pending trial — as is the usual practice in Uruguay — there is no action that the
executive could take to overturn that decision [...].’”*>

. “[...] has no control over the rules in its penitentiary system, which could
significantly impede the ability of counsel to speak with and take instructions from
its client and main witnesses”“*; and “there is no action that the executive could

39 Id. [ 15. See also, Id. | 1(c).

49 CI. Letter (5 December 2016) at 1.

41 Td., at 2-3 (“Uruguay cannot do anything to prevent the arrest and imprisonment of Italba’s key witnesses because
both the Uruguayan courts and the State Prosecutor are independent from Uruguay’s executive branch and thus not
subject to their control.”) See also, Cl. Letter (9 February 2017) at 3 (stating that “Although the Uruguayan
government has given assurances that it would not interfere with Italba’s efforts to gather evidence and
documentation in this arbitration, it has also admitted that it has no ability to control the actions of the independent
prosecutors or the judiciary.”)

Id, at 2.

8 Id., at 3.

#4 Id, at 2.

take to [...] provide special privileges” to Mr. Herb6n and Mr. Alberelli should the

courts decide to imprison them pending trial.*>
59.  Italba also maintains that, despite the Tribunal’s request of 25 November 2016, Uruguay
has not referred to “a single concrete action” that it would take to prevent Mr. Alberrelli’s

and Mr. Herb6n’s arrest or pre-trial detention on their return to Uruguay.*°

60. In Claimant’s view, “only this Tribunal, with its ability to bind all elements of the

Uruguayan State — and not only its executive branch — can effectively protect Italba

from the deleterious effects of this investigation [...].”*”

61. Lastly, Italba contends that access to other witnesses has been ‘chilled’ by this criminal
prosecution.*® Italba claims that when Mr. Alberelli approached other individuals, who
might be potential witnesses for this arbitration, none was willing to become involved;
and that, according to Mr. Alberelli, one (unnamed) individual expressed fears of
Government retaliation or incarceration.*? Claimant goes on to state that it
“understand[s] that the Office of the Presidency has been in touch with this witness in an

attempt to persuade him not to testify on Italba’s behalf.”°°

62. Proportionality. In Italba’s view, the measures requested are proportionate, because
they would minimize Italba’s harm, while preserving Respondent’s sovereign right to

prosecute crime in its territory.*! Italba argues that the measures are “proportionately less

4 Id, at 3.

46 Id., at 2.

47 Id., at 2.

48 Cl, App. Prov. Meas., 36. See also, Cl. Reply Prov. Meas., | 17.

4° Cl. Reply Prov. Meas., [ 17. See also, Cl. Letter (9 February 2017) at 2.

5° Cl. Reply Prov. Meas., | 17. See also, Cl. Letter (5 December 2016) at 4 (arguing that “Italba has also submitted
evidence that the same office of the Presidency has been contacting Italba’s potential witnesses to harass and
threaten them so that they will not give testimony for Italba in this arbitration”); and Cl. Letter (13 December 2016)
at 2 (referring to “Uruguay’s attempts to influence or coerce potential witnesses in this arbitration into refusing to
provide testimony for Italba” and arguing that “[a]s a result of Uruguay’s egregious conduct, certain witnesses with
information that could be helpful to Italba have either refused to speak with Dr. Alberelli or indicated that they could
not support Italba openly in this arbitration because of the fear that Uruguay would retaliate against them for doing

 

 

51 CI. App. Prov. Meas., 38.

63.

64.

65.

66.

EL
3 Id.,
CL
SCL.
CL.
CL
SCL.
Id,

prejudicial to Uruguay than the serious harm that Italba would suffer if one of its key

witnesses were indicted and imprisoned.”>*

Claimant contends that a stay of the criminal proceedings for a few months would not
cause serious prejudice to Respondent. “[A]ny harm to Uruguay resulting from such a
stay would merely involve a delay in the prosecution of an alleged crime from six years

1" The criminal

ago, which Uruguay could have investigated as early as 201
prosecution would only be suspended, not dropped, and it could be resumed once the
arbitration ended.* Thus, a stay would not infringe upon Respondent’s sovereign right to

conduct criminal investigations.*°

By contrast, Claimant argues, failure to suspend the proceedings could lead to
intimidation or incarceration of witnesses, prejudicing Claimant’s ability to present its
case.*© A stay would “shield” Italba from irreparable harm by providing it unfettered
access to testimony and documentary evidence of its principals and other witnesses,

thereby allowing it properly to present its case.>”

Claimant further remarks that, while Respondent has invoked its sovereign right to
prosecute crimes in its territory, the criminal offense in the investigations at issue is an

alleged fraud “not on Uruguay, but on the Tribunal, because the allegedly forged

documents were submitted to the Tribunal”,** which is a matter for the Tribunal to

decide.

Bad Faith. Ttalba denies that a finding of State’s bad faith is needed for the imposition of

provisional measures.*?

Reply Prov. Meas., { 20.
420. See also, Cl. Letter (9 February 2017) at 3.

App. Prov. Meas., 440.

Reply Prov. Meas., { 20.

App. Prov. Meas., 39. See also, Cl. Reply Prov. Meas., 20.
App. Prov. Meas., 4 39.

Reply Prov. Meas., { 24.

430.

  

67.

68.

69.

70.

Notwithstanding the above, Italba states that in light of Uruguay’s repeated assertions
that the Investigation is conducted in good faith and without any hint of impropriety,
Claimant feels compelled to note that “there is evidence that Uruguay’s criminal
investigation [...] is politically motivated or, at the very least, tainted by the significant
role that the Office of the President, through the Secretary of the Presidency [...] played

in the process.”°°

Italba claims that the timing of the Investigation is “extremely suspicious”, as the
documents at issue have been known to Uruguay for five years.°! According to Claimant,
they were submitted by Italba’s subsidiary in court proceedings against the Uruguayan
government, and no action was taken then.” For Claimant, this fact “both underscores
the political nature of the current prosecution and undermines any sense of urgency in

respect of that prosecution.”*

Claimant also remarks that Respondent has admitted that the Investigation was prompted
by inquiries made with Dr. Fernando Garcia by the Secretary of the Presidency, who
subsequently wrote to the state prosecutor stating his belief that Mr. Alberelli and Mr.
Herb6n may have committed criminal offenses. Italba claims not only that “it is highly
unusual for officials in the Office of the President to be actively involved in initiating and
gathering information to be used in criminal prosecutions or to be in direct
communication with the state prosecutor about those prosecutions”, but also that the
Investigation is per se tainted due to “the coercive effect of a high-ranking official

contacting a witness directly to solicit information for use in a criminal prosecution.”®

Lastly, Claimant alleges that the Secretary of the Presidency “has been actively involved

in efforts to stop witnesses from supporting Italba and has caused such witnesses to fear

© Id., $9.6, 7 (a), and 31.
1 7d., 432.
2d. 4 7c).

“1d., 4
1d. 4

I
I
8 Hd. 1c).
I
I

33.
33,

for their ability to freely operate in Uruguay without adverse legal consequences if they

do not agree to his demands.””*°

c The Request

71. On the basis of the above, Claimant requests:

“[...] an order by the Tribunal recommending that Uruguay:

(a) Take all appropriate measures to end or, alternatively, suspend
the criminal proceedings until this Tribunal issues a final award in
this arbitration;

(b) Refrain from initiating any other criminal proceedings directly
related to the present arbitration, or engaging in any other course of
action, which may jeopardize the procedural integrity of this
arbitration;

(c) Refrain from taking any further measure of intimidation against
Dr. Gustavo Alberelli, Mr. Luis Herbon or any other director,
shareholder, representative or employee connected to, or affiliated
with, Trigosul and to refrain from engaging in any conduct that
may aggravate the dispute between the parties and/or alter the
status quo that existed prior to the initiation of the criminal
investigation launched on October 21, 2016 or any local
proceedings related, directly or indirectly, to the subject-matter of
this arbitration, including any further steps which might undermine
Italba’s ability to substantiate its claims, threaten the procedural
integrity of the arbitral process, aggravate or exacerbate the dispute
between the parties, or directly or indirectly affect the legal or
physical integrity of  Italba’s directors, shareholders,
representatives or employees.””®”

(2) On the Request for Temporary Relief

72. Inits Application, Claimant argued that the circumstances at issue require “an immediate

intervention by this Tribunal in order to preserve the status quo in this arbitration and

6 Td., | 1(d). See also, Cl. Letter (5 December 2016) at 4.

°T Cl. App. Prov. Meas., | 45. See also, Cl. Letter (5 December 2016) at 4 (requesting “[...] an order enjoining
Uruguay from continuing that criminal prosecution until the conclusion of this arbitration or taking any other
measures that may impair Italba’s ability to present its case, including by intimidating Italba’s potential witnesses.”)
and Cl. Letter (13 December 2016) at 2 (reiterating “request for provisional measures to suspend the criminal
prosecution against Mr. Herbon and Dr. Alberelli and to enjoin Uruguay from taking any measures that may impair
its ability to present its case, including by intimidating Italba’s potential witnesses.”)

 

 

18

prevent Italba from suffering imminent irreparable harm while the Application is

pending.”®* In particular, Claimant requested that “promptly upon receipt” of the

Application, the Tribunal:

“[...] issue temporary relief with immediate effect, ordering

Uruguay to suspend its criminal prosecution of Dr. Alberelli and

Mr. Herbon and enjoining Uruguay from taking any measure that

could alter the status quo, aggravate the parties’ dispute in this

arbitration, or affect the rights that are the subject of this

application until such time as this Tribunal has rendered its

decision regarding the provisional measures requested by Italba.”°?
73. According to Claimant, ICSID tribunals have “routinely ordered” such temporary relief
to prevent actions that could alter the status quo, aggravate the dispute or affect a
tribunal’s ability to address the issues arising in a pending application for provisional

measures.””

74. Claimant justified this request noting that, as Mr. Herb6n was required to appear in a
criminal court on 1 December 2016, both Claimant and Mr. Herb6n would suffer serious
and irreparable harm if Respondent was allowed to continue with the Investigation while
the briefing on this Application was completed and the Tribunal deliberated: Mr. Herbon
“will be subject to indictment, arrest and pre-trial detention”, and Italba’s access to a key

witness and documents will be severely impaired.”!

B. Respondent’s Position

75. Respondent requests the Tribunal to dismiss the application for Provisional Measures and
the request for a temporary order, and to issue an order for costs and attorney’s fees

against Claimant.’”

68 Cl, App. Prov. Meas., 42.

© Id., YW 9 and 44.

% Td. (42.

7! Cl. App. Prov. Meas., 143. As noted above, on 13 December 2016, Claimant reported that Mr. Herbén’s counsel
had been able to reschedule the hearing date until February 2017, but argued that he and Mr. Alberelli were still
“unable to return to Uruguay to gather evidence and conduct business without the threat of pretrial incarceration.”
Cl. Letter (13 December 2016) at 2.

% Resp. Res. Prov. Meas., 75.

(1) On the Request for Provisional Measures

76. Respondent contends that Claimant’s application invites the Tribunal to “prohibit
Uruguay from exercising one of its most fundamental and quintessentially sovereign

rights: to enforce its criminal laws by investigating the commission of serious offenses

within its own territory.””? Respondent opposes this “extraordinary step”, observing
that:
. (i) There is “overwhelming evidence that signatures have been forged and

documents, including a purported contract, have been falsified in violation of the
Penal Code’s sanctions against the crimes of forgery and fraud [...].””*

. (ii) It is “indisputable” that Mr. Alberelli and Mr. Herb6n are “material witnesses in
regard to the commission of these criminal offenses [...].””°
. (iii) “There is no evidence, and no reason to suspect, that Uruguay’s investigation

into these criminal offenses is being conducted in bad faith, or is motivated by a
desire to retaliate against Claimant for having initiated these arbitral proceeding, or
to hamper Claimant in the presentation of its case [...].""° The Secretary of the
Presidency’s actions in connection with the investigation were taken “in fulfillment
of his official duties and his obligations under Uruguayan law” as the “Uruguayan
Penal Code imposes strict obligations on all public officials to report unlawful
activity that comes to their attention.””” The facts demonstrate that there is “good
reason” to conduct the criminal investigation in question, and that it was “entirely
reasonable” to have cited Mr. Alberelli and Mr. Herbén to “solicit their testimony”
on how the allegedly forged signature came to appear in the documents.’”® Mr.
Alberelli is the addressee of the letter and Mr. Herb6n signed the contract, in which
the alleged forged signature appears.” There are no pending allegations against
Mr. Herb6n or Mr. Alberelli, and “they have been cited by the Criminal Court as
witnesses [...].”°°

Bid, Ql.

74 Td., Y3 and 15.

3 1d. (3.

7 Id., 43 and 19.

7 Resp. Res. Prov. Meas. {[ 13 (third bullet) and n. 15. Respondent explains that Article 177 of the Criminal Code
“requires any official who becomes aware of the possible commission of a criminal offense to report the
circumstances to the appropriate law enforcement authoriti adding that “[a]n official’s failure to report such
circumstances is itself a criminal offense, punishable by three to eighteen months’ imprisonment.” Jd. n. 15. See
also, Resp. Letter (8 November 2016) at 2.

78 Resp. Res. Prov. Meas., {{f 17-18.

% Id, 21.

80 7d, (21.

 

20

77. Respondent has emphasized that international organizations have recognized Uruguay as

a “mature democracy with solid public institutions and a stable political system” with an

1

independent judiciary.*! It has also observed that its Constitution provides for “the

complete separation and independence of the different branches of Government,

including the Executive and Judicial branches.”*?

78. In Respondent’s view, Claimant has failed to show that the Investigation will interfere
with its procedural or other rights, since Claimant has already presented its case in the

Memorial dated 16 September 2016.** Uruguay further stated that it:

“[...] recognizes that these witnesses might also be called upon by
Claimant to assist in the preparation of its Reply (due in April
2017) or testify at the oral hearings (expected in November 2017).
In that regard, and to avoid prejudice to Claimant, Uruguay is
prepared to guarantee that its investigation into the circumstances
of the apparently forged signatures and fraudulent documents,
regardless of its course, will not prevent either Dr. Alberelli or Mr.
Herbon from participating in the preparation or presentation of the
remainder of Claimant's case.”**

79. The above was confirmed in Uruguay’s letter of 28 November 2016.*° In particular, the

letter states that:

“{...] Uruguay will honor its commitment to respect Claimant’s
rights in this arbitration, including its rights to have Mr. Herb6n
and Dr. Alberelli gather evidence in Uruguay to present to this
Tribunal, help prepare Claimant’s written pleadings, and assist
Claimant in the preparation of its case.

Uruguay will also respect Claimant’s right to call witnesses to give
oral testimony, in person, at the hearings tentatively set to be held
in November 2017. Thus, Uruguay will not take any action that
will impede the witnesses, Mr. Herbén and Dr. Alberelli, from

811d. 4. See also, Resp. Letter (8 November 2016) at 1.
® Resp. Letter (8 November 2016) at 1.

% Resp. Res. Prov. Meas., 15.

“14,46.

85 Resp. Letter (28 November 2016), at 2.

21

attending the scheduled hearings and freely offering their
testimony.”®°

“[...] Uruguay will take the necessary and proper measures so that
Mr. Herbén and Dr. Alberelli can attend the hearings scheduled by
the Tribunal without any restriction. Similarly, Uruguay will also
adopt the necessary and proper measures to enable Mr. Herb6n and
Dr. Alberelli to collect all the evidence in Uruguay that may be
necessary for submission to this Tribunal.”*’

80. In that letter, Uruguay also remarked that it was making these commitments:

“[...] notwithstanding that (1) it has not been established that the
Tribunal has prima facie jurisdiction in these proceedings, and (2)
as a consequence, the Tribunal is without authority to recommend
provisional measures, let alone measures that would diminish
Uruguay’s sovereign right to investigate crimes or enforce its penal
laws in its own territory.”**

81. It added, however, that:

“At the same time, in the interest of full transparency, Uruguay
trusts that the Tribunal will appreciate that Uruguay’s judiciary is
independent, as part of its democratic and republican government
system. At the present time, there is no formal accusation against
Mr. Herb6n or Dr. Alberelli. They were summoned by the
competent authorities of the criminal justice system in order to
provide information on the matter under investigation. Whatever
transpires as a result of this criminal investigation is within the
exclusive competence of the judicial authorities of Uruguay.”®?

82. Uruguay further argues that “[...] its guarantee is entitled to the same status and respect
that international courts and tribunals consistently give to similar undertakings by

sovereign States.”°°

83. By letter of 14 February 2017, Uruguay reiterated the guarantee previously made to the

Tribunal, stating that:

86 Id., at 3.
87 Id., at 4.
88 Id. at 2.
8 Id., at 4.
% Resp. Letter (13 December 2016) at 2 (citing ICJ case law).

22

“its investigation into the circumstances of the apparently forged
signatures and fraudulent documents, regardless of its course, will
not prevent either Dr. Alberelli or Mr. Herb6n from participating in

the preparation or presentation of the remainder of Claimant’s

case.””!

84. Uruguay also takes the view that, there is “no reason to believe” that Mr. Herbon or Mr.
Alberelli will refrain from providing further support to Claimant, as they are both
interested parties. Further, for Respondent, there are no basis to conclude that other
persons would be “chilled” from cooperating, as Claimant has not identified any other

potential witnesses.”

85. Respondent adds that the alleged “impact” of the Investigation in the preparation of
Claimant’s case is undermined by the fact that the documents at issue in that
Investigation are only of “marginal” importance to the question of damages in this
arbitration. According to Respondent, they have no bearing on questions of jurisdiction

or merits.”

86. Uruguay also takes issue with Claimant’s assertion that Uruguay’s Investigation will
usurp the Tribunal’s fact finding role in assessing the evidence. Accepting that the
Tribunal has “the exclusive competence to evaluate the evidence [...] for the purpose of
ruling on all claims and defences presented in these arbitral proceedings”,°* Respondent
states that a finding by a Uruguayan court that the signatures were forgeries would not be

binding on this Tribunal.?>

87. Similarly, Uruguay questions the notion that Respondent should not be allowed to
conduct a criminal investigation based on documents it received as part of this arbitration.
For Respondent, a claimant in an ICSID proceeding “does not automatically enjoy

immunity from the application of the host State’s criminal law.”°°

 

6 Id., 425.

23

88. Recognizing that a State may not abuse its sovereign right to enforce criminal laws “[...]

 

by exercising them in bad faith, including for the purpose of obtaining unfair advantage

in an arbitration”, Uruguay argues that no such bad faith is present here.””

89. In response to Claimant’s allegations that the Secretary of the Presidency has been
engaged in a campaign to intimidate witnesses, in its communication of 6 December

2016, Respondent stated:

“Uruguay represents to the Tribunal, categorically and
unequivocally, that it has made, and will make, no effort to
dissuade any witnesses from cooperating with or testifying on
behalf of Claimant. Uruguay has done no more than its due
diligence in inquiring of particular individuals in Uruguay whether
the actions or comments attributed to them by Dr. Alberelli or Mr.
Herbon in their Declarations are as described therein. That is how
Uruguay discovered that Dr. Garcia had no communications with
either Dr. Alberelli or Mr. Herbon, contradicting what they said in
their Declarations, and that his signatures on the documents
submitted by them are forgeries.

Uruguay has since discovered that Claimant has also falsely
reported on its communications with other persons and entities in
Uruguay, including Canal 7 and DirecTV. Uruguay has received
letters from authorized representatives of these companies, which it
will submit with its Counter Memorial on 16 January, denying the
truthfulness of the representations made about them in the
Declarations of Dr. Alberelli and Mr. Herbon. It appears from
Uruguay's due diligence that Claimant has engaged in a pattern of
false representations about its contacts and business dealings in
Uruguay. This may be the reason it is falsely accusing Uruguay of
witness intimidation — to discourage Uruguay from exercising its
right to ascertain the veracity of the representations Claimant has
made in these proceedings.”**

97 Td, 427.

°8 Resp. Email (6 December 2016). Claimant responded also on 6 December 2016, arguing that this submission was
an attempt to “distract the Tribunal from the matter at hand.” Italba went on to state that “it would not be at all
surprising if the new allegations in Uruguay’s letter portend a widened criminal investigation in Uruguay — the goal
of which is either to force this entire dispute into the Uruguayan criminal courts or, at the very least, to cripple
Italba's ability to respond in this arbitration with live witnesses to any of Uruguay's forthcoming arguments.”
Claimant also argued “that Uruguay's desperate effort to use unsupported and baseless allegations in order to avoid
an order of provisional measures only highlights why this arbitration became necessary in the first place: Uruguay
will stop at nothing to block Italba from enjoying the fruits of its investments in Uruguay.”

  

24

a. Lack of Prima Facie Jurisdiction

90. Respondent contends that the Claimant’s Application must be rejected because Claimant
has not established the Tribunal’s prima facie jurisdiction.”” For Uruguay, “[bJefore an
ICSID tribunal may consider the recommendation of provisional measures, it must be
satisfied that, at a minimum, its prima facie jurisdiction has been established.”!

According to Respondent, the contrary argument is incorrect as a matter of law.'°!

91. Uruguay maintains that to exercise jurisdiction the Tribunal must find that Claimant is an
investor protected by the Treaty, and more particularly, that it had an investment in
Uruguay at the relevant time.'°? In Respondent’s view, although the claims are based on
alleged actions against a Uruguayan company (Trigosul, S.A.) purportedly owned by

Italba, Claimant has provided no evidence that it owns Trigosul S.A.!%

92. In Respondent’s view “[u]nless and until Claimant comes forward with proof of
ownership of Trigosul, sufficient to establish the prima facie jurisdiction of the Tribunal,
there is no basis for the Tribunal to even consider, let alone grant, the Application for

Provisional Measures or the request for a temporary order.”!°

b. The Requirements for the Granting of Provisional Measures are Not Met

93. In Uruguay’s view, there is a “high threshold” for the recommendation of provisional
measures, namely “[...] that there is a right that is threatened with irreparable impairment;
that the threat is imminent and the need for relief is urgent; and that the relief sought is

proportional.”!°5

94. According to Respondent, tribunals have “uniformly” recognized that provisional

measures are an “extraordinary remedy” subject to a “high bar’, which is “particularly

%® Resp. Res. Prov. Meas., 12.

100 Td. 170.

101 See Resp. Letter (28 November 2016) at 2-3.

02 Resp, Res. Prov. Meas., 70.

3 Td., Wf 12, 71-73. See also, Resp. Letter (28 November 2016) at 2-3 and Resp. Letter (14 February 2017) at 1-2.
104 Resp, Res. Prov. Meas., 74. See also, Resp. Letter (28 November 2016) at 3.

5 Resp, Res. Prov. Meas., {{[ 11 and 34-37.

25

95.

96.

97.

98.

high” when the requested measures would interfere with the sovereign right to investigate

criminal offenses in its territory.!°°

Uruguay argues that tribunals have “routinely” rejected applications similar to the one at
issue here “holding that a respondent State’s sovereign right to investigate criminal
activity in its own territory may not be infringed absent a showing of improper

motive.”!07

Respondent contends that the cases in which the applications have been
granted, on which Claimant relies, are based on findings of a State’s “bad faith” in the

initiation or conduct of the investigation. !°°

For Respondent, Claimant has failed to meet this high threshold. In short, in Uruguay’s
view: (i) Claimant has no right to insulate witnesses from good faith criminal
investigations in Uruguay; (ii) even if such right existed, there is no imminent threat
requiring urgent relief; and (iii) the relief sought is not proportionate.!°

The Allegedly Impaired Right. Uruguay contends that Claimant has failed to demonstrate
that it has a right threatened with irreparable impairment.'!? While Claimant has a right
freely to present its case before the Tribunal, such right does not include immunity for its
witnesses from Uruguay’s good faith exercise of its sovereign right to conduct a criminal

investigation.'"!

According to Respondent, Claimant’s rights are not impaired by the mere fact of calling
witnesses for questioning in a criminal investigation in Uruguay’s territory.!'? The
Investigation does not infringe on the exclusivity of the arbitral proceeding, nor does it
undermine the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. Respondent points out that the matter being
investigated (forgery of signatures and falsification of documents) is very different from

the subject matter of the arbitration (alleged treaty violations arising out of the revocation

106 Td, | 38.

07 Td., 9 7 and 8-10.
108 Td., Wf 9, 39, and 52.
09 Td, FLL.

10 1d, 155.

1 Td, Wf 41-42.

21d, 4.43.

26

99.

100.

101.

102.

103.

of Trigosul’s frequencies in 2011 and alleged failure to comply with a 2014 judgment of

the Tribunal Contencioso Administrativo).'°

Urgency and Proportionality. In Respondent’s view, absent any threat of irreparable
harm, there is no urgent need for protection, and any provisional measures would be

disproportionate. !!4

In addition, Respondent contends that there is no urgency because (i) Mr. Alberelli has
not even been served with summons as he lives in the the United States; and (ii) although
Mr. Herbén has been summoned to appear before the criminal court on 1 December, that

fact alone does not deprive Claimant of any of its rights in this arbitration.!!>

By letter of 14 February 2017, referring to the new date for Mr. Herb6n’s hearing, noted
that “Mr. Herbon, acting through Uruguayan counsel, has successfully rescheduled his
hearing on previous occasions. Claimant has provided no reason to believe this time will

be any different.”!!°

In Respondent’s view, there is no proportionality. The measures requested are “extreme”
and “grossly disproportionate” as the remedy sought would cause greater harm to
Uruguay’s indisputable sovereign right to conduct criminal investigations for serious

offenses in its territory.!!”

(2) On the Request for Temporary Relief

In Respondent’s Response of 21 November 2016, Uruguay argued that this request was
“entirely unjustified”.''® Uruguay observed that it was based on the assumption that the
Tribunal would not be able to rule on the Claimant’s Application for Provisional

Measures before 1 December 2016, when Mr. Herbén had been summoned to appear. In

13 1d, 445.
41d, 156.
45 1d. 57.
46 Resp, Letter (14 February 2017) at 2.
471d, 458.
48 Td, 1 63.

27

104.

105.

106.

IV.

107.

addition, Respondent contended, the request also failed for the same reasons adduced

with respect to the Application for Provisional Measures.!!?

Uruguay distinguished the cases on which temporary orders have been issued, observing
that in those cases the orders were issued to prevent the State from committing alleged
treaty violations, including unlawful expropriation, during the pendency of the
arbitration.'° By contrast, in this case the only “imminent” event was the appearance of

Mr. Herbon before the Criminal Court on 1 December 2016. '?!

In its 21 November 2016 submission, Respondent went on to argue that there was no
need for the temporary order as Mr. Herbén could remain outside of Uruguay until the
Tribunal ruled on the Application for Provisional Measures, if he did not wish to testify

on | December 2016.!??

Finally, Uruguay took the view that the Claimant’s Application and the Respondent’s
Response provided enough elements for the Tribunal to rule on Claimant’s Application
before 1 December 2016 (even without a second round of pleadings). It noted, however,
that even if this were not possible, the alternatives of Mr. Herbén (a) appearing to testify
or (b) remaining outside of Uruguay until the Tribunal ruled on Claimant’s Application
were “far less onerous than the extreme measure of ordering Uruguay to refrain from

exercising its sovereign rights.”!”>

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

In order to arrive at this decision, the Tribunal reviewed and considered all the arguments
of the Parties and the documents submitted by them in this phase of the proceeding. The
fact that the Tribunal does not specifically mention a given argument or reasoning does

not mean that it has not considered it. In their submissions, the Parties produced and

419 Td, Wf 61-63.
120 1d, 1 64.

'21 Resp. Res. Prov. Meas., 4 65. As already noted, on 13 December 2016, Respondent informed the Tribunal that
Mr. Herbén had not appeared in court on 1 December. Resp. Letter (13 December 2016) at 1.

22 Resp, Res. Prov. Meas., 66.
"3 1d. 167.

28

cited numerous awards and decisions dealing with matters that they consider relevant to
these provisional measures. The Tribunal has considered these documents carefully and
may take into account the reasoning and findings of these and other tribunals. However,
in coming to a decision on the matter of provisional measures and temporary relief
requested by Italba, the Tribunal must perform, and in fact has performed, an independent
analysis of the ICSID Convention, the Arbitration Rules, and the particular facts of this

case.

A. Legal Framework

108.

109.

For the decision on provisional measures, Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Rule

39 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules particularly are applicable.

Article 47 of the ICSID Convention provides the following:

“Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it considers that the
circumstances so require, recommend any provisional measures which should be
taken to preserve the respective rights of either party.”

Rule 39 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules reads as follows:

“(1) At any time after the institution of the proceeding, a party may request that
provisional measures for the preservation of its rights be recommended by the
Tribunal. The request shall specify the rights to be preserved, the measures the
recommendation of which is requested, and the circumstances that require such
measures.

(2) The Tribunal shall give priority to the consideration of a request made
pursuant to paragraph (1).

(3) The Tribunal may also recommend provisional measures on its own initiative
or recommend measures other than those specified in a request. It may at any time
modify or revoke its recommendations.

(4) The Tribunal shall only recommend provisional measures, or modify or revoke
its recommendations, after giving each party an opportunity of presenting its
observations.

(5) If a party makes a request pursuant to paragraph (1) before the constitution of

the Tribunal, the Secretary-General shall, on the application of either party, fix
time limits for the parties to present observations on the request, so that the

29

request and observations may be considered by the Tribunal promptly upon its
constitution.

(6) Nothing in this Rule shall prevent the parties, provided that they have so
stipulated in the agreement recording their consent, from requesting any judicial
or other authority to order provisional measures, prior to or after the institution of
the proceeding, for the preservation of their respective rights and interests.”

110. Pursuant to Rule 39 (1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the application for provisional
measures must include three matters: the rights to be preserved; the measures requested

and the circumstances that require such measures.

B. Jurisdiction

111. Before it can recommend provisional measures, the Tribunal must be satisfied that it has

prima facie jurisdiction over the parties and the dispute submitted to it.

112. In the present case, the Respondent in its Counter-Memorial has raised a jurisdictional
objection in relation to the standing of the Claimant to advance a claim in respect of
Uruguay’s actions towards the Uruguayan company, Trigosul S.A., which are alleged to
be in violation of the BIT.!** According to the Respondent, the Claimant has not
furnished evidence that it owns Trigosul S.A. and hence cannot prove, even on a prima

facie basis, that it has an investment in Uruguay for the purposes of the BIT.

113. The Respondent has not requested that its aforementioned jurisdictional objection be
dealt with in a preliminary phase of this arbitration in accordance with Article 41 of the
ICSID Convention. The Respondent has instead agreed that its jurisdictional objection

should be determined at the same time as its defences on the merits, in a final award.

114. In these circumstances, the Tribunal considers that the Respondent has accepted that the
Tribunal is vested with the necessary adjudicative powers to conduct this arbitration.
Those powers include the power to recommend provisional measures where appropriate,
in accordance with Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 39 of the ICSID

Arbitration Rules. In reaching this conclusion, the Tribunal in no way prejudges the

24 Td., 9 70-74.; Resp. Letter (28 November 2016) at 2 and 3.

30

merits of the Respondent’s jurisdictional objection, which will be determined by the

Tribunal in accordance with the procedure agreed to by the parties.

C. Merits

115.

116.

(1) Italba’s request for Uruguay to end or suspend the investigation

The Tribunal considers that Uruguay has the sovereign right and duty to investigate
alleged criminal actions that have taken place in its territory, in accordance with the rules
and procedures established under the laws of Uruguay. That right is recognised and

protected by international law. As stated by the Tribunal in Churchill v. Indonesia:

“At the outset, the Tribunal stresses that the right, even the duty, to conduct
criminal investigations and prosecutions is a prerogative of any sovereign
State.”!5
The Tribunal does not have the power to order or recommend the cessation of a criminal
investigation that is being conducted by the relevant organs of Uruguay in relation to an
alleged criminal action on its territory. In the words of the Tribunal in SGS v. Pakistan:
“[w]le cannot enjoin a State from conducting the ordinary processes of criminal,

7126 This conclusion was

administrative and civil justice within its own territory.
confirmed by the Tribunal in Hamester v. Ghana (“A state may obviously exercise its
sovereign powers to investigate and prosecute criminal actions.”!?’) and in Teinver v.
Argentina (“[a]s has been held by a number of arbitral tribunals, Respondent clearly has
the sovereign right to conduct criminal investigations and it will usually require
exceptional circumstances to justify the granting of provisional measures to suspend

criminal proceedings by a State.”)!?° Besides the above, there is no evidence on the

"5 Churchill Mining PLC and Planet Mining Pty Ltd. v. the Republic of Indonesia, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/14,
Procedural Order No. 14 (22 December 2014), 72.

126 SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/13,
Procedural Order No. 2 (16 October 2002), 36.

"27 Gustav F W Hamester GmbH & Co KG v. Republic of Ghana, ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/24, Award (18 June
2010), 297.

28 Teinver S.A. et al v. the Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1, Decision on Provisional Measures (8
April 2016), ¥ 190.

31

record to support Claimant’s contention that the criminal investigation in the present case

has been brought in bad faith by the Uruguan authorities.

117. Claimant maintains that the investigation will: “(a) thwart Italba’s ability to proceed with
this arbitration by incarcerating its principals and chilling assistance from relevant
witnesses; (b) aggravate the status quo; and (c) usurp the functions of this Tribunal.”!°
On the basis of its present understanding of the matter based upon the totality of the
submissions that it has received, the Tribunal is not persuaded that there is, as yet,
substantive and compelling evidence of a serious risk that Claimant’s rights will suffer
irreparable harm as a result of the Investigation or that the integrity of these arbitration

proceedings will be compromised.

118. Furthermore, the Tribunal is satisified that its functions will not be usurped by the
Investigation. Respondent has accepted, as it must, that the Tribunal is in no way bound
by any finding ultimately made by the Uruguayan courts in relation to the authenticity or
otherwise of the documents in question.'*° The Tribunal does not consider that the
Investigation will “aggravate the status quo” in any relevant sense. As noted above,
Uruguay has the right to investigate alleged criminal conduct in its territory. There can be
no legitimate expectation on the part of Claimant that the prosecution of an ICSID
arbitration against Uruguay confers a blanket immunity upon its principals and witnesses

from a criminal investigation in Uruguay.

119. In relation to Claimant’s ability to present and prove its case in this arbitration,

Respondent has given the following undertakings:

a

Uruguay’s “investigation of the apparently forged signatures and fraudulent
documents ... will not prevent either Dr. Alberelli or Mr. Herb6n from participating

in the preparation or presentation of the remainder of Claimant’s case.”;

b

“Uruguay will honor its commitment to respect Claimant’s rights in this arbitration,

including its rights to gather evidence in Uruguay to present to this Tribunal ...”; and

29 Cl. App. Prov. Meas., 491 1 and 5.
130 Resp, Res. Prov. Meas., 24.

32

120.

121.

122.

123.

124.

c) “... Uruguay will not take any action that will impede the witnesses, Mr. Herbén and
Dr. Alberelli, from attending the scheduled hearings and freely offering their

testimony”.

Claimant’s application is based on the anticipated consequences of the investigation. It
has filed no evidence that Dr. Alberelli’s and Mr. Herbén’s participation in this
proceeding has been affected by such the investigation to date. Under the present
circumstances, the Tribunal must accept that Uruguay’s commitment to respect

Claimant’s rights in this arbitration has been made in good faith and will be adhered to.

For the above reasons, the Tribunal rejects Claimant’s Application for Provisional

Measures to end or to suspend the Investigation.

(2) Temporary Relief

It will be recalled that Mr. Herbén was summoned to appear on 1 December 2016 before
the Criminal Court conducting the investigation. Claimant maintained that: “By the time
of that hearing or shortly thereafter, he will be subject to indictment, arrest and pre-trial

detention...”!3!

To avoid that possibility, on 10 November 2016, Claimant requested the Tribunal to
“issue temporary relief with inmediate effect, ordering Uruguay to suspend the Criminal
prosecution of Dr. Alberelli and Mr. Herbén until such time as this Tribunal has rendered

its decision regarding the provisional measures requested by Italba.”!*?

It was Respondent’s position that: “if Mr. Herbén does not wish to testify on 1
December, he can remain outside Uruguay temporarily until the Tribunal rules on the

Application for Provisional Measures. That need not be much beyond 1 December.”!*?

51 Cl, App. Prov. Meas., 43.
21d. 444,
33 Resp, Res. Prov. Meas., 66.

33

125. The Tribunal has now been fully briefed on the Claimant’s Application for Provisional
Measures and has decided to reject this Application. Accordingly, the Tribunal need not
decide on the Claimant’s request for temporary relief.

Vv. DECISION

126. For the above reasons, the Arbitral Tribunal unanimously decides the following:

1) The Application for Provisional Measures and Temporary Relief filed by Italba

Corporation is rejected.

2) The Parties are reminded of their duty to act in good faith during this proceeding and

to refrain from taking any action that could affect the integrity of the arbitration.

3

To reserve to the final award or decision the matter of the costs of the procedure

related to Claimant’s Application.

John Beechey CBE Zachary Douglas, Q.C.
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: February 15, 2017 Date: February 15, 2017

Rodrigo Oreamuno
President
Date: February 15, 2017

34

