INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

 

ITERA INTERNATIONAL ENERGY LLC AND ITERA GROUP NV
CLAIMANTS

GEORGIA
RESPONDENT

ICSID CasE No. ARB/08/7

DECISION ON ADMISSIBILITY
OF ANCILLARY CLAIMS

BEFORE THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL COMPOSED OF:
Judge Hans Danelius, President
Professor Francisco Orrego Vicufia (Arbitrator)
Professor Brigitte Stern (Arbitrator)

SECRETARY OF THE TRIBUNAL:

Ms. Natali Sequeira

DATE OF DISPATCH TO THE PARTIES: 4 December 2009

I. GENERAL BACKGROUND

1. The Claimants are Itera International Energy LLC (hereinafter “Jtera”) and Itera
Group NV (hereinafter “JGNV”). Itera is a company organized under the laws of the
State of Florida, USA, and is wholly owned by IGNV, a company organized in Curagao
under the laws in force in The Netherlands.

2. As of 1996, Itera supplied gas in Georgia to state-owned companies and government
entities which accumulated considerable debts to Itera, as a result of deliveries of gas
which remained unpaid.

3. According to Resolution No. 1612, dated 27 December 2002, issued by the President
of Georgia, the Ministry of Finance was ordered to make funds available for the payment
of the debt owed by the Ministry of Fuel and Energy to Itera. The latter Ministry was
further directed to ensure the payments to Itera and enter into a debt restructuring and
repayment agreement with Itera.

4. Also on 27 December 2002, the Energy Ministry of Georgia and Itera concluded
Agreement No. 03-910/02 (hereinafter the “Debt Restructuring Agreement”) setting out
a general framework for the repayment by Georgian state-owned or state-financed
organizations of their debts to Itera.

(a) Azot

5. JSC Azot (hereinafter “Azot”) was a Georgian state-owned company which operated a
large chemical fertilizer plant in Rustavi. The plant produced a variety of chemical
products and had numerous employees.

6. On 21 February 2001, the Rustavi City Court approved the initiation of bankruptcy
proceedings against Azot. On 27 July 2001, the same court deferred the opening of
bankruptcy proceedings and approved a Rehabilitation Plan for Azot in accordance with
Georgian bankruptcy law.

7. As result of the negotiations between Itera and the Georgian authorities in connection
with Itera’s purchase of 90% of the shares in Azot, IGNV issued on 17 October 2002 a
corporate guarantee for the fulfilment of Itera’s obligations resulting from the purchase.
These obligations were specified in a Business Plan set-up for Azot which incorporated
the Rehabilitation Plan approved by the court.

8. On 31 December 2002, the President of Georgia issued Decree No. 568 authorizing
the privatization of Azot. The Decree provided that the state-owned shares in Azot,
amounting to 90% of the total stock, should be transferred to Itera by direct sale for a
nominal price of US$500,000 and that an undertaking by Itera to carry out the Business
Plan should be made.

9. On 20 March 2003, in furtherance of this Decree, the Ministry of State Property
Administration and Itera concluded a Contract for the sale and purchase of a block of
state-owned shares in Azot (hereinafter the “Sale-Purchase Agreement”). The Sale-
Purchase Agreement provided that the Ministry would transfer 24,979,644 shares (90%
of the total stock) to Itera for a nominal amount of US$500,000. An undertaking to fulfil
the obligations under the Business Plan was also included in the Agreement and Itera
would pay Azot’s verified and recognized debts within three years. Disputes regarding
the Sale-Purchase Agreement were to be referred to the Arbitration Institute of the
Stockholm Chamber of Commerce.

10. Also on 20 March 2003, the Ministry of Finance and Itera concluded an Agreement
on the repayment of Azot’s debt to the Ministry. A Bill was to be submitted to
Parliament in order to provide certain state organizations with funds of GEL22,111,941
(the equivalent of approximately US$10.2 million) to pay their debts for natural gas to
Ttera, and Itera would then transfer this amount to the Ministry in payment of Azot’s
fiscal debts.

11. On 4 October 2003, Decree No. 503 on the Repayment of Debts was promulgated by
the President of Georgia. A debt of GEL 22,111,941 to Itera was acknowledged in the
Decree, and the Ministry of Finance was instructed to take measures to pay the debt.

12. On 14 November 2003, the Ministry of Finance, Itera and Azot concluded the
negotiations of an Agreement (hereinafter the “Set-Off Agreement”) providing that
pursuant to Decree No. 503, Itera and Azot had concluded contracts for assignment of
claims against natural gas consumers in the total amount of GEL 22,111,941.82, that the
Ministry. The Set-Off Agreement also provides that, from the moment of signing the
Agreement, the Ministry would lose the right to claim tax indebtedness from Azot in that
amount, and that Azot would be deemed to have paid off the tax indebtedness in that
amount.

13. In March 2005, the Ministry of Economic Development, dissatisfied with Azot,
issued a public tender calling for proposals for purchase of the shareholdings and assets
of Azot.

14. In a petition of 25 May 2005 to the Rustavi City Court, the Minister of Finance stated
that Azot had not been able to carry out the measures envisaged in the Rehabilitation
Plan and had not discharged tax and loan indebtedness owed to the Ministry of Finance.
The Minister therefore requested the court to terminate Azot’s rehabilitation regime and
resume the bankruptcy proceedings.

15. By Decree No. 211 of 28 May 2005, the Government of Georgia granted the Ministry
of Economic Development authority to participate in Azot’s rehabilitation and
bankruptcy proceedings as a creditor on behalf of the State.

16. On 30 May 2005, an Agreement was concluded between the Ministry of Economic
Development and the Energy Invest Joint Stock Company (hereinafter “Energy Invest”).
According to this Agreement, the Ministry would petition the court to conduct

bankruptcy proceedings in regard to Azot and then make every effort to conclude a
purchase agreement with Energy Invest and to sell Azot’s assets to Energy Invest.

17. In an Interlocutory Decision of 6 June 2005, the Rustavi City Court decided, upon the
request of the Minister of Finance, to terminate the rehabilitation proceedings and pursue
bankruptcy proceedings in regard to Azot.

18. In a writ of 23 June 2005, Itera lodged an appeal against the Interlocutory Decision.
The appeal was declared inadmissible on 29 August 2005 by the Appeals Chamber for
Civil, Entrepreneurial and Bankruptcy Cases of the Tblisi District Court. Itera lodged a
new appeal which, on 23 September 2005, was declared to be unfounded by the Appeals
Chamber. The appeal was referred to the Supreme Court of Georgia which, on 28
September 2006, rejected the appeal and upheld the Appeals Chamber’s Decision of 29
August 2005.

19. By an Agreement of 22 July 2005, Itera, represented by the Receiver in Bankruptcy,
sold Azot’s immovable property to Energy Invest.

(b) Sistema

20. According to the Debt Restructuring Agreement, Itera would assign to a financial
agent selected by the Energy Ministry its claims against the debtors in the amount of
US$46,406,352.30. The Energy Ministry would pay this amount to Itera within seven
years from 2003 in quarterly instalments. Disputes relating to the conclusion, fulfilment
or termination of the Agreement were to be referred to the Arbitration Institute of the
Stockholm Chamber of Commerce. On 20 March 2003, the Ministry of Fuel and Energy
designated the state-owned company OOO Sistema (hereinafter “Sistema”) as financial
agent.

21. The dispute between the Parties regarding Sistema is based essentially on the
following two documents which, in the Claimants’ opinion, were validly concluded
agreements but, in the Respondent’s opinion, were only draft Agreements not validly
concluded between the parties concerned:!

(i) The Assignment Contract No. 03-144/03, dated 14 July 2003, between Itera and
Sistema in which Itera assigned to Sistema its claims under a certain number of contracts
for sale and purchase of natural gas. The debtors were to pay US$13,564,946.29 to
Sistema, while Sistema would pay that amount to Itera over a period of seven years in
quarterly instalments. Disputes regarding the implementation of the Contract were to be
resolved by way of negotiation or, in the last resort, by arbitration at the International
Commercial Arbitration Court of the Chamber of Commerce of the Russian Federation
(hereinafter “JCAC”).

' By using in this Decision the terms “Assignment Contract”, “Surety Agreement” and “Sistema
Agreements”, the Arbitral Tribunal takes no position on whether or not these agreements were legally
valid, a matter which, as explained above, is in dispute between the parties.

(ii) The Surety Agreement No. 03-162/03, also dated 14 July 2003, between Itera, the
Energy Ministry and Sistema in which the Energy Ministry accepted to be liable to Itera
for the fulfilment by Sistema of its obligations under the Assignment Contract to Itera.
Disputes were to be resolved by ICAC arbitration.

22. In January 2006, Itera initiated arbitration proceedings before ICAC against the
Ministry of Energy which Itera accused of having breached the Surety Agreement. These
proceedings are still continuing.

23. On 12 September 2006, the Tblisi City Court, at the request of the Ministry of
Finance, found that the Ministry of Energy, when signing the Debt Restructuring
Agreement and the Surety Agreement, had not been entitled to do so and therefore
decided to nullify these Agreements.

II. PROCEDURE

24. In a letter of 18 April 2008 to the President of Georgia, the Claimants, referring to
their investments in Georgia, stated as follows:

 

and IGNV’s investments have been adversely affected by a series of measures taken by
Georgia and its agencies and instrumentalities, starting in early 2004. In particular:

 

(a) Georgia and its agencies and instrumentalities breached, repudiated and/or purported to
invalidate several agreements with Itera, including an assignment agreement signed by the State-
owned company OOO Sistema, and a surety agreement signed by the Ministry of Fuel and Industry
of Georgia (the Sistema Treaty Violations): and

(b) the Ministry of Finance and the courts of Georgia orchestrated the bankruptcy of JSC Azot, a
company majority-owned by Itera, in violation of prior express commitments, due process and the
requirements of Georgian law, and sold Azot’s assets to a third party (the Azot Treaty Violations).”

  

25. The Claimants submitted that the measures taken were breaches of various provisions
of the Treaty between the Government of the United States of America and the
Government of the Republic of Georgia concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal
Protection of Investment (hereinafter the “US-Georgia BIT”) and the Agreement on
Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments between Georgia and the
Kingdom of the Netherlands (hereinafter the “Georgia-Netherlands BIT”). They also
consented to submit their investment dispute with Georgia concerning the “Azot Treaty
Violations” to arbitration before the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment
Disputes (hereinafter “JCS/D”) in accordance with the two BITs.

26. In regard to the “Sistema Treaty Violations”, the Claimants stated as follows:

“Arbitration proceedings initiated by Itera in relation to the Sistema Treaty Violations are currently
pending before the International Commercial Arbitration Court of the Chamber of Commerce of the
Russian Federation (ICAC). Those proceedings were commenced against the Ministry of Energy of
Georgia (the Energy Ministry) pursuant to the agreed mechanism in the surety agreement. In the
ICAC proceedings, the Energy Ministry has argued that Georgia (rather than the Energy Ministry) is

 

the proper party to the arbitration, and that ICAC lacks competence to consider any dispute
involving a state entity. Moreover, the Ministry of Justice has already declared its intention to
oppose the enforcement of any ICAC award in Itera’s favour.

In light of the positions taken by the Energy Ministry and the Ministry of Justice mentioned above,
Itera and IGNV fully reserve their rights to submit additional claims arising out of the Sistema
Treaty Violations to ICSID, should our clients’ losses not be fully as a result of the
ICAC proceedings.

Itera and IGNV are presently ready to submit their claims to ICSID, but would be willing to
postpone doing so for a short period of time, upon receiving an early indication of Georgia’s
willingness to present constructive proposals for the amicable settlement of the dispute.

Specifically, we recognise that parallel ICSID and ICAC proceedings may result in disruption and
other difficulties, and would thus be willing to agree with the Energy Ministry to suspend the ICAC
proceedings pending the outcome of the ICSID arbitration.

Finally, Itera and IGNV fully reserve all their rights and remedies arising out of the Sistema Treaty
Violations and the Azot Treaty Violations. Nothing in this letter should be considered as a limitation
of any kind on the facts, evidence or legal arguments Itera and IGNV may present, or on the legal
rights and remedies Itera and IGNV may pursue, in support of their claims before the ICAC or
ICSID tribunals or otherwise.” (Emphasis added)

27. On 5 June 2008, ICSID registered a Request for Arbitration, dated 7 May 2008,
which Itera and IGNV as Claimants had submitted against Georgia as Respondent on the
basis of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and
Nationals of Other States (hereinafter the “Washington Convention”).

28. In the Request for Arbitration, the Claimants alleged that the Respondent had
breached its obligations under the US-Georgia BIT and the Netherlands-Georgia BIT in
respect of Itera’s investment in Azot (hereinafter the “Azot Dispute”).

29. The Claimants also referred to the dispute with Georgia concerning Sistema
(hereinafter the “Sistema Dispute”) in regard to which arbitration proceedings were
pending before ICAC. The Claimants stated, expressis verbis, that they “do not advance
claims based upon the Sistema Treaty Violations in this Request, while fully reserving
their rights to introduce these additional violations into the present proceedings, should
their losses not be fully compensated as a result of the ICAC proceedings.” (§ 53 of the
Request for Arbitration, emphasis added)

 

 

30. By letter of 11 December 2008, the parties were notified by ICSID that an Arbitral
Tribunal composed of Justice Hans Danelius, Professor Francisco Orrego Vicufia and
Professor Brigitte Stern was deemed to have been constituted and the proceedings to
have. The parties were also notified that Ms. Natalf Sequeira, Counsel, ICSID, would
serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

31. The First Session of the Tribunal and the parties was held by conference call on 26
January 2009. During the Session, the Tribunal and the parties discussed a number of
procedural matters, including the schedule for the written pleadings. In regard to the

Sistema Dispute, the minutes of the Session contain the following statements by the
parties:

‘Claimants’ position

 

Claimants have requested to the ion of this with an
ongoing ICAC proceeding in Moscow. Although the claims brought in the ICAC proceeding are
factually and legally distinct from those presented here, for the reasons mentioned in the Request for
Arbitration, consolidation of the two proceedings would serve the interests of efficiency and
economy. Consolidation would be particularly sensible considering that: (i) Georgia has taken the
position that ICAC is an improper forum for the resolution of state disputes; and (ii) Georgia has
denounced in advance any arbitration award that might be rendered in the ICAC proceedings.

 

 
  

Considering Georgia’s categorical refusal to combine the proceedings (see below), the Claimants
reserve the right to present the Sistema Treaty Claims before this Tribunal (as already reserved in
their Notices of Dispute and Request for Arbitration) in accordance with Rule 40.

 

Respondent's position:

ICAC.

does not consent to the proposed inclusion in this case of the claims currently before the

 

 

There is no basis to 2
the Centre, would

sume that the ICAC claims, which have not been submitted to or registered by
sfy the jurisdictional requirements of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.

 

 

Consolidation would in any event be unwarranted because:

(i) The ICAC claims are, as Claimants have acknowledged, factually and legally distinct from the
claims in this ICSID arbitration. The ICAC claims are contractual claims, not even allegedly treaty
claims, and concern a contract other than the contract(s sue in this ICSID arbitration.

 

 

(ii) The language of the two arbitrations is different (the language of the ICAC arbitration is
Russian) and consolidation does not justify the cost of translating hundreds of pages of documents
from Russian into English.

 

(iii) The applicable law is different, as Russian law governs the substance and procedure of the
ICAC arbitration.

(iv) The final hearing of the ICAC arbitration is scheduled for May 2009 and consolidation would
considerably delay resolution of the ICAC claims, drastically increasing costs.

 

(v) Contrary to Claimants’ implication in its idation request, *s obj to
jurisdiction in the ICAC claim do not suggest, explicitly or implicitly, that those claims be instead

referred to the Centre.” (Emphasis added)

32. In accordance with the agreed schedule, the Claimants filed their Memorial on
15 April 2009. In this Memorial, they alleged violations of the BIT in regard to both Azot
and Sistema. They argued that the Sistema claims were “ancillary” or “additional” claims
arising out of the same subject-matter as the Azot claims and that the Tribunal was
therefore competent to examine them on the basis of Article 46 of the Washington
Convention and Rule 40 of the Arbitration Rules of ICSID.

33. On 4 May 2009, the Respondent raised a number of objections to the Arbitral
Tribunal’s jurisdiction. In regard to the Sistema claims, the Respondent argued that they
were not ancillary claims within the meaning of Article 46 of the Washington
Convention and Rule 40 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, as they did not arise directly out
of the subject-matter of the dispute, and that the Tribunal therefore had no competence to
deal with them. Other objections related to a “fork-in-the-road” provision in the US-
Georgia BIT, to the doctrine of lis pendens and to IGNV’s lack of standing under either
the US-Georgia or the Netherlands-Georgia BIT.

34. The Respondent also requested that the Tribunal suspend the proceedings on the
merits and order “bifurcation”, i.e. a separate jurisdictional phase to consider the
jurisdictional and admissibility objections raised by the Respondent.

35. On 15 May 2009, the Claimants asked that the Arbitral Tribunal deny the request for
“bifurcation”. Further submissions on this issue were made on 22 May 2009 by the
Respondent and on 27 May 2009 by the Claimants.

36. On 22 June 2009, the Arbitral Tribunal informed the parties that it had decided to
grant the Respondent’s request for “bifurcation” but only in regard to the question of
whether the Sistema claims could be accepted as ancillary claims according to Article 46
of the Washington Convention and Rule 40 of the Arbitration Rules. On this issue, the
parties were given the opportunity to make simultaneous further written submissions not
later than 31 August 2009 and to present oral arguments before the Tribunal on 15
October 2009.

37. Both parties submitted Memorials on the said issue on 31 August 2009. A hearing
was held at the seat of ICSID in Washington, D.C. on 15 October 2009. The Claimants
were represented at the hearing by MM. Nigel Rawding, Noah Rubins and Craig
Chiasson, of the law firm Freshfield Bruckhaus Deringer, and the Respondent by MM.
Paul Friedland, Charles Nairac, Michael Ottolenghi and Ms. Kirsten Odynski, of the law
firm White & Case LLP, and Mr. Lasha Arveladze, Ministry of Justice of Georgia.

I. RELEVANT LAW

38. The present arbitration is based on the US-Georgia BIT and the Netherlands-Georgia
BIT.

39. Under the US-Georgia BIT, each Contracting Party guarantees national treatment,
most-favoured-nation treatment and fair and equitable treatment to investors of the other
Contracting Party (Article II). It lays down standards which must be observed in the case
of expropriation or nationalization by one Contracting Party of the investments of
investors of the other Contracting Party (Article III). It gives the investor a right to ICSID
or other arbitration in case of an investment dispute with the State of investment (Article
IX).

40. Similarly, the Georgia-Netherlands BIT guarantees fair and equitable treatment,
national treatment and most-favoured-nation treatment of investments (Article 3) and

regulates the conditions under which one Contracting Party may deprive nationals of the
other Contracting Party of their investments (Article 6). It also allows investment
disputes covered by the BIT to be referred to ICSID for arbitration (Article 9).

41. Article 46 of the Washington Convention provides:

  

“Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal shall, if requested by a party, determine any
incidental or additional claims or counterclaims arising directly out of the subject-matter of the
dispute provided that they are within the scope of the consent of the parties and are otherwise within
the jurisdiction of the Centre.”

42. Linked to this Article is Rule 40 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules which reads as
follows:

“Rule 40
Ancillary Claims

(1) Except as the parties otherwise agree, a party may present an incidental or additional claim or
counter-claim arising directly out of the subject-matter of the dispute, provided that such ancillary
claim is within the scope of the consent of the parties and is otherwise within the jurisdiction of the
Centre.

(2) An incidental or additional claim shall be presented not later than in the reply and a counter-
claim no later than in the counter-memorial, unless the Tribunal, upon justification by the party
presenting the ancillary claim and upon considering any objection of the other party, authorizes the
presentation of the claim at a later stage in the proceeding.

 

 

(3) The Tribunal shall fix a time limit within which the party against which an ancillary claim is
presented may file its observations thereon.”

43. The Explanatory Notes prepared by the ICSID Secretariat as guidelines to the
Arbitration Rules (in effect as of January 1, 1968), provide that for Arbitration Rule 40
the test to satisfy the condition that claims must arise “directly” out of “the subject-matter
of the dispute” is “whether the factual connection between the original and the ancillary
claim is so close as to require the adjudication of the latter in order to achieve the final
settlement of the dispute, the object being to dispose of all the grounds of dispute arising
out of the same subject matter”.

IV. THE PARTIES’ CLAIMS

44. The Respondent requests that the Arbitral Tribunal rule that the purportedly ancillary
claims introduced by the Claimants in their Memorial are inadmissible in these
proceedings.

45. The Claimants request that the Tribunal:

(a) deny the Respondent’s preliminary objection to the admissibility of the claims
relating to the Sistema Treaty Violations;

10

(b) order the Respondent to pay all of the costs and expenses incurred by the Claimants
in relation to the preliminary objection; and

(c) award such other relief as the Tribunal considers appropriate.
V. SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS

46. The parties’ submissions may be summarized as follows:

A. The Claimants:

(a) Background

47. The Claimants’ claims relate to various investments connected with the restructuring
of significant gas debts owed by Georgian state-owned entities to Itera. The claims arose
as a result of the actions subsequently taken by Georgia that rendered the Claimants’
investments valueless.

48. Both the Azot rehabilitation project and the restructuring of debts through the
governmental payment agent Sistema had their genesis in the same activity: the
Claimants’ pioneering work supplying energy in a newly-independent Georgia.
Beginning in 1996, the Claimants supplied gas to state-owned companies and
government entities, which accumulated significant debts towards Itera over the years
that followed. Itera’s negotiations with Georgia resulted in a Debt Restructuring
Transaction which formed the foundation for the Claimants’ claims in both Azot and
Sistema.

49. Thus, the Azot deal was not a self-standing transaction, but was part of the
restructuring of Georgia’s gas debts. The Sistema Agreements were concluded for
precisely the same purpose. Georgia undertook to allocate funds to various state-owned
entities, funds earmarked in advance for the repayment of gas debts to Itera, another
portion of which was to be repaid through Sistema. The Rehabilitation Decree of 4
October 2003 recorded that investment in Azot was based upon the Debt Restructuring
Agreement, which also underlay the Sistema payment arrangement, and it was
understood that the proceeds that Itera was to receive from Sistema would be used to
help finance Azot’s rehabilitation programme.

50. Moreover, Georgia’s conduct in relation to Azot was co-ordinated and intertwined
with its conduct in relation to Sistema. In fact, Georgia took steps to nullify the entire
Debt Restructuring Transaction, including both the privatization of Azot and the
guaranteed repayment of debt through Sistema.

(b) “Ancillary claims”
51. Georgia has been fully aware of the factual and legal bases of all of the Claimants’

claims since at least 18 April 2008, when it was notified of the existence of the present
dispute. The Request for Arbitration, submitted to ICSID on 7 May 2008, described the

11

factual and legal bases for these claims in further detail. In their notification letter and in
the Request for Arbitration, the Claimants specifically reserved their rights to seek
remedies for the Sistema Treaty Violations in the present proceedings.

52. First, the Claimants’ claims form part of a single dispute that was properly brought
directly before this Tribunal, depriving Georgia’s objection of any basis and eliminating
any need to assess whether the Sistema Treaty claims are “ancillary” within the meaning
of the Washington Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules. Secondly, the Sistema
claims also fall within the definition of “ancillary claims” in Article 46 of the Convention
and Rule 40 of the Rules.

53. Article 36(2) of the Washington Convention provides that “[t]he request [for
arbitration] shall contain information concerning the issues in dispute ....” On the basis
of such information, the Secretary-General is to decide whether the request for arbitration
is suitable for registration at ICSID. Similarly, Rule 2(1)(e) of the ICSID Institution
Rules provides that the request for arbitration shall contain information concerning the
issues in dispute, indicating that there is, between the parties, a legal dispute arising
directly out of an investment. Itera’s Request for Arbitration exceeded in several ways
the requirements of Article 36(2) and Institution Rule 2 with respect to the Sistema
claims. Thus, Itera fulfilled the requirements of Article 36 and Institution Rule 2 for the
presentation of a claim, providing the requisite “information concerning the issues in
dispute” in relation to both the Azot and the Sistema elements of the present dispute.

54. By including the Sistema claims in the Memorial, the Claimants did not expand the
dispute beyond the elements already before the Tribunal. All of the issues covered in the
Memorial had been adequately described in the Request for Arbitration, and are thus
properly before the Tribunal.

55. Article 46 of the Convention and Rule 40 of the Arbitration Rules provide
mechanisms by which “ancillary claims” may, at the request of a party, be included
within the scope of a dispute before a tribunal. In practice, “ancillary claims” are
admitted to pending ICSID proceedings in circumstances where (a) they are connected to
existing claims, such that it would be procedurally efficient and consistent with the
objective of achieving a final resolution of the parties’ dispute to adjudicate all claims
together; and (b) doing so would not cause undue prejudice to the other party. Arbitral
tribunals have adopted a flexible and pragmatic approach to the introduction of ancillary
claims, joining claims that presented far more tenuous connections and were raised at a
far later stage in the proceedings than the claims under consideration in the present case.

56. The object and purpose of Article 46 and Rule 40 are settled and uncontroversial: to
avoid unnecessarily duplicative proceedings, and to facilitate the settlement of the
parties’ entire dispute, where subsequently filed claims can reasonably be heard
simultaneously with existing claims.

57. Accordingly, the presumption must be in favour of consolidating subsequent claims
with existing claims, provided that to do so would not cause undue prejudice to the
opposing party. The drafters of Rule 40 provided safeguards aimed at ensuring that the

12

party against whom ancillary claims are directed should not be taken by surprise. These
safeguards include the requirement that an “ancillary claim” arise “directly out of the
subject-matter of the dispute,” and that time-limits be respected, i.e., no addition of
claims after the second round of pleadings. The Sistema claims satisfy both of these pre-
requisites.

58. As the various claims currently before the Tribunal are inextricably linked, it would
be procedurally inefficient to separate them. A separation would lead to parallel or
consecutive proceedings and/or give rise to the avoidable risk of conflicting outcomes.
Moreover, the Respondent will suffer no prejudice if the Sistema Treaty claims are
adjudicated as part of these proceedings.

59. In addition to the time and resources spent to constitute a second tribunal, this would
necessarily entail the preparation and submission of argument and evidence with respect
to the same facts and law as have already been presented here. Ultimately, the second
tribunal would hear much of the same facts and consider the same evidence, in part given
by the same witnesses, as would this Tribunal.

60. Moreover, certain of Georgia’s remaining objections to admissibility and jurisdiction
purportedly apply to both Azot and Sistema, and therefore will have to be heard by two
tribunals if the current objection is upheld. For example, Georgia argues that IGNV
should be dismissed as a claimant with respect to all claims, because its investment was
indirect and allegedly not subject to protection under the Netherlands-Georgia BIT.

61. ICSID tribunals have consistently declined to require that claimants make a
substantial evidentiary showing at a preliminary stage with respect to the admissibility of
their claims. The accepted standard in this regard is prima facie evidence that the facts as
alleged by the Claimants in this case, if established, are capable of coming within those
provisions of the BIT which have been invoked.

62. As is the case with any objection to admissibility, Georgia bears the burden of proof.
It must therefore establish to the satisfaction of the Tribunal by competent evidence the
elements of its “ancillary claims” objection under Article 46 and Rule 40. However, even
setting aside arguendo Georgia’s burden of proof, the Claimants have amply
demonstrated that the Sistema and Azot Disputes are inextricably linked parts of a single
overarching transaction, such that the Sistema claims are clearly ancillary to the Azot
claims.

B. The Respondent:
(a) Background
63. The Debt Restructuring Agreement addressed the restructuring of the debts to Itera of

various Georgian public sector organizations and state-owned companies, not including
Azot.

13

64. On the one hand, Itera contacted Sistema to arrange for the repayment of part of the
debts covered in the Debt Restructuring Agreement and submitted the Draft Assignment
Contract to Sistema and the Draft Surety Agreement to the Ministry of Energy (jointly
the “Draft Sistema Agreements”). The Draft Sistema Agreements did not mention Azot
and did not include any debts of Azot to Itera or its subsidiary Gruzgas.

65. On the other hand, at the same time as Georgia and Itera were negotiating the Draft
Sistema Agreements to repay one portion of the debts covered in the Debt Restructuring
Agreement, Georgia was negotiating the conditional privatization of Azot with Itera.
Azot had been experiencing serious financial difficulties, and a Rehabilitation Plan for
the company had been approved in bankruptcy proceedings. By concluding the Sale-
Purchase Agreement, Azot undertook to carry out a Business Plan which included the
Rehabilitation Plan, but no mention was made of any intended use by Itera of funds from
or through Sistema to fulfil its obligations under this Business Plan. It was never
understood that Itera would use the proceeds from the debt payments under the Debt
Restructuring Agreement to help finance Azot’s revitalization program, in accordance
with the Business Plan, or that the funds that Georgia committed to provide in
performance of the Sale-Purchase Agreement and the Surety Agreement were to be used
to advance the acquisition and rehabilitation of Azot. It is also a fact that neither the Debt
Restructuring Agreement nor the other Sistema-related documents refer to Azot.

(b) “Ancillary claims”

66. In order to constitute an “additional” or “ancillary” claim admissible under Article 46
of the ICSID Convention, the Sistema Dispute must arise directly out of the subject-
matter of the Azot Dispute already submitted to the Arbitral Tribunal. According to Note
B to ICSID Arbitration Rule 40, the test to satisfy this ancillary jurisdictional condition is
whether the factual connection between the original and the new claim is so close as to
require the adjudication of the latter in order to achieve the final settlement of the
dispute, the object being to dispose of all the grounds of dispute arising out of the same
subject-matter. The Claimants do not satisfy this test. Resolution of the Azot Dispute
does not require adjudication of the Sistema Dispute.

67. In the Azot Dispute, the Claimants allege that the Respondent interfered with the
Claimants’ investment in Azot by (i) failing to honour its commitments under the
agreement governing the conditional privatization of Azot, (ii) pursuing an improper and
unfair bankruptcy process directed at Azot, and (iii) wrongfully “re-privatizing” Azot.
Resolution of the Azot Dispute will require the Tribunal to address a set of agreements
for privatization and rehabilitation of the Azot plant and a series of administrative actions
taken by the Respondent in relation to Azot. None of these allegations relates to Sistema.
The Sistema Dispute, by contrast, concerns a separate series of agreements involving
Sistema for repayment through Sistema of energy debts of Georgian public sector
organizations and state-owned companies to Itera.

  

68. The Claimants have by their litigation conduct and choices confirmed that the
resolution of the Azot Dispute is independent of the Sistema Dispute and vice versa. The
Claimants submitted to arbitration before ICAC in Moscow, claims that are factually

14

indistinguishable from those that comprise the Sistema Dispute in this case. The
Claimants then submitted the Azot Dispute to ICSID arbitration, without seeking to
include the Sistema Dispute therein. The Claimants knew of the Azot Dispute when they
started the ICAC arbitration in January 2006, and they knew of the Sistema Dispute
when they commenced the present arbitration, but judged it unnecessary or not useful to
include the Sistema Dispute in this case. They have now changed their mind about their
tactical choices, but this change of mind does not change the underlying facts, which
permitted them to pursue each set of claims separately.

69. As the Claimants have initiated the ICAC arbitration and pursued it for three years,
they can suffer no prejudice from the dismissal of the Sistema Dispute from the present
proceedings. Admitting the Sistema Dispute, by contrast, would be prejudicial to the
Respondent, which has expended considerable time and resources in defending the
Sistema Dispute in the ICAC arbitration for the past three years, and which now would
be faced by vastly increased costs to re-litigate those claims in this case. Were the
Sistema Dispute to be accepted in this case, the Tribunal would reward the Claimants’
forum shopping and create the risk of conflicting decisions on virtually identical sets of
Sistema-related claims.

70. To support their effort to switch fora, the Claimants are compelled to establish a link
between the two disputes. The Debt Restructuring Agreement, which addresses a series
of Georgia’s energy sector debts and calls for payments through a financial agent which
would later be Sistema, does not cover the Azot-related transactions, or even mention
Azot.

71. The Claimants have evoked a “Debt Restructuring Transaction” that supposedly
covered both the Azot and Sistema transactions, and they have also alleged that “it was
understood” that payments made pursuant to any and all agreements associated with such
“Transaction” would be used by Itera to rehabilitate the Azot plant. However, there is no
basis to find either that a “Debt Restructuring Transaction” ever existed or that there was
any “understanding” linking Azot thereto.

72. The Debt Restructuring Agreement created a framework for the repayment of
USD46,406,352.30 to Itera according to a seven-year repayment schedule. It does not
discuss Azot at all, and its implementation neither requires, nor is served by, any of the
agreements subsequently entered into in relation to Azot.

73. The Azot agreements, and the Azot Dispute, lie elsewhere. In connection with the
conditional privatization of Azot, which is at the heart of the Azot Dispute, Itera was
keen to use outstanding Azot tax debts to operate a set-off with some of the debts owed
to Itera by Georgian public sector organizations and state-owned companies. The parties
therefore carved out some of the debts listed in the Debt Restructuring Agreement, and
provided for a set-off mechanism instead of repayment pursuant to the Debt
Restructuring Agreement. The Azot Dispute concerns the monies covered by the Azot
Debt Set-Off Agreement, which are different from those addressed in the Sistema
agreements, and not any other sum under the Debt Restructuring Agreement.

15

74. There is thus no meaningful factual or legal connection between the Sistema Dispute
and the Azot Dispute, let alone a connection that establishes that the Sistema Dispute
arises directly out of the subject-matter of the Azot Dispute or a factual connection
between the original and the new claim so close as to require the adjudication of the latter
in order to achieve the final settlement of the dispute (cf. Note B to ICSID Arbitration
Rule 40).

75. In any case, the Claimants have the burden of proof and must establish that their new
claims relating to the Sistema Dispute arise directly out of the subject-matter of the
original dispute. They cannot meet their burden of proof because the Azot and Sistema
Disputes are based on different facts and debts, and allege different wrongs against
Georgia, and the resolution of the Azot Dispute does not therefore require the Tribunal to
resolve the Sistema Dispute. Admitting the Sistema claims as ancillary claims would
directly undercut the rationale behind Article 46 and Rule 40 as it would be counter to
judicial economy and potentially lead to conflicting outcomes between these proceedings
and the ICAC arbitration. Admitting the Sistema claims would also be unfair to the
Respondent, which has already gone through three years of defending factually
indistinguishable claims in the ICAC arbitration.

76. In deciding whether the Claimants’ new claims are admissible in this arbitration, the
Tribunal need not consider any of the many issues that will be presented at the merits
stage. No questions of performance arise. No questions of quantum arise. A decision by
the Tribunal that the Claimants’ new claims are inadmissible in this separate phase of
proceedings would create very substantial cost savings for both parties in this arbitration.

77. Finally, and independently of the separateness of the Azot and Sistema Disputes,
there is a defect in the Claimants’ consent to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the Sistema
Dispute.

78. Resolution of the Sistema dispute will require the Tribunal to consider the Draft
Assignment Contract and the Draft Surety Agreement. Resolution of the Azot Dispute
will require the Tribunal to consider the Sale-Purchase Agreement and the Business Plan
as well as the Set-Off Agreement and Decree No. 503. The Tribunal will not need to
address the Draft Assignment Contract and the Draft Surety Agreement to resolve the
Azot Dispute, and the Sistema Dispute does not therefore arise “directly out of the
subject-matter” of the Azot Dispute.

79. In their letter instituting these ICSID proceedings, the Claimants “formally
consent[ed] to submit their investment dispute with Georgia concerning the Azot Treaty
Violations to international arbitration under the [ICSID Convention]”. The Claimants
also reserved their “rights” to introduce the Sistema Dispute at a later time “should
[Itera’s] losses not be fully compensated as a result of the ICAC proceedings”. In their
Request for Arbitration, the Claimants again excluded the Sistema Dispute from these
proceedings, noting that they did “not advance claims based upon the Sistema Treaty
Violations”. Such exclusion places the Sistema Dispute outside the “scope of consent of
the parties” under Article 46 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 40.
The Claimants’ previous lack of consent to the submission of the Sistema Dispute to

16

ICSID therefore means that the Sistema Dispute is inadmissible in these proceedings as it
was not “within the jurisdiction of the Centre” at the time the Azot Dispute was
submitted. Nor can the Claimants purport even to exercise the “right” reserved in their
letter exercising ICSID proceedings to introduce the Sistema Dispute in the Memorial, as
such reservation of rights was based on a condition that has not occurred, i.e. the
conclusion of the ICAC proceedings.

80. The dismissal of the Sistema Dispute in these proceedings would entail considerable
savings, including:

(a) saved costs associated with the briefing and arguing of issues relevant only to the
Sistema Dispute, including the costs associated with additional hearing time;

(b) saved costs associated with the translation of Russian and Georgian language
documents relevant solely to the Sistema Dispute; such documents are not the same as
the documents that bear upon the Azot Dispute;

(c) saved costs associated with the preparation of an expert report on relevant issues of
Russian law; the Azot Dispute, by contrast, involves no issues of Russian law; and

(d) saved costs associated with the issue of the quantum of compensation due for
Georgia’s alleged breaches of the Surety Agreement.

81. If, on the other hand, the Tribunal decides to admit the Sistema Dispute into these
proceedings, the parties may face conflicting decisions on the Sistema Dispute.
Conflicting decisions are usually avoided, and judicial efficiency is usually served, by
consolidating claims into one set of proceedings, but in this case the Claimants’ attempt
to introduce into these proceedings the Sistema Dispute that was already the subject of
the ICAC arbitration has created the opposite situation. Only the Tribunal’s dismissal of
the Sistema Dispute from these proceedings could avoid potentially conflicting decisions
and serve interests of judicial efficiency and comity. Admitting the Sistema Dispute
would reward the Claimants’ tactical forum shopping and set a dangerous precedent in
investment arbitration.

V. THE TRIBUNAL’S REASONING

82. On 22 June 2009, the Arbitral Tribunal decided to grant the Respondent’s request for
“bifurcation” but only in regard to the question of whether the claims in the Sistema
Dispute can be accepted as ancillary claims in the present case according to Article 46 of
the Washington Convention and Rule 40 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

83. In their subsequent submissions, the Claimants argued, as a first line of defence, that
it would not be necessary for the Arbitral Tribunal to respond to this question, since, in
their view, the Sistema and Azot claims form part of one single dispute which in its
entirety was properly brought before the Tribunal in the Request for Arbitration. The
Claimants contended that the Sistema Dispute had been sufficiently described in the
Request for Arbitration and argued that, by including claims regarding Sistema in their

17

Memorial, they had not expanded the case beyond what had already been submitted to
the Tribunal. The Claimants argued that, having regard to these circumstances, the
Respondent’s objection based on Article 46 of the Washington Convention and Rule 40
of the ICSID Arbitration Rules was moot and should be denied.

84. The Arbitral Tribunal is not convinced by the Claimants’ argument on this point. An
arbitration is essentially delimited by the parties’ claims and not by the contents of their
submissions in so far as they are unrelated to any specific claim for relief.

85. In this case, the Claimants, in their Request for Arbitration, described their disputes
with Georgia regarding Azot as well as Sistema. They presented claims against Georgia
based on allegations of Treaty violations in respect of Azot but declared that they did not,
for the time being, make any claims on the basis of the facts relating to Sistema, while
fully reserving their rights to do so in the future.

86. The Arbitral Tribunal thus finds it clear that in the Request for Arbitration the only
dispute submitted for arbitration was the Azot Dispute. The fact that the Claimants also
described the Sistema Dispute and even reserved the right to present claims relating to
that dispute at a later stage does not mean that the Sistema Dispute was already part of
the case submitted to ICSID for arbitration.

87. It follows that the Claimants’ argument that the Sistema Dispute was already part of
the case and that no question of adding an ancillary claim arises must be rejected.

88. The Tribunal is therefore called upon to examine whether the Claimants were
entitled, according to Article 46 of the Washington Convention and Rule 40 of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules, to extend the scope of the arbitration in their Memorial by including
the Sistema claims as ancillary claims.

89. Ancillary claims under Article 46 of the Washington Convention and Rule 40 of the
ICSID Rules are incidental or additional claims arising directly out of the subject-matter
of the dispute. The crucial question is therefore whether or not the Sistema claims can be
considered to arise directly out of the subject-matter of the Azot Dispute, the latter being
the only dispute submitted for arbitration in the Request for Arbitration.

90. The Arbitral Tribunal recognizes that there is a link between the Azot and Sistema
Disputes in so far as they had a common purpose of ensuring payment of debts to Itera.
To some extent this common background appears from the Debt Restructuring
Agreement which laid down a general pattern of repayment of Georgian state debts to
Itera.

91. The total debt dealt with in the Debt Restructuring Agreement was US$
46,406,352.30. Out of this amount, the Sistema Agreements provided for the repayment
of US$ 13,564,946.29, and the Azot Agreements were intended to result in repayment
through a set-off transaction of GEL22,111,941 (the equivalent of approximately US$
10.2 million). This amount represented a tax debt of Azot which Itera was supposed to
pay but would not be claimed by the Ministry of Finance of Georgia in exchange for an

18

equivalent amount being deducted from the amounts owed to Itera by various public
entities mentioned in the Debt Restructuring Agreement.

92. The method of repayment envisaged in the Debt Restructuring Agreement was that
Ttera would assign claims to a financial agent selected by the Energy Ministry which
would then repay to Itera the amount of the claims in quarterly instalments within a
period of seven years starting as of 2003. This method was implemented when the
Ministry of Fuel and Energy designated Sistema as financial agent and the Assignment
Contract was concluded providing for the assignment by Itera of claims to Sistema and
for corresponding subsequent payments by Sistema to Itera over a period of seven years
in quarterly instalments.

93. However, a different method of repayment of debts to Itera was chosen in the Azot
Agreements of 20 March 2003 which provided for repayment to Itera by way of a set-off
arrangement in connection with Itera’s acquisition of Azot at a low price. In the Azot
Agreements, there was no question of repayments by a financial agent designated by
Georgia, nor were the repayments to take place periodically over a certain time period.
The link between the Debt Restructuring Agreement and the Azot Agreements was
therefore weak, and the Azot Agreements can only in an indirect manner, be considered
an implementation of the Debt Restructuring Agreement.

94. It may also be noted that, while the Debt Restructuring Agreement and the Sistema
Agreements involved the Ministry of Energy and its financial agent Sistema and
concerned direct repayment of debts, the Azot Agreements were concluded with the
Ministry of State Property Administration and the Ministry of Finance and dealt
essentially with the privatization of Azot and the payment of Azot’s fiscal debts,
although, by means of a set-off transaction, they also served the purpose of providing
Itera with satisfaction for some of its claims..

95. The Tribunal notes that as a part of its acquisition of 90% of the shares in Azot, Itera
undertook to carry out a Business Plan which included a plan for the rehabilitation of the
company approved by the competent court in bankruptcy proceedings. Another element
in the transaction was that the Ministry of Finance would guarantee that a bill was
submitted to Parliament about funds being made available for repayment of debts to Itera
which in its turn would pay Azot’s fiscal debts to the Ministry of Finance. The
Respondent argues that Itera failed to fulfil its obligations under the Business Plan, while
Itera considers that Georgia failed to make the required payments to Itera and also took
action which eventually caused the bankruptcy of Azot and the forced sale of its assets.

96. The Tribunal thus observes that the Azot Dispute essentially centres around questions
as to whether Itera and/or Georgia carried out their respective undertakings to ensure the
continued existence of Azot and what were the decisive factors which ultimately led to
Azot’s bankruptcy and to Itera’s loss of its investment.

97. The Sistema Dispute, on the other hand, essentially concerns questions of whether the
Debt Restructuring Agreement and the Sistema Agreements, in particular the Surety

19

Agreement, had been validly concluded and, if so, why there was no repayment to Itera
of US$ 13,564,946.29 under the Sistema Agreements.

98. The Arbitral Tribunal notes that the facts of the present case differ significantly from
those of other ICSID cases? in which new claims were accepted as ancillary claims. In
those cases, the new claims related to the same investments as the original claims

99. In CMS, the tribunal pointed out that the important factor was the subject-matter of
the dispute and found that, in that case, the subject-matter was the alleged loss by CMS
of its investment in a company. The subsequent claims submitted by the Claimants as
ancillary, were accepted by the tribunal as ancillary, since the acts of the Argentine
Government initially complained of and the new claims resulted in the same loss.. In
Enron, the Claimants presented a request concerning the adoption by the Argentine
Government of certain additional measures which were alleged to affect the same
investment as was the subject of the initial request for arbitration. The tribunal accepted
that this was an ancillary claim without any specification of the criteria that would be
decisive for such acceptance, but it may be assumed that the tribunal relied on the same
analysis as in CMS, finding that the claims related to the same investment and the same
loss. The circumstances of the present case are different in so far as, in the Azot claims,
the loss complained of is the loss of the Azot company by expropriation, whereas, in
regard to the Sistema claims, the loss results from the alleged failure of Sistema to
reimburse debts to Itera. While the investor is the same, it entered in two different types
of relationship with Georgia, which, in the view of the Tribunal, cannot be analyzed as a
single investment.

100. In support of their contention that the Sistema claims are ancillary to the Azot
claims, the Claimants have also relied on an argument of efficiency, arguing that it
would be more efficient for one and the same tribunal to deal with all Itera’s claims
against Georgia. However, under Article 46 of the Washington Convention and Rule 40
of the ICSID Rules, efficiency considerations are not in themselves decisive for whether
or not a new claim shall be accepted as an ancillary claim, but the subject-matter must be
the same, which means that the link between the claims must be so strong that the
examination of one claim cannot be carried out adequately without the other claim being
adjudicated at the same time. No such situation exists in the present case. The Tribunal
notes in this respect that the Claimants themselves considered for a long time that the
two claims could be dealt with separately and limited their Request for Arbitration to the
Azot claims. It is not denied that efficiency may in some circumstances be a result of, a
claim being accepted as ancillary. However, it is at least doubtful whether acceptance of
the Sistema claims as ancillary would promote efficiency, as it would involve a new
examination of matters that have already been discussed for a long tome before another
arbitral tribunal.

2 CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. the Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8), Decision on
Objections to Jurisdiction, 17 July 2003, LG&E Energy Corp., LG&E Capital Corp. and LG&E
International, Inc. v. the Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1), Decision on Objections to
Jurisdiction, 30 April 2004, Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets L.P. v. the Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3), Decision on Jurisdiction (Ancillary Claim), 2 August 2004.

20

101. The Tribunal thus considers that, despite a certain common background of the Azot
and Sistema Disputes, the Sistema Dispute cannot be considered to arise directly out of
the Azot Dispute and the subject-matter cannot be considered to be the same. It follows
that the conditions laid down in Article 46 of the Washington Convention and Rule 40 of
the ICSID Rules are not satisfied and that the Sistema claims cannot be accepted as
ancillary to the Azot claims.

102. In regard to the Claimants’ claim for costs, the Arbitral Tribunal considers that this
claim relates to the general issue of costs which will be examined at a later stage of the
proceedings.

DECISION

103. The Arbitral Tribunal decides that the Sistema claims were not part of the dispute
brought before the Tribunal in the Request for Arbitration and are not ancillary claims
according to Article 46 of the Washington Convention and Rule 40 of the ICSID

Arbitration Rules.

104. Professor Orrego Vicuiia’s dissenting opinion is attached to this Decision.

21

 

[SIGNED] [SIGNED]
Professor Francisco Orrego Vicufia Professor Brigitte Stern
Member of the Tribunal Member of the Tribunal
Date: November 30, 2009 Date: November 20, 2009

Subject to the attached dissenting opinion

[SIGNED]

Justice Hans Danelius
President of the Tribunal
Date: December 3, 2009

