International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

 

Jan de Nul N.V.
Dredging International N.V.

CLAIMANTS

Arab Republic of Egypt
RESPONDENT

ICSID Case No. ARB/04/13

 

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

 

Rendered by an Arbitral Tribunal composed of

Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, President
Professor Pierre Mayer, Arbitrator
Professor Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

RELEVANT FACTS REGARDING JURISDICTION ...........cccccesesseseeeeeeteeeesteeseeeaeeee

THE PARTIES

 

a. The Claimants
b. The Respondent

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

aaa

 

a. The SCA and the calls for tenders
b. The Contract and its performance
c. The proceedings before the Egyptian administrative courts
d. The BITs
aa. The 1977 BIT
bb. The 2002 BIT

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

 

INITIAL PHASE

 

a. Registration of the Request for Arbitration
b. Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal and commencement of the proceedings

THE WRITTEN PHASE ON JURISDICTION .......c:cscscseseesceseseseseecseseeeeecscecesaeseeneceseseeeenenes

THE HEARING ON JURISDICTION

 

PARTIES’ POSITIONS

 

THE CLAIMANTS’ POSITION

 

THE RESPONDENT'S POSITION

 

DISCUSSION:

INTRODUCTORY MATTERS

 

a. The relevance of previous ICSID decisions or awards
b. The law applicable to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
c. The applicable standard

SO©DNADOD

19
19
20

21

21
22
22
22

THE REQUIREMENTS OF ARTICLE 25 OF THE ICSID CONVENTION (INCLUDING THE DEFINITION

OF INVESTMENT UNDER THE BITS)
a. Is there a legal dispute with a Contracting Party?
aa. The distinction between treaty and contract claims
bb. The Claimants’ (treaty) claims
cc. The status of the SCA under international law

2

 

25
25
26

b.

c.

C. THE APPLICABILITY RATIONE TEMPORIS OF THE 2002 BIT.

Does the dispute arise out of an investment?

aa. An investment within the meaning of Article 25 ICSID?

bb. An investment within the meaning of the 1977 BIT

cc. An investment within the meaning of the 2002 BIT

Have the parties consented in writing to arbitrate the dispute?

 

a. Adifferent dispute in terms of parties and applicable legal standards
b. The relevance of the Lucchetti award
c. The relevance of the contractual dispute settlement clause
d. Must the investment exist at the time of the entry into force of the BIT?
e. Conclusion
D. Costs
DECISION ON JURISDICTION

 

28
28
30
32
32

33
34
36
38
39
39

40

40

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

For the sake of convenience, the Tribunal will use the following abbreviations:

1977 BIT

2002 BIT

Arbitration Rules
BIT(s)

CM. J.

Contract

Exh. [C-] [R-]
First Claimant
ICSID

ICSID Convention

JTB
Mem. J.

Rejoinder J.
Reply J.
Respondent
SCA

Second Claimant
SoC

Tr. J. [page:line]

Agreement between the Belgo-Luxembourg Economic Union on the one
hand, and the Arab Republic of Egypt on the other hand, on
encouragement and reciprocal protection of investments of 28 February
1977

Agreement between the Belgo-Luxembourg Economic Union on the one
hand, and the Arab Republic of Egypt on the other hand, on
encouragement and reciprocal protection of investments of 28 February
1999

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings

Bilateral investment treaty(ies); specifically bilateral investment
treaties between the Belgo-Luxembourg Economic Union and the Arab
Republic of Egypt (respectively the “1977 BIT” and the “2002 BIT”,
collectively the “BITs”)

Claimants’ Counter Memorial on jurisdiction of 15 September 2005
Contract of 29 July 1992 between the Claimants and SCA

Exhibits [Claimants] [Respondent]

Dredging International N.V.

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States
and Nationals of other States

Jurisdictional Trial Bundle
Respondent’s Memorial on jurisdiction of 15 June 2005

Claimants’ Rejoinder on jurisdiction of 15 December 2005
Respondent's Reply on jurisdiction of 31 October 2005

The Arab Republic of Egypt (also referred to as “Egypt” or “R.A.E.”)
Suez Canal Authority

Jan de Nul N.V.

Claimants’ Statement of Claim of 15 March 2005

Transcript of the hearing on jurisdiction

RELEVANT FACTS REGARDING JURISDICTION

This chapter summarizes the factual background of this arbitration to the extent
necessary to rule on the Respondent's objections to jurisdiction.

THE PARTIES

The Claimants

The Claimants in these proceedings are (i) Dredging International N.V. (the “First
Claimant”) and (ii) Jan de Nul N.V. (the “Second Claimant’) (collectively the
“Claimants’).

The First Claimant, Dredging International N.V., is a company incorporated under the
laws of Belgium with its registered office at Scheldedijk 30, B-2070 Zwijndrecht,
Belgium.

The Second Claimant, Jan de Nul N.V., is a company established under the laws of
Belgium with its registered office at Tragel 60, B-9308 Hofstade-Aalst, Belgium.

The Claimants are among the leaders in the world dredging market. They are the two
partners of the Joint Venture DI-JDN Suez, an unincorporated joint venture (the "Joint
Venture"). The Joint Venture Agreement was entered into by the two partners for the
purpose of jointly performing dredging operations in the Suez Canal under a contract
awarded by the Suez Canal Authority (the “SCA”), an Egyptian State entity.

The Claimants are collectively represented in this arbitration by Professors Antonio
Crivellaro and Luca Radicati di Brozolo, BONELLI EREDE PAPPALARDO, Via Barozzi 1,
20122 Milan, Italy.

The Respondent

The Respondent in this arbitration is the Arab Republic of Egypt (“Egypt”).

The Respondent is represented in this arbitration by

. Dr. Iskandar Ghattas, Under Secretary, Ministry of Justice; Dr. Mostafa Abdel
Ghaffar, Director of International Cooperation, Ministry of Justice; Mr. Hosam
Abdel Azim, President of the Office of State Litigation; Mr. Osama Mahmoud,
Office of State Litigation, and

. Messrs Robert Saint-Esteben and Louis Christophe Delanoy, BREDIN PRAT,
130, rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré, 75008 Paris, France.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

The current dispute arises out of a contract which the Claimants entered into with the
SCA for the widening and deepening of certain southern stretches of the Suez Canal
(the “Contract”). In substance, on the Claimants’ case, the Respondent through SCA
deliberately deceived them by intentionally misrepresenting the conditions under which
the Contract was to be performed.

The SCA and the calls for tenders
The SCA is a public agency, which was established by Law No. 30/1975 (Exh. C-9).

On 19 March 1991, the SCA invited the Claimants, together with 21 competing
international dredging companies, to submit their prequalifications for the widening and
deepening of “some southern regions of Suez Canal”.

The two first rounds of tendering having failed, the SCA called for a third offer limited to
Lot (1’) —i.e., from km 150,000 to km 162,250 — and consisting of (i) widening by 45 m
of the East slope and (ii) deepening by 4,5 m of the canal (from level — 20,50 m to
level -25,00 m), with a volume of approximately 17,6 million m® to be dredged.

The Contract and its performance

The Contract was awarded to the Claimants on 30 June 1992 after three calls for
tenders and was executed on 29 July 1992. The representations which the parties, and
in particular the Respondent, made during the tendering phase are disputed.

During the performance of the dredging work, the Claimants were under the impression
that SCA concealed relevant information on the quantities to be dredged and the soil
conditions. In particular, the Claimants rely on the following facts:

(i) the SCA had pre-dredged the lot awarded to the Claimants and did not
disclose this fundamental circumstance to the bidders;

(ii) the SCA guaranteed in writing on at least two occasions the existence of 100%
of the volumes resulting from the tender documents, although it knew this to be

inaccurate;

(iii) the Claimants were not put in the position to avail themselves of a bathymetric
report;

(iv) the SCA was aware that at least 40% of the soil was composed of hard
materials, but provided the bidders with misleading information indicating only
3%.

The SCA denied each of these allegations on the ground that it did not conceal any
relevant information and did not give the guarantees upon which the Claimants rely.

The works were completed during the spring of 1994.

The proceedings before the Egyptian administrative courts

On 17 July 1993, the Claimants brought proceedings before the Administrative Court of
Port Said pursuant to the dispute resolution clause contained in the Contract’. Relying
on Articles 120 (error), 121 (significant error), and 125 (fraud) of the Egyptian Civil
Code, the Claimants requested the Court (i) to declare the Contract null and void on
account of the SCA’s acts and omissions during the negotiation of the Contract and (ii)
to award compensation for all expenses and losses incurred during the performance of
the Works, plus lost profits (the total cost of the Works being assessed at US$ 130

million).

On 9 December 1995, the Claimants filed a second action against the SCA before the
Administrative Court of Ismailia (to which the Administrative Court of Port Said had

Article 22 of the Contract reads as follows: “Any dispute, difference or controversy, which may arise
between the parties related to the interpretation, application, implementation or effect of this Contract which
cannot be resolved amicably, will be settled by the Egyptian courts, according to Egyptian laws”.

7

20.

21.

22.

23.

transferred the case filed in July 1993) seeking relief for a series of deductions by the
SCA from the amounts to be paid under the Contract.

On 30 September 1998, the Claimants resorted to the Committee for Settling the
Complaints of the Investors (established by the Prime Minister's Decree No. 64 of
1996). The proceedings before this Committee were abandoned in the spring of 1999.

In the meantime, on 24 December 1998, the Administrative Court of Ismailia decided to
join the two proceedings.

On 22 May 2003, the Administrative Court of Ismailia rendered its decision. In
substance, the Court rejected the claims for annulment of the Contract in their entirety
(first action) and awarded approximately one third of the amounts sought for deductions
applied by the SCA (second action).

On 20 July 2003, the Claimants filed an appeal against the judgment of the
Administrative Court of Ismailia before the High Administrative Court of Egypt. The
appeal proceedings, which are currently pending, were brought by the Claimants
“without prejudice to the [Claimants]' right to submit the matters of the present case to
the international arbitration administered by the International Centre for the Settlement
of Investment Disputes — ICSID” and “to withdraw the present appeal once the ICSID
Arbitral Tribunal shall have retained Jurisdiction to proceed to examining the merits of
the case”.

Considering that the judgment of the Administrative Court of Ismailia definitively
eliminated all prospects that they could obtain redress from the Egyptian State, on 23
December 2003, the Claimants commenced the present proceedings. In substance, the
Claimants assert that Egypt’s conduct constitutes not only a breach of the Contract and
of Egyptian law (as submitted before the Egyptian Courts) but also a breach of the rules
of international law concerning the treatment of foreign investments, specifically of the
provisions of the two successive bilateral investment treaties between the Belgo-
Luxemburg Economic Union and the Arab Republic of Egypt (respectively the “1977
BIT” and the “2002 BIT”; collectively the “BITs”) *.

As set forth in the Claimants’ last brief, the violations invoked by the Claimants “consist of a long sequence
of illegalities to the detriment of the Claimants, beginning with (i) the gross misrepresentations when the
host State admitted the investment on its territory, which were aimed at inducing the Claimants to make the
investment on disastrous financial terms and continuing with (ii) the systematic refusal of the administrative
and judicial organs to redress the situation and to conceal all responsibility for the initial misdeeds, until (iii)

8

24.

25.

aa.

26.

27.

The BITs

The 1977 BIT was signed on 28 February 1977 (Exh. C-4) and remained in force until
23 May 2002 (the date on which it was replaced by the 2002 BIT). The 2002 BIT was
signed on 28 February 1999 (Exh. C-1 [French version] and Exh. C-159 [English
version]). It entered into force on 24 May 2002 and is still in force today.

Because they are referred to repeatedly in the parties’ submissions and in this Decision,
the texts of certain provisions of the BITs are set forth in the following paragraphs.

The 1977 BIT

The Preamble to the 1977 BIT declared that the Contracting parties intended “to create
favourable conditions for the investments by nationals and legal persons” of Belgium
and that Egypt recognised “that Protection of such investments is apt [...] to increase
the economic prosperity of both Countries”. Specifically, under the 1977 BIT the
Respondent assumed the following obligations:

Article |

1. All investments, and goods, rights and interests in connection with such
investments, belonging directly or indirectly to nationals or legal persons of
one of the Contracting Parties shall enjoy fair and equitable treatment in the
territory of the other Contracting Party.

2. Such investments, goods, rights and interests shall also enjoy continuous
protection and security, excluding all unjustified or discriminatory measures
which could "de jure" or "de facto" hinder their management, maintenance,
utilization, enjoyment or liquidation.

3. The protection guaranteed by paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article | shall [...] in
no case be less favourable than that recognized by international law.

The 1977 BIT contained the following provision on the settlement of disputes between
host State and investors:

Article IX

Each Contracting Party hereby irrevocably and anticipatory [sic] gives its consent
to submit to conciliation and arbitration any dispute relating to a measure
contrary to this Agreement, pursuant to the "Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States" of 18 March
1965, at the initiative of a national or legal person of the other Contracting Party,
who considers himself to have been affected by such a measure.

This consent implies renunciation of the requirement that the internal
administrative or judicial resorts should be exhausted.

 

the judgment of the Court of Ismailia, which definitively did away with any possibility for the Claimants to
obtain the compensation owed to them.” (Rejoinder J. 4.11. p. 5).

9

28.

29.

bb.

30.

With respect of its application ratione materiae, the 1977 BIT contained the following

definitions:

Article Ill
For the purpose of this agreement:

1. The term “investments” shall comprise every direct or indirect contribution of
capital or any other kind of assets invested or reinvested in enterprises in the
field of agriculture, industry, mining, forestry, communications and tourism.
The following shall more particularly, thought not exlusively [sic], be
considered as investments within the meaning of the present Agreement:

(a)

(b)
(c
(d.

(e

Movable and immovable property as well as any other right "in rem"
such as mortgages, pledges, usufructs and similar rights:

Shares and other kinds of interest in companies;

Debts and rights to any performance having economic value;
Copyrights, marks, patents, technical processes, trade names, trade
marks and goodwill;

Business concessions under public law, including concessions to search
for, extract or exploit natural resources.

With respect to its application ratione temporis, the 1977 BIT contained the following

clause:

Article XII

In case of termination of the present Agreement the provisions thereof shall
continue to be effective for a period of validity of contracts concluded between
the Contracting Party and the investor of the other Contracting Party prior to the
notification of termination of the present Agreement.

The 2002 BIT

The 2002 BIT reaffirmed the intent of the Contracting States set out in the Preamble to

the 1977 BIT and laid down substantially the same obligations concerning the

protection of foreign investments, i.e.:

Article 2 — Promotion of Investment

1. Each Contracting Party shall promote investment on its territory by investors
of the other Contracting Party and shall accept and encourage all investment
in accordance with its legislation.

2. In particular, each Contracting Party shall authorise the conclusion and
execution of licensing contracts and of contracts relating to commercial,
administrative or technical assistance, as far as these activities are in
connection with investments as mentioned in Paragraph 1.

Article 3 —- Treatment of Investment

1. All investments belonging directly or indirectly to investors of one of the
Contracting Parties shall enjoy fair and equitable treatment in the territory of
the other Contracting State(s).

2. Such investment shall also enjoy continuous protection and security,
excluding any unjustified or discriminatory measure which could hinder their
management, maintenance, utilization, enjoyment or liquidation.

3. The treatment and protection guaranteed by paragraphs 1 and 2 of this
Article shall at least be equal to that enjoyed by investors of any third State
and will in no case be less favourable than that recognized under
international law.

4. Nevertheless, the treatment and protection referred to in the preceding
paragraphs, shall not be extended to privileges which either Contracting
Party accords to the investors of a third State because of its participation or
association with a free trade zone, customs union, common market or any
other form of regional economic organization.

31. The 2002 BIT contained the following provision on the settlement of disputes between
host State and investors:

Article 8 —- Disputes between a Contracting Party and an Investor

1. Any dispute which may arise between an investor of one Contracting Party
and the other Contracting Party in connection with an investment in the
territory of the other contracting State(s) shall, whenever possible, be settled
amicably.

2. As far as possible, the Parties shall endeavor to settle the dispute through
negotiations, if necessary by seeking expert advice from a third party, or by
conciliation between the Contracting Parties through diplomatic channels.

3. If such a dispute between an investor of one Contracting Party and the other
Contracting Party continues to exist after a period of six months, the investor
shall be entitled to submit the case either to:

(a) international arbitration of the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes established pursuant to the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other
States opened for signature at Washington D.C. on 18 March 1965
(ICSID Convention ), or

(b) an arbitrator or international ad hoc arbitral tribunal established under the
Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law (UNCITRAL ), or

(c) the Cairo Regional Center for International Commercial Arbitration, or

(d) arbitration Rules of the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) in
Paris.

32. With regard to its application ratione materiae, the 2002 BIT contains the following
definitions:

Article 1
For the purpose of this agreement:

1. The term "investments" means any kind of assets and any direct or indirect
contribution in cash, in kind or in services, invested or reinvested in any
sector of economic activity in the territory of one Contracting Party in
accordance with its laws and regulations by an investor of the other
Contracting Party and includes in particular, though not exclusively:

(a) movable and immovable property as well as any other right such as
mortgages, pledges, usufruct and similar rights;

(b) shares and other kinds of interest in companies or enterprises;

(c) bonds, claims to money and rights to any performance having economic
value;

(d) copyrights, marks, patents, technical processes, trade-names, trade-
marks and goodwill;

(e) concessions, granted under public law, or under contract including
concessions to search for, extract and exploit natural resources.

Changes in the legal form in which assets and capital have been invested or
reinvested shall not affect their designation as "investments" for the purpose
of this Agreement.

2. The term “investors” means with regard to each Contracting Party

(a) Any natural person having the nationality of the Kingdom of Belgium, of
the Grand-Duchy of Luxembourg or of the Arab Republic of Egypt in
accordance with its legislation;

(b) Any legal entity, including corporations, companies, firms, enterprises or
associations constituted in the territory of one of the Contracting States in
accordance with its legislation;

3. The term “returns” means:

The amount yielded by an investment for a defined period in particular
though not exclusively: profits, dividends, royalties and interests.

4. The term “territory” shall apply to the territory of the Kingdom of Belgium, to
the territory of the Grand-Duchy of Luxembourg and to the territory of the
Arab Republic of Egypt as well as to the maritime areas i.e. the marine and
underwater areas which extend beyond the territorial waters of the State
concerned and upon which the latter exercise, in accordance with
international law, their sovereign rights and their jurisdiction for the purpose
of exploring, exploiting and preserving natural resources.

33. With regard to its application ratione temporis, the 2002 BIT provides the following
rules:

Article 12 — Application of the Agreement

This agreement shall apply to all investments made by investors of a Contracting
Party in the territory / territories of the other Contracting State(s) prior to or after
its entry into force in accordance with the law and regulations of the other
Contracting State. It shall, however, not be applicable to disputes having arisen
prior to its entry into force.

Article 13 — Entry into Force and Duration

1 [el

34.

2. Upon entry into force of this Agreement, the Agreement between the Belgo-

Luxembourg Economic Union and the Arabic Republic of Egypt signed in
Cairo on February 28" 1977 shall be replaced by this Agreement.

Investments made prior to the date of termination of this agreement shall be
covered by this Agreement for a period of ten years from the date of
termination.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

INITIAL PHASE

Registration of the Request for Arbitration

On 23 December 2003, the Claimants submitted a Request for Arbitration (the “RA” or
the “Request”) to the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes
(‘ICSID” or the “Centre”), accompanied by nine exhibits (Exh. [C-]1 to 9). In the
Request, the Claimants relied upon the provisions of the BITs and sought the following

relief:

CLAIMS FOR DECLARATORY DECISIONS IN THE PRINCIPLE

1.

The Claimants seek an Arbitral Award:

e acknowledging that the Respondent induced the Claimants to make an
investment in Egypt by negotiating in bad faith and by fraudulently
misrepresenting facts of crucial relevance to the evaluation of the cost of
the investment by the Claimants;

e acknowledging that the Respondent has failed to promptly repair the

resulting damages by adequate compensation and that all its organs

have constantly disregarded the Claimants’ rights to a just remedy;
therefore, declaring that the Respondent has breached its international
obligations under the agreements between it and Belgium, and notably
the obligation to ensure fair and equitable treatment and full protection
and security to foreign investments.

MONETARY CLAIMS

1.

In addition, the Claimants request that the Arbitral Tribunal award to them
complete compensation for all the damages suffered as a result of Egypt's
breaches of its international obligations.

These damages include in particular:

e the difference between the fair value of the investment made by the
Claimants and the much lower amount received in partial compensation
therefore, amounting at least to US$ 74 million;

e the amount unduly retained and expropriated by SCA in relation to the
subject-matter of the Second Case amounting at least to US$ 2,890,370
(US$ 1,148,816.61 plus EGP 5,244,659.82);

13

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

e the amount of the legal fees and other costs incurred by the Joint
Venture during the unfair and futile judicial proceedings before the
Egyptian domestic courts, amounting approximately to US$ 4,500,000;

e the amount of the financial damages suffered by the Claimants to be
calculated by applying to the total amount of damages indicated above a
9% compound interest running from June 30, 1993 (the central point of
the performance period of the works) until actual payment by the
Respondent. The rate of 9% is the proper rate already applied to an
amount due by Egypt in a previous ICSID case;

The exact amount of the damages will be determined more precisely during
the proceedings.

3. In addition, the Claimants request that the Respondent be ordered to
reimburse them for all costs incurred and to be incurred by them in
connection with the present arbitration, including legal fees.

On 14 January 2004, the Centre transmitted a copy of the Request to the Respondent
and to the latter's Embassy in Washington, D.C, in accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID
Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (the
"ICSID Institution Rules").

Exchanges of correspondence ensued between the parties and the Acting Secretary-
General of ICSID concerning the jurisdiction of ICSID over the Request and its
registerability under Article 36(3) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (the "ICSID Convention") and
ICSID Institution Rules 6 and 7.

On 27 May 2004, the Acting Secretary-General, in accordance with ICSID Institution
Rule 7, notified the parties of the registration and invited them to proceed to constitute
an Arbitral Tribunal as soon as possible.

Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal and commencement of the proceedings

By letter of 17 June 2004, the Centre acknowledged that the parties agreed “that there
shall be three arbitrators, one appointed by each party and the third, who shall be the
president of the Tribunal, appointed by the two party-appointed arbitrators”.

On 29 June 2004, the Claimants appointed Professor Pierre Mayer, a national of
France, as arbitrator. On 18 July 2004, the Respondent appointed Professor Brigitte
Stern, a national of France, as arbitrator. On 7 September 2004, the Centre informed
the parties that the two party-appointed arbitrators had appointed Professor Gabrielle
Kaufmann-Kohler, a national of Switzerland, as the President of the Tribunal.

40.

A.

42.

43.

On 14 September 2004, the Secretary-General of ICSID, in accordance with Rule 6(1)
of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”),
notified the parties that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that
the Tribunal was therefore deemed to be constituted and the proceedings to have
begun on that date. The same letter informed the parties that Ms Aurélia Antonietti,
Counsel, ICSID, would serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 13(1), and after consulting with the parties
and the Centre, the Tribunal scheduled a first session on 10 November 2004 in Paris.
By letters of 28 and 29 October 2004, the parties communicated to the Tribunal the
agreements they had reached on procedural matters identified in the provisional
agenda for the first session, which had been sent to them by the Tribunal’s Secretary.

Consequently, the Arbitral Tribunal held its first session on 10 November 2004, at the
offices of the World Bank in Paris. At the outset of the preliminary hearing, the parties
expressed agreement that the Tribunal had been properly constituted (Arbitration Rule
6) and stated that they had no objections in this respect. The parties reiterated their
agreement on the points communicated to the Tribunal in their letters of 28 and 29
October 2004, and the remainder of the procedural issues on the agenda for the
session were discussed and agreed upon, including two different procedural calendars
depending on whether the Respondent would raise objections to jurisdiction. An audio
recording of the session was later distributed to the parties. Minutes were drafted,
signed by the President and the Secretary of the Tribunal, and provided to the parties,
as well as all Members of the Tribunal on 29 November 2004.

In accordance with Arbitration Rule 22, the parties in particular agreed on the following
arrangements in respect of the procedural language:

e The Parties will file their written submissions and make their oral arguments
either in English or in French without any translation needed.

e Any communication, decision, order or award issued by the Tribunal will be
rendered and the record of the proceeding will be kept in English. At
hearings, the Tribunal will use the English language and might also use the
French language when appropriate.

[...] all instruments including without limitation supporting documentation, as well
as witness statements and expert opinions, would be filed either in French or
English without translation. Documents filed in Arabic shall be filed together with
an English or a French translation.

(Minutes of the First Session, at No. 7)

 

In accordance with the preliminary procedural calendar agreed upon during the first
session, the Claimants submitted their Statement of Claim on 15 March 2005 (“SoC”),
accompanied by 155 exhibits (Ex. C-10 to C-164), including two witness statements
(Exh. C-18: witness statement by Mr. Jacques Albert; Exh. C-46: witness statement of
Mr. Pierre Tison). In their SoC, the Claimants invoked the provisions of the BITs and
sought the following relief:

[...] subject to later amendments during the proceedings, the Claimants seek an

award:

e declaring that Egypt has violated its obligations under the First and 2002
BIT;

¢ ordering Egypt to compensate the damage caused to the Claimants; and
therefore

¢ ordering Egypt to pay to the Claimants the amounts of US$ 76.531.040 and
€ 3.307.008,47, plus interest starting from the dates and at the rate claimed
in Section 12.3 above; and

¢ ordering Egypt to bear the entirety of the costs of the present proceedings.

By a letter dated 13 April 2005, Responded informed the Tribunal that it intended to
raise objections to jurisdiction.

Consequently, on 18 April 2005, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1 (PO#1)
setting the following procedural calendar:

- The Respondent shall file a memorial on its objections to jurisdiction by June
15, 2005;

- The Claimants shall file their counter-memorial to the objections to
jurisdiction by September 15, 2005;

- The Respondent shall file its reply on jurisdiction by October 31, 2005;
- The Claimants shall file their rejoinder on jurisdiction by December 15, 2005;

- Apre-hearing telephone conference shall take place on December 22, 2005
at 4 pm, Paris time;

- Ahearing for the examination of witnesses and/or experts, if any, or for oral
arguments on jurisdiction will take place on January 30 and, if necessary, 31,
2006;

- If a witness and/or experts hearing takes place on January 30 and 31, 2006,
the oral arguments on jurisdiction will take place on February 15, 2006.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

THE WRITTEN PHASE ON JURISDICTION

In accordance with the procedural calendar set in PO#1, by “Mémoire du 15 juin 2005”,
the Respondent submitted its Memorial on jurisdictional objections (Mem. J.). The
Respondent did not append any documentary evidence.

In accordance with the procedural calendar set in PO#1, on 15 September 2005, the
Claimants submitted their Counter-Memorial to the Objections to Jurisdiction (CM. J.)
accompanied by six exhibits (Exh. C-165 to C-170), including a legal opinion (Exh.
C-165: expert opinion of Professor Christoph Schreuer dated 5 August 2005) and a
third witness statement (Exh. C-168: witness statement of Mr. Gideon Hein).

In accordance with the procedural calendar set in PO#1, by “Mémoire du 31 octobre
2005”, the Respondent submitted its Reply on Jurisdiction (Reply J.) accompanied by
one exhibit (Exh. R-1).

In accordance with the procedural calendar set in PO#1, on 15 December 2005, the
Claimants submitted their Rejoinder to the Objections to Jurisdiction (Rejoinder J.).

In accordance with the procedural calendar set in PO#1, on 22 December 2005, the
Tribunal held a telephone conference in preparation of the hearing on jurisdiction.
During this conference, none of the parties expressed the intent to examine/cross-
examine witnesses or experts at the forthcoming hearing. Hence, it was agreed that the
hearing on jurisdiction would be limited to oral arguments and would take place on 30
January 2006 according to an agreed tentative schedule. It was further confirmed that
(i) at the hearing, counsel for the Claimants would speak in English and counsel for the
Respondent would speak in French, and (ii) verbatim transcripts would be made in the
original language used. It was finally agreed that (i) there would be no need for
interpreters, and that (ii) the parties would submit (a) by 20 January 2006 a common
trial bundle with legal authorities, i.e. primarily ICSID cases on which they relied in their
memorials, and (b) by 24 January 2006, a list of the exhibits on which they intended to
rely in their oral arguments, being understood that these would exclusively be
documents already on record.

52.

53.

THE HEARING ON JURISDICTION

The Arbitral Tribunal held the hearing on jurisdiction on 30 January 2006 in Paris. In

addition to the Members of the Tribunal, and the Secretary*, the following persons

attended the jurisdictional hearing:

(i) On behalf of the Claimants:

Prof. Antonio Crivellaro;

Prof. Luca Radicati Di Brozolo;

Mr. Lorenzo Melchionda, Bonelli Erede Pappalardo;

Mr. Tom Lenearts, General Counsel for Dredging International; and

Mr. Bart Ceenaeme, General Counsel for Jan de Nul.

(ii) On behalf of the Respondent:

Mr. Robert Saint-Esteben;
Mr. Louis-Christophe Delanoy;
Ms. Anne Carole Crémadés, cabinet Bredin Prat;

Mr. Mustapha Abdel Ghaffar, International cooperation, Egyptian Ministry
of Justice;

Mr. Hosam Abdel Azim, President of the Egyptian State Litigation
Authority;

Mr. Osama Mahmoud, Vice-president of the Egyptian State Litigation
Authority;

Mr. Fouad Hosni, SCA;
Mr. Fouad Negm, SCA; and
Mr. Mohamed Mokhtar, SCA.

During the jurisdictional hearing, Messrs Robert Saint-Esteben and Louis-Christophe

Delanoy addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the Respondent and Professors Antonio

Crivellaro and Luca Radicati Di Brozolo addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the

Claimants.

With the agreement of the parties, Dr. Antonio Rigozzi, an attorney practising in the law firm of the

President of the Tribunal, also attended the hearing.

18

54.

55.

56.

57.

An audio recording of the jurisdictional hearing was made as well as a verbatim
transcript which were later distributed to the parties (Tr. J.).

It was agreed at the end of the jurisdictional hearing that the Tribunal would issue a
reasoned decision on jurisdiction. If the Tribunal declined jurisdiction, it would render an
award terminating the arbitration; if the Tribunal upheld jurisdiction, it would render a
decision asserting jurisdiction, and would issue an order with directions for the
continuation of the proceedings pursuant to Arbitration Rule 41(4) (Tr. J.. p. 120).

The Tribunal has deliberated and considered the parties’ written submissions on the
issue of jurisdiction and the oral arguments presented at the jurisdictional hearing.
Before reaching a conclusion on jurisdiction, the present decision summarizes the
parties’ positions (Ill) and discusses the relevant issues (IV).

PARTIES’ POSITIONS

THE CLAIMANTS’ POSITION

In their written and oral submissions, the Claimants advanced the following five main

arguments:

(i) In withholding essential information and consistently misrepresenting the true
nature of the situation, the Respondent lured the Claimants into investing in
Egypt under unacceptable conditions.

(ii) The damage arising from this conduct was compounded by the subsequent
behaviour of the other organs of the Egyptian State until the Court of Ismailia
adopted the judgment which definitively eliminated all prospects that the
Claimants could obtain redress from the Egyptian State, as they had naively
believed possible until that moment.

(iii) With respect to jurisdiction, the 2002 BIT is applicable, given that the dispute
submitted to the Tribunal — which is different from the one submitted to the

Administrative Court of Ismailia — arose after the judgment of that court and
therefore after the entry into force of the 2002 BIT.

19

58.

59.

(iv)

In any event, the dispute would also be covered by the 1977 BIT, since its
replacement by the 2002 BIT was meant to reinforce foreign investors’
protection.

As regards the merits, the Claimants rely upon the 2002 BIT with respect to
illegalities committed by the Respondent after the entry into force of the treaty
and on the substantive provisions of the 1977 BIT for illegalities committed
before that date.

On the basis of these contentions, the Claimants requested the Tribunal to “reject all

the Respondent's objections and decide that it has jurisdiction” (CM. J. p. 53; reiterated
in Rejoinder J. p. 20).

THE RESPONDENT’S POSITION

In its written and oral submissions, Egypt put forward the following six main arguments:

(i)

ti

The 2002 BIT is “[inJapplicable to disputes having arisen prior to its entry into
force” and cannot thus form the basis of the jurisdiction of this Tribunal over a
dispute which arose more than ten years ago.

The Claimants’ contention that the dispute arose when the Administrative
Court of Ismailia rendered its judgment of 22 May 2003 is artificial. The dispute
before this Tribunal is the same dispute as that which was decided by the
Court of Ismailia and is currently under appeal.

The 1977 BIT expired in its entirety on 24 May 2002.

When the present proceedings were initiated on 23 December 2003, the
Respondent's consent to ICSID jurisdiction under the 1977 BIT had lapsed.
Indeed, the entry into force of the 2002 BIT brought with it the expiration of the
1977 BIT.

The Claimants cannot rely on any purported “continuity of protection by the two
BITs” given that the dispute falls outside the scope ratione materiae of the
1977 BIT.

20

62.

(vi) In any event, the present dispute is not between an investor and a State but
rather between an investor and its contractual counterpart, which is a legal
entity distinct from the State.

In reliance on these arguments, the Respondent invites the Tribunal to

- Decline jurisdiction to adjudicate all the claims raised against it by the

Claimants.

- Order the Claimants to jointly and severally reimburse all the costs which it will
have incurred to respond to their spurious action, including the legal costs and
the amounts paid to ICSID in the present arbitration.

(Reply J. p. 42)*

In support of their positions on jurisdiction, both parties have relied on rules of
international law, decisions of courts and arbitral tribunals, and on opinions of learned
authors. In the course of the following discussion, the Tribunal will review the law
argued by the parties and its applicability to the facts of the present case. While Part III
of this decision summarizes the main arguments of the parties, other arguments were
made and will be referred to in Part IV to the extent the Tribunal considers them

relevant.

DISCUSSION

INTRODUCTORY MATTERS

Before turning to the main issues, the Tribunal wishes to address certain preliminary
matters, i.e., (a) the relevance of previous ICSID decisions and (b) the law applicable to
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, and (c) the standard applicable to the assessment of

jurisdiction.
Free translation of the French original: “- Se déclarer incompétent pour connaitre de l'ensemble des
prétentions élevées a son encontre par les Demanderesses; - Condamner solidairement les

Demanderesses a lui rembourser I'intégralité des frais qu'elle aura exposés pour faire face a leur action
malveillante et infondée, en ce compris les frais de conseil et les sommes versées au C.I.R.D.I. a
l'occasion du présent arbitrage”.

21

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

The relevance of previous ICSID decisions or awards

In support of their position, both parties relied extensively on previous ICSID decisions
or awards, either to conclude that the same solution should be adopted in the present
case or in an effort to explain why this Tribunal should depart from that solution.

The Tribunal considers that it is not bound by earlier decisions®, but will certainly
carefully consider such decisions whenever appropriate.

The law applicable to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction

As a preliminary matter, the Tribunal notes that there is no dispute as to the
jurisdiction of this Tribunal to decide the jurisdictional challenges brought by Egypt
(Article 41 of the ICSID Convention).

This Tribunal’s jurisdiction is contingent upon the provisions of the BIT(s) and of the
ICSID Convention.

The relevant provisions of the BITs (i.e., Articles |, IX an XII of the 1977 BIT and Articles
2,3,8,12 and 13 of the 2002 BIT) have already been quoted (see supra Nos. 26 et seq.).

The relevant provision of the ICSID Convention is Article 25(1) which reads as follows:

The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly out
of an investment between a Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision or
agency of a Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a
national of another Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in
writing to submit to the Centre. When the parties have given their consent, no
party may withdraw its consent unilaterally.

The applicable standard

At the hearing, the parties agreed that for purposes of jurisdiction, the Claimants

must establish a prima facie case on the merits (Ir. J., pp. 65, 98, 104-105). Hence,

the Tribunal will apply the following test as it was stated in Impregilo v. Pakistan:
[T]he Tribunal has considered whether the facts as alleged by the Claimant in

this case, if established, are capable of coming within those provisions of the BIT
which have been invoked.®

AES Corporation v. the Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/17, Decision on Jurisdiction of 13 July
2005, §{ 30-32; available at http://www.investmentclaims.com/decisions/AES-Argentina_Jurisdiction.pdf.

Impregilo S.p.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/3, Decision on Jurisdiction of 22
April 2005, 4 108; available at http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/impregilo-decision.pdf [JTB at 19].

22

70.

71.

72.

73.

The tribunal in Impregilo articulated this test by reference to the separate opinion of
Judge Higgins in Oi! Platforms, who proposed the following approach:
The only way in which, in the present case, it can be determined whether the
claims of [Claimant] are sufficiently plausibly based upon the 1955 Treaty is to
accept pro tem"! the facts as alleged by [Claimant] to be true and in that light to
interpret Articles |, |V and X for jurisdictional purposes, that is to say, to see if on

the basis of Iran’s claims of fact there could occur a violation of one or more of
them. °

Or, in the words of the tribunal in Bayindir v. Pakistan, “the Tribunal should be
satisfied that, if the facts or the contentions alleged by [the claimant] are ultimately
proven true, they would be capable of constituting a violation of the BIT’®. And the
Bayindir tribunal further specified the test as follows:
In performing this task, the Tribunal will apply a prima facie standard, both to the
determination of the meaning and scope of the BIT provisions and to the
assessment whether the facts alleged may constitute breaches. If the result is

affirmative, jurisdiction will be established, but the existence of breaches will
remain to be litigated on the merits. °

THE REQUIREMENTS OF ARTICLE 25 OF THE ICSID CONVENTION (INCLUDING THE DEFINITION
OF INVESTMENT UNDER THE BITS)

The Tribunal will start by reviewing the requirements of Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention ((a) to (c)). When dealing with the requirement of an investment (b), it will
also address the notion of investment under the BITs for the sake of expediency.
Thereafter, the Tribunal will review the remaining conditions under the BITs, which will
eventually be limited to the applicability ratione temporis of the 2002 BIT (c).

It is undisputed that this Tribunal has jurisdiction only if the requirements set in
Article 25 of the ICSID Convention are satisfied, i.e., if (a) the dispute is a legal
dispute between a Contracting State of the ICSID Convention (in the present case
Egypt) and investors of another Contracting State (in the present case Belgium), (b)
the dispute arises from an investment, and (c) the Claimants and the State have

An abbreviation for pro tempore, i.e., in English, provisionally or for the time being.

Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States of America, |.C.J. Reports 1996, Il, p. 810, § 32 of the separate
opinion.

Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/29,
Decision on Jurisdiction of 14 November 2005, § 195 (references omitted), available at
http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/ARB0329Decisionjurisdiction.pdf [JTB 28].

Id., 4197.

23

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

given their consent to ICSID jurisdiction (in the present case under one of the two
BITs).

Is there a legal dispute with a Contracting Party?

The Respondent did not contest that the current dispute is a “legal dispute” within the
meaning of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention and rightly so. Indeed, in the
Tribunal’s opinion, the present dispute is clearly legal in nature as it deals with “the
existence or scope of [Claimants’] legal rights” — to use the words of the Report of the
Executive Directors of the World Bank on the Convention — and with the nature and
extent of the relief to be granted to the Claimants as a result of the Respondent's
alleged violation of those legal rights"’.

Whether the rights asserted by the Claimants are ultimately found to exist must await
the proceedings on the merits. Subject to determining whether the Claimants made an
investment within the meaning of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, which will be
discussed below, the Tribunal holds that the assertion of such rights has given rise to a
legal dispute which is within the jurisdiction of the Centre as set forth in Article 25(1) of
the ICSID Convention.

It is established that Egypt and Belgium are bound by the ICSID Convention and qualify
as Contracting States within the meaning of Article 25.

In its objections to jurisdiction, the Respondent contended that the present dispute
is not with the Respondent, since the dispute constitutes “in reality the continuation
of the contractual dispute of domestic law that they [the Claimants] had with the
SCA before the Administrative Court of Ismailia” (Mem. J., { 204, pp. 81-82").

In order to assess the merits of the Respondent’s argument, the Tribunal must refer to
the well-established distinction between claims for breach of a treaty (treaty claims) and
claims for breach of a contract (contract claims).

See Report of the Executive Directors on the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes

Between States and Nationals of Other States; International Bank for Reconstruction and Development,
18 March 1965, § 26; available at http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/basicdoc/partB-section05.htm#03.

Free translation from the French original.

24

aa.

79.

80.

bb.

82.

The distinction between treaty and contract claims

As a preliminary matter, the Tribunal notes that the Respondent does not ignore the
distinction between treaty and contract claims and accepts that it is now well
established in ICSID jurisprudence. Both parties have referred to the decision of the ad
hoc committee in Vivendi v. Argentina, in which such distinction was circumscribed as
follows:
A particular investment dispute may at the same time involve issues of the
interpretation and application of the BIT’s standards and questions of contract. '°

Whether there has been a breach of the BIT and whether there has been a
breach of contract are different questions. Each of these claims will be
determined by reference to its own proper or applicable law in the case of the
BIT, by international law, in the case of the Concession Contract, by the proper
law of the contract. '*

Accordingly, the fact that a dispute involves contract rights and contract remedies does
not in and of itself mean that it cannot also involve treaty breaches and treaty claims"®.

The Claimants’ (treaty) claims

It is the Claimants’ case that the Respondent's conduct amounts in substance to a
violation of (i) the duty of fair and equitable treatment, (ii) the duty of continuous
protection and security, and (iii) the duty to promote investments (SoC, Section 10.3
pp. 19 et seq.).

 

It is undoubtful that the BITs impose such duties on Egypt and confer correlative rights
to the Claimants with respect to their investment. It follows that the dispute regarding
the alleged violation of these duties and rights is a dispute with Egypt, as required by
Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention"®.

Companhia de Aguas del Aconquija SA and Vivendi Universal (formerly Compagnie Générale des Eaux) v.
Argentine Republic, Decision on Annulment of 3 July 2002, § 60, ICSID Review (2004), vol. 19, No. 1, 41
ILM 1135 (2002), also available at http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/vivendi_annul.pdf [JTB 4].

Ibid., $ 96.

See also Bayindir v. Pakistan [supra Fn. 9], § 157.

For the very same reason, the Tribunal cannot agree with Respondent's argument that this Tribunal’s
jurisdiction over the present dispute would transform the Tribunal in a “supranational appellate court” (free
translation from the original French in Mem J., §.147, p. 61) reviewing national administrative decisions.
Likewise, the mere fact that the Claimants have filed a (parallel) appeal before the High Administrative
Court of Egypt “without prejudice to the Appellants’ right to submit the matters of the present case to the
international arbitration administered by [...] |CSID” and have explicitly reserved “the right to withdraw the
present appeal once the ICSID Arbitral Tribunal shall have retained Jurisdiction to proceed to examining
the merits of the case” (Exh. C-8, at page 17) is irrelevant.

 

25

ce.

83.

84.

85.

86.

The status of the SCA under international law

In its objections to jurisdiction, the Respondent relied on the fact that the SCA has an
independent legal personality under Egyptian law to suggest that the present dispute is
not a dispute with a Contracting Party'” (Mem. J, 4 204, p. 82).

As the Claimants correctly pointed out, the issue of whether a State is responsible for
the acts of a State entity is to be resolved in accordance with international law, and in
particular with the principles codified in the Articles on State Responsibility for
internationally wrongful acts. Referring to numerous ICSID precedents, the Claimants
submit that “the SCA is part of the Government of Egypt and the Government itself is
directly liable for its actions and omissions” (CM. J., 158. p. 29). Alternatively’®, the
Claimants submit that “the SCA committed the fraud in its capacity [of] puissance
publique and [that] the remaining illicit acts were committed by the Government and by
the judiciary” (Rejoinder J.. 1 23, p. 12"%).

According to the test set out above (see supra Nos. 69-71), it is not for the Tribunal at
the jurisdictional stage to examine whether the case is in effect brought against the
State and involves the latter's responsibility. An exception is made in the event that if it
is manifest that the entity involved has no link whatsoever with the State”. This is
plainly not the case in the present dispute.

Another exception was contemplated in Salini v. Morocco, a decision to which both
parties referred:

Since the claims of the Italian companies are being directed against the State
and are founded on the violation of the Bilateral Treaty, it is not necessary, in
order to determine whether the Tribunal has jurisdiction, to know whether ADM is
a State entity. However, as this issue has been discussed at length by the
Parties and may possibly, as the case may be, have an influence on the merits

The Tribunal notes though that the main developments regarding the independence of SCA were made
with regard to the question of the “soumission du litige a la clause attributive de juridiction stipulée au
Contrat”.

At the hearing, the Claimants made clear that their “principal theory is that it is an Article 4 body; in the
alternative it is certainly an Article 5 body” (Tr. J.. p. 125).

Claimants add that “these behaviors were carried out by a State in the exercise of its sovereign powers:
when Egypt called for the tender for works on the Suez Canal, when it organized the tender, set draconian
deadlines, modified the terms of the tender and selected the winning bidder, it did so by means of
administrative procedures and was therefore undoubtedly acting as a sovereign. In the language of RFCC
v. Morocco, all those decisions were adopted in the exercise of a puissance publique, i.e. in the interest
and on behalf of the State”.

Consortium Groupement L.E.S.I. - DIPENTA v. République Algérienne Démocratique et Populaire, Award
of 27 December 2004, 4 19; available at http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/lesi-sentence-fr.pdf [JTB
24].

26

of the case, the Tribunal considers that it is of use to rule on the matter in order
to satisfy the legitimate expectations of the Parties.”

87. However, contrary to the situation in Salini v. Morocco, the issue of attribution was only
briefly touched upon by the parties in this case. In its last written submission, the
Respondent elaborated on its argument regarding the absence of a dispute with the
Egyptian state (see supra No. 77) with the following considerations:

The observations in the Claimants’ reply that the acts or omissions of SCA could,
in international law, be attributed to Egypt are without bearing, in particular as
[...] the ICSID case law acknowledges that a contractual dispute between an
investor or alleged investor and an independent administrative authority like the
SCA is not covered by an ICSID arbitration offer related to disputes between the
Contracting States and the nationals of the other Contracting State.

Or in the original French version:

Les observations en réplique des Demanderesses, selon lesquelles les actes ou
omissions de la S.C.A. pourraient, en droit international, étre attribués a la
R.A.E., sont sans portée, alors surtout que la jurisprudence du C.I.R.D.I., sans
méconnaitre les régles d'attribution ainsi invoquées, n'en reconnait pas moins
qu'un litige de nature contractuelle entre un investisseur ou prétendu tel, et une
autorité administrative indépendante, comme I'est la S.C.A., n'est pas couvert
par une offre d'arbitrage C.I.R.D.l. visant les différends entre les Etats
signataires d'un BIT et les ressortissants de l'autre Etat signataire.

(Reply J. 198, p. 37)

88. In response to a specific question of the Tribunal at the hearing, the Respondent added
that “rien dans I'appel d'offres et dans la signature du contrat ne relevait de la
puissance publique” (Tr. J. p. 104). By contrast, the Claimants made the following
statements at the hearing:

Looking at the law which established SCA, if you have been constituted by law
and your governance, presidency and the board are appointed not only by the
government, but the President of the Republic himself, and replaced by his
decision, and the law gives you the power to issue decrees for administrative
delegation, which includes admitting or excluding passages, applying fines,
applying charges, this should be an organ, this is a body which speaks and acts
on behalf and in the name of the state. [...] [I]n a broader sense SCA is certainly
part of the executive branch of the state administration, and it is the most
important. SCA in Egypt is unquestionably much more important than seven
ministries put together! [...] It is the most rich authority, the entries of SCA [...]
go directly to the treasury, directly, so it is a tax”.

(Ir. J. p. 114)

Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Kingdom of Morocco, |CSID Case No. ARB/00/4, Decision
on Jurisdiction of 23 July 2001, 42 ILM, 2003 [JTB 2], at § 30.

27

89.

aa.

90.

91.

When assessing the merits of the dispute, the Tribunal will rule on the issue of
attribution under international law, especially by reference to the Articles on State
Responsibility as adopted on second reading in 2001 by the International Law
Commission and as commended to the attention of Governments by the UN General
Assembly in Resolution 56/83 of 12 December 2001 (the ILC Articles) as a codification
of customary international law. In particular, the Tribunal will consider the following

provisions:

e Art. 4 of the ILC Articles which codifies the well-established rule that the conduct of
any State organ, according to the internal law of the State, shall be considered an
act of that State under international law. This rule addresses the attribution of acts
of so- called de jure organs which are empowered to act for the State within the
limits of their competence.

e Art. 5 of the ILC Articles which goes on to attribute to a State the conduct of a
person or entity which is not a de jure organ but which is empowered by the law of
that State to exercise elements of governmental authority provided that person or
entity is acting in that capacity in the particular instance. Such provision restates the
generally recognized rule that the conduct of an organ of a State or of a person or
entity empowered to exercise elements of governmental authority shall be
considered an act of the State under international law if the organ, person or entity
acts in that capacity, even if it exceeds its authority or contravenes instructions.

Does the dispute arise out of an investment?
An investment within the meaning of Article 25 ICSID?

It is common ground between the parties that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is
contingent upon the existence of an “investment” within the meaning of Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention and of an investment under the BIT”.

The ICSID Convention contains no definition of the term “investment”. The Tribunal
concurs with ICSID precedents which, subject to minor variations, have relied on the
so-called “Salini test’. Such test identifies the following elements as indicative of an
"investment" for purposes of the ICSID Convention: (i) a contribution, (ii) a certain
duration over which the project is implemented, (iii) a sharing of operational risks, and

See infra Nos 97 et seq.

28

92.

93.

94.

(iv) a contribution to the host State’s development”, being understood that these
elements may be closely interrelated, should be examined in their totality and will
normally depend on the circumstances of each case® (see also the unchallenged

statement of Prof. Schreuer, Exh. C-165, 4 24, p. 9).

The Tribunal agrees with the Claimants that their activities in connection with the
dredging operation in the Suez Canal clearly meet these criteria. In particular, the
amount of work involved (including the mobilization of two heavy ships for a period of
approximately 19 months) and the related compensation show that the Claimants’
contribution was substantial. Moreover, there can be no question that an operation of
such magnitude and complexity involves a risk and one cannot seriously deny that the
operation of the Suez Canal is of paramount significance for Egypt's economy and
development.

These matters are not disputed. The only aspect which the Respondent appears to
question is whether the duration of the operation is sufficient to qualify as an investment
(Tr. _J., p. 28)®. In response to a specific question by the Tribunal at the hearing on
jurisdiction (Tr. J.. p. 75), both parties expressed the opinion that an operation may be
characterized as an investment if it lasts at least two years.

The Respondent asserted that “it did not intend to make any submission on the
existence of an investment in 1992” and merely noted that “if one starts from the date of
the contract, that is 29 July 1992, to the delivery of the works, i.e. in June 1994, this
amounts to a little less than two years” (Tr. J.. p. 1002"). According to the Claimants, in
the construction industry an investment starts from pre-qualification, as the investor

Salini. v. Morocco, [supra Fn. 21}, passim as restated, for instance in Bayindir v. Pakistan [supra Fn. 9],
4130.

Id. See also L.E.S.1. v. Algeria [supra Fn. 20], 13 (iv).

Joy Mining Machinery Limited v. The Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/11, Decision on
Jurisdiction of 6 August 2004, § 53 in fine; available at http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/joy-mining-
award.pdf.

In this respect, Counsel for the Respondent referred to ‘paragraphe 24.3 de la requéte d'arbitrage aux
termes duquel ‘The claimants entered into an international construction contract with SCA for a
considerable duration’ - disent-elles -, ‘almost three years from prequalification in December 1991 until the
end of the demobilisation in October 1994’. Je ne reviendrai pas ici sur la date de naissance du contrat
selon elles, décembre 1991, je croyais que c’était le 25 juillet 1992, mais elles le font vivre jusqu'a la levée
du chantier, si je puis dire, en octobre 1994, sachant que les travaux, eux, avaient été achevés des le 5
mars 1994 et que leur réception définitive avait été prononcée le 29 juin 1994, c'est la piece C81. Si on
avait voulu discuter de I'existence ou pas d'un investissement, il y aurait déja eu une bonne question a se
poser qui était celle de la durée. On n'a jamais vu probablement un investissement sous I'empire du CIRDI
6tre aussi court. Mais ce n'est pas mon propos.”

Free translation of the following French original: “Egypte n'a pas entendu se prononcer sur I'existence d'un
investissement ou pas en 1992 [...] si on part de la date du contrat, qui est le 29 juillet 1992, jusqu’a,
disons, la réception des travaux en juin 1994, cela fait un peu moins de deux ans”.

29

95.

96.

bb.

97.

98.

99.

starts spending money and making expenditures when preparing the offer and deciding
whether to pre-qualify or not (Tr. J. p. 107). Thus, in the present case the investment

covers a period beginning with “the pre-tender or the tender stage”

; and lasting
throughout “the contractual period of the works, [and] the subsequent period of the
works” (Tr. J, p. 75) until “autumn 1994, when the two ships went back to Europe” (Tr.
J, p. 107). Since the pre-qualification was initiated in March 1991, the Claimants
consider that “the duration of the works is approximately three years [...] [which] is in

line with standard BIT case law” (Tr. J, p. 75).

The Tribunal agrees with the Claimants that the duration of the operation was sufficient
for it to qualify as an investment within the meaning of Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention, even starting from the execution of the Contract on 29 July 1992.

Irrespective of the duration, it is common ground between the parties that the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction is contingent upon the Claimants having made an investment within the
meaning of the relevant BIT.

An investment within the meaning of the 1977 BIT

Article IIl(1) of the 1977 BIT contains the following general definition of investment:

The term "investments" shall comprise every direct or indirect contribution of
capital and any other kind of assets, invested or reinvested in enterprises in the
field of agriculture, industry, mining forestry, communications, and tourism.

It is not disputed that the Claimants have made a “contribution of capital or any other
kind of assets” within the meaning of the 1977 BIT. It is also common ground that the
definition of investment under the 1977 BIT is limited to the sectors listed in its Article
III(1). The question on which the parties differ is whether the contribution was invested
in one of the fields covered by the 1977 BIT or, more specifically, whether the dredging
of the Suez Canal is related to “communications” within the meaning of Article III(1).

According to the Respondent, the dredging of the Canal cannot relate to
communications since the ordinary meaning of "communications" in the English
language is limited to the exchange of information. However, as the Claimants pointed
out, two of the dictionaries cited by the Respondent in support of this argument contain
a definition of “communication” which appears to cover the Claimant's activity in Egypt:

The Claimants’ contention that “investment starts from pre-qualification in the construction industry,

[because] you start spending money and making expenditures when you prepare the offer and you decide
whether to pre-qualify or not” (Ir.. p. 107) was not really by the te

30

100.

101.

102.

103.

(i) The American Heritage Dictionary, contains the following definition:
“Communication [...] Plural [...] 5. Any connective passage or channel””?;

(ii) The Websters New Collegiate Dictionary (1973) contains the following
definition: “Communication [...] 4. (pl) : a system (as of telephones) for
communicating; a system of routes for moving troops, supplies, and

vehicles”.

Similar definitions are contained in other dictionaries, which demonstrates that the word
“communications” is not limited to the transmission of information, but includes a
geographic dimension*".

Under these circumstances, the Tribunal fails to see how the Respondent can argue
that including “road of communication” or “transport of persons and goods” in the
meaning of “communications” under Article III(1) can be “at odds with the common and
ordinary meaning of the term communications” (Mem. J., 138 ab initio, p. 58, free
translation).

Similarly, the Tribunal is unconvinced by the Respondent's argument that, because the
Claimants’ activity related to the dredging of the canal and not to the communications
through the canal, the Claimants did not invest in an “enterpris[e] in the field of [...]
communications” within the meaning of Article III(1) (the Respondent's emphasis; see
Mem. J., (138, p. 58). Of course, in the sense of “economic productive units”, the
Claimants are companies that are active in the field of dredging (or, in the Respondent

792)

words of “travaux publics’ and not in the field of communications. This does not

mean that they did not invest in an enterprise in the field of communications in the
sense of a “project” in that field.

Finally, the Tribunal notes that the mere fact that the Claimants never invoked the 1977
BIT before it was replaced by the 2002 BIT, which contains a broader definition of

As quoted in Mem. J., Fn. 19, p. 57.

As quoted in Reply J., Fn. 13. p. 14.

See for instance the quotations reported in Prof. Schreuer’s expert legal opinion: “The Shorter Oxford
English Dictionary includes the following definition under ‘communication’: ‘Access or means of access
between two or more persons or places; passage’. Webster's College Dictionary includes the following
definition for ‘communication’: ‘passage or an opportunity or means of passage between places’.” (Exh. C-
165, .

Reply J.. 432, p. 13.

31

104.

ce.

105.

106.

107.

108.

investment, does not in and of itself mean that there was a common understanding
among the parties that the Claimants’ activities fell outside the 1977 BIT®.

In conclusion, the Tribunal holds that the Claimants have made investments in an
enterprise in the field of communications according to Article III(1) of the 1977 BIT and
dismisses the Respondent's objection on the “original inapplicability” of the 1977 BIT,
i.e., the objection that the 1977 BIT does not apply ratione materiae.

An investment within the meaning of the 2002 BIT

In its relevant part, Article 1(1) of the 2002 BIT defines “investment” as follows™:

The term "investments" means any kind of assets and any direct or indirect
contribution in cash, in kind or in services, invested or reinvested in any sector of
economic activity in the territory of one Contracting Party in accordance with its
laws and regulations by an investor of the other Contracting Party [...].

It is not challenged that the activities of the Claimants in Egypt constitute a "contribution
in [...] services” and that they are thus covered by the definition of "investment" as
quoted above (which contains no limitation to specific economic sectors unlike the 1977
BIT)®.

Have the parties consented in writing to arbitrate the dispute?

In order to establish the jurisdiction of this Tribunal under Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention, the Claimants rely upon (1) the consent of the Respondent to arbitration
contained in the 1977 and/or 2002 BIT combined with (2) their own consent contained
in the Request for Arbitration.

According to a now “well established practice, it is clear that the coincidence of these
two forms of consent can constitute ‘consent in writing’ within the meaning of Article
25(1) of the ICSID Convention [...] if the dispute falls within the scope of the BIT.” The

Likewise, contrary to the Respondent's suggestions at the hearing (Tr. J., p. 24), the mere fact that the
Claimants made submissions before the Egyptian Governmental Committee on Foreign Investment to
demonstrate that they were “investors” according to the Egyptian regulations applicable before that
Committee has no bearing on the question of whether they qualify as investors under the BIT.

For the complete wording of Article 1(1), see supra No. 32.

The Respondent objects to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal under the 2002 BIT on the ground that, assuming
that the dispute arose on 23 May 2003, the Claimants’ investment was no longer existing on that date. This
argument will be discussed when examining the applicability ratione temporis of the 2002 BIT (cf. infra No.
134 et seq.).

Impregilo v. Pakistan [supra Fn. 6] § 108.

32

109.

110.

111.

112.

Respondent does not dispute this. It contends, however, that its offer to arbitrate under
the 1977 BIT had already lapsed when the Claimants purportedly accepted it by filing
their Request for Arbitration. With respect to its consent to arbitrate under the 2002 BIT,
the Respondent contends that its offer to arbitrate does not cover the present dispute
as it arose well before the entry into force of that BIT.

The Tribunal will assess the applicability ratione temporis of the two BITs following the
Claimants’ case, i.e. assuming primarily that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over the
present dispute under the 2002 BIT and alternatively that it has jurisdiction under the
1977 BIT. It is self-evident that the latter assessment will not be necessary if the
Tribunal finds that it has jurisdiction under the 2002 BIT.

THE APPLICABILITY RATIONE TEMPORIS OF THE 2002 BIT

The 2002 BIT contains the following provision with regard to its application ratione
temporis:

Article 12 — Application of the Agreement

This agreement shall apply to all investments made by investors of a Contracting
Party in the territory/territories of the other Contracting State(s) prior to or after its
entry into force in accordance with the law and regulations of either Contracting
State. It shall, however, not be applicable to disputes having arisen prior to its
entry into force.

It is common ground that the time when the investment was made has no relevance for
the applicability ratione temporis of the 2002 BIT (Reply J. 46-47, p. 18: Tr. J.. p.
30). Likewise, it is undisputed that Article 12 of the 2002 BIT restricts its applicability to
disputes which have arisen after its entry into force, that is after 24 May 2002 (CM J.,
(12, p. 3 a contrario). In other words, for jurisdiction to be based on the 2002 BIT the
dispute must have arisen after 24 May 2002.

On the Claimants’ primary case, “the dispute submitted to the Tribunal — which is
different from the one submitted to the Administrative Court of Ismailia — arose after the
Judgment of that Court was handed down, and therefore after the entry into force of the
Second BIT” (Rejoinder J. 4.9. p. 5). It is not challenged that the dispute decided by the
Court of Ismailia arose well before 24 May 2002. Hence, the issue is whether the
dispute before this Tribunal is different from the dispute decided by the Court of
Ismailia.

33

113.

114.

115.

116.

In support of their contention that the dispute is different from the one currently before
the Egyptian courts, the Claimants assert that (a) the dispute relates to the violation by
Egypt of its obligations under international law. Moreover, they rebut the Respondent's
objections which are based, (b) on the recent ICSID award in Lucchetti, (c) on the
existence of a dispute settlement clause in the Contract, and (d) on the fact that in May
2003 the Claimants’ investment no longer existed.

A different dispute in terms of parties and applicable legal standards

The Claimants insist on the fact that the parties to the two disputes are different. Before
the Court of Ismailia, the defendant is the SCA acting as an entity under municipal law,
albeit as an organ of the State. Before the Arbitral Tribunal, the respondent is the
Egyptian State as a subject of international law.

The Respondent considers that the identity of the parties is relevant to determine
whether a decision is res judicata or whether there is lis pendens and/or whether a
party has made a choice under a fork in the road provision, but is irrelevant to
determine whether the dispute before this Tribunal is a new dispute. According to the
Respondent, to rely on the (different) identity of the parties and on the (different) legal
bases for the claims would deprive Article 12 in fine of the 2002 BIT of any meaning:

It is obvious that when two States bound by a BIT decide to exclude the

application of the BIT to the disputes that arose prior to its entry into force, they

can not, when making such decision, have in mind disputes based on the said

treaty given that, by hypothesis, no previous dispute that arose before the entry

into force of a treaty can be based on a breach of that treaty. They regard thus

necessarily disputes that have another causae petendi than the breach of the
treaty, in particular the alleged violation of their own domestic law.

And in the original French version:

ll est en effet évident que lorsque deux Etats parties a un BIT décident d'en
exclure l'application aux litiges nés antérieurement a son entrée en vigueur, ils
ne peuvent avoir en vue, en prenant cette décision, des litiges fondés sur ledit
traité puisque, par hypothése, aucun litige antérieur a un traité donné ne peut
avoir pour fondement la violation de ce traité. Ils visent donc nécessairement des
litiges ayant d'autres causae petendi que la violation du traité, parmi lesquelles la
violation alléguée de leur droit interne parait devoir occuper la premiére place.

(Reply, 151, p. 20)

The Tribunal disagrees. The purpose of Article 12 of the 2002 BIT is to exclude
disputes which have crystallized before the entry into force of the BIT and that could be
deemed “treaty disputes” under the treaty standards. Indeed, considered a contrario,

34

117.

118.

119.

120.

121.

the Respondent's position would mean that, failing a provision like Article 12 in fine of
the 2002 BIT, the BIT would cover any previous contract dispute.

In the present case, while the dispute which gave rise to the proceedings before the
Egyptian courts and authorities related to questions of contract interpretation and of
Egyptian law, the dispute before this ICSID Tribunal deals with alleged violations of the
two BITs, specifically of the provisions on fair and equitable treatment, on continuous
protection and security, and on the obligation to promote investments.

There is nothing unsound in the Claimants’ assertion that the damage they suffered
because of the alleged fraud was compounded by the subsequent conduct of the
organs of the Egyptian State until the Court of Ismailia adopted the judgment which —
according to the Claimants — definitively eliminated all prospects that the Claimants
could obtain redress from the Egyptian State.

Moreover, the claims regarding the judgment and the manner in which the Egyptian
courts dealt with the dispute address the actions of the court system as such, and are
thus separate and distinct from the conduct which formed the subject matter of the
domestic proceedings. Hence, they do not coincide with the conduct examined in the
course of the dispute brought under domestic law. The fact that the most important part
of the Claimants’ SoC is devoted to alleged BIT violations in connection with the very
facts that founded the claim before the Ismailia court (and only a minor part to the
alleged wrongdoings of the court system) does not change the situation. In Professor's
Schreuer’s words, the (relevant) fact is that “the domestic dispute antedated the

international dispute and ultimately led towards it”®”.

Under these circumstances, the Tribunal is unconvinced by the Respondent's (implied)
argument that, in fact, the Claimants are merely trying to disguise their contract case as
a treaty case.

Indeed, as set forth by the Claimants’ legal expert, there is a clear trend of cases
requiring an attempt to seek redress in domestic courts before bringing a claim for
violations of BIT standards irrespective of any obligation to exhaust local remedies®®.
Although it agrees with the Respondent that there is no requirement for a mandatory

Cf. Schreuer Report (Exh. C-165) at 9 111.

Cf. Schreuer Report (Exh. C-165) at 9] 66-67 referring to Generation Ukraine, Inc. v. Ukraine, Award, 16
September 2003, paras. 20.30, 20.33 and 11.2, as well as Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican
States, Award, 30 April 2004, para. 116.

35

122.

123.

124.

125.

“pre-trial” before the local courts, this consideration reinforces the Tribunal in its
conclusion that the dispute only crystallized after 22 May 2003 when the Ismailia Court
rendered its judgment.

Having concluded that the dispute arose after the entry into force of the 2002 BIT, the
Tribunal does not need to consider the Claimants’ fall back argument that the alleged
breaches by Egypt occurred through a composite act within the meaning of Article 15 of
the ILC Articles on State Responsibility and that, for the purpose of assessing the
jurisdiction ratione temporis, this kind of composite act does not "occur" until the
completion of the series of acts of which it is composed (Tr., p. 110 et seg.*2). It must,
however, address the Respondent's most emphatic argument with respect to the
moment when the dispute arose. This argument relates to the ruling in Lucchetti.

The relevance of the Lucchetti award

In support of its contention that the dispute before this Tribunal is the same as the one
before the Egyptian courts, the Respondent relies on an award rendered by an ICSID
Tribunal on 7 February 2005 in Lucchetti v. Peru. In that case, the tribunal considered
that there was no new dispute when “the facts or considerations that gave rise to the
earlier dispute continued to be central to the later dispute” (at { 50 in fine) and held that
the adoption of a decree revoking an authorization granted by a local court merely
continued the earlier dispute (at 53).

In substance, it is the Respondent's case in this arbitration that the central element of
this dispute remains the alleged misrepresentations made during the pre(contractual)
phase (as it was before the Court of Ismailia). Hence, according to the Respondent, the
Egyptian decision in the present case should, like the decree in the Peruvian case, be
considered a mere “péripétie de différends préexistants a l'entrée en vigueur des BIT,
qui, partant, seraient inapplicables” (Mem. J., { 166, p. 68).

On the Claimants’ case“°, the Lucchetti award is irrelevant because of the fundamental
difference between that case and the present one, namely:

See also Cf. Schreuer’s Report (Exh. C-165) at 9 72 et seq. referring, inter alia, to Stanimir A. Alexandrov,
The "Baby Boom" of Treaty-Based Arbitrations and the Jurisdiction of ICSID Tribunals: Shareholders as
"Investors" and Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis, in: The Law and Practice of International Courts and
Tribunals, Volume 4, Number 1, 2005, pp. 19-59, 53.

At the hearing, the Claimants added that the Lucchetti award should be not only “distinguished [...] on the
basis of the facts” (Tr. p. 86) but also be considered as “probably wrong” (Tr. p. 87) and emphasized the

36

126.

127.

128.

129.

In the Lucchetti case, the same organ issued identical measures twice within a
very short interval of time. Here, the acts complained of by the Claimants have
been committed by different organs of the State at different stages within an
extremely long period of time and are of a different nature. Indeed, there is a
significant difference between the acts which took place before the entry into
force of the Second BIT (the illegal misrepresentations and the Egyptian
Government's refusal to adopt appropriate remedies and those which were
committed after that date (in particular the handing down of the Judgment). Here
again the Respondent seeks to downplay the relevance of the Judgment and the
fact that it was, of its own, an illegal act.

(Rejoinder J., 421, p. 10)

The application to this case of the test adopted in Lucchetti leads to the conclusion that
the present dispute is a new one. Indeed, in Lucchetti, the tribunal held that the relevant
issue was whether “the facts or considerations that gave rise to the earlier dispute
continued to be central to the later dispute”. Specifically, the Lucchetti tribunal took into
consideration the facts underlying each dispute and their “origin or source” ({ 53). It
found unequivocally that “both disputes originated in the municipality's stated
commitment to protect the environmental integrity of the Pantanos de Villa and its
repeated efforts to compel Claimants to comply with the rules and regulations
applicable to the construction of their factory in the vicinity of that environmental
reserve”.

In the present case, the position is different. Admittedly, the previous dispute is one of
the sources of the present dispute, if not the main one. It is clear, however, that the
reasons, which may have motivated the alleged wrongdoings of the SCA at the time of
the conclusion and/or performance of the Contract, do not coincide with those
underlying the acts of the organs of the Egyptian State in the post-contract phase of the
dispute. Since the Claimants also base their claim upon the decision of the Ismailia
Court, the present dispute must be deemed a new dispute.

The intervention of a new actor, the Ismailia Court, appears here as a decisive factor to
determine whether the dispute is a new dispute. As the Claimants’ case is directly
based on the alleged wrongdoing of the Ismailia Court, the Tribunal considers that the
original dispute has (re)crystallized into a new dispute when the Ismailia Court rendered
its decision.

Under these circumstances, the Tribunal considers that the decision of the Ismailia
Court is, in the words of the Luchetti award, “a legally relevant element that compels a

 

fact that an appeal was currently pending against the Lucchetti award (Tr. p. 86). It is not for this Tribunal to
second-guess the solution adopted in a previous award.

37

130.

131.

132.

133.

oi)

ruling that the dispute before this Tribunal is a new dispute”"’. Hence, the Tribunal

concludes that the present dispute arose on 22 May 2003.

The Tribunal is reinforced in this conclusion by the fact that the Lucchetti tribunal further
justified its solution by “the fact that Lucchetti did not have an a priori entitlement to this
international forum” and that “[i]t cannot say that it made its investment in reliance on
the BIT, for the simple reason that the treaty did not exist until years after Lucchetti had
acquired the site, built its factory, and was well into the second year of full production”
(961).

In the present case, it is undisputed that a BIT did exist when the Claimants made their
investment. Interestingly, the Respondent seems to acknowledge the relevance of the
existence of previous protection when it argues that there is no reason to distinguish
Lucchetti precisely because the 1977 BIT was inapplicable ratione materiae. In any
event, as the Tribunal has rejected the Respondent's objection regarding the “original
inapplicability” or inapplicability ratione materiae of the 1977 BIT (see supra No 104),
this is an additional reason to distinguish the findings of this Tribunal from those
reached in Lucchetti.

The relevance of the contractual dispute settlement clause

The Respondent finally contends that the Tribunal cannot assert jurisdiction because
the dispute resolution clause contained in the Contract submits all disputes between the
Claimants and the SCA to the jurisdiction of the Egyptian administrative courts.

The Tribunal cannot follow the Respondent's arguments in this respect. As the
Claimants emphasized, this argument has no independent bearing as it presupposes
that this dispute is the same as the one brought before the Egyptian courts. Moreover, it
is undisputed that the claims brought in this arbitration are separate and juridically
distinct from the contract claims asserted before the Egyptian courts. As such, they are
not covered by the contract dispute settlement clause.

Under these circumstances, the Tribunal does not need to consider the holding of the Lucchetti tribunal that
“[t]he allegation of a BIT claim, however meritorious it might be on the merits, does not and cannot have the
effect of nullifying or depriving of any meaning the ratione temporis reservation spelled out in Article 2 of
the BIT” (at 59; reference omitted, referred to in Reply J. p. 21, 9 54).

38

134.

135.

136.

137.

138.

Must the investment exist at the time of the entry into force of the BIT?

The Respondent objects to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal under the 2002 BIT on the
ground that, assuming the dispute arose on 22 May 2003, the Claimants’ investment no
longer existed. It is the Respondent's contention that a dispute is covered by a treaty
only if the investment was present in the territory of the State at the time when the
dispute arose (Reply J., 4.107, p. 40).

The Tribunal disagrees. As the Claimants stressed, not only is it stated “nowhere [...]
that the investment should still be in existence when the dispute arises” but also and
more importantly, “should this be the case the entire logic of investment protection
treaties would be defeated” (Reply J.. {| 26, p. 14). As convincingly explained by the
Claimants’ legal expert,

Providing an effective remedy is part of the duties of fair and equitable treatment

and of continuous protection and security for investments. A violation of that duty

after the investment has come to an end does not change its nature. The duty to

provide redress for a violation of rights persists even if the rights as such have

come to an end. Otherwise an expropriating State might argue that it owes no
compensation since the investment no longer belongs to the previous owner.

(Schreuer, § 38, p. 12 [not discussed in the Reply at pp. 38-39])
For the same reasons, the Tribunal rejects the Respondent's additional contention that
in the absence of an investment on 22 May 2003, the current dispute could not be in
relation to an investment within the meaning of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention (see
Reply J.. 1110 in fine, p. 41).

Conclusion

Having concluded that the general conditions of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention are
fulfilled, that the 2002 BIT is applicable ratione temporis and materiae, the Tribunal
concludes that it has jurisdiction to decide the present dispute under the 2002 BIT.

Prior to reaching this conclusion, the Tribunal has extensively considered the issue of
whether a dispute arising after the Ismailia Court judgment could include claims which
do not arise directly out of the judgment but out of previous facts. While the Claimants’
submissions were sufficient to assert jurisdiction under the applicable test, the Tribunal
wishes to stress that the limited analysis it conducted at the jurisdictional stage is
without prejudice to the full analysis which it will conduct when examining the merits.

39

139.

Among other requirements, this analysis will in particular review whether the claims
based on the SCA’s alleged wrongdoings are attributable to the Respondent, a matter
which the Claimants will have to establish.

Costs

At this stage, the Tribunal takes due note of the parties’ positions and requests with
respect to costs. It will deal with costs at the merits stage, which will allow it to make an
overall assessment.

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

For the reasons set forth above, the Tribunal makes the following decision:

a)

b)

¢)

The Arbitral Tribunal has jurisdiction over the dispute submitted to it in this
arbitration.

The Tribunal will, accordingly, make the necessary order for the continuation of the
proceedings on the merits.

The decision on costs is deferred to the second phase of the arbitration on the
merits.

Made on 16 June 2006

/signed/ /signed/

Prof. Pierre Mayer Prof. Brigitte Stern

/signed/

Prof. Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler

40

