HKIAC Case No. 18117
Final Award

IIKIAC CcHNU. 18117

IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION UNDER THE
FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA AND THE REPUBLIC Of KOREA (THE “KORUS ETA”)
-and-
THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RILES (WITH NEW’ ARTICLE 1,
PARAGRAPH 4, AS ADOPTED IN 2013) (THE “UNCITRAL RULES”)

~between-
(the “Claimant”)
-and-
THE GOVERNMLNI OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA

(the “Respondent”, and together with the Claimant, the “Parties”)

 

 

FINAL AWARD

 

 

Tribunal
Judge Bruno Simma (Presiding Arbitrator)
Dr. Benny Lo
Professor Donald McRae
Assistant to the Tribunal
Dr. Heiner Kahlert

Administering Institution

Hong Kong International .Arbitration Centre (“HKIAC")

HKIAC Case No. 18117
Final Award
Page J ol 35

it INTRODUCTION

|. The present arbitration concerns. the expropriation in 2016 of property in Seoul owned by
the Claimant. The Claimant asserts that the expropriation violated Article 11.6 of the
KORUS FTA because the Respondent failed to pay adequate compensation and because the
evpropriation wae nether for a public purpose nor was it conducted in a non-discriminatory
manner and In accordance With due process. Moreover, the Claimant argues that the
Respondent violated the fair and equitable treatment guarantee laid down in Article 11.5 of
the KORUS FTA because the Respondent allegedly relied on a forged document that
purported to constitute consent by the Claimant to the redevelopment of the area in which
her property was situated and thereby amounting to a denial! of justice

2. Pursuant to Articles 11.20.6 and 11.20.7 of the KORUS FTA, the Respondent requested that
the Tribunal decide on on expedited basis on four preliminary objections (the “Application
for Preliminary Objections”) and thus dismiss the case on grounds of lack of jurisdiction,
lack of admissibility and/or manifest lack of legal merit.

3. This award represents the Tribunals decision on the Application for Preliminary Objections,

ii. | PROCEDURAL HISTORY

4. — This section does not purport to be a comprehensive account of every’ proceduial step taken
in this arbitration. Instead, the following paragraphs merely provide a summary of the most
important steps. The entire procedural history is a matter of record of these proceedings.

5. On 12 July 2018, die Claimant served the Respondent with a Notice of Arbitration under
Article 11.16.1(a)G@)(A) of the KORUS FTA. after having failril io resolve the subject
dispute following (i) the service of a Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim to Arbitration to the
Respondent on 9 September 2017 pursuant to Article 11.16.2 of the KORUS-FTA, and (ii)
an attempt to resolve the dispute by consultation and negotiation pursuant Io Article 11.15.

6. The Claimant subsequently served amendments to her Notice of Arbitration on 29 August
2018, 13 September 2018 and 1 April 2019. In the second amendment, the Claimant
appointed Dr. Benny Lo, of Des Voeux Chambers, 38/F, Gloucester Tower, The Landmark,
Central. Hong Kong, as arbitrator (having proposed for him to be appointed) as sole
arbitrator in the original Notice of Arbitration and the first amendment thereof).

7. On 13 August 2018, the Respondent served the Claimant with a Response to the NOlice of
Arbitration.

8. On 30 October 2018, the Respondent appointed Professor Donald McRae. of the Faculty of
Law, Common Law Section, University of Ottawa, S7 Louis Pasteur, Ottawa, Ontario, KIN
ONS, Canada, as arbitrator.

HKIAC Case No. 18117
Final Award
Page 3 of 35

On 29 November 2018, the Respondent informed Dr. LO and Prolessor McRae that the
Parlies had agreed that the HKIAC will administer this arbitration subject to the application
of the UNCITRAL Rules, and the scat of the arbitration and the venue of hearings will be
Seoul, Korea. In the same letter, the Respondent also informed Dr. Lo and Professor McRae
of the Parties’ agreed “list procedure” for the selection and appointment of the presiding
arbitrator and sought their assistance in compiling the Hs" for this purpose,

On 12 January 2019, pursuant to that procedure, Judge Bruno Sinuna, of the Iran-United
States Claims Tribunal, Parkweg 13, 2585 JH The Hague, The Netherlands was appointed as
the presiding arbitrator whereupon the Tribunal was duly constituted.

On 26 February 2U19, the Respondent submitted the Application for Preliminary Objections,

On 5 April 2019, the Tribunal issued a written Decision on Claimant's Application to
Submit 3" Amendment to Notice of Arbitration and Respondent’s Request for a Hearing on
its Application for Preliminary Objections. Therein the Tribunal granted permission for the
Claimant to file the 3“ amendment to the Notice Of Arbitration and acceded to the
Respondent's request for a hearing in respect of the Application for Preliminary Objections,

On 11 April 2019, the Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 1, which includes within it a
procedural timetable for the preliminary objections phase of this arbitration,

On 12 Aptil 2019, the R de submii an di to the lication for
Preliminary Objections, as permitted by the Tribunal, following the filing of the Claimant's
third amendment to her Notice of Arbitration.

 

On 19 June 2019, the United Slates of America filed a non-dlSpUting party submission
pursuant to Article 11.20(4) of the KORUS FTA and Procedural Order No. |. Tler Claimant
and the Respondent tiled responses thereon on 11 and 12 July, respectively,

Following a pre-hearing conference call held on 12 July 2019, the Tribunal issued its
Procedural Order No. 2 in which, inter aliay it was decided that the Claimant COUid be CTOSS-
examined in idation to her testimony at the hearing on the Application for Preliminary
Objections (the “Hearing”), and that she may file a pre-hearing motion by 19 July 2019,

The Claimant filed a pre-hearing motion on 19 July 2019, to which the Respondent replied
on 25 July 2019. The Tribunal issued a decision on the pre-hearing motion on 26 July 2019,
ruling that (i) certain portions of the Respondent's expert reports shall be excluded from

testimony Jat the Hearing. and (ii) two alleged tenants of the Claimant, namely
ee |. summoned to appear as witnesses at the Hearing.

ITie Hearing wtas held in Seoul from 31 July to 2 August 2019.1 At the Hearing, the
Claimant and one of lici alleged tenants, HR. tre heard as witnesses.2

 

‘ The persons who were present at the Hearing are listed in the Annex to this Final Award.

HKIAC Case No. 18117
Find Award
Page 4 ot 35

Moreover, two a witnesses picsemcd by the Respondent (Professors

| and one expert witness presented by the Claimant (Professor [gaa
estified on Korean law. The Heating concluded with oral closing submissions. from
both Panics.

 

19. After the Hearing, the Pardee submitted their rcapovlive costs Statements. On 19 August
2019, the Respondent sought leave to make a bnef additional submission, which request was
objected to by the Claimant and dismissed by the Tribunal on 4 September 2019.

iff. FACTUAL BACKGROUND

20. Before setting out the salient tacts of this case, the Tribunal notes that for the purposes of the
Tribunal’s ruling on the Application for Preliminary Objections, the Respondent expressly
accepted almost all of the Claimant's factual allegations, with the only three exceptions
being highlighted in the account of facts below.' Equally, beyond the three areas of
disagreement just referred 10, the Claimant did not dispute any of the Respondent ( factual
allegations that supplemented or were additional to the Claimant's own factual assertions.’

21. Accordingly, the facts summarized in this section are undisputed between ihe Parties, save
for the few facts for which the Tribunal has expressly noted otherwise.

A. The Claimant

22. The Claimant was bom in Koiea o and wfas a Korean citizen. After
having moved to California in 2004, the Claimant obtained) the status of a permanent US
resident in 2008.5

23. In early 2013, the Claimant returned to Korea due to a serious medical condition of her

falher. On 23 May 2013, the Claimant was naturalized as a US citizen and lost her Korean

citizenship.

* The oilier alleged tenant summoned by the Tribunal was unable to attend the Hearing due to a serious medical
condition.

» Amended Application for Prelimimtiy Objections, paTos. 3.2 and 4,38; Respondent's Reply to the Response to
the Application for Preliminary Objections, para, 4.8.2. Respondent's Response. to Non-Disputing, Paity
Submission; Respondent's clarification at the Hearing. see the Transcript of Day 3, from page 29, line 6 to page
30, line 10,

*The Tribunal notes that while the Claimant took issue with the Respondent’s suggestion that she may have
obtained US citizenship in order to come under the protection of KORUS FTA, ihe Respondent did not actually
submit that this was the case. Rather. it reserved the right to make such argument at a later stage, sec the
Application for Preliminary Objections, at paras. 9.2 (“reairrvey ity rights‘) and 9.3 ("appears possible that the
Claimant is claiming US citizenship simply so she can bring a claim under KORUS" ).

*Claimant’s Witness Statement (Exhibit CW 1), para. 6.

 

HKIAC Case No. 18117
Final Award
Page 5 of 35,

B, The KORUS FTA

24. On 15 March 2012, the KORUS FTA entered into force.

C. The Property:

25. On 4 April 2001, the Claimant signed! a contract to purchase 76.87 onnteresnia nj
of land, the size of which was 187.8 square meters, located! in) 12-93,
GR (the “ Land"). The purchase price was KRW 330,000-000 (approximately

USD 300,000 at the time). This purchase included the two residential houses situated on the
I and. One house had two stories (the “Twu-Ston House”) while the other had only a single
story’ (the “Single-Story House”),

26. The purchase was registered in the land registry, and ownership of the said share was thus
completed, on 8 June 2001.7

27. On 17 August 2001, the Claimant purchased the remaining 10,86/87* of interest in the
Land. This purchase was registered in the land registry on 23 August 2001, following which
the Claimant became the sole owner of the Land.®

2

we

On 23 October 2003, the Claimant transferred 47 1/187.8* of interest in the Land to Let
husband. together with the title Us the Single-Story House.’ The Claimant
continued to owm the remaining share in the Land, and the Two-Story House (together with
her share in the Land, the “Property”), until the Property was expropriated in 2016.

29. At the time of her purchase of the I and. and until 2010, the Claimant's. parents lived on the
second floor of the Two-Story: House, on the’ basis Of a one-time deposit that the parents had
paid to the previous owner of the Laud."° In Korea, there are twfo alternative ways of paying
rent. One way is to pay a small deposit plus a monthly rent. ‘The other way is to pay only a
large one-time deposit, which the landlord can then invest and try to make a profit out of it
during the lease period; at the end thereof, the deposit is usually returned in full (and tenants
nowadays increasingly take out insurance against the risk of the landlord being unable to
repay the whole deposit).''

© Real Extaie Sale and Purchase CuiiUdCl (Exhibit Cfe-J).

” Ccitificaie of All Matters ot Registration - Land (Exhibit CF-4), row 14 (p. 4 of the PDF).

* Certificate of Al] Matters of Registration — Land (Exhibit CE4), row 16 (p. 4-5 of the PDF). (The Tribunal
notes that no sale and purchase agreement for this transaction was submitted in this arbitration; however, the
respective allegation by the Respondent has remained! undisputed), and the registry in fact indicates, as “grounds
Jor registration” "Aug. 17. 2001+ Trading*.)
* Certificate of All Matters of Registration = f and (Fxhibit CE), row 17 (p. 5 of the PDF).

™ Claimant’s Witness Statement (Exhibit CW1), paras. 1-2.

' The respective explanations given’ by Claimant's counsel at the Hearing may be seen from the Transcript of
Day |, at page 90, lines 2-6 and the Transcript of Day 3, at page 82, line 12 to page 83, line 11.

 

 

HKJAC Case No. 18117
Final Award
Page 6 of 35

30, In 2011, the Claimant's family (comprising at that time the Claimant, her husband, their
Children and the Claimant’s father) moved to the second floor of the Two-Story House and
continued to live there" until they vacated the Property in May 2017 in the context of the
expropriation, ?

31, It is disputed between the Parties whether the Single-Stuiy House and the TWO-StOTy House
had in fact been rented out. The Claimant asserts," but the Respondent disputes. that the two
houses were partially rented out as follows:

¢ Room | (Single-Story House): Rented from March 2003 to January 2004 and from
August 2014 until April 2017 (albeit without the Claimant requiring rent payment as of
December 2016)

¢ Room 2 (Single-Story House): Rented from March 2003 to May 2003, from March
2004 to September 2007 and from May 2011 to June 2017

¢ Room 3 (First Hoor Ot the Two-Story Home): Rented from 2007 to Novembci 2016
(albeit without the Claimant requiring rent payment as of July 2016)

¢ Room 4 (First floor of the Two-Story House): Rented from 2003 to July 2017 (albeit
without the Claimant requiring rent payment as of December 2016)

© Second floor of the Two-Story House: Rented between July 2010 and April 2014,

32. It is likewise disputed between the Parties whether certain wrorks were undertaken on the
Property. The Claimant asserts,'S but the Respondent disputes, that the following work was
earned out, and that she paid for some of the works hereelf, out of her rental income (with
the rest paid for by her husband):

¢ In March 2014, the parking lot was paved with concrete, which cost KRW 1,050,000
(USD 960).

e A fence and a gate were installed around the parking lot in December 2014, which cost
KRW 2.000.000 (USD 1,800).

¢ From early 2014 to late 2015, an amount exceeding KRW 2,000.000 (USD 1,800) was
spent on wallpaper and floor oil-paper for rooms 1-4.

 

® However. the Claimant's father passed away in June 2014, see Claimant's Witness Statement (Exhibit CW'1),
para. 12.

Claimant's Witness Statement (Exhibit CWI ), paras. 11 ff and 38.

" Claimant's Witness Statement (Exhibit CW 1). paras, 26-37,

'S Claimant’s Witness Statement (Exhibit CW’), paras. 15-25,

HKAC Case No. 18117
Final Award
Page / ol 35

¢ In Febiudiy 2016, a “huf* that formed part ol the Two-Story House was renovated into
a room. Specifically, an amount of KRW 400,000 (USD 360) was paid fui installing a
door and door frame; a boiler was purchased for KRW 350.000 (USD 320); a further
amount ol KRW 650,000 (USD 600) was paid for the purchase of electricity
equipment, a toilet and oil-paper, all of which was installed for KRW 1,000,000
(USD 900),

0. The Redevelopment of [EEE and the Expropriation of the Property

33. On 27 December 2007, the Seoul Metropolitan City, being the local government for the city
of Seoul, designated the , where the Land is located, as a
redevelopment area (the “Redevelopment AreiTV*

34. Under Korean law, the designation of a redevelopment area means that ihc owners ot
properties in that area arc entitled (but not obliged) to initiate a redevelopment project aimed
at improving living conditions. In order to do so, the property Owners must establish a
redevelopment association, which requires (1) the consent of no less than 75% of the
property owners in the designated area, provided that they represent owrncrs owning at least
50% of the land area, and (i) the approval of the head of the relevant District.” If a
redevelopment association is so established, it becomes a legal entity with authority to plan
and implement the redevelopment project.'8
35. Every person who owns property in the designated area automatically becomes a member of
the redevelopment association, irrespective of whether that person gave its consent to the
cstablisluncnt of the redevelopment association.’Y After the redevelopment association's
redevelopment plan is approved by the head of the devout District, every member ol the
redevelopment association is given the choice of either (i) purchasing a property in the
redevelopment aica (so-called “parcelling-out”) by paying the difference between the value
ol this person’s property in the area, and the value of the redeveloped property lo be
purchased, or (ii) receiving a cash settlement based on an assessment of the value of this
Person's property in the ares * If the first option io choscn, the title lo the member's
property will be transferred 10 the redevelopment association in exchange for the title in the
redeveloped property; by contrast, if the second option is chosen, the property owner loses

 

 

* Exhibit CE-S.

"7 Act on the Maintenance ami Improvement of Urban Areas and Dwelling Conditions fnr Residpnts, No. 12640
(Exhibit Ct-15, the “Urban Improvement Act”), at Articles 13(1) and 16(1). (The Tribunal notes that when
the Head of the Mapo Disctrict approved the Project on 16 May 2008, the applicable law’ was Act No. 8970.
which came into force on 12 April 2008 (see footnote 8 in the Application for Preliminary Objections). Neither
party has provided a copy of that Act. nor made any arguments based on it, Accordingly, the Tribunal is
Satisfied that both parties agree that any differences between Act. Nu. 8970 and the Maintenance and
Improvement Act arc irrelevant for the presmt dispute.)

* Urban Improvement Act (Exhibit CE-15), Articles 8(1) and 18(1).

"’ Urban Improvement Act (Exhibit CE-15), Article 19(1).

°° Urban Improvement Act (Exhibit CE+15), Articles 46, 47 and 57.

HKIAC Case No. 18117
Final Award
Page 8 of 35

title upon receipt of the cash compensation and ceases to be a member of the redevelopment
association,”

we
s

In early 2008, a consent form was sent to the Claimant and to the other property owners in
oidei for them to establish and become members of the redevelopment association (the
“Redevel ent ciation") for the red )pi of the R pi Area (the
“Redevelopment”), Signed and Stamped consent forms were returned under the name of the
Claimant and her husband. However, the Claimant asserts that ‘his was done without their
knowledge, with the Claimant’s sister having fraudulently used their personal authorization
stamps and an unknown person forging their signatures. In any case, even without the
Claimant's and her husband’s consent, a majority of more than 75% of property owners had

to the bli of the Redevelop ciation, which was finally
established on 16 May 2008 by virtue of the approval of the Head of Mapo District.23

 

 

 

we
a

On 19 January 2012, the Mapo District authorized the redevelopment plan for the
Redevelopment Area.”? Under Korean law, this triggered a duty for the Redevelopment
Association to notify the property owners about the details of the parcelling out, and a
corresponding deadline for the properly owners to apply for the purchase of a parcelled-out
property in the Redevelopment ,Area.+

w
e

On 30 April 2014, the Claimant and her husband applied to purchase a parcelled-out
property in the Redcvclopmuil Area.**

39. On 23 July 2014, the Redevelopment Association WrOt to the Claimant and all other
owners uf property in the Redevelopment Area, informing them of "the estimated value of
each site or structure to he parcelled-out to each person entitled to parcelhnv-out" and
providing a “detailed Statement of previous land or structures held by each person entitled
to parcelling nut. and the price thereof . According to that Inlirr, the “total assessed value”
o! the Land was KRW 611,165,055, with an amount of KRW 462,008,398 being attributable
to the Property.?*

40. Shortly thereafter, on 30 July 2014, the Claimant's husband came to the office of the
Redevelopment Association and removed the Claimant'e application to purchase a
parcelled-out property.?”

41. On 25 August 2014, the Claimant and her husband wrote to the Redevelopment Association

formally requesting the withdrawal of their application to purchase a_parcelled-out

3! Expert Report of Professor MM. para. 37; Expert Report of ProfessoiEE. para. 76.

25 Exhibit R-1.

° Exhibit R-2.

* Urban Improvement Act (Exhibit CE=15), Arlirlr 46.
* Reference to this application is made in Exhibit R-11.
** Exhibit R-7.

® Referenced to in Exhibit R-I1.

 

42.

43,

44,

45.

46.

HKJAC Case No. 18117
Final Award
Page 9 of 35

property,” which was accepted by the Redevelopment Association by a letter of 7 March
2015."

On 12 March 2015, the Mapu District posted the official notice authorizing the management
and disposal plan for the Redevelopment Area.*?

On 28 October 2013, the Redevelopment Association filed an application for adjudication
on the appropriate value of the Property with the Land Expropriation Committee of the
Seoul Metropolitan City (the “SLECV

On 9 December 2015, die Redevelopment Association filed a complaint for eviction before
the Western Seoul District Court against the Claimant, her husband and four other persons
living on the Land.” The Claimant asserts, but the Respondent disputes. that in these
proceedings (and in subsequent negotiations with the Mapu District municipal government)
she invoked the alleged forgery of her and her husband's consent to the establishing of the
Redevelopment Association.53

On 8 January 2016, the Seoul Western District Court awarded an injunction against the
Claimant and her husband to prohibit the transfer of the Property, as requested by the
Redevelopment Association. An enforcement officer visited the Property on or about 19
January 2016 bur could not enter the Claimant's home and thus failed to execute the
injunction.“ On die ncxi day, accompanied by representatives of the Redevelopment Union
and with the assistance of a locksmith, the enforcement officer entered the Claimant’s home
and notified her in person of the injunction, thereby executing it under Korean law.
Subsequently, the Claimant suffered from menial and emotional distress and has sought
medical assistance until recently. Die Claimant is still taking medication for this condition.*>

On 79 January 2016, the SLEC issued its decision, ruling dial die appropriate compensation
for the Property was KRW 608,916,500, and that the "jdJa‘w of expropriation shall be
March 18, 2016". Subsequently, the Redevelopment Association offered this amount to
the Claimant hut she rejected the offer.

** Exhibit R-8.

M Exhibit R11.

* Exhibit CE-5.

5! Exhibit K-18,

33 Fyhihit R.24

Notice of Arbitration, paras V7 and V.12.

54 Exhibit CE:8,

'S Exhibit CE-10; Notice of Arbitration section IV, pages 7-8.
* Exhibit CE-, pages 4 and 8.

HKIAC Case No. 18117
Final Award
Page 10 of 35

17. Baaed on an application by the Claimant, the entry in the land registry for the Property was
amended on 5 February 7016 so as to indicate her US nationality. As “grounds for
registration the land registry record indicates "May 23, 2013: Loss of nationality” ""

48. On 18 March 2016, the Redevelopment Association placed the compensation amount of
KRW 608,016,500 decided by the 3LEC to be payable to the Claimant into an escrow
account for her benetit.*

49. On 8 May 2016, the Claimant filed an appeal with the Central [and Expropriation
Committee (the “CLECT) against the SLEC’s decision. The statement of appeal dated
8 May 2016," as well as a further submission filed on 13 June 2016” in that proceeding,
contained references to the KORUS FTA. A subsequent submission filed by the
Redevelopment Association in November 2016 responded to those references to the
KORUS FTA.*!

50. On 6 and 13 December 2016, the Claimant filed two submissions with the Seoul Western
District Court making reference to the KORUS FTA #2

51. On 11 January 2017, the Seoul Western District Court found in favour of the
Redevelopment Association with respect to the eviction of the Claimant and her husband.*

52. On 19 January 2017, the CLEC upheld the decision Ot the SLEC hut increased’ the
compensation amount to KRW 641,526,550 for the Claimant.“

wn
oa

On 21 February 2017, the Claimant filed an appeal against the decision rendered by the
Seoul Western District Court, inter alia referencing the KORUS FTA and mentioning that
3he was preparing an ISD5 lawsuit’7° Vhe Claimant subsequently withdrew the appeal on
27 February 2017 **

54. The additional compensation grained by the CLEC was put in escrow on 8 March 201747

5S In May 2017, the Claimant and her family vacated the Property.*

» Exhibit Cfe-4, row’ 16-1,
W Exhibit CE-7, page 2 of the PDF.

* Exhibit R-20.

“ Exhibit K-21.

41 Exhibit R-22.

+ Exhibits R-25 and R-26.

41 Exhibit CE-8.

4 Exhibit R-73

* Exhibit R-27.

46 Exhibit R-28.

* Exhibit CE-7, at page 3 of the PDF,
“ Claimant's witness statement (Exhibit CW-1), para. 38,

Iv.

HKJAC Case No. 18117
Final Awaid
Page 11 of 35

Ttii PARTits’ SUBMISSIONS

56.

57.

58.

59,

60.

The Respondent has raised four separate preliminary objections. The Parties’ respective
submissions on each of these objections are summarized briefly in turn below.

I, Objection I: No “investment” and no*covered investment

The Respondent's first preliminary objection goes to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, and rests on
two separate limbs.

The first limb is the argument that the Claimant did not make on uinvestment as defined in
Article 11.28 of the KORUS FTA The Respondent asserts that none of the three
characteristics of an investment expressly mentioned in the said provision (“commitment of
capital or other resources, the expectation of gain or profit, or the assumption of risk’) is
fulfilled in the present case. Moreover, the Respondent claims that the Tribunal ought to
apply the Salini criteria®” and, in particular, thp requiroment of a contribution to the host
State's development, which the Respondent contends was not made here. Also, the
Respondent argues that the Tribunal should require a flow of private capital into Korea, and
suggests that the Property was presumably purchased with funds originating from within
Korea.

TTie Claimant argues that the Property qualifies as an “investment as defined in Article
11.28 of the KORUS FTA because she committed capital (the purchase price), assumed nsk
(of the asset losing value, not obtaining sufficient rent income, being expropriated and
having her home invaded by State officials) and had an expectation of gain or profit
(through rental income. noting also that real estate is a widely accepted way to ptoviUc
retirement funding), In the Claimant's view, die characierlSIICS Of an investment set out in
Article 11.28 of the KORUS FTA arc exhaustive and the Tribunal may not add any other
criteria, be it by recourse to the Salini criteria or otherwise.

As the second limb of its first preliminary objection, the Respondent submits that the
Claimant marie no “covered investment” ac defined in Article 1.4 of the KORUS FTA. In
this respect the Respondent asserts that an “investment (...) of an investor of the other Party,
that is in existence as of the date of entry into force of (the KORUS FTA)” was absenl
(because the Claimant acquired US citizenship only after the KORUS FTA entered into
force), nor has the Claimant thereafter “established. acquired or expanded” an investment.
Hence, according to the Respondent, neither of the two alternatives provided for in Article
1.4 of the KORUS FTA is present to qualify die Propeny as a “covered investment\

The Claimant, in turn, claims that her investment is in fact a “covered investment’ as
defined in Article 1.4 of the KORUS FTA. Specifically, she contends that by having had her
US nationality rrgiuered in the land registry, and by withdrawing her application to paiVCi-

” Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. vs. Morocco, ICSID Case No. ARB 00/4, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 11 July 2001. para, 52 (Exhibit RLA-35).

62.

63.

64,

65.

66.

67.

68.

FIKIAC Case No, 18117
Final Award
Page 12 of 35

OUL she “re-estahliile-L’ her investment. In addition, ehe asserts thot she “expanded” the
investment by virtue of the alleged addition of a fifth rental unit and the other improvements
that were allegedly made to the Property

2. Objection 2: Fork-in-the-road

The Respondent’s second objection likewise stands on two pillars, and is raised as @ maiter
of jurisdiction and of admissibility.

The first pillar is the Respondent’s argument that because of her submissions on the KORUS
FTA before the Seoul Western District Court and the CLEC, in accordance with Annex 11+
E of the KORUS FTA the Claimant is barred from bringing her claim hefore this Tribunal as
ahe has alleged ihe same breach before both a court and an administrative tribunal of Korea.
In this regard, the Respondent, based on Korean law expert evidence. contends that the
CLEC is to be qualified as an administrative tribunal of Korea within the meaning of Annex
11-F of the KORUS FTA.

The Claimant, in turn, submits that her claim does not fall under Annex 11-E of the KORUS
FTA. In particular, she contends that none of her references to the KORUS FIA in the
proceedings before the CLEC and the Seoul Western District Court amounted to an
allegation of such breach, as required by Annex 11-F of the KORUS FTA, given the lack of
specificity of her submissions, and also because she was 1101 represented by COUIIsel m those
proceedings.

Moreover, also based on Korean law expert evidence, the Claimant claims that the CLEC is
not an administrative tribunal within the meaning of Annex I1-E of the KORUS FTA,
mainly because it lacks independence from the Ministry 0] Land and because the Cl FC U
merely concerned with an appraisal of the compensation rather than with the facts of ihr
case. In addition, the Claimant asserts that the CLEC was not competent to make any ruling
on an allegation of breach of the KORUS FTA and that, therefore, allegations made before
such forum could not have the result of barring the Claimant from access to this Tribunal.

As an alternative basis of its tork-m-the road objection, the Respondent submits that even if
Annex 11-E of the KORUS FTA were not pertinent, the Claimant would still be prevented
from bringing her claim before this Tribunal because the claim has the same fundamental
basis as the proceedings before the Seoul Western District Court and the CLEC.

In response thereto, the Claimant argues that Annex 11-E removes any need for a
“fundamental basis test”.

3. Objection 3: Time limitation.
As Its third objection, the Respondent contends that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction and the

claim is inadmissible because it is time-harred pursuant to Article 11.18.1 of the KORUS
FTA.

69,

70,

71

73.

HKIACCase No. 18117
Final Award
Page 13 of 35

Specifically, the Respondent argues that, at the latest, the Claimant know or should at Icast
have known about the alleged breach uf die fait and equitable treaimeni guarantee under
Article 11.5 ol the KORUS FTA on 20 April 2015 (when. the Redevelopment Association
sent her a copy of the allegedly forged consent), and about the alleged breach concerning
expropriation under Article 11.6 ot the KORUS FTA on 12 March 2015 (when the
management and disposal plan was posted), On this basis, the Respondent submits that
when the Claimant commenced arbitration on 12 July 2018, iiioic than ilirec years had
elapsed after the Claimant had or should have acquired knowledge about either alleged
breach, so that the requirements of Article 11.18.1 of the KORUS FTA were met.

On the other hand. the Claimant argues that the ordinary: meaning of Article 11.18.1 of the
KORUS FTA is clay in ilini the limitation period can only start running once a breach has
actually occurred. On her ease, the breach of Article 11.6 of the KORUS FTA. only occurred
on 29 January 2016, when the SLEC rendered its decision on the compensation for the
expropriation. Any previous actions by the Redevelopment Association were not acts of the
Respondent and could not have triggered the limitation period. Accordingly, the three-year
period had not elapsed when the Claimant commenced the aibiliatioil on 12 July 2018.

As regards the breach of Article 11.5 of the KORUS FTA, the Claimant argues that the
earliest date at which the Claimant requested that the Respondent take action with respect to
the forged consent was during the eviction proceedings that commenced on 9 December
2015. This date was likewise less than three years before the commencement of the
arbitration.

4. (New) Objection 4: Part of the claim is manifestly without legal merit due
to lack of evidence

Initially, the Respondent’s fourth preliminary objection rested on the ratione tempotis
argument that the Claimant's claim under Article 11.5 of the KORUS FTA exceeded the
scope of the KORUS HA, as set out in its Article 11.1.2, because the claim related to
alleged acts that occurred prior to the KORUS FTA. entering into force.

Subsequently, the Respondent alleged, which the Claimant disputes, that the Claimant had
changed its position on this point, and replaced the initial fourth preliminary’ objection with
a new objection. This new objection is that the Claimant's claim under Article 11.5 of the
KORUS FTA is manifestly without legal merit because there was no proof for the
underlying assertion that the Claimant ever raised’ towards officials of the Respondent an
allegation that the Claimant's and hpr husband's consent to the establishment of the
Redevelopment Association had been finged.

The Claimant made no specific response to this latter objection but contends that based on
Article 11.20.6(c) of the KORUS FTA, her factual assertions shall he assumed to he imp for
the purposes of the Tribunal’s ruling on the Application for Preliminary: Objections.

HK.JAC Case No. 18117
Final Award
Page 14 of 55

Vie REQUESTS FOK RFL.IFF

/. In relation to the Application for Preliminary Objections, the Respondent has submitted the
following requests for relief:

"The Respondent respectfully requests that this Arbitral Tribunal

10./J find and declare that the Arbitral Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over all
claims raised by the Claimant and dismiss all claims, in accordance with the
Respondent's preliminary objections raised in this Application;

10.1.2 order, pursuant to Article 42 of ihe UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules and
Article 11.20}H) KURUS, the Claimant to puy ull costs and expenses of this
arbitration proceeding, including the fees and expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal and
the cost of the Respondent's legal representation, plus pre-award and post-award
interest thereon; and

10.1.3 grunt any other or additional relief as may be appropriate under the
circumstances or as may otherwise be just and proper.” *®

76. The Claimant, in turn, has submitted the following request for relief:

“The Claimant respectfully requests the Tribunal to dismiss the Respondents
Application for Preliminary Objection and pursuant to Article 42 of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules and KORUS Article 11.20(8) to order the Respondent to pay all
costs of this proceeding, including the fees and expenses of the Tribunal, the costs of
the HKIAC, mid Claimant V legal fees and expenses. ">!

vi. LEGAL ANALYSIS

A. Burden of proot

77. The Claimant made certain factual allegations relevant to the Application for Preliminary:
Objections that were disputed by the Respondent. Therefore, it is necessary fur the Tribunal
to determine whether the Claimant bears the burden of proving those facts.

78. The Claimant position is that pursuant to Article 11.20.6(c) of the KORUS ITA, the

Tribunal shall assume iliusc factual allegations to be true. The tribunal disagrees with this

proposition for the following reasons

79. Article 11.20.6(c) of the KORUS FTA states as follows:

 

“ Amended Application for Preliminary Objections dated 12 April 2019, para. 10.1.
* Response to Respondent's Application for Preliminary Objections dated 22 April 2019, para. 10.

80.

81.

82

81.

HKIAC Case No. 18117
Final Award
Page 15 of 35

“Il deciding Gn objection under thin pavngraph that a claim submitted is not a claim
for which ait award in fumr uf the claimant may be made under Article 11.16, the
tribunal shall assume to be true claimant's factual allegations in support of any
claim in the notice of arbitration (or any amendment thereof) and, in disputes
brought under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the statement of claim referred to
in Article 18 ef the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rulex The tribunal may also consider
any relevant facts not in dispute." (emphasis added)

 

 

 

 

 

The meaning of this provision is very clear indeed. The assumption of a claimant's factual
allegations being true is confined to only one type of potential objections that a respondent
may raise under Article 110.6 of the KORUS FTA, namely the objection that the claim is
not one for which ai awaul may be made under Article 11./6 01 the KURUS FI A.

Had the drafters of the KORUS FTA intended for Article 11.20.6(c) of the KORUS FTA to
apply also to any of the other types of preliminary objections foreseen in Article 11,20.6 and
11.20,7 of the KORUS FTA, they could have easily done so. The drafters chose otherwise,
and there is no indication that thia was an inadvertent drafting cum.

Accordingly, the Tribunal may only assume the Claimant's factual allegations to be true
when deciding on an objection that a claim is not a claim for which an award may be made
under Article 11.26 of the KORUS FTA. Given the contents of Article 11.26 of the KORUS
FTA. such assumption applies, and only applies. to an objection relating to the type of relief
requested by the Claimant (ef. paragraphs 1 to 4 of Article 11.26 Ot the KURUS FTA®).

While the Respondent stated in the introduction to its Application for Preliminary
Objections that “all of the claims raised by the Claimant [...] are claims for which an award
in finnur of the Claimant may not be made***, none of liter objections actually raised
thcicaftci in the Application for Preliminary Objections in substance relates to Article 11.26
of tlic KORUS FTA. Instead, all preliminary objections are founded on the alleged lack of
either jurisdiction/competence* or legal merit, which are clearly distinguished frum an
objection that the claim submitted is not a claim for which an award may be made under
Article 11.26 of the KORUS FTA. Indeed, the Rcepondent never actually raised this lotto
type of preliminary objection, despite what is expressly stated in the introduction. to its
Application tor Preliminary Objections.

For this reason alone, the Tribunal finds that it may not assume the Claimant's factual
allegations to be true in deciding the Application for Preliminary: Objections.

 

* The Tribunal notes that the other paragraphs of Article 11.26 of the KORUS FTA relate to post-award matters
which, by their very nature, cannot be relevant to an objection that the claim is not a claim for which an award
may be made.

"" Amended Application for Preliminary Objections, para, 1.1,

“The Tribunal notes that for two of the objections, the Claimant argued that besides going to the Tribunal’s
Jurisdiction, they also rendered the claim inadmissible. It is not necessary for the Tribunal to make any finding
on this distinction because the subject-matter of those objections does not relate to Article 11,26 of the KORUS
FTA irrespective of whether one characterizes them as objections to jurisdiction or admissibility,

HKIAC Case No. 18117
Final Award
Page 16 of 3$

85. To the extent that the Respondent's objections concern jurisdiction, the Tribunal hac taken
account of rulings of previous tiibunals that dealt with provisions in other US free trade
agreements corresponding to Articles 11.20.6 and 11.20.7 of the KORUS FTA. As noted by
the Respondent as wdl as by the United States of America, those tribunals have found that
objections to a tribunal's competence do not come within Ilie scope of the provisions
corresponding to Article 1120.6, rendering Article 11 70 6(c) inapplicable to objections of
this kind.’ This Tribunal agrees with the analysis of those picviuus tribunals, which is
supported by the plain wording not only ot Article 11.20.6(c) of the KORIJS FTA™, but also
of Article 11.20.7 of the Treaty. The latter explicitly distinguishes between objections under
Article 11.20.6 and competence-related objections pursuant to Article 11.20.7 of the
KORIJS FTA, without giving any indication that any of the provisions of Article 11.20.6 of
die KORUS FTA arc meant to apply also to competence-related objections.

86. Given the absence of any other applicable provision in the KORUS FTA on the burden of
proof, the Tribunal finds that the normal rules on burden of proof shall apply, i.e. that the
party relying on a disputed fact bears the burden of proving it.”

87.

Consequently, the Inbunal holds that the Claimant bears the burden of proving the disputed
facts that it seeks to rely on in opposing the Application for Preliminary Objections,

A. Preliminary Objection 1 (first limb): No “investment”
88. Article 11.28 of the KORUS FTA provides the follow ing definition:
“investment means every asset that an investor owns or controls, diteclly or
indirectly, that has the characteristics. of an investment, including such
characteristics as the commitment of capital or other resources, the expectation of
Sain or profit, nr the assumption of risk. Forms that an investment may take include:

L..]

(h) other tangible or intangible, movable or immovable property). and related
property rights [...]”

 

 

*" See The Renco Group Inc v. Republic of Peru, UNCT/13/1, Decision as to the scope of the Respondent's
Preliminary Objections under Article 10.20.4, IX December 2014, paras, 198 and 208 (Exhibit RI.A-3K);
Bridgestone Licensing Senirex Mr v Republic of Panama, ICSID Catse No. \RB/1634, Decision on
Expedited Objections, 13 December 2017, para. 110 (authimty nu.4 cited by the United States Of America).

* The Tribunal notes that in the two cases referenced in the previous footnote, the relevant Treaty language was
different in that the provision corresponding to Article 11.20.6(c) of the KORUS FTA merely referred to “an
objection under this paragraphTherefore, in those cases. a distinction was drawn only between objections to
Jurisdiction and other preliminary objections, while in the present case the wording of Article 11.20.6(c) of the
KORUS FTA nanows its scope to application even further, namely to one specific type of (non-jurisdictional)
preliminary’ objection.

7 Same view taken for jurisdictional objections in Bridgestone Lic ensing Services, Inc. v. Republic of Pemumu,
ICSID Case No. ARB/16/34, Decision on Expedited Objections, 13 December 2017, para. 118.

8%

90,

91

92

94

95.

HKIAC Case No. 18117
Final Award
Page 17 of 38

It Is undisputed between the Parties that the Property qualifies as an “asser” within the
meaning of Article 11.28 of the KORUS FTA, specifically as ‘Immovable property’ listed
in subparagraph (h) of the above definition. However, the definition makes clear that not
every such asset qualifies. Instead, it must have “the characteristics of an investmenr. The
Parties disagree on whether the Property meets this requirement. Before turning to answicr
this question (see section 2. below), the Tribunal finds ii necessary first to determine the
meaning of such requirement.

1. The “characteristics of an investmenr

In order to determine the meaning of the term “characteristics of an investmenr, the
Tribunal will interpret. we believe tor the first time. the definition of “investment” in Article
11.28 of the KORUS FTA in good faith in accordance with its ordinary meaning, in its
context and in the light of its object and purpose (Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention on
the Law of Treaties).

Dosed on its wordiug, the definition of the term “investment” in the KUKUS HA seems to
us to be plainly circular* in that the object of the definition, i.e. an Minvestmentis defined
by reference to the weharacteristics” of that very object.

This leads to the next question of what are the relevant “characteristics of an investment\.
and what ie the relationship between them,

The Tribunal notes that Article 11.28 of the KORUS FTA expressly mentions three such

characteristics: “the commitment of capital or other resources, the expectation of gain or

profit, or the assumption of risk”. However, this list is non-exhaustive as it is preceded by

the words “including such characteristics as\ In our view, this means that other

characteristics may also be relevant in determining what is an investment under the KORUS
[AL

It is also worth noting that Article 11.28 of the KORUS FTA connects the three listed
characteristics with the word “o?\ Thus, not all three characteristics uiuM necessarily be
present cumulatively for an asset to quality ag an investment. Based on the plural in the
phrase “including such ch istics” hasis added), the Resp argues that at
least two of the mentioned three mentioned characteristics must be present,

However, the Tribunal is not attracted by the Respondent's argument. It would have been
very easy for the drafters of the KORUS FTA to incorporate such kfclwo out of three”
requirement in a very clear fashion if that is what was intended Further, the Tribunal finds it
highly unlikely that the State parties to the KORUS FTA preferred instead to count on
tribunals reaching such result as a matter of subtle linguistics for this important issue of
what qualifies as “investment” for treaty protection. Instead, the Tribunal considers dial the
meaning of the phrase “including such characteristics” in Article 11.28 of the KORUS FTA

** As rightly noted by the Respondent, see its Amended Application for Preliminary’ Objections, para. 4.9,

HKIAC Case No. 18117
Final Award
Page 18 of 35

is merely to express that the three listed characteristics are examples for “characteristics of
an investment’. However, as the word “or” implies, none of them is indispensable,

96. In any case, the prudent course of action is a global assessment of which characteristics are
present and how strongly they show in the asset in question. In doing so, one should stait
with the three listed characteristics because they were deemed particularly important by the
drafters of the KORUS FTA, before looking into any other characteristics that may also be
piocnl-

97. In view of the above analysis, the Tribunal does not accept the Respondent’s argument
whereby one must add to the three listed characteristics a fourth one from the Saiini criteria,
namely that there must be a contribution to the bust Slate’s development, and then consider
all four cumulative criteria or requirements in deciding whether the iclcvaiii asset qualifies
as an “investment”. Such interpretation is precluded by the fact that the three listed
characteristics are not cumulative requirements (given the word “or’). This cannot, as a
matter of logic, change even if one were to add a fourth characteristic.

 

98. Also, the Tribunal notes ihat the Saltni criteria serve to identity an investment within the
meaning of the ICSID Convention, which does not itself provide any definition of what an
investment is. This stands in stark contrast to Article 11.28 of the KORUS FI‘A, which
contains an express definition of die term. The Tribunal does not find it possible or
appropriate to replace the wording of said provision (in particular the terms “including\ and
“or'') with another tribunal's findings made in die context of ICSID arbitration cases."

99, While the Respondent is correct in noting dial the KORUS FTA also allows for ICSID
arbitration and that the term “investment” should not be given different meanings depending
on which forum is chosen, this doas not permit the Tribunal to disregoid the expicss
wording of Article 11.28 of the KORUS FTA. Instead, as noted in Salim,

‘insofar as the option of jurisdiction has been exercised in favour of ICSID, the
rights in dispute must also constitute an investment pursuant to Article 25 of the
Washington Convention™ (emphasis added)

100. In other words, if an investor under the KORUS FTA chooses to resort to ICSID arbitration,
this does not affect the interpretation of the term “investment” within the meaning of the

® Similar in thie regard (in the context of the inapplicability of the Saiini ciiiciia under the Energy Charter
Treaty) RREEF Infrastructure (G.P.) Limited and RRELt Pan-buroptan Infrastructure Two Lux Sd rl. v.
Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/30, Decision on Jurisdiction, 6 June 2016, para. 157 (Exhibit CLA.
1)

Amended Applicaiion for Preliminary Objections, para. 4.Y.

“ Saiini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. vs. Morocco, \CSID Case No. ARB 00/4, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 31 July 2001, para, 44 (Exhibit RLA-35). Further arbitral jurisprudence on this dual test is
referenced by Schreuer et al. The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2* edition, 2009, paras. 122 ff (Exhibit
RLA-S1).

HKIAC Case No. 1X117
Final Award
Page IQ of 35

KORUS FTA. but rather adds an additional requirement whereby there must aleo be an
investment within the meaning of the ICSID CuuvciUiun.

101.

The foregoing does not mean that the criteria identified in Salini arc completely irrelevant
for the purposes of Article 11.28 of the KORUS FTA. In fact, two of them (contiibutions
and participation in the risk of the transaction) seem to correspond to two of thr
characteristics expressly mentioned in Article 11.28 of the KORUS ITA (commitment uf
capital ui other resources and assumption of risk). Moreover, there is force to the argument
that the further, undefined “characteristics of an investment” within the meaning of that
provision permits consideration of at least one other criterion mentioned in Salini (certain
duration, see below section 2(d)). However, that does not make the Salini test, whose four
requirements arc usually undcistood to be exhaustive and cumulative, applicable to the
KORUS FTA, which pursues a typological approach that ievolves around a non-exhaustive
and non-cumulative list of three important characteristics.

2. Does the Property have the “characteristics of an inwstment''?

(a) Commitment of capital or other resources

102. With respect to the question of whether the Claimant committed capital or other resources,
the Tribunal does not agree with the Respondent's proposition that such resources must not
Originate from within the host State (which may have heen the case here). Article 11.28 of
the KORUS FTA requires plainly the commitment of “capital or other resources”, not
‘foreign capital or other foreign resources’.

103,

a

In addition, as conceded by the Respondent, multiple other tribunals have likewise accepted
that an investment had heen made despite the resources having originated from within the
host State. It is true iluti in timse cases ihe investor wat not a national of the host State
when the investment was made and that this added a foreign element (while in the present
case the Claimant was a Korean national when she purchased the Property). It is also true
that the preamble of the KORUS FTA militates in favour of requiring a foreign clement.
However, such foreign clement comes into play elsewhere in the KORUS FTA, namely
when the substantive guarantees require either an investment by an “investor of the Other

 

© See in this regard! also White Industries Australia Limited v. The Republic of India, INCITRAL, Final Award,
30 November 2011, para. 7.4.9 (Exhibit CLA-2).

® Also the Respondent considers them to he “tubftantinify the same\ cee Amended Application for Preliminary
Objections, para. 4.6.

™ The Respondent referred the Tribunal to Joseph Lemire v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/Q6/18, Award, 28
March 2011 (Exhibit RLA-19); Mr Franck Charles Arif v Republic of Moldoya, ICSID Case No. ARB/I 1/23,
Award, 8 April 2013 (Exhibit RL.A-25); BernhardNon Pezold and Others v Republic of Zimbabwe, ICSID Case
No. ARB/10/13, Award, 28 July 2013 (Exhibit KLA-3); Waguih the George Siag and Clorinda Vecchi v The
Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/15, Award, | June 2009 (Exhibit RLA-42). The Tribunal
notes that these were all ICSID cases. As the ICSID Convention does not give a definition «/investment’, one
might even say it would have been more open to the requirement of “foreign capitaF than the KORUS FTA,
which expressly speaks of “capitaF without any limitation.

104,

106.

10

a

HKIAC Case No. 18117
Final Award
Page 20 of IS

Party\ an “investor Of a non-Party” or a "covered investment* (the definition of which
includes the requirement of an “investor of the other Party”, see Article 1.4 of the KORUS
HA), hor this reason. the Tnbunal sees no need to read into the definition of “investment a
requirement that cannot be derived from the wording of that definition.

By contrast, the Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that it is relevant how significant the
commitment of capital or other resources is. The purpose of the KORUS FTA, as per its
pitumble, is inter alia

“to raise living standards, promote economic growth and stability, create new
employment opportunities, and improve the general welfare in their territories by
liberalizing and expanding trade".

. OF course, it could hardly be expected that each individual! investment’ would single-

108.

 

handedly raise living standards and improve the general welfare (etc.) of an entire nation.
Otherwise, only the largest of projects could qualify as investment, and there is no indication
that IHix was what the drafters of the KORUS FTA intended. However, if the capital ui
resources committed aie incapable, because of their insignificance, ot contributing in any
meaningful way to the objectives of the KORUS FTA, this will usually make it very
difficult for the investor to demonstrate dial such commitment was intended to be afforded
protection under the KORUS FTA.

In the present cace, the Claimant committed an amount of KRW 300,000,000
(approximately USD 300,000 at the time) to acquire the Property. The Tribunal does not
find this commitment to be non-significant per se. While this particular asset did nut involve
millions or even billions® of capital commitments often seen in investment treaty cases, the
Trihirnal hax little doubt that the amount ac cuch would not raise serious concem if the
purpose of the cuuuuilinem were clearly and exclusively commercial in nature, ¢.g. if it
were the puichase price fur office facilities or a factory building. However, as the Tribunal
considers that the purpose of the commitment is rather relevant for the existence of an
expectation of gain or profit, it will be dealt with separately belowr.

Ae regardf. the first characteristic of an investment mentioned in Article 11.28 of the
KORUS FTA, the Tnbunal therefore concludes that there was a sufficient commitment of
capital despite its amount.

(b) Expectation of gain or profit

The Respondent argues that the Claimant purchased residential real-estate for her family’s
private dwelling. without any expectation of gain or profit, and also referred die Tribunal to

W The Tribunal notes that this is the price for the purchase of the 76.14/8Th interest in the Land on 4 April 2001.
The Claimant did not assert that she paid anything in addition for the transfer of the remaining share on 17
August 2001.

* Th terms of United States Dollar.

20

HKIAC Case No. 18117
Final Award
Page 21 of IS

other arbitral awards which required a commercial activity for the relevant asset to qualify
as an “investment” in the present context.’ The Claimant, in turn, contends that She rented
out part of the Property and thereby did have an expectation of gain or profit. In particular,
she argues that it is irrelevant that during the years that her parents lived in the Two-Story
House, she allowed them to keep the rent from the other tenants,

109. Reginning with the last point, the Tribunal agrees with the Claimant that it is not relevant
whcihci she kept any proceeds from the Property for hcrselt, bestowed them upon, her
parents, or used them for any other purpose. If there is an expectation of gain or profit, it
docs not matter for what purposes such gain or profit is (intended to be) used.

110. Ac regards the arbitral jurisprudence on die icquiiemait of a commercial activity, the
Tribunal agrees that investment treaties in general, and the KORUS FTA in particular, aim
at stimulating investment in the commercial sphere rather than in the purely private one.
This is supported by the preamble of the KORUS FTA, which not only refer multiple times
to the trade between the State parties, but even makes it a specific objective to enhance Tlic
rnmpptitiveness of their firms. However, in the Tribunal's view, there is no sepalale
icquilemail of aigaging in a commercial activity because the notion of a commercial
context is anyway inherent to other characteristics of an investment such as, in particular,
the expectation of gain and profit and the assumption of risk,

 

Il

Therefore. the Tribunal now turns to the question of whether the Claimant had an
expectation of gain or profit. Doth Fairies seem 1o accept, aS does the Tribunal, that it the
Property merely served as a private residence for the Claimant, her parents and other
members of her family, this does not imply any expectation of gain or profit. Instead, the
only source of such expectation could be the alleged renting out of part of the Property.

1

vn

- As mentioned befuie, the Respondent has disputed that the Claimant did in fact rent out part
of the Propcity and generated rental income. The Tribunal has already found that it is for the
Claimant to prove the facts. The available evidence for the renting out of the Property
consists of the following:

¢ the Claimant's own testimony as a witness;

* written confirmations by both I: NIN Coth alegedty
tenants of rooms in the Two-Story House);

© the testimony of (II at the Hearing; and

¢ bank statements in relation to accounts held by the Claimant and her husband.

 

“ Notably Casinos Austria International GmbH and Casinos Austria AhiengescUschaft y. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB'14/32, Decision on Jurisdiction, 29 June 2018. paras. 189f (albeit in the context of the
Salini criteria, but excluding the most controversial fourth one) (Exhibit RLA.7); Franz Sedelmayer y. The
Russian Federation, Award, 7 July 1998, page 65 (Exhibit RLA- 13),

 

HKIAC Case No. 1X117
Final Award
Page 77 of 35

113. The Tribunal notes at the outset that the Claimant granted thp title to the Single-Story House
and 47.3/187.84 of interest in the Land to her husband un 23 October 2003. Accordingly,
she no longer owned this pari of the Land when the KORIUS FTA came into force in 2012,
or when the alleged Treaty breaches occurred in 2015 and 2016, respectively. Therefore,
whether or not the Single-Story House was rented out is irrelevant because it is clear that at
least this part of the Land was not at the relevant times an investment nf the Claimant in
relation to which any breaches of the KORUS FTA could have occurred.

114. In relation to the Two-Story House, the Tribunal is prepared to accept that
HMM rented Room 3 from August 2015 to November 2016. This was confirmed by
both in his written statement and his oral testimony, as well as by the
Claimant in her witness testimony. However, as testified by and as
confirmed also by the Claimant in her written witness statement," ihc Claimant relieved him
from his duty to pay rent after 1 June 2016.

1

a

- The Tribunal further accepts that EEE rented Room 4 in the Two-Story House from
Tiily 7015 m Inly 2017. This is confirmed both by a written statement a
was unable to tesiify at the hearing due to a severe health condition) and by the Claimant's
own testimony. The Tribunal is aware of the Respondent's argument that the Claimant also
testified that she received N's monthly rent in cash and deposited it into her
uccounh while the available bank statements of the Claimant’s bank account (which she
testified was her only ftrmimt at the time) do not chow any such deposits. However, the
Tribunol considers that the bank statements submitted by the claimant either do not cover
the relevant period of time” or do not, given the nature of the statement, show any cash
deposits/' Hence, while it is true that there is no bank statement to support the Claimant's
testimony and the written confirmation of EEE the Tribunal finds that the available
bank statements not showing any such deposits do not tuuliadiU the Claimant’s Submission
either. However, as per the Claimant's written witness statement. the Tribunal notes that she
iclicved ME from her duty to pay any rent after November 2016.72

 

116. Moreover, the Claimant submitted, and confirmed in her witness testimony, that she rented

out the second floor of the Two-Story House to [M from July 2010 till
April 2014 for a one-time deposit of KRW 120,000,000, Room 3 / from
2UU/ till August 2015 for a one-time deposit of KRW 70,000,000, and Room 4 tol

AHfrom 2003 to July 2015 for a one-time deposit of KRW 35,000,000.

 

“The Tribunal notes that in her written witnete ctaifment (para. 25), the Claimant referred to 1 October 2015 as
the dart date, However, ar Exhibit C4 refers at page 2 to August 2015, which was confirmed ai the Hearing by
both the Claimant and in their respective testimonies, the Tribunal assumes that the
reference to | October 2( Nn. witness statement was an error.

© Claimant's witness statement (Exhibit CW-1), para. 35.

” This applies tu the bank statement Issued 0 6 March 2Uiy (Exhibit C4, pages 7-11), which covers only the
period Irom 26 December 2001 till 22 December 2010.

” This applies to the hank statements issue 4 March 2019 (Exhibit C4, pages 5-6) and to the different
withdrawal statements (Exhibit C4, pages 12-16).

2 Claimant’s witness statement (Exhibit CW-1), para. 36.

 

  

22

HKIAC Case No. 18117
Final Award
Page 23 oHS.

117. Also. the Claimant confirmed in her testimony that the one-time deposits of JE

and were returned in full at tlic end uf the lease.” This is corroborated by
bank statements that show withdrawals from the Claimant's husband’s bank account in
August 2015, which add up to KRW 70,000,000 and show’ the name under

“Notes,” as well as withdrawals in May and (mainly) July 2015, which add up to
KRW 35,000,000 and show the name SNS under “Notes While the Claimant
did not say explicitly whether the same occurred with respect to the deposit of

ME the Tribunal is satisfied that this was the case. First. the Claimant testified more
generally that the normal course of action was to return large one-time deposits when the
tenants moved out/* which is in line with the explanations provided to the Tribunal by the
Claimant's counsel regarding the system of paying rent through one-time deposits in
Kores."" Second, the Claimant has submitted bank statements which show withdrawals in

March and (mainly) April 2014, adding up to KRW 120,000,000, and one of which shows
the name | under “Notes'’.

118. On the basis of the Claiman
thus satisfied that MITHPHIPHIBPIIWIW
die Property from MA vaimanHxiMt one-time dep and that those deposits were
returned in frill at the end of the respective lease. With respect to the duration of the leases,
the Tribunal notes that the end dates asserted by the Claimant correspond largely to the dates
on which the deposits were withdrawn from l’s account. and Tribunal is prepared to
accept also the start Hates.

 
 
  

the Tribunal is
rented pans of

    

 

119, In summary, therefore, the Tribunal considers proven that out of the three units that existed
in the Two-Story House already when the Claimant purchased the Property, Room 3 was
rented out in exchange for rent payment from 2007 through June 2016, Room 4 was rented
out from 2003 through November 2016, and the second fluui was reined oUt from July 2010
through April 2014. It is undisputed that the new unit allegedly added in February 2016 was
nut rented out before the Claimant vacated the Property.

120.

Ss

In order to determine whether this shows an expectation of profit or gain, the Tribunal must
first consider the fart that fnr a very significant period of time, the three units were rented
out in exchange for one-time deposits that were returned in full at the end ot the lease. At
first sight, this indeed suggests that for this reason alone, there cannot have been any
(expectation of) any gain or profit in respeci of ‘his time period, as argued by the
Respondent at the Hearing, However, the Tribunal considers that such finding would not
truly reflect the reality of the rental market in Korea. It was not disputed by the Respondent
that in Korea, one of the traditional forms of making rental payments is a one-time deposit
that is returned in lull at the end of the lease. During the period of the lease, the deposit is
available to the landlord to invest. In essence, instead of receiving monthly rent, landlords

” Lranscript ot Day 1, at page 148. line 8-10,
™ Exhibit C4, at page 12.

* Transcript of Day 1, at page 147, lines 5-7.
* See above at paru. 29.

23

121.

122.

Ss

8
&

12:

a

HKIAC Case No. 18117
Final Award
Page 24 of IS

receive an interest free loan which allows them to try and mnice a profit. As both forme of
making rental payments are still prevalent in Kuica, il must be assumed that while each of
them will have its advantages and disadvantages for the landlord, both of them are aimed at
allowing the landlord to generate income from renting out the property.

While the one-time deposits in question were apparently paid into and refunded from the
Claimant's husband's bank account, the Tribunal considers that this docs not necessaiily
mean tlmi any pioeeeds from using those deposits are not to he considered rental income of
the Claimant. In that respect, the Tribunal accepts the Claimant's testimony whereby in
Korea, a husband and wife co-usc their bank accounts. Accordingly, if the Claimant chose to
have one-time deposits owed to her as the landlord paid into her husband’s bank account,
this by itsclf docs not necessarily mean that she bestowed upon her husband any proceeds
that may be derived from those deposits during the lease,

Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that despite the one-time deposits having been paid into the
Claimant's husband’s bank account, and despite those deposits having been returned in full,
one cannot disregard the relevant lease periods for the purpose of assessing wliellia Hlicie
was an expectation of profit or gain.

As a result, the Tribunal further finds that the Two-Story House was rented out lor
approximately half of the time during the Claimant's ownership.”

- Given that there ie no suggestion that either die amounts of the monthly rents or of the one-

time deposits were unusual for rental units of the kind offered by the Claimant, the Tribunal
does not find it necessary to determine how much rental income exactly the Claimant
generated by partially renting out the Property. Instead, the Tribunal is content to limit itself
to the findings that the Claimant generated approximately half of the income tlidl she could
theoretically have generated by renting out the Two-Story House completely/*

This leads to the question whether there exists an expectation of profit or gain within the
meaning of the KORUS FTA if a property is partially used by the purchaser's family and
partially rented out. In the Tribunal’s view, it is sensible to answer this question by
ascertaining which of the two types of use was picdoiniriant in the acquisition Of the
property. If the predominant purpose was to use it as a private dwelling, the Tribunal

 

” The Claimant purchased the Property in 2001 and vacated it in 2017, ie. she could have rented out the three
Pre-existing units for 17 years each, yielding a total nismhfr of 51. When counting for each unit the years during
which it way rented out (not counting the Claimant's parents), this yields a lulal number of 26. Dividing 26 by
51 yields a percentage of approximately 51%. The Tribunal notes, however, that this is only an approximation
as the exact starting and end dates (and in some cases even the relevant months) are not known. Also, it may be
unrealistic to assume that the Claimant could still find tenants after the SLFC had decided that the Property
would be cApiupiiaicd. Because of ihose points, the percentage could be slightly higher or lower (and thus
potentially below 50%).

™ Assuming that all three pre-existing units in the Two-Story House could have been rented out without any
intermission for 17 years., While this may not be an entirely realistic hypothesis, the Tribunal is satisfied that
this approximation appropriately reflects the magnitude of the rental income.

24

12

127.

12

12

130.

6.

ad

o.

Ss

HKIAC Case No. 18117
Final Award
Page 25 of 15

considers that there is no expectation of gain or profit If, hy contrast, the predominant
Purpoce was to rent out the property; there can be little doubt dial its owner reasonably
expects to make protits.

The percentage to which the Property was rented out, as we found above, docs not help in
determining or inferring the predominant purpose because it is around 50%. However, the
Tribunal finds it particularly relevant that for two years after having acquired the Property,
the Claimant did not rent out any pan of the Two-Story House other than to her parents,
Similarly, between 2003 and 2007, only one of the two units not occupied by her parents
was rented out. As the Claimant did not suggest that she tried but failed to find tenants
during those years, this creates doubt as to whether, at the time the Claimant purchased the
Property, and thus committed capital, she had intended the Property to serve as anything but
a home to her family. In fact, the Claimant's family moved to the USA in 2004, i.e. the year
after the Claimant started renting out the Two-Story House. As a result, the Tribunal finds it
more likely that the Claimant had first purchased the Property for private dwelling and then
decided, given the family’s move to the USA. to rent out the rooms that were not occupied
by her parents. On that basis, the Tribunal finds that the predominant use of the Property at
the time of acquisition by the Claimant was not to serve as an income-generating
investment.

While it may not be an absolute requirement that the expectation of gain or profit must exist
already when the capital is committed, it is at least very untypical for an investment if there
ic no such concurrence, Usually, in ease of an investment, the capital is committed tor the
very purpose of making profit, rather than for a different purpose that is subsequently
changed into a profit-making venture.

Accordingly. the Tribunal is reluctant to assume that the Claimant lias an expectation of
profit ui gain in relation to the Property, However, the tribunal does not find it necessary to
make a definitive finding at This point given that it will anyway need to assess globally all
relevant characteristics. Therefore, the Tribunal can conclude here with the observation that
the presence of an expectation of profit or gain was at best weak in relation to the Property,

(c) Assumption of risk

As regards the assumption of risk, the Claimant has relied on four different types of risk that
she claims to have assumed, each of which the Tribunal will address in turn.

First, the Claimant invoked the risk that the value of the Property wrould decline after the
purchase, While this may certainly be a risk that is relevant to a property owner, the
Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that for the purpose of the KORUS FTA, this risk
alone cannot be sufficient because it is inherent in the purchase of any asset. Article 11.28 of
the KORUS FTA is clear in that an asset only qualifies as an investment if it has certain
clmiactcristies, such as ihe assumption ol nsk. Those characteristics, including the
assumption of risk, must go beyond the features that any asset automatically has. Otherwise.
the requirement of the asset showing the characteristics of an investment would be rendered

25

HKIAC Case No. 18117
Final Award
Page 26 of IS

meaningless, Therefore. the risk of an asset declining in value cannot be the type of risk that
the drafter of the KORUS FTA had in mind.

13

- Secondly, the Claimant submitted that by acquiring the Property, she assumed the risk of it
being expropriated. In the Tribunal’s view, if one acquires an asset in another State, this
always creates the risk of such asset being expropriated, As a consequence, the reasoning
from the previous paragraph applies. If one found that this type of risk qualifies for the
purposes of AitiUc 11.28 of the KORUS FTA, the characteristic of an assumption of risk
would be rendered meaningless. The Tribunal docs not accept that this was the intention of
the drafters of the KORUS FTA.

132. Thirdly, at the Hearing, the Claimant added that a fuilliei risk materialized When an
execution officer entered the Claimant's house to serve the Seoul Western District Court’s
injunction on her. According to the Claimant, this hostile incident led her to waive the rent
otherwise payable to her by ” The Tribunal accepts dial by acquiring
the Property, the Claimant assumed the risk of being subject to Korean laws (which in this
case apparently allowed for that entry into her houac). However, once again, tliis is a risk
inherent in any asset acquired in the host State. Accordingly, the [nbunal finds it difficult to
accept that the risk of being subject to the laws of the host State qualifies as a risk within the
meaning of Article 11.28 of the KORUS FTA.

oe
o

. Fourthly, the Claimant referred to the risk of the predicted rental income not materializing.
To the Tribunal, this risk is a necessary coiullaiy of an expectation Of profit = Whenever
there is an expectation of profit, there is also a risk that such expectation is frustrated.
However, the Tribunal would be prepared to still accept that such type of risk qualities for
the criterion of “assumption of risk”, given that it is not necessarily excluded that some of
the charaoterkrir+ of an investment overlap. Also, the Tribunal finds that failing lo generate
profit by using the acquired asset is in fact a very typical nsk of an investment. However,
the Tribunal lias already concluded that it is very doubtful whether there was an expectation
of profit. As a flipside of the coin, the Tribunal is equally doubtful whether the Claimant
assumed the corresponding risk of such expectations not materializing.

13.

=

On this head, the Tribunal accordingly concludes dku since the expectation Of profit OT gain
Was weak, the presence ot an assumption of risk is equally doubtful.

(d) Other characteristics

135, Finally, the Tribunal turns to other characteristics not expressly mentioned in the definition
of the term “investment” in Article 11.28 of the KORUS

 

© The Tnbunal noics dial while —— did not directly confirm this fact in his testimony, he did
say, when asked why he thought that his rent was waived: “Ar that time I knew the whole area, including the
house that I was residing, would be redeveloped. And at that lime I remember that I was somewhat abused

verbally by the Redevelopment Union [...] And also remember that the landlord told me that she would like to
— she would like me to stay here™ (Transcript of Day 3, lines 111).

 

26

HKIAC Case No. 18117
Final Award
Page 27 of 35

136. Both parties have mentioned the characteristic of duration ® Indeed, it is widely accepted

13:

8.

Ss

that a typical characteristic of an investment is that it is made fui a certain duration/' While
the Claimant owned the Property tor approximately 15 years, it is not quite clear whether
this is the relevant period of time, given that the KORUS rTA entered into force only 11
years after the Claimant acquired the Property. In other words, the Claimant owned the
property for four years after the KORUS KIA came into fore. However. the Tribunal does
not find it necessary to decide which of the two periods is the relevant one because it
considers four years to be a sufficient period ot time in any event.‘ In addition, the
Claimant did not freely terminate her ownership but rather lost ownership due to the
expropriation/"

. In the context of the ICSID Convention, some tribunals and commentators have found that a

contribution to the economy of the host State is either a mandatory icquircment or at least a
relevant clement in establishing the existence of an investment. This view is based on the
reference in the preamble of the ICSID Convention to “economic development’ #’ Although
the preamble of the KORUS H’A expressly mentions the objective of “promoting economic
growth", the Tribunal is not convinced that this factor is applicable hue, at least for the
icasou that it originates from the ICSID Convention which is not applicable in this case

(c) Global assessment

In summary, out of the three characteristics expressly mentioned in Article 11.28 Of the
KORUS FTA, only some contribution ot capital is present. By contrast, the Tribunal is of
the view: that both the expectation of gain or profit and the assumption of risk are very weak
and taken individually do not meet the requirements of Article 11.28 of the KORUS FTA.
Although there was a sufficient duration of the Claimant's commitment, the Tribunal
considers that this is outweighed by the said conclusion on the characteristics listed in
Article 11.28.

. Taken together, the Tribunal is not convinced that die KORUS FTA wras meant to protect as

an investment the purchase of a relatively modest residential property which is initially used
exclusively ae the private dwelling of the ownci'’s family and only subsequently and
partially rented out. The | nbunal considers that the Claimant’s ownership of the Property is
simply too far away from the idea of an “investment” within the meaning of the KORUS
FTA.

  

Notice of Arbitration, at paru. VIL3; Amended Application foi Piclijnmajy Objections, at paras. 4.6 and 4.16.
* See notably Salini Cosrrunori S.pA. and Italstrade S. pA. Ys. Morocco, ICSID Case No. ARB/O0/4, Decision
on Jurisdiction, 31 July 2001, para. 44 (Exhibit RLA-35); further references given by Schreuer et a!, The ICSID
Convention: A Commentary, 2 edition, 2009, para. 162 (Exhibit RLA-51).

* Othei tribunals have found 2+3 years to be sufficient (in ICSID context), see only the references given by
Schreuer et at, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2" edition, 2009, para. 162 (Exhibit RLA-51),

Sec also In this regard ibid, para. 133, whereby it is the expectation of a certain duration that counts, even if
there is an early breakdown.

™ Ibid, paras. 164ff.

27

HKIAC Case No. 18117
Final Award
Page 28 of 35

B. Preliminary Objection I (second limb): No *covered investment*

140.

141.

142.

Ss

143,

144,

145,

However, even if the Claimant were able to show that her Property had the characteristics of
an investment, the Tribunal considers that the Claimant did not hold a “covered investment’,
as required by both of the substantive guarantees that the Claimant invokes, i.e. Articles 11.5
and 11.6 of the KORUS FTA.

Puisuaui tu Article 1.2 of the KORUS FTA, the term “covered investment’ means

“with respect to a Party, an investment, as defined in Article 11.28 (Definitions), in
its territory of an investor of the other Party: that is in existence as of the date of
entry into force of this Agreement or established, acquired, or expanded thereafter”.

Accordingly, assuming arguendo that the Claimant's ownership in the Property qualifies as
an investment, there arc two alternatives for it to qualify as a “covered investment. While
both alternatives require that the investment is one of an "investor of the other Party’, the
first alternative TTfjuirpe that the investment ie in existence when the KORUS FTA entered
into force, while the second alternative requires that such investment was subsequently
“established, acquired or expanded’

As per Article 11.28 of the KORUS FTA, the term “investor of a Party’ means,

“a Party or state enterprise thereof. or a national or an enterprise of a Puny, that
attempts to make, is making, or has made an investment in the territory of the other
Party: provided. however, that a natural person who is a dual national shall be
deemed to be exclusively a national of the State of his or her dominant and effective
nationality"

Accordingly, the first alternative of the definition of “covered investment” requires that, at
the time of entering into force of the KORUS FTA, the Claimant was a national of the
United States, for otherwise her owning the Property could not have been, at the relevant
point in lime, the investment Or an “investor af the other PartyH However, it is undisputed
that the Claimant only acquired US nationality more than a yceaj dfleT the KORUS FTA
came into force. Both parties agree, and so does the Tribunal, that for this reason, the first
alternative of the definition ¢f “covered investment’ is not applicable here.

 

Consequently, what remains to be determined is whether the Claimant “established,
acquired or expanded’ an investment after the KORUS FTA entered into force, and after
she became an “investor of the other Party” by acquiring US nationality, While the
Claimant undisputedly did not “acquire” the investment after she obtained US nationality,
she claims to have both “established’ and “expanded” that investment. The Tribunal will
address both requirements separately below’.

28

HKIAC Case No. 18117
Hnal Award
Page 29 of 35

1. Was the investment “extahlishetT after the KIORUS FTA came into force?

146. The claimant has argued that there are two different grounds that she has established the

148.

149,

15

oe

investment, which will be dealt with by the Tribunal in turn.

(a) Registration of the Claimant’s US nationality: in the land registry

+ The Claimant asserts that she established the investment by having had her US nationality

registered in the land registry. The Tribunal is unable to accept this proposition for three
distinct reasons.

Fiisi, the Claimant's own case is that the breaches of the KORUS FTA occurred on
9 Deveiiibci 2015 (with respect to Article 10.5 of the KORUS H’A) and 29 January 2016
(with respect to Article 10.6 of the KORUS FTA). However, the Claimant had hci
nationality reflected in tlie land registry on 5 February 2016, ie. alter the alleged breaches
had occurred. In the Tribunal’s view, an action by the investor that occurred after the alleged
breaches cannot retroactively bring die investment within the scope 01 the KURUS FTA so
as to atlord it protection against those past breaches.

Secondly, the nationality of the Claimant is relevant only to her personal status as an
“Inwstor of the other Party”, By contrast. her nationality is not relevant in any way to the
existence or status of the investment itself. In fact, the Claimant herself argued. and the
Tribunal agrees, that an investment within the meaning of the KORUS FTA does not imply
a foreign element because such element comes into play when assessing if the investor is an
“investor of the other Party’. Hence, if the nationality of the investor changes, this does not
change in any way the characteristics of the investment. Much less can the investment be
considered as “estuO/isheJ” based merely On a change of nationality of the investor being
reflected in the land registry

Thirdly, the Tribunal notes that the only type of investment nor covered by the definition of
“covered investment” is an investment that, at the time the KORUS FTA enters into force, is
held by a national of either the host State or a third State, and which investment Is thereafter
neither acquired, established Or expanded by a national of the other State party to the
KORUS FTA.

+ The Tribunal has no doubt that the purpose of this requirement for a “covered investment’ in

Articles 11.5 and 11.6 of the KORUS FTA is to preclude requests for protection from
investors of the other State (or of a third State) who are not entitled to protection because
they did not have any major involvement with the investment during the existence of the
KORUS FTA ~ neither by holding the investment when the KORUS FTA came into force,
nor by acquiring, establishing or expanding it thereafter.

 

'S This position was again confirmed during the Heariug, see Transcript of Day 3, page 41, lines 11.

29

HKIAC Case No. 18117
Final Award
Page 10 of IS

152. This rationale suggests that an investor of the other State party can only claim to have
“established” on it if the invol in the i is of a similar di
as the holding Or acquiring Ot the investment during the currency of the KORUS FTA. This
is also supported by the plain fact that the definition of ‘covered investment” considers the
establishing of the asset as an equivalent alternative to the holding or acquiring of an
investment, given that each of them allows the investor of the other State party to enjoy the
protection of Articles 11.5 and 11.6 of the KORUS FFA.

153.

w

In the Tribunal’s view. therefore, the requirement of an investment to be “established” must
be understood to refer mainly, if not solely, to acts that bring the relevant asset into
existence (as opposed to an asset being “acquired’, which the Tribunal interprets as
referring to a transfer of an already existing asset). Typical examples WOUId be the building
of a factory’ or an invention that gives rise to intellectual piupcily liglus.

154. By contrast, the mere registration of the Claimant's nationality in the land registry in
relation to the Property, which she had owned for almost 15 years at that time (and for 12
yetirs hrfnre the KORUS FTA came into force), Dimply docs not constitute an involvement
with the investment of OK same character as the holding or acquiring thereof.

155. In consequence of the above, the Tribunal docs not accept that the Claimant Mestablished’
the investment by having her nationality reflected in the land registry.

(b) The Claimant's withdrawal of her application lor parcelling-out
156, The Claimant argues that by withdrawing her application to the Redevelopment Association
tor parcelling-out of redeveloped property, she re-established’ her interest in the Property,
which che had previously given up by agicvilig 1o IlIC parcelling-OUt.

15

a

. If the initial application had in fact caused the Claimant to lose her tights to the property,
and her withdrawal of such application had resulted in a resurrection of those rights, the
Claimant's argument would be more plausible. However. the Tribunal is not convinced that,
as a matter of Korean law, the Claimants property rights were in any way affected by her
applying fut parcelling-out or withdrawing the application,

15

a

Due to the redevelopment of the Redevelopment .Area, it Was clear that the Claimant would
lose the Property one way or another. The only difference that a parcelling-out application
made was that instead of receiving cash compensation, she would have been credited with
the value of her Property against the price that she had to pay for the parcelled-out property.
This, however, does not attcci the Claimant's rights in the Property Accordingly, the

=
a
s

160.

16

16

8

163,

a

HKIAC Case No. 1X117
Final Award
Page Al oHS

Claimant neither gave up the Property by applying for parcelling-out nor did her subsequent
withdrawal of the said application re-establish lici interest in die property.**

. Asa result, the Claimant did not (re-)esiablish her investment by virtue of such withdrawal.

2. Was the investment “expanded'"*

The Claimant submits that the investment was “expanded’ after she acquired US nationality.
In this respect, she first refers to a number of improvements to the Property (paving the car
park with concrete, erecting a fence and gate around it, changing wallpaper and floor oil-
paper), which she claims to have cost approximately KRW 5,000,000 (approximately
USD 4,000). Second, she alleges rhai a new rental unit was added to the Twro-Story House
by renovating a hut into a 1oom, which cost KRW 2,400,000 (approximately USD 2,000).

: The Respondent, in turn, disputes that those works were done. Even if they were, the

Respondent disputes that they were paid for hy the Claimant, rather than by her husband.

- In fact, for significant parts ot the asserted works, the only evidence presented by the

Claimant is her own witness testimony. However, the Tribunal finds that it can be left open
whether the Claimant did in fact spend the asserted amounts on the alleged improvements
and expansion, ‘JTtis is because even if she did, the Tribunal would not qualify those works
as an expansion of the investment within the meaning of the definition of a “covered
investment”.

As already explained above, the definition 2f “covered investment’ seeks to exclude cases in
which the investor of the other State party did not, during the currency of the KORUS FTA,
have any major involvement with the investment dial is similar 10 the holding, acquiring or
establishing of the investment. Accordingly, the expansion of an asset can only qualify and
bring the investor within the protection of Articles 11.5 and 11.6 of ihe KORUS FTA ifsuch
expansion significantly changes the character and/or magnitude of the investment.

. With respect to the car park, the Tribunal noton that it was merely paved and fenced. In uui

view, such wuik did nut bring the car park into existence nor did it significantly change the
character of the Property. The same holds true even more for the changing of wallpaper and
oil-paper, which seem to be acts of maintenance rather than the creation of anything new or
additional. In the Tribunals view, the renovation of the hut into an additional room is the act
that seems most capable of having changed to some extent the character of the Property.
However, the Tribunal notes that the Two-Story House already contained two other rooms
in the first story and an apartment in the second story. Adding one additional room in the
first story does not appear to the Tribunal to be a very significant change,

* As confirmed by Professor IMME (at paras, 31ff of his expert report; Transcript of Day 3, at page
68, lines 1Off) and Professor HR (** paras. 258f of his expert report; Transcript of Day 3, at page
83, lines 16ff).

HKJAC Case No. 18117
Final Award
Page 32 of 35

165. In addition, and crucially, even if one considered the Claimant's allegations pioven, the
casts of all wwks combined (RKW 7/,4UU,UUU) only amount to approximately 2% of the
capital initially committed by the Claimant some 13 years earlier (KRW 330,000,000). The
Tribunal considers that such small additional commitment cannot qualify as an expansion of
the investment within the definition of "covered investment’. It docs not establish an
involvemrnt with the investment that is comparable to the other alternatives deemed
sufficient by this definition, i.c. the holding, acquiring or establishing of an investment.

166. If one were to accept such minor improvements or additions to an existing investment,
investors of the host State or a third State could very easily come under the protection of’ the
KORUS FTA after its entry into force by changing their nationality to that of the other State
party to the KOKUS hJ A, and making very small changes to the investment. The Tribunal
considers that this Was not the intention of the drafters of the KORUS FTA. In fact, the
Tribunal is of the view that one of the very reasons behind the definition of “covered
investment" was to exclude host State investors, or investors from third States, from
henefitting from the protections of the KORUS FTA without having had any significant
involvement with the investment during the Currency of the KURUS FT A.

167.

=

Consequently, the Tribunal holds that the Claimant did not expand the investment after the
KORUS FTA came into force and after she acquired US nationality. Therefore, we hold that
there was no “covered investment” of the Claimant in relation to which the guarantees of
Articles 11.5 and 11.6 of the KORUS FTA could apply ui have been breached.

C. Conclusion on the Application for Preliminary Objections

168. Based on the foregoine, the Tribunal upholds the Respondent’ Preliminary Objection no. |
because the Claimant was unable to show’ that she made an “investment” and a “covered
investment” within the meaning of the KORUS TTA.

169. As a result, the Claimant’s interest in the Property falls outside the scope of the KORUS
TTA, as pei’ its Article 11.1.1, and the Tribunal concludes that it does not have jurisdiction
over the Claimant’s claim. Given this conclusion, it ie not necessary for the Tribunal to
determine Preliminaiy Objections uus. 2 to 47.

VII. COSTS

170. On the pleadingg, both Parties have requested that the other Party be oidcicd to beat all costs
and expenses incurred in connection with this application. However, at the close of the
Hearing, the Claimant submitted that, unless there arc extraordinary’ circumstances, each
Party should beai its own expenses including legal costs whatever the result ol the

 

"In his separate Concurring Opinion, Dr. Benny Lo has provided his own analysis on the Respondent’s
Preliminary Objections nos. 2 to 4,

32

17.

172.

nv

172.

nv

174,

17:

a

176,

aS

HKIAC Case No. 18117
Final Award
Page 33 of 35

application**, In any event. as directed hy the Tribunal, hnih Parties have submitted cost
stotements setting out their respective legal fees and expenses.

- Inrelation to costs, Article 11.20.8 of the KORUS FTA provides as follows;

“When it decides a respondent's objection under paragraph 6 or 7, the tribunal may;
if warranted award to the prevailing disputing party: reasonable costs and
attorney fees incurred in submitting or opposing the objection. In determining
whether such an award is warranted, the tribunal shad consider whether either the
claimant's claim or the respondent's objection was frivolous, and shall provide the
disputing parties a reasonable opportunity’ to comment."

In addition, Article 11.26.2 of the KORUS FTA reads as follows:

“A tribunal may also award costs and attorney's fees in accordance with this
Section and the applicable arbitration rules.“

The applicable arbitration rules in this ease aie the UNCITRAL Rules, which provides as
follows in Article 42 as follows:

The costs of the arbitration shall in principle be borne by the unsuccessful party or
parties. However; the arbitral tribunal may apportion each of such costs between the
Jjuirties if it determines that apportionment is reasonable; taking into account the
circumstances of the case.”

In the Tribunal’s view, if an application for preliminary objections pursuant to Article
11.20.6 andor 1 1.20.7 of the KORIJS FTA results in a dismissal of the entire caro, the costo
decision is governed by Article 11.26.2 of the KORUS FTA. This is because Article 11,20.8
of the KORUS FTA provides for a costs award only iu uanuw circumstances, namely if
such award is “warrantedespecially in case of a frivolous claim or objection. In other
words, Article 11.20.8 of the KORUS FTA presupposes that in the usual course of events,
ie. when those narrow circumstances are not met. there will he (only) a regular costs
decision later on in the proceedingn.

- Indeed. the purpose of Article 11.20.8 of the KORUS FTA quite clearly is to allow a

tribunal to apportion the costs of the pidiuiinary objections phase separately from the other
costs of the arbitration if it considers that the parties’ submissions in the preliminary
objections phase so warrant. If, however, the case does not proceed beyond the preliminary
objections phase, there is no room foi scpaiatc appuiliouiiig of the Cosis of the preliminary
objections phase because there are no oilier costs incurred thereafter.

Therefore, this Tribunal will apply Article 11.26.2 of the KURUS FTA. While this Article
refers In the rules on costs in the arbitration rules, which in this case is a reference to Article
42 of the UNCITRAL Rules, the Tribunal notes that the wording of Article 11.26.2 of the

Transcript of Day 3, at page 83, line 20 to page 84, line 10.

33

HKIAC Case No. 18117
Final Award
Page 34 of 35

KORUS FTA grants a discretion to the Tribunal (Mnfey"). The ‘Tribunal would find it
difficult to assume that this con be overridden by the UNCTTRAL Rules. In any case, while
Article 42 ot the UNCITRAL Rules provides in its first sentence that the costs “shair be
borne by the unsuccessful party, this is qualified at once with the addition of the term “In
principleand the second sentence mokes clear that the Tribunal may depait from this
principle if it deems it reasonable in viewr of the “circumstances of the catr*

177. Actuatingly, the Tribunal finds that Article 42 of the UNCITKAL Rules does not remove or
fetter the discretion granted in Article 11.26.2 of the KORUS FTA, for which reason it is not
necessary’ to make a definitive finding on which of the two provisions prevail.

178. The Tribunal notes that the Claimant was the unsuccessful party in this arbitration, Applying
Article 42 of the UNCITRAL Rules, the starting point in principle is that the Claimant
should be made to bear all costs of this arbitration. However, the Tribunal does not find this
appropriate in view of the following three circumstances®®.

179.

©

First, the Rrspnnripnt raised four separate preliminary’ objections, all of which were
discussed extensively by both Parties in writing and during the Hearing. Both Parties” expert
opinions were focussed mainly (in case of the Claimant's expert: solely) on preliminary’
objection no.3, However, in the end, the Tribunal needed to decide only on preliminary
objection no.1, rendering in hindsight a very’ significant part of the costs unnecessary,

181

S

Secondly, the Claimant had opposed a hearing. Aftci the Tribunal had granted the
Respondent's request for a hearing, the Claimant advocated in favour of a one-day hearing.
wrhereas the Respondent suggested a duration of three days, arguing that more lime was
needed for oral pleadings and the taking of evidence. In the end, the Hearing lasted two and
a half Hays, corresponding closely to the Respondent's suggestion. As tlic costs of die
Ilcaiiug fuuii a very significant pan of the overall costs ot this arbitration, the Tribunal
considers that the Claimant's opposition to holding a hearing, and to it lasting for more than
a day, must be taken into account in the costs decision.

18

Thirdly, the legal fees and expenses claimed hy the Parties are quite unequal, with the
Rerpondent claiming approximately foui times the amount claimed by the Claimant.

182.

Ss

Under those circumstances, the Tribunal would not find it appropriate to order the Claimant,
even though she was the unsuccessful Party, to bear all the costs of the arbitration.

183. Instead, in the Tribunal’s view, the appropriate approach towards costs in the present case is
for each party to beai Iwif uf the fees and expenses of the Tribunal and half of the lees and
expenses of the HKIAC. In addition, the Trihunal finds it appropriate that each party shall
bear its own legal fees and expenses.

 

“In his separate Concurring Opinion, Dr. Benny Lo has provided additional reasons why he considers chat the

Tribunal’s costs order, stated under section VIII below, 1u be reasonable and appropriate.

34

HKIAC Case No. 18117
Final Avyaid
Page 35 of 35

VIII. OPERATIVE PART

For the reasons set ouc above, the Tribunal finally:

+ DETERMINES that the Respondent's Preliminary Objection no. 1 be upheld;

rp

DETERMINES that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction over the Claimant’s claims:
3, ORDERS that the Claimant's claims be dismissed; and

4, ORDERS that each Party’ shall bear and pay its own legal fees and expenses, and
half of the fees and expenses of the Tribunal and the HKIAC.

Place of Arbitration: Seoul, Republic of Korea

Date of this Award.dft September 2019

=
o—
(Prnw tsC— f —

Judge Bruno Simma

 

 

? Dred
zg oo

Dr. Benny Lo

 

= Professor Donald McRae

