INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the Proceeding Between

JOSEPH CHARLES LEMIRE
(Claimant)

and

UKRAINE
(Respondent)

(ICSID CasE No. ARB/06/18)

 

DECISION ON JURISDICTION AND LIABILITY

 

Members of the Tribunal:
Professor Juan Fernandez-Armesto, President
Mr. Jan Paulsson, Arbitrator
Dr. Jiirgen Voss, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal:
Mr. Ucheora Onwuamaegbu

Representing Claimant:

Dr. Hamid G. Gharavi
Mr. Julien Fouret

Ms. Nada Sader
Derains & Gharavi
Paris, France

Representing Respondent:
Mr. John S. Willems

Mr. Michael A. Polkinghorne
Ms. Olga Mouraviova

White & Case LLP

Paris, France

Mr. Sergii Svyryba
Ms. Marta Khomyak
Ms. Olha Yaniutina
Magisters

Kyiv, Ukraine

INDEX

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Page
I. | PROCEDURE 6
II. | Basic FActTs 11
III. | THE PARTIES 12
IV. | RELIEF SOUGHT 13
V. | JURISDICTION 15
V1. POSITIONS OF CLAIMANT AND RESPONDENT 15
V.2. DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL 15
V.3. JURISDICTION RATIONE PERSONAE 16
V.4. JURISDICTION RATIONE MATERIAE 17
V.5. JURISDICTION RATIONE VOLUNTATIS 18
A) Jurisdiction With Respect to Claims Based on an Alleged 18
Breach of the Settl Agr /2000 Award
B) Jurisdiction With Respect to Claims Based on an Alleged | 22
Violation of the BIT
VI. | ALLEGED BREACHES OF THE SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT 25
VI.1. APPLICABLE LAW 25
VI.2. INTERPRETATION 26
VI.3. RESPONDENT’S FAILURE TO CORRECT INTERFERENCES 27
A) The State Centre as the “C ission of Experts” 29
B) ion of Interferences 29
©) Adoption of Technical Measures To Remove Interferences 30
VIL4. ALLOCATION OF FREQUENCIES 31
A) I of Radio Fr ies by the State C 33
B) Late Constitution of the National Council 34

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

©) Failure of National Council To Promptly Acknowledge the | 35
Settlement Agreement as Bindi

D) Award of Licences to Other Companies at National Council’s | 35
First Meeting in January 2001

E) Late Award of Broadcasting Licences by National Council 37

F) Allocation of Low-Powered Frequencies 40

G) Allocation of Four Frequencies Which Were Contested by the} 41
Armed Forces of Ukraine

VII. | ALLEGED VIOLATIONS OF THE BIT 43

VIL1. | CLAIMANT’S GENERAL ALLEGATIONS 43

VII.2. | RESPONDENT’S GENERAL ALLEGATIONS 45

VII.3. | CLAIMANT’S FIRST ALLEGATIONS: THE VIOLATION OF THE FET | 47
STANDARD IN THE AWARDING OF FREQUENCIES

VIL.3.1. INTRODUCTION 47

VII.3.2. THE FET STANDARD AS DEFINED IN THE BIT 50

A) Cc ‘y International Law Mini Standard and FET 51
Standard

B) Meaning of Article II.3. of the BIT 53

© Pursuit of Local R di 56

D) Summary 59

VII.3.3. PROCEDURE FOR THE AWARDING OF LICENCES IN THE| 60
BROADCASTING SECTOR UNDER UKRAINIAN LAW

A) The National Council 60

B) The Administrative Procedure for the Issuance of Licences 61

VII.3.4._ GALA’S APPLICATIONS FOR ADDITIONAL FREQUENCIES 66

A) Overview of Gala’s Participation in Tenders for Additional 66
Frequencies

B) The Tender of October 19, 2005 and the Interference of the 69
President of Ukraine

© The Tender of May 26, 2004 for an AM Frequency 73

D) The Tender of February 6, 2008 with 40% Ukrainian Language | 76
Requirement

E) The Tender of November 20, 2002 in Which Claimant Was the 80
Only Applicant

F) The Tender of October 19, 2005 in Favour of NMB Radio 81

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

G) The Award of Frequencies During the Time When the National 84
Council Was Not Operative
VII.3.5. CONCLUSIONS REGARDING THE AWARDING OF RADIO LICENCES 86
VIL.3.6. POSTPONEMENT OF DECISION REGARDING DAMAGES 87
VIL4. CLAIMANT’S SECOND ALLEGATION: THE CONTINUOUS 88
HARASSMENTS BY RESPONDENT AND THE REQUEST FOR MORAL
DAMAGES
VII.4.1. CLAIMANT’S ALLEGATIONS 88
VII.4.2. RESPONDENT’S ALLEGATIONS 90
VIL.4.3. THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION 92
A) Introduction 92
B) The Inspection of Gala Radio 93
Cc Renewal of the Licence 97
D) Decision of the Arbitral Tribunal 97
VIL. CLAIMANT’S THIRD ALLEGATION: THE VIOLATION OF THE FET | 100
STANDARD BY OTHER ACTIONS PERFORMED BY RESPONDENT
VIL6. © CLAIMANT’S FOURTH ALLEGATION: THE “UMBRELLA CLAUSE” 101
VIL.7. © CLAIMANT’S FIFTH ALLEGATION: THE PROHIBITION OF LOCAL | 102
PURCHASE
A) All ‘ion of the Parties 102
B) Decision of the Tribunal 102
VIL8. OTHER ALLEGATIONS 105
VIII. | DECISION 106

 

 

 

 

2000 Award

Arbitration Clause

BIT

Centre
Claimant
FET

First Arbitration

Gala
ICSID
ICSID Convention

Institution Rules

LNC

LTR

Mirakom
NAFTA
National Council
Request
Respondent

Settlement Agreement

State Centre
State Committee
UCRF
Umbrella Clause

UNIDROIT
UNIDROIT Principles

GLOSSARY

Award dated September 18, 2000 finalizing the First Arbitration

Dispute resolution provision contained in the Settlement Agreement which
provides that all the disputes arising from or in connection with the Settlement
Agreement shall be resolved through arbitration

Treaty between the United States of America and Ukraine concerning the
Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investment which entered into
force on November 16, 1996

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
Mr. Joseph Charles Lemire
Fair and Equitable Treatment

An investment arbitration proceeding filed with ICSID on November 14, 1997
between Claimant and Respondent, which was finalized by the 2000 Award

CJSC “Radiocompany Gala”
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of other States, done at Washington on March 18, 1965.

ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration
Proceedings

Law on National Television and Radio Council of Ukraine last amended in
2006

Ukrainian Law on Television and Radio Broadcasting last amended in 2006
CJSC “Mirakom Ukraina”

North American Free Trade Agreement entered into force in 1994

Ukrainian National Council for Television and Radio Broadcasting

Claimant’s request for arbitration against Respondent dated September 6, 2006
Ukraine

Agreement dated March 20, 2000 between Claimant and Respondent on the
settlement of the First Arbitration

Ukrainian State Centre of Radio Frequencies
Ukrainian State Committee on Communications and Information Technology
Ukrainian State Centre of Radio Frequencies

Clause contained in Article II.3 (c) of the US-Ukraine BIT which permits a
breach of contract to be characterized as a breach of the BIT

International Institute for the Unification of Private Law

Principles of International Commercial Contracts adopted by UNIDROIT

L PROCEDURE

On September 11, 2006, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) received from Joseph Charles Lemire
(Mr. Lemire” or “Claimant”), a citizen of the United States, a request for
arbitration (the “Request”) dated September 6, 2006, against Ukraine
(“Respondent”).

On September 12, 2006, the Centre, in accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID
Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration
Proceedings (the “Institution Rules”) acknowledged receipt of the Request and
on the same day transmitted a copy thereof to Ukraine with a copy to its
Embassy in Washington, D.C.

The Request, as supplemented by Claimant’s letter of November 14, 2006,
was registered by the Centre on December 8, 2006, pursuant to Article 36(3)
of the ICSID Convention. By letter of the same day, the Secretary-General of
ICSID, in accordance with Rules 6 and 7 of the Institution Rules, notified the
parties of the registration and invited them to proceed to constitute an Arbitral
Tribunal as soon as possible.

The parties not having reached agreement on the number of arbitrators and the
method of their appointment more than 60 days after the registration of the
Request, Claimant invoked Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention by letter
of February 8, 2007. Article 37(2)(b) prescribes a Tribunal consisting of three
arbitrators, one appointed by each party and the third, who shall be the
President of the Tribunal, appointed by agreement of the parties.

On February 22, 2007, Claimant appointed Mr. Jan Paulsson of France as
arbitrator and on March 7, 2007, Respondent appointed Dr. Jiirgen Voss of
Germany as arbitrator, each of whom the parties had also appointed in the
earlier concluded ICSID Additional Facility case Joseph C. Lemire v. Ukraine
(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/1).

The Tribunal not having been constituted 90 days after the registration of the
request, Claimant requested by letters of March 9, 2007, and March 20, 2007,
that the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council designate an arbitrator
to be the President of the Tribunal, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 4(1).

On June 6, 2007, the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council, in
consultation with the parties, designated Professor Juan Fernandez-Armesto, a
national of Spain, as the presiding arbitrator.

All three arbitrators having accepted their appointments, the Secretary-General
of ICSID, by letter of June 14, 2007, informed the parties that a Tribunal
consisting of Professor Juan Fernandez-Armesto, Mr. Jan Paulsson and
Dr. Jiirgen Voss, had been constituted and that the proceeding was deemed to
have commenced on that day, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 6(1).

At the time of the filing of the Request, Claimant was represented by the law
firm of Salans. From December 2008 to December 2009, Claimant was
represented by the law firm of Derains Gharavi & Lazareff in Paris, France,
and, subsequently, by the law firm of Derains & Gharavi.

By letters of June 25, 2007 and July 9, 2007, Respondent notified the Centre
of the appointment of the law firm of White & Case LLP in Paris, France, and
of the law firm of Magisters in Kyiv, Ukraine, as its legal representatives in
this matter.

The first session of the Tribunal was held on July 23, 2007, at the World
Bank’s offices in Paris, and various aspects of procedure were determined at
the session. Present at the session were:

Members of the Tribunal

Prof. Juan Fernéndez-Armesto, President
Mr. Jan Paulsson, Arbitrator

Dr. Jiirgen Voss, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mr. Ucheora Onwuamaegbu (by video conference)

Attending for Claimant

Mr. Joseph C. Lemire, Claimant

Mr. Sergey Denisenko, Executive at Gala
Ms. Julia Tumash, Executive at Gala

Mr. Hamid G. Gharavi, Salans

Ms. Brenda Horrigan, Salans

Mr. William Kirtley, Salans

Attending for Respondent

Mr. Sergiy Beketov, Ministry of Justice of Ukraine
Mr. John S. Willems, White & Case LLP

Mr. Michael Polkinghorne, White & Case LLP
Ms. Olga Mouraviova, White & Case LLP

Ms. Anna-Marta Khomyak, Magisters

On November 12, 2007, Claimant filed its Memorial on the Merits.

On February 25, 2008, Respondent filed a Memorial in Support of Its
Objections to Jurisdiction and, on February 26, 2008, Respondent filed its
Counter-Memorial on the Merits, dated February 25, 2008.

On March 17, 2008, Claimant filed observations on Respondent’s Memorial in
Support of its Objections to Jurisdiction.

On March 26, 2008, the Tribunal notified the parties that it had decided to join
the issue of jurisdiction to the merits.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

Also on March 26, 2008, the parties filed their respective requests for
production of documents and, on April 18, 2008, exchanged responses on
their respective requests for production of documents. On May 13, 2008, the
Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. | concerning the requests for production
of documents.

On July 31, 2008, Respondent filed a further request for production of
documents. On August 8, 2008, Claimant filed observations on Respondent’s
request, and on August 13, 2008, Respondent filed a response to Claimant’s
observations of August 8, 2008. Claimant answered Respondent’s request on
August 28, 2008.

On August 15, 2008, Claimant filed a request for provisional measures,
concerning Ukraine’s decision to charge a certain fee for the renewal of Gala’s
broadcasting licence.

On August 20, 2008, Claimant filed its Reply on the Merits.

On August 29, 2008, Respondent filed a proposal for the disqualification of
Mr. Jan Paulsson as arbitrator, and the proceeding was suspended in
accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(6). Existing deadlines and
schedule of the proceeding remained in effect and continued to run during the
period of suspension of the proceeding.

On September 2, 2008, Respondent filed observations on Claimant’s request
for provisional measures.

On September 10, 2008, Claimant filed a response to Respondent’s
observations on Claimant’s request for provisional measures.

On September 23, 2008, the Centre notified the parties that in accordance with
Article 58 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(4), the
proposal for the disqualification of Mr. Jan Paulsson had been decided by the
other members of the Tribunal, Prof. Juan Fernandez-Armesto and Dr. Jiirgen
Voss. The proposal for disqualification of Mr. Paulsson was dismissed and the
suspension of the proceeding was lifted as of the date of the notification. The
reasoned Decision on Respondent’s proposal for the disqualification was
communicated to the parties on September 29, 2008.

On October 22, 2008, Claimant withdrew the request for provisional measures
of August 15, 2008.

On November 6, 2008, Respondent filed a Rejoinder on the Merits.
On November 13 and November 18, 2008, Claimant filed requests for
production of witnesses, and on November 14, 2008, the parties filed witness

statements.

On November 19, 2009, the President of the Tribunal held a pre-hearing
conference by telephone with the parties.

28.

29.

30.

On November 25, 2008, Respondent filed observations on Claimant’s requests
of November 13 and 18, 2008, for production of witnesses.

On December 1, 2008, the parties filed rebuttal witness statements and on
December 3, 2008, the President of the Tribunal held a further pre-hearing
conference by telephone with the parties.

The hearing on jurisdiction and the merits was held from December 8, 2008 to
December 12, 2008, at the at the World Bank’s offices in Paris. Present at the
hearing were:

Members of the Tribunal

Prof. Juan Fernéndez-Armesto, President
Mr. Jan Paulsson, Arbitrator
Dr. Jiirgen Voss, Arbitrator

Assistant to the Tribunal
Ms. Deva Villantia Gomez

Attending for Claimant

Mr. Joseph C. Lemire, Claimant’s witness

Mr. Hamid G. Gharavi, Derains Gharavi & Lazareff
Mr. Nabil Lodey, Derains Gharavi & Lazareff
Mr. Julien Fouret, Derains Gharavi & Lazareff
Ms. Nada Sader, Derains Gharavi & Lazareff

Mr. Sergiy Koziakov, Derains Gharavi & Lazareff
Mr. Eric Degand, witness

Mr. Viktor Petrenko, Claimant’s witness

Mr. Paval Shylko, witness

Mr. Piotr Jalowiec, witness

Mr. Sergey Denisenko, witness

Dr. Andre Wiegand, expert

Dr. Klaus Goldhammer, expert

Attending for Respondent

Mr. John S. Willems, White & Case LLP

Mr. Michael Polkinghorne, White & Case LLP
Ms. Olga Mouraviova, White & Case LLP
Mr. Sergii Svyryba, Magisters

Ms. Nathalie Makowski, White & Case LLP
Ms. Olga Boltenko, White & Case LLP

Ms. Olga Glukhovska, Magisters

Ms. Olga Ianiutina, Magisters

Mr. Markiian Kliuchkovskyi, Magisters

Ms. Tuuli Timonen, White & Case LLP

Ms. Renee Bissell, White & Case LLP

Ms. Ludmila Zaporozhets, National Television and Radio
Broadcasting Council of Ukraine

Mr. Vitaliy Shevchenko, witness

Mr. Thor Kurus, witness

Mr. Volodymyr Kirichenko, witness

Mr. Iulian Leliukh, witness

Mr. Viktor Petrenko, Respondent’s witness
Mr. Vladyslav Lyasovskyi, witness

Ms. Olena Volska, expert

31. As decided at the hearing, the parties filed their respective post-hearing briefs
on March 4, 2009 and their respective statements of costs on March 20, 2009.

32. Members of the Tribunal deliberated using various means of communication.

33.

34.

35.

IL. BASIC FACTS

This dispute was submitted to ICSID by Claimant against Respondent under
(1) the Treaty between the United States of America and Ukraine Concerning
the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investment, done in Kyiv on
October 17, 1996 (the “BIT”) and (2) an agreement between Claimant and
Respondent on the settlement of a dispute, dated March 20, 2000 (the
“Settlement Agreement”), which was recorded as an award on agreed terms on
September 18, 2000 (ICSID No. ARB (AF) 98/1 (the “2000 Award”).

Article VI of the BIT entitles any national of a State party to the BIT to submit
to ICSID any dispute with the other State party to the BIT relating to either
“an investment agreement between that Party and such national” or “an
alleged breach of any right conferred or created by this Treaty with respect to
an investment”.

On November 14, 1997, Claimant filed with ICSID a first arbitration request
(the “First Arbitration”) against Respondent, with regard to the same
investments that underlie the present arbitration. This First Arbitration
eventually led to the Settlement Agreement, which was then recorded in the
2000 Award. Paragraph 31 of the Settlement Agreement provides for the
resolution of all disputes arising from or in connection with the Agreement by
ICSID Arbitration in accordance with the ICSID Additional Facility
Arbitration Rules.

36.

37.

Ill. THE PARTIES

Claimant, Mr. Joseph Charles Lemire, is a national of the United States of
America residing at 91 Saksagansko St., Office 8,01032 Kiev, Ukraine.
Claimant is a majority shareholder, through CJSC “Mirakom Ukraina”
(“Mirakom’”) of CJSC “Radiocompany Gala” (‘Gala’), a closed joint stock
company constituted in 1995 under the laws of Ukraine with its principal
office located at the same address as Mr. Lemire’s residence. Gala is a music
radio station in Ukraine currently licenced to broadcast on various frequencies
in Ukraine.

Respondent is the State of Ukraine. With respect to the events giving rise to
the present arbitration, Respondent has acted through its President, Prime
Minister, Parliament, Ministry of Defence, the National Council for Television
and Radio Broadcasting (the “National Council”), the Ukrainian State Centre
of Radio Frequencies (the “State Centre”), the State Committee on
Communications and Information Technology (the “State Committee”), all of
which are organs for which Ukraine is responsible under international law.

IV. RELIEF SOUGHT

38. Claimant seeks relief for alleged breaches of the Settlement Agreement/2000
Award and for alleged breaches of the BIT following the 2000 Award. More
specifically, Claimant seeks I

a)

39. b)

c)

d)

e)

a decision declaring that Respondent has breached the 2000 Award and
the BIT;

a decision ordering Respondent to pay Claimant damages in the amount
of 55,173 million USD on account of its breaches of the 2000 Award and
the BIT which had the effect of preventing Claimant from developing
Gala into a full national network as of January 1, 2001 and from
establishing two other national networks (an FM radio network as of
January 1, 2002 and an AM network as of July 1, 2004); or

— alternatively ordering Respondent to pay Claimant damages in the
amount of 51,277 million USD on account of its breaches of the 2000
Award and the BIT which blocked Claimant from developing Gala
into a full national network as of January 1, 2004 and developing a
second FM national network as of January 1, 2002; or

— alternatively ordering Respondent to pay Claimant damages in the
amount of 34,732 million USD on account of its breaches of the 2000
Award and the BIT which blocked Claimant from developing Gala
into a full national network as of January 1, 2001;

a decision ordering Respondent to pay Claimant damages in the amount
of one million USD for Respondent’s failure to take reasonable measures
to correct interference with Gala’s 100 FM frequency, in breach of the
Award and the BIT from the year 2000 to August 2008;

a decision ordering Respondent to pay Claimant damages in the amount
of 958,000 USD representing loss of profits for Respondent’s enactment
of the Law on Television and Radio Broadcasting (the “LTR”) and/or
application thereof in breach of the BIT;

a decision ordering Respondent to pay Claimant moral damages in the
amount of three million USD for Respondent’s harassment of Claimant,
in breach of the BIT;

the costs of this arbitration, including all expenses that Claimant has
incurred, legal counsel, experts and consultants, as well as Claimant’s
internal costs in pursuing this arbitration, all of the fees and expenses of
the arbitrators, fees for use of the facilities of the Centre;

' Claimant's Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 151.

40.

8)

h)

compound interest at a rate of LIBOR + 3, compounded semi-annually,
to be established on the above amounts as of the date these amounts are
determined to have been due to Claimant; and

any such other and further relief as the Arbitral Tribunal shall deem
appropriate.

Respondent seeks”:

a)

b)

c)

a decision dismissing all Claimant’s claims, or a substantial part thereof,
for lack of jurisdiction;

 

a decision dismissing Claimant’s claims in their entirety; and

a decision awarding to Respondent its fees, costs and expenses in
connection with this proceeding.

? Respondent's Rejoinder, para. 252; Respondent’s Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 653.

Al.

V.1.

42.

43.

44.

V.2.

4S.

Vv. JURISDICTION

The Tribunal has decided to join Respondent’s objections on jurisdiction to the
merits of the dispute, in accordance with Article 41(2) of the ICSID
Convention.

POSITIONS OF CLAIMANT AND RESPONDENT
Claimant’s basic allegations in this arbitration are twofold:

- first, that Respondent’s actions constitute a breach of the Settlement
Agreement; and

- second, that Respondent has breached the BIT by subjecting Claimant to
unfair, inequitable, arbitrary and discriminatory treatment, harassment
and creeping expropriation and by enacting a new law in violation of
Article IL.6 of the BIT.

Respondent raises a number of jurisdictional objections*:

- that the Centre lacks jurisdiction for claims arising out of the Settlement
Agreement;

- that there is no investment underlying the claims related to the tenders
for additional frequencies;

- that Claimant’s capital invested did not emanate from abroad as required;

- that Claimant has not made out a prima facie case of expropriation.

Claimant denies these jurisdictional objections and affirms the Centre’s
jurisdiction and the Tribunal’s competence to decide all claims raised.

DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL

In order for the Centre to have jurisdiction and for the Tribunal to have
competence with regard to these claims, four well known conditions must be
met, three deriving from Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and a fourth
resulting from the general principle of law of non-retroactivity:

- first, a condition ratione personae: the dispute must oppose a Contracting
State and a national of another Contracting State;

- second, a condition ratione materiae: the dispute must be a legal dispute
arising directly out of an investment;

- third, a condition ratione voluntatis: the Contracting State and the
investor must consent in writing that the dispute be settled through
ICSID arbitration;

- fourth, a condition ratione temporis: the ICSID Convention must have
been applicable at the relevant time.

* Respondent’s Memorial in Support of its Objections to Jurisdiction; Respondent's Rejoinder, paras.

146-256.

15

46.

47.

48.

V.3.

49.

50.

The jurisdictional requirements of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention must be
read in conjunction with those of the BIT. The relevant provisions are Article
VL.1 and VL4 of the BIT, which read as follows:

“VII. For purposes of this Article, an investment dispute is a dispute
between a Party and a national or company of the other Party arising out
of or relating to (a) an investment agreement between that Party and
such national or company; (b) an investment authorization granted by
that Party’s foreign investment authority to such national or company; or
(c) an alleged breach of any right conferred or created by this Treaty
with respect to an investment.

V1.4. Each Party hereby consents to the submission of any investment
dispute for settlement by binding arbitration in accordance with the
choice specified in the written consent of the national or company under
paragraph 3. Such consent, together with the written consent of the
national or company when given under paragraph 3 shall satisfy the
requirement for:

(a) written consent of the parties to the dispute for purposes of
chapter II of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Centre)
and for purposes of the Additional Facility Rules; and

(b) an “agreement in writing” for purposes of Article II of the
United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement
of Foreign Arbitral Awards, done at New York, June 10, 1958.”

In addition, Article I.1(a) of the BIT defines the term “investment”:

“L.1. For the purposes of this Treaty,

(a) “investment” means every kind of investment in the territory of one
Party owned or controlled directly of indirectly by nationals or
companies of the other Party, such as equity, debt, and service and
investment contracts; ...”

Jurisdiction ratione temporis has not been challenged and the Tribunal will not
analyze it. It will focus on jurisdiction ratione personae (V.3), materiae (V.4)
and voluntatis (V.5).

JURISDICTION RATIONE PERSONAE

Claimant is, and at all relevant times has been, a national of the United States
and thus a “national of another Contracting State” under Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention as well as a “national of a Party” under the BIT. Ukraine,
since July 7, 2000, is a State Party to both the ICSID Convention and to the
BIT.

The requirements for ICSID jurisdiction ratione personae are hence satisfied.

V4.

51.

52.

53.

54.

JURISDICTION RATIONE MATERIAE

Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention further requires a “legal dispute
arising directly out of an investment”. Claimant submits that he has made
investments in Gala Radio and that he is Gala’s major shareholder. It is
undisputed that the present dispute is a legal dispute and that it arose directly
out of these investments.

Claimant’s investment

Gala was not founded by Mr. Lemire — in fact, Ukrainian legislation requires
that radio broadcasters be founded by Ukrainian nationals*. The law however
authorizes foreign investments in the broadcasting sector (Article 12.3 of
LTR). Mr. Lemire bought participations in Gala, an existing company, which
already had a radio licence, and which had been promoted by a Ukrainian
citizen, Mr. Glieb Maliutin’, and founded by a Ukrainian company called
Provisen. On June 8, 1995, two Investment Agreements were signed by Mr.
Lemire providing (somewhat diffusely) for contributions in cash and in kind
amounting to 290,000 USD plus 3,000,000 USD*.

The actual amount contributed by Mr. Lemire is disputed. Respondent’s expert
acknowledges that at least 141,000 USD were invested by Mr. Lemire’ and
Respondent has accepted an investment of 236,000 USD*. Claimant himself
states that his investment amounts to well over 5,000,000 USD’. This number
seems to include real estate held in Mr. Lemire’s name, and let rent free to
Gala, and payments made directly by him on behalf of the company’. No
document has actually been produced in this arbitration, giving a precise
breakdown of Mr. Lemire’s contributions. It seems, moreover, that for
accounting purposes, the expenditures made directly by Mr. Lemire on behalf
of Gala are not recorded in Gala’s books".

Summing up the evidence, the Tribunal has no doubt that Mr. Lemire actually
made an investment in Ukraine, although the undisputed total amount is only
236,000 USD. Respondent has not challenged that Mr. Lemire is — at least
since 2006 — indirect owner of 100% of the share capital of Gala. The evidence
shows that Mr. Lemire has made payments with his own moneys on behalf of
Gala. But the record of the actual amounts paid has not been produced, and
that the total exceeds 5,000,000 USD is nothing more than affirmation’.

+ Article 13 of the 1993 Law on Television and Broadcasting

* Respondent has presented a Witness Statement from Mr. Maliutin.

® Annex F of EBS Expert Report.

7 EBS Expert Report, p. 5.

§ Respondent's Exhibit at the hearing RH-1, p. 23.

° Mr. Lemire, Hearing Transcript 1, p. 279, at 10.

'° Mr. Lemire, Hearing Transcript 1, p. 281, at 14.

"' Mr. Lemire, Hearing Transcript 1, p. 286, at 23.

Mr. Lemire, Hearing Transcript, p. 285, para. 20 and p. 304, para. 9.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

V.5.

60.

A)

61.

62.

It is immaterial that Claimant holds his controlling stake in Gala through
Mirakom. Article I.1(a) of the BIT accords treaty protection to “every kind of
investment in the territory of one Party owned or controlled directly or
indirectly by nationals...of the other Party”.

Transfer of funds from abroad

Respondent further submits that Claimant has failed to prove the transfer of his
invested funds into Ukraine from abroad. However, neither the BIT nor the
ICSID Convention includes an origin-of-capital requirement. Nor is such a
requirement to be inferred from the purposes of the BIT and/or the ICSID
Convention.

In setting out the purposes of the BIT, the Preamble emphasises the promotion
of investments of nationals of one party in the territory of the other, without
any reference to the origin of the funds invested; and Article I.3 of the BIT
implies that reinvested earnings qualify as investments under the BIT; these
earnings by definition originate within the host country.

Moreover, Claimant’s certificate of registration dated September 18, 1995
shows that at least part of his investment capital originates from abroad; this
suffices for jurisdictional purposes.

Hence, the requirements for ICSID jurisdiction are also satisfied ratione
materiae.

JURISDICTION RATIONE VOLUNTATIS

A singular feature of this arbitration is that consent to ICSID arbitration was
formalized in two different legal instruments: the Settlement Agreement and
the BIT. Each will be analyzed separately.

Jurisdiction With Respect to Claims Based on an Alleged Breach of the
Settlement Agreement/2000 Award

The Settlement Agreement contains the following dispute resolution provision
in clause 31 (the “Arbitration Clause”):

“All the disputes arising from or in connection with this Agreement shall
be settled by negotiations. In the event no solution is achieved within 60
days from the date of beginning of negotiations, either party may address
to the ICSID its application for settlement under the ICSID Additional
Facility Arbitration Rules.”

Respondent however objects to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction for alleged claims
under the Settlement Agreement on two grounds, namely the fact that (a) the
Settlement Agreement was recorded as an award, and (b) the Arbitration
Clause refers, for settlement of disputes under the Agreement, to the ICSID
Additional Facility Arbitration Rules, rather than the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

a) Settlement Agreement as an award

Respondent argues that the parties voluntarily transformed the Settlement
Agreement into an enforceable award, in order to benefit from the
jurisdictional effect of such measure. Claimant thus waived his right to the
dispute resolution mechanism contained in the original accord'*. Awards
under the ICSID Additional Facility must be enforced through the New York
Convention — there is no scope for enforcement through the arbitration clause
inserted in the Settlement Agreement.

The Tribunal disagrees with Respondent’s theory. It is not supported by the
text of the ICSID Convention or applicable arbitration rules, and it is based on
a misunderstanding of the differences between disputes arising out of a
contract and enforcement of an award.

The Settlement Agreement is first and foremost a contract, product of consent
expressed by both parties. Settlement agreements, like all contracts, may give
rise to disputes. In the Settlement Agreement Mr. Lemire and Ukraine agreed
that disputes arising “from or in connection” with this contract should be
settled by arbitration.

After executing the Settlement Agreement both parties requested, and the
Tribunal in the First Arbitration agreed that “the Tribunal shall record the
settlement in the form of an award” (as authorized by Article 49(2) of the
ICSID Additional Facility Arbitration Rules).

The precise text of the 2000 Award is as follows:

“Accordingly the Tribunal orders unanimously that the said agreement
between the Parties as set forth below shall be recorded verbatim as an
award on agreed terms”.

And then the award copies ad pedem literae the full text of the Settlement
Agreement, including the Arbitration Clause.

Respondent’s basic argument is that, by accepting that the Settlement
Agreement be recorded as an award, Claimant was waiving his right to the
Arbitration Clause.

The Tribunal disagrees. There is no hint that, by requesting the Tribunal to
issue the consent award, Claimant proposed and Respondent accepted
neutralisation of the Arbitration Clause.

It is very telling that the 2000 Award reproduces the complete text of the
Settlement Agreement, including the Arbitration Clause. The parties could
have requested that the Arbitration Clause be excluded from the 2000 Award.
They did not. What the 2000 Award proves is that as of the date of the request
of its issuance, each party reiterated its consent that all disputes arising from or
in connection with the Settlement Agreement be solved by arbitration.

'S Respondent’s Rejoinder, para. 155.

72.

723.

74.

75.

In fact, the purpose and meaning of the consent award is very transparent.
What the parties were seeking when they asked for the 2000 Award was
twofold:

- on the one hand, they wished to have the possibility of recognition and
enforcement of the Settlement Agreement through the New York
Convention; i.e. that a Court recognise the legal force and effect of the
award and ensure that it is carried out in accordance with its terms;

- on the other, if any dispute arose from or in connection with the
Settlement Agreement, the parties reiterated their agreement that disputes
should be resolved by arbitration.

With regard to the Settlement Agreement, the relief sought by Claimant in this
arbitration is a declaration that Respondent has breached its obligations and an
order for payment of damages. The thrust of Claimant’s argument is that
during the execution of the Settlement Agreement, Respondent has defaulted.
Respondent denies such accusation. Consequently, a dispute regarding the
execution of the Settlement Agreement has arisen.

This dispute can and must be submitted to arbitration in accordance with
Clause 31 of the Settlement Agreement:

- first, because that is what the parties bargained for in the Arbitration
Clause; and

- second, because a procedure under the New York Convention before a
national Court can only result in the recognition and enforcement of the
award, not in resolving a dispute related to the breach of obligations and
the determination of damages; if Claimant had submitted the relief
sought in this procedure to a national Court, Respondent could have
validly raised the defence of Article II.3 of the New York Convention'*,
and requested that the judge refer the dispute to arbitration.

b) Reference to ICSID Additional Facility Arbitration Rules

The Arbitration Clause provides for “‘settlement under the ICSID Additional
Facility Arbitration Rules” of “all the disputes arising from or in connection
with this Agreement’.

When the Settlement Agreement was signed on March 20, 2000 Ukraine had
not ratified the ICSID Convention, and consequently the Centre could only
administer arbitrations involving Ukraine under the Additional Facility Rules
(Article 2(a)). Things moved quickly thereafter. On July 7, 2000 the ICSID
Convention entered into force in Ukraine. With the effectiveness in Ukraine of
the ICSID Convention, the Additional Facility became unavailable and was
superseded by arbitration under ICSID Rules. Notwithstanding this fact, the

'4 Article I.3 of the New York Convention provides that: “The Court of a Contracting State, when seized

of an action in a matter in respect of which the parties have made an agreement within the meaning of
this Article, shall, at the request of one of the parties, refer the parties to arbitration, unless it finds that
the said agreement is null and void, inoperative or incapable of being performed".

20

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

parties requested, and on September 18, 2000 the Tribunal in the First
Arbitration issued the 2000 Award, with an unchanged Arbitration Clause.

Claimant argues that the reference to the Additional Facility in the Arbitration
Clause implicitly includes a reference to ICSID proper, once it became
available.

Respondent objects and refers to the clear, unambiguous terms of the
Arbitration Clause’®.

On this issue the Tribunal sides with Claimant.

The Arbitration Clause states that “either party may address to the ICSID its
application for settlement”, and then adds “under the ICSID Additional
Facility Arbitration Rules”. These Rules were available when the Clause was
signed, but no longer once the Clause was incorporated into the 2000 Award,
and since then they have ceased to be available. They have been superseded by
the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

Imprecise arbitration clauses are a frequent occurrence in commercial
arbitration. They must be interpreted by the arbitrators, in order to restore the
true intention of the parties, distorted by the parties’ ignorance of the
mechanics of arbitration, error in designating the correct institution or rules,
or, as here, supervening legal developments'”.

In our case, the true intent of the parties is very clear: the Arbitration Clause
explicitly says that “either party may address to ICSID its application for the
settlement” of the dispute. The very wording of the Arbitration Clause
evidences the parties’ wish that disputes arising from the Settlement
Agreement be settled through arbitration administered by ICSID, and not
through any other dispute settlement mechanism, nor by any national Court.

Where the parties were unclear is not in the description of the dispute
settlement mechanism which they preferred, but in an ancillary point: the
precise rules which the institution entrusted with the administration of the
arbitration should apply. The parties correctly referred to the Rules which were
applicable at the time the Settlement Agreement was executed — the ICSID
Additional Facility Arbitration Rules. And when the Settlement Agreement
was recorded as an award a couple of months later, they did not take into
account that in the meantime Ukraine had ratified the ICSID Convention, that
the applicable arbitration rules now were the ICSID Arbitration Rules, and that
the rules which they were referring to— the ICSID Additional Facility Rules —
were in fact no longer available.

5 Claimant's letter dated March 17, 2008, paras. 13 and 14; Claimant’s Reply Memorial, paras. 39-43.

'6 Respondent’s Memorial in Support of its Objections to Jurisdiction, para. 19.

'T This is not controversial: see e.g. Fouchard/Gaillard/Goldman, “International Commercial Arbitration”
(1999), p. 263.

21

83.

B)

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

The ambiguity elided by the parties when they recorded the Settlement
Agreement as an award is purely technical and ancillary, and cannot distort the
real intent: that any dispute arising from or in connection with the Settlement
Agreement be settled by arbitration administered by ICSID, and governed by
the appropriate rules approved by the Centre: before Ukraine had ratified the
ICSID Convention, the ICSID Additional Facility Arbitration Rules;
thereafter, the ordinary ICSID Arbitration Rules.

Jurisdiction With Respect to Claims Based on an Alleged Violation of the
BIT

By Article VI.3 of the BIT, Ukraine agreed that investment disputes with
American investors be submitted to arbitration administered by the Centre.
Claimant accepted the offer by filing this arbitration. Respondent objects to
the Centre’s jurisdiction and the Tribunal’s competence, but not with regard to
the claims in toto, but only with regard to some specific claims.

These claims, and the reasons for objecting to jurisdiction, are explained in the
following paragraphs.

a) Claims related to tenders for frequencies and broadcasting licences

Respondent objects to the Tribunal’s competence with respect to claims
arising out of Claimant’s failure in tenders for additional frequencies on the
ground that such tenders precede investments and that pre-investment
activities fall outside the ICSID Convention. Respondent, however, seems to
concede that such pre-investment activities are within the scope of the Bir’.

Claimant disagrees"”, arguing that Mr. Lemire established investments in radio
networks in Ukraine, and that they were harmed by Respondent’s acts and
omissions.

The Tribunal sides with Claimant.
Pre-investment activities

Mr. Lemire’s claim related to tenders for frequencies and broadcasting
licences does not refer to, and cannot be considered as, a pre-investment
activity. Pre-investment activities are those which precede the actual
investment. Whether pre-investment activities merit treaty protection is
debatable. But it is irrelevant for the purpose of adjudicating Claimant’s claims
in this arbitration, since the Tribunal has already established that Mr. Lemire
has made investments in Gala Radio and is Gala’s sole shareholder, and that
these investments qualify for protection under the BIT.

Tf an investor claims that his investment, once made, was subsequently denied
frequencies and broadcasting licences in violation of Ukraine’s obligations as
assumed in the BIT, this claim constitutes an “investment dispute” for the

'S Respondent’s Rejoinder, para. 184.
° Claimant's Reply Memorial, para. 52.

22

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

97.

purposes of Article VI of the BIT; the Centre has jurisdiction and the Tribunal
competence to adjudicate it.

This conclusion is confirmed by the text of the BIT. The BIT expressly
extends protection to “associated activities’ which include “access to
... licences, permits and other approvals...” (see Articles I.1 (e) and IL.11 (b)
of the BIT). Article II.3 (b) moreover provides that “Neither Party shall in any
way impair by arbitrary or discriminatory measures the .. . expansion. . . of
investments”. The allocation of frequencies was a condition for Claimant’s
ability to expand his investment. Claimant’s allegations related to tenders for
frequencies and licences thus fall within the scope of the BIT.

 

Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention

Respondent submits that disputes related to the allocation of new frequencies,
while arguably within the ambit of the BIT, do not arise “directly” out of an
investment and therefore fall short of the requirements of Article 25(1) of the
ICSID Convention. In Respondent’s view, moreover, the narrower definition
in the ICSID Convention prevails over the broader definition in the BIT.

The Tribunal sees the force in Respondent’s submission that bilateral treaties
cannot extend the scope of the multilateral ICSID Convention. However,
where the ICSID Convention is open to interpretation, such interpretation
should seek compatibility rather than contradiction.

The Tribunal must therefore determine whether disputes related to the
allocation of frequencies and issuance of broadcasting licences may be
considered as “arising directly out of an investment” within the meaning of
Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. For this purpose, Claimant’s case must
be distinguished from the scenario where an applicant intends to enter a
market for the first time. In such scenario, the application for frequencies and
licences indeed is a step towards facilitating a planned investment, because no
investment exists at the time of the allocation process.

In the present case, Claimant had already invested in Gala Radio; and Gala
was a going concern at the time of the tenders. The applications for additional
frequencies and licences formed an integral part of Gala’s business operations.
They were intended to defend and expand Gala’s market share against growing
competition and thus enhance the sustainability and profitability of Claimant’s
investment. Disputes affecting these objectives thus are directly related to
Claimant’s investment as controlling shareholder of Gala.

In accordance with the purposes of the ICSID Convention and consistent with
its wording, the Tribunal therefore affirms its jurisdiction for disputes arising
out of Gala’s treatment in tender proceedings for additional frequencies and
licences.

For this conclusion, it is immaterial whether the receipt of additional

frequencies had already been envisaged in Claimant’s initial business plan and
whether Respondent had made any commitment to support such a business

23

98.

99.

100.

101.

102.

plan. It suffices that the additional frequencies were sought by Gala as part of
its strategy to defend and/or expand its market share.

It is furthermore immaterial whether additional frequencies were sought to
extend the reach of Gala’s existing program or to access new audiences with
newly designed programs. In either case, the applications were part of Gala’s
business strategy to maintain and enhance its position in the Ukrainian market.
They formed an integral part of Gala’s overall business operation. The
Tribunal’s assumption of competence thus extends to applications by Gala for
frequencies with a view to creating new networks for young and mature
audiences”,

b) Claimant has failed to establish a prima facie case of expropriation

 

Respondent has raised the issue that there is an initial threshold that must be
crossed by any claimant arguing expropriation: that the facts adduced show at
least prima facie the legal requirements of expropriation under international
law?!. And in Ukraine’s opinion, the very facts alleged by Claimant are not
capable of constituting expropriation, and consequently the Tribunal should
dismiss this claim for lack of jurisdiction — as did the Tribunal in the Telenor
v. Hungary case”,

Claimant countered Respondent’s objection arguing that for jurisdictional
purposes the prima facie test was in fact easily met. As Claimant explained”,
he was presenting claims for:

- expropriation of a beauty salon;

- expropriation of the rights to the Energy trademark; and

- creeping expropriation of the Gala Radio network, a process that yet has
to be completed but which, in Claimant’s submission, appears imminent.

In the course of the procedure, Claimant has however dropped the claims for
expropriation of the beauty salon and of the Energy trademark”, and the
creeping expropriation of the Gala Radio network is subsumed in the
allegation of harassment and a request for moral damages (see paragraph 500
below).

Respondent’s allegation consequently has become moot.

?° Respondent's Rejoinder, paras.189 and 202.

2! Respondent's Rejoinder, para. 239.

” Telenor Mobile Communication A.S. v. The Republic of Hungary, 1CSID Case No.ARB/04/15, Award
of 13 September 2006.

2B

Respondent's Rejoinder, para. 88.

*4 See Claimant’s Post-Hearing Memorial.

24

VI. ALLEGED BREACHES OF THE SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT

103. In the Settlement Agreement of March 20, 2000, Respondent assumed the
following obligations:

- Clause 13(a):
“By April 15, 2000 the Commission of experts, appointed by the
Respondent, shall examine the quality of broadcasting within the radio
frequencies band of FM 100-108. Based on the conclusions of the
Commission, the Respondent will take necessary, reasonable among
others, technical measures to remove the obstacles (if any) for radio
broadcasting of Gala Radio on FM 100 in Kiev by June 1, 2000”.

- Clause 13(b):
“By May 15, 2000 the Respondent in person of the State Committee on
Communications and Information Technology, agrees to use its best
possible efforts to consider in a positive way the application of Gala
Radio to provide it with the licences for radio frequencies (provided
there are free frequencies bands) in the following cities: [...]
The Claimant can apply for the radio channels in the above cities to the
National Council for TV and Radio Broadcasting (hereinafter called “the
National Council”) in a due course in accordance with the current
legislation after the National Council has been fully personally formed
under the existing law of Ukraine. The Respondent, within the limits of its
powers, will assist for the positive consideration of this issue at the
National Council.
The granting of licences for radio frequencies and broadcasting channels
will be made in accordance with the requirements of Ukrainian
legislation upon payment of the licence fees”.

104. Claimant alleges that Respondent has defaulted on both sets of obligations.
Respondent’s position, on the contrary, is that it has fully complied with these
obligations.

105. Before analysing the parties’ allegation, it is necessary to establish the law

applicable to the Settlement Agreement (VI.1), and the criteria to be applied in
its construction (VI.2).

VI.1. = APPLICABLE LAW

106. Clause 30 of the Settlement Agreement provides that the applicable law shall
be that determined by “Article 55 of the ICSID Additional Facility Arbitration
Rules’. The relevant article in the Additional Facility Rules is in fact Article
54. The mistake is an obvious typographical error, and the Tribunal has no
doubt that the common intent of the parties was to refer to Article 54. In
accordance with this rule the Tribunal shall apply “(a) the law determined by
the conflict of laws rules which it considers applicable and (b) such rules of
international law as the Tribunal considers applicable”.

25

107.

108.

109.

110.

111.

VI.2.

112.

113.

Should the Tribunal make use of this authorization to apply not only a
municipal law, determined through conflict of laws rules, but also the “rules of
international law ... the Tribunal considers applicable”?

The Settlement Agreement contains an extensive chapter called “Principles of
Interpretation and Implementation of the Agreement”, which includes Clauses
20 through 26. These Clauses were reproduced, with very light linguistic
adjustments, from the 1994 UNIDROIT Principles”.

It is impossible to place the UNIDROIT Principles — a private codification of
civil law, approved by an intergovernmental institution — within the traditional
sources of law. The UNIDROIT Principles are neither treaty, nor compilation
of usages, nor standard terms of contract. They are in fact a manifestation of
transnational law.

As the Preamble to the Principles states, they “shall be applied when the
parties have agreed that their contract be governed by them” and they “may
be applied when the parties have agreed that their contract be governed by
‘general principles of law’, the ‘lex mercatoria’ or the like”.

When negotiating the Settlement Agreement, the parties evidently gave
thought to the issue of applicable law, and were apparently unable to reach an
agreement to apply either Ukrainian or US law. In this situation, what the
parties did was to incorporate extensive parts of the UNIDROIT Principles
into their agreement, and to include a clause which authorises the Tribunal
either to select a municipal legal system, or to apply the rules of law the
Tribunal considers appropriate. Given the parties’ implied negative choice of
any municipal legal system, the Tribunal finds that the most appropriate
decision is to submit the Settlement Agreement to the rules of international
law, and within these, to have particular regard to the UNIDROIT Principles.

INTERPRETATION

The parties have discussed the principles of interpretation to be applied to the
Settlement Agreement. This issue is extensively dealt with in Clauses 20
through 26 of the Agreement.

Claimant has emphasized Clauses 20 (“good faith and fair dealing in
international business”), 22 (“common intent of the Parties “), 23 (especially
reference to “preliminary negotiations”) and 26 (non-performance to include
“improper performance or late performance’) as well as Articles 1.7 and 4.1
of the 1994 UNIDROIT Principles. Respondent has referred to Clause 27 of
the Settlement Agreement, pursuant to which the Settlement Agreement
“constitutes the entire agreement between the Parties on the subject matter
hereof and supersedes all prior correspondence, negotiations and
understandings between them with respect to the matters covered herein”.
Ukraine also relies on Article 5.5 of the 1994 UNIDROIT Principles (“the way

5 The 1994 UNIDROIT Principles have now been superseded by the 2004 edition.

26

114.

115.

116.

VI.3.

117.

in which the obligation is expressed in the contract’) as the primary factor in
determining the scope of an obligation.

The Tribunal agrees with Claimant that the “common intent” of the parties
determines the scope of contractual obligations. However, the analysis of the
common intent must start from the wording of the contract; and it must be
presumed that the wording, as understood by a reasonable impartial person,
properly reflects the common intent. While this presumption may be rebutted,
the party doing so bears the burden of proof that the common intent differs
from the wording. “Good faith” and “fairness in the market place” arguments
are appropriate for interpreting ambiguous wording and filling lacunae in the
text, but they can scarcely prevail against the clear wording of a contractual
provision.

In accordance with Clause 23 of the Settlement Agreement, preliminary
negotiations must — among other factors - be taken into account “for
interpreting this Agreement”. But Clause 27 provides that the Settlement
Agreement “supersedes all prior correspondence, negotiations and
understandings”. Read together, these Clauses require that expectations raised
during the negotiations of the Settlement Agreement must be reflected in the
text of the Agreement. The text of the Settlement Agreement is the only
source of obligations. The fact that an undertaking was discussed, or even
orally agreed to during the negotiation phase, is not enough. The obligation
must have been recorded in the Settlement Agreement. If the Settlement
Agreement does include an obligation, then the scope of the undertaking can
be construed in accordance with the expectations of the parties during the
negotiation. Without support in the text, expectations nurtured by Claimant do
not give rise to contractual obligations of Respondent.

Claimant argues that Respondent has breached its obligations under the
Settlement Agreement to correct interferences (VI.3.) and to award 11 FM
frequencies (VI.4). Each allegation will be examined separately.

RESPONDENT’S FAILURE TO CORRECT INTERFERENCES

Clause 13(a) of the Settlement Agreement sets out Respondent’s undertaking
on this matter as follows:

 

“By April 15, 2000 the Commission of experts, appointed by the
Respondent, shall examine the quality of broadcasting within the radio
frequencies band of FM 100-108. Based on the conclusions of the
Commission, the Respondent will take necessary, reasonable among
others, technical measures to remove the obstacles (if any) for radio
broadcasting of Gala Radio on FM 100 in Kiev by June 1, 2000”.

27

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.

123.

Claimant argues that Respondent defaulted on its obligations under the above
provision by failing to”:

- appoint a Commission of experts;

- examine the quality of broadcasting on FM 100 between March 20, 2000
(execution of the Settlement Agreement) and April 15, 2000; and

- cure interference with Gala’s FM 100 frequency by June 1, 2000.

According to Claimant, such interference “has continued unabated from prior
to the time of the Settlement Agreement until today”” (August 2008), and
“there was ongoing work between UCRF personnel and engineers from Gala
Radio to attempt to cure the problem and Claimant had indeed continually
complained about the existing interference on Gala’s 100 FM frequency”.

Respondent counters that the function of the “Commission of Experts” was
performed by the State Centre, which under Ukrainian law was in charge of
detecting interferences with radio frequencies and was adequately equipped for
that task. Between January 1999 and March 2000, the State Centre carried out
a series of measurements and tests regarding alleged interference with FM
100; and tests on March 9 and 10, 2000 showed that no interference existed at
that time with Gala’s FM 100.

According to Respondent, there was no interference with FM 100 between
March 20 (the date of the execution of the Settlement Agreement) and June 1,
2000 (the final date for remedial measures against any interference under
Clause 13(a))?. Only a total of seven complaints about interferences were
received from Claimant, the first on January 30, 2002 and the other between
July 2004 and June 2007; no complaint was received in 2000 and 2001. The
complaints in January 2002 and thereafter related to incidents that had arisen
long after June 2000 and were thus outside the scope of the Settlement
Agreement. Claimant consistently cooperated with the State Centre on the
matter of interference and, before the institution of the present arbitral
proceedings, Claimant never insisted on the appointment of an ad hoc-expert
commission for examining interferences with Gala’s FM 100.

Claimant has presented three specific breaches by Respondent of its
obligations under Clause 13(a):

- the State Centre is not the appropriate “Commission of Experts” (A);

- the interferences were not examined as provided for in the Settlement
Agreement (B); and

- insufficient measures were taken to correct interferences (C).

These contentions will be analysed in the following sections.

?6 Claimant's Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 54.
27 Claimant's Reply Memorial, para.125.

?8 Claimant's Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 46.
*° Respondent's Rejoinder, para. 291.

28

A)

124.

125.

126.

127.

128.

B)

129.

130.

The State Centre as the “Commission of Experts”

Clause 13(a) of the Settlement Agreement entrusts the duty to examine the
interferences to “the Commission of experts, appointed by the Respondent’. It
does not require that the commission be constituted ad hoc.

Furthermore, Clause 13(a) clearly states that the Commission be appointed
exclusively by Respondent, without participation of Claimant in the
appointment process. The provision does not include any requirements for the
composition of the commission, such as a representation of several agencies,
or the inclusion of independent experts. Respondent was therefore free to
entrust the tasks under Clause 13(a) to any group of experts with the technical
skills to do the job.

Respondent chose the State Centre as the “Commission of Experts” with the
duty to perform the examinations required under Clause 13(a). Claimant has
not pleaded that the State Centre was unfit to examine the alleged
interferences. In fact, the State Centre is the public entity which in accordance
with Ukrainian legislation supervises interferences in radio frequencies, and it
is adequately equipped to perform this task. To the Tribunal, the choice of the
State Centre is appropriate, given the wording of the Settlement Agreement,
and reasonable, given its experience and scope of activity.

There is one further argument: the record shows that Claimant never
challenged the State Centre’s role as expert commission before instituting this
arbitration, i.e. for some seven years. To the contrary, he has co-operated with
the State Centre and addressed his complaints to it. He has thus acquiesced to
the role of the State Centre.

The Tribunal can hence not find a violation of Clause 13(a) in Respondent’s
assignment of the State Centre as expert commission.

Examination of Interferences

Pursuant to Clause 13(a), the examination of interferences should have taken
place by April 15, 2000. In fact, such examinations were carried out between
January 1999 and March 10, 2000, i.e. before execution of the Settlement
Agreement on March 20, 2000. Claimant argues that these pre-agreement
examinations are not sufficient to comply with the undertaking assumed by
Ukraine in Clause 13(a) of the Settlement Agreement.

In Respondent’s opinion, the March 2000 tests proved the absence of any
interference with Gala’s FM 100, so that any further tests were pointless. The
Settlement Agreement had been negotiated since November 1999, and during
these negotiations, and as a sign of goodwill, Respondent carried out the
examinations required by Clause 13(a), even before the Settlement Agreement
was signed and came into force. The Settlement Agreement signed on March
20, 2000 provided that the examination of the quality of broadcasting be
performed “by April 15, 2000”. In fact, the examination had thus already been
performed, before the signing of the Settlement Agreement.

29

131.

132.

133.

134.

135.

C)

136.

137.

Does this pre-agreement examination imply a default of Clause 13(a)?

One begins with the literal wording of the Clause, which requires that the
examination be performed “by April 15, 2000”. An examination on March 10,
2000 evidently meets that requirement. But a literal interpretation is just a first
approach. In accordance with Clauses 20 and 22 of the Agreement, the guiding
principles of any interpretation shall be the common intent of the parties and
good faith.

Did the common intent of the parties require that the examination be carried
out after the signature of the Settlement Agreement? There is a very revealing
fact: Claimant never requested that a second examination be performed after
the signature of the Settlement Agreement. If he had, good faith would have
precluded Respondent from refusing the request. But Mr. Lemire never did so.
He accepted, at least tacitly, that the pre-agreement examination complied with
the requirements of the Settlement Agreement.

Article 1.8 of the 2004 UNIDROIT Principles prohibits inconsistent
behaviour:

“A party cannot act inconsistently with an understanding it has caused
the other party to have and upon which that other party reasonably has
acted in reliance to its detriment”.

Mr. Lemire did not require a second examination, and Ukraine reasonably
understood that Claimant felt satisfied with the first examination, and
consequently did not carry out a second one. Mr. Lemire cannot now
reversetrack and argue that Respondent defaulted on its contractual
obligations.

Adoption of Technical Measures To Remove Interferences

Clause 13(a) of the Settlement Agreement obliges Respondent to “take ...
technical measures to remove the obstacles (if any) for radio broadcasting of
Gala Radio on FM 100 ... by June 1, 2000”. This language clearly limits the
scope of the obligation to obstacles that existed before June 1, 2000; obstacles
that might have arisen after this date fall outside the scope of the Settlement
Agreement. (As to Respondent’s alleged duty to cure such obstacles under the
BIT, see paragraph 493 below).

To find a breach of the Settlement Agreement, it is therefore crucial that
interferences with Gala’s FM 100 preexisted June 1, 2000. Claimant has
pleaded this by alleging that interference “has continued unabated from prior
to the time of the Settlement Agreement until today*””. Respondent, on the
other hand, argues that no interference occurred between March 10 and June 1,
2000 and that any interference which occurred long after June 1, 2000 was
isolated and cannot be traced back to a cause pre-existing on June 1, 200071.

*° Claimant's Reply Memorial, para. 125.
+! Respondent's Rejoinder, para. 291-293.

30

138.

139.

140.

141.

VL4.

142.

As evidence for his assertion, Claimant presented a DVD of July 30, 2008°2
and witness statements on interferences of Messrs. Lemire and Denisenko™
(a manager of Gala). The witness statements, while confirming several
interferences after June 2000, do not prove that the cause of such interferences

pre-dated June 2000.

Claimant has submitted seven letters to the State Centre or the National
Council complaining about interferences with FM 100*°. However, these
letters date from January 2002 to June 2007; they do not offer any indication,
let alone evidence, that the cause pre-dated June 2000. Respondent, on the
other hand, has submitted some eighty documents with test results showing
that at different times after June 2000, there was no interference with Gala’s
FM 100°.

If interferences with FM 100 had been observed between March and June
2000, Claimant could at that time have requested the examinations and
remedial measures foreseen in Clause 13(a) of the Settlement Agreement. Yet,
there is no record of any complaint or other action of Claimant in this respect
during the period March 2000 through January 30, 2002.

On the basis of the above record and in light of the language of Clause 13(a),
the Tribunal concludes that Claimant has failed to prove a violation of the
Settlement Agreement in this respect.

ALLOCATION OF FREQUENCIES

The second allegation presented by Claimant refers to the granting of
frequencies to Gala. Under Clause 13(b) of the Settlement Agreement,
Respondent assumed several obligations with respect to the allocation of radio
frequencies and broadcasting licences to Gala in 11 cities. The Clause reads as
follows:

“By May 15, 2000 the Respondent, in the person of the State Committee
on Communications and Information Technology, agrees to use its best
possible efforts to consider in a positive way the application of Gala
Radio to provide it with the licences for radio frequencies (provided
there are free frequencies bands) in the following cities: Kharkiv, Lviv,
Donetsk, Zaporizhya, Lugansk, Simpheropol, Dniepropetrovsk, Odessa,
Vynnitsa, Kryviy Rog, Uzhgorod.

The Claimant can apply for the radio channels in the above cities to the
National Council for TV and Radio Broadcasting (hereinafter called “the
National Council”) in a due course in accordance with the current

* Claimant's Exhibit CM-96.

 

tatement of Mr. Joseph Lemire dated 14 November 2008, p. 18 et seq.
tatement of Mr. Sergey Denisenko dated 14 November 2008, pp. 7 and 8.

* Claimant's Exhibits CM-24, CM-63, CM-88, CM-114, CM-115 and CM-154; Respondent's Exhibit R-

82.

* See Respondent’s Exhibits R-29, R-63, R-87, R-88, R-104, R-140, R-141, R-146, R-149, R-155, R-
205, R-314, R-315, R-316, R-317, R-318, R-322, R-326, R-347, R-369 and R-396.

31

143.

144.

145.

146.

147.

148.

legislation after the National Council has been fully personally formed
under the existing law of Ukraine. The Respondent, within the limits of its
powers, will assist for the positive consideration of this issue at the
National Council.

The granting of licences for radio frequencies and broadcasting channels
will be made in accordance with the requirements of Ukrainian
legislation upon payment of the licence fees”.

Summary of facts

Under Ukrainian law, broadcasting requires both (i) a “radio frequency
licence” from the State Committee on Communications and Information
Technology and (ii) a “broadcasting licence” from the National Council. The
National Council is a regulatory body established directly by law”,
independent of the Government and reporting to both the President and the
Parliament of Ukraine.

Delivery of the licences required

Claimant obtained all the licences mentioned in Clause 13(b) by October 9,
2002, i.e. within a period of some thirty months from the date of the
Settlement Agreement.

The 11 radio frequency licences from the State Committee were obtained
relatively expeditiously — two of them prior to the Settlement Agreement, four
on April 14, 2000, another four on June 13, 2000, and the last on September 1,
2000.

The broadcasting licences suffered longer delays: two were received prior to
the Settlement Agreement, seven on September 18, 2001, one on March 26,
2002, and the last on October 9, 2002.

Two broadcasting licences had already been awarded by the National Council
prior to the Settlement Agreement. Thereafter, the National Council was
temporarily inoperative. It was reconstituted in June 2000. After building the
necessary administrative capacities, it resumed issuance of broadcasting
licences in January 2001. Under the Ukrainian Law on Television and Radio
Broadcasting, such licences were awarded on the basis of competitive tenders.

At its first meeting after its reconstitution on January 1, 2001, the National
Council focused on issuing broadcasting licences to companies which were
broadcasting on frequencies allocated to them by the State Committee during
the time when the National Council was inoperative. Claimant was excluded
from this tender. Shortly thereafter, on March 22, 2001, the National Council
announced a tender, including eight of the nine frequencies still expected by
Claimant under Clause 13(b) of the Settlement Agreement. The broadcasting
licences for seven of these frequencies were granted to Gala on September 18,

57 Article 5, Law on Television and Radio Broadcasting dated December 21, 1993.

32

149.

150.

151.

152.

A)

153.

154.

155.

2001. In March and October 2002, Claimant received the last two outstanding
broadcasting licences.

Four of the 11 frequencies allocated to Claimant under the Settlement
Agreement were subsequently contested by the Armed Forces of Ukraine.
These challenges were eventually resolved in 2008.

Violations asserted by Claimant

Claimant alleges seven violations of Clause 13(b) of the Settlement
Agreement:

- late issuance of frequency licences by the State Committee (A);

- late constitution of the National Council (B);

- award of licences to other companies at National Council’s first meeting
in January 2001 (C);

- failure of National Council promptly to acknowledge the Settlement
Agreement as binding (D);

- late award of broadcasting licences by National Council (E);

- allocation of low powered frequencies (F); and

- allocation of four frequencies which were contested by the Armed Forces
of Ukraine (G).

Respondent denies all of the alleged violations.
Each alleged breach will be analysed seriatim.
Issuance of Radio Frequencies by the State Committee

Under Clause 13(b), paragraph | of the Settlement Agreement, “by May 15,
2000 the Respondent, in the person of the State [Committee] agrees to use its
best possible efforts to consider in a positive way the application of Gala
Radio to provide it with the licences for [11] radio frequencies [...]”. In
accordance with the express terms of this contractual provision, Respondent
undertook only to apply its best efforts, so that the applications from Gala to
the State Committee would be granted by May 15, 2000 — not to achieve that
result.

Article 5.1.4 of the 2004 UNIDROIT Principles defines the duty of best efforts
in the following terms:

“[...] To the extent that an obligation of a party involves a duty of best
efforts in the performance of an activity, that party is bound to make such
efforts as would be made by a reasonable person of the same kind in the
same circumstances”.

For Claimant to establish a violation of this best efforts obligation, it is not

sufficient to prove that by May 15, 2000 the 11 radio frequency licences had
not been granted — the required test is that he produce evidence showing that

33

156.

157.

158.

159.

B)

160.

161.

162.

163.

Ukraine has failed to make such efforts as would be made by a reasonable
government in the same circumstances.

What is the factual situation?

In accordance with the Settlement Agreement Ukraine had to use its best
efforts to grant the frequency licences within two months of signature
(signature was on March 20, and the deadline was May 15). Of the 11 licences
envisaged, six were granted by the State Committee before the May 15, 2000
deadline, another four by June 13, 2000 (i.e. within one month of May 15) and
the last one on September 1, 2000 (within 2 /2 months of the deadline).

Ukraine’s efforts to induce its State Committee to grant the licences resulted in
11 of the 12 licences being issued within one month of the deadline. One
licence was then granted with 2 /2 months delay.

In the Tribunal’s opinion, these delays do not amount to a violation of
Ukraine’s best efforts obligation. There is often a gap between political
decision and bureaucratic compliance. Paragraph 3 of Clause 13(b) explicitly
requires that “the granting of licences ... will be made in accordance with the
requirements of Ukrainian legislation”. There is no evidence that Ukraine
abated its pressure on the State Committee to perform. The State Committee
issued the licences within time limits which are not unreasonable in the
context of Ukrainian administrative practices.

Late Constitution of the National Council

It is undisputed that the National Council — which had been founded in 1993 —
became inoperative in March 1999, because its members were not appointed.
It remained inoperative until it was reconstituted in June 2000.

Claimant argues that the time period while the National Council was
inoperative was abnormal and could not legitimately be expected**, This
constitutes, in Claimant’s opinion, a violation of the Settlement Agreement,
and specifically of Respondent’s obligation of good faith and fair dealing
(Clause 20 of the Settlement Agreement).

The Tribunal is unconvinced.

The Settlement Agreement lacks any obligation to reconstitute the National
Council, nor even an indication of when this could happen. To the contrary,
Clause 13(b), paragraph 2, specifically states that applications for broadcasting
licences must be made “after the National Council has been fully personally
formed’, without referring to any time frame — an explicit acceptance by
Claimant that he was aware that the National Council was not operative at the
time, and that the political decision to designate new members had to be
implemented before the granting of the licences.

** Claimant's Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 57.1.

34

164.

C)

165.

166.

167.

168.

169.

D)

170.

The National Council was in fact reconstituted in June 2000, three months
after the signature of the Settlement Agreement. Nothing in the Settlement
Agreement legitimizes an expectation on the part of Claimant of a faster
rehabilitation of the National Council. The absence of any time frame, and the
explicit warning in Clause 13(b), paragraph 2, that Gala’s applications will
have to wait for the reconstitution of the National Council, point to the
contrary.

Failure of National Council To Promptly Acknowledge the Settlement
Agreement as Binding

When the National Council was eventually reconstituted in June 2000,
Claimant immediately made numerous attempts to contact its members and to
establish the process for obtaining the frequencies. In Claimant’s opinion, the
National Council’s lack of reaction violated Ukraine’s duties to act in good
faith (Clause 20) and to cooperate (Clause 24)”.

Claimant’s argument is not totally accurate.

It is undisputed that on March 20, 2001 the National Council adopted its
Resolution No. 36 in which it decided to “recognize priority position of CJSC
Radio Company Gala” in the allocation of broadcasting licences for the cities
listed in Clause 13(b). It is immaterial whether the National Council’s decision
thus acknowledged a legal obligation, or whether it followed political
considerations. In any case, it implies an acknowledgement of the Settlement
Agreement and it granted Claimant the best position that he could expect.

Was this acknowledgement by the National Council unduly late?

The National Council had just started in January 2001 the process of
organizing tenders for broadcasting licences. Given the complexities
surrounding the Gala decision (reconciling “positive consideration” of
Claimant’s interests under the Settlement Agreement with the independence of
the National Council and competing interests of other applicants), the March
20, 2001 decision cannot be considered as unduly late.

Award of Licences to Other Companies at National Council’s First
Meeting in January 2001

The Settlement Agreement regulates the issuance of broadcasting licences by
the National Council in subparagraphs II and III of Clause 13(b) (reproduced
above). These provisions create an obligation by Ukraine to “assist [Claimant]
for the positive consideration of this issue [the awarding of licences] by the
National Council’. This obligation is not absolute, but subject to important
caveats:

* Claimant's Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 57.3.

35

171.

172.

173.

174.

first of all, there is no time limit for the awarding of the licences (the
May 15, 2000 deadline only works for the licences from the State
Committee);

second, Ukraine’s obligation to assist is qualified with the words “within
the limits of [Respondent’s] power’ — thus acknowledging that, in
accordance with the law, the National Council is an independent public
entity;

third, Claimant could apply “in a due course ... after the National
Council has been fully personally formed”,

fourth, application and granting of the licences were to be “in accordance
with the requirements of Ukrainian legislation”; Clause 16 specifically
added that “the Agreement shall not be treated as a document granting
any rights, benefits or privileges which are different or additional to the
ordinary rights and obligations of a foreign investor in Ukraine in
accordance with the Ukrainian laws and international treaties to which
Ukraine is a party”.

The National Council held its first tender in January 2001, ie. some six
months after its reconstitution. This time was used by the National Council to
build the logistics and administrative capacities for proper tender procedures.
No fault can be found in the fact that the National Council gave first priority to
creating the enabling logistics and administrative capacities for such
proceedings.

In its first tender in January 2001, the National Council did not include any of
the frequencies for which Gala had received frequencies from the State
Committee. Rather, the National Council focused only on frequencies on
which radio stations had been broadcasting without a valid broadcasting
licence at that time.

Claimant submits that the organization of this first tender, from which Gala
was excluded, implied a breach of the Settlement Agreement on two different
counts:

first, the National Council should have taken the opportunity of the first
meeting to act on the licences for Gala; and

second, the very existence of the first tender proves that radio stations
existed which were broadcasting only with a licence from the State
Committee, but without a licence from the National Council; since Gala
already had licences from the State Committee, it should have been
authorized to broadcast straight away.

The Tribunal disagrees with Claimant’s first argument. Nothing in the
Settlement Agreement implies that the National Council was bound to give
first priority to Claimant. The National Council decided first to regularize
broadcasting outside the law, which had developed during the time when it
had been inoperative. This prioritization cannot be challenged under the
Settlement Agreement. (As to the claim for violation of the Fair and Equitable
Treatment (“FET”) standard defined in the BIT, see paragraph 410 below).

36

175.

176.

177.

178.

E)

179.

180.

The second argument merits a more in-depth analysis. Respondent itself has
acknowledged that during the period when the National Council became
inoperative, “the State [Committee] became the central authority of the
executive power, administering communications and radio frequencies of
Ukraine and it developed the practice of granting licences for use of radio
frequencies before the tenders for frequencies were announced”, What
happened was illegal: under Ukrainian law, a radio station could not start
broadcasting until it had obtained the necessary authorization from the
National Council. Notwithstanding the legal requirements, during the 15-
month period when the National Council was inoperative, certain Ukrainian
companies were de facto awarded frequencies and authorized to broadcast,
although they had only received the authorization from the State Committee.

Given this factual situation, Claimant argues that it could and should have
been awarded frequencies and authorized to broadcast, once it had obtained
the authorization from the State Committee in the summer of 2000, without
having to wait for the reconstitution of the National Council and its formal
tender procedure. And that, by not having done so, Ukraine violated its
obligations under the Settlement Agreement.

After due consideration and some hesitation, the Tribunal rejects Claimant’s
argument. In the Settlement Agreement, Ukraine could not undertake to
perform acts contrary to Ukrainian law nor to authorise Claimant to operate
new frequencies without the licence from the National Council; this would
have violated the LTR. And Clause 13(b) specifically refers to the need for the
National Council to be reconstituted and to issue the necessary licences.

But while it was agreed between Claimant and Respondent to act as required
by Ukrainian law, Ukraine de facto authorized domestic radio companies to
start broadcasting without the necessary authorizations. This situation was then
cured in the first tender organized by the National Council after its
reconstitution. While these actions do not constitute a violation of the
Settlement Agreement, their status under the BIT will be analysed as such
below at paragraph 410.

Late Award of Broadcasting Licences by National Council

The facts regarding the issuance of the broadcasting licences by National
Council can be summarized as follows.

Facts

On March 1, 2000 (i.e. before the Settlement Agreement had actually been
signed), the Minister of Economy of Ukraine wrote a proposal to the Cabinet
of Ministers in order to “entrust the [State Committee] and the [National
Council] to allocate to CJSC RC “Gala” the following frequency assignments
The frequencies referred to were five of those mentioned in the
Settlement Agreement. Respondent has not provided any similar proposal for

“° Respondent's Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 207.
4! Respondent’s Exhibit R-27.

37

the remaining six frequencies promised in the Settlement Agreement, nor has
Respondent submitted any decision from the Cabinet of Ministers approving
the proposal of the Minister of Economy.

181. The record shows no further documents relating to the National Council,
before a letter dated February 22, 2001 sent by Mr. Lemire to the Ministry of
the Economy”. In the meantime, the State Committee had issued its licences,
and the National Council had been reconstituted. Mr. Lemire’s letter starts by
stating that “we have practically reached finalization of performance of the
terms of the Dispute settlement Agreement”. This recital is important, because
it shows that, at that moment, Claimant was convinced that Ukraine had not
breached its obligations. Mr. Lemire then goes on, stating that a “serious
problem” has arisen with the National Council because “now this authority
says that our frequencies are subject to a tender that will begin in some
weeks”. He adds “we understand that such situation has arisen due to the fact
that the National Council is not properly informed” and asks the Ministry of
the Economy to intervene.

182. The record does not show the actions adopted by the Ministry of the Economy,
but some advice must have been transmitted from the Ministry of the
Economy because it is a fact that three weeks later, on March 20, 2001, the
National Council decided to “recognize priority position of CJSC Radio
Company Gala’ in the allocation of broadcasting licences for the cities listed
in Clause 13(b)°.

183. Claimant has argued that in a meeting on March 19, 2001 the Chairman of the
National Council, Mr. Kholod, did not consider the Settlement Agreement as
binding, stating that the National Council is a “constitutional independent
body, not subordinated to the government” and “that the government cannot
adopt any act influencing the development of TV/radio broadcasting in
Ukraine”. Claimant has produced a transcript of the meeting, which Mr.
Lemire prepared at that time“. Mr. Kholod’s statement has not been
challenged and the Tribunal is inclined to accept it as true. But what is
undeniable is that one day after the meeting, the National Council approved an
official decision recognizing Gala’s priority position to receive the frequencies
promised in the Settlement Agreement.

184. Not only that, on March 22, 2001, i.e. only two days after this decision in
favour of Gala, the National Council announced a new tender for frequencies,
which included eight of the 11 frequencies mentioned in Clause 13(b) of the
Settlement Agreement. In meetings in June and July 2001, the National
Council decided to allocate seven of these frequencies to Gala; and the seven
broadcasting licences were issued on September 18, 2001. Two other licences
had already been issued on October 9, 1997 (long before the Settlement
Agreement)”. Two remained pending — those in Dniepropetrovsk and Lviv -
and were eventually issued on March 26 and October 9, 2002, respectively.

* Respondent’s Exhibit R-39.
43 Respondent’s Exhibit R-40.
* Claimant's Exhibit CM-101.
45 Tn Kryviy Rog and Uzhgorod.

38

185.

186.

187.

188.

189.

190.

191.

192.

The frequency in Dniepropetrovsk was put to tender on July 26, 2001, but
because of accumulated workload of the National Council, it was not approved
until March 2002. As regards Lviv, the frequency under discussion had
already been granted to other radio companies, whose rights had first to be
cancelled, and this justifies the delay.

Summing up, in the end the National Council eventually granted to Gala all 11
broadcasting licences mentioned in Clause 13(b). Two had been issued before
the Settlement Agreement, seven were issued in September 2001, one in
March 2002 and the final one in October 2002.

Claimant alleges that this late performance of the Settlement Agreement is
tantamount to non-performance, and asks the Tribunal to declare that Ukraine
has breached the terms of the Settlement Agreement.

Ukraine’s alleged breach

The Tribunal acknowledges that there were delays in the issuance of the
broadcasting licences by the National Council. But this is not really the point
under discussion. What is relevant is whether Ukraine has breached the terms
of the Settlement Agreement and for this, it is paramount to look at the actual
text of what was agreed.

As noted above, Clause 13(b) of the Settlement Agreement does not establish
obligations of the National Council, nor does it create a deadline for the
National Council to issue its decisions. It simply states Ukraine’s commitment
to “assist for the positive consideration of this issue at the National Council”.

The difference between Clause 13(a) and Clause 13(b) is striking. The first
Clause creates a best efforts obligation to issue the State Committee’s
authorization within an agreed time frame. It proves that when the parties
wanted to establish obligations and time limits, they were perfectly capable of
doing so in clear and unambiguous terms. Clause 13(b), however, lacks any
specific time frame, and only refers to Ukraine’s commitment to “assist”
Mr. Lemire in his endeavours vis-a-vis the National Council.

Did Ukraine comply with its part of the bargain, assisting Claimant “within the
limits of its power” and “in accordance with the requirements of Ukrainian
legislation” in the obtaining of the licences?

The record suggests that the Ministry of the Economy’s assistance was helpful
indeed. Mr. Lemire wrote for the first time complaining on February 22,
2001. The National Council’s initial attitude had been rather negative, as
proven by the meeting with its Chairman. This was overcome, undoubtedly
because of advice from the Government. On March 19, 2001 — one month
after Mr. Lemire’s first complaint — the National Council reversed its opinion
and acknowledged Claimant’s rights to the licences. Two days later, the first

39

193.

F)

194.

195.

196.

197.

tender was launched and nine of the 11 frequencies were duly awarded by
September 2001 — not bad a record for an agency which had been recently
reconstituted. The two other licences were delayed — one just because of
bureaucratic delays, the other because of underlying problems with the
entitlement to the frequency.

The facts proven in this arbitration do not substantiate Claimant’s claim that
Ukraine failed to assist Claimant in his endeavour to obtain the broadcasting
licences required from the National Council. In hindsight, it is unfortunate for
Claimant that he only bargained for such a weak commitment from the
counterparty. But the terms agreed are lex contractus, and it is those terms
which the Tribunal must apply.

Allocation of Low-Powered Frequencies

The power of frequencies allocated to Gala ranged from 0.1 to 4kW with an
average of 1,17 kW. On all its frequencies combined, Gala reaches some 22%
of the population of Ukraine.

Claimant complains that the power of the frequencies allocated to Gala under
the Settlement Agreement was far below his legitimate expectations and failed
to meet his business purposes*°, He alleges that in the negotiations of the
Settlement Agreement as well as in pre-settlkement communications with the
National Council and other agencies of Respondent, much higher powers had
been envisaged. In this respect, Claimant refers to correspondence between the
National Council and State Inspection of Electric Communication of July 18
and October 18, 1995 which suggested the availability of much higher
powered frequencies for Claimant*”.

The Settlement Agreement, in any case, is silent on the power of frequencies
sought by Claimant. Nor does it include any reference to Claimant’s business
purposes — e.g. his desire to cover the whole territory of Ukraine - from which
a minimum power could be inferred. While the preliminary negotiations
between the parties and the purpose of the Settlement Agreement are to be
taken into account in determining the common intent of the parties (per
Clauses 23(a) and (d) of the Settlement Agreement), Clause 27 provides that
the Settlement Agreement “constitutes the entire agreement between the
Parties on the subject matter hereof and supersedes all prior correspondence,
negotiations and understandings...”. This disqualifies prior correspondence
and negotiations as a basis of obligations deliberately not mentioned in the
Settlement Agreement. Claimant can therefore not derive a claim from pre-
Settlement Agreement correspondence and negotiations.

 

Furthermore, the power of the frequencies awarded to Claimant was not
abnormally low. Claimant has acknowledged that the average power of the
frequencies allocated to him matched that of frequencies allocated to major
competitors**. If Mr. Lemire felt that he was entitled to higher powered

“© Claimant's Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 57.12.
* Claimant's Exhibits CM-1 and CM-2.
“8 Claimant's Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 57.12.

40

198.

199.

G)

200.

201.

202.

203.

* Claimant's Po!

frequencies than his competitors, he would have had to include such
entitlement in the Settlement Agreement. That has not happened.

Finally, Claimant learned the actual power of the frequencies allocated to him
by September 1, 2000, when Gala received the licences from the State
Committee. He thus knew the power of the frequencies on September 20, 2000
when the Settlement Agreement was recorded as the 2000 Award. Claimant
did not seek any amendment of the Settlement Agreement, nor did he reserve
his position.

The power of the frequencies was specified in the announcement of the tenders
by the National Council. Claimant applied for these frequencies without
complaining about the power. Thus, even if Claimant had been entitled to
higher powered frequencies (which in the Tribunal’s opinion does not derive
from the Settlement Agreement), he acquiesced with the power of the
allocated frequencies. To claim now that this lack of power gives rise to a
breach of the Settlement Agreement denotes inconsistent behaviour, contrary
to Article 1.8 of the 2004 UNIDROIT Principles.

Allocation of Four Frequencies Which Were Contested by the Armed
Forces of Ukraine

Claimant finally complains that four of the frequencies allocated to him were
contested by the Armed Forces of Ukraine”. In Claimant’s opinion, Ukraine
failed to de-conflict with the Army the frequencies awarded to Gala.

Respondent counters that the contests were prompted by Gala itself, which
decided to change the location of its radio transmitters in three cities, by a
distance of between 4.6 and 1.87 km, and increased the height of its antenna
from 55 to 70 m in another’. These changes require the approval of the State
Centre, which issues such authorization only with the approval by the General
Headquarters of the Armed Forces. What happened in these four cases is that
the General Headquarters of the Armed Forces refused to approve the changes.
Refusal however did not mean that the frequencies became contested — Gala
Radio in fact continued to broadcast on them. Gala was required only to
change the locations and/or parameters of the transmitters following the
recommendations of the State Centre, and obtained all required permits in
2008.

In the Tribunal’s opinion, the difficulties incurred by Claimant with regard to
these four frequencies do not constitute a breach of Respondent’s obligations
under the Settlement Agreement.

Under Clause 13(b) paragraph 2 Ukraine is bound to “assist” Claimant “within
the limits of its powers” to obtain the authorization of the National Council.
There is no express reference to the Armed Forces. But in an interpretation
based on good faith, and bearing in mind that Clause 24 creates an obligation
for each party to cooperate with the other, the Tribunal is prepared to admit

 

Hearing Memorial, para. 57.13.

* Respondent’s Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 271.

41

204.

205.

206.

207.

208.

that the obligation to assist should be extended to encompass not only the
National Council, but also any other institution controlled by Ukraine.
Consequently, in accordance with the Settlement Agreement, Respondent was
under an obligation to assist Mr. Lemire in obtaining or maintaining the
necessary authorizations from the Armed Forces.

Did Respondent fail to do so?

Claimant has argued that a senior manager of the State Centre admitted that
Ukraine failed to de-conflict the four frequencies and apologized for the
mistake by stating that “unfortunately we failed to coordinate with military
department’. An analysis of the evidence submitted by Claimant to prove
this allegation does not support the conclusion. Claimant has presented a
summary, prepared by his own officers, of a meeting on February 21, 2005
with Mr. Zhebrodski, a senior manager of the State Centre. The exact
exchange of words which, in accordance with that summary, took place
between the officer of Gala and Mr. Zhebrodski is the following:

“[...] Dima: Also, we have had interferences for the past few months and
we have uncertain situation with Donetsk...

Zhebrodski: I am going to call military department in Donetsk, what
happened is back in 2000 we had a straight order to give you licence in
Donetsk (107,2 fm) and unfortunately we failed to coordinate it with
military dpt. Are they complaining?

Dima: No complaints so far, we have been working there for quite
awhile.

Zhebrodski: Good. I am sure we can sort it out at least I am gonna try

[...]”.

The exchange of words between the officer of Gala and the senior manager of
the Centre does not prove a breach by Ukraine of its obligation to assist
Claimant. Quite to the contrary. What it shows is that, up to that moment
(2005), the Army had not complained about the changes in Donetsk, that Gala
was broadcasting there and that the State Centre was offering its help if a
problem with the Army eventually arises. The problem afterwards
materialized, and it was then, it appears, satisfactorily settled by 2008.

Summing up, the Tribunal is of the opinion that the problems which Gala
encountered with the Army regarding four frequencies, which were eventually
solved, do not amount to a default by Ukraine of its obligations under the
Settlement Agreement.

For the reasons explained above, the Tribunal concludes that, although
Claimant encountered difficulties and delays in the obtaining of the
frequencies expected under the Settlement Agreement, and although the end

*! Claimant's Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 57.13.
* Claimant’s Exhibit CM-143.

42

209.

VIL1.

210.

211.

result may not have satisfied all the expectations harboured by Claimant,
Respondent did not breach any of the obligations it had assumed in that
Agreement.

VII. ALLEGED VIOLATIONS OF THE BIT

The Tribunal will first summarize Claimant’s general allegations (VII.1), then
Respondent’s (VII.2), before analyzing and deciding the claims:

- in first instance, the Tribunal will study the alleged violation of the FET
standard in the awarding of frequencies, and will effectively come to the
conclusion that certain actions of Respondent are not compatible with
this standard (VIL3);

- asecond section will be devoted to the alleged continuous harassment of
Claimant, and his request for moral damages (VII.4);

- in the next sections the Tribunal will reject Claimant’s additional
allegations, regarding an alleged violation of the FET standard by other
actions performed by Ukraine (VILS) and the applicability of the
“Umbrella Clause” (VII.6); and

- the Tribunal will then decide whether the 2006 amendment of the LTR
and in particular the 50% Ukrainian music requirement amounts to a
violation of the BIT (VII.7), and finally devote a short section to other
allegations submitted by Claimant (VII.8).

CLAIMANT’S GENERAL ALLEGATIONS

Claimant’s starting point is that, after having made the investment in Gala
Radio, he had a legitimate expectation that he would be authorized to increase
the size and audience of his radio company, and to establish three radio
networks in Ukraine aimed at three different age groups. This plan had been
discussed with the National Council members and encouraged by them.

As evidence of his expectations, Claimant especially relies on three
documents, namely:

- aletter of July 18, 1995 from the Chairman of the National Council to the
Chairman of the State Inspection on Electric Communications. This
letter advises that “the National Council...considers possibility to issue a
licence to radio company GALA” and requests the State Inspection “to
consider a possibility to give the company the frequency channels” in 13
cities “up to” a specified power;

- a letter from the Chairman of the State Inspection on Electronic
Communications to Claimant of October 18, 1995 informing of the
availability of high power frequencies in the cities concerned and
advising that the requisite permissions would be issued after Gala had
received the pertinent broadcasting licences from the National Council™;
and

* Claimant's Exhibit CM-1; the English translation by mistake does not include the words “up to” which
appear in the Ukrainian original.
* Claimant’s Exhibit CM-2.

43

212.

213.

214.

215.

216.

217.

- a “Plan of Measures” negotiated between Claimant and the National
Council in 1997 envisaging the allocation of frequencies to set up the
Gala networks.

The main thrust of Claimant’s submission is that his legitimate expectations
were thwarted by Ukraine’s actions in violation of the BIT. Claimant divides

his allegations regarding these violations into four different sections”.

(i): In the first section, Claimant argues that Ukraine has violated the FET
standard applicable to protected investments, and the prohibition of arbitrary
and discriminatory measures, established in Article II.3. (a) and (b) of the BIT.
Respondent’s specific actions, which have resulted in violation, can be divided
in two groups:

- denial by the National Council of nearly 300 applications for frequencies
submitted by Gala or Energy (a company also owned by Claimant), and
illegal award of frequencies to companies other than Gala, during the
period when the National Council was not operative; and

- other actions performed by Respondent, like failure to correct the
interferences on Gala’s 100 FM frequency, failure of the National
Council to acknowledge its obligations under the Settlement Agreement;
allocation of low powered frequencies to Gala; allocation of frequencies
contested by the Army.

Of the alleged violations, the first one, the systematic denial of applications, is
by far the most important one. Claimant argues that the Ukrainian legal
procedure for allocation of frequencies is in itself unfair, inequitable,
discriminatory and arbitrary. The procedure was moreover applied by the
National Council in an unfair, inequitable and discriminatory fashion. It was
tainted by interferences from other political organs of Respondent, including
the President of Ukraine. The National Council’s aim was to preclude Gala
from establishing multiple networks with national coverage. And it was
successful in achieving this.

Claimant specifically refers to six tenders for frequencies, from 2002 through
2008, which in his view demonstrate Respondent’s practice in breach of the
BIT.

(ii): In the second section, Claimant asserts that Respondent is submitting Gala
to continuous harassment, in violation of Article II.3 (a) of the BIT.
Respondent attempted to rely on the “founder” principle to deny Gala Radio
an extension of its licence beyond the expiry date of September 18, 2008.
Furthermore, there have been concerted efforts by the National Council to
force Claimant out of the radio industry through ongoing actions of
harassment and the issuance of unlawful warnings.

Claimant acknowledges that Respondent, after a few years of costly and
lengthy litigation, ultimately cancelled the warnings, renewed the broadcasting

* Claimant's Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 64.

44

218.

219.

VIL.2.

220.

221.

222.

licence and applied the correct fee. But this eventual acceptance of Claimant’s
rights does not provide Ukraine with immunity from paying damages.
Claimant alleges that Respondent’s harassment since the Award has inflicted
significant moral harm for which Respondent should be held liable in an
amount of three million USD.

(iii): In the third section, Claimant submits that the 50% local music
requirement in the LTR implies a violation of Article II.6 of the BIT, namely
of the prohibition to “impose performance requirements ... which specify that
goods and services must be purchased locally, or which impose any other
similar requirements”. Respondent has tried to justify the local music
requirement on public policy grounds. In Claimant’s opinion, the argument
can at best justify an expropriation subject to the payment of the corresponding
damages. The abnormal high level of the requirement and its abrupt
incorporation caused Claimant to suffer loss for 2008 of advertising revenue,
and such loss will continue until the expiration of the licence in 2015.

(iv): Finally, Claimant submits that, as a consequence of the Umbrella Clause
contained in Article II.3 (c) of the BIT, all the contractual breaches of the
Settlement Agreement have also been transformed into violations of the BIT,
which entitle Claimant to be compensated for the damages suffered.

RESPONDENT’S GENERAL ALLEGATIONS

Respondent submits that its legal procedures for tenders involving radio
frequencies are consistent with the requirements of the BIT; the
implementation of these procedures also conforms with the BIT requirements.

The procedures for allocation of frequencies meet the standards of due process
and procedural fairness, including the right to be heard. Frequencies are
awarded by means of tenders announced in the press; prospective participants
may submit their applications within one month of the notice. Such
applications must include an information package. Thereafter, the National
Council reviews the requests applying statutory criteria, and especially valuing
the programming content proposed by each applicant. The meetings of the
National Council are public, and the National Council holds briefings with
representatives of the radio industry. A frequency is awarded to a radio
company if the application receives at least five of the votes of the eight
members of the National Council. All decisions of the National Council are
published on the National Council’s official website. Finally, the decisions of
the National Council are subject to judicial review.

The National Council is an independent body. Each of its members exercises
his or her judgment without external pressure, and Claimant’s allegations of
corruption and undue pressure are unsupported by any evidence. Furthermore,
the LTR was amended in 2006, and since then members may be removed from
their functions only by a joint decision from the Parliament and the President.
Claimant’s allegations of political influence were not corroborated during the
hearing. No member of the National Council has been impeached, no one

45

223.

224.

225.

226.

227.

228.

associated with the National Council has been prosecuted for corruption, and
no one has been convicted of wrongdoing.

Gala Radio was treated in a fair and equitable manner and was not
discriminated against during the tenders. Claimant lost the four tenders which
were analyzed during the hearing for objective reasons. There is no proof of
unfair, inequitable, arbitrary and discriminatory treatment against Claimant.

Respondent also addresses Claimant’s allegations regarding harassment. In
Respondent’s opinion, the procedure and practice of monitoring radio
companies is consistent with Ukraine’s obligations under the BIT. The results
of any inspection are reviewed in a meeting of the National Council, where its
members listen to a presentation of one of them, review a set of documents,
listen to oral explanations from the representative of the radio company, and
only thereafter take a decision.

All radio stations are continuously monitored. Those inspected and sanctioned
are publicly mentioned in the Annual Report of the National Council. None of
Gala’s inspections was conducted in an unfair, inequitable or abusive manner.
The warning issued against Gala on October 5, 2005 sanctioned Gala’s refusal
to produce documents and materials required for the inspection. This warning
was successfully challenged before the Ukrainian Courts. On November 23,
2005 a second warning was issued for violating the quota of broadcasting in
Ukrainian, the law on advertising, and the terms of its licence. The second
warning was also cancelled by the Kiev Court. In May 2006 a third inspection
was carried out. Since Gala had significantly improved its business activities,
compared to previous periods, the National Council decided not to issue a
third warning. There were subsequent inspections in March and June 2008, but
they did not lead to any sanction, although Gala Radio admitted that by
accident it had committed violations of the election legislation.

Other radio companies have also been inspected and received warnings - some
of them three, and the National Council has started court proceedings in five
cases in order to cancel the broadcasting licence.

The 2006 LTR had been debated by members of Parliament for more than
three years, and its purpose was to make Ukrainian Law comply with
European requirements. In Respondent’s opinion, the LTR must be considered
as part of the State’s legitimate right to organize broadcasting. The 50%
Ukrainian music requirement, which requires that either the author, the
composer and/or the performer of 50% of the music broadcast be Ukrainian,
was neither abrupt, nor excessive nor unfair. Gala Radio signed in August
2006 a Memorandum proposed by the National Council for the progressive
implementation of the 50% requirement, and Gala Radio and all its
competitors are presently in compliance. There is no link between the 50%
Ukrainian music quota and the decline in Gala Radio’s ratings.

Respondent finally makes three additional allegations:

- Claimant did not behave as a diligent businessman;

46

VIL3.

229.

VIL3.1.

230.

231.

*° Mr. Lemi

- Gala Radio did not take advantage of available remedies; and
- Claimant abused his position as a foreign investor.

CLAIMANT’S FIRST ALLEGATION: THE VIOLATION OF THE FET STANDARD
IN THE AWARDING OF FREQUENCIES

The main thrust of Claimant’s allegation is that Ukraine has failed to provide
fair and equitable treatment to its investment in Gala, and subjected it to
arbitrary or discriminatory measures. Ukraine rejects both allegations. The
Tribunal will analyze this dispute — which is the basic issue submitted to its
adjudication - in a short introduction and three separate sections:

- the first devoted to the concept of FET standard, as defined in the BIT
(VII.3.2);

- the second to the procedures for awarding frequencies under Ukrainian
law (VII.3.3); and

- the third to the facts surrounding Gala’s applications for frequencies
(VII.3.4).

INTRODUCTION
Claimant

Claimant, Mr. Joseph Charles Lemire, is an American citizen residing in
Ukraine. By profession, Mr. Lemire is a lawyer, although he also has
experience in accounting. He is the owner and chairman of Gala, a closed
joint stock company constituted in 1995 under the laws of Ukraine. His
participation in Gala is held through another Ukrainian company, Mirakom.
He initially purchased 30% of Gala, but since 2006 he indirectly owns 100%
of the company*’. The proven amount of his investment is 236,000 USD.
There is circumstantial evidence that Mr. Lemire has made payments with his
own monies on behalf of Gala. But the record of the actual amounts paid has
not been produced, and Mr. Lemire’s statement that the total exceeds
5,000,000 USD*” has not been locked up with hard evidence. The personal
assets of Mr. Lemire and those of Gala appear to some extent commingled”*.

Gala

Gala is a company which since 1995 operates a contemporary music radio
station. It holds a licence to broadcast on two frequencies in Kyiv and on 12
other frequencies in nine areas of Ukraine. Gala Radio applied for and
received a licence recognizing its status as a national broadcaster on October
17, 2007”. In the late 1990’s, Gala ranked amongst the most popular radio
stations in Ukraine. Claimant acknowledges that its market share has declined
—and attributes this decline to Respondent’s actions.

 

, Hearing Transcript 1, p. 283, atl4.

*7 Mr. Lemire, Hearing Transcript 1, p. 285, at 20 and p. 304, at 9.
*8 Mr. Lemire, Hearing Transcript 1, p. 288, at 25.
* Respondent's Exhibit R-153.

47

232.

233.

234.

235.

236.

Gala has been a reasonably successful company. Its revenues have gone up
from 600,000 USD in the year 2000 to 1.369,000 USD in the year 2007 (with
a profit of 121,000 USD)”. As Respondent’s expert witness says, “while
being small business in a competitive market and risky environment, it is
obvious that Gala has become a successful national radio station, and as
investor, Joseph Charles Lemire has achieved reasonably good results and
revenue growth”! ”

On a qualitative basis, Claimant has alleged and Respondent has accepted that
Gala won the Radio Company of the year award for brand recognition in 1999,
won an award for the best radio program on Olympic News from the Golden
Pen competition organized by journalists and that four of the top 10 disk
jockeys in Ukraine work for Gala, including the well-known DJ Pascha (the
alias of Mr. Pavel Shylko), who testified in this arbitration”.

Mr. Lemire’s relationship with the National Council

Respondent has insisted, throughout the procedure, that Mr. Lemire abused his
position as foreign investor and harassed the National Council with rude,
disrespectful and to some extent even aggressive conduct. Respondent
argues that Mr. Lemire has sent scores of hostile letters to the National
Council, copying the former President of Ukraine, the current President of
Ukraine, the Vice President of the United States, the US Ambassador and
others. He also video-recorded meetings of the National Council.

The relation between Mr. Lemire and the National Council was not always
tense. At the outset of the investment, in 1995, the relationship seems to have
been friendly, and the National Council supported Mr. Lemire’s efforts to
invest in the Ukrainian radio sector. Suddenly the relationship soured in 1996,
for no obvious reason. Asked by the Tribunal why his relationships with the
National Council became hostile, Mr. Lemire has declared under oath that the
reason was that “at one point I was asked for a bribe and I said I would not
pay”. No further evidence of this alleged request for bribes has been
produced.

What is undisputed is that in 1996 Gala Radio sued the National Council
before the Ukrainian Courts, because Gala had been removed from the air by a
decision of the National Council. On February 26, 1997, the Supreme
Arbitration Court of Ukraine ruled in Gala’s favor®. In 1997, Mr. Lemire
initiated the First Arbitration against Ukraine, which eventually led to the
Settlement Agreement and 2000 Award. In 2006 Gala challenged before the

© EBS Expert Report, p. 6.

°! EBS Expert Report, p. 5.

© Claimant's Memorial, para. 117.

® Respondent's Counter Memorial, para. 83.

° Mr. Lemire, Hearing Transcript 1, p. 309, at 3.
® Mr. Lemire, Hearing Transcript 1, p. 166, at 5.

48

237.

238.

239.

240.

Ukrainian Courts, and again successfully, two decisions of the National
Council to issue warnings”. Finally, Mr. Lemire of course started this
arbitration, accusing the National Council of having treated him in “an unfair,
inequitable, arbitrary and discriminatory manner in breach of its BIT
obligations”.

The fact that Mr. Lemire challenged a number of decisions of the National
Council before the Ukrainian Courts and filed two successive investment
arbitrations against Ukraine cannot have helped to improve the climate
between Gala Radio, a company acting in a highly regulated and supervised
legal environment, and the National Council, its regulator and supervisor. The
existence of successive court actions may have been one of the reasons for
deterioration of the relationship. The Tribunal is also convinced that on certain
occasions, Mr. Lemire felt threatened, and that he was afraid that Gala would
be taken off the air by the authorities. There were at least two incidents — the
third inspection, which could have led to a third warning and revocation of the
licence, and the difficulties in obtaining a renewal of Gala Radio’s licence —
where Mr. Lemire’s reaction shows real worry. Mr. Lemire’s tactics vis-a-vis
Gala’s regulator and supervisor may seem high handed and sometimes even
aggressive, but they may have been the only method available to a small,
private radio company in Ukraine owned by a foreigner, to draw attention to
its situation.

Respondent

Respondent in this arbitration is the Republic of Ukraine. The actions and
omissions on which Claimant bases his claims were carried out by the
National Council, the State Centre and the State Committee, all of which are
organs of Ukraine, for which under international law the Republic is
responsible.

As Respondent has explained to the Tribunal, Ukraine became an independent
State on August 24, 1991, and after independence its political, economic and
legal systems underwent a_ substantial transformation®’. Ukraine has
acknowledged that in the initial years of independence, constant political
battles and economic instability caused a lack of coordination in the activities
of state bodies and hampered their ability to create an effective system of
government.

Ukraine is an independent and sovereign state, governed by a Constitution,
which entrusts to Parliament, elected by general democratic vote, the task of
promulgating laws. The Arbitral Tribunal naturally respects the legislative
function or the Ukrainian Parliament. It certainly is not the task of this Arbitral
Tribunal, constituted under the ICSID Convention, to review or second-guess
the rules which the representatives of the Ukrainian people have promulgated.
The powers of this Tribunal are much more limited: they only encompass the
authority to decide on a case-by-case basis whether Ukraine has violated

© Claimant's Exhibit CM-50 and Respondent's Exhibit R- 353.
°7 Respondent’s Memorial, para.18.

49

241.

242.

VII.3.2.

243.

244.

245.

certain guarantees, offered to American investors under the BIT, and to
establish the appropriate remedies.

The respect for Ukraine’s sovereignty is reinforced by the sector in which
Claimant made his investment: radio broadcasting. In all jurisdictions, Radio
and TV are special sectors subject to specific regulation. There are two reasons
for this:

- first, radio frequencies are by technical nature scarce assets, and
consequently the law must articulate systems for allocating licences to
prospective bidders;

- but there is also a second reason: when regulating private activity in the
media sector, States can, and frequently do, take into consideration a
number of legitimate public policy issues; thus, media companies can be
subject to specific regulation and supervision in order to guarantee
transparency, political and linguistic pluralism, protection of children or
minorities and other similar factors.

The exceptional character of media companies, and specifically of radio
broadcasting companies, is accepted in the BIT itself. In its Annex, both the
United States and Ukraine reserve the right to make or maintain limited
exceptions to the national treatment principle (provided for in Article IL.1 of
the BIT) with regard to radio broadcasting stations. The exception does not
affect the principles which are being pleaded by Claimant in this procedure,
but it proves the special sensitivity towards the media shown by both States
when approving the BIT.

THE FET STANDARD AS DEFINED IN THE BIT

The purpose of this section is to determine the general scope and meaning of
the FET standard defined in the BIT.

Article II.3 (a) and (b) of the BIT reads as follows:

“3. (a) Investment shall at all times be accorded fair and equitable
treatment, shall enjoy full protection and security and shall in no case be
accorded treatment less than that required by international law.

(b) Neither Party shall in any way impair by arbitrary or
discriminatory measures the management, operation, maintenance, use,
enjoyment, acquisition, expansion, or disposal of investments. For
purposes of dispute resolution under Articles VI and VII, a measure may
be arbitrary or discriminatory notwithstanding the fact that a Party has
had or has exercised the opportunity to review such measure in the
courts or administrative tribunals of a Party”.

The origin of Article II.3 (a) and (b) can be traced to the 1992 and 1994 US
Model BIT, which proposed the following wording:

“Investments shall at all times be accorded fair and equitable treatment,
shall enjoy full protection and security and shall in no case be accorded

50

246.

A)

247.

248.

249.

treatment less than that required by international law. Neither Party
shall in any way impair by arbitrary and discriminatory measures the
operation, i use, enjoy , acquisition,

expansion or disposal of investments. Each Party shall observe any
obligation it may have entered into with regard to investments”.

Article II.3 of the BIT was thus taken literally from the US Model BIT which
was in force at the time when the BIT was negotiated, with only the addition
of the phrase referring to judicial review. It is a rule of Delphic economy of
language, which manages in just three sentences to formulate a series of wide
ranging principles: FET standard, protection and security standard,
international minimum standard and prohibition of arbitrary or discriminatory
measures.

Customary International Law Minimum Standard and FET Standard

A classic debate in investment arbitration law is whether the FET standard
established by bilateral or multilateral investment treaties coincides with or
differs from the international minimum standard of protection for aliens
imposed by customary international law.

The starting point of this debate is the very definition of the international
minimum standard — a question which is fraught with difficulties. For claims
arising from administrative or legislative acts of Governments — which are the
type of claims typically submitted in investment disputes — the historic leading
case seems to be Roberts”, issued by the United States — Mexico General
Claims Commission in 1926, which defined the minimum treatment as that
required “in accordance with ordinary standards of civilization”. Mr. Roberts,
a US citizen, had been imprisoned in Mexico in what he held to be inhumane
conditions. Mexico had argued that Mexicans were held in identical
conditions. And the Tribunal decided:

“Facts with respect to equality of treatment of aliens and nationals may
be important in determining the merits of a complaint of mistreatment of
an alien. But such equality is not the ultimate test of the propriety of the
acts of authorities in the light of international law. That test is, broadly
speaking, whether aliens are treated in accordance with ordinary
standards of civilization. We do not hesitate to say that the treatment of
Roberts was such as to warrant an indemnity on the ground of cruel and
inhumane imprisonment”.

Roberts is understood to stand for the propositions that a certain treatment may
give rise to international responsibility notwithstanding that it affects citizens
and aliens alike, and that administrative and legislative actions may amount to

®§ As quoted in I. Tudor, “The Fair and Equitable Standard in the International Law of Foreign
Investment” (2008) p. 28.

For a status quaestionis see Paulsson/Petrochilos: “Neer-ly Misled?” ICSID Review: Foreign
Investment Law Journal (2007), vol.22.2, pp. 242-257.

Harry Roberts (U.S.A.) v. United Mexican States; November 2, 1926; U.N. Report of International
Arbitral Awards, IV, p. 71.

Sl

250.

251.

252.

253.

a violation of the customary minimum treatment even if the State did not act in
bad faith or with willful neglect of duty”.

The relationship between FET and customary minimum standard has been the
subject of much debate, especially in NAFTA based arbitrations, and has led
the NAFTA Free Trade Commission to issue a binding interpretation on July
31, 2001. According to this interpretation:

“2. Minimum Standard of Treatment in Accordance with International
Law
J. Article 1105(1) prescribes the customary international law
minimum standard of treatment of aliens as the minimum
standard of treatment to be afforded to investments of investors of
another Party.
2. The concept of ‘fair and equitable treatment’ and ‘full
protection and security’ do not require treatment in addition to or
beyond that, which is required by the customary international law
minimum standard of treatment of aliens. [...]’.

The same proposition, that the FET standard should be reduced to the
customary international law minimum standard, was afterwards adopted in the
new 2004 US Model BIT. Article 5 of this model provides”:

“Article 5: Minimum Standard of Treatment™

J. Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment in
accordance with customary international law, including fair and
equitable treatment and full protection and security.

2. For greater certainty, paragraph I prescribes the customary
international law minimum standard of treatment of aliens as the
minimum standard of treatment to be afforded to covered
investments”.

Is this principle of assimilation between customary minimum standard and
FET standard also applicable to the US — Ukraine BIT?

The answer must be in the negative. The BIT was adopted in 1996, and was
based on the standard drafting then proposed by the US. The words used are
clear, and do not leave room for doubt: “Jnvestments shall at all times be
accorded fair and equitable treatment ... and shall in no case be accorded
treatment less than that required by international law”. What the US and
Ukraine agreed when they executed the BIT, was that the international
customary minimum standard should not operate as a ceiling, but rather as a
floor. Investments protected by the BIT should in any case be awarded the
level of protection offered by customary international law. But this level of

7| While for claims based on denial of justice, aggravating circumstances like outrage, bad faith, willful
neglect of duty or other egregious behavior are required; see L.F.H. and P.E. Neer (U.S.A) v. United
Mexican States; October 7, 1926; U.N. Report of International Arbitral Awards, IV, p. 60

” Quoted in I. Tudor, “The Fair and Equitable Standard in the International Law of Foreign Investment”
(2008) p. 57.

Footnote omitted.

52

254.

255.

B)

256.

257.

258.

259.

260.

protection could and should be transcended if the FET standard provided the
investor with a superior set of rights”,

In view of the drafting of Article II.3 of the BIT, the Tribunal finds that
actions or omissions of the Parties may qualify as unfair and inequitable, even
if they do not amount to an outrage, to willful neglect of duty, egregious
insufficiency of State actions, or even in subjective bad faith.

This leads to the next question: what is the exact meaning of the FET standard
acknowledged by the BIT?

Meaning of Article I1.3 of the BIT

The words used by the Article II.3. are the following: “Jnvestments shall at all
times be accorded fair and equitable treatment [...] Neither party shall in any
way impair by arbitrary or discriminatory measures the management,
operation, maintenance, use, enjoyment, acquisition, expansion or disposal of
investments”.

These general principles require interpretation in order to give them specific
content and this interpretation must comply with the requirements of Article
31.1. of the Vienna Convention — it must be done “in good faith in accordance
with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context
and in the light of its object and purpose” ”

a) Ordinary meaning

An inquiry into the ordinary meaning of the expression “fair and equitable
treatment” does not clarify the meaning of the concept. “Fair and equitable
treatment” is a term of art, and any effort to decipher the ordinary meaning of
the words used only leads to analogous terms of almost equal vagueness.

The literal reading of Article II.3 of the BIT is more helpful. In accordance
with the words used, Ukraine is assuming a positive and a negative obligation:
the positive is to accord FET to the protected foreign investments, and the
negative is to abstain from arbitrary or discriminatory measures affecting such
investments. Any arbitrary or discriminatory measure, by definition, fails to be
fair and equitable. Thus, any violation of subsection (b) seems ipso iure to also
constitute a violation of subsection (a). The reverse is not true, though. An
action or inaction of a State may fall short of fairness and equity without being
discriminatory or arbitrary”®. The prohibition of arbitrary or discriminatory
measures is thus an example of possible violations of the FET standard.

The literal interpretation also shows that for a measure to violate the BIT it is
sufficient if it is either arbitrary or discriminatory; it need not be both.

™ Tn agreement: I. Tudor, “The Fair and Equitable Standard in the International Law of Foreign
Investment” (2008) p. 29.

*5 Emphasis added.

"© LG&E Energy Corp., LG&E Capital Corp. and LG&E International Inc. v. Argentina, \CSID Case
No.ARB/02/1, Decision on Liability of 3 October 2006, para. 162.

53

261. Discrimination, in the words of pertinent precedents, requires more than
different treatment. To amount to discrimination, a case must be treated
differently from similar cases without justification”; a measure must be
“discriminatory and expose[s] the claimant to sectional or racial prejudice”;
or a measure must “target[ed] Claimant’s investments specifically as foreign
investments””.

262. Arbitrariness has been described as “founded on prejudice or preference
rather than on reason or fact”; “"..contrary to the law because...[it] shocks,
or at least surprises, a sense of juridical propriety®"”; or “wilful disregard of
due process of law, an act which shocks, or at least surprises a sense of
judicial propriety”; or conduct which “manifestly violate[s] the requirements

of consistency, transparency, even-handedness and non-discrimination®™”,
84

 

Professor Schreuer has defined (and the Tribunal in EDF v. Romania” has
accepted) as “arbitrary”:
“a. a measure that inflicts damage on the investor without serving
any apparent legitimate purpose;
b. a measure that is not based on legal standards but on discretion,
prejudice or personal preference;
c a measure taken for reasons that are different from those put
forward by the decision maker;
d. a measure taken in wilful disregard of due process and proper
procedure.”
263. Summing up, the underlying notion of arbitrariness is that prejudice,
preference or bias is substituted for the rule of law.
b) Context
264. ‘Words used in treaties must be interpreted through their context. The context

of Article II.3 is to be found in the Preamble of the BIT, in which the
contracting parties state “that fair and equitable treatment of investment is
desirable in order to maintain a stable framework for investment...” The FET
standard is thus closely tied to the notion of legitimate expectations - actions
or omissions by Ukraine are contrary to the FET standard if they frustrate

7 Saluka Investments BV y. Czech Republic PCA, UNCITRAL, Partial Award of 17 March 2006,
para. 313.

'S Waste Management Inc. v. United Mexican States, \CSID Case No.ARB (AF)/00/3, Award of 30 April
2004, para. 98, confirmed in Methanex Corporation v. United States of America, UNCITRAL, Award of
3 August 2005, para. 274.

” LG&E Energy Corp., LG&E Capital Corp. and LG&E International Inc. v. Argentina, \CSID Case
No.ARB/02/1, Decision on Liability of 3 October 2006, para. 147.

® Ronald S. Lauder v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Award of 3 September 2001, para. 221.

8! Tecnicas Medioambientales Tecmed SA y. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2, 29
May 2003, para. 154.

® Loewen Group Inc and Raymons L. Loewen y. United States of America, ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)98/3, Award of 26 June 2003, para. 131.

Ssaluka Investments BV v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award of 17 March 2006, para. 307.

4 See EDF (Services) Limited v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/13, Award of 8 October 2009, para.
303; Professor Schreuer acted as expert and his opinion was quoted and accepted by the Tribunal.

54

265.

266.

267.

268.

269.

270.

legitimate and reasonable expectations on which the investor relied at the time
when he made the investment*®.

Legitimate expectations

Which were the legitimate expectations of Claimant at the time he made his
investment?

It must be recalled that when in 1995 Mr. Lemire made his first investment
and acquired a controlling stake in Gala Radio, this was a small company in a
nascent industry. Historically, before independence and political change, the
radio industry in Ukraine had been in the hands of the State. In the mid 1990s
the sector began to be privatized, a first Law on TV and Radio having been
approved on December 21, 1993. All these factors had a bearing on Claimant’s
legitimate expectations.

On a general level, Claimant could expect a regulatory system for the
broadcasting industry which was to be consistent, transparent, fair, reasonable,
and enforced without arbitrary or discriminatory decisions. It is true that
Ukraine and the United States, when accepting the BIT, had reserved their
right to make or maintain limited exceptions to the national treatment in the
radio sector®*, Under this exception, Ukraine could e.g., validly require that
the founders of broadcasting companies be Ukrainian nationals. But Mr.
Lemire could equally expect that, once he had been awarded the necessary
administrative authorization to invest in the Ukrainian radio sector, there
would be a level playing field, and the administrative measures would not be
inequitable, unfair, arbitrary or discriminatory.

And on a more specific and personal level, Mr. Lemire undoubtedly had the
legitimate expectation that Gala, which at that time was only a local station in
Kyiv, would be allowed to expand, in parallel with the growth of the private
radio industry in Ukraine.

The actual level of anticipated expansion has been the object of much
discussion by the parties. Mr. Lemire has submitted that his intention at that
time was to create three radio networks, two in FM, and one in AM, centered
around three different age groups*”, Respondent has challenged this statement,
and has referred to the absence of any formal business plan setting out the
intended business structure.

In the Tribunal’s opinion, the available evidence shows that what Mr. Lemire
had in mind when he bought into Gala Radio in June 1995, was to convert
Gala into a national broadcaster and to create a second AM channel. The idea
to create a third radio network — called “Energy” — seems to have been an

5 The relationship between FET and legitimate expectations has been established in a number of
decisions: Saluka Investments BV v. Czech Republic PCA, UNCITRAL, Partial Award of.March 17,
2006, para. 302 which then quotes Tecnicas Medioambientales Tecmed SA v. United Mexican States,
CME v. Czech Republic and Waste Management v. United Mexican States.

* See Annex to BIT.

*) Mr. Lemire, Hearing Transcript 1, p. 121, at 17.

55

271.

272.

273.

C)

274.

afterthought. At the time of the acquisition of Gala, Claimant must have
approached the National Council, and asked whether a national licence for
Gala and an AM licence could be obtained. The National Council reacted in
positive terms, as proven by a letter addressed to the State Centre, in which the
National Council states that it is “considering the possibility” of issuing to
Gala licences for a nationwide FM channel and for a second AM Band, and
enquires whether the frequencies would be available. There is no reference to a
third channel**. The State Centre reacted positively®.

Respondent has insisted that Claimant has not been able to produce a formal
business plan”. That is true. But the Tribunal does not attach too much weight
to this omission. Formal business plans are customary in sizeable investments
in settled economic and business environments. None of these characteristics
applied to Mr. Lemire’s investment in Gala Radio: a small amount was
involved and the situation of Ukraine was anything but settled.

c) Object and purpose

The object and purpose of the BIT - the third interpretive criterion - is defined
in its Preamble: the parties “desir[e] to promote greater economic cooperation
between them, with respect to investment by nationals and companies of one
Party in the territory of the other Party” and recognize that the BIT “will
stimulate the flow of private capital and the economic development of the
Parties”. The main purpose of the BIT is thus the stimulation of foreign
investment and of the accompanying flow of capital.

But this main purpose is not sought in the abstract; it is inserted in a wider
context, the economic development for both signatory countries. Economic
development is an objective which must benefit all, primarily national citizens
and national companies, and secondarily foreign investors. Thus, the object
and purpose of the Treaty is not to protect foreign investments per se, but as an
aid to the development of the domestic economy. And local development
requires that the preferential treatment of foreigners be balanced against the
legitimate right of Ukraine to pass legislation and adopt measures for the
protection of what as a sovereign it perceives to be its public interest.

Pursuit of Local Remedies

Respondent has submitted that Gala Radio, although it asserts a list of errors
concerning the tenders, never challenged any of the decisions before the
Ukrainian Courts”!. In Respondent’s opinion, Claimant should have taken
advantage of the available local remedies that would have been capable of
correcting the alleged administrative wrong. Claimant did so when confronted
with the warnings issued by the National Council, and successfully challenged
two decisions before the Ukrainian Courts. Respondent draws the Tribunal’s
attention to the Generation Ukraine award, which stressed the need for the

88 Claimant’s Exhibit CM-1.

® Claimant’s Exhibit CM-2.

® Claimant’ s Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 90.

°! Respondent’s Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 625.

56

275.

276.

277.

278.

279.

investor to make a reasonable effort to obtain the legal correction of an
administrative fault:

“[...]In such instances, an international tribunal may deem that the
failure to seek redress from national authorities disqualifies the
international claim, not because there is a requirement of exhaustion of
local remedies but because the very reality of conduct tantamount to
expropriation is doubtful in the absence of a reasonable — not necessarily
exhaustive — effort by the investor to obtain correction””.

The question which the Tribunal must answer is whether, given the fact that
Gala Radio has not challenged the decisions of the National Council, it is now
precluded from presenting its claim in this arbitration.

The starting point of the Tribunal’s analysis must be the text of the BIT. The
BIT — unlike other Treaties — does not include any clause requiring the
initiation or exhaustion of local remedies before the filing of an investment
arbitration. Quite the contrary: Article II.3 deviates from the standard US
Model BIT in only one point, the insertion of the following phrase:

“[...] For purposes of dispute resolution under Articles VI and VII, a
measure may be arbitrary or discriminatory notwithstanding the fact that
a Party has had or has exercised the opportunity to review such measure
in the courts or administrative tribunals of a Party”.

The literal meaning of this phrase could not be clearer: even if a party has had
(and has not exercised), or has exercised (with whichever outcome) the right to
judicial review, such action or omission is irrelevant in an investment
arbitration deciding whether the measure is arbitrary or discriminatory. The
consequence is that in an arbitration under the US-Ukrainian BIT, the
possibility to file a claim against a specific measure, is not burdened by any
requirement to previously appeal to the national Courts.

This does not mean that an investor can come before an ICSID tribunal with
any complaint, no matter how trivial, about any decision, no matter how
routine, taken by any civil servant, no matter how modest his hierarchical
place. In this case, however, the claim is raised against the conduct of the
National Council, that is to say the highest regulatory organ for the
broadcasting industry. On this basis, the Tribunal considers that there should
be no impediment to Claimant seeking to hold Ukraine accountable for an
alleged breach of the BIT.

Given the clear language of the BIT, the Tribunal rejects Respondent’s
submission that Claimant is precluded from pursuing his claims in the present
arbitration, due to his failure to appeal the tender decisions of the National
Council.

” Generation Ukraine Inc. v. Ukraine, \CSID Case No. ARB/00/9, Award of 16 September 2003,
para. 20.30.

S7

280.

281.

282.

283.

Generation Ukraine

The Tribunal would like to add that — even if Article II.3 of the BIT had lacked
a specific reference to local remedies — the present case has significant
differences with Generation Ukraine. In Generation Ukraine, the claim filed
by Claimant was based on expropriation, and the appropriate level of
compensation - a type of claim which could have been submitted to and
decided by the local Courts. In the present arbitration, the situation is quite
different: the claim is for damages arising from the violation of the BIT
standards, and such claim can only be filed before an international arbitration
tribunal.

It is true that under Article 30.4 of the LTR, Gala Radio would have had the
opportunity to challenge the decisions of the National Council awarding
frequencies to other companies. But those claims would only have succeeded
in setting aside the National Council’s decision, and forcing that the tender be
repeated. Gala Radio would never be certain that in this repeat tender it would
be successful. The practical result of an appeal against a tender decision of the
National Council is very limited — if the procedure is unfair or the
administrative body biased, it could again decide to grant the licence to
another contender and not to Gala. The effect is quite different from that of an
appeal against a warning — in this case the Court’s decision provokes the
immediate setting aside of the measure.

The test proposed by Generation Ukraine is based on reasonableness.
Claimant is only required to put in a reasonable effort to obtain correction of
the wrong decision. In the circumstances of the present case, it would have
been unreasonable to require Claimant to have fought in the Ukrainian Courts
the National Council’s decisions adjudicating frequencies.

The Tribunal is not thereby suggesting that a breach occurs if the National
Council makes a decision which is different from the one the arbitrators would
have made if they were the regulators. The arbitrators are not superior
regulators; they do not substitute their judgment for that of national bodies
applying national laws. The international tribunal’s sole duty is to consider
whether there has been a treaty violation. A claim that a regulatory decision is
materially wrong will not suffice. It must be proven that the State organ acted
in an arbitrary or capricious way. A regulatory organ charged with the
attribution of licences on a competitive basis plainly violates essential notions
of fairness it refuses to consider the information provided by a qualified
applicant, or if it engages in favouritism. And the State itself breaches its
obligations under the treaty if it exercises undue influence over the decision-
making of regulatory bodies.

 

58

D)

284.

285.

286.

Summary

The FET standard defined in the BIT is an autonomous treaty standard, whose
precise meaning must be established on a case-by-case basis. It requires an
action or omission by the State which violates a certain threshold of propriety,
causing harm to the investor, and with a causal link between action or
omission and harm. The threshold must be defined by the Tribunal, on the
basis of the wording of Article II.3 of the BIT, and bearing in mind a number
of factors, including among others the following:

- whether the State has failed to offer a stable and predictable legal
framework;

- whether the State made specific representations to the investor;

- whether due process has been denied to the investor;

- whether there is an absence of transparency in the legal procedure or in
the actions of the State;

- whether there has been harassment, coercion, abuse of power or other
bad faith conduct by the host State;

- whether any of the actions of the State can be labeled as arbitrary,
discriminatory or inconsistent.

The evaluation of the State’s action cannot be performed in the abstract and
only with a view of protecting the investor’s rights. The Tribunal must also
balance other legally relevant interests, and take into consideration a number
of countervailing factors, before it can establish that a violation of the FET
standard, which merits compensation, has actually occurred:

- the State’s sovereign right to pass legislation and to adopt decisions for
the protection of its public interests, especially if they do not provoke a
disproportionate impact on foreign investors;

- the legitimate expectations of the investor, at the time he made his
investment;

- the investor’s duty to perform an investigation before effecting the
investment;

- the investor’s conduct in the host country.

Once the scope and meaning of the FET standard has been defined in the
abstract, the Tribunal must establish the facts and decide whether they
constitute a violation of such standard. This will be achieved by reviewing the
legal procedure created by Ukrainian law for the awarding of licences in the
broadcasting sector (VI.3.3), then by analyzing in detail the facts surrounding
the allocation of frequencies which affected Gala (VI.3.4).

59

VII.3.3. PROCEDURE FOR THE AWARDING OF LICENCES IN THE BROADCASTING

287.

A)

288.

289.

290.

SECTOR UNDER UKRAINIAN LAW
Two fundamental laws regulate the Ukrainian radio sector:

- the Law on National Television and Radio Council of Ukraine (“LNC”),
originally issued on September 30, 1998°’, amended on a number of
occasions, the last on January 12, 2006; the scope of this law is the
designation and scope of responsibilities of the National Council;

- the Law on Television and Radio Broadcasting (“LTR”), originally
issued on December 21, 1993, amended significantly a number of times,
lastly on March 1, 2006", and which provides the general rules
regarding the functioning of radio and TV in Ukraine.

The National Council

The LNC establishes the National Council as a “constitutional permanent
collegiate agency”. Its activities “shall be based upon the principles of
legality, independence, impartiality, transparency...°°”. The eight members of
the National Council are appointed in parity by the President and the
Parliament respectively, for five-year terms with the possibility of a single
reappointment”. Until 2006, the President and the Parliament could at any
time disqualify any of their appointees from office. That was no empty threat:
on February 2, 2004 the Parliament’s Committee on Freedom of Speech and
Information approved a resolution, recommending that Parliament carry out a
“credibility impeachment” of all the members of the National Council®®.

Since 2006 the situation has improved because the LNC has been amended,
and the National Council in toto can be dismissed only upon a vote of no
confidence carried by Parliament and confirmed by the President”.

The National Council derives its status and mandate directly from a
constituent law. Its independence and impartiality is expressly guaranteed by
that law. Formally, it thus is independent. The appointment of independent
regulators by Parliament and/or the Head of State follows wide-spread
practice. Before 2006, the power of the President and the Parliament,
respectively, to remove their appointees from office indeed represented a
threat to Council members’ independence. With the requirement of a
concurring decision of both the President and the Parliament for removing the
Council in toto from office, a safeguard against undue political pressure was
introduced.

° Claimant's Exhibit CM-2; the Tribunal used Claimant's translation, to which Respondent has not made
any objection.

°* Claimant's Exhibit CM-3; the Tribunal will quote from the translation prepared by Claimant, to which
Respondent has made no objection.

°S Article 1 of the LNC.

°° Article 3.1 of the LNC.

*” Article 4 of the LNC.

° See Claimant's Exhibit CM-31.

® Article 16.5 of the LNC.

60

291.

292.

B)

293.

294.

The level of political interference with the decisions of the National Council is
difficult to gauge from the outside. The only incident which is proven beyond
any doubt is the interference of the President of Ukraine with the tender of
October 19, 2005, which was awarded to the bidder mentioned in the
President’s letter to the National Council (which will be analyzed in detail
below). During the hearing, Mr. Lyasovsky, a member of the National
Council, was directly asked whether National Council members follow the
instructions of the political establishment. His answer, under oath, was the
following:

“Well, we’re very accustomed to hearing this kind of language, I'll be
honest and frank. Yes, there have been — there are attempts at putting
pressure on the council. However, due to the specifics of how the council
is formed, such attempts are ineffective, especially since recently, since
amendments were made, passed in 2006. Indeed, we now are an
independent body and we’re not subject, or rather we’re immune to
pressure”.

The answer acknowledges that pressure has been exercised on the National
Council, but expresses the contention that since 2006 — when the LNC was
amended and the Council was given a higher level of independence — the
situation has been improving.

The Administrative Procedure for the Issuances of Licences

The LTR is an extensive law, comprising 75 articles, regulating the creation,
licensing, functioning, supervision and sanctioning of companies operating in
the TV and radio sectors. Section III of the Law, as it now stands, is devoted to
the rules governing the tender procedure and the issuance of broadcasting
licences.

From a historical perspective, the system for granting radio licences has gone
through four phases:

- ina first phase, between 1993 and 1995, licences were issued by the
National Council under Article 14 of the 1993 LTR, upon individual
application of persons interested in setting up a radio station;

- after 1995, radio frequencies were awarded by means of tender
announced in the press'”!;

- the third phase began on December 15, 1998, when the National Council
became inoperative because it ceased to have five duly designated
members, and consequently could not validly carry decisions; during this
interregnum, radio frequencies were awarded directly by the State
Committee, in clear violation of the LTR!™. The situation was solved in
June 2000, when the National Council regained all its members, and a

' Mr. Lyasovsky, Hearing Transcript 2 p. 73, at 24.

'°! Mr. Petrenko, Hearing Transcript 4, p. 81, at 25.

'® See Claimant's Exhibit CM-11, letter of National Council member S. Aksenenko to the Vice Prime
Minister of Ukraine.

61

295.

296.

297.

298.

299.

8 This

 

first tender in accordance with the LTR was then organized on January 1,
2001;

- since January 2001, licences have all been awarded by way of tenders
supervised by the National Council.

The LTR contains detailed rules with regard to the organization of tenders.
The decision to launch a tender for new frequencies is adopted by the National
Council, then published in the press. Prospective bidders have a one-month
period to present their applications, which must include information required
by Article 24 of the LTR. Applications are then reviewed by the individual
members of the National Council. The criteria of review are now those
established in Article 25.14 of the LTR:

“While considering the applications the National Council shall prefer
TV/radio organization that:

a) is capable to fulfill the licence conditions to the best extent;

b) prefers socially important programs (informational, social and
political, children, etc.), satisfies informational needs of national
minorities and secures freedom of speech;

c) has an advantage in financial and economical as well as professional
and technical capabilities for TV/radio broadcasting,”

The system for deciding the winner of the tender is simple: the National
Council holds a formal meeting, the various applications for each frequency
are presented, each member of the National Council expresses a vote and the
licence is awarded to the applicant supported by at least five members of the
National Council'®’. If no applicant reaches this threshold, the frequency is
not awarded, although it may be put again to tender on a future occasion.

The voting system gives rise to three different issues:

a) Publicity of the vote
The first is the publicity of the vote.

The LTR contains no provision regarding the formal requirements of the
National Council’s decision. Practices seem to have developed. It is
undisputed that in an initial phase, the votes would be cast in a private meeting
of the Council, behind closed doors, and that there was no transparency of how
each member of the National Council had voted. The parties have debated
when this phase ended. Claimant has submitted that the change occurred in
1995'™. while Respondent’s position is that this happened in 2000'°°. The
evidence submitted by Respondent in order to support its position are minutes
of National Council meetings which took place from December 24, 2003
onwards. These minutes list representatives of participating radio companies
as “invited persons” present during the discussions.

is is not controversial; see Respondent’ s Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 350.

'4 Claimant’s Reply Memorial, para.104.

los

Respondent's Rejoinder, para. 511.

62

300.

301.

302.

303.

304.

305.

306.

307.

The Tribunal concludes that from the end of 2003 onwards, the practice of the
National Council has been to “invite” interested parties to attend its meetings.
This constitutes a significant improvement in the transparency of the decision
procedure.

b) Reasoning of the vote
The second issue is the reasoning underlying the votes.

The LTR does not require that the votes of each member of the National
Council, or the National Council’s decision as such, be reasoned. This derives
clearly from the drafting of Article 25 of the LTR.

In paragraph 8 of this provision, the law specifically establishes that if the
National Council is to exclude a person from participating in a tender, such
decision must be “reasoned”. In the documents presented in this arbitration
there is at least one example of a decision excluding a participant in the tender,
and that decision is duly reasoned!°,

The situation is different as regards decision for the awarding of frequencies.
Paragraph 13 of the same article describes the procedure for awarding the
licence to the winner of the tender:

“A decision on the winner of a tender and on broadcast licence issuance
shall be made by the National Council within a 30-day period after
application period is finished”.

It is very telling that for this decision of awarding frequencies the law omits
the requirement that it be “reasoned” — a requirement which the same article
of the Law specifically requires for exclusion of applicants.

The administrative practice of the National Council when awarding
frequencies adhered to the principle established in the LTR. Respondent has
presented a great number of minutes of decisions taken by the National
Council. These minutes simply state in favour of whom each member is
casting his vote. And if a participant received five votes, the frequency was
awarded to him. The minutes do not include any discussion among the
members or the reasoning of the decision.

The evidence presented in this arbitration does not indicate that before the
National Council’s meeting, either the administrative staff of the Council, or
its members, prepared a reasoned and researched report with a valuation and
ranking of the applications submitted. This is surprising, since Article 25.14 of
the LTR orders that in considering the application, the National Council “shall
prefer” radio organizations that offer socially important programs, satisfy
minorities, secure freedom of speech, have better financial resources or
professional or technical capabilities. The evidence submitted seems to show

'06 See Respondent’s Exhibit R-350, regarding the exclusion of NBCU from two tenders.

63

308.

309.

310.

311.

312.

that the National Council made no formal effort to measure to what extent
each application complied with the requirements of the Law!””,

Respondent has acknowledged that “the members of the National Council are
not obliged by the existing legislation to explain the details of their reasoning
during the voting process'°°”, But Respondent has added that in practice the
members of the National Council did explain their reasoning at the meeting,
during debates with the candidates and during the discussions with other
members of the National Council, and after the meetings at briefings with the
press. In the opinion of the Arbitral Tribunal, these informal explanations,
which started in 2004, although certainly a step forward, do not off-set the
absence of any reasoning justifying the vote of each Council Member, and the
corporate decision of the National Council as a body.

The absence of reasoning of the decision represents a significant weakness in
the administrative procedure for the issuance of licences.

Thus, a participant who has lost cannot ascertain why his application was
rejected, how he was ranked with regard to other participants, and what he
could do to improve his chances to be successful in the next bidding.

The absence of reasoning also jeopardizes the possibilities of public scrutiny
and of judicial review. A Court cannot judge the reasonableness of the
National Council’s decision to award the tender to one participant or the other,
if there is no formal explanation of the reasons which prompted the decision.
Absence of reasoning de facto reduces the causes of judicial review to
procedural irregularities during the tender.

In April 2007, three Deputies from the parliamentary majority proposed to
Parliament the creation of an Investigating Committee centred on the activities
of the National Council, including the “transparency and publicity of
broadcasting licences issuing and renewal 109» Although the proposal of the
three Deputies may also have had political motivations, the mere fact that it
was presented — it is unclear from the record if the Committee was actually set
up!” - proves the existence of significant unease with the degree of
transparency and publicity of the procedure for awarding broadcasting
licences.

‘7 Respondent has submitted that in order to help members of the National Council, an “informational
passport” for each region of Ukraine was prepared by National Council Staff (Post-Hearing Memorial,
para. 347); but this passport did not include any valuation of the various applications submitted.

'°8 Respondent's Rejoinder, para. 512.

‘® Claimant's Exhibit CM-86.

"Tn Claimant's Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 71.3, Claimant submits that it was created; in Claimant's
Memorial, para. 32 and Claimant’s Reply Memorial, para. 170, the assertion is that it was proposed.

64

313.

314.

315.

316.

"Mr, Lyasov:

c) Lack of knowledge of ultimate owners

A third characteristic of the system for allocation of frequencies is that
participants were under no obligations to disclose the ultimate owners of their
companies. While the direct controlling owners of companies bidding for
frequencies were registered with the National Council, the owners of the
owners were not. The Council members, who deposed as witnesses, when
asked on several occasions by counsel to Claimant and by the Tribunal, were
not able to provide any information regarding the beneficial owners of the
radio companies to whom they had awarded significant numbers of licences!!!

Politically influential individuals are thus able to beneficially own radio
stations, which participate in tenders for new frequencies, and to hide behind
“ownership chains”, so that their interest in the decision remains undisclosed.
This lack of transparency clearly represents a shortcoming of the system. The
LTR does not require information about ultimate owners, and the National
Council apparently never asked any of the participants to disclose the names of
their controlling shareholders. This is especially troubling, since the legal
criteria which National Council should apply when selecting the winner must
include freedom of speech and financial and economic capability of the
applicants — criteria difficult to apply if there is no transparency regarding
beneficial owners of radio stations. It also makes it difficult for the public —
and for judicial bodies — to determine whether there has been undue influence.

The Tribunal has already stated its respect for Ukraine’s sovereignty and for
Ukraine’s right to promulgate the laws which its Parliament deems are best
suited to further the Nation’s public interest. The powers of this Tribunal are
limited to judging whether Respondent has acted in ways that affect Claimant
and breach the FET standard enshrined in the BIT. But in order to value
specific measures, the Tribunal must analyze the general legal framework
within which specific conduct took place. That analysis has revealed that the
procedure presents some shortcomings, which in essence affect:

- the independence of members of the National Council;

- the existence of an interregnum, during which licences were awarded
without tender procedure;

- the absence of formal valuation of the applications for licences against
clearly established criteria;

- the absence of reasoning for National Council decisions, whether
collectively or for individual votes; and

- the lack of transparency of ultimate owners of radio companies.

While none of the above features alone stigmatizes the entire tender process as
arbitrary, there is a risk that the shortcomings may end up mutually reinforcing
each other. Members of the National Council, by virtue of the designation

 

Hearing Transcript 2, p. 52, at 17; Mr. Shevchenko, Hearing Transcript 3, p. 13, at 1;

Mr. Kurus, Hearing Transcript 4, p. 7.

65

317.

VII.3.4

318.

A)

319.

320.

system, tend to have political affiliations and interests. Deficient disclosure
and transparency requirements ease the misuse of discretionary powers by
Council members to accommodate political or personal interests. In sum, the
procedure for allocating frequencies by the National Council is fraught with
shortcomings that facilitate arbitrary decision making.

A final note is important: Ukraine gained its independence only in 1991 and
still is in the process of developing its institutional framework. During this
formative period, legal imperfections are to be expected. Ukrainian law has
improved, and after the 2006 amendments of the LTR, a significant number of
weaknesses have been ameliorated.

GALA’S APPLICATIONS FOR ADDITIONAL FREQUENCIES

In the preceding section the Tribunal has concluded that the tender procedure
for the issuance of licences presents certain shortcomings, which although
falling short of disqualifying the entire system as arbitrary, remain relevant for
the assessment of the National Council’s measures. In this section the Tribunal
will establish the facts surrounding Gala’s applications for additional
frequencies, and will decide whether the actions or omissions of Respondent
amount to a violation of the FET standard guaranteed in the BIT to protected
investors.

Overview of Gala’s Participation in Tenders for Additional Frequencies

It is undisputed that between 2001 and 2007 Gala Radio participated in a great
number of tenders for broadcasting licences, additional to those that were
awarded to Gala pursuant to the Settlement Agreement. The exact number of
frequencies for which Gala applied, however, is debated. Claimant states that
the number of applications amounts to more than 200 for Gala, plus 100 more
for Energy (a second chain of radio stations which Claimant tried to create)!!?,
Respondent accepts 180 applications for Gala!" and 71 for Energy! an

What is not disputed is that all those applications were unsuccessful — with one
exception: Claimant was awarded the frequency in Chechelnik, a village of
5,000 inhabitants without any satellite receiver (which implies that the station
cannot be linked to Gala’s network). It is undisputed that the business
relevance of this frequency is minimal. Claimant adds that the National
Council’s decision to reward Gala’s continuing efforts with the awarding of
this local frequency in a remote, unconnected village was intended to rub salt
in the wound'°.

‘2 Respondent's Reply, para. 167; see also Claimant's Exhibit CM-99 with a list of the applications.
"3 Respondent's Exhibit R 344-A.

"4 Respondent's Post-Hearing Memorial, paras. 434 and 453.

"5 Claimant’s Reply, para. 168.

66

321.

322.

323.

324.

"6 Claimant
"7 Claimant

Claimant’s argument

Claimant argues that Gala’s dismal record in receiving frequencies stands in
stark contrast with that of its competitors, all controlled by powerful and well-
connected personalities. Claimant gives the following examples! 16,

- Radio Era applied for 93 frequencies and was awarded 38 (41% success
rate); the station is allegedly owned by Mr. Derkach, who is said to be a
supporter of the current President of Ukraine;

- Hit Radio applied for 139 frequencies and was awarded 42 (30%);
Claimant alleges that it is owned by Mr. Bagrayev, a Deputy (i.e.
member of Parliament) and member of the National Council 2000-2002;

- NBM Radio applied for 205 frequencies and was awarded 56 (27%); it is
allegedly owned by Mr. Poroshenko, also an ally of the current
President;

- Russkoe Radio applied for 111 and was awarded 31 (28%); allegedly
also owned by Mr. Bagrayev'"’,

Claimant has produced circumstantial evidence to substantiate that these radio
chains are actually owned by the above-mentioned individuals''’, During the
hearing, Claimant asked the members of the National Council who deposed, to
clarify the ownership structure of these radio stations. They all declined, in
essence arguing that information regarding beneficial owners is not available
to the National Council. The Tribunal also notes that Respondent has not
produced any evidence contradicting Claimant’s allegations.

Respondent’s arguments

Respondent’s main argument is that Claimant cannot assert a breach of the
BIT while remaining at a “macro-statistical” level. Each tender is different
from the next, and each applicant is different from the rest. As regards the
statistics themselves, Respondent submits that of the 180 frequencies Gala
applied for, only 68 were destined for broadcasting a music format that could
be similar to Gala Radio’s program concept'!”, Respondent also states that in
some tenders which it eventually lost, Gala received the favourable votes of
some of the Council members — but it never received the five votes necessary
for the awarding of the licence.

The main thrust of Respondent’s argument is that Gala Radio did not win
tenders because it “is an average radio station'®” and that it is not at the top
level of the overall Ukrainian broadcasting market. Its programming concept is
no longer as popular and innovative as it used to be. This would, in
Respondent’s assertion, justify the National Council’s decision to deny new
licences to Gala.

Exhibit CM-129.
Post-Hearing Memorial, para.106.

 

"8 Claimant’s Exhibits CM-105, CM-116 and CM-124 and Mr. Lemire’s Witness Statement, para. 123.
" Respondent's Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 438.
2° Respondent's Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 447.

67

325.

326.

327.

328.

329.

330.

331.

The Tribunal’s position

The Tribunal agrees with Respondent that mere statistics are insufficient for
maintaining a claim for violation of the FET standard. But on the other side,
statistics do give an overview of how the facts have developed and may
provide valuable insight into patterns of behaviour.

If an impartial bystander looks at the gross, macro-statistical numbers, an
impact cannot be avoided. In six years Gala Radio, a radio company in good
standing, although it tried insistently, has not been able to obtain additional
frequencies (except in a small village in rural Ukraine and except for the
frequencies allocated pursuant to the Settlement Agreement). Whether one
takes Claimant’s numbers (200 applications for all types of frequencies) or
Respondent’s (68 applications for music format frequencies similar to Gala’s)
is really irrelevant. Respondent’s number is in fact even more striking, because
it refers to cases where the National Council denied Gala an additional
frequency for the type of programming it was already offering, and with good
success.

It is undisputed that Gala’s main competitors — Era, Hit, NMB, Russkoe —
were much more successful than Gala: they received between 38 and 56
frequencies. Respondent has tried to justify this differential treatment stating
that Gala “is an average radio station’, that its programming concept is stale
and that other competitors offer better broadcasting.

The problem with Respondent’s argument is that, since the National Council
does not reason or explain its decisions, it is totally impossible for a third party
(be it a local judge or this Tribunal) to verify whether Gala’s applications were
rejected because its programming concept was worse than that of its
competitors (as Respondent now submits), or due to some other cause, and
whether this cause was good, arbitrary or discriminatory.

A suspicion in any case remains: if Gala, as Respondent readily admits, “is an
average radio station”, the natural consequence would seem to be that Gala
should have had an average success rate in its tenders. And the record shows
that it had a success rate which was much below average.

Summing up, the Tribunal feels that the macro-statistical analysis cannot
provide conclusive evidence that Respondent has violated the FET standard;
but the overall numbers, the absence of any reasonable explanation, the
strikingly different success rates of Gala and of its competitors, the
impossibility of verifying the reasons why Gala was rejected, are all factors
which cast doubts on the decisions of the National Council.

In order to substantiate these doubts, it is necessary that the Tribunal analyze
each of the tenders in particular. This will be done in the next sections.

68

B)

332.

333.

334.

335.

336.

337.

The Tender of October 19, 2005 and the Interference of the President of
Ukraine

Undisputed facts

On July 2004 the National Council announced a tender for 15 frequencies,
with the special condition that the channel thus created be used solely for
“informational broadcasting”. Radio channels which exclusively or
predominantly broadcast music, like Gala or Kiss, are of limited political
relevance. Informational channels, however, are politically more sensitive,
since they represent important elements for the formation of public opinion.

It is an undisputed fact that on July 20, 2004, ie. four days after the
announcement of the tender, the President of Ukraine sent a “Doruchennya” to
Mr. Shevchenko, the Chairman of the National Council, which literally stated
as follows ’!:

“DORUCHENNYA OF THE UKRAINIAN PRESIDENT

To: O. SHEVCHENKO
O. GAJDUK

In accordance with the set procedure to consider the matter relating to
the allocation of the frequency resource to “Radio Era” and “Radio
Kokhannya”

Signed V. YUSCHENKO”.

The “Doruchennya” included a further paragraph, addressed to top officials of
the Ukrainian Government and the City of Kiev, asking for support for the
activities of TRC “Era” and “Radio Era”.

Radio Era was an already existing talk radio, broadcasting informational
programs. Claimant has alleged that Radio Era (and Radio Kokhannya) are
widely reported to be owned by Mr. Derkach, a political ally and supporter of
the current President of the Ukraine.

There has been some discussion about the precise translation of the word
“Doruchennya”. During the hearing the Chairman of the National Council
Mr. Shevchenko was questioned regarding the precise meaning, and it was
agreed that the best English translation would be “instruction”, not “order”!”?,

The “Instruction” was followed up by a letter sent on August 2, 2005, in which
the “First Deputy State Secretary of Ukraine” asked Chairman Shevchenko to
“inform the Secretariat of the President of Ukraine of status of the task
commissioned by the Head of the State 123

'*! Claimant's Exhibit CM-45.

12

Mr. Shevchenko, Hearing Transcript 3, p. 161, at 19; Claimant has accepted the translation; see

Claimant's Post-Hearing Memorial, fn. 271.
3 Claimant's Exhibit CM-108.

69

338.

339.

340.

341.

342.

343.

The record shows no letter from either Mr. Shevchenko or the National
Council reacting either to the “Instruction” or to the Secretariat’s reminder.

On October 19, 2005 the National Council decided to award the 15
frequencies on tender to Radio Era. It is undisputed that during the discussion
which led to the Council’s decision, a deputy of the Ukrainian Parliament
called Derkach attended the meeting. Radio Kokhannya was later on awarded
12 frequencies more.

Claimant’s position

In Claimant’s view, Gala lost the tender to Radio Era due to the President’s
intervention and then later due to the physical presence of a Parliamentary
Deputy at the tender meeting itself. The tender was procedurally improper,
and the outcome was unfair, inequitable, arbitrary and discriminatory. As a
consequence of these measures, Claimant lost the opportunity to establish a
separate talk radio format in an FM format that solely focused on news,
informational programs, culture, education and sports 4,

Respondent’s position
Respondent asserts'> that the channel was awarded to Radio Era in view of
the latter’s supremacy in information broadcasting. The message of the
President, in Respondent’s view, did not constitute an order. Deputy Derkach
does not own Radio Era and did not intervene in the National Council’s
deliberation. Thus, no undue influence was exercised on the National
Council’s tender decision.

The Tribunal’s position

The National Council was established by the LNC as a “constitutional
permanent collegiate agency”; and its activities “shall be based on the
principles of legality, independence, impartiality, transparency...” (Articles 1
and 3 of the LNC). Decisions on the allocation of radio frequencies in
particular are to be made in accordance with a tender process and tender
evaluation criteria prescribed by law (see Article 25 of the LTR).
Independence and impartiality of National Council members from other State
bodies is pivotal to the integrity of the system.

 

Any interference by a State body in the statutory tender process and the
supposedly independent and impartial evaluation of tenders must therefore be
considered as violating both the LNC and the LTR. This applies especially to
any interference by the President, who appoints and reappoints half of the
members of the National Council. It must also be remembered that at the time
of the Instruction, members of the National Council could be removed by a
decision of the President.

'°4 Claimant’s Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 92.

1s

Respondent's Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 398.

70

344.

345.

346.

347.

348.

349.

350.

Taken literally, the “Instruction” of the President only states that the Chairman
of the National Council shall “in accordance with the set procedure [...]
consider the matter relating to the allocation of the frequency resource to
“Radio Era” and “Radio Kokhannya”. Respondent, supported by the
deposition of Messrs. Shevchenko and Kurus, tries to depict the message as a
routine call by the President on the National Council to do its job.

The Tribunal does not have to decide whether the message qualified as a
Presidential order which must be obeyed. As noted before, it is sufficient if it
constituted an interference with the independent and impartial decision-
making process of the National Council, i.e. an indication of the President’s
expectations with respect to the pertinent decisions.

Impact of the “Instruction”

Did the “Instruction” from the President amount to interference?

Respondent submits that the “Instruction” should be construed exclusively on
the basis of its plain language, and that it amounts to no more than an
admonition to the National Council to do its job. No explanation has, however,
been given why the National Council needs such an admonition. In the
hearings of the present case, National Council members Shevchenko and
Kurus could not refer to any similar action of the President, before or after this
incident. Its singularity draws attention to the Presidential message and
heightens its potential to influence decision making.

Moreover, the message was written in the context of an instruction to other
State officials to “remove obstacles” to Radio Era’s activities and “report on
the measures taken” within seven days. The different language used for
addressing these officials, who do not enjoy independence guaranteed by law,
and the National Council Chairman, respectively, shows the President’s
awareness of the National Council’s independence. Yet, it also reflects the
President’s standing in support of Radio Era.

An additional factor to be borne in mind is that within two weeks of the
Presidential “Instruction”, but before the pertinent tender decision, the
Secretariat enquired on the status of the “task commissioned” by the President.
This letter is a clear indication of the President’s support of Radio Era’s offer
and his expectation that his message would be duly taken into account in the
process.

In these circumstances, the attendance at the decisive National Council
meeting on October 19, 2005 by Deputy Derkach is clearly more than a
routine participation of a deputy in a Council meeting. It appears as a
demonstration of vigilance, intended to remind Council members that their
decisions are watched.

71

351.

352.

353.

354.

Deputy Derkach

It has proven impossible for the Tribunal to ascertain whether Mr. Derkach
actually owns or is somehow connected to Era Radio, as alleged by Claimant.
Specifically asked by the Tribunal, Chairman Shevchenko could not confirm
whether Mr. Derkach was the owner of Era Radio, nor could he give any
information regarding the person or persons who controlled this radio
station'?®. It is highly implausible that the Chairman of the National Council,
who had been twice elected as a Parliamentary Deputy, who had received an
“Instruction” from the President to consider Era’s application favourably, and
who voted in favour of awarding Era the licences to strengthening it as a
leading broadcaster in Ukraine, should remain completely unaware of the
ownership structure of this company.

In any case, for present purposes it suffices to record that, as documented by
Claimant, Mr. Derkach has been reported in the media as being associated
with Era Radio'”’, so that his presence at the National Council meeting must
have been perceived as a supporter of this radio station. It can also remain
open whether he has expressed his support by his body language, as
maintained by Claimant. His mere attendance at this meeting in conjunction
with his publicly reported association with Radio Era constitutes an action in
support of this applicant.

Respondent’s counter-argument

Respondent has asserted that the President’s “Instruction” was
inconsequential, because the channel of frequencies in question had been
reserved for informational broadcasting and Radio Era was the national
champion in this market segment. Even Claimant concedes that according to a
market survey (the so-called “SIREX Report”) Radio Era was the national
leader on information broadcasting, with an established track record, while
Gala intended to set up a new “talk format radio network” in order to satisfy
the tender condition. Claimant adds, however, that in accordance with the
SIREX Report Gala was number two (after Radio Era) in news broadcasting,

and Radio Era’s closest competitor!”*,

The Arbitral Tribunal is again confronted with the impossibility of reviewing
the reasons underlying the National Council’s decision. A decision in favour
of the established leader in the relevant field over a newcomer may under
certain circumstances be appropriate. But Article 25.14 (b) of the LTR also
orders the National Council to take into account the objective of “secur[ing]
freedom of speech”. Since Radio Era already had a radio network, pluralism
could arguably be better served if the new channel was awarded to a different
company. Gala had a realistic prospect of winning this tender against Radio
Era, and such opportunity was taken away by the Presidential interference.

°° Mr. Shevchenko, Hearing Transcript 3, p. 172.
7 Claimant's Exhibits CM 105 and CM 124; Claimant's Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 81.
°°8 Claimant’s Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 91.

72

355.

356.

357.

C)

358.

359.

360.

The President’s “Instruction” referred not only to the tender applications of
Radio Era, but also to those of Radio Kokhannya. It is undisputed that radio
Kokhannya received 12 frequencies from July 2005 through January 2006'”°,
in tenders in which Gala also participated.

Decision

In light of the aforementioned circumstances, the Tribunal concludes that the
President’s “Instruction” amounted to interference with the independent and
impartial decision of the National Council in favour of two of Claimant’s
competitors — Radio Era and Radio Kokhannya. It thus constituted a violation
of applicable Ukrainian legislation, namely the LNC and LTR, which meets
the Saluka test, since it “manifestly violate[s] the requirements of consistency,
transparency, even-handedness and non-discrimination” and thus amounts to
an “arbitrary or discriminatory measure” within the meaning of Article II.3
(b) of the BIT. Furthermore, the apparently politically motivated preference
for one competitor represents a discrimination against Claimant, who was
applying in the same tender processes for the same frequencies.

In conclusion, the Tribunal determines that when the National Council at the
meeting of October 19, 2005 granted 15 frequencies for an information
broadcasting channel to Radio Era, and subsequently awarded 12 frequencies
to Radio Kokannya, such decisions violated the FET standard established by
Art II.3 of the BIT.

The Tender of May 26, 2004 for an AM Frequency

In May 2004 Gala applied for an AM frequency for Kiev, together with two
competitors (Odessa Legal Academy and Charity Public Fund Radio). In the
National Council meeting on May 26, 2004, the two competitors received each
four votes and Gala secured one vote. As no application was supported by the
requisite five votes, the National Council cancelled this tender, convened a
new tender and awarded the frequency to NART TV.

Gala has been broadcasting on FM frequencies, which are appropriate for a
program based fundamentally on music. The AM frequency is not suitable for
music programs but only for talk and information programs.

Claimant’s position

Claimant submits that with the AM frequency for which it was applying, Gala
had intended to establish a new talk radio format'*®. Gala was the only
qualified applicant in the May 26, 2004 tender, as its competitors lacked the
necessary financial resources, radio experience and management capability.
Notwithstanding Gala’s qualifications, in an arbitrary and discriminatory
decision the National Council decided not to award the frequency to Claimant,
to retender it and to issue to NART TV, a company which had the correct
political connections.

2 See Mr. Lyasovski, Hearing Transcript 2, p. 81, at 23.
‘50 Claimant’s Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 114.

73

361.

362.

363.

364.

365.

Respondent’s position

Respondent contests Gala’s assertion that it was the only qualified applicant in
the May 26, 2004 tender'!, In Respondent’s view, Gala’s competitors did
have adequate resources and capabilities and Gala’s failure can be explained
by the lack of experience in informational talk programs and the perception by
Council members that Gala was a music channel, without an information
broadcasting concept.

The Tribunal’s position

The Tribunal has already established (see paragraph 271 above) that Mr.
Lemire’s expectations, when in 1995 he started his investments in the
Ukrainian radio sector, were to create two channels, one in FM and the other
in AM. The concepts for both programs would have been different: the FM
channel would be based on music, the AM channel structured as a talk radio
(because AM technically is not appropriate to broadcast music in a quality
format).

In May 2006 the National Council put to tender an AM frequency in Kiev with
50 kW. This was an important tender, since AM frequencies are powerful and
have an extensive range of coverage. Claimant has asserted'*? that the
frequency to be awarded actually covered a radius of 800 to 1000 km around
Kyiv, i.e. the entire Ukrainian territory. Whoever won the tender for this
frequency would be able to create a talk radio network, and broadcast news
and information to the entire nation.

It is undisputed that the only participants in the tender, in addition to Gala,
were the Odessa Legal Academy (a University) and Charity Fund Radio. In its
meeting of May 26, 2006 the National Council rejected all three applications.
The reasons for the Tribunal’s decision have never been made public. The only
document in the file referring to the decision is the minutes (not the transcript)
of the meeting of the National Council', These minutes state only that the
two other applicants received four votes each and Gala only one. There is no
explanation of the decision, not even a summary of the presentations made by
the applicants.

During the hearing Chairman Schevchenko was expressly asked about the

reasons underlying the National Council’s decision. His explanation was very
134

vague ~":

“But in this particular case, I must say that Gala Radio had fewer
chances to become a winner of this contest because in many indicators
was lagging behind the other contestants. Therefore the results of this
voting is not accidental. I can explain to you my motives in voting this
way, but it did not win this competition due to objective reasons”.

'5! Respondent's Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 460.

'22 Claimant’s Memorial, para. 173.

'3 Respondent's Exhibit R-79.

'M Mr. Shevchenko, Hearing Transcript 3, p. 102, at 18.

74

366.

367.

368.

369.

370.

In its Post-Hearing Memorial, Respondent justifies the National Council’s
decision by saying that the National Council was under the impression that
Gala intended to broadcast music on the AM frequency, since Gala never
presented to the National Council a different concept. As evidence of this
assertion, Respondent only relies on a statement from Chairman Shevchenko.
Claimant has submitted that it presented a talk radio proposal for the AM
channel'**, In the Tribunal’s opinion, Claimant’s position is more plausible.
It makes no business sense to broadcast a music program through an AM
channel, and it seems unlikely that Mr. Lemire, an experienced radio operator,
would be proposing such a business plan. Unfortunately, with the evidence
presented by Respondent in this procedure, it is impossible to ascertain what
Mr. Lemire actually told the National Council with regard to his plans.
Mr. Lemire had the opportunity to speak at the Council’s meeting, but
Respondent has only produced the minutes, not the transcripts of this meeting.

Summing up, the Tribunal accepts as proven that Gala proposed to create a
radio channel with talk radio format, and that for reasons which have not been
explained, the National Council decided not to award the frequency to
Claimant.

There is a second important factual element: the National Council decided, in
the same meeting in which it rejected Gala’s bid, to retender the same
frequency (and this decision was carried unanimously). Only four months
thereafter, in September 2004, the new tender was announced. The frequency
was awarded on December 21, 2004 to NART TV, through a tender in which
Gala did not participate. Claimant has asserted, and has presented
circumstantial evidence'** proving that NART TV is associated with
Mr. Tretwakov, the head of financial affairs in the campaign of President
Yuschenko'*”, After obtaining the frequency, NART TV never used it. The
National Council cancelled it and announced new tenders in 2007 and 2008, in
which Gala did not participate.

Decision

The Tribunal must decide whether the National Council’s decision in May 26,
2004, denying Gala the AM frequency in Kyiv, and then immediately
thereafter retendering the frequency, and awarding it in December 2004 to
NART TV, violates the FET standard, by constituting an arbitrary or
discriminatory measure. After due consideration, and not without some
hesitation, the Tribunal comes to the conclusion that there is a preponderance
of evidence showing that the National Council’s decisions indeed were
arbitrary and discriminatory.

The decisions of the National Council in May/December 2004, to reject
Claimant’s application and award the frequency to NART TV, must be viewed
together with the decision of October 2005, denying Gala’s application for a
FM channel, and granting it to Radio Era. Both decisions affected talk radio

'85 Claimant’s Reply Memorial, para. 204.
86 Claimant's Exhibit CM-106.
‘57 Claimant’s Reply Memorial, para. 206.

75

371.

372.

D)

373.

channels devoted to information. In both, Claimant was denied the licence, and
in both the licence was awarded to radio companies which — in accordance
with circumstantial evidence — are owned by or associated with persons
closely connected with the Government. The Tribunal has already decided that
the October 2005 decision, in which 15 FM frequencies were granted to Radio
Era, violated the FET standard. The same consideration must be extended to
the decision of the National Council affecting the AM frequency and adopted
in the period May/December 2004.

The Saluka test requires that the National Council’s decision “manifestly
violate[s] the requirements of consistency, transparency, even-handedness and
non-discrimination”. The Tribunal finds that the National Council’s decisions
to award the AM frequency to NART TV and to deny it to Gala, meets these
requirements. In reaching this conclusion, the Tribunal relies on the following
factors:

- Claimant’s expectation that it would be awarded an AM licence and that
it would be granted the possibility of setting up a talk radio channel;

- the utter absence of any reasoning justifying why the National Council
denied Claimant’s request to be awarded the AM frequency in the initial
tender;

- the immediate decision of the National Council of retendering of the
frequency, the announcement of the new tender four months thereafter
and the subsequent issuance of the licence in favour of NART TV; and

- the total lack of official information regarding the ultimate ownership of
NART TV.

The findings of the Tribunal are not affected by Claimant’s failure to
participate in the second tender. In his deposition, Mr. Lemire explained that
he had decided not to participate, because he deemed the effort futile'**, The
justification is reasonable. Given that Gala had been unsuccessful in the first
tender, in which the other participants were weak and inexperienced operators,
its chances of succeeding in the retender, in which a high profile company like
NART TV participated, were likely nonexistent. The arbitrary and
discriminatory nature of the Council’s decisions arises from the rejection of
Claimant’s initial application, the immediate retender and the awarding of the
channel to a politically influential applicant. Whether Claimant participated or
not in the second tender is immaterial for the Tribunal’s decision.

The Tender of February 6, 2008 With 40% Ukrainian Language
Requirement

The tender of February 6, 2008 had a singular characteristic: the frequencies to
be awarded were subject to an additional language requirement, namely that
40% of the program had to be in the Ukrainian language (this being in addition
to the 50% Ukrainian music requirement under the 2006 LTR).

'8 Mr. Lemire, Hearing Transcript 1, p. 273, at 25.

76

374.

375.

376.

377.

9 Claimant’
'® Claimant's

Claimant’s position

Claimant submits that Gala competed with Kiss FM radio (the station whose
ultimate owner allegedly is Mr. Bagrayev) for a number of frequencies in this
tender’. At that time, Gala was broadcasting 37% of its program in Ukrainian
language and thus fell 3% short of the tender condition. (Additionally Gala
was meeting a second requirement introduced by the 2006 amendment to the
LTR: in more than 50% of the music broadcast, the author, the composer or
the performer were Ukrainian). When in the February 6, 2008 meeting of the
National Council Mr. Lemire tried to explain how Gala would reach
compliance with the 40% tender condition, he was cut off by Council member
Kurus with the words: “/t’s very straightforward, I must say. According to the
tender requirements, you must have no less than 40 percent”. Mr. Lemire was
not allowed to give any further explanation.

During the same meeting, a member of the National Council Secretariat
reported the corresponding figures of Kiss: share of songs in Ukrainian
language 1%, share of music by Ukrainian authors and performers 11%.
Nevertheless, Kiss received three frequencies in the February 6, 2008 tender,
and Gala received none.

‘When National Council Chairman Shevchenko, in the December 8 — 12, 2008
hearings of the present case, was confronted with the transcript of the February
6, 2008 Council meeting, he explained that applicants were not required to
comply before the tender with the 40% Ukrainian language condition, but that
they had to demonstrate how they would meet this condition in the future
(‘what they had before the competition doesn’t matter”). In Claimant’s
interpretation, Mr. Shevchenko, who voted for Kiss FM, has admitted that his
decision was pre-determined before the National Council meeting discussed
the case.

Respondent’s position

Respondent, without refuting Claimant’s allegations in detail, argues that
Mr. Shevchnenko’s testimony as relied on by Claimant with respect to the
February 8, 2008 tender “is of no probative value”, In Respondent’s view,
Claimant confused Mr. Shevchenko by referring him to parts of the transcript
relating to tenders other than those won by Kiss. Kiss FM had won the tender
for the frequency 89.0 for Ternopil against 14 competitors, while
Mr. Shevchenko had been referred to the discussions of the tenders for
frequencies for Sumy and Ivano-Frankivsk. Notably the record of Kiss FM
was reported in the context of Ivano-Frankivsk. As Mr. Shevchenko’s
testimony did not relate to the discussion of a tender won by Kiss FM, it
cannot provide the basis for a comparison of the treatment of Kiss and Gala,
respectively.

  

Hearing Memorial, para.105.

‘4 Respondent's Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 433.

77

378.

379.

380.

381.

Respondent does not, however, explicitly refute Claimant’s allegation that all
tenders discussed in the February 8, 2008 meeting were equally subject to the
40% Ukrainian language condition.

The Tribunal’s position

Since there are divergencies between the parties regarding the facts, it is
important that, as a preliminary step, the Tribunal establish as precisely as
possible what actually happened.

On February 6, 2008 the National Council met, in order to award a large
number of frequencies. Mr. Kurus, a member of the National Council, has
deposed during the hearing that every frequency to be issued during that
meeting was subject to the requirement that at least 40% of its programming

be broadcast in Ukrainian'*!.

An official transcript of the meeting, prepared by the National Council itself,
and consequently of high probative value ‘2 ‘reveals the following incidents:

- Mr. Lemire was asked to speak during the tender for the frequencies in
Sumy Oblast; although Gala had applied for a number of frequencies, the
transcript shows that not all participants were invited to speak at each of
the tenders; this tender was the only occasion when Mr. Lemire was
authorized to speak; he explained that Gala Radio was complying with
the 50% Ukrainian music requirement, and that the Ukrainian language
percentage was 37%. He was interrupted by Mr. Kurus, a member of the
National Council, who said: “Jt is very straight forward, I must say.
According to the tender requirements you must have no less than 40%”;

- during the tender for Ivano-Frankivsk — in which Gala, Kiss and many
other radio stations participated — President Shevchenko requested Mr.
Sokur, a civil servant from the National Council, to provide the relevant
statistics for Kiss (the official name of which is Utar TV and Radio
Broadkasting UC); his answer was the following: “We have statistics for
Utar TV and Radio Broadcasting UC as a competitor. And the figures
are the worst. The share of music by national authors and performers is
only 11% and the share of songs in Ukrainian 1%”;

- during the hearing, Chairman Shevchenko was cross examined with
regard to this statement; he accepted that statistic prepared by National
Council staff were correct '** and that if it were proven that Kiss was only
broadcasting 11% Ukrainian music, this would constitute a violation of
the law; as regards the 1% Ukrainian language content, his
explanation was that the percentage before the tender was irrelevant,

  

‘Mr. Kurus, Hearing Transcript 4, p 42, at 12; Mr. Shevchenko, when asked the same question,
answered that there “could be different conditions for different frequencies” (Tr. 3, p. 138, 6); the
Tribunal, after reviewing the transcript of the National Council meeting, coincides with Mr. Kurus’
opinion, because references to the 40% requirement appear repeatedly when discussing various
frequencies.

'® Respondent's Exhibits R-351 and R-352.

143

Mr. Shevchenko, Hearing Transcript 3, p 81, at 16.

'4 Mr. Shevchenko, Hearing Transcript 3, p. 89, at 11.

78

382.

383.

384.

385.

Las

what was important was that the bidder had a good program concept, and
in future could reach the 40% threshold'“*.

There has been some discussion among the parties regarding which radio
company won which frequencies during the February 6, 2008 National
Council meeting. It is undisputed that Kiss won the frequency for Ternopil
with seven of the eight votes, because a copy of the official transcript clearly
states so'“°. Claimant submits that Kiss won two additional tenders.
Respondent has not provided clear evidence for this fact (because the
transcript is not complete). It is undisputed that Gala was awarded no
frequency.

At the core of Claimant’s grievance is the unequal treatment of Gala and Kiss
with respect to the Ukrainian language tender condition. This condition
applied to all tenders — including the tender for Ternopil won by Kiss FM and
all the tenders lost by Gala. But it was interpreted in a completely different
way when applied to Gala as compared to Kiss. Respondent has tried to
defend the National Council’s record, stressing that the different
interpretations were voiced in different tenders. The argument is
unconvincing, because all tenders had the same basic requirement. And the
fact remains that Kiss has been awarded (at least) a frequency, despite its
nearly nil Ukrainian language record and its violation of the 50% Ukrainian
music requirement (known to the National Council), while Gala has been
disqualified on the basis of a much stronger record.

As noted before, a measure violates Article II.3 (b) of the BIT if it is either
“discriminatory” or “arbitrary”. It is readily apparent from the record that
Gala and Kiss were treated differently in a similar case (i.e. on the same issue
in the same tender proceeding, although not necessarily for the same
frequency) without justification and, worse, in violation of applicable tender
conditions. According to Article 25.14 (a) of the LTR, in its tender decisions
the National Council must prefer applicants “capable to fulfil the licence
conditions to the best extent”. The Ukrainian language requirement was a
highly relevant condition for all the tenders, and Gala’s capability of fulfilling
that condition was far superior to that of Kiss. While Kiss won at least a
tender, Gala’s record was pretextually discounted in order to exclude it from
further consideration.

Although not every violation of domestic law necessarily translates into an
arbitrary or discriminatory measure under international law and a violation of
the FET standard, in the Tribunal’s view a blatant disregard of applicable
tender rules, distorting fair competition among tender participants, does. In
conclusion, the Tribunal considers that when the National Council at its
meeting of February 6, 2008 decided to award at least a frequency to Kiss, and
to deny all applications submitted by Gala, such decision violated the FET
standard required by Article II.3 of the BIT.

Mr. Shevchenko, Hearing Transcript. 3, p. 82, at 23

'46 Respondent's Exhibit R-352, p. 10.

79

E)

386.

387.

388.

389.

390.

391.

The Tender of November 20, 2002 in Which Claimant Was the Only
Applicant

On November 20, 2002, the National Council denied Gala’s application for a
frequency for the city of Zhytomir, although Gala was the only applicant in
this tender. The National Council’s decision to reject Claimant’s application
for Zhytomir was not reasoned. Without providing further specifics, Claimant
regards this decision as a violation of the FET standard "7,

The Tribunal’s position

Claimant is only alleging two circumstances in order to prove the arbitrary or
discriminatory character of the National Council’s decision to reject the
Zhytomir application:

- that Gala was the only applicant; and
- that the decision was not reasoned.

Factual situation

Before analyzing these circumstances in more detail, it is important to stress
that the factual situation asserted by Claimant with respect to this tender was
quite different from that pleaded and decided in section C). In the case of the
AM channel, what happened was that Claimant’s application was denied, and
immediately thereafter the same frequency was assigned to a competitor, who
apparently enjoyed privileged political connections. In the Zhytomir decision
there is no allegation that the channel was afterwards retendered and awarded
to a third party, in circumstances which could represent a violation of
applicable rules. Nor does Claimant make any other indication of impropriety
with regard to the actions of the National Council.

The starting point of the Tribunal’s analysis must be whether the Zhytomir
decision violated Ukrainian Law. In accordance with the practice of the
National Council, which conforms with the LNC (Article 26.4), every
allocation of a broadcasting licence required the affirmative vote of a majority
of members, i.e. five. The same rule applied for tenders with only one
participant. The single applicant had to secure five supportive votes in order to
win the tender; otherwise the frequency was not allocated at all.

The lack of reasoning does not by itself constitute a violation of the LTR. As
has already been explained (see paragraph 303 above), the LTR only requires
reasoning for the National Council’s decisions not to allow a company to
participate in a tender (Article 25.8) — but not for the decision to award or deny
the frequency (Article 25.13).

Against these rules, Gala’s position as the single applicant did not ipso iure
entitle it to the Zhytomir frequency, but only to an unbiased consideration of
the application in accordance with the statutory guidelines. The burden of

‘47 Claimant’s Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 118.

80

392.

393.

394.

F)

395.

396.

‘8 Claimant’

proof that the decision was discriminatory or arbitrary (or otherwise violated
the FET standard) lies with Claimant.

The National Council’s decision

The National Council’s decision denying Gala’s application could never be
considered discriminatory, because in this case no third party existed which
benefited from it.

It could nevertheless be arbitrary.

After due consideration, the Tribunal rejects Claimant’s assertion, for want of
sufficient evidence. Under Ukrainian law, the National Council was entitled to
deny a licence, even if the applicant was the only entity applying, and
Ukrainian law does not require that decisions be reasoned. The Tribunal has
already indicated that the absence of reasoning represents a significant
weakness in the administrative procedure for the issuance of licences (see
paragraph 312 above). But this weakness does not imply ipso iure that all
unreasoned decisions of the National Council are arbitrary. For a decision to
be considered arbitrary, an additional element of lack of probity must have
been pleaded and proven. Claimant has not succeeded to do so in the case of
the Zhytomir frequency, and consequently Claimant’s challenge to the
National Council’s decision fails.

The Tender of October 19, 2005 in Favour of NMB Radio

On July 16, 2005 the National Council announced a tender for 29 frequencies
grouped in a channel, which was to broadcast in Ukrainian only, with 100%
Ukrainian language content. On October 19, 2005, NBM Radio was awarded
this channel in a tender with 14 applicants, including Gala.

Claimant’s position

According to Claimant, NBM Radio is owned by Mr. Poroshenko, a friend and
political ally of the President. Claimant asserts'“* that the outcome of the
tender was pre-determined and that the channel of 29 frequencies was
specifically calculated for NBM Radio, as evidenced by the fact that NBM
Radio was the only one of the 14 applicants for this channel that had no
overlap in its coverage with the frequencies allocated for tender. Claimant has
also produced minutes of a meeting in Gala on February 21, 2003 where
Mr. Zhebrodki, a manager of the State Centre, allegedly stated that the State
Centre had received applications for frequencies from NBM and had “to do
something about it, since Mr. Poroshenko has become a National Security
Advisor”.

 

s Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 98.

‘® Claimant's Exhibit CM-143.

81

397.

398.

399.

400.

401.

Respondent’s position

Respondent pleads ignorance regarding Mr. Poroshenko’s ownership of NBM
Radio’ and submits that some 15 companies had participated in the tender
(rather than 14 as alleged by Claimant), that these applications were discussed
in meetings of the National Council during October 19 — 26, 2005, and that
Radio NBM was awarded the channel because it best promised compliance
with a key tender condition. This condition was to broadcast in Ukrainian
language only with a 100% “Ukrainian content”. While Claimant in the
hearing of the National Council had criticized this tender condition, NBM
Radio had promised full compliance and referred to its already superior record
in this respect.

The Tribunal’s position

Claimant submits that the October 19, 2005 National Council decision
awarding 29 frequencies in favour of NMB Radio was arbitrary and
discriminatory; the evidence presented is the following:

- (i) NMB Radio is owned by Mr. Poroshenko, a close ally of the
President;

- (ii) the channel was specifically calculated to fit with NMB’s present
coverage;

- (ili) a statement from Mr. Zhebrodki, Manager of the State Centre; and

- (iv) a threat of prosecution from the National Council against Mr.
Lemire.

The Tribunal will analyse each piece of evidence separately.
Valuation of the evidence

(i): As regards the ownership of NMB Radio, the Tribunal has again been
unable to ascertain the ultimate owner because all the members of the National
Council have deposed that they lack this information'*'. The deposition is so
implausible, that the Tribunal — in the absence of any convincing evidence to
the contrary - is prepared to accept the circumstantial evidence presented by
Claimant and assume that Mr. Pereshenko is indeed the owner of NMB Radio.
But even if this is assumed, and also that he is an ally of the President of
Ukraine, these circumstances give rise to some suspicion but, in the absence of
any further evidence of political interference, fall short of indicating a
manipulation of the tender process.

(ii) and (iii): Claimant further alleges that the channel of 29 frequencies had
been specifically calculated for NBM Radio to enhance its national coverage.
The only evidence submitted to prove this point is the statement from
Mr. Zhebrodski (a manager of the State Centre)!*. This statement was
apparently made during a private meeting at Gala’s premises held with certain

'50 Respondent's Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 408.
'S! See Respondent's Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 410.
'S? Claimant’s Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 101.

82

402.

403.

404.

405.

officers of the company, identified simply as “Natalie, Dima, Kid”. Neither
Natalie, Dima nor Kid have appeared as witnesses in this arbitration or even
submitted a witness statement. Then, after the meeting, some unidentified
person prepared a transcript, translating what undoubtedly was spoken in
Ukrainian into English. This two page English transcript is what has been
presented, and there Mr. Zhebrodski is quoted as saying. “Right now we have
applications from NMB and Channel 5 and we have to do something about it,
since Poroshenko has become a National Security Advisor'”,

This evidence is weak. There is no certainty that Mr. Zhebrodski actually used
these words, that they were correctly recorded and then correctly translated
into English. But even if arguendo the quotation is accepted as true,
Mr. Zhebrodski only indicates that the prominent position of Mr. Pereshenko
(not necessarily his relationship with the President) added some sense of
urgency for the State Centre to perform its duties (i.e. to calculate frequencies
in the presence of applications); it did not necessarily imply any manipulation.

(iv): Finally, there is the alleged threat of prosecution by the National Council.
What happened is that on September 15, 2005, Mr. Lemire sent a letter to the
National Council, asking for a general suspension of tenders in view of
allegations of corruption against the Ukrainian Government and also against
the National Council!**. As a reaction to this letter, on September 21, 2005,
the National Council adopted a decision declaring Mr. Lemire’s allegations
“groundless and far-fetched” and “consider[ing] them as the tool of exerting
pressure on the National Council management”, and informing the public of
the “blackmail efforts” undertaken'»°.

The documentary record does not evidence any threat of prosecution from the
National Council. What seemed to have happened is that Claimant sent a
strongly worded letter (to use an understatement) to the National Council, with
copies to the President and the Prime Minister and to the American
Ambassador, and that the National Council reacted with a decision, also
drafted in strong terms, rejecting the accusations and describing Claimant’s
behaviour as blackmail.

Summing up, the Tribunal considers that each piece of evidence submitted by
Claimant, by itself, is not sufficient to support an allegation that the tender
decision was arbitrary or discriminatory. The Tribunal has finally considered
whether the evidence in the aggregate might establish conclusive evidence of a
manipulation of the tender process, even if none of these circumstances did so
by itself. Such a conclusion might be appropriate in the absence of a plausible
explanation for the result of the tender decision. Thus, it is necessary that the
Tribunal analyse the details of the National Council’s decision.

‘SS Claimant's Exhibit CM-143.
'S4 Claimant’s Exhibit 30 to Request of Arbitration.
‘SS Claimant's Exhibit CM-39.

83

406.

407.

408.

G)

409.

The decision to award the frequencies

The record of this arbitration includes the transcript of the meeting of the
National Council on October 19, 2006, in which both Gala and NBM (among
various others) made presentations to defend their applications'®®, NMB
spoke first, explaining that NBM Radio had started 10 years ago, and that it
was the first radio station that conducted and continued to conduct the
broadcasting exclusively in Ukrainian'*”, Gala, who spoke afterwards,
accepted that the tender “is an entirely different format, not the format of Gala
radio Company'** ” and declared that it would comply with the requirements
of the National Council “that all DJ’s must speak Ukrainian, there should be
Ukrainian music, and thus shape and form Ukrainian culture”. Mr. Lemire
finally added a phrase which could be understood to express some challenge to
the National Council’s determination that the channel should be 100%
Ukrainian: “We should allow the audience to determine what it wants and we
think that since Ukraine is seeking the status of a country with a market-
economy, it should not introduce Ukrainian culture by force — it needs to be
developed'” ”

The National Council had defined as a fundamental condition for the new
channel that it be 100% in Ukrainian. This was a legitimate decision, based on
a public interest choice to extend the use of Ukrainian in the media. When
awarding licences, the first criterion which the National Council must take into
consideration is whether the winner will be able to fulfil the conditions to the
best extent (Article 25.14 (a) of the LTR). Applying this criterion to the
present tender, it seems both plausible and legitimate that NMB’s and Gala’s
different experience and attitude towards broadcasting 100% in Ukrainian,
swayed the Council members’ votes in favour of Radio Era.

Against the satisfactory explanation of the tender decision, the four
circumstances alleged by Claimant cannot be accepted as evidence of a
manipulation of the tender process amounting to a violation of the FET
standard defined in Article II.3 of the BIT.

The Award of Frequencies During the Time When the National Council
Was Not Operative

The National Council became inoperative in March 1999, because its members
were not appointed, and remained in this situation until June 2000!
Claimant submits that during this period, Respondent developed the practice
of illegally awarding frequencies to companies other than Gala. The National
Council then held its first tender on January 1, 2001, at which Claimant was
not authorized to participate, and at which preferential treatment was given to
the companies which had been illegally given licences during the National
Council’s black out period.

'S6 Respondent's Exhibit R-279.

'S7 Respondent's Exhibit R-279, p. 3.

'58 Respondent's Exhibit R-279, p. 10.

'° Respondent's Exhibit R-279, p. 10.

' Claimant’s Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 67.3.

84

410.

411.

412.

413.

414.

Als.

416.

417.

The Tribunal’s position

It is undisputed that between March 16, 1999 and June 9, 2000 the National
Council did not function, because its members had not been appointed. After
Parliament appointed its members on May 18, 2000 and the President made
his appointment on June 9, 2000, a newly constituted National Council was
able to resume its functions. It is also undisputed that on January 1, 2001 the
first tender organized by the new National Council was held, and that Gala
was not permitted to participate, because it was reserved for companies who
had been affected by the National Council’s black-out period.

There is an important dispute among the parties regarding the precise scope of
companies which had access to this special tender.

Respondent submits that the tender was reserved to broadcasters whose licence
had expired while the National Council was inoperative'®'. Claimant’s
explanation is totally different: during the interregnum Ukraine had developed
the practice that the State Committee grant licences for radio broadcasting, in
violation of the LTR, through a non-transparent and closed procedure that was
not available to Claimant!?. And the first tender was organized to legitimize
these beneficiaries.

There is strong evidence that Claimant’s explanation is the correct one.

First of all, the renewal of licences under the LTR does not require a tender
(Article 24.9). Extension is a “right” of the licence holder, and the National
Council can reject the application for extension only in very limited
circumstances (Article 33.7). Respondent’s explanation of what happened
seems a legal impossibility, and is at any rate entirely implausible.

Secondly, there is a letter sent on September 28, 1999 by S. Aksenenko, a
member of the National Council, to the Vice Prime Minister of Ukraine!™, in
which Mr. Aksenenko protests that other institutions of the executive branch
are usurping the National Council’s powers, taking advantage of the fact that it

is not operative.

Finally, Mr. Lemire has presented the transcript of a meeting held on March
19, 2001 with Mr. Koholod, the then chairman of the National Council, who
acknowledged that during the interregnum “some bad things [were]
happening” and that the State Committee, and not the National Council, had

been issuing the licences'™,

The Tribunal concludes that during the period between March 16, 1999 and
June 9, 2000, when the National Council was not operative, Respondent
developed the practice that certain licences for radio broadcasting were issued
directly by the executive branch of Government, without transparency or

‘6! Respondent's counsel, Hearing Transcript 1, p. 71, at 16.
‘© Claimant’s Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 57.2.

‘8 Claimant’

Exhibit CM-11.

 

‘4 Claimant's Exhibit CM-101; Respondent has not challenged the accuracy of the transcript.

85

418.

VIL3.5.

419.

420.

421.

publicity and without meeting the requirements of or following the procedures
established in the LTR. The de facto situation was then legalized through the
first tender, convened by the National Council exclusively with this purpose.
Claimant was excluded from this procedure.

In the opinion of the Tribunal, Respondent’s above described practice
constitutes a violation of the FET standard established in Article II.3 of the
BIT, because it facilitates the secret awarding of licences, without
transparency, with total disregard of the process of law and without any
possibility of judicial review. The practice must be considered arbitrary, since
it meets the Saluka test of “manifestly violat{ing] the requirements of
consistency, transparency, even-handedness and non-discrimination'*”. The
lack of propriety is such that — as the test was articulated in Tecmed and
Loewen - the practice also “shocks, or at least surprises, a sense of juridical
propriety!”

CONCLUSIONS REGARDING THE AWARDING OF RADIO LICENCES

As a starting point the Tribunal has studied the administrative procedure
defined in Ukrainian Law for the issuance of radio frequencies. The
conclusion reached by the Tribunal is that the procedure was marred by
significant shortcomings (although these have been ameliorated after the 2006
amendment to the LTR). These weaknesses facilitated arbitrary or
discriminatory decision-taking by the National Council.

In six years Gala Radio, although it tried insistently, and presented more than
200 applications for all types of frequencies, was only able to secure a single
licence (in a small village in rural Ukraine). Gala’s main competitors were
much more successful and each received between 38 and 56 frequencies.
Although this macro-statistical analysis does not provide conclusive evidence
that Respondent, when awarding radio licences, has been violating the FET
standard, there are factors (the strikingly different success rates of Gala and of
its competitors, the inexistence of any information regarding the real owners of
the competing stations, the impossibility of verifying the reasons why Gala
was rejected) which can be construed as indications that at least some of the
decisions of the National Council when it awarded frequencies were arbitrary
and/or discriminatory.

To confirm or reject these indications, the Tribunal then looked in detail at five
tenders for radio frequencies and at the administrative practice for awarding
licences in the interregnum while the National Council was not operative
between 1999 and 2000. The Tribunal came to the conclusion that the
following decisions did not meet the FET standard provided for in the BIT:

‘8 Saluka Investments BV v. Czech Republic PCA, UNCITRAL, Partial Award of 17.March 2006,

para 307.

' See Tecnicas Medioambientales Tecmed SA v. United Mexican States, 1CSID Case No. ARB
(AF)/00/2, Award of 29 May 2003, para. 154 and Loewen Group Inc and Raymons L. Loewen v. United
States of America, ICSID No. ARB(AF)98/3, Award of 26 June 2003, para. 131.

86

422.

VII3.6

423.

424.

425.

- the National Council’s decision adopted on October 19, 2005 granting an
FM information channel to Radio Era, and the subsequent decisions to
award 12 frequencies to radio Kokannya;

- the National Council’s decision of May 26, 2004 denying Gala Radio the
licence for an AM channel, and the decision of December 21, 2004
granting such licence to NART TV;

- the National Council’s decision of February 6, 2008 denying Gala’s
application and accepting the application of Kiss Radio;

- Respondent’s practice of awarding radio licences while the National
Council’s was not operative between March 16, 1999 and June 9, 2000,
and the National Council’s decision of January 1, 2001 to legalize the
licences illegally granted during the interregnum.

On the other hand, the Tribunal is unconvinced by Claimant’s allegation that
the National Council’s decisions of November 20, 2002 and of October 19,
2005 represented a breach of the FET standard.

POSTPONEMENT OF DECISION REGARDING DAMAGES

Claimant has presented extensive allegations regarding damages, and an expert
report prepared by Goldmedia. Respondent has submitted a counter report
prepared by EBS. Both experts deposed during the hearing.

In its Post-Hearing Memorial, Respondent has added'®’ that the damage
reports were prepared in the summer of 2008, that since then the economic
basis has completely changed, and that the Ukrainian economy has shifted
from a high growth rate to a sharp drop. There have also been significant
changes in the parity of the UAH vis-a-vis the USD. Ukraine asserts that its
economy “has been devastated by the worldwide economic crisis” and that it
will shrink dramatically in the future. These changes in the overall economic
climate, according to Ukraine have a significant impact on the DCF analysis
presented by the experts.

The Tribunal agrees with Respondent that the changes suffered by the
Ukrainian and the world economy since the dates when the expert reports were
prepared, and its effects on the quantum of the damage, require further
investigation. Furthermore, the assumptions underlying the experts’ reports do
not coincide with the conclusions reached by the Tribunal in this Decision, and
the quantum evidence therefore requires recalibration in accordance with the
present decision. Consequently, the question of the appropriate redress of the
breach, including the quantification of the damages, will be addressed in a
short second phase of this arbitration. After hearing the parties, the Tribunal
will issue a Procedural Order for the continuation of the procedure.

'S7 Respondent's Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 646.

87

VIL4.

VIL4.1.

426.

427.

428.

429.

430.

431.

CLAIMANT’S SECOND ALLEGATION: THE CONTINUOUS HARASSMENT BY
RESPONDENT AND THE REQUEST FOR MORAL DAMAGES

CLAIMANT’S ALLEGATIONS
Claimant submits'® that the National Council, in a concerted effort to force
Claimant out of the radio industry, has:

- abusively monitored and inspected Gala from 2005 through 2008;

- issued two warnings to Gala and threatened issuance of a third warning
with the purpose of revoking Gala’s licence;

- threatened Gala with non-renewal of its licence on the basis of the 2006
LTR disqualifying foreigners as “founders” of radio stations;

- delayed the decision on the renewal of Gala’s licence with a view to
imposing a tenfold licence fee under a newly enacted formula; and

- allowed only an unrealistically short period for payment for an exorbitant
licence fee.

Claimant adds that Gala was the first radio company which complied with the
50% Ukrainian music requirement, despite the negative effects on its ratings.
This notwithstanding, in September 2005 the National Council inspected Gala
and, as a result, issued a first warning on October 5, 2005. This warning was
voided on April 4, 2006 by the Kyiv Economic Court, with the National
Council’s appeal dismissed on September 26, 2006.

In October and November 2005, Gala was again repeatedly monitored and
inspected, with a second warning (dated November 23, 2005) as a result. Due
process defence against this warning was denied to Claimant. Upon Gala’s
redress, the second warning was also voided by the Kyiv Economic Court and
the National Council’s appeal against that decision was again dismissed on
February 15, 2007.

In May/June 2006 Gala was monitored and inspected yet again; and on July
19, 2006, the National Council met to decide on a third warning. Under the
new 2006 LTR, a third warning would have enabled the National Council to
institute court proceedings for revoking Gala’s licence. Against this threat, the
meeting was attended by five Gala executives, Gala’s local and international
attorneys, and the First Secretary of the US Embassy in Ukraine. In view of
this presence, the National Council shied away from issuing a third warning.

The two warnings and the threat of a third, terminal warning were based on
frivolous grounds. Claimant refers to other radio stations which were rarely
inspected and did not receive warnings despite graver violations.

Claimant further submits that the Chairman and other representatives of the
National Council have repeatedly threatened to reject the renewal of Gala’s
broadcasting licence, which expired on September 18, 2008. They referred to
Claimant’s US citizenship and to Article 12(2) of the LTR, which prohibited

‘8 Claimant’s Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 125.

88

432.

433.

434.

435.

the “foundation” of TV/radio stations by “foreign legal entities and physical
persons”, although a similar prohibition already existed in the historic 1993
LTR. Besides the National Council representatives knew that Claimant had
acquired his controlling share in Gala from the Ukrainian company Provisen
and thus had not been Gala’s founder.

While Gala had applied for an extension of its licence on March 13, 2008, the
National Council delayed its final decision until July 19, 2008. It then applied
a new formula for calculating the licence fee, which had been adopted by the
Council of Ministers just on July 9, 2008. To make matters worse, the new
formula was applied wrongly to Gala’s detriment. As a result, Gala was
invoiced a renewal fee of the equivalent of 1,039 million USD, more than ten
times the fee that would have been due under the previous formula. Gala was
allowed only 16 days for payment of this unexpectedly high fee. Other radio
companies (e.g., HIT FM and Russkoye Radio owned by Mr. Bagrayev, a
political ally of the President) had applied for a renewal of their licence later
than Gala, but received the renewal before Gala, at a fee calculated under the
previous formula.

On August 15, 2008, Claimant requested a Provisional Measure from the
Tribunal, suspending ultimate payment of the renewal fee until the Final
Award in this arbitration. On August 19, 2008, Respondent requested that
Mr. Paulsson resign as an arbitrator in the present case, due to the involvement
of his law firm in another case with Respondent as a party; this request and a
subsequent official challenge by Respondent to Mr. Paulsson’s impartiality,
delayed the Tribunal’s decision on the requested Provisional Measures.

The National Council finally reassessed the renewal fee to the amount
expected by Claimant. This reassessment was prompted by an advice from the
Ministry of Justice that the previous formula (rather than the new formula) was
applicable to Gala’s renewal fee.

Claimant acknowledges that the harassment finally has not been successful,
because the broadcasting licences have been extended with the payment of the
correct fees, Gala has not been fined and the warnings have been quashed by
the Ukrainian Courts. But Claimant submits that this does not provide
Claimant with immunity from paying damages for the harassment and moral
harm that Ukraine’s malicious acts have caused. Invoking the precedent of
DLP y. Yemen'®, Claimant requests that Respondent “be held to be liable to
reparation for the injury suffered by Claimant, whether bodily, moral or
material in nature”. Respondent’s harassment has inflicted significant moral
harm, including anxiety, pain and suffering, for which Respondent should be
held liable in the amount of three million USD.

'® Desert Line Projects LLC v. Yemen, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/17, Award of 6 February 2008.

89

VII.4.2. RESPONDENT’S ALLEGATIONS

436.

437.

438.

439.

Respondent denies!” that the National Council had any intention, let alone

concerted action strategy, to shut down Gala and force Claimant out of the
radio industry in Ukraine. All monitoring, inspections and other actions
advanced by Claimant were performed by the National Council in the exercise
of its regulatory and supervisory responsibilities as per the parameters and
guidance provided in applicable legislation.

Statistics refute Claimant’s allegation that Gala had been targeted for
excessive monitoring and inspections. During 2004 — 2008, the National
Council ordered a total of 1438 inspections and issued a total of 288 warnings.
The five inspections of and two warnings to Gala are not egregious. Other
broadcasters similarly had experienced between three and six inspections; and
five broadcasters had even received three warnings and presently face court
proceedings for cancellation of their licences.

The procedures for monitoring and inspections are not inequitable, arbitrary or
discriminatory, and are equally applied to all broadcasters under the
jurisdiction of the National Council. As a matter of administrative routine,
broadcasters are continuously monitored to check whether they comply with
applicable legislation and with their licences. Monitoring is based on an
evaluation of the programmes broadcast; it does not involve the companies
and does not interrupt their business. Inspections are ordered by the National
Council if monitoring reveals indications of violations; they are carried out at
the premises of the radio station and last one business day at most. Inspection
reports are immediately shared with the broadcasters concerned and submitted
for decision to the National Council. If the inspection reveals violations of
either applicable legislation or the terms of a broadcaster’s licence, the
National Council may impose sanctions. These range from warnings (lightest
sanction) and monetary penalties to court proceedings and revocation of
licence. Sanctions imposed can be appealed to Ukrainian Courts.

Gala was monitored in September 2005, together with several other
broadcasters, in accordance with the normal administrative process. Since
violations of applicable legislation were detected (with respect to Ukrainian
language and advertising rules), the National Council by letter of September
27, 2005 informed Gala of its decision to conduct a first inspection on
September 30, 2005. When the National Council experts tried to perform this
inspection, Gala representatives denied them access to Gala’s premises. The
National Council thereupon issued a first warning on October 5, 2005 and, at
the same time, decided to repeat the inspection within two weeks. On April 4,
2006 this first warning was quashed by the Kiyv Economic Court, on the
ground that the National Council had failed to prove receipt by Gala of the
Council’s aforementioned letter of September 27, 2005.

"7° Respondent's Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 516.

90

440.

441.

442.

443.

444,

445.

Gala was inspected again on October 19, 2005. This inspection detected
violations of broadcasting and advertising legislation, and of the terms of
Gala’s licence regarding children’s and educational programs. On November
2, 2005 the National Council discussed the inspection results with Gala and
gave it two weeks to cure the violations. After negative results of a subsequent
monitoring, the National Council issued a second warning on November 23,
2005, requiring Gala to cure the violations within six months. This second
warning was also quashed by the Kiev Economic Court, on the ground that it
was based on an inspection prompted by the first warning, which had been
voided previously by the Court.

On May 27, 2006, i.e. six months after the second warning, a monitoring
revealed that Gala had not ceased in its violations. Thereupon, a third
inspection was carried out on June 2, 2006. It confirmed continuing violations
as per the monitoring report, but also noted that Gala had rectified its previous
violations regarding broadcasting in Ukrainian language. In view of this
improvement, the National Council abstained from issuing a third warning.

In 2008, Gala was inspected twice, in April as a routine matter in advance of
the pending renewal of Gala’s licence and on June 3 after monitoring detected
a violation of Ukrainian election legislation. The April inspection was
inconsequential, while the June inspection confirmed the violation.
Nevertheless, the National Council, in its meeting on June 18 accepted
Claimant’s explanation that the violation was accidental, did not issue a
warning but rather proceeded with the renewal of Gala’s licence.

National Council representatives have never threatened to deny the renewal of
Gala’s licence due to Claimant’s US citizenship.

The licence was renewed on July 19, 2008 in due time before its expiry on
September 18, 2008. The processing time was required for clarification of
outstanding issues.

The renewal fee had initially been calculated under the new formula on the
National Council’s understanding that the Cabinet decree had entered into
force at the date of its receipt by the National Council on July 11, 2008. Since
the renewal had been granted thereafter (July 16), the Council had applied the
new formula in good faith. Nevertheless, the National Council had sought the
guidance of the Cabinet of Ministers on the issue as early as August 11, 2008,
i.e. before Claimant’s request for Provisional Measures challenging the fee.
The Cabinet had referred the matter to the Ministry of Justice, which on
September 15, 2008 advised the National Council that the formula entered into
force only with the publication of the decree in the Official Bulletin of Ukraine
on July 18, 2008, i.e. after the renewal of Gala’s licence on July 16. In light of
this advice, the National Council promptly recalculated the fee under the
previous formula, more advantageous to Claimant, and informed the Tribunal
accordingly.

91

446.

447.

448.

VIL.4.3.
A)

449.

450.

451.

452.

The challenge of Mr. Paulsson as an arbitrator in the present proceeding had
been prompted by disagreements between Claimant and Respondent regarding
implications of the issue for the status of the final award. It had nothing to do
with Claimant’s request for provisional measures and/or the calculation of the
renewal fee.

The fact that the two warnings against Gala have been set aside by Ukrainian
Courts shows, in Respondent’s view, that the Ukrainian system provided
adequate redress against administrative error, in compliance with the FET
standard under the BIT.

Claimant had suffered no harm as a result of the National Council’s actions
wrongly described by Mr. Lemire as harassment. All inspections together have
taken at most four business days over a four-year period. Claimant is still
operating a profitable business — a fact which according to Respondent
precludes any claim on the basis of “creeping expropriation” or violation of
“full protection and security”.

THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
Introduction

Claimant’s basic line of reasoning is that, behind the individual facts of this
case, an overall aim appears: the Ukrainian authorities’ desire to get rid of an
annoying American investor, by systematically denying any application for
further frequencies, thwarting plans to create new channels, and harassing him
with irregular inspections and difficulties for the renewal of his licence.

Respondent has vehemently denied the accusation. Chairman Shevchenko has
stated that the National Council never resorted to procedures aimed at any
revocation of the Gala Radio licence and has not even contemplated such

steps!7!.

The Tribunal has already come to the conclusion that Respondent’s practice
regarding the allocation of frequencies is not compatible with the FET
standard defined in the BIT. As a consequence of the violation of the BIT
Claimant is entitled to be indemnified for the economic damages he has
suffered. As has already been stated (see paragraph 426 above), this issue will
be addressed in a subsequent phase of this arbitration.

Claimant is now asking that the Tribunal decide whether the harassment which
he allegedly suffered, entitles him to receive an additional indemnification,
further to the economic loss, for the moral damage suffered. The harassment in
itself cannot constitute additional violations of the BIT because, as Claimant
himself acknowledges, in the end the inspections led to no sanctions and the
licence was correctly extended. For this reason, Claimant restricts his prayer
for relief to a request that the Tribunal indemnify Claimant for the moral harm
he has suffered, caused by Respondent’s continuing harassment.

'”! Reespondent’s Rebuttal Witness Statement of Mr. Shevchenko dated 2 December 2008, p.31.

92

453.

B)

454,

455.

456.

457.

458.

In order to decide this claim, the Tribunal has to analyze the two separate
issues submitted by Claimant, the inspection of Gala Radio (B) and the
renewal of the licence (C), leading to the Tribunal’s conclusions (D).

The Inspection of Gala Radio

The National Council is the supervisor and regulator of the TV and radio
sector in Ukraine (Articles 13 and 14 of the LNC). As such, the Council has
the power to monitor and inspect radio companies, including Gala Radio. The
procedure of inspection is defined in Articles 70 to 75 of the LTR, and in an
Instruction of the National Council, issued in 2003 and amended in subsequent
years!”, Monitoring is a process of recording and analyzing the broadcasting
of a radio company, and is done directly by the National Council, without
involvement of the radio station. An inspection is a more serious review,
which requires access to the company’s premises. Inspections can be
scheduled — i.e. in accordance with a plan approved by the National Council —
or unscheduled — i.e. motivated by some exceptional circumstance.

The results of an inspection are formalized in an inspection report; the affected
company has access to the report, and is entitled to give explanations, to
provide evidence and to file claims (Article 73.3 of the LTR). The inspection
report, prepared by the National Council staff, is submitted to the National
Council which has the right either to close the file without sanction, or to issue
a warning, to impose a penalty or to appeal to a Court in order to revoke the
licence (Article 72.6 of the LTR). The practice of the National Council is to
listen during the meeting to an oral explanation of the representative of the
radio company!”>,

It is undisputed that until 2005 Gala was never inspected. Since then, Gala has
suffered five inspections, four of which were unscheduled !”*,

The first warning

The first inspection took place on September 28, 2005, and it has been
described in detail in the report prepared by the inspectors!” The day before
the inspection, the inspectors had sent a fax to Radio Gala, announcing their
visit for the next day. When they arrived, a female employee told them that the
management of the company was outside Kyiv, and would not return until
October 17, 2005. The employee stated that she “was not authorized to
provide any information or documents”.

A week later, on October 5, 2005 the National Council decided to issue a
warning to Gala because the personnel of Gala Radio “prevented [National
Council representatives] from carrying out their legitimate actions” 176 | by

'? Responent’s Exhibit RLA-15 (original text) and RLA-64 (amended text).
'® Tyspector Iulian Leliukh, Hearing Transcript 4, p.103, at 15.

‘4 Mr. Denisenko, Hearing Transcript 2, p. 209, at 16.

"5 Respondent’ s Exhibit R-270.

"76 Respondent's Exhibit R-272.

93

459.

460.

461.

refusing to produce the documents and materials required for conducting the
inspection. The decision was abusive, because the inspectors’ report did not
reflect any refusal to cooperate, only the absence of management, and because
the advance notice had been unreasonably short. Besides, there is no evidence
that Gala was heard before the decision was adopted, and the LTR does not
typify the refusal to produce documents as a sanctionable wrong. Gala
successfully challenged the warning before the Kyiv Economic Court, and it
was set aside by this Court on April 11, 2006. The National Council appealed,
the appeal was rejected on February 14, 2008.

The second warning

On October 14, 2005 the National Council informed Gala that an inspection
would be performed on October 19, 2005. The inspection took place on this
date, in the presence of Mr. Lemire, who refused to sign the inspection
report!””, The inspection report reflects the following:

- the language of programs is Ukrainian;

- the language of commercials is predominantly Ukrainian, although two
commercials were in Russian, which represents a violation of the Law on
Advertising;

- there is one instance where a commercial was not separated from other
elements of the program, in violation of the Law on Advertising;

- the air time devoted to information programs, to educational programs
and to children programs were significantly less than the figures
mentioned in the licence.

On November 2, 2005 the National Council met, heard representatives of
Gala, and decided to postpone their vote for two weeks!”8. On November 23,
the National Council met again and issued a warning against Gala, for the
reasons set forth in the inspectors’ report. The warning was cancelled by the
Kyiv Economic Court on February 15, 2007, because the Court considered the
inspection illegal'”.

The June 2006 inspection

With two warnings against Gala in the appeal Courts, on May 29, 2006
Chairman Shevchenko ordered the Control and Monitoring Department of the
National Council to conduct a new inspection, which was carried out on June
2, 2006. Inspector Leliukh has declared that the inspection was conducted in a
hostile environment, and that Mr. Lemire was accompanied by four lawyers
and a representative of the American Embassy. The inspection report came to
the following conclusions 180,

‘77 Respondent's Exhibit R-276.
"8 Respondent’s Exhibit R-282; Respondent submits that the two weeks delay was to permit Gala to cure

the irregularitie:
' See Claimant’

this does not derive from the transcript.
submission to the Court in Respondent's Exhibit R-312.

 

 

'80 Respondent's Exhibit R-298.

94

462.

463.

464.

- the advertising exceeded the 20% legal maximum per hour (i.e. 12
minutes maximum) in four hourly time periods: from 9 am to 10 am, by
18 seconds, from 12 pm to | pm, by 14 seconds, from 1 pm to 2 pm, by 3
seconds and from 5 pm to 6 pm by 12 seconds;

- Gala was basically complying with the licence conditions, it had
broadcast 6.36 h. of cultural programs, when the licence required 3.50 h.;
Gala had however failed to broadcast children’s programs, as required by
the licence;

- Gala was complying with the 50% Ukrainian music percentage;

- language is 100% Ukrainian, including advertisements;

- two advertisements were not clearly separated from the other elements of
the program.

Claimant asserts that the inspection team, headed by Inspector Leliukh,
included in its submission to the National Council a proposal that a third
warning be issued. A third warning would have blocked the renewal process
for the licence, which was then under discussion and might have triggered an
action to revoke Claimant’s licence (although this is not a must: the LTR does
not require that a third warning triggers a procedure of licence revocation).
Claimant was sufficiently worried about the prospect of a third warning and its
consequences that he asked for the assistance of US Embassy officials and of
his international lawyers at the meeting of July 19, 2006 to lobby against the
issuance of the third warning.

Inspector Leliukh, asked by the Tribunal if he had recommended issuing a
third warning, answered: “J do not remember whether or not I recommended a
warning'*! ”. And under cross examination, asked whether the draft resolution
would be in the record of the National Council, he stated that “as a rule a
draft resolution is not maintained — resolutions themselves are archived, not
draft resolutions”,

Although Inspector Leliukh does not remember, there is clear evidence in the
file showing that a third warning was indeed proposed. Respondent has
submitted the transcript of the July 19, 2006 session’, and there it is clearly
stated that Shevchenko put the draft decision for issuing a warning to the vote.
The decision received one vote in favour (from Chairman Shevchenko) and
five members abstained, and consequently it was rejected. Immediately
thereafter, a new decision was tabled and carried unanimously. This decision
states that the National Council:

- takes knowledge of the report resulting from Gala’s inspection;

- obligates the management of Gala to bring its activities in line with the
licence, Deputy Chairman Kurus being in charge of control of this
obligation; and

- informs the founders of Gala that in accordance with Article 12 of the
LTR foreigners are prohibited from being the founders of radio stations.

'S! Inspector Iulian Leliukh, Hearing Transcript 4, p. 111, at 8.
'®? Ispector Iulian Leliukh, Hearing Transcript 4, p. 116, at 7.
'83 Respondent's Exhibit R-306, p. 2070.

95

465.

466.

467.

468.

469.

The reference to the founding of Gala, and to Article 12 of the LTR, is
especially troubling. In accordance with the records, which must have been
available to the National Council, Gala Radio had not been founded by Mr.
Lemire, but by Provisen, an Ukrainian company, and Claimant subsequently
bought a controlling stake in the company. The prohibition of foreign
foundership of radio stations was already included in Article 13 of the 1993
LTR, and was then taken over into Article 12 of the 2006 LTR. Consequently,
it existed when the National Council authorized Mr. Lemire’s purchase of the
control in Gala.

The July 19, 2006 decision of the National Council “informs” the founders of
Gala that foreigners are prohibited from being founders of radio stations. This
statement is difficult to understand, because:

- it seems incongruous in a decision regarding the imposition of a sanction
to Gala;

- it is unnecessary, if it is just a reminder of a legal rule which had existed
since 1993;

- it is without purpose, because a company can never retroactively change
its founders;

- if it purports to be an anticipation of what the National Council would
decide in the future (the licence will not be renewed, because Mr. Lemire
is American), it is legally incorrect, because Mr. Lemire is not the
founder and his investment had been duly authorized.

The 2008 inspections

In April 2008 Gala was subject to a further, scheduled inspection, which
resulted in a conclusion that there was no irregularity.

Then, in June 3, 2008 an additional unscheduled inspection took place, which
led to a decision of the National Council on June 18, 2008. What had
happened was that on the day of the Municipal Elections, a candidate had
spoken on Gala Radio, starting his words by saying “J will not promote myself
... Twill not advertise either. All I wanted to say is that everyone has to come”.
Hereafter, he made a short presentation why citizens should vote in his favour.
The inspection report prepared by the National Council inspection team stated
that the broadcasting of these declarations violated the Ukrainian Election Law
which requires that “campaigning” cease 24 hours before the vote!*,

During the session of the National Council on June 18, 2008'*, a member of
the National Council acknowledged that all TV channels show interviews with
various candidates during the ballot casting. Gala explained at the hearing that
they had committed a mistake. Respondent submits that the National Council

decided not to issue a warning !*®,

'™4 Respondent's Exhibit R-373.

'85 Respondent's Exhibit R-375 (transcript of the meeting).

8° Respondent’s Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 548; not contradicted by Claimant; the transcript of the
meeting, however, is not clear; Chairman Shevchenko’s last words are: “But they admit their fault, saying

96

C)

470.

471.

472.

473.

474.

D)

475.

Renewal of the Licence

Gala Radio’s licence was due for renewal on September 18, 2008. Claimant
applied for renewal on March 13, 2008. The National Council reacted with a
number of documentary requests, to which Gala duly responded |’, The
licence was eventually issued on July 16, 2008, on the last possible meeting of
the National Council.

On July 25, 2008 Gala received an invoice for more than one million USD,
which represented a 10 fold increase with regard to the renewal fee which
would have been applicable in accordance with the guidelines approved in
1995. The new methodology for calculating had been approved by the
National Council on November 22, 2006, but required a confirmation decision
from the Cabinet of Ministers. On July 9, 2008 the Cabinet adopted the
necessary decree, and the National Council at its meeting of July 16, 2008
declared that the new methodology would be used to calculate its fees — the
same meeting which approved the extension of Gala’s licence.

In Claimant’s opinion, the National Council on purpose delayed the
application process, in order to be able to charge the higher fee'**, Claimant
further alleges that Russkoie Radio and Hit FM — both allegedly owned by Mr.
Bagrayev, National Council member until 2002 - applied for their renewal
after Gala, but were awarded their licence on May 28, 2008, seven weeks
before Gala'*’, This statement has not been denied by Respondent.

Claimant finally was only required to pay the lower, historic fee. The reason
for this is that when the National Council issued the one million USD plus
invoice, it failed to take into consideration, that on the date of Gala’ renewal
the decree had not yet been published in the Official Bulletin, and
consequently it had not entered into force and could not be applied to the Gala
licence renewal.

Claimant filed a request for interim measures in this arbitration, Ukraine
eventually accepted Claimant’s arguments and modified the licence renewal
fee to the historic figure, which Claimant accepted and duly paid, desisting
from the Request.

Decision of the Arbitral Tribunal

The Tribunal is in this case confronted with a request for moral damages,
which Claimant allegedly has suffered as a consequence of harassment by the
National Council. The moral damages — as alleged by Claimant — include
anxiety, pain and suffering, and they are estimated at three million USD, a
figure which is deemed “very conservative ... in light of the long duration,

 

that it was all by accident, and we agree with this point, advising the company to take this fact into
account as a warning”

'S? See Claimant's Exhibits CRIM-S, 6, 7, 8 and 9.

'88 Claimant’s Reply Memorial, para. 248.

‘8° Claimant’s Reply Memorial, para. 253.

97

476.

477.

478.

479.

480.

481.

482.

intensive and diverse harassment to which Respondent has subjected
Claimant'*°”.

Moral damages in investment arbitrations

In most legal systems, damages which can be recovered by the aggrieved
include not only the damnum emergens and lucrum cessans, but also moral
damages. The Tribunal shares the conclusions reached in Desert Line
Projects 191,

“Even if investment treaties primarily aim at protecting property and
economic values, they do not exclude, as such, that a party may, in
exceptional circumstances, ask for com] ion for moral de

 

The circumstances in Desert Line Projects were very exceptional indeed.
Claimant had been subject to physical duress and suffered a siege by the
armed forces of Respondent.

Can moral damages be applied in the factual situation of this case in which
Claimant is not making any allegation of physical duress?

Claimant in essence is submitting that the National Council incurred in
systemic bias against Gala Radio. Not only did the National Council reject the
200 applications made by the radio station for new frequencies, jeopardizing
Gala’s plans to expand its activities, but it also maliciously subjected Gala to a
series of inspections, with the hidden agenda to close it down, and then in bad
faith delayed the renewal of the licence, until a new regulation had come into
force, which increased the renewal fee by 10.

Claimant’s accusations are very grave indeed.

The National Council is Radio Gala’s lawful supervisor and regulator,
entrusted by Ukrainian law with authorizing, monitoring, inspecting and
sanctioning TV and radio stations. Agencies with powers analogous to those of
the National Council exist in most jurisdictions, because they have proven
necessary in order to guarantee correct assignment of scarce frequencies,
protection of rights of viewers and listeners and defence of liberty of
information and plurality of opinions. Regulatory agencies, provided by law
with wide powers to intervene, must act with absolute independence and
impartiality. And regulated entities have an obligation to cooperate with their
supervisor, to follow their supervisor’s instructions and to comply with
applicable rules.

In all jurisdictions regulated entities are also required to respect and cooperate
with their lawful regulatory agencies. Mr. Lemire’s behaviour vis-a-vis the
National Council, and his extensive use of the Courts to obtain redress for his
grievances and of the American Embassy to secure protection, may have

' Claimant’s Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 147.
1! Desert Line Projects LLC v. The Republic of Yemen, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/17, Award of 29
January 2008, para. 289.

98

483.

484.

485.

486.

looked rude and disrespectful to the Ukrainian authorities. But the personal
behaviour of the regulated should never impair on the impartiality of the
supervisor.

Another important aspect to bear in mind is whether the Ukrainian legal
system affords an efficient system for appealing the regulator’s decisions
before a Court. That right also exists in Ukraine, and it has worked. The
Courts have twice quashed (in first instance and then on appeal) illegal
decisions of the National Council. And in the case of the renewal fees, the
Ministry of Justice has sided with Claimant against the National Council.

The Tribunal has analyzed in detail the relationship between Gala Radio and
the National Council and certain facts stand out:

- Gala was never inspected until 2005, and in the next three years it was
the object of five inspections, of which four were unscheduled;

- the first warning issued by the National Council against Gala was clearly
abusive, and was correctly set aside by the Ukrainian Courts;

- the second warning was issued for alleged infractions which to an
impartial bystander look petty; this warning was again set aside by the
Courts;

- the draft resolution of the National Council proposed the issuance of a
third warning, and Chairman Shevchenko voted in favour; the underlying
inspection report showed that most of the infractions which led to the
second warning had been cured, and only found some very minor
infringements;

- the third warning was rejected, but the National Council adopted a
decision which seemed to imply that Mr. Lemire, as an American, was
prohibited by law from being the rightful owner of Gala;

- the facts which led to the 2008 inspection probably did not merit the
commencement of an inspection procedure, since similar actions had
been committed by other TV and radio stations, which were not
inspected;

- Gala’s application for extension of its licence was delayed in comparison
with other applications; it was approved in the same session when the
National Council approved a 10 fold increase in the renewal fees.

If these facts are added to the National Council’s rejection of all (bar one) of
Gala’s applications for new licences, the resulting overall picture is that Gala
has received a one-sided treatment from its regulator. Gala’s reaction,
consisting in a vehement defence of its rights, presence of US Embassy
officials, protest before the National Council and successive appeals to the
Ukrainian Courts, seem to have exacerbated the National Council’s stance.

Since the Tribunal has already decided that certain of Respondent’s actions
related to awarding radio frequencies are not compatible with the FET
standard defined in the BIT, Claimant will in any case be entitled to an
economic indemnification. Whether the facts of the case constitute
“exceptional circumstances”, which merit the awarding of moral damages, is
a question which the Tribunal will decide in a future phase of this procedure

99

VILS.

487.

488.

489.

490.

491.

492.

12
3 Cai
mG

195.6

 

when it may have the benefit of further insights, notably into context and
causation.

CLAIMANT’S THIRD ALLEGATION: THE VIOLATION OF THE FET STANDARD
BY OTHER ACTIONS PERFORMED BY RESPONDENT

Claimant’s main allegation is that the allocation of frequencies has given rise
to a violation of the FET standard. In addition, Claimant submits an ancillary
claim: that a number of other actions or omissions, which primarily constitute
a breach of the Settlement Agreement, are also are unfair, inequitable,
arbitrary or discriminatory !”?. In Claimant’s opinion these actions or omissions
constitute not only a breach of the Settlement Agreement, but also a violation
of the FET standard defined in the BIT.

The actions alleged by Claimant are the following:

- (i) the failure of the National Council to acknowledge its obligations
under the Settlement Agreement!” or to acknowledge the Settlement
Agreement as legal or binding’;

- (ii) the State Centre’s decision to allocate low powered and contested
frequencies'””; and

- (ili) Respondent’s failure to correct interferences.

a

The Tribunal has already analysed whether these actions and omissions
represented defaults under the Settlement Agreement, and come to the
conclusion that they did not. It will now review, albeit rather summarily,
whether these actions conceivably could imply an international law
delinquency of Ukraine and a violation of the BIT.

First and second claim

(i) and (ii): Since the Tribunal has come to the conclusion that Respondent did
not breach its obligations under the Settlement Agreement, and_ that
frequencies allocated were appropriate (see paragraph 209 above), Claimant’s
allegation that the failure to acknowledge the Settlement Agreement or the
allocation of frequencies could conceivably constitute an international wrong
has no chance of succeeding.

Claimant’s first and second claims are dismissed.

Failure to correct interferences

(iii): There is a final type of action or failure to act, which Claimant submits
amounts to a violation of the FET standard, and which merits a more in-depth

analysis. This is Respondent’s alleged failure to correct the interferences on
Gala 100 FM. Such failure would have related to interferences that occurred

aimant’s Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 67.

Hearing Memorial, para. 67.4.

aimant’s Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 67.6.
jaimant’s Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 67.7 and 67.8.

100

493.

494.

495.

496.

VIL6.

497.

after the conclusion of the Settlement Agreement and would thus not have
been affected by the Tribunal’s decision that Respondent has performed its
obligations under the Settlement Agreement.

Claimant’s argument runs as follows!'**: Respondent, as the host state and as
issuing authority and regulator of frequencies, has the duty to ensure that any
investor can enjoy the normal operation and use of his investment. This
includes — in Claimant’s assertion - an obligation to provide a frequency that is
free of interference, however caused, and an obligation to monitor and regulate
other radio companies.

The Tribunal disagrees with Claimant’s reasoning.

Interference occurs when other radio stations which are also broadcasting do
not remain within the prescribed deviation level. The record shows that
Claimant on seven occasions between 2000 and 2007 complained to the State
Centre, protesting that Gala’s signal was suffering interference. The complains
were made in 2002, 2004, 2005, 2006 (2) and 2007 (2)'°”. The record shows
that the State Centre reacted, at least trying to solve the problems. On August
17, 2004 the State Centre ordered two radio stations which were causing
interference to cease doing so'®. The State Centre monitored the 100 FM
frequencies during the year 2007, and found no interference!”?. Finally, as
Claimant acknowledges, after an extensive period of monitoring during the
autumn 2008, the problem has now been — to use Claimant’s words -
“significantly reduced”,

Claimant’s allegation that Ukraine’s conduct with regard to the interferences
constitutes a violation of the BIT is bound to fail. The State Centre may have
been performing the public service of monitoring and supervising radio
frequencies with more or less diligence; the solution adopted in 2008 probably
could have been anticipated; but even if Claimant’s allegations were accepted
to be true, they would never give rise to an international delinquency of
Ukraine, nor amount to the violation of the FET and full protection standards
defined in the BIT. Not every malfunctioning of a public service, suffered by a
foreign investor, not every lack of diligence by a supervisory authority opens
the door to a claim under the BIT. As has already been explained, the violation
of the FET standard requires significantly more, namely that the actions of the
State trespass a certain standard of propriety. The evidence does not support
that in this instance the threshold has been surpassed.

CLAIMANT’S FOURTH ALLEGATION: THE “UMBRELLA CLAUSE”

Article II.3 (c) of the BIT includes the so called Umbrella Clause:

'°6 Claimant’s Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 67.1.
'7 Respondent's Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 170.
'®8 Respondent's Exhibits R-84 and R-85.

'® Respondent's Exhibit R-146.

2 Claimant's Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 48.

101

498.

VIL7.

A)

499.

500.

B)

501.

201

202

Claimant's Post.
Respondent’ s Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 570.

“Each party shall observe any obligation it may have entered into with
regard to investments”.

The Tribunal agrees with Claimant’s submission that Article II.3 (c) of the
BIT brings the Settlement Agreement into the ambit of the BIT, so that any
violation of the private law agreement becomes ipso iure a violation of the
international law BIT. This, however, exhausts the effect of the Umbrella
Clause; the Umbrella Clause has no impact on the meaning or scope of the
Settlement Agreement. In other words, any violation of the Umbrella Clause
presupposes a breach of the Settlement Agreement. Since the Arbitral Tribunal
has already come to the conclusion that Respondent has not breached its
obligations under the Settlement Agreement, the Umbrella Clause of the BIT
is moot and Respondent cannot have violated the BIT on this footing.

CLAIMANT’S FIFTH ALLEGATION: THE PROHIBITION OF LOCAL PURCHASE
Allegation of the Parties

Claimant’s final allegation”! is that the 2006 LTR, by imposing a 50%
Ukrainian music requirement, breaches Article II.6 of the BIT which does not
allow the host state to “impose performance requirements as a condition ...”
Claimant acknowledges that Respondent has tried to justify the legal
imposition on public policy grounds. Yet, even assuming its validity, this
argument can, in Claimant’s opinion, at best justify the breach, subject to the
payment of the corresponding damages. And the damages sustained by Gala
were significant, because its program concept is based 100% on hits. The high
level of the local source requirement and its abrupt incorporation caused
Claimant to lose advertising revenue, resulting in a damage of 958,000 USD.

Respondent disagrees””. A change in the host’s State’s regulatory framework
does not equate with a breach of the BIT. The protection of the legitimate
expectations must be balanced with the need to maintain a reasonable degree
of regulatory flexibility on the part of the host State in order to respond to
changing circumstances in the public interest. The imposition of a Ukrainian
music requirement is neither abrupt, excessive nor unfair, and did not breach
Claimant’s legitimate expectations.

Decision of the Tribunal

The facts of this allegation are rather straightforward. Article 9.1 of the 2006
LTR required that “... music produced in Ukraine shall constitute at least 50%
of general broadcasting time of each ... radio organization”. This requirement
applies to all broadcasters in Ukraine, not only to Gala Radio. “Music
produced in Ukraine” includes any music where the author, the composer
and/or the performer is Ukrainian.

Hearing Memorial, para. 148.

 

102

502. The implementation of this new requirement was not immediate, but in steps.
On July 21, 2006 the National Council and certain radio companies signed a
memorandum2, which provided that the requirement would be implemented
in stages from October 1, 2006 through February 1, 2007. Gala adhered to this
memorandum in August 2006.

503. Gala’s basic criticism?” with regard to the new Ukrainian music requirement
is that there are too few hits of Ukrainian music, and since its formula is 100%
hits, it must continuously replay the same few Ukrainian hits. In Claimant’s
opinion, the 50% Ukrainian music requirement violates Article II.6 of the BIT,
which provides as follows:

“Neither party shall impose performance requirements as a condition of
establishment, expansion or maintenance of investments, which require
or enforce commitments to export goods produced, or which specify that
goods and services must be purchased locally, or which impose any other
similar requirements”.

504. The Tribunal disagrees with Claimant’s contention.

505. As a sovereign State, Ukraine has the inherent right to regulate its affairs and
adopt laws in order to protect the common good of its people, as defined by its
Parliament and Government. The prerogative extends to promulgating
regulations which define the State’s own cultural policy. The promotion of
domestic music may validly reflect a State policy to preserve and strengthen
cultural inheritance and national identity. The “high measure of deference that
international law generally extends to the right of domestic authorities to
regulate matters within their own borders”®*” is reinforced in cases when the
purpose of the legislation affects deeply felt cultural or linguistic traits of the
community.

506. The desire to protect national culture is not unique to Ukraine. France requires
that French radio stations broadcast a minimum of 40% of French music?”,
Portugal has a 25 — 40% Portuguese music quota?” and a number of other
countries impose similar requirements?”*, The Tribunal in Plama reasoned that
a rule cannot be said to be unfair, inadequate, inequitable or discriminatory,
when it has been adopted by many countries around the world”. If one adds
that the 50% Ukrainian music rule is applied to all broadcasters, the necessary
conclusion is that it is compatible with the FET standard defined in the BIT.

2° Respondent's Exhibit R-131.

204 Claimant’s Memorial, para. 207.

25 § D. Myers Inc. v. Canada, UNCITRAL, First Partial Award of 13 November 2000, para. 263.

2 Article 12 I Loi n° 86-1067 du 30 septembre 1986 relative a la Liberté de Communication, amended
by Loi n° 94-88 du ler février 1994.

27 Article 44 A 1 Lei 7/2006 de 3 de margo.

28 See K. Bhattachrjee: “Local Content Rules in Broadcasting”, reproduced as Respondent's Exhibit
RLA-41,

2 See Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/02, Award of 27
August 2008, para 269.

103

507.

508.

509.

510.

S11.

But this conclusion is really obiter dicta, because Claimant challenges the 50%
Ukrainian music requirement not as a violation of the FET standard, but rather
as a breach of the local content rule contained in Article II.6 which prohibits
“performance requirements ... which specify that goods or services must be
purchased locally”. Is this rule applicable to a cultural restriction like the 50%
Ukrainian music requirement?

The answer to this question requires that Article II.6 be interpreted “in
accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in
their context and in the light of its object and purpose” (Article 31.1. Vienna
Convention)”!°.

The ordinary meaning of the terms used by a treaty provides the first criterion
of interpretation. The BIT prohibits that local law specify that “goods or
services ...must be purchased locally”. It can be argued that the LTR does not
fall foul of this rule: the law does not specify that radio stations must purchase
any goods or services locally, but rather that a certain percentage of the music
broadcast should be authored, composed or produced by Ukrainian artists. The
argument, however, is not decisive, because it might be reasoned de adverso
that although the LTR does not prohibit radio stations from obtaining
Ukrainian music from non-Ukrainian sources, de facto the market for
Ukrainian-authored, -composed or -produced music is located in Ukraine.

The object_and purpose of Article II.6 sheds more light on its correct
interpretation. The object of the BIT is to “promote greater economic
cooperation” between the Parties (Preamble II). And the purpose of Article
IL6 is trade-related: to avoid that States impose local content requirements as a
protection of local industries against competing imports. When in 2006
Ukraine amended the LTR, the underlying reasons were not to protect local
industries and restrict imports, but rather to promote Ukraine’s cultural
inheritance, a purpose which is compatible with Article II.6 of the BIT.

In conclusion, the Tribunal finds that Article 9.1 of the 2006 LTR, which
requires that “/...] music produced in Ukraine shall constitute at least 50% of
general broadcasting time of each ... radio organization” does not amount to
a violation of the local content rule contained in Article II. 6 of the BIT which
prohibits “performance requirements ... which specify that goods or services
must be purchased locally”.

210 Emphasis added.

104

VIL8.

512.

OTHER ALLEGATIONS

In his Memorial, Claimant included alleged additional violations of the BIT,
referring to affiliation agreements, trademarks and the expropriation of a
beauty salon. This last claim has been specifically withdrawn, and the other
two have not been addressed either at the hearing or in the Post-Hearing
Memorial, and seem to have been tacitly dropped. To the extent that these
claims may still be alive, the Tribunal finds that Respondent’s conduct with
regard to Gala’s affiliation agreements or to its request for trademark
protection does not amount to a violation of the BIT.

105

513.

514.

VIII. DECISION

In view of the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal unanimously as regards
Sections I trough VI, and by majority as regards some aspects and conclusions
of Section VII, decides as follows:

1. to dismiss Respondent’s objections to the jurisdiction of the Centre and
the competence of the Tribunal;

2. to declare that Respondent has not breached any obligations assumed in
the Settlement Agreement;

3. to declare that Respondent, in the manner in which it dealt with the
award of radio frequencies as described in paragraph 422 of this
Decision, breached Article II.3 of the BIT; and

4. — to dismiss all other claims regarding the merits submitted by Claimant.

The question of the appropriate redress of the breach, including questions of
quantum, will be addressed in a second phase of this arbitration, for which the
Tribunal retains jurisdiction. The Tribunal will issue a Procedural Order for
the continuation of the procedure. The question of costs is reserved until the
Award.

106

[signed] [signed]

Mr. Jan Paulsson Dr. Jiirgen Voss
Arbitrator Arbitrator

[signed]

Professor Juan Fernandez-Armesto
President

[January 14, 2010]

Date

107

