INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the matter between

JOSEPH CHARLES LEMIRE
(Claimant)

and

UKRAINE
(Respondent)

(ICSID CAsE No. ARB/06/18)

AWARD

Members of the Tribunal:
Professor Juan Fernéndez-Armesto, President
Mr. Jan Paulsson
Dr. Jiirgen Voss

Secretary of the Tribunal:
Ms. Aissatou Diop

Representing Claimant:
Mr. Hamid G. Gharavi
Mr. Stephan Adell
Ms. Nada Sader
Derains & Gharavi
Paris, France

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: March 28,

Representing Respondent:
Mr. John S. Willems
Mr. Michael A. Polkinghorne
Ms. Olga Mouraviova
Ms. Nathalie Makowski
White & Case LLP
Paris, France

Mr. Sergii Svyryba
Ms. Olga Glukhovska
Ms. Olha Yaniutina
Mr. Markiyan Kliuchkovskyi
Ms. Oksana Tsymbrivska
Magisters
Kyiv, Ukraine

2011

Iv.1

w oN

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

GLOSSARY. 5
PROCEDURE 9
Registration of the Req 9
Constitution of the Tribunal ..........ccsscsssssessessessesnesneeseessceneeneeneeneeseeneeneeneeneeseeenes 9
The Jurisdiction and Liability Phase ...........cssssssessesseeseeeseeseseeneenessesneeneeseenecenes 9
The Remaining Issues Phase ........s.csssssssssessssessssessssessssessssessssessssessssessssessssessseees 10
THE FIRST DECISION. 13
Introducti 13
The Separate Opinion 16
Claimant’s legal standing 17
The Definition of the FET Standard ............cccccscsssseeseseeesseesteseseeseseesesteneaneness 19
The Annex to the BIT and its Importance for Interpreting the FET Standard......20
A. The Scope of the Exception 20

 

B. Procedural Requirements

 

 

The Alleged Privilege Enjoyed by Protected Foreign Contender:
Legitimate Expectation: 25

Definition of Legitimate Expectations and of Gala’s Business Expansion Plans. 25

 

 

 

 

 

Assessment of Evidence Regarding Gala’s Planned Expansion............0:ccsce 26
Effect of the Settlement Agreement on Gala’s Initial Business Plans................. 28
Claimant’s Record in Tender Decisions ............:scscsecsesseesesseesessessessnsseeeeseeneenees 31
Introduction 31
Alternative Explanation for Gala’s Dismal Success Record .........cccceeeeeeeees 31
Administrative Practice during the Interregnum..........0... cece eee 32
A. Ultra Petita and Audiatur et Altera PATS ...cccccccsceccssestssestsectsee teste teseeneseeesienes 33
B. Alleged Falsehood of the Tribunal’s Key Assumption ...........ccceeeeeeeees 34
C. Licences Granted Under the Settlement Agreement ..........0.0. cece 35
LEGAL ANALYSIS 37
Quantification of Damages from the Breach of FET Standard.

Claimant’s Case 37
Respondent’s Case 40
The Arbitral Tribunal’s Decision ...........c.ceccessesseessesseeesseeseesessessessesseseeneeneeneenees 45

3.5.
IV.2

won

wow
bob

= ow
< ib
te

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

General Considerations Regarding the Calculation of Damages.............::00 46
Respondent’s Argument of Lack of Causation .........cccceeeeeeeesesesneeeeeeeeeeneees 48
A. Cause 49
B. Effect 50
C. Causal Link. 50
Review of the Expert Reports Submitted by the Parties... eee 62
A. Goldmedia’s Calculations ...........c.cccesessesseesnesseeeeesseesessessesseesnssssseeeeneeseenees 62
B. EBS’ Calculations 65
Determination of the Compensation by the Arbitral Tribunal ............0....ccee 69
A. Introduction 69
B. Selection of a Scenario
C. The Calculation of Gala Radio’s “Enterprise Value”
D. Application of UAH v. USD....
E. Discount Rate
F. Determination of Free Cash FlOW .......0.cccccccccesesseseeteseeteseeeseesesteseseesseeneseenes 78
Conclusion 81
The Existence of Moral D: ig 85
Claimant’s Case 86
Respondent’s Case 88
The Arbitral Tribunal’s Decision .............c.cccesesssessessesseeseeseesessesseesssseneeneeneesese 90
The Standards for Moral Damages ............c.cccssescsseesesseeseeseseesesteseseesessesestensanenees 90
Application of the Standards to the Facts ........c.ccccccessssestsseesesseeseeeseesseeneseenes 92
A. Breaches in the Awarding of Frequencies..........c.ccccccssessseeseseeteseeteseeeseeneseenes 92
B. Inspection 93
C. Renewal of Licence 93
Conclusion 94
. Interest 95
Claimant’s Case 95
Respondent’s Case 96
The Arbitral Tribunal’s Decision ...........c.ceccessesseessesseeesseeseesessessessesseseeneeneeneenees 97
. Costs 100
Claimant’s Request 100
Respondent’s Request 101
The Abandonment of Claims ...........ccccccsceseeseseeeseesestesestesestesesteseseeseseenesneneseneas 101
The Dismissal of Claims 101
The Misconduct 102

 

3.
4.
v.

 

Claimant’s Reply.
The Arbitral Tribunal’s Decision

Decision

Amoco

Award
BIT

Biwater

Bludgeon
Approach

Bollecker-
Stern

Centre

Cheng

Claimant
CMRI
CMS

CPFR
DCF

Desert Line

Dr. Voss
EBITDA
EBS
EDF

ELSI

ESR

I. GLOSSARY

Amoco International Finance Corp. v. Iran, (Iran United States Claims
Tribunal Case No. 56), Partial Award of July 14, 1987

This Final Award in ICSID Case No. ARB/06/18

Treaty between the United States of America and Ukraine concerning
the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investment, done in
Kyiv on October 17, 1996, which entered into force on November 16,
1996

Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd v. United Republic of Tanzania, Doc.
RLA 74, (ICSID Case No ARB/05/22), Award of July 24, 2008

Valuation method based on discounted rates including a separate
country risk premium, as calculated by Prof. Aswath Damodaran,
introduced by Goldmedia

Brigitte Bollecker-Stern: “Le prejudice dans la théorie de la
responsabilité international”, 1973

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

Bin Cheng: “General Principles of Law as applied by international
Courts and Tribunals”, 1987

Mr. Joseph Charles Lemire
Claimant’s Memorial on Remaining Issues

CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case
No. ARB/O1/8), Award of May 12, 2005

Charity Public Fund Radio
Discounted Cash Flow

Desert Line Projects LLC v. Republic of Yemen (ICSID Case No.
ARB/0S/17), Award of February 6, 2008

Dr. Jiirgen Voss
Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization
EBS Expertise Services

EDF (Services) Limited v. Romania, (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/13),
Award of October 8, 2009

Case concerning Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (United States v. Italy), Doc.
RLA 113, International Court of Justice, July 20, 1089

EBS Supplementary Report

Factory at
Chorzow

FET
Final Award

First
Decision

Gala Radio
GFR

Goldmedia

GSR
HT

HTRI

ICSID
Convention

ILC
ILC Articles

Interregnum
IPO

July 18,
1995, Letter

Kantor
LG&E

LNC

LTR

Lusitania
Cases

M
Marboe

Case Concerning Certain German Interests in Polish Upper Silesia
(Germany v. Poland), merits, 1928, PCIJ, Series A, No. 17, p. 21 et seq.

Fair and Equitable Treatment
This Final Award in ICSID Case No. ARB/06/18

Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability issued on January 14, 2010 in this
arbitration

CJSC “Radiocompany Gala”
Goldmedia First Report

Goldmedia GmbH
Goldmedia Supplementary Report

Transcript of the hearing on jurisdiction and merits that took place on
December 8 to 12, 2008

Transcript of the hearing on remaining issues that took place on July 12,
2010

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States
and Nationals of other States, done at Washington on March 18, 1965

International Law Commission.

ILC’s Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful
Acts

Period between March 16, 1999 and June 9, 2000, when the National
Council was not operative

Initial Public Offering

July 18, 1995, letter signed by Mr. Petrenko and addressed to the State
Committee

Mark Kantor: “Valuation for Arbitration”, 2008

LG & E Energy Corp., LG & E Capital Corp. and LG&E International,
Inc. v. Argentine Republic, (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/01), Award of
July 25, 2007.

Law of Ukraine on National Television and Radio Council of Ukraine
last amended in 2006.

Ukrainian Law on Television and Radio Broadcasting last amended in
2006

More than 50 cases decided by the Mixed Claims Commission (United
States-Germany), included in Volume VII of the November 1, 1923 to
1930, Reports of International Arbitral Awards prepared by the UN.
Million

Irmgard Marboe: “Calculation of Compensation and Damages in
International Investment Law”, 2009

McLachlan /
Shore /
Weiniger

Mirakom
Mr. Lemire
MTD

NACVA

National
Council

PCIy
PSEG

PHB

Radio
Academy

Request

Respondent
RMRI

ROI
Rumeli
Scenario I
Sempra
Separate
Opinion
Settlement
Agreement

Siag

Treaty

Tudor

Campbell McLachlan/Laurence Shore/Matthew Weiniger: “International
Investment Arbitration: Substantive Principles”, 2007

CJSC “Mirakom Ukraina”
Mr. Joseph Charles Lemire

MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTH Chile S.A v. Republic of Chile (ICSID
Case No. ARB/O1/7), Award of May 25, 2004

United States National Association of Certified Valuation Analysts

Ukrainian National Council for Television and Radio Broadcasting

Permanent Court of International Justice

PSEG Global Inc. Et al. v. Republic of Turkey (ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/5), Award of January 19, 2007

Post-Hearing Brief
Odessa Legal Academy

Claimant’s request for arbitration against Respondent dated September
6, 2006

Ukraine

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on Remaining Issues

Return on investment

Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri

A.S. v., Republic of Kazakhstan (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/16), Award of
July 29, 2008

Base scenario calculated by Goldmedia representing the value of Gala
Radio as it operates today

Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/16), Award of September 28, 2007

Dr. Jiirgen Voss’ separate dissenting opinion appended to the Final
Award

Agreement dated March 20, 2000 between Claimant and Respondent on
the settlement of a dispute, which was recorded as an award on agreed
terms on September 18, 2000 (ICSID No. ARB (AF)98/1)

Waguih Elie George Siag and Clorinda Vecchi v. The Arab Republic of
Egypt, (ICSID Case No. Arb/05/15), Award of June 1, 2009

Treaty between the United States of America and Ukraine concerning
the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investment, done in
Kyiv on October 17, 1996, which entered into force on November 16,
1996

Ioana Tudor: “The Fair and Equitable Treatment Standard in
International Law of Foreign Investment”, 2008

UAH

UMH
UNIDROIT
Principles
US

USD

Ws

Ukrainian Hryvnia
Ukrainian Media Holding

Principles of International Commercial Contracts adopted by the
International Institute for the Unification of Private Law

United States
United States Dollar

Witness Statement

Il. PROCEDURE

II.1. REGISTRATION OF THE REQUEST

Mr. Joseph Charles Lemire [“Mr. Lemire” or “Claimant”], a national of the
United States, submitted his request for arbitration [the “Request”] against
Ukraine [“Respondent”] to the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes [“ICSID” or the “Centre”] on September 11, 2006. The next day, the
Centre acknowledged receipt of the Request and transmitted copies thereof to
Ukraine and its Embassy in Washington, D.C.

On December 8, 2006, the Centre registered the Request, as supplemented by
Claimant’s submission of a letter dated November 14, 2006, and notified the
parties of the registration, inviting them to constitute a tribunal.

II.2. CONSTITUTION OF THE TRIBUNAL

On February 8, 2007, 60 days after the registration of the Request, Claimant
invoked Article 37(2)(b) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of other States, done at Washington on
March 18, 1965, which entered into force on October 14, 1966 [“ICSID
Convention”, and on February 22, 2007, appointed Mr. Jan Paulsson of France as
arbitrator. On March 7, 2007, Respondent appointed Dr. Jiirgen Voss of Germany
as arbitrator. Each of them had also been similarly appointed in the ICSID
Additional Facility case Joseph C. Lemire v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/98/1).

After the passage of 90 days from the registration of the Request, Claimant
invoked Article 38 of the ICSID Convention by letters of March 9, 2007 and
March 20, 2007, requesting the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council to
designate an arbitrator to be the President of the Tribunal. On June 6, 2007, the
Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council, in consultation with the parties,
designated Professor Juan Fernandez-Armesto of Spain as the presiding arbitrator.

On June 14, 2007, the Secretary-General of ICSID informed the parties that the

Tribunal had been constituted and that the proceedings were deemed to have
commenced on that day, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 6(1).

11.3. THE JURISDICTION AND LIABILITY PHASE

The Tribunal held its first session on July 23, 2007.

Following the procedural calendar agreed at the first session, Claimant filed his
Memorial on the Merits on November 12, 2007. Respondent filed its Memorial on
Jurisdiction on February 25, 2008 and Counter-Memorial on the Merits on
February 26, 2008. Claimant filed observations on Respondent’s Memorial on
Jurisdiction on March 17, 2008.

The Tribunal decided on March 26, 2008 to join jurisdiction to the merits.

The document production phase took place between March 26, 2008 and August
28, 2008.

Claimant filed a request for provisional measures on August 15, 2008.
Claimant filed his Reply on the Merits on August 20, 2008.

On August 29, 2008, Respondent filed a proposal for the disqualification of
Mr. Jan Paulsson as arbitrator, and the proceedings were suspended in accordance
with ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(6). On September 2, 2008, Respondent filed
observations on Claimant’s request for provisional measures. On September
10, 2008, Claimant filed a response to Respondent’s observations on Claimant’s
request for provisional measures.

On September 23, 2008, the other members of the Tribunal, Prof. Juan Fernandez-
Armesto and Dr. Jiirgen Voss dismissed the proposal for disqualification of
Mr. Paulsson. The suspension of the proceedings was lifted on the same day. On
October 22, 2008, Claimant withdrew the request for provisional measures of
August 15, 2008.

On November 6, 2008, Respondent filed its Rejoinder on the Merits.
On November 19, 2008, the President of the Tribunal held a pre-hearing
conference by telephone with the parties, and on December 3, 2008 a further

similar conference was held.

The hearing on jurisdiction and the merits took place on December 8 through 12,
2008.

The parties filed simultaneous post-hearing briefs [“PHB”] on March 4, 2009 and
simultaneous statements of costs on March 20, 2009.

The Tribunal rendered its Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability on January 14,
2010.

I1L.4. THE REMAINING ISSUES PHASE
On February 1, 2010, the Tribunal proposed to hold a consultation with the parties
for the purposes of discussing the continuation of the procedure. By separate

letters of February 11, 2010 from Claimant and February 12, 2010 from
Respondent, the parties agreed to the Tribunal’s proposal.

10

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

On March 1, 2010, the Tribunal held a telephone conference with the parties and,
on March 4, 2010, issued Procedural Order No. 2, setting out the procedural
calendar for the remainder of the proceeding.

On April 16, 2010, Claimant filed his Memorial on Remaining Issues [““CMRI”].
On June 21, 2010, Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial on Remaining Issues
[“RMRI”]. Each contained submissions with regard to costs.

Following the Tribunal’s direction in Procedural Order No. 2, Respondent
submitted its document production request to Claimant on April 26, 2010, i.e. in
the first 10 days of the allotted time period for the preparation of its Counter-
Memorial. Claimant delivered the documents with comments on May 11, 2010,
ie., within 15 days of the request.

On May 17, 2010, the deadline for the document production phase to be finalized,
Respondent submitted observations on Claimant’s production and reserved its
rights to request the Tribunal’s assistance in obtaining documents alleged missing
in Claimant’s production.

On July 2, 2010, the President of the Tribunal acting on behalf of the Tribunal
held a pre-hearing conference by telephone with the parties to discuss procedural
matters relevant to the hearing. Minutes of points covered and agreements reached
were circulated to the parties on July 8, 2010.

On July 12, 2010, the Tribunal held a hearing on Remaining Issues at the World
Bank offices in Paris. Attending the hearing were:

The Tribunal

Prof. Juan Ferndndez-Armesto, President of the Tribunal
Mr. Jan Paulsson
Dr. Jiirgen Voss

The ICSID Secretariat
Ms. Aissatou Diop, Secretary of the Tribunal

Participating on behalf of Claimant

Mr. Joseph Charles Lemire, Claimant

Mr. Sergey Denisenko, Technical Director of CJSC “Radiocompany Gala” [Gala
Radio”]

Mr. Hamid G. Gharavi, Derains & Gharavi

Mr. Stephan Adell, Derains & Gharavi

Ms. Nada Sader, Derains & Gharavi

Mr. André Wiegand, Goldmedia GmbH

Ms. Aurore Descombes, Intern, Derains & Gharavi

Ms. Ana Paula Montans, Intern, Derains & Gharavi

Participating on behalf of Respondent

Ms. Tetyana Aparina, Ministry of Justice of Ukraine
Mr. John S. Willems, White & Case LLP

Ms. Olga Mouraviova, White & Case LLP

Ms. Nathalie Makowski, White & Case LLP

Ms. Oksana Tsymbrivska, Magisters

Mr. David Bonifacio, Lalive

Mr. Thor Kurus, former member of the Ukrainian National Council for Television
and Radio Broadcasting [“National Council”]

Ms. Olena Volska, EBS LLC

Ms. Noor Davies, Intern, White & Case LLP

26. As regards the fundamental rules of procedure, at the end of the hearing on
Remaining Issues, the Chairman of the Tribunal asked the parties whether they
were aware of any breach of due process at that stage. Both parties declared that
they had no objections to assert',

27. On July 23, 2010, the Secretary of the Tribunal circulated to the parties and
Tribunal members an audio recording made of the entire hearing.

28. On August 6 and 9, 2010, Claimant and Respondent, respectively, filed their final
submission on costs.

' Transcript of the Hearing on Remaining Issues that took place on July 12, 2010 [*HTRI”], p. 274.

12

29.

30.

31.

II. THE FIRST DECISION

IIL.1 INTRODUCTION

Claimant originally submitted this dispute to ICSID invoking:

the Treaty between the United States of America and Ukraine Concerning
the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investment, done in Kyiv
on October 17, 1996, which entered into force on November 16, 1996 [the
“BIT” or the “Treaty”]; Article VI of the BIT entitles any national of a State
party to the BIT to submit to ICSID any dispute with the other State party to
the BIT relating to either “an investment agreement between that Party and
such national” or “an alleged breach of any right conferred or created by
this Treaty with respect to an investment”; and

an agreement between Claimant and Respondent on the settlement of a
dispute, dated March 20, 2000 [the “Settlement Agreement”], which was
recorded as an award on agreed terms on September 18, 2000 (ICSID Case
No. ARB (AF)98/1).

On January 14, 2010 the Arbitral Tribunal issued a “Decision on Jurisdiction and
Liability” [the “First Decision”], in which the Tribunal:

partially accepted Claimant’s First Allegation (“The Violation of the FET
Standard in the Awarding of Frequencies”) and concluded that
Respondent’s practice regarding the allocation of radio frequencies was not
compatible with the Fair and Equitable Treatment [‘FET”] standard defined
in the BIT’;

analysed Claimant’s Second Allegation (“The Continuous Harassment by
Respondent and the Request for Moral Damages”) and decided that the
decision of whether the facts of the case constitute “exceptional
circumstances”, which merit the awarding of moral damages, would be
decided in this award [this “Award” or the “Final Award” }’; and

dismissed all other contentions of Claimant.

The relevant findings with respect to the First and Second Allegations were
summarized in the First Decision:

First Alle gation’

“419. As a starting point the Tribunal has studied the administrative
procedure defined in Ukrainian Law for the issuance of radio
frequencies. The conclusion reached by the Tribunal is that the

? First Decision, para. 451.
5 First Decision, para. 486.
* Footnotes omitted.

procedure was marred by significant shortcomings (although these
have been ameliorated after the 2006 amendment to the LTR). These
weaknesses facilitated arbitrary or discriminatory decision-taking by
the National Council.

420. In six years Gala Radio, although it tried insistently, and
presented more than 200 applications for all types of frequencies, was
only able to secure a single licence (in a small village in rural
Ukraine). Gala’s main competitors were much more successful and
each received between 38 and 56 frequencies. Although this macro-
statistical analysis does not provide conclusive evidence that
Respondent, when awarding radio licences, has been violating the
FET standard, there are factors (the strikingly different success rates
of Gala and of its competitors, the inexistence of any information
regarding the real owners of the competing stations, the impossibility
of verifying the reasons why Gala was rejected) which can be
construed as indications that at least some of the decisions of the
National Council when it awarded frequencies were arbitrary and/or
discriminatory.

421. To confirm or reject these indications, the Tribunal then looked
in detail at five tenders for radio frequencies and at the administrative
practice for awarding licences in the interregnum while the National
Council was not operative between 1999 and 2000. The Tribunal
came to the conclusion that the following decisions did not meet the
FET standard provided for in the BIT:

- the National Council’s decision adopted on October 19, 2005
granting an FM information channel to Radio Era, and the
subsequent decisions to award 12 frequencies to radio
Kokannya;

- the National Council’s decision of May 26, 2004 denying Gala
Radio the licence for an AM channel, and the decision of
December 21, 2004 granting such licence to NART TV;

- the National Council’s decision of February 6, 2008 denying
Gala’s application and accepting the application of Kiss Radio;

- Respondent's practice of awarding radio licences while the
National Council’s was not operative between March 16, 1999
and June 9, 2000, and the National Council’s decision of
January 1, 2001 to legalize the licences illegally granted during
the interregnum.

422. On the other hand, the Tribunal is unconvinced by Claimant's
allegation that the National Council’s decisions of November 20, 2002
and of October 19, 2005 represented a breach of the FET standard”.

Second Allegation

“484. The Tribunal has analyzed in detail the relationship between
Gala Radio and the National Council and certain facts stand out:

14

- Gala was never inspected until 2005, and in the next three years
it was the object of five inspections, of which four were
unscheduled;

- the first warning issued by the National Council against Gala
was clearly abusive, and was correctly set aside by the
Ukrainian Courts;

- the second warning was issued for alleged infractions which to
an impartial bystander look petty; this warning was again set
aside by the Courts;

- the draft resolution of the National Council proposed the
issuance of a third warning, and Chairman Shevchenko voted in
favour; the underlying inspection report showed that most of the
infractions which led to the second warning had been cured, and
only found some very minor infringements;

- the third warning was rejected, but the National Council
adopted a decision which seemed to imply that Mr. Lemire, as
an American, was prohibited by law from being the rightful
owner of Gala;

- the facts which led to the 2008 inspection probably did not merit
the commencement of an inspection procedure, since similar
actions had been committed by other TV and radio stations,
which were not inspected;

- Gala’s application for extension of its licence was delayed in
comparison with other applications; it was approved in the
same session when the National Council approved a 10 fold
increase in the renewal fees.

485. If these facts are added to the National Council's rejection of all
(bar one) of Gala’s applications for new licences, the resulting overall
picture is that Gala has received a one-sided treatment from its

lator. Gala’s reaction, isting in a veh defence of its
rights, presence of US Embassy officials, protest before the National
Council and successive appeals to the Ukrainian Courts, seem to have
exacerbated the National Council’s stance”.

 

32.

33.

III.2. THE SEPARATE OPINION

The Arbitral Tribunal adopted its First Decision regarding jurisdiction and
liability “unanimously as regards Section I through VI, and by majority as
regards some aspects and conclusions of Section VII”. Section VII was devoted to
“Alleged Violations of the BIT’. During the deliberation phase of this Final Award
Arbitrator Dr. Jiirgen Voss [“Dr. Voss”] has seen fit to append a lengthy separate
dissenting opinion [the “Separate Opinion”], identifying propositions and
conclusions to which he could not assent both in the First Decision and in the
present Award. He comes to the conclusion that the Tribunal has manifestly
exceeded its powers and that there has been a serious departure from fundamental
tules of procedure.

Since Dr. Voss’ detailed comments with regard to the First Decision did not
emerge until the deliberation of this Final Award, the Arbitral Tribunal could not
react to them in the First Decision. This Final Award will, consequently, start with
a concise section, explaining why Dr. Voss’ opinion with regard to the First
Decision has not persuaded the Tribunal to resile from the norms which it believes
should guide its decision, nor from the conclusions derived from them. This
section will cover (1) Claimant’s legal standing, (2) the definition of the FET
Standard, (3) Claimant’s legitimate expectations and (4) Claimant’s record in
tenders. Comments to Dr. Voss’ submissions regarding the present Award will be
inserted as footnotes where appropriate in the text of this document.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

1. Claimant’s legal standing

Dr. Voss submits that “without offering an explanation” the First Decision
disregards Gala’s and Mirakom’s® legal personalities, piercing their corporate
veils, and attributing Gala’s rights under Ukrainian legislation to Claimant in his
capacity as a United States [“US”] investor in Ukraine’. In Dr. Voss’ opinion, the
BIT does not extend its protection to shareholder derivative suits, and no
established principle for piercing Gala’s veil applies to the case’. To the contrary:
in Dr. Voss’ opinion, Gala’s corporate veil is imposed on Claimant by Ukrainian
law (which limits the participation of foreigners in the radio industry to acting as
shareholders) and under the reservation made by Ukraine in Section 3 of the
Annex to the BIT®. He submits that Claimant cannot on the one hand hide behind
Gala’s corporate personality for purposes of the Ukrainian sector legislation,
while simultaneously on the other hand portraying himself as Gala’s alter ego in
order to invoke the BIT.

The Separate Opinion concludes that all of Claimant’s claims should have been
dismissed in limine, because the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae'® to
decide a shareholder’s derivative suit, and that the First Decision and the Award
exceeded the Tribunal’s powers

Dr. Voss’ point was conceived by him alone; it was never pleaded by Respondent.

Respondent did present and argue a number of jurisdictional objections. On
February 25, 2008, it submitted a Memorial in Support of its Objections to
Jurisdiction, which included six separate objections. These arguments were
further developed in Respondent’s Rejoinder’? and analysed and decided in the
First Decision. The argument that shareholder derivative suits are inadmissible
under the BIT was not among them.

Tf, on the basis of a jurisdictional objection never articulated by Respondent nor
therefore answered by Claimant, the Tribunal had dismissed the arbitration, it
would indeed have seriously departed from fundamental rules of procedure.

* CJSC “Mirakom Ukraina”.

© Separate Opinion, para. 63.

7 Separate Opinion, paras. 64 to 78.

8 Section 4 of the Annex to the BIT: “3. Ukraine reserves the right to make or maintain limited exceptions
to national treatment, as provided in Article II, paragraph 1, in the sectors or matters it has indicated

below:

Production of equipment used exclusively for nuclear power plants; maritime transportation including
ocean and coastal shipping; air transportation; nuclear electric energy generation; privatization of those
educational, sports, medical and scientific facilities financed by the national budget; mining of salt;
mining and processing of rare earth, and of uranium and other radioactive elements; ownership and
operation of television and radio broadcasting stations; and ownership of land.”

° Separate Opinion, para. 93.

Sic.

"' Separate Opinion, paras. 103 to 105.
" Paras. 146 to 256.

39. Inadmissible as a matter of procedure, Dr. Voss’ argument is also flawed in
substance. Article I.1(a) of the BIT protects “every kind of investment in the
territory of one Party, owned or controlled directly or indirectly by nationals or

. ; pol3 . A
companies of the other Party”. Indirect investments, as the one held by
Claimant, are included within the scope of protection of the BIT.

'S Emphasis added.

40.

Al.

42.

43.

2. The Definition of the FET Standard

The Separate Opinion submits'* that the circumstances of the case, and
specifically the fact that frequencies are awarded through public tenders, require
that a specially restrictive interpretation of the FET Standard be applied, and that a
violation would only exist if:

- Claimant is directly affected in his rights as foreign investor;

- Gala’s treatment is linked to Claimant’s capacity as a foreign investor;

- Gala’s treatment is captured by an established category of the FET
Standard, notably, denial of justice;

- the treatment amounts to denial of justice or is so egregious as to amount to
a breach of the minimum standard of customary international law.

The Tribunal has already explained in its First Decision’ the general scope and
proper interpretation of the FET standard as defined in the BIT. It has addressed
all arguments submitted by the parties and sees no reason to amend its opinion or
expand its reasoning. The Separate Opinion, however, submits certain new
arguments, which were never pleaded in the case, and the Tribunal, consequently,
never had the opportunity of expressing its opinion; it will do so, as concisely as
feasible, in the following paragraphs.

Before doing so, the Tribunal has to dispel a misconception that appears
repeatedly in Dr. Voss’ Separate Opinion'®. Dr. Voss states that the FET standard
“cannot be interpreted as an “umbrella clause” ipso iure elevating violations of
tender rules to international delicts”. He seems to imply that the Tribunal is in
disagreement with this principle. In fact, the Tribunal agrees. Dr. Voss adds that
the FET standard cannot be construed as “an empowerment of tribunals ex aequo
et bono to develop a case law superseding host countries’ administrative laws’"".
The Tribunal concurs.

But neither the First Decision nor this Award have ever stated that violations of
tender rules ipso iure amount to international wrongs, nor has the Tribunal ever
assumed that it enjoys ex aequo et bono powers to disregard Ukrainian
administrative law. Quite the contrary. As the First Decision stated, “not every

iolati of de ic law necessarily transl into an arbitrary or
discriminatory measure under international law and a violation of the FET
Standard”'*, For this to happen, it is necessary that the State incurs in “a blatant
disregard of applicable tender rules, distorting fair competition among tender
participants”"”. And this is what has occurred: the First Decision found that on

'4 Separate Opinion, para. 148.

'S First Decision, para

 

243 et seq.

'© Separate Opinion, para. 128.
'T Separate Opinion, para. 449.

'S First Decision, p:
'° First Decision, p:

 

44.

4S.

46.

four occasions (three tenders plus an administrative practice) Ukraine indeed
acted in “blatant disregard of applicable tender rules”.

2.1. The Annex to the BIT and its Importance for Interpreting the FET
Standard

The main argument with which Dr. Voss supports his restrictive interpretation of
the FET standard is by advocating an extensive application of the exception
contained in the Annex to the BIT?!. This exception reads as follows:

“3. Ukraine reserves the right to make or maintain limited exceptions

to national treatment, as provided in Article II, paragraph 1, in the
sectors or matters it has indicated below:

Production of equipment used exclusively for nuclear power plants;
maritime transportation including ocean and coastal shipping; air
transportation; nuclear electric energy generation; privatization of those
educational, sports, medical and scientific facilities financed by the national
budget; mining of salt; mining and processing of rare earth, and of uranium
and other radioactive elements; ownership and operation of television and
radio broadcasting stations; and ownership of land ae

 

In the Tribunal’s opinion, Dr. Voss’ argument lacks merit, (A) because the scope
of the exception is limited to the national treatment principle, and (B) because
application of the exception requires prior notification, and there is no evidence
that such requirement has been complied with.

A. The Scope of the Exception

In the Annex to the BIT, both the US and Ukraine reserved the right “to make or
maintain limited exceptions to national treatment’”> in the “ownership and
operation of radio stations”. The literality of the Treaty does not leave room for
doubt: the parties can make or maintain exceptions, but the scope of these
limitations must be restricted to the principle of national treatment. This
conclusion is confirmed by the definition of national treatment contained in
Article IL.1:

“Each Party shall permit and treat investment and activities
associated therewith, on a basis no less favourable than that accorded
in like situations to investment or associated activities of its own
nationals or companies ... subject to the right of each Party to make
or intain exceptions falling within one of the sectors or matters

listed in the Annex of the Treaty”.

 

2 See para. 31 supra.
2! Separate Opinion, para. 137.

> Emphi

 

20

47.

48.

49.

50.

Sl.

52.

53.

Article II.1 is thus structured as a general principle, subject to an exception (for
investment in listed sectors and matters). It strengthens the literal interpretation of
the Annex: the exception is linked to the national treatment principle.

Moreover: only Article II.1 (the rule defining national treatment) includes a
reference to the exception for investments in protected sectors or matters. Article
IL.3 (which defines the FET standard) lacks any similar reference. The difference
in the drafting of both sections of Article II reinforces once more the literal
interpretation of the Annex: the exception can only be applied in the context of
national treatment — not with regard to FET. And since the Tribunal’s findings in
the First Decision are based on a violation of the FET standard, the exception
contained in the Annex to the BIT is irrelevant.

B. Procedural Requirements

There is an autonomous reason why the exception contained in the Annex can
have no impact in this case: a State’s right to make or maintain exceptions to the
national treatment in protected sectors is not unlimited, but subject to specific
notification requirements; Art. II.1. provides:

“Each Party agrees to notify the other Party before or on the date of
entry into force of this Treaty of all such laws and regulations of
which it is aware concerning the sectors or matters listed in the
Annex. Moreover, each Party agrees to notify the other of any future
exception ... and to limit such exceptions to a minimum”.

Previous notification of limiting laws and regulations is not simply a formality: it
is a fundamental requirement in order to guarantee that investors enjoy legal
certainty, and that States cannot invoke the exception ex post facto, surprising the
investor’s good faith.

Has Ukraine notified the US of any laws or regulations concerning the radio
sector? Respondent has never argued the existence of such notification, and there
is no evidence in the file showing that it has taken place. Consequently, it is
legitimate to proceed on the basis that no such notification took place.

Non-compliance with the procedural safeguards included in the BIT is a final
factor reinforcing the conclusion that the exceptions mentioned in the Annex have
no bearing whatsoever for the resolution of the present dispute.

2.2. The Alleged Privilege Enjoyed by Protected Foreign Contenders

Dr. Voss submits that equal treatment between participants is pivotal to the
fairness and effectiveness of a tender process”.

The Tribunal agrees.

*5 Separate Opinion, para. 117.

21

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

26 Separate Opinion, para.
27 First Decision, p

But Dr. Voss goes on to reason that where protected foreign investors compete in
tender proceedings with domestic investors and with other foreign investors
without BIT protection, they enjoy a privilege. In Dr. Voss’ opinion, BIT
protection thus undermines the integrity of the tender process”®,

Here, the Tribunal disagrees.

When agreeing to BITs, States confer rights to foreign investors, which are
unavailable to their own citizens. Most jurisdictions deny local investors, who
have suffered unfair or inequitable treatment at the hands of their own authorities,
a specific cause of action. Municipal law typically restricts remedies to the
annulment of administrative acts, to the declaration, under limited circumstances,
of the public administration’s tort liability or to the right to compensation in
certain cases of expropriation.

Foreign investors covered by a BIT enjoy an additional level of protection: they
can avail themselves of the same instruments open to local investors, and
additionally they can draw protection from the international law rights conferred
by the treaty. The different treatment between foreign and domestic investors is a
natural consequence of a BIT. However, this unequal treatment is not without
justification: justice is not to grant everyone the same, but suum cuique tribuere.
Foreigners, who lack political rights, are more exposed than domestic investors to
arbitrary actions of the host State and may thus, as a matter of legitimate policy,
be granted a wider scope of protection.

The facts proven in the present case are a good example of the role played by
BITs.

Role of the BIT

When in the 1990s Mr. Lemire proposed to invest in Ukraine in a then unexplored
sector — that of commercial radio, traditionally dominated by State owned stations
— he was received with open arms and authorised to buy a local radio station.
Claimant quickly developed his venture and became one of the leading
broadcasters in the Kyiv area. But then local, better connected groups became
aware of the opportunities. Gala’s main competitors, controlled by powerful
Ukrainian investors, were each able to obtain from the National Council between
38 and 56 additional frequencies, while Gala, although it tried incessantly, and
presented more than 200 applications, was only able to secure a single licence (in
a small village in rural Ukraine).

Radio channels can be divided into two basic categories: those which
fundamentally broadcast music and those which fundamentally broadcast
information. The first are of limited political relevance. Informational channels,
however, are politically more sensitive, because they are important elements for
the formation of public opinion”.

 

332.

 

22

6l.

62.

63.

64.

Gala Radio was and is predominantly a music broadcaster, although it also
broadcasts news. On at least two occasions, Gala tried to obtain the necessary
authorisations to create a second channel, devoted to informational broadcasting.
The first was the AM tender of May 26, 2004, and the second a specific tender for
15 FM frequencies reserved for informational radio held on October 19, 200578.
Both tenders had a high political importance: the AM tender, because it covered
the entire Ukrainian territory; the FM tender, because it would allow the winner to
create a nationwide information radio channel. On both occasions, Gala’s bid was
rejected, and the frequencies concerned awarded to close political friends of
President Viktor Yuschenko. In the case of the AM frequency, this happened after
declaring the first tender void and retendering the frequency. In the case of the FM
frequency, Claimant was able to trace and submit in evidence a written
“Instruction”, signed by the President of Ukraine himself and directed to the
National Council, expressing his expectations that the frequencies be awarded to
Radio Era, a company controlled by Deputy Derkach, a close political ally”.

The President of Ukraine interfered in this administrative procedure, not once, but
twice: first by sending an “Instruction” to the National Council, indicating the
recipients of the frequencies, and then by having one member of his staff follow
up on the Instruction and enquire about the results. The interference must be
deemed wilful, because the President knew — or should have known — that the
National Council was an independent agency, under a legal obligation to decide
tenders impartially, in accordance with the process and criteria prescribed by the
law, and that his interference was subverting that legal order’

The significance of the President’s interference is magnified by the powers which
he held at that time. The members of the National Council could at any time be
removed from office by a decision of the President or of the Parliament*!. There
was an unspoken but evident threat in the messages from the President and his
staff: if the licences were not awarded to the radio stations indicated by the
President, the tenure of the National Council members was threatened. The
National Council duly granted the licences to the radio channels indicated in the
presidential Instruction.

 

The weaknesses in the Ukrainian legal procedure for the issuance of radio
frequencies and the lack of transparency in the administrative procedures resulted
in an arbitrary advantage to local investors with greater political clout. It is not
true, as Dr. Voss assumes, that “at most, Gala suffered a “reverse discrimination”
alongside with several domestically-owned contenders in each instance”.
Domestically owned radio companies eventually obtained the number of licences
required to create nation-wide radio channels. Mr. Lemire, precisely because he
was a foreigner and lacked the close political connections that the Ukrainian
media groups had, was pushed aside and deprived of the opportunity to compete
with local investors on a level playing field.

 
 
  

* First Decision, para. 3
* First Decision, p
*! First Decision, p

* Separate Opinion, para 460.

23

65.

66.

Under these circumstances, application of the BIT has not resulted — contrary to
Dr. Voss’ assertions — in any privilege in favour of Claimant. What the Treaty has
achieved is the reestablishment of a level playing field, which had been tilted
against the foreign investor. Gala was competing against domestic players who
were able to use their preferential relationship with the public administration and
the regulators to their own advantage. The effect of the application of the BIT is to
redress a situation of discrimination — it does not create any privilege. To affirm
the contrary, as the Separate Opinion does, is to confuse the victim with the
offender.

Interpretation of the BIT

Dr. Voss adds that BIT protection in tender processes, since it could lead to an
unjustified privilege in favour of foreign investors, should be construed
narrowly**. The Tribunal disagrees. There is nothing in the text of the BIT which
supports this conclusion. The BIT must be construed, like any other treaty, in
accordance with the principles set forth in the Vienna Convention.

*} Separate Opinion, paras. 127 and 128.

24

67.

68.

69.

4
5

3. Legitimate Expectations

3.1. Definition of Legitimate Expectations and of Gala’s Business Expansion
Plans

The Separate Opinion includes an extensive section criticising the conclusions
established in the First Decision regarding Mr. Lemire’s legitimate expectations
and Gala’s business expansion plans™. In order to address this criticism, it is
necessary, as a first step, to recapitulate how these matters were treated in the First
Decision.

o

Legitimate Expectations

In the First Decision, the Tribunal referred to legitimate expectations in the course
of its interpretation of Article II.3 of the BIT*. In the Tribunal’s reasoning,
legitimate expectations play a subsidiary role as a normative criterion®. The
cornerstone of the Tribunal’s findings was the law, and specifically the FET
standard enshrined in Article II.3 of the BIT. It is worth remembering that
legitimate expectations are nowhere mentioned in that article, nor anywhere else
in the BIT.

Treaties must be interpreted in accordance with the Vienna Convention. Article
31.1 of this Convention provides that terms used in a treaty must be construed “in
their context’. For this purpose, the Tribunal resorted to the Preamble of the BIT,
which establishes “that fair and equitable treatment of investment is desirable in
order to maintain a stable framework for investment...” and concluded that the
FET standard was closely tied to the notion of legitimate expectations. The
Tribunal then went on to analyse what gives rise to investors’ legitimate
expectations, and came to the conclusion that these expectations can be defined on
a general and on a specific level:

- On a general level, the Tribunal found that Claimant was entitled to expect
that the Ukrainian regulatory system for the broadcasting industry would be
consistent, transparent, fair, reasonable, and enforced without arbitrary or
discriminatory decisions*’;

- More particularly, Mr. Lemire had the legitimate expectation that Gala,
which at the time was only a local station in Kyiv, would be allowed to
expand on its own merits, in parallel with the growth of the private radio
industry in Ukraine™*.

Separate Opinion paras. 8 to 60.
First Decision, para. 264.

 

25

70. These legitimate expectations were not based on an individual negotiation
between Mr. Lemire and the Ukrainian State; they represent the common level of
legal comfort which any protected foreign investor in the radio sector could
expect.

Gala’s Business Expansion Plans

71. The First Decision then went on to analyse the related matter of Mr. Lemire’s
initial business plans. This was much discussed by the parties, because Claimant
was not able to produce a formal business plan. From circumstantial evidence, the
Tribunal concluded that his initial plans had been to convert Gala into a national
broadcaster and to create a second AM channel, and that the Ukrainian authorities

were informed of his plans®.

72. Legitimate expectations and Gala’s initial business plans are thus separate
concepts:

- one concept is constituted by Mr. Lemire’s expectations regarding the
protection afforded by the Ukrainian regulatory system and the possibility
of expanding Gala on its own merits and under the same terms and
conditions as the private radio industry in Ukraine; these legitimate
expectations are a criterion which the Tribunal used to construe the meaning
of Article II.3 of the BIT;

- a separate concept are the actual business plans which Claimant had at the
time when he made his initial investment, i.e. whether he envisaged to
create a local or a nationwide radio channel, whether his plans also included
the incorporation of additional channels, and whether the authorities were
aware of these projects; this issue is relevant for the calculation of the
damage suffered by Claimant because it defines Gala’s “but for” scenario’,
but it has no direct bearing on Mr. Lemire’s legitimate expectations.

73. The Separate Opinion disagrees with the Tribunal’s findings, because (3.2.) Dr.
Voss rejects the Tribunal’s assessment of evidence, and (3.3.) because he submits
that the initial business plans were affected by the Settlement Agreement.

3.2. Assessment of Evidence Regarding Gala’s Planned Expansion

74. Dr. Voss disagrees with the Tribunal’s assessment of evidence regarding Gala’s
business expansion plans*', because he attaches more weight to Mr. Petrenko’s
witness statement, and less to that of Mr. Lemire’s, and because he induces certain
consequences from a particular reading of two administrative letters”,

75. The Tribunal will not engage in a detailed analysis or evaluation of Dr. Voss’
assessment of the evidence. But a few remarks are needed.

* First Decision, para. 270.
+ See para. 253 infra.

4! Separate Opinion, pa
® Separate Opinion, pa

 

26

76.

77.

78.

79.

Mr. Lemire affirmed in his witness statement that his initial plan, when he entered
into the radio industry, was to have two national FM broadcasters, with distinct
music programming targeted at different age ranges, and a talk radio. According
to Mr. Lemire, these plans were included in a business plan which he submitted to
Respondent". Mr. Lemire went on to explain that, in his meetings with
Mr. Petrenko (the Chairman of the National Council) he was advised to buy an
existing radio company in Kyiv — that became Gala Radio — and was assured that
it would be allowed to expand and create the envisaged additional networks.
Mr. Lemire explained that he asked Mr. Petrenko to give him some written
assurance. Mr. Lemire alleged that the July 18, 1995, letter signed by
Mr. Petrenko and addressed to the State Committee [the “July 18, 1995, Letter”]*
is written proof of such assurances*>,

Mr. Petrenko, on the other hand, confirmed that he met with Mr. Lemire two or
three times during this period, but otherwise rejects having ever made any
promises or assurances as regards the expansion of Gala Radio. Mr. Petrenko
explains that the only purpose of the July 18, 1995, Letter was to check with the
State Committee on the availability of certain frequencies*®, And that the October
18, 1995, response from the State Committee*’ does no more than confirm such
availability’.

In fact, the July 18, 1995, Letter was signed by Mr. Petrenko as the Chairman of
the National Council and addressed to the Chairman of the State Inspection on
Electronic Communications. Chairman Petrenko indicates in his letter that the
National Council is considering the possibility to issue a licence to Gala Radio
and expressly asks the State Inspection to “consider the possibility to give the
company stated above [i.e. Gala Radio] the frequency channels for establishing
radio broadcasting service according to their license application in the following
cities ...”. The letter then mentions 12 cities for the FM band and Kyiv for the AM
band, and defines the power allocation for each station. Claimant has argued that
the frequencies and power mentioned in this letter would allow for national
coverage”. Respondent has not denied it. The Arbitral Tribunal views this letter
as clear proof that Mr. Lemire planned to build a FM national broadcaster and an
AM channel, and that Respondent was aware of it. Since Claimant has not been
able to produce his business plan®’, there is not sufficient evidence, apart from
Mr. Lemire’s statement, that his plans also included a second FM network, and
that Respondent was aware of it.

Dr. Voss has argued that the answer from the State Committee does not mention
the AM channel, and that this is evidence against the inclusion of the AM channel
among the initial investment plans of Claimant*'. It is true that the October 18,

4 Hearing Transcript of the hearing on jurisdiction and merits that took place on December 8 to 12, 2008
[“HT”], Day 1, pp. 121 and 122.

* Doc. CM-L.

45 Witness Statement [“WS”] of Mr. Lemire, para. 17.

46 WS (Rebuttal) of Mr. Petrenko, paras. 25 et seq.

* Doc. CM-2.

48 WS (Rebuttal) of Mr. Petrenko, paras. 30 et seq.

* Claimant’s PHB, para. 57.12.

“HT, Day 1, pp. 122 and 128.

*! Separate Opinion, para. 48.

27

80.

81.

82.

83.

1995 letter from the State Committee does “recommend” high powered FM
frequencies for 11 of the 12 cities applied for by Claimant, but that it does not
mention any AM channel. There is no evidence in the file to clarify the State
Committee’s position with regard to the availability of an AM frequency. But
even if arguendo the Tribunal accepted that the AM frequency was not available,
that fact would not change the Tribunal’s conviction that Mr. Lemire’s initial
business plan included the creation of an AM band and that Respondent was
aware of it, and that its initial reaction was positive — it would just show that while
the FM frequencies were immediately available, it is uncertain whether AM
frequencies were available at that moment.

Summing up, after having heard the oral evidence of both Mr. Lemire and of
Mr. Petrenko and carefully weighed the documentary evidence, the Tribunal came
to the conclusion that Mr. Lemire’s initial plans when he bought into Gala Radio
in June 1995 were to create an FM national broadcaster, for music format, plus a

second AM channel, for talk radio”.

3.3. Effect of the Settlement Agreement on Gala’s Initial Business Plans

Dr. Voss opines that the Tribunal by building its Award on Claimant’s business
expansion plans, without considering the impact of the Settlement Agreement,
fails to recognize the res iudicata effect of the ICSID award which formalizes the
Settlement Agreement and manifestly exceeds its powers>. Towards the end of
the Separate Opinion Dr. Voss reprises the same issue, but on this occasion, the
reasoning provided is of a contractual nature: in his opinion, the Settlement
Agreement constitutes a waiver of any claims on account of the allocation of
frequencies before the Settlement Agreement, and precludes consideration of all

. ae s 5:
prior correspondence, negotiations and understandings™.

The Arbitral Tribunal disagrees with both of Dr. Voss’ formulations.

As a first step, it is important to briefly recall what the Tribunal has actually
decided. In the First Decision, the Tribunal came to the conclusion that three
tenders for the allocation of licences and the administrative practice followed by
Ukraine during the Interregnum (which lasted from March 16, 1999, through June
9, 2000, and then led to a regularization of the frequencies irregularly awarded on
January 1, 2001) did not meet the FET standard provided for in the BIT®. And in
this Award, the Tribunal will establish the appropriate compensation, by
comparing Gala’s “as is” value (i.e. what Gala is now worth), with Gala’s “but
for” value (i.e. what Gala would be worth, if no violation of the BIT had taken

* The discussion of whether Mr. Lemire’s initial plans were limited to creating a single national
broadcaster (as Dr. Voss asserts), or also included a second AM channel (as the Tribunal concluded), is in
any event irrelevant for the purpose of calculating the amount of compensation due to Claimant: the
Tribunal will establish Claimant’s damages assuming the so called Scenario II, which foresees Gala
Radio simply as a national broadcaster, without an AM channel. Whether Mr. Lemire planned or did not
plan the AM channel, and whether the authorities knew or ignored it, therefore has no impact whatsoever
on the quantum of damages.

*} Separate Opinion, para. 39.
* Separate Opinion, para.
First Decision, p:

 

502.
a. 421.

 

28

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

place)**. In order to establish the “but for” value, the Tribunal will assume that

Gala would have become a national broadcaster and would have created a second

AM channel, as Mr. Lemire foresaw when in 1995 he prepared his initial business
37

plans’.

Against this background, Dr. Voss’ first formulation — that the Tribunal is
violating the res iudicata effect of the September 18, 2000, ICSID award which
formalized the Settlement Agreement — is difficult to follow. The Tribunal will
therefore focus on Dr. Voss’ second formulation, namely that the Settlement
Agreement (i) constitutes a waiver of pre-existing claims regarding the allocation
of frequencies, and (ii) precludes consideration of all prior correspondence,
negotiations and understandings.

The scope of the Settlement Agreement

The purpose of the Settlement Agreement was to finally settle all claims which
Claimant had filed in an ICSID Additional facility Arbitration against Ukraine™.
Claimant agreed to waive these claims, and as a quid pro quo Ukraine agreed to
appoint a commission of experts for the examination of the quality of Gala’s
broadcasting (taking corrective action if necessary), and to use its best efforts to
consider in a positive way certain applications for radio frequencies submitted by
Gala”.

The scope of the claims being settled was defined in Clause 10 of the Settlement
Agreement, which states as follows:

“The Parties agree and confirm that all the claims, counterclaims,
complaints and requests contained in the Consent to Arbitrate, Notice
for Arbitration, Ancillary Claims and all other official letters of the
Claimant to the Respondent or ICSID, as well as other
correspondence of the Claimant addressed to third parties are hereby
finally settled’.

Clause 10 of the Settlement Agreement thus provides that all claims, complaints
and requests were being settled, subject to one condition: claims must have been
referred to in the submissions made during the arbitration or in pre-existing letters
and correspondence. This implies that the settlement cannot refer to claims which
did not exist as of the date of execution of the Settlement Agreement, or which,
existing at that time, had never been mentioned in pre-existing documents, letters
or correspondence.

Can any of the claims awarded in the First Decision coincide with the claims
affected by the Settlement? The claims accepted by the First Decision consist in
the declaration that three tenders and the administrative practice during the
Interregnum amounted to violations of the FET standard. Respondent has never

*6 See para. 253 infra.

*? First Decision, para. 270 and para. 201 infra; the Tribunal will however not assign any specific value to
the AM channel, due to its speculative nature.

* Clause 10.

* Clause 13 (a) and (b).

29

89.

90.

91.

alleged that any of these claims was mentioned in documents, letters or
correspondence predating March 20, 2000. In fact, it is impossible that these
claims could by that date have been mentioned in any type of documents, letters
or correspondence, because they materialized after that date. Thus it is factually
impossible that Claimant’s claims awarded in this arbitration could be affected by
clause 10 of the Settlement Agreement.

Dr. Voss submits a second line of argument: in his opinion, the Tribunal falls foul
of clause 10 of the Settlement Agreement, because when it analysed the available
evidence regarding Mr. Lemire’s initial business plans, it took into consideration
not only the Witness Statements of the relevant witnesses, but also an 1995
exchange of letters between Mr. Lemire and the Ukrainian authorities.

Dr. Voss is mistaking claims with facts. Settlement agreements can extinguish all
existing claims between the parties in relation to the matters which are being
settled. This is what clause 10 of the Settlement Agreement purports to achieve
(subject to the additional requirement that claims must have been mentioned in
existing written documents). But what settlement agreements in general, and
clause 10 of the Settlement Agreement in particular, simply cannot accomplish is
to extinguish past factual occurrences. It is a fact — proven in the First Decision —
that in 1995 Mr. Lemire developed certain expansion plans for Gala. And when
the Tribunal in this Award establishes the compensation owed to Claimant, and
for this purpose has to determine Gala’s “but for” value, the Tribunal can and
must take into account, as a fact, Mr. Lemire’s historic plans. Without doing so,
the Tribunal would be unable to develop, with a minimum of certainty, the “but
for” value of Gala.

The above conclusions are reinforced by clause 27 of the Settlement Agreement,
which provides that the Agreement “supersedes all prior correspondence,
negotiations and understandings between the parties with respect to the matters
covered herein”. The purpose of this standard clause is that the final Settlement
Agreement replace all prior understandings between the parties “with respect to
the matters covered herein”, i.e. with regard to the claims being settled and the
obligations being assumed. It does not preclude the possibility that this Tribunal,
in order to calculate the compensation in a subsequent arbitration, in which
different claims are being discussed, takes into account facts which occurred prior
to the execution of the Settlement Agreement.

30

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

 

4. Claimant’s Record in Tender Decisions
4.1. Introduction

Dr. Voss starts his analysis of Claimant’s record in tender decisions, with the
statement that this record is not directly relevant to the Award. He adds: “[t]he
latter is based solely! on the Interregnum from March 1999 through June 2000
and, in particular, the assumption that Gala would have operated an FM network
with nationwide coverage as of January 2001 had it not been denied the requisite
frequencies by the ‘irregular practice’ during the Interregnum”"',

This statement does not reflect the truth. The Tribunal’s findings (summarized in
paragraphs 420 and 421 of the First Decision”) are that three irregular tenders and
the irregular practice during the Interregnum amounted to a violation of the FET
standard provided for in the BIT. The determination that, in addition to the
Interregnum practice, three tenders — including the tender of October 19, 2005, in
which the personal and direct interference of the President of Ukraine could be
conclusively proven — were tainted by irregularities and gave rise to international
wrongs, are fundamental factors for establishing Respondent’s liability.

A completely separate issue is that, for the purpose of calculating Claimant’s
damages, the Tribunal will use a comparison between Gala’s “as is” value, and its
“but for” value (i.e. its value if Mr. Lemire’s initial plan had not been thwarted by
Ukraine’s irregular behaviour). For that purpose, the Tribunal will assume®™ that
Gala had received during the Interregnum the licences necessary to create a
national network. But this assumption does not imply that the irregularities
committed by Ukraine in the three relevant tenders can be conveniently forgotten
or minimized.

4.2. Alternative Explanation for Gala’s Dismal Success Record

The Separate Opinion submits that Respondent has offered a reasonable, even
plausible explanation for Gala’s dismal success record in its applications for
additional frequencies: the perception on the part of the National Council
members that the Ukrainian market was already saturated with Gala’s type of
music, and that Gala lacked sufficient resources™,

The problem with Dr. Voss’ assumption is that the National Council never

published the reasons for its decision to award or deny licences — and this
represents, as the First Decision found, a “significant weakness in the

L

S! Separate Opinion para. 164; the same idea is repeated in para. 229.
© Copied in para. 31 supra.

© See para. 261

“ Separate Opinion, paras. 169, 173 and 176.

31

97.

98.

99.

. . 9965 . . :
administrative procedure’ 65 Consequently, there is no contemporary evidence in

the file, in which the National Council explains the reasons for its repeated
rejections of Claimant’s applications. Dr. Voss bases his assumptions on a
Witness Statement of a member of the National Council, presented in the second
phase of this arbitration, i.e. after the issuance of the First Decision, and upon this

evidentiary basis he sees fit to criticise the First Decision.

In fact, the Tribunal is of the opinion that the evidence presented in this arbitration
proves the contrary to what is asserted in the Separate Opinion:

- it is undisputed that in the years 1997 - 1999 Gala Radio held the number 1
and number 2 positions among the broadcasting stations in Kyiv, that it
was capable of attracting talent (including DJ Pascha, the alias of Mr. Pavel
Shylko, who acted as the presenter in the Eurovision Festival held in
Ukraine, and the Olympic gold medallist Mr. Viktor Petrenko"), that it won
prizes for the quality of its broadcasting” and that its news services were
ranked in second place, immediately after those of Radio Era”; on the basis
of the evidence produced, the Tribunal is convinced that if Gala Radio had
been awarded the appropriate licences, it had the necessary talent and know
how to provide a successful radio service in different segments of the
market;

- Gala Radio has been financed by capital and loan injections made by its
only shareholder, Mr. Lemire; broadcasting is not a capital intensive
business; there is no reason to doubt that if the National Council had granted
additional licences, Mr. Lemire would have been able to contribute the
necessary funds for financing the additional investment (which Goldmedia,
the expert designated by Claimant, has established would amount to
2,757,430 UAH, approximately 500,000 USD”).

Besides these general comments on the reasons underlying the National Council’s
decisions, the Separate Opinion includes a lengthy analysis of the administrative
practice during the Interregnum. The Tribunal will only make a few remarks with
regard to certain new issues, which the Separate Opinion has brought up for the
first time.

4.3. Administrative Practice during the Interregnum

In the First Decision the Tribunal concluded that during the Interregnum (between
March 16, 1999 and June 9, 2000), when the National Council was not operative,
Respondent developed the practice of issuing licences for radio broadcasting
directly, without publicity and without complying with the requirements or
applying the procedures established in the law. The de facto situation was then

°° First Decision, para. 309.
S Separate Opinion, para. 177, which refers to the third WS of Ihor Kurus, which was submitted in the
second phase of this arbitration and which was not available to the Tribunal when it issued its First
Decision.
®” Doc. CM-131; HTRI, p. 65.
Both appeared as witnesses in the first hearing of the arbitration.
© Doc. CM-89 with a list of Gala Radio’s awards and prizes.
™ According to the ratings produced by Sirex.
7 GSR, p. 52.

32

legalised through a tender held on January 1, 2001, in which Claimant was not
authorised to participate, and which gave preferential treatment to the companies
that had been illegally awarded licences during the Interregnum”.

100. The Separate Opinion makes a number of comments with regard to these
conclusions.

A. Ultra Petita and Audiatur et Altera Pars

101. In first instance, the Separate Opinion affirms that Claimant only alleged the
illegality of the Interregnum practice as a violation of the Settlement Agreement,
but not as a violation of the BIT, and, based on this assertion, concludes that the

First Decision violated the principle of ne ultra petita”®.

102. The Tribunal disagrees.

103. In his first Memorial, Claimant described Respondent’s practice of granting
licences in the time period which expands between the execution of the Settlement
Agreement, on March 20, 2000, and the date when the last frequency provided for
in Settlement Agreement was actually given to Gala (in October 2002). For this
time period, which overlaps with the Interregnum, Claimant presented two
specific claims:

- first, that Respondent’s practice of systematic rejection of Gala’s application
constituted a violation of the Settlement Agreement”; this claim was
dismissed by the Tribunal in its First Decision;

- secondly, Claimant submitted that “Respondent instead awarded the
frequencies to other applications who were clearly less qualified than Gala.
In doing so, Respondent breached the BIT, in particular the requirement
that Gala be protected against unfair, inequitable, arbitrary and
discriminatory treatment”; the same allegation was repeated in para. 67.3

of Claimant’s PHB” (submitted before the First Decision); there can thus be
no doubt that, since his initial pleading, Claimant has continuously alleged
that Respondent’s denial of licences during the Interregnum period
represented a violation of the BIT, and Respondent had ample opportunity
to counter these allegations.

104. Dr. Voss’ assertion that “Respondent had thus no opportunity to react’ to the

Tribunal’s decision is groundless. Respondent did react, both before and after the

First Decision”.

 

” First Decision, paras. 409 and 418.

” Separate Opinion, paras. 188 to 190.

” Claimant’s Memorial, para. 85.

*5 Claimant’s Memorial, para. 86. Dr. Voss, in para. 520 of his Separate Opinion, argues that this pleading
relates to the period March 2000 to October 2002. The Tribunal disagrees; para. 85 of Claimant's
Memorial defines the applicable time period as “up until and well after the May 15, 2000 deadline”; such
time period covers the Interregnum, which lasted from March 1999 through June 2000.

7 “Respondent's practice of illegally awarding frequencies to companies other than Gala from the period
immediately after the Settlement Agreement until well into 2001,as described in paragraph 57.2 above,
constitutes a breach of the BIT provisions of fair and equitable treatment (Article IT.3.(c),
77 Separate Opinion, para. 191.

 

33

10:

106.

107.

5.

a

a

B. Alleged Falsehood of the Tribunal’s Key Assumption

In the First Decision the Tribunal dismissed Respondent’s defence that the new
licences issued during the Interregnum only affected frequencies which came up
for renewal. Dr. Voss now submits that the Tribunal erred, because “Respondent
has thus produced documentary evidence that the majority's key assumption was

false”.

The Tribunal disagrees.

The First Decision rejected Respondent’s argument that the Interregnum practice
only extended to renewals, and it did so on three grounds®:

“414. First of all, the renewal of licences under the LTR does not
require a tender (Article 24.9). Extension is a “right” of the licence
holder, and the National Council can reject the application for
extension only in very limited circumstances (Article 33.7).
Respondent's explanation of what happened seems a_ legal
impossibility, and is at any rate entirely implausible.

415. Secondly, there is a letter sent on September 28, 1999 by S.
Aksenenko, a member of the National Council, to the Vice Prime
Minister of Ukraine 163, in which Mr. Aksenenko protests that other
institutions of the executive branch are usurping the National
Council’s powers, taking advantage of the fact that it is not operative.

416. Finally, Mr. Lemire has presented the transcript of a meeting
held on March 19, 2001 with Mr. Koholod, the then chairman of the
National Council, who acknowledged that during the interregnum
“some bad things [were] happening” and that the State Committee,
and not the National Council, had been issuing the licences”.

108. After the First Decision had been issued, Respondent submitted in its RMRI"' that

Articles 24.9 and 33.7 of the Ukrainian Law on Television and Radio
Broadcasting, last amended in 2006, [“LTR”], to which the Tribunal had
referred*’, in fact were not in force in year 2000, and that, at that time, the
applicable provision was a previous version of Article 17 of the LTR. Respondent
attached the text of this Article to his RMRI as Document RLA 108*°. Respondent
also produced with its RMRI a third WS from Mr. Kurus, in which Mr. Kurus
states that in the year 2000 renewals of licences had to be made through tenders,

 

78 See Respondent’s PHB (submitted before the First Decision), para. 388 analysing Mr. Aksenenko’s
letter (Doc. CM 11), which is an important piece of evidence regarding the Interregnum period (see para.
415 First Decision); see also RMRI, paras. 154 et seq.

”° Separate Opinion para. 199.

® First Decision paras. 414 to 416; footnotes omitted.

*! Para. 174.

® And which the Tribunal had taken from a translation of the LTR submitted by Claimant as CLA 3,
which bears the title “The Law of Ukraine in Television and Radio Broadcasting of December 21, 1993”.
% In the relevant passage. art. 17 states: “To continue broadcasting the TV and radio company must
repeatedly receive the license according to the procedure stipulated by this Law”

34

and that of the frequencies irregularly awarded during the Interregnum, 25
corresponded to previously expired licences™

109. The Tribunal is prepared to accept, ad arguendum, that Respondent’s submission
and Mr. Kurus’ WS are correct, and that 25 of the licences granted during the
Interregnum corresponded to renewals upon expiration; but even if this hypothesis
is accepted, taking into account that more than 80 frequencies were awarded, the
Tribunal would see no reason to modify its conclusions regarding the irregularity
of the administrative practice during the Interregnum®

110. There is overwhelming evidence — including the statements from Messrs.
Aksenenko and Koholod referred to above — that during this period, while the
National Council was not operative, the executive branch of Government acted
wrongfully: it awarded significant numbers of radio licences directly, without
transparency or publicity and without meeting the requirements of or following
the procedures established in the LTR — a practice which in the opinion of the
Tribunal and due to its blatant disregard of the law implies a violation of the FET
standard established in Article II.3 of the BIT.

C. Licences Granted Under the Settlement Agreement

111. Dr. Voss finally presents a third argument, which is new and has never been
advanced by Respondent: in his opinion,

“Gala’s position in relation to the Interregnum practice is similar to
the position of other broadcasters in Ukraine in relation to Gala’s
treatment under the Settlement Agreement.

 

Since there is no doubt about the legality of the Settlement Agreement, the
rationale for legality would apply mutatis mutandis to Ukraine’s Interregnum
practice*’

112. The Tribunal disagrees. The facts do not support Dr. Voss’ allegations.

113. On 29 December 1997 Mr. Lemire presented the notice to institute his first ICSID
arbitration against Ukraine. At that time, Mr. Lemire alleged (inter alia) that he
had suffered unfair, inequitable and discriminatory behaviour on the part of
Ukraine in the awarding of frequencies. The procedure commenced, and two years
later the parties eventually reached a Settlement Agreement, in which Claimant
agreed to withdraw his claims and Respondent assumed certain obligations in
order to redress Mr. Lemire’s situation. The Settlement Agreement regulated the
issuance of broadcasting licences in favour of Gala in subparagraphs II and III of
Clause 13(b). In accordance with these provisions Ukraine undertook to “assist
[Claimant] for the positive consideration of this issue [the awarding of licences]
by the National Council”. This obligation was not absolute, but subject to
important caveats, the most important of which was that the licences were to be

 

se Paras 7 and 10. In the hearing, the number used by Respondent was 31 (see HTRI, pp. 48 and 49).
as. 187 to 188 infra

 

87 Separate Opinion, para. ot 1

35

114.

115.

116.

issued “in accordance with the requirements of Ukrainian legislation”. The
National Council eventually recognised Gala’s priority position and granted to
Gala all 11 broadcasting licences mentioned in Clause 13(b) — albeit with
significant delays.

Dr. Voss now submits that if one accepts this treatment of Gala by the National
Council for the purposes of giving effect to the Settlement Agreement, one must
condone Ukraine’s practice during the Interregnum of de facto awarding
frequencies and authorisations to broadcast without transparency or publicity and
in disregard of Ukrainian legislation.

Dr. Voss here, too, confuses victim and offender.

Mr. Lemire had been denied frequencies. He had been forced to file an ICSID
arbitration. His claims must have carried some weight: Respondent preferred to
settle, and accepted to redress the injustice by agreeing to assist Gala in its future
applications for 11 frequencies — without granting Gala any privileges “which are
different or additional to the ordinary rights and obligations of a foreign investor
in Ukraine in accordance with the Ukrainian laws and international treaties to
which Ukraine is a party”. It seems a travesty to state — as Dr. Voss does — that
this act of rebalancing of an unjust situation “can in terms of propriety not be
distinguished” from Ukraine’s practice during the Interregnum of arbitrarily
granting frequencies and authorisations with total disregard of the Law.

88 Separate Opinion, para. 208.

36

117.

118.

119.

120.

IV. LEGALANALYSIS

The Tribunal reserved two questions to be addressed in this Final Award: the first
is “the question of appropriate redress of the breach, including the quantification
of damages”, resulting from the First Allegation, i.e. the violation of the FET
standard defined in the BIT; the second is whether the circumstances of the case,
and the harassment which Claimant has allegedly suffered, merit the awarding of
moral damages.

Each of the two questions identified in the preceding paragraph will be analysed
in separate sections (IV.1 and IV.2) and additional sections will cover (IV.3)
interest and (IV.4) costs.

TV.1 QUANTIFICATION OF DAMAGES FROM THE BREACH OF FET STANDARD
1. Claimant’s Case

On April 16, 2010 Claimant submitted his Memorial on Remaining Issues. His
arguments and allegations were further developed during the hearing held on
July 12, 2010, when his Counsel presented oral Opening and Closing Statements.

Mr. Lemire’s Investment in Gala Radio

Mr. Lemire is the shareholder, through Mirakom, of Gala Radio®. Claimant
considers that the loss suffered to the value of his investment corresponds entirely
to the prejudice caused to Gala Radio by reason of Ukraine’s breaches of the BIT.
He submits that he invested significant amounts of his own money in furthering

the business of Gala Radio. These investments include”:

- the letting of 10 apartments with 619 m” rent free to the company; this real
estate belongs directly or indirectly to Mr. Lemire; the total rental value of
these properties for the 1996 - 2010 period is alleged to be 1,310,341 United
States Dollar [“USD”];

- certain payments made by Claimant, on behalf of Gala Radio, either in fixed
assets or in licence fees, amounting to 832,589 USD;

- investments in the development of Gala Radio’s brand, amounting to
2,296,366 USD;

- credit facilities granted to Gala Radio by an offshore company belonging to
Mr. Lemire, and not reimbursed, for 277,915 USD;

® First Decision, paras. 36, 53 and 54.
°° CMRI, para. 11.

37

121.

122.

123.

- the value of the time Mr. Lemire has invested in support of the radio
company, at a rate of 360,000 USD per year, amounting to, approximately,
5 millions [“M”] USD.

Claimant admits that the assets of Mr. Lemire and Gala Radio are commingled”',
but submits that even Respondent has accepted between 900,000 USD and
1M USD as an investment, and has challenged the rest based on technicalities”.
In the radio industry, what matters is expertise and know-how more than
resources. As an example, Claimant refers to the purchase by a company called
Ukrainian Media Holding [“UMH”] of a 50% participation in Radio 5, a full
network radio station, for 10 M USD. From this, Claimant infers that a full
network has a value of approximately 20 M USD®™.

Structure of Claimant’s Calculation of Damages

Mr. Lemire’s calculation of damages is based on the comparison of a base
scenario [“Scenario I”]"*, which represents the value of Gala Radio as it operates
today, with four alternative hypothetical Scenarios, which represent under
different assumptions what its present value would have been, if the violation of
the FET standard had not occurred. Claimant submits that the difference between
the actual (“as is”) and the hypothetical (“but for”) value of Gala Radio represents
the damage caused by Respondent to Claimant”.

Claimant underlines that the calculation of damages should place Claimant in the
position he should have been in, had there not been a breach by Respondent. Since
the outset, Mr. Lemire wanted to establish two full networks, and thereafter a third
network, Energy. He applied and was defeated each time, and was prevented from
creating the three networks because the tenders and procedures for awarding the
frequencies breached the FET standard enshrined in the BIT”. During the
Interregnum or “blackout period”®”, during which the National Council was not
functioning, Respondent awarded directly more than 80 frequencies”®; Claimant
submits that with 14 of these frequencies Gala Radio could have covered the
whole country; and with seven, two thirds of it’. Thus Gala Radio could have
become a national broadcaster. A second FM network could have been obtained
by Gala Radio if Ukraine had not acted in breach of the BIT when awarding 12
frequencies to Kokhannya in 2006 and one frequency to Kiss in 2008'. And the
AM network could have been awarded in 2004, and been converted to FM in
2006, in the wake of the Radio Era tender!”!,

°“ HTRI, p. 14.

° HTRI, p. 14.

° HTRI, p. 14; see also Doc. CM-117 with press report about the transaction.
° The exact meaning of each scenario will be explained in paras. 256 to 259 infra.
°5 CMRI, para. 30.

°° HTRI, p. 13.

°7 HTRI, p. 19.

TRI, p. 18.

°° HTRI, pp. 23 and 24.

‘00 HTRI, p. 24.

‘Ol HTRI, p. 25.

38

124. Claimant has calculated the present value of the various Scenarios using the
Discounted Cash Flow [“DCF”] methodology developed by its expert, Goldmedia
GmbH [‘Goldmedia”], who issued a report dated April 16, 2010, and testified
during the hearing (in the person of Dr. André Wiegand). The conclusions of this
calculation are the following”:

- Scenario II: the total damage would amount to 30,469,000 USD;

- Scenario III: the total damage would amount to 40,402,000 USD;

- Scenario IV: the total damage would amount to 46,651,000 USD;

- Scenario IV A): the total damage would amount to 43,617,000 USD.

Causation

125. Claimant submits that causation has already been decided by the Tribunal in its
First Decision, and that the Tribunal should not second-guess the outcome of the
tenders or engage in an additional review of the procedures in order to establish
whether Gala Radio would have won the frequencies'*.

'©2 CMRI, para. 53 et seq.
'3 HTRI, p. 28.

39

126.

127.

128.

129.

130.

131.

2. Respondent’s Case

On June 21, 2010 Respondent submitted its RMRI, and then presented arguments
and allegations during its Opening and Closing Statements at the Hearing.

The Financial Crisis and its Impact on Gala Radio

Respondent submits that the financial crisis hit the Ukrainian economy in the
second half of 2008. A sharp decline ensued in industrial production, in new
construction and in the GDP'™, The 2008 State budget had to be saved by an
emergency loan of 16 billion USD from the International Monetary Fund’. The
media market in Ukraine could not avoid the effects of the crisis. Advertising
revenues in the radio market declined by 26.4 % in 2009.

Gala Radio’s financial results for 2008 and 2009 also suffered. Profit of
121,000 USD in 2007 became a loss of 264,000 USD in 2008 and a further loss of
81,000 USD in 2009. Revenues also decreased by about 50% from 2008 to 2009
and the EBITDA" turned negative!”

Respondent further argues that Gala Radio’s statutory financial report does not
accurately reflect Gala Radio’s performance. Its revenues and costs are
understated. Most employees are paid unrealistically low wages. Respondent
suspects that cash payments to employees are made with the purpose of avoiding

corporate and payroll taxes 108

Gala Radio is declining, because its format is no longer popular. In 2010 it did not
appear in the rating of the top 10 radio stations, whether in Kyiv or, generally in
Ukraine. This contrasts with the years 1997 - 1999, when its popularity
increased to the number 1 position in Kyiv''®. In Respondent’s opinion, Gala
Radio is a reasonably popular radio station, which has achieved average results,
notably in Kyiv and, generally, in Ukraine. But it is not a leader, because it lacks a
distinctive music format.

In sum, Respondent views Gala Radio as a business which has incurred losses for
two years in a row, and has never generated more than 121,000 USD profits per
year (Gala Radio’s profit’s having been 105,000 USD, 94,000 USD and
121,000 USD in 2005, 2006 and 2007, respectively'''). Respondent furthermore
suspects that Gala Radio’s financial records understate income and expenses.

 

't Gross domestic product.

'°5 RMRI, para. 69.

'06 “Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortisation”.

‘7 RMRI, para. 78.

‘8 HTRI, p. 68.

'° RMRI, para. 83, based on Doc. R 459: DAR Kyiv rating from February 15 to April 25, 2010, which
show Gala Radio in place 14.

" Doc. CM-131 and HTRI, p. 65.

"! Respondent’s Opening Statement (presentation for the Hearing on Remaining Issues), p. 24.

40

132.

133.

134.

Claimant’s Investment in Gala Radio

Respondent argues that the damages claimed are disproportionate to the capital
invested, which over a 15-year period in fact amounted to less than 1 M usp!.
Respondent then analyses in detail the various categories of investment claimed
by Mr. Lemire:

- Real estate: Respondent submits that Claimant has not shown that the
apartments were actually used by Gala Radio, and not by Mr. Lemire
personally; there are only three lease agreements between Gala Radio and
the owners of the apartments, and the rent-free leases do not appear in the
company’s financial statements'";

- Fixed assets: with regard to this category of assets, Respondent argues that
Claimant has not specified whether the outlay was made by Claimant
personally or by Gala Radio; in the first case, such payments would not
represent an outlay or investment of Claimant himself; after reviewing the
record of evidence, Respondent concludes that out of the 832,589 USD
claimed by Mr. Lemire under this heading, only 352,439 USD correspond to
real investments! M4

- Brand support and marketing: In Respondent’s opinion, marketing costs are
not classified as investments, but rather as expenses accounted for in the
P & L account; there is no evidence that they were paid with Gala Radio’s
own funds, rather than contributed by Mr. Lemire ~;

- Credit facilities: Claimant has only provided supporting documentation for a
single line of credit granted by a BvI''® company (“Gala Entertainment
Ltd.”) to Gala Radio in 2008 in the modest amount of 470,000 usb!";

- Mr. Lemire’s time: Respondent submits that Mr. Lemire’s own time should
not be included in the quantification of Claimant’s investments; Mr. Lemire
received compensation from Gala Radio — 36,000 USD per annum — and
absent evidence to the contrary this sum must represent a fair payment for
his time!'®.

Causation

Respondent argues that Claimant has decided to ignore the issue of causation
altogether, simply hiding behind rhetoric. In any BIT arbitration, damages may
only be awarded to the extent that there is sufficient causal link between the
breach and the loss sustained by the investor. Claimant is not entitled to assume

causation, but must prove it!

Since Claimant did not even attempt to establish a causal link between breaches
and alleged loss, the Tribunal should infer that:

'? RMRI, para. 100.
"3 RMRI, para. 105.
"4 RMRI, para. 110.

Lis

RMRI, para. 114.

"6 British Virgin Islands.

"7 RMRI, para. 115.

"8 RMRI, para. 119.

"° RMRI, paras. 131 to 135.

41

135.

136.

- Gala Radio would not have won frequencies in any of the tenders that were
identified by the Tribunal in paragraph 421 of the First Decision;

- the breaches were not a proximate cause, let alone dominant cause of
Claimant’s loss, because there was an intervening cause for the damage
alleged 120, and

- it is inherently speculative to find a causal link in any tender process which
involves multiple qualified contestants and the application of both objective
and subjective criteria.

For these reasons, the Tribunal should declare that the causal link is not
. . . . 12
established and Claimant is not entitled to compensation'”!,

Respondent further submits that Gala Radio would not have won the FM
frequencies allocated in 1999 - 2000!”?, nor in the tender of January 1, 2001 123 As
regards the AM frequency, Gala Radio would also have been unsuccessful,
because the documents in the record confirm that Gala Radio’s proposed
programming concept for the AM frequency was the same as the general FM
frequency” . In any case, Gala Radio had no long-term interest in maintaining an
AM network in Ukraine, as proven by Claimant’s allegation that a year after
obtaining a hypothetical AM frequency, he would have switched the AM talk
radio into an FM frequency’. Respondent also analyses the tender of Radio Era
and comes to the conclusion that an informational channel of 15 frequencies
would never have been allocated to a company with hits music entertainment
experience like Gala Radio'”*. Ukraine further submits that Gala Radio and
Energy Media could not have won the Radio Kokhannya tenders of January 25,
2006 and March 30, 2006, because they never participated'?’, Finally, Respondent
alleges that even if Kiss FM had not participated in the tender of February 6,
2008, Gala Radio and Energy would not have won the frequencies, because their
applications were not sufficiently convincing and other competitors were better
positioned'**,

Summing up, Respondent submits that Gala Radio lost the tenders identified at
para. 421 of the First Decision because of”:

- a lack of a distinct programming;

- an absence of innovation;

- vague and confusing presentations before the National Council;

- under-capitalisation of its business and lack of financial capabilities;
- better qualified competitors.

0 HTRI, p. 42.

1 RMRI, para. 153.

'22 RMRI, para. 168.

3 RMRI, para. 184.

'4 RMRI, para. 202.

5 RMRI, para. 221.

6 RMRI, para. 244.

7 RMRI, para. 262.

8 RMRI, para. 272.

°° RMRI, para. 285 et seq.

42

137.

138.

139.

140.

141.

142.

143.

Since the results of the tenders can be fully explained by causes independent of
the BIT breaches, Claimant cannot establish the required proximity between the
breaches and the loss, and should be awarded no damages’,

Claimant’s Assessment is Unreliable and Speculative

As a subsidiary argument, Respondent states that Claimant bears the burden of
proving the quantum of the compensation. The amount of damages must be
certain, unchallengeable and not resulting from speculative calculations'*'. The
methodology of Goldmedia’s report, on which Claimant relies, is fundamentally
flawed and has led to inaccurate results:

(i) Respondent rejects Claimant’s use of the enterprise value or fair market value
under various Scenarios. In Ukraine’s opinion the calculation should be
performed under a lost profits analysis'™. This correction alone, without changing
Goldmedia’s other assumptions, would provoke a sharp decrease in the amount of
compensation (by more than 14 M USD in Scenario mm,

(ii) Although Goldmedia acknowledged that the Ukrainian radio advertising
market was affected by the economic crisis in 2009, and that the overall decrease
in media advertising revenues reached 22%, it did not apply this percentage, but
only 9%, on the basis that first movers suffered a smaller reduction. In

Respondents view, this number is a sheer invention by Claimant’s expert'™.

(iii) Respondent submits that Goldmedia’s projections are unreliable; the expert
had projected for 2008 and 2009 that Gala Radio’s profits would amount to
715,000 USD, when in fact there has been a combined loss of 345,000 USD’. In
Ukraine’s opinion, this and other similar discrepancies seriously undermine the
credibility of Goldmedia’s assessment of damages.

(iv) Furthermore, Goldmedia’s analysis is permeated by errors, which include the
use of incorrect discount rates, of incorrect starting dates, of incorrect data and of
inflated revenues and understated costs!*°, the inconsistent use of USD versus
Ukrainian Hryvnia [*UAH”]'*’ and excessive reliance upon a supposed “First
Mover Advantage”'**.

EBS’s Restatement of Goldmedia’s Calculations

For illustration purposes, EBS Expertise Services [“EBS”] — Respondent’s
expert — has performed a calculation of Claimant’s alleged damages on the basis

80 HTRI, p. 42.
5! RMRI, para. 302.
'? HTRI, p. 78 to 79.

'S RMRI.

' RMRI, para. 3
‘8S RMRI, para

‘86 RMRI, pa

‘7 RMRI, para.

8 RMRI, para. 373.

 

43

of Goldmedia’s basic damage theory, but with the adjustments discussed above.
As a consequence, Claimant’s restated damages would be the following'*”:

- Scenario II: 190,490 USD;

- Scenario III: 178,780 USD;

- Scenario IV: 205,660 USD;

- Scenario IV A): 145,550 USD.

144. Respondent finally provides, for illustration purposes only, and without admission
that Claimant is entitled to compensation, an alternative damage calculation,
based on the assumption that Gala Radio would have been granted seven
additional frequencies (two FM frequencies in 2001, one AM frequency in 2004,
one FM frequency in 2005 and two FM frequencies in 2008). In this new scenario
Respondent calculates that the additional profit which Gala Radio could have
expected would have amounted to 22,000 USD in 2010. Reduced to net present
value, the total damages to be awarded to Claimant would be in the range of
122,000 USD".

‘8° RMRI, paras. 398 to 399; by reference to EBS Supplementary Report [“ESR”].
‘0 RMRI, para. 403.

44

3. The Arbitral Tribunal’s Decision

145. In order to decide this issue, the Tribunal will first (3.1) make some general
observations regarding the calculation of damages in scenarios where a State has
violated the FET standard of a BIT; thereafter, (3.2) it will analyse Respondent’s
argument that Claimant’s request should be rejected ab initio because of lack of
causation; then (3.3) review the expert reports submitted by both parties; finally
leading to (3.4) the Tribunal’s determination of the quantum of prejudice and to
its (3.5) conclusions.

45

3.1. General Considerations Regarding the Calculation of Damages

146. In its First Decision the Tribunal established that Respondent, when awarding
radio frequencies to Claimant, breached the FET standard enshrined in Article II.3
of the BIT, and that the relief must consist in an order to Respondent to pay
compensation equal to the damages caused. This leads to the issue under
discussion, namely the proper quantification of damages.

147. Article II.3 of the BIT does not provide any rule regarding the appropriate redress
in cases of violation. This contrasts with Article III.1, which prohibits unlawful
expropriations and includes precise rules for the calculation of “compensation”"*',
based on the concept of “fair market value”. The failure of Article I1.3 of the
Treaty to specify the relief which an aggrieved investor can seek does not imply
that a violation of the FET standard may be left without redress: a wrong
committed by a State against an investor must always give rise to a right for
compensation of the economic harm sustained’. The quaestio vexata is how this
economic harm is to be measured.

148. The BIT establishes the rule that compensation for expropriation is to be based on
“fair market value” of the investment; this principle, however, is of little use in
the present arbitration, because the breach does not amount to the total loss or
deprivation of an asset. Gala Radio still exists and Claimant still owns it:
compensation thus cannot be based on fair market value of assets expropriated",

149. It is generally admitted that in situations where the breach of the FET standard
does not lead to total loss of the investment, the purpose of the compensation must
be to place the investor in the same pecuniary position in which it would have
been if respondent had not violated the BIT", In the classic formulation of the
Permanent Court of International Justice [“PCIJ”] in the Factory at Chorzow'®,
reparation:

‘4! Article II.3 of the BIT: “Compensation shall be equivalent to the fair market value of the expropriated
investment immediately before the expropriatory action was taken or became known, whichever is
earlier; be calculated in freely usable currency on the basis of the prevailing market rate of exchange at
that time; be paid without delay; include interest at a commercially reasonable rate, such as LIBOR plus
an appropriate margin, from the date of expropriation; be fully realizable; and be freely transferable”.

'® See Article 31.1 International Law Commission [“ILC”] Draft Articles on State Responsibility [“ILC
Articles”] (“The responsible state is under an obligation to make full reparation for the injury caused by
the internationally wrongful act’); see also Campbell McLachlan/Laurence Shore/Matthew Weiniger:
“International Investment Arbitration: Substantive Principles”, 2007, [“McLachlan/Shore/Weiniger”],
p. 334; and Irmgard Marboe: “Calculation of Compensation and Damages in International Investment
Law”, 2009, [“Marboe”], para. 3.114.

"3 1G & E Energy Corp., LG & E Capital Corp. and LG&E International, Inc. v. Argentine Republic,
(ICSID Case No. ARB/02/01), Award of July 25, 2007, [“LG&E”], para. 36.

'4 Marboe, para. 3.288.

"5 Case Concerning Certain German Interests in Polish Upper Silesia (Germany v. Poland), merits,
1928, PCH, Series A, No. 17, p. 21 et seq. [“Factory at Chorzow”].

46

150.

151.

152.

“... must, so far as possible wipe out all the consequences of the illegal
act and re-establish the situation which would, in all probability, have
existed if that act had not been committed. Restitution in kind, or, if
this is not possible, payment of a sum corresponding to the value
which a restitution in kind would bear ...”"*°.

Reparation can thus take the form of restitution or compensation. In our case, the
relief requested by Claimant is limited to compensation, and it is this form of
reparation which the Tribunal must address.

Compensation

The aim of compensation is the elimination of all negative consequences of the
wrongful act, through the payment to the injured party of an amount sufficient to
cover “any financially assessable damage including loss of profits insofar as it is
established” (Article 36.2 ILC Articles).

But this is only a theoretical definition of a general standard; the actual calculation
of damages cannot be made in the abstract, it must be case specific: it requires the
definition of a financial methodology for the determination of a sum of money
which, delivered to the investor, produces the equivalent economic value which,
in all probability, the investor would enjoy, “but for” the State’s breach. The
parties have submitted extensive expert evidence with the purpose of defining and
applying this financial methodology. The Tribunal will analyse it in sections 3.3,
and 3.4 below. But before that, it is necessary to address one of the fundamental
defence lines articulated by Respondent: the absence of causation.

 

 

'46 Factory at Chorzow, p. 47.

47

3.2. Respondent’s Argument of Lack of Causation

Respondent’s Position

153. Respondent has argued insistently that the Tribunal should ab initio reject
Claimant’s request for compensation, because there is no causal link between
Respondent’s breaches and Claimant’s alleged losses. Respondent submits that
Gala Radio would never have won any frequencies in the irregular tenders
identified in para. 421 of the First Decision, but would have lost these tenders in
any case, because it was a weak applicant and its competitors were better-
positioned'*’,

Claimant’s Position

154. In response, Claimant has argued that it is impossible to second-guess now who
would have won certain tenders, and that the issue of causation has already been
settled in the First Decision, when the Tribunal decided that Gala Radio had been

the subject of unfair and inequitable treatment'**,

155. The Tribunal agrees with Respondent that it is a general principle of international
law that injured claimants bear the burden of demonstrating that the claimed
quantum of compensation flows from the host State’s conduct, and that the causal
relationship is sufficiently close (i.e. not “too remote”). The duty to make
reparation extends only to those damages which are legally regarded as the
consequence of an unlawful act'”. Article 36.1 of the ILC Articles reflects this
general principle:

“The State responsible for an internationally wrongful act is under an
obligation to compensate for the damage caused thereby”,

156. But beyond this general principle, the ILC Articles remain silent on the particulars
of the issue. It is therefore left to judges and arbitrators to define and give content
to the specific elements required!” ' The only supplementary guidance is provided
in Article 39 of the ILC Articles entitled “Contribution to the injury”, which
states:

“filn the determination of reparation, account shall be taken of the
contribution to the injury by wilful or negligent action or omission of

‘57 RMRI, paras. 153 and 285.

48 HTRI, p. 28.

'° Bin Cheng: “General Principles of Law as applied by international Courts and Tribunals”, 1987,
[“Cheng”], p. 322.

'S0 Emphasis added.

'S! Brigitte Stern: “The Obligation to make reparation” in “The Law of International responsibility”
(James Crawford/Alain Pellet/Simon Olleson — Eds.), 2010, p. 570.

48

157.

158.

the injured State or any person or entity in relation to whom
reparation is sought”.

Requirements of Causation

Proof of causation requires that (A) cause, (B) effect, and (C) a logical link
between the two be established.

A. Cause
The wrongful acts attributable to Ukraine, in breach of the FET standard,

constitute the initial cause. The existence of such acts was established in the First
Decision and is res iudicata. The First Decision made the following ruling

152,

“To declare that Respondent, in the manner in which it dealt with the
award of radio frequencies as described in paragraph 421 of this
Decision, breached Article IL3 of the BIT’

And paragraph 421 provided as follows:

“[...] The Tribunal came to the conclusion that the following decisions
did not meet the FET standard provided for in the BIT:

- the National Council’s decision adopted on October 19, 2005
granting an FM information channel to Radio Era, and the
subsequent decisions to award 12 frequencies to radio Kokannya;

- the National Council’s decision of May 26, 2004 denying Gala
Radio the licence for an AM channel, and the decision of
December 21, 2004 granting such licence to NART TV;

- the National Council’s decision of February 6, 2008 denying
Gala’s application and accepting the application of Kiss Radio;

- Respondent's practice of awarding radio licences while the
National Council’s was not operative between March 16, 1999 and
June 9, 2000, and the National Council’s decision of January 1,
2001 to legalize the licences illegally granted during the
[Interregnum]”.

159. In order to reach this decision, the Tribunal concluded that

“there are factors (the strikingly different success rates of Gala and of
its competitors, the inexistence of any information regarding the real
owners of the competing stations, the impossibility of verifying the
reasons why Gala was rejected) which can be construed as
indications that at least some of the decisions of the National Council
when it awarded frequencies were arbitrary and/or
discriminatory”.

'S First Decision, para. 513.

153

The First Decision initially referred, by mistake, to para. 422. This typographical error was duly
corrected.

'S First Decision, para. 420.

49

160.

161.

162.

163.

The Decision went on to say:

“To confirm or reject these indications, the Tribunal then looked in
detail at five tenders of radio frequencies and the administrative
practice for awarding licences in the [Interregnum]”'>.

The result of this analysis was that a number of tenders, plus the administrative
practice while the National Council was not operative, were found not to meet the
minimum standard required by the BIT.

B. Effect

Without licences granted by the National Council, it is unlawful to engage in the
business of broadcasting. Consequently the effect of the irregular denial of
licences was that Gala Radio’s business plans could not be achieved, that its
planned development was curtailed, its market position eroded, its capacity to
generate profits impaired and its potential market value was never achieved; and
Claimant, as owner of Gala Radio, suffered the corresponding losses. The damage
due to Mr. Lemire can be established as the difference in value between Gala
which he actually owns (Gala’s “as is” value), and the Gala which he had planned,
and which he has not been able to achieve, due to Ukraine’s wrongful acts (Gala’s
“but for” value). Claimant is requesting Jucrum cessans, compensation for an
asset or profit which he never acquired, but which, absent the wrongdoing, he
would have earned.

If the damage is defined as the difference in value between the Gala Mr. Lemire
planned and the real Gala which Claimant now owns, the question of
Mr. Lemire’s initial business plans becomes decisive. This question has already
been clarified in the First Decision'®®: Mr. Lemire’s initial plans when he bought
into Gala Radio in June 1995 were to create an FM national broadcaster, for
music format, plus a second AM channel, for talk radio — this is the “but for”
scenario. But the “as is” reality is quite different from the plan: Claimant is the
owner of what basically is a local Kyiv radio station, complemented by low power
frequencies in 11 Ukrainian cities, which Gala Radio obtained under the
Settlement Agreement (plus an additional frequency in a remote village in rural
Ukraine). The whole network only covers 22% of Ukraine’s population a7.

C. Causal Link
a) Introduction

The third element of causality is the so called causal link, the chain which leads
from cause to effect. The causal link can be viewed from two angles: the positive
aspect requires that the aggrieved party prove that an uninterrupted and proximate
logical chain leads from the initial cause (in our case the wrongful acts of
Ukraine) to the final effect (the loss in value of Gala); while the negative aspect

'S5 First Decision, para. 421.

'S6 And further anal

sis has been provided in paras. 71 et seq. of this Award.

 

‘57 CMRI, para. 36.

50

164.

165.

166.

167.

permits the offender to break the chain by showing that the effect was caused —
either partially or totally — not by the wrongful acts, but rather by intervening
causes, such as factors attributable to the victim, to a third party or for which no
one can be made responsible (like force majeure)'*®.

Another preliminary distinction is important: causal links can be divided into pure
or transitive’. Pure causal links exist when the damage derives directly from the
wrongful act, without intermediary elements. In practice, this situation is rare,
because it is difficult to prove that a certain factor is the immediate and unique
cause of a result. Normally, the link between wrong and damage is more complex,
and additional elements intervene to form a chain of events.

Thus, if a State wrongfully arrests a vessel, thereafter the shipping company is
forced into bankruptcy, and if its shareholders finally suffer a loss, the causal link
between wrongful act and loss is transitive: the loss has not been caused directly
by the arrest, but rather by the bankruptcy, which in its turn was caused by the
wrongful action.

Transitive causal links do not exclude the responsibility of the wrongdoer — even
in cases where a lucrum cessans is claimed'©’. But the victim must prove that the
chain of events is neither too remote nor too aleatory'*'. The classic definition of
this principle is contained in the Administrative Decision num. 2 of November 1,
1923 of the US-German Mixed Commission’:

“Tt matters not whether the loss be directly or indirectly sustained so
long as there is a clear, unbroken connection between Germany's act
and the loss complained of. — It matters not how many links there may
be in the chain of causation connecting Germany's act with the loss
sustained, provided there is no breach in the chain and the loss can be
clearly, unmistakably and definitely traced, link by link, to Germany’s
act... All indirect losses are covered provided only that in legal
contemplation Germany's act was the efficient and proximate cause
and source from which they flowed”.

In the shipping example given above, the victim, in order to be entitled to
compensation, would have to prove each element of the chain of events: that the
arrest of the ship led to losses for the shipping company, that the losses led to its
bankruptcy and that, as a consequence of the bankruptcy, the shareholders lost
their investment. And vice versa: the State could escape responsibility if it could

'8 The Tribunal in the Lauder case (Ronald S. Lauder vy. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL case, Award of
September 3, 2001, para. 234) seems to have placed on the aggrieved party the burden of proving that
such intervening causes were not the immediate cause for the damage. This Tribunal, however, sees no
reason to deviate from the generally accepted principle alleganti probatio incumbit. If the offender claims
that other intervening causes exist, which are the superseding cause for the damage, it is for such offender
to marshal the necessary evidence.

'° The terminology is from Brigitte Bollecker-Stern: “Le prejudice dans la théorie de la responsabilité
international”, 1973, [“Bollecker-Stern”], p. 186.

' Cheng, p. 247.

'6! Bollecker-Stern, p. 211-214.

' Doc. RLA 38, p. 29.

Sl

prove that some other cause (e.g. mismanagement) provoked the bankruptcy and
the shareholders’ loss.

168. In the case submitted to the Tribunal, the causal link is not only transitive
(because damage is not caused directly by Ukraine’s wrongful acts), it also has a
second, more specific characteristic: the State’s irregular behaviour took place in
public tenders, convened for the awarding of radio frequencies in accordance with
pre-established legal criteria. The presence of tenders within the causal chain
creates at least two additional difficulties:

- first of all, a number of bona fide third parties — and not only Claimant and
the media groups irregularly privileged by the authorities — participated in
the tenders; the possibility that these bona fide third parties could have been
awarded frequencies in preference over Claimant must be factored into the
analysis;

- the difficulty is increased by a specific feature of the Ukrainian process:
although the law established a number of criteria for awarding frequencies
by tender, the National Council was not required to explain the reasons
underlying its decisions — each member simply voted in favour of the
participant he preferred, and the participant who received five votes was
awarded the frequency.

 

Proximity and Foreseeability

169. Given the characteristics of the Ukrainian process for the awarding of licences, it
is impossible to establish, with total certainty, how specific tenders would have
been awarded if the National Council had not violated the FET standard. The best
that the Tribunal can expect Claimant to prove is that through a line of natural
sequences it is probable — and not simply possible — that Gala would have been
awarded the frequencies under tender'®. If it can be proven that in the normal
cause of events a certain cause will produce a certain effect, it can be safely
assumed that a (rebuttable) presumption of causality between both events exists,
and that the first is the proximate cause of the other.

170. The chain of causation can also be seen from the opposite point of view: offenders
must be deemed to have foreseen the natural consequences of their wrongful acts,
and to stand responsible for the damage caused. Proximity and foreseeability are
related concepts: a chain of causality must be deemed proximate, if the wrongdoer
could have foreseen that through successive links the irregular acts finally would
lead to the damage. As the Portuguese-German Arbitral Tribunal said in the
Angola case'™:

“It would not be equitable to let the injured party bear those losses
which the author of the initial illegal act has foreseen and perhaps
even intended, for the sole reason that, in the chain of causation, there
are some intermediate links”.

‘8 Bollecker-Stern, p. 201; see also Decision in Maninat by the French-Venezuelan Mixed Commission

of July 31, 1905; Recueil des Sentences Arbitrales, Volume X, p. 81.
‘431 July 1928, Recueil des Sentences Arbitrales, Volume II, p. 1031.

52

171.

172.

173.

174.

175.

176.

16s

In summary, the specific circumstances of this case require that two links in the
causal chain be analysed and be proven:

- if the tenders had hypothetically been decided in a fair and equitable
manner, and Claimant had participated in them, he (and not some of the
other participants) would have won the disputed frequencies;

- with these frequencies, Mr. Lemire would have been able to grow Gala
Radio into the broadcasting company he had planned: a FM national
broadcaster, for music format, plus a second AM channel, for talk radio.

The Tribunal has already established the existence of wrongful acts attributable to
Ukraine, in breach of the FET standard. What remains to be analysed is whether
the first and second links of the chain of causation can be deemed to have been
proven and whether they are sufficiently proximate.

b) = The First Link

Could Gala have obtained the frequencies necessary to create a national FM
broadcaster and an AM channel for talk radio?

National FM Broadcaster

Gala Radio had two avenues open in order to expand its franchise in Kyiv, and to
become a national FM broadcaster: the first possibility was to obtain high
powered frequencies in a small number of cities, and the second to receive low
powered frequencies in a larger number of cities.

(i) In the beginning, Gala appears to have pursued the first route: during the
negotiations with the National Council in 1995, the alternative discussed was that
Gala receive frequencies in 12 cities, with a (high) power of between 5 and 10
kw! The frequencies were never awarded and Claimant filed the first ICSID
arbitration. This led to the Settlement Agreement, dated March 20, 2000, in which
Respondent agreed to “use its best possible efforts to consider in a positive way
the application” in 11 of the 12 cities originally discussed. The Settlement
Agreement did not require that the new frequencies to be awarded attain a specific
power, and those eventually allocated only had an average of 1.17 kw!°. Because
of the low power, Gala was only able to reach some 22% of the population of
Ukraine'®’. Claimant’s first route to obtaining a national FM broadcaster was thus
thwarted.

  

(ii) The second route for achieving this objective would have required the
allocation of low powered frequencies in a larger number of cities. Claimant has
averred — and Respondent has not disputed — that with additional licences in 14

The evidence is clear: the National Council’s July 18, 1995 Letter, Doc. CM-1, addressed to the State

Committee; the reaction of the State Committee was encouraging: it offered FM frequencies in 11 cities
with an average power of 22 kW; see letter from the State Committee of October 18, 1995 (Doc. CM-2).
‘6 First Decision, para. 194; the First Decision came to the conclusion that the allocation of low powered
frequencies did not constitute a breach of the Settlement Agreement.

'S7 First Decision, para. 194.

53

locations, Gala would have been able to cover the whole country’, And Claimant

has alleged that these frequencies could and should have been awarded to Gala
during the Interregnum, when the National Council was not operative, or in the

tender organized on January 1, 2001 to legalize the situation’.

177. The Tribunal concurs.

178. During the period between March 16, 1999 and June 9, 2000, when the National
Council was not operative, more than 80 licences!” for radio broadcasting were
issued directly by the executive branch of the Government, without transparency
or publicity and without meeting the requirements of or following the procedures
established in the LTR. The de facto situation was then legalised through a
subsequent tender, convened by the National Council exclusively for this purpose.

Claimant was excluded from this procedure!”!.

179. If these 80 plus frequencies had been awarded by tender in accordance with the
procedure set forth in the LTR, it is likely that Claimant would have won the 14
licences required to create a national FM network. The Tribunal bases its opinion
on the undisputed fact that at the time of the Interregnum, Gala Radio was one of
the most successful radio operators in Kyiv — it held the number 1 and 2
position”. If the National Council had proceeded properly to award the new
licences, it would have applied the criteria set forth in Article 25.14 of the LTR.
Gala Radio was well placed to meet these criteria: being one of the leading
operators, it would have received high marks with regard to the first and third
criteria; and as regards the second criterion, Gala was well known to have
broadcast socially relevant programs'”*; moreover, as an independent broadcaster,
its presence would reinforce freedom of speech.

Respondent’s Counterarguments

180. Respondent has argued!” that in a hypothetical tender, Claimant would not have
won these frequencies, and submits a number of arguments:

‘68 HTRI, p. 23 and 24.
‘© CMRI, para. 37.

' The number is
'T First Decision, para. 417.

'? Doc. CM-131 and HTRI, p. 65. In para. 314 of his Separate Opinion, Dr. Voss accepts that in 1999
Gala held a predominant market position, adding that this position eroded quickly and consistently down
to rank 15 in 2008. In his opinion, these facts discredit the Award’s reliance on Gala’s overall competitive
strength. The Tribunal disagrees. It sees Gala’s decadence as additional evidence that Respondent's
irregular behaviour, denying frequencies, provoked that what originally was a successful radio operator
became relegated to an ancillary position in the Ukrainian broadcasting market.

"3 “While considering the applications the National Council shall prefer TV/radio organization that: a)
is capable to fulfil the licence conditions to the best extent; b) prefers socially important programs
(informational, social and political, children, etc.), satisfies informational needs of national minorities
and secures freedom of speech; c) has an advantage in financial and economical as well as professional
and technical capabilities for TV/radio broadcasting”.

'4 It sponsored events as the Olympics, Chestnut Run, Burs’ Night Charity Ball, We are the Champions,
Golden Lilya and many others. See WS of Mr. Denisenko, p. 3.

"5 RMRI, paras. 168 to 180.

 

 

54

181.

182.

183.

184.

185.

186.

187.

(i) In first place, Respondent alleges that Gala never planned to compete for the
additional 14 frequencies'”*,

The argument is without merit, because the key issue is not whether Claimant
participated or not in the irregular practices and the rigged tenders, since no one
can be held to task for failing to participate in irregular administrative procedures.
The question which must be proven is premised upon the hypothesis that the
tenders had been announced and then decided in strict compliance with Ukrainian
law and without violating the FET standard, and that Gala had been compliant.
Under these assumptions, the Tribunal finds that Gala, in all probability, would
have been awarded, at the least, the comparatively small number of frequencies
required to fulfil its plans.

(ii) In second place, Respondent submits that the Settlement Agreement was
signed on March 20, 2000!” and later confirmed in the Award by Consent of
September 18, 2000; consequently, in Respondent’s opinion, any allocation of
frequencies by the State Committee before September 18, 2000 could not serve as
a foundation for damages claims!*,

The Tribunal disagrees.

When Claimant signed the Settlement Agreement on March 20, 2000, he accepted
to withdraw his claims, against Ukraine’s best efforts obligation to assign a
number of frequencies on the terms and conditions established in such Agreement.
By executing the Settlement Agreement, Claimant did not, however, acquiesce to
Ukraine’s violations of the FET standard. The Settlement does not state so, and
none of its clauses can be interpreted to provide for such acceptance. There is no
evidence that, when the Settlement Agreement was executed, Claimant was even
aware of Respondent’s irregular practice of awarding licences without publicity
and without tenders. This violation continued throughout the Interregnum, which
lasted till June 9, 2000, and then extended to the tender of 1 January 2001, in
which the National Council legalized the licences illegally granted during the
Interregnum; whatever may have been agreed in the Settlement Agreement cannot
be considered as Claimant’s acquiescence to Ukraine’s wrongful conduct.

(iii) In third place, Respondent argues that the 80 plus licences awarded during the
Interregnum in fact would never have been available to Gala Radio, because they
either referred to locations where Gala was already broadcasting or were allocated
to other broadcasters already using these frequencies with a preferential right!”

The argument cannot be accepted, because Gala Radio was only transmitting in
Kyiv, and the frequencies it then obtained in 11 cities had very low power; as
regards the priority rights of previous broadcasters, this only affected 31
frequencies'*” and Claimant has convincingly shown that 20 of these could have

‘6 RMRI, para. 160.

'7 This date, when the meeting of minds took place, is the relevant date; and not September 18, 2000,
when the Settlement Agreement was formalized into an Award.

"8 RMRI, para. 167.

‘7° RMRI, para. 168; HTRI, p. 20.

'8 HTRI, p. 20.

55

been awarded'*', The Tribunal concludes that during the Interregnum there were
enough frequencies available so that Gala Radio, the leading operator in the Kyiv
area, should have been able to secure at least 14 radio stations in order to create a
nationwide music radio network.

188. (iv) As a fourth argument, Respondent submits that Gala suffered a lack of
distinct programming, an absence of innovation and that its presentations before
the National Council were vague and confusing!*?.

189. The Arbitral Tribunal is disinclined to accept that Gala Radio’s alleged
shortcomings could have had an effect on the denial of frequencies, especially in
2000 and early 2001, when Gala Radio undoubtedly was one of the leading radio
stations in Ukraine and was broadcasting a highly successful concept. Mr. Lemire
has made a detailed description in his witness statements'*? of the technology used
by Gala and how state of the art equipment was for the first time introduced in
Ukraine; the Arbitral Tribunal is unpersuaded by Respondent’s allegations of
absence of innovation.

190. The record also contains Gala’s appearance before the National Council, which
were far from being considered vague and confusing. Well-known Ukrainian
celebrities like DJ Pasha (the best known DJ in Ukraine'®*) and Mr. Viktor
Petrenko (a role model in Ukraine due to his accomplishments as the only male
Winter Olympic Gold Medal winner in ice figure skating in Ukraine'**) attended
tenders to make presentations on behalf of Claimant; which shows that Claimant
made efforts to impress the National Council. Statements were also made by
Mr. Lemire himself, Mr. Sergey Denisenko and Gala Radio’s lawyer'*®, Claimant
often encountered the problem that the National Council ignored or even
prevented Gala Radio from making its presentation'*’,

191. In summary, the Tribunal concludes that under the hypothesis that Respondent’s
wrongful acts (the practice of awarding radio licences while the National Council
was not operative and the tender of January 1, 2001 to legalise the licences) had
not occurred, and that the more than 80 licences had been correctly assigned in
compliance with Ukrainian legislation, Gala Radio should have received, no later
than January 1, 2001, at least the 14 frequencies required to operate a nationwide
FM music network'**.

'S| HTRI, p. 23.

'8? RMRI, para. 288.

'8 WS of Mr. Lemire, para. 21; WS of Mr. Shylko, para. 5.

'S HT, Day 2, p. 137.

'85 WS of Mr. Petrenko, para. 13.

'86 HT, Day 1, p. 252.

'S’ HT, Day 1, p. 253; WS of Mr. Petrenko, para. 20.

'8§ Dr. Voss in his Separate Opinion states that Respondent was misled in building its defence and that his
right to be heard was violated (p. xiv of his summary). The argument lacks any merit. Both parties
presented well-reasoned and extensive Submissions on Remaining Issues. During the hearing held on July
12, 2010, Claimant and Respondent had the opportunity to orally present Opening Statements and
Closing Statements (see pp. 2 to 93 and 248 to 273 of the HTRI). At the end of the hearing, the Tribunal
asked the parties whether “they [were] aware of any breach of due process” (HTRI p. 274); Respondent
answered “We have no objections to assert” (HTRI, p. 274).

 

56

192.

193.

194.

195.

196.

197.

AM Channel for Informational Radio

Would Gala Radio also have been awarded an AM channel for informational
radio?

There is no evidence in the file that during the Interregnum AM frequencies were
assigned, thus, the Tribunal cannot assume that Gala Radio could have received at
that time the licence for an AM channel. The opportunity arose three years later,
when in May 2004 the National Council convened a tender for a powerful AM
frequency with nationwide coverage. In the First Decision'® the Tribunal
declared that the National Council’s decision of May 26, 2004 denying Gala
Radio the licence for an AM channel had violated the FET standard defined in the
BIT.

Claimant has submitted that if the May 26, 2004 National Council decision had
been properly adopted, Gala Radio should have been the winner of the tender'®®.

The Tribunal concurs.

Three participants decided to bid in the 2004 tender for a nationwide AM
frequency: Odessa Legal Academy [Radio Academy”], Charity Public Fund
Radio [“CPFR”] and Gala Radio. The applicable legislation at the time of the
tender set forth the following criteria for selecting the winner (Article 14 LTR, as
amended on January 10, 2002”):

“The interests of television viewers and radio listeners; the need to
protect national interests, to promote cultural values; the need for
more complete coverage of the viewpoints of various social groups in
television and radio programs; compliance with the conditions
specified in the application for license and with the tender conditions;
compliance with technical capacities and creative potential during
arrangement of television and radio broadcasting to the stated
characteristics, to the obligations of television and radio
organizations as regards social broadcasting; previous use of the
broadcasting channel”.

Radio Academy was a small radio company, created two years before, which was
using an AM frequency in Mikolayiv Oblast, a region of Ukraine, to broadcast to
villagers; its plan was to use the new frequency to expand its coverage to other
rural areas!?”, CPFR was a non-commercial radio, which had been broadcasting
for two years through the internet. It intended to use the AM frequency for a
simpler, more popular program, with a ratio of 60% informational and 40% music
entertainment'”’, Compared with these two competitors, Gala Radio had been

'® Para. 421.
‘0 CMRI, para. 42.
'*! Doc. RLA 13.

192
193

Doc. R 439, transcript of the st
Doc. R 439, transcript of the session of the National Council, p. 3.

sion of the National Council, p. 2.

     

s7

198.

199.

200.

201.

202.

203.

'4 See par
'®5 Tn his Separate Opinion (paras. 331 and 335), Dr. Voss
they were created “ad hoc for the purpose of this arbitration”. TI

transmitting for 10 years, it was Kyiv’s most successful music broadcaster and it
had been ranked number two as regards the quality of its news services'™,

Confronted with these three applications, the National Council’s decision was to
let the tender fail, not awarding the frequency to any of the participants, and to
immediately convene a new tender; and in this new procedure to award the
channel to NART TV — an entity with close ties to the President of Ukraine. The
Tribunal has already decided that, in doing so, the National Council violated the
FET standard enshrined in the BIT.

What would have happened under the hypothesis that the National Council had
properly decided the tender of May 26, 2004, in accordance with the criteria set
forth in Ukrainian law then in force?

The Tribunal finds that in such case it is probable that Gala, by far the best
qualified of the three competitors, the only one with a broadcasting experience in
Kyiv, with a proven and successful track record as a music transmitter and as a
news provider, should have been successful. It certainly was the participant which
best complied with the criteria established by legislation.

KK

In summary: the Tribunal finds that, under the assumption that Ukraine’s
wrongful acts had not occurred, and that tenders had been correctly awarded under
applicable Ukrainian legislation, it is probable that Gala would have been able to
fulfil its initial plans:

- by 2001 it would be operating a nationwide FM music channel;
- by 2004 Gala would additionally have received an AM informational
channel.

The Tribunal thus concludes that the first link of the causal chain, the assumption
that if the tenders had hypothetically been decided in a fair and equitable manner,
and Claimant had participated in them, he (and not some of the other participants)
would have won the disputed frequencies, has been satisfied.

c) The Second Link

This leads to the second link of the chain: having received these frequencies,
would Mr. Lemire have been able to develop Gala into the successful
broadcasting company he had planned, a FM national broadcaster, for music
format, plus a second AM channel, for talk radio!>?

 

. 97 and 179 supra.
isqualifies Gala’s business plans, alleging that

contrary to the proven facts. The

   

 

Tribunal has established (see para. 270 of the First Decision), on the basis of coetaneous documentary

evidence and of witnes:

s’ declarations, that in 1995 Mr. Lemire’s business plans were to convert Gala

 

into a national broadcaster and to create a second AM channel.

58

204.

205.

206.

207.

208.

Respondent submits!”° that under no circumstances would this have happened,

arguing that Gala Radio was a weak, undercapitalized company, lacking the
financial clout to develop its business'’’, even if the frequencies had been
available. Respondent pleads that Gala’s own shortcomings were the proximate
cause of its lack of growth! and, subsidiarily, that this should at least be
considered as a contributing cause!”

The Tribunal disagrees. In its opinion Gala Radio was a reasonably well funded
corporation, and it had the financial strength and the necessary know how to
successfully operate the two radio channels.

It is true that Gala Radio is not a large company. It is a private company owned by
an individual, Mr. Lemire. But throughout its life time, Gala Radio has been a
reasonably successful broadcaster. Its revenues went up from 568,900 USD in
2001 to 1,369,050 USD in 2007. Its real EBITDA continuously grew, reaching
almost 6 M UAH in 20057. It has financed its development with capital
contributions and loans from its shareholder. Although there is little information
in the record regarding Mr. Lemire’s net worth, there also is no indication that
Gala Radio was insufficiently funded or that it had to abandon any business
project because of lack of financing. But even if such shortcomings existed (quod
non probatur), Respondent has not been able to prove that Gala Radio’s
competitors did not present the same shortcomings and thus were better qualified
in this respect — especially not in a system in which the National Council, when
awarding frequencies, apparently did not know the ownership and the actual
financial strength of the companies to whom it was assigning the tenders””!,

The Tribunal is also convinced that, if the National Council had awarded Gala
Radio the authorisations, Gala Radio had the necessary know how to successfully
manage the channels. Gala had won a number of awards for the quality of its
broadcasting”, it employed four of the top 10 disc jockeys in Ukraine, including
the well-known DJ Pascha””?, its news services were highly ranked, and it had
held the number | or number 2 position among the broadcasting stations in
Kyiv™, There is no reason to believe that it would not have been able to provide
excellent nationwide music and informational programs.

KK

In conclusion, the Tribunal finds that Claimant has been able to prove that the
initial cause (Ukraine’s wrongful acts) and the final effect (Claimant’s frustration
to fulfil his plans and operate a nationwide FM channel plus an AM informational
channel) are linked through a chain of causation. And this chain of causation is
proximate and foreseeable: Ukraine was aware of Claimant’s business plans,

‘86 RMRI, paras. 8 and 9.

'7 Respondent’s PHB, para. 618 et seq.
‘8 RMRI, para. 139.

'° RMRI, para. 141.

20 ESR, p. 39; thi

 

is the expert’s estimation of Gala Radio’s real EBITDA.

 

201 WS of Mr. Shevchenko (Rebuttal), para. 74.

202

Doc. CM-89 with a list of Gala Radio’s awards and prizes.

3 First Decision, para. 233.
4 HT, Day 2, p. 65.

59

209.

210.

211.

Ukraine could foresee that irregularities in the tender procedures would result in
the rejection of Gala Radio’s applications thwarting Gala’s expansion and
eventually leading to a reduction in the value of the company and to a loss for its
investor. And Respondent has not been able to prove that the denial of frequencies
was due to causes other than the National Council’s wrongful behaviour, that if
tenders had not been rigged, Gala would not have succeeded in receiving the
authorisations required to create a nationwide FM network plus an AM channel
and that, once awarded, Gala would not have been able to muster the financial
resources and know how to successfully operate both channels.

d) Analysis of the Case Law Submitted by Respondent

Respondent has drawn the Tribunal’s attention to two awards, which in
Respondent’s opinion, support its arguments.

(i) The first case is Biwater™:

In 2003 Biwater was awarded different contracts for the
implementation of the Dar es Salaam Water and Sewerage
Infrastructure. The most important contract was a lease agreement,
under which claimant was to lease certain assets belonging to the State
and to use them to supply water and sewerage services. The project
turned out to be a failure. Claimant filed an ICSID arbitration,
claiming, among other things, expropriation and breach of the FET
standard. The arbitral tribunal concluded that as at the date
immediately prior to the first act of respondent in breach of the BIT,
the performance of the lease contract was already encountering serious
problems””, which showed that claimant would suffer significant
operating losses going forward’, The proximate or direct cause of
the loss and damage for which Biwater sought compensation were acts
and omissions which had already occurred prior to the BIT breach.
None of respondent’s violations of the BIT in fact caused the loss and
damage in question, or broke the chain of causation that was already
in place”,

The Arbitral Tribunal does not think that this case, quoted by Respondent, in fact
helps to support Respondent’s position. In Biwater claimant’s damages were the
consequence of the desperate financial condition which claimant had put itself
into, prior to the violation of the BIT. In our case, the first violation of the BIT
took place during the Interregnum, at a time when Gala Radio was a successful
radio operator and a leader in its field. Thus, Claimant’s damages, its loss of
business, can in no way be due to the situation in which Claimant found himself
immediately prior to the violation of the BIT.

° Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of Tanzania, Doc. RLA 74, (ICSID Case No.
ARB/05/22), Award of July 24, 2008, [“Biwater”].

°° Biwater, pal

 

28 Biwater, para. 798.

60

212. (ii) Respondent has also referred to ELSP”:

ELSI was an Italian company wholly owned and controlled by two
American companies. Since September 1967 it was obvious for its
shareholders that a financial crisis was imminent and the responsible
officers were keeping a close watch on the declining funds, to ensure
that ELSI did not reach a point where continued operations would be
contrary to Italian law. On April 1, 1968 representatives of ELSI met
representatives of its banking creditors to discuss the company’s plans
for an orderly liquidation. However, no agreement was reached. On
the same day the Mayor of Palermo issued an order, effective
immediately, requisitioning ELSI’s plant and related assets for a
period of six months. A decree of bankruptcy was issued by a Palermo
Court on May 16, and a trustee and creditors committee was
appointed. Subsequently, ELSI’s premises, plant and equipment were
sold in an auction. The Chamber denied the existence of a violation of
the Treaty. The Chamber held that ELSI had no practical possibility of
successfully carrying out a scheme of orderly liquidation under its
own management and consequently it was not the requisition that
deprived it of this faculty of control and management. The Chamber
went on to say that there was an uncertain and speculative character in
the causal connection between the requisition and the results attributed
to it by the United States. The Chamber acknowledged that there were
several causes acting together that led to the disaster of ELSI and that
the requisition might have been one of them, but the underlying cause
was ELSI’s headlong course towards insolvency””.

213. ELSI hardly presents any similarities with the present case and in no way can it be
interpreted in favour of Respondent’s position.

214. Although the judgment refers to a “causal connection”, what the Chamber is
actually doing is analysing whether the facts (basically, the requisition) constitute
a violation of the Treaty (and not, whether the violation had caused damages to
the aggrieved). The question under discussion is not the issue of causation with
regard to damages, and the conclusions reached have no significant bearing for the
present Award.

2 Case concerning Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (United States v. Italy), Doc. RLA 113, International Court
of Justice, July 20, 1989 (“ELST”).
21 Para. 101 of the judgment.

61

215.

216.

217.

218.

2G,
212g,
236)
24 yy
215

3.3. Review of the Expert Reports Submitted by the Parties

Both Claimant and Respondent have retained damage experts.

Claimant has submitted two damage reports, one dated August 20, 20087"! and a
supplementary report dated April 16, 2010°"?. Both were prepared by Goldmedia,
a research institute and strategic consultancy founded in 1998 and based in Berlin,
specialised in the fields of media and telecommunications?'*. Dr. André Wiegand,
Goldmedia’s Co-Managing Director, was the person responsible for the reports,
and examined by the parties and the Tribunal at the hearing held on July 12,

Respondent has also presented two damage reports, one dated November 3, 2008
and one dated June 21, 20107'°. These reports were prepared by EBS, a
consultancy founded in 1998 in Ukraine, specialized in financial consulting
services. Ms. Olena”!® Volska is the person responsible for the reports. She is
EBS’ Managing Partner and Director and was examined by the parties and the
Tribunal at the hearing held on July 12, 20107".

A. Goldmedia’s Calculations

Goldmedia’s calculation of damages is based on the differences in value between
five different Scenarios, of which Scenario I represents an evaluation of Gala
Radio as it exists today, from January 1, 2001 up until September 18, 2015. The
other four scenarios (which all end in 2015) represent hypothetical situations: they
show the value which Gala Radio would have reached, under certain assumptions,
if Respondent had not breached the FET standard. The four Scenarios,
denominated II through IV A), are the following:

- Scenario II represents the present value of Gala Radio if it had been a full
national network; it assumes that Gala Radio would have been able to
establish itself as a full national network as of January 2001, because it
would have participated in tenders held in the 1999 - 2000 period, from
which it was excluded while the National Council was inactive;

- Scenario III represents the present value of Gala Radio as a full national
network from 2001, plus a second FM radio network for young audiences,
which would have been granted to Gala Radio by 2006, if Respondent had
not breached its BIT obligations;

oldmedia First Report [*GFR”].
oldmedia Supplementary Report [*GSR”].
FR, p. 79.

TRI, p. 103.

SR.

*!6 Sometimes referred to as Helena.
27 HTRI, p.193.

62

- Scenario IV represents the present value of Gala Radio as a full national
network from 2001, plus a second FM radio network for young audiences
from 2001, plus a third nationwide AM radio network with talk radio
format; in this Scenario, the AM network would have been granted by 2004
and Claimant foresees that the AM network would have switched to FM
from 2006 onwards;

- Scenario IV A) finally represents the present value of Gala Radio as a full
national network from 2001, plus a second nationwide AM radio network
with talk radio format.

219. Using a DCF methodology Goldmedia projected and compared the enterprise
value of Gala Radio operating one or more networks, depending on the Scenarios,
to the estimated enterprise value of Gala Radio as it operates today. In order to do
so, Goldmedia carried out its analysis through the following steps:

- it assessed the incremental revenues, depending on each Scenario; the
evaluation of the future revenues was done with a bottom-up approach, e.g.
taking as its starting point not the actual performance by Gala Radio, but
rather business ratios and operating figures from benchmark radio
networks?!®;

- it then assessed the incremental costs for each Scenario;

- it next calculated the free cash flows for each year from 2001 up to 2015
and, using DCF methodology, established its net present value;

- the terminal value of the investment in 2015 was calculated by multiplying
the free cash flow in that year by seven;

- net present value plus discounted terminal value were added, to establish
enterprise value;

- enterprise value for Scenario I (Gala Radio “as is”) was deducted from
enterprise value for each of Scenarios II through IV A), and thus the amount
of damages was established.

220. The final total damages derived under each Scenario were the following:

- Scenario II: 30,469,000 USD?””;
- Scenario III: 40,402,000 USD*””;
- Scenario IV: 46,651,000 USD™!

- Scenario IV A): 43,617,000 USD”.

  

 

 

Revenue and Costs Forecast

221. All hypothetical Scenarios were based on bottom-up revenue calculations”*,
taking the advertising prices of the first movers in the radio market (HIT,

218 GSR, p. 12.
21° GSR, p. 67.
2° GSR, p. 68.
21 GSR, p. 68.
22 GSR, p. 77
?°3 An alternative top down approach was abandoned in the GSR.

63

Russkoye, Nashe and Europa Plus”) and on an estimation of the additional costs

which a national network would generate.

Discount Rate

222. For its calculations, Goldmedia used discount rates obtained applying the
methodology of the US National Association of Certified Valuation Analysts
[“NACVA”}5. Goldmedia used Category 1 (ie. least risky company) for the
hypothetical Scenarios II — IV A), and Category 2 (i.e. somewhat more risk) for
Scenario I (i.e. for Gala Radio “as is” 226

223. As an alternative, and in order to meet criticism by Respondent’s expert,
Goldmedia also introduced an alternative valuation based on discounted rates
including a separate country risk premium, as calculated by Prof. Aswath
Damodaran™’ [“Bludgeon Approach”]. Applying discount rates adapted from
Prof. Damodaran’s approach, the total damages would be reduced to the following
amounts”**

- Scenario II: 26,791,000 USD;

- Scenario III: 35,303,000 USD;

- Scenario IV: 40,696,000 USD;

- Scenario IV A): 38,066,000 USD”.
Currency

224. In its Supplementary Report, Goldmedia carried out all the relevant calculations in
UAH, while only final results were converted and discounted into USD?”
EBITDA Valuation

225. To cross check the findings of the DCF valuation, Goldmedia also carried out an
EBITDA valuation, applying an 8.0 multiple, which it describes as a very
moderate and conservative multiple”). Taking Scenario II, the total enterprise
value for 2007 would have been 34,983,000 USD and for 2008 30,960,000 USD.
Goldmedia submits that these figures confirm its damage calculation (which
showed a figure for this Scenario II of approximately 30 M USD). Goldmedia also
acknowledges that for 2009 the EBITDA valuation only provides a total
enterprise value of 16,739,000 USD, which does not match the damage valuation.
In Goldmedia’s opinion, this lack of confirmation is attributable to the severe
economic crisis which in 2009 affected Ukraine”*”

4 GSR, p. 36.

25 GSR, p. 13.

26 HTRI, p. 178.

227 GSR, p. 18.

°8 GSR, pp. 71 to 73.

2° GSR, p. 78.

250 GSR, p. 11.

251 GSR, p. 26.

2 GSR, p. 69.

64

226.

227.

228.

229.

Gala’s P & L 2008/2009

Gala incurred a negative EBI (net earnings)** both in 2008 (-1,691,000 UAH)
and 2009 (-859,000 UAH). The losses in the first year are attributable — in
Goldmedia’s opinion — to a substantial increase in research and marketing
expenses, caused by a repositioning of music format and brand image entrusted to
Brand Support, and in the second year to the general crisis which hit Ukraine.

 

B. EBS’ Calculations

EBS accepts Goldmedia’s position that the appropriate methodology to calculate
damages must be based on comparing Gala Radio’s “as is” situation, with
hypothetical Scenarios, applying a DCF analysis. Respondent’s expert, however,
disagrees with the system adopted by Goldmedia to value Gala Radio, which
implied measuring Gala Radio’s enterprise value, i.e. the sum of the net present
value of future free cash flow, plus the present value of the terminal value in year
2015. EBS recommends the adoption of a lost profit approach, which (using the
same methodology used by Claimant’s expert) calculates the net present value of
future free cash flow, the fundamental difference being that no terminal value is
added™”.

Tf this alternative methodology is adopted, the amount of damages is significantly
reduced; as EBS concludes»:

- Scenario II: 11,946,000 USD;

- Scenario III: 14,432,000 USD;

- Scenario IV: 16,224,600 USD;

- Scenario IV A: 15,297,000 USD.

Currency

EBS disagrees with Goldmedia as to the application of the UAH instead of the
USD and submits that Goldmedia’s mixed approach, relying alternatively on
UAH or USD, is misleading”**. Goldmedia converts the UAH denominated
discounted cash flows of each year into dollars at a fixed and predetermined
exchange rate of 8 UAH to 1 USD. In EBS’ opinion, this approach renders the
calculations unreliable, because neither the country itself nor world financial
institutions are able to give reliable forecasts in relation to the Ukrainian currency.
A more consistent approach would have been to do the whole damage assessment
in UAH and after applying the appropriate discount rate, convert the final UAH
amount into USD at today’s exchange rate”*’,

253 GSR, p34.

°4 ESR, pp. 12 and 13.

35 ESR, p.13.

6 ESR, p. 16.

7 HTRI, p. 202; Ms. Volska had some doubts whether the appropriate rate should be that as of the award
or that as of the date of actual payment.

65

230.

231.

232.

233.

234.

Discount Rate

EBS submits that the NACVA approach to establishing discount rates is only
correct for developed countries, and that in developing countries like Ukraine the
Bludgeon Approach pioneered by Prof. Damodaran is more appropriate. This
latter methodology includes a country risk, which reflects the difference of
running similar businesses in different countries, and also the exchange rate risk.
Nor does EBS agree with Goldmedia’s attempt at proposing an alternative
calculation using the Bludgeon Approach, because it finds that Goldmedia is
using Prof. Damodaran’s formulae incorrectly. Applying this system in what EBS
deems the appropriate fashion, EBS arrives at a discount rate of 18.51%. EBS
submits that if this alternative were applied, without changing any of Goldmedia’s
other assumptions, the actual damages would be 33% lower than those presented
by Goldmedia in its GSR?*.

Valuation Through Comparable Transactions

EBS also presented an alternative valuation based on recent mergers and
acquisitions of radio companies in Ukraine”’. Some information about these deals
is available in open sources and in the press, but the terms of significant
transactions are confidential and the public information is not always reliable.
Taking into consideration the available information, and assuming that Gala
Radio as a national radio network with a second FM network and an AM talk
radio would have reached a 5% market share, EBS comes to the conclusion that
its market value could not exceed 6 M USD*”, while the value of Gala Radio “as
is” would amount to 1.5 M USD.

Under this methodology, the detriment suffered by the investor would be equal to
4,5 M USD (the difference between the enterprise of Gala Radio “as is” and the
hypothetical enterprise value if it had developed three networks and reached a 5%
market share).

Undervaluation of Gala Radio’s Official Figures

EBS submits that, in order to dodge taxes, most of the Ukrainian media market is
not working in a transparent way and that revenues and salaries declared in
official statements prepared by media companies are understated“, In EBS’
opinion this also applies to Gala Radio.

Based on this premise, and using information from other competitors and from
MediaMonitor, EBS calculates that Gala Radio’s 2009 underreported income was
7.2.M UAH (the official revenues being 5.6 M UAH)”. EBS also concludes that
personnel costs were underreported, in order to avoid payroll tax. In EBS’
opinion, this is proven by the fact that a significant portion of personnel (about

8 ESR, p. 21.
2) ESR, p. 25.
240 ESR, p. 27.
41 ESR, p. 31.
* ESR, pp. 34 and 35.

66

235.

236.

237.

238.

239.

240.

75 - 80%) is working at the minimum wage salary level, and all personnel is being
paid at a level that was significantly below the average market level™?,

Criticism of Different Scenarios

EBS voices a significant number of criticisms with regard to each of the Scenarios
developed by Goldmedia:

With regard to Scenario I, EBS is of the opinion that Gala Radio’s past financial
performance is underreported. If Gala Radio’s financial statements are restated,
this would show that Gala Radio is more profitable than what Goldmedia is
assuming, thus reducing the amount of damages. Taking Scenario II as an
example, the restatement of Gala Radio’s financial statements in Scenario I would
result in a reduction of the total damages to 22,967,860 uUsD*4.

Scenario II is also criticised by EBS for a number of reasons”:

- 2001 - 2006 numbers are based on 2007 rates, deflated by US average
consumer price index, not by the Ukrainian domestic inflation rate;

- Goldmedia’s proposed average rate for Kyiv is 49% higher than Gala
Radio’s actual rate, without any support for this increase;

- the benchmark radios should be Hit and Europa Plus, excluding Nashe and
Russkoe Radio;

- personnel costs are underestimated and must be increased to reflect reality.

These changes alone would result in a reduction of damages to
18,528,830 USD™*.

In Scenario III, EBS objects that the forecasted revenues for the second FM
network are higher than Gala Radio’s actual revenues for the same relevant year.
In EBS’ opinion, Kiss is not the appropriate benchmark to be used to assess
potential rates for the second FM network. Goldmedia’s projection for the
advertising load is aggressive and EBS suggests a more reasonable increase. EBS
also disagrees with the proposed CAPEX expenditures, and suggests decreasing
the time span by one year and increasing the personnel costs. These changes
would result in a reduction of damages to 30,339,420 USD™"” (from a maximum
calculated by Goldmedia of 40,402,000 USD”"*).

As regards Scenarios IV and IV _A, EBS disagrees with Goldmedia’s proposed
plan of converting the AM frequency to an FM format in 2006 and also with the
Era Radio rates quoted by Goldmedia””. In EBS’ opinion, the AM format is
generally considered commercially unjustified because the target audience is
mostly the rural population, which is not of high interest for commercial

3 ESR, p. 36.
4 ESR, p.38.
45 ESR, p. 40.
4 ESR, p. 44.
47 BSR, p. 47.
48 ESR, p. 37.
> ESR, p. 47.

67

advertisers and commands lower advertising rates; furthermore, AM requires
significant additional CAPEX investments. Evidence of this is provided by the
fact that tenders for AM frequencies frequently could not be held, as there were no
applicants. There is only one commercial AM operator in Ukraine, Radio Majak,
and most AM broadcasters are motivated by non-commercial objectives. EBS also
proposes that a number of assumptions regarding personnel cost, time span and
price growth be adjusted.

241. Summing up, EBS is of the opinion that if Gala Radio had operated an AM
network it would have incurred constant losses”. If it is assumed that Gala Radio
would have switched its AM format to FM, then EBS anticipates that the total
damages would have amounted to 36,294,600 USD**! (and not 46,651,000 USD
as proposed by Goldmedia””).

Alternative Calculations

242. EBS also performed an alternative assessment of damages, outlined in two
Scenarios:

- a bottom-up approach based on Goldmedia’s approach but using EBS
assumptions; this leads, for Scenario II, to a calculation of damages
amounting to 190,490 USD***;

- a top-down approach based on the original methodology used by Goldmedia
in its first report, but using EBS assumptions and a 5% annual market
growth rate; with this methodology and taking again Scenario II as an
example, the damages would amount to 2,805,630 USsD™,

250 ESR, p. 50.

51 ESR, p. 51.

252 ESR, p. 37.

253 ESR, p. 53.

4 ESR, p. 54.

68

243.

244.

245.

3.4. Determination of the Compensation by the Arbitral Tribunal
A. Introduction

The main finding in the Tribunal’s First Decision was that Gala Radio, although it
tried insistently for six years, and presented more than 200 applications for all
types of frequencies, was prevented, because of wrongful actions of the National
Council, from obtaining a single licence (except for one in a small village in rural
Ukraine)”. If it had not been for this delictual treatment, Gala Radio would now
be a bigger, more profitable and more valuable radio operator.

The damage suffered by Claimant can thus be defined as the difference between a
real “as is” value of Gala Radio — what the investor now actually owns — and a
hypothetical “but for” value — what the investor would have owned if the host
State had respected the BIT°**. This second evaluation requires that the Tribunal
assume that the National Council had acted in a way different from its actual
behaviour. But this is not the only relevant factor. Broadcasting is a heavily
regulated and supervised business. There is an interrelation between the actions of
the regulator and the decisions of the regulated entities. If the National Council
had acted in a different manner, Claimant would also have in all likelihood taken
different decisions. When reconstructing the “but for” scenario, the Tribunal must
assume not only that the Ukrainian authorities adhered to the BIT standards, but
also that Claimant reacted in the manner to be expected from a diligent and
reasonable investor (i.e. making the CAPEX investments required to operate the
radio licences).

Is the damage speculative?

Respondent has drawn the Tribunal’s attention to the statement of the Iran-US
Claims Tribunal in Amoco v. Iran” that:

“Tojne of the best settled rules of the law of international
responsibility of States is that no reparation for speculative or
uncertain damage can be awarded”.

 

The same idea is expressed in Article 36.2 of the ILCA Articles, which provides
that “compensation shall cover any financially assessable damage including loss
of profits insofar as it is established”. As the Commentary notes, “Tribunals have
been reluctant to provide compensation for claims with inherent speculative
elements”.

*55 First Decision, paras. 420 and 451.
256 See para. 161 supra.

“" Amoco International Finance Corp. v. Iran, (Iran United States Claims Tribunal Case No. 56), Partial

Award of July 14, 1987, [“Amoco”], para 238.
258 James Crawford: “The international Law Commission’s Articles on State Responsibility”, 2002, para.

27.

69

246.

247.

248.

249.

250.

251.

The Tribunal agrees that it is a commonly accepted standard for awarding forward
looking compensation that damages must not be speculative or uncertain, but
proved with reasonable certainty; the level of certainty is unlikely, however, to be
the same with respect to the conclusion that damages have been caused, and the
precise quantification of such damages. Once causation has been established, and
it has been proven that the in bonis party has indeed suffered a loss, less certainty
is required in proof of the actual amount of damages; for this latter determination
Claimant only needs to provide a basis upon which the Tribunal can, with
reasonable confidence, estimate the extent of the loss’.

In our case, it is the Tribunal’s firm conviction, based on the available evidence,
that Claimant has indeed suffered a loss, resulting from Gala Radio’s curtailed
growth, and consequent loss of value, and that the proximate cause of the loss
were the wrongful actions of Respondent.

While the existence of damage is certain, calculating the precise amount of the
compensation is fraught with much more difficulty, inherent in the very nature of
the “but for” hypothesis. Valuation is not an exact science. The Tribunal has no
crystal ball and cannot claim to know what would have happened under a
hypothesis of no breach; the best any tribunal can do is to make an informed and
conscientious evaluation, taking into account all the relevant circumstances of the
case, not unlike that made by anyone who assesses the value of a business on the
basis of its likely future earnings.

The issues surrounding the measure of compensation for breaches of the FET
standard are — as the Tribunal in LG & E said — “particularly thorny”, To
estimate the damages, the Tribunal will inevitably have to accept certain
assumptions. These assumptions can and must be checked, applying tests of
reasonableness. But in the end, there is no denying that the calculation of damages
in a case like this, inevitably requires a certain amount of conjecture as to how
things would have evolved “but for” the actual behaviour of the parties. This
difficulty in calculation cannot, however, deprive an investor, who has suffered
injury, from his fundamental right to see his losses redressed.

Is the damage a loss of chance?

The Tribunal’s certainty that Claimant has indeed suffered a loss has another
important implication: it excludes the possibility that Mr. Lemire’s injury be
classified as a simple loss of chance.

Compensation for a lost chance is admissible, and is normally calculated as the
hypothetical maximum loss, multiplied by the probability of the chance coming to

25° Mark Kantor: “Valuation for Arbitration”, 2008, [“Kantor”], p. 72; Jan Paulsson: “The Expectation
Model” in “Evaluation of Damages in International Arbitration”, (Yves Derains and Richard H. Kreindler
Eds.), 2006, p. 60.

2 TG & E, para. 30.

70

fruition’*'. To take the example given in the Official Comment to the UNIDROIT
Principles”:

“[T]he owner of a horse which arrives too late to run in a race as a
result of delay in transport cannot recover the whole prize money,
even though the horse was the favourite”.

In this example, the owner must be satisfied with compensation proportionate to
the probability of the win.

252. But the facts of our case do not fit the example: the Tribunal’s conclusion is not

that Gala Radio was relegated in certain specific tenders for frequencies, and was
deprived of a chance to win in these procedures; what the Tribunal has found is
that the initial cause (Ukraine’s wrongful acts) and the damage (Claimant’s
frustration to carry out his plans and create a nationwide FM channel plus an AM
informational channel) are linked through a proximate chain of causation. The
investor’s loss does not consist in being deprived of some chance to win
additional frequencies; what has been proven is that Ukraine’s wrongful acts have
resulted, through a foreseeable and proximate chain of events, in the damage
suffered by the investor.

The Tribunal’s task

253. The compensation to which Mr. Lemire is entitled is the loss of value which his

investment has suffered, and this loss must be established by subtracting the
actual value of Gala Radio in its “as is” condition from the hypothetical value of
the investment “but for” the wrongful acts of Respondent. This task has been
addressed by the experts appointed by each party, who acquitted themselves to a
very professional standard, but nevertheless came to strikingly different results
(with Goldmedia arriving at figures of between 30 and almost 50 M USD**, and
EBS of significantly less than 0.5 M USD*™).

254. The only aspect on which both experts have agreed is that the appropriate

methodology to establish the damage in a case like this one is a DCF analysis.
This methodology, based on the prediction of a future stream of cash flow, which
is then discounted at a given rate, has been acknowledged and frequently applied
in the recent practice of investment arbitration’. Given this acceptance and the
common proposal of both experts, the Tribunal sees no difficulty in using a DCF
methodology. The Tribunal will thus adopt the basic philosophy proposed by the
experts, but will critically review their assumptions and calculations.

26 Kantor, p. 74.

262

Principles of International Commercial Contracts adopted by the International Institute for the

Unification of Private Law [“UNIDROIT Principles”), Article 7.4.3(2).
263
GSR, p. 6.
264 ESR, p. 52.
265 Marboe, p. 209.

71

255.

256.

257.

258.

259.

260.

B. Selection of a Scenario

As explained above”, Goldmedia compared Scenario I, which represents Gala
Radio in “as is” conditions, with one of four hypothetical Scenarios, numbered II,
II, IV and IV A) which represent the “but for” situation. The Tribunal’s first task
is to determine which, if any, of these four alternatives may serve as a foundation
for the most plausible assessment of damages.

Scenario II assumes the existence of a national FM channel as of 2001. The
Scenario thus correctly reflects the Tribunal’s assumption that, had Respondent
not engaged in irregular practices during the Interregnum, Gala should have
received, by January 1, 2001, the 14 frequencies required to operate a nationwide
FM music network”.

Scenario III adds to Scenario II the existence of a second FM radio network for
young audiences, which would have been granted to Gala Radio. The Tribunal has
concluded that Claimant’s initial plans did not include the creation of a second
FM network, that there is no causal link between the violation and the inexistence
of this second network and that consequently this unforeseeable and remote factor
must be excluded from the calculation of damages”,

Scenario IV adds to Scenario III the existence of a nationwide AM radio network
with talk radio. Since the Arbitral Tribunal has already rejected Scenario III, the
possibility of accepting Scenario IV becomes moot.

Scenario IV A) adds to Scenario II — which has already been accepted — the
existence of a nationwide AM radio network with talk radio. The Tribunal has
already decided that, absent the National Council’s wrongdoing, Gala would have
received in 2004 the necessary authorisation to incorporate an AM network”,
Consequently, Scenario TV A) is the one which, prima facie, best represents
Claimant’s initial plans and which could serve as basis for the calculation of
damages.

Scenario ITV A), however, suffers important shortcomings, due to the particular
difficulties of establishing a proper DCF value for an AM channel:

- in Ukraine most AM channels are operated by non profit organisations”””,
there being only one commercial AM network, Radio Majak, and its reach
is not comparable to that which Gala Radio could have obtained?”!; there is
a lack of comparable entities to perform a bottom up calculation of
revenues, with the result that the projected income of an AM channel in
Ukraine cannot be predicted with a minimum level of certainty;

- secondly, the audience which uses AM receivers is mostly the rural
population, which is not of high interest for commercial advertisers; when

266 See para. 218 supra.
267 See para. 179 supra.

268 See

para. 162 supra.

 

26 See para. 201 supra.
27 Confirmed by Dr. Wiegand, HTRI, p. 177.
271 BSR, p. 50.

72

261.

262.

263.

264.

AM frequencies were put out to tender, in many cases the tender process
could not be concluded, as there were no applicants”;

- thirdly, Goldmedia itself acknowledges the economic difficulties of AM
channels, and in its GSR for the first time includes the assumption that the
AM frequency would have been converted into an FM licence in 20067”;
this assumption is speculative, because there is no evidence that Gala Radio
had at any time envisaged such a switch.

For these reasons, the Tribunal finds that Scenario IV A) is too uncertain, because
it incorporates a type of business — broadcasting talk radio on AM band in
Ukraine — which has not been developed on a commercial for profit basis in
Ukraine, and for which it is impossible to prepare a DCF valuation without an
intolerable level of speculation. Consequently, the Tribunal will opt for the most
conservative Scenario and adopt Scenario II, which foresees Gala Radio as a full
national broadcaster but without an AM channel. The Tribunal finds that in this
Scenario the projections for income and costs offer a much higher level of
certainty, and that the requirement that speculative losses be excluded from the
calculation is better served. Besides, the Tribunal is unconvinced that the
existence of an AM talk radio channel would have produced significant additional
net income.

C. The Calculation of Gala Radio’s “Enterprise Value”

Goldmedia calculated the value of Gala Radio under Scenario II using an
“enterprise value” methodology’. This methodology is based on two elements:

- the discounted free cash flow, which represents the cash flow available for
distribution among all the securities holders of an enterprise, discounted at
the corresponding discount rate; and

- the discounted terminal value, which is the value that the enterprise would
be worth at the end of the valuation horizon, similarly discounted.

In order to obtain the discounted free cash flow, the report applied the following
steps:

- it first estimated Gala Radio’s EBITDA in UAH for the years 2001 - 2015;

- it then deducted the taxes for that period of time;

- it so obtained the operating cash flow of Gala Radio;

- the next step consisted in subtracting capital expenditures, which it assumed
only occurred in 2001;

- thus obtaining the free cash flow for each year in UAH;

- which is then converted into USD;

- discounted at 13.46%;

- resulting in a net present value of 12,515,000 USD.

Golmedia equates the terminal value to the discounted free cash flow in 2015
multiplied by an estimated further company lifetime of seven years (assuming a

2? BSR, p. 48 and Appendix B 5.
2 GSR, p. 10; HTRI, p. 175.
274 Different valuation methodologies in these situations are described in Kantor, p. 42.

3

265.

266.

267.

268.

typical licence period)*”>. This rather simple definition turns into more complex
calculations~”*:

- the discounted free cash flow in 2015 has been calculated as
6,087,000 USD*”;

- the report divides this amount by 0.3258;

- this number is obtained through the following formula:

Discount interest rate * (1 + discount interest rate) * further
company lifetime = 13.46% * (1+13.46%)47

- the terminal value is thus fixed at 18,682,000 USD.

Goldmedia added the two elements to establish Gala Radio’s “as of” “enterprise
value” of 31,198,000 USD?” , deducted from this amount the “enterprise value”
in “as is” conditions, 728,000 USD, and thus calculated the total damage for
Scenario II as 30,469,000 USD””.

EBS disagrees with this “enterprise value” methodology and has advocated that
the valuation be performed using a “lost profits” approach instead. Under this
approach, damages would be calculated on the basis of the discounted free cash
flows from 2001 through 20157*°, without taking into consideration any terminal
value. EBS has not disputed Goldmedia’s proposal that the basis of the DCF
analysis should be the free cash flow available to Gala Radio (and not EBIT or
any other similar accounting concept).

The Tribunal’s Position

The Tribunal agrees with Respondent’s expert, EBS, that the terminal value
should not be added when calculating the damages. The Tribunal bases its
decision on the following reasons:

(i) In first instance, the Tribunal notes that under the Goldmedia methodology the
terminal value is by far the most important element in the establishment of the
“enterprise value”; thus it is fundamental that the quantification of this element is
sufficiently certain; in the Tribunal’s opinion, this requirement is not met, since
the terminal value is calculated using the estimation for the 2015 free cash flow
and then multiplying this already rather uncertain figure by a factor — a product of
the expert’s personal judgement — of seven; thus any inaccuracy in the calculation
of the 2015 cash flow provokes a multiplied effect in the terminal value™*!,

275 GER, p. 18, HTRI, p. 128.

276 The formula applied is available at the excel spread sheet of damage calculation provided by
Goldmedia on October 10, 2008.

27” GSR, p. 67.

28 (12,515,000 USD + 18,682,000 USD = 31,198,000 USD). The slight differences in the above amounts
are a result of the rounding of numbers by Claimant’s expert.

2 GSR, p. 67; again there are differences caused by the rounding of numbers.

280 EBS agrees for the Scenario II with the 2001 to 2015 time span; see ESR, p. 17.

8! Acknowledged by Dr. Wiegand, HTRI, p. 129.

74

269.

270.

271.

272.

273.

282

(ii) Secondly, although it is rational in principle that someone assessing the value
of a business today would consider not only the value of an income stream from
today until 2015, but would also project net income from that year forward as
establishing a residual additional present value, the Tribunal does not view Gala
Radio in this light. The evidence, particularly witness testimony, in this case
creates an irresistible impression that Gala Radio’s fortunes depend on the
initiatives and personal commitment of Mr. Lemire. Gala Radio cannot be
described as an institutionalised enterprise, nor can the industry or environment in
which it operates be described as one that gives assurance of such a corporate
evolution.

In other words, the Tribunal believes that the case of Gala Radio presents in a
rather emphatic way the problem of the “succession factor” present in the
valuation of family-owned small-to-medium businesses, and on that basis sees no
warrant to endorse Claimant’s inclusion of a residual value beyond the one that
reflects lost value until the 2015 horizon. The Tribunal is aware that this is quite a
conservative approach, in effect giving no credit for possible profit beyond a five-
year period, but believes it appropriate in the circumstances of this case.

If EBS’s “lost profit” methodology is applied in Scenario II, and all other
parameters and conditions in Goldmedia’s calculation are preserved, the amount
of damages suffered by Claimant is reduced to 12,388,000 USD (the result of
subtracting a Scenario I net present value of 127,000 USD from a Scenario II net
present value of 12,515,000 USD”).

D. Application of UAH vy. USD

In GFR, Goldmedia’s original 2008 Report, USD was the main currency for the
presentation of Gala Radio’s historical financial statements and the currency for
forecasts and valuations. That approach may have seemed reasonable, because
until the recent financial crisis the Hryvnia was relatively constant vis-a-vis the
USD***, In 2008, however, the Ukrainian currency suffered a major and rapid
devaluation of up to 40% and prices uncoupled from the USD". As a
consequence of these changes, in its final presentation Goldmedia switched
currencies. For historical periods of up to 2008 inclusive, Goldmedia first took
Gala Radio’s actual cash flows in UAH, and then converted them into USD at the
historic exchange rate. All post 2008 cash flows are calculated in UAH, and then
translated into USD at a forecasted exchange rate of 8 UAH/USD”*»; the annual
free cash flows denominated in USD are finally discounted at the appropriate

discount rate”**.

EBS has submitted that there is a methodological flaw in the way Goldmedia is
using the different currencies. The Tribunal disagrees, and on this issue sides with
Goldmedia.

GSR p. 67; ESR, p. 13 arrives at slightly different figure, because it applies a different discount rate.

83 HTRI, p. 138.

24 HTRI, p. 141.

*85 ESR, p. 16.

8 Acknowledged by Dr. Wiegand, HTRI, p. 138.

75

274. For reason to be explained below, the Tribunal will adopt Prof. Damodaran’s
approach for calculating the discount rate, and will accept EBS’s number,
established under this methodology, of 18.51%. This rate is the result of adding a
Riskfree Rate based on the ROI’ of US Bonds, a Mature Market Premium based
on the US market, plus a Country Risk Premium of 7.43%. Since the Risk Free
rate is expressed in nominal (i.e. without taking into account the effect of
inflation) Dollar terms, consistency requires that discounted cash flows also be
expressed in nominal Dollars”**. In Goldmedia’s model, the cash flows are
expressed in nominal Hryvnias, and then converted into Dollars at a fixed
exchange rate. Goldmedia has chosen 8 UAH/USD, which reflects present market
situations, and EBS has not proposed an alternative calculation. All in all, the
Tribunal finds that Goldmedia is using Dollars and Hryvnias in a consistent way
and that Goldmedia’s application of the UAH/USD exchange rate is reasonable.

E. Discount Rate
275. Goldmedia and EBS disagree on the discount rate to be applied in the DCF model.
NACVA

276. Goldmedia initially applied NACVA methodology”, a rather simple system,
based on five defined risk categories. Claimant’s expert used Category | (i.e. least
tisky company) for the hypothetical Scenarios II — IV A), and Category 2 (i.e.
slightly more risk) for Scenario I (i.e. for Gala Radio “as is” an By picking a
higher, riskier discount rate for Scenario I compared to Scenarios II through IV
A), the valuation performed by Goldmedia increased the amount of damages”.

277. The overall discount rate used by Goldmedia in the GSR added up for Scenarios II
through IV A) to 13.46%7°*. In Goldmedia’s opinion, the reasonableness of this
rate was confirmed in the 2008 IPO”? in the Frankfurt Stock Exchange of the
company UMH, in which Concorde Capital, in order to value the company,
applied an average discount rate for 2009 - 2012 of 13%. The discount used for
Scenario I is 18.46%.

278. EBS submits that the NACVA approach for establishing discount rates is only
correct for developed countries, but that in developing countries like Ukraine the
Bludgeon Approach pioneered by Prof. Damodaran is more appropriate. EBS
adds that, even if the NACVA methodology is selected, Claimant’s expert is
applying it incorrectly, because the same discount rate must be used both for
Scenario I and for all the remaining Scenarios. The use of a higher discount rate
for Gala Radio “as is” increases the difference in valuation between Scenario I
and all other Scenarios.

87 Return on Investment [“ROI”].

288 Aswath Damodaran: “Estimating Risk free Rates”, Paper, p. 5, available at
http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~adamodar/pdfiles/papers/riskfree.pdf.

8 GSR, p. 13.

290 HTRI, p. 178.

°°! HTRI, p. 180 and 181.

2° GSR, p. 15

?°3 “Initial Public Offering”; GSR, p. 67.

76

279.

280.

281.

282.

283.

284.

On this issue, the Tribunal sides with EBS.

NACVA represents a domestic methodology, which is appropriate to value
companies in the US and possibly in other developed nations. It does not,
however, reflect country risk, i.e. the fact that the same company, situated in the
US or in Ukraine, is subject to different political and regulatory risks; to reflect
this difference, ceteris paribus the discount rate in Ukraine must be higher (and
the valuations lower) than in the US The NACVA approach does not
acknowledge this difference, while the Damodaran methodology includes a
specific item to reflect country risk and thus is to be preferred.

Goldmedia has argued that if the investor had sold Gala Radio, the buyer would
have been a domestic player, which would not take country risk into account?™*,
The Tribunal is unconvinced: a buyer will rationally pay more when investing in

the equity of companies located in nations with low country risk.

Prof. Damodaran’s Approach

EBS already proposed in its first report that the appropriate methodology for
calculating the discount rate is Prof. Damodaran’s approach. Aswath Damodaran
is a Professor at Stern School of Business, NY, and a prominent authority in the
valuation of companies and cash flows and the creator of a frequently used web
page with formulae and data”, Both experts agree that, in accordance with his
methodology, the cost of equity is equal to the sum of:

- the Riskfree Rate, based on the ROI of US bonds;

- a Beta (namely the stock price volatility of individual equities) multiplied by
a Mature Market Premium, based on the US market; and

- a Country Risk Premium, which is dependent on the country in which the
investment is located.

In its GSR Goldmedia accepted the Bludgeon Approach, as an alternative to the
NACVA system, and submitted a calculation of the discount rate based on
Prof. Damodaran’s methodology””®. Goldmedia used the average Beta of all stock
companies operating in all industries in Central and Eastern Europe, as listed in
Prof. Damodaran’s homepage. The result was a total discount rate, which would
be different for each year between 2001 and 2015, and which would float between
10.81% for 2005 and 16.10 % for 2010°”.

In its second report, while welcoming the use by Goldmedia of the Damodaran
approach, EBS disagreed with Goldmedia’s alternative calculation, because in its
opinion Goldmedia was using Prof. Damodaran’s formulae incorrectly. Applying
the system in what EBS deemed the appropriate fashion, EBS arrived at a uniform
discount rate of 18.51%"*.

24 GSR, p. 18.

295

http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/adamodar.

2° GSR, p. 18.
*°” GSR, p. 24.
8 ESR, p. 21.

77

285.

286.

287.

288.

289.

Not without hesitation, the Tribunal prefers EBS’ calculation of the discount rate.
The reasons are the following:

- EBS’ calculation of the Riskfree Rate is based on the exact data from the
Prof. Damodaran’s web site;

- the Beta used by EBS for the broadcasting industry in developing markets
appears to better reflect Gala Radio’s risk than the Beta proposed by
Goldmedia, which refers to all companies in Central and Eastern Europe;

- EBS’ use of a 10 year average of the Mature Market Premium is to be
preferred to Goldmedia’s proposal of selecting the Market Premium in one
single year (2009).

The Tribunal thus concludes that the appropriate discount rate, both for Scenario I
and II, is 18.51%. Since the discount rate will be applied to a stream of nominal
Dollars, the Tribunal finds that it is inappropriate that this rate be increased by the
projected inflation rate in Ukraine.

Goldmedia has drawn the Tribunal’s attention to the 2008 IPO in the Frankfurt
Stock Exchange of the company UMH, in which Concorde Capital valued the
company applying an average discount rate for 2009 - 2012 of 13%. In the
Tribunal’s opinion, it is not appropriate to compare Gala Radio with UMH,
because UMH is a diversified holding, listed on the Frankfurt stock exchange,
while Gala Radio is a much smaller, undiversified radio broadcaster in Ukraine.
Furthermore, as EBS has pointed out” , the UMH discount rate was estimated as
weighted average cost of capital, whereas Gala Radio does not have any debt.

F. Determination of Free Cash Flow

As in all other hypothetical Scenarios, Goldmedia has calculated Gala Radio’s
Scenario II income using a bottom-up approach*”, i.e. applying the advertising
prices of the first movers in the radio market (HIT, Russkoye, Nashe and Europa
Plus)**'. In Scenario II these calculations lead to the following predictions:

- “but for” revenues in year 2008 would amount to 32,770,000 UAH and in
2015 to 81,116,000 UAH;

- “but for’ costs for the same years would be 12,386,000 UAH and
16,322,000 UAH;

- a predicted CAPEX investment of 2,757,430 UAH;

- leading, after conversion of amounts denominated in Hryvnias into Dollars,
to predicted free cash flow of 2,840,000 USD in 2008 and 6,087,000 USD
in 2015".

The Tribunal has reviewed the methodology used by Goldmedia when calculating
Gala Radio’s available free cash flows. While it is true that some of the

2 ESR, p. 24.

5° An alternative top down approach was abandoned in the GSR.

1 GSR, p. 36.

5 GSR, p. 54.

*°8 GSR, p. 67; EBS Appendix A-3 calculates the 2008 free cash flow as 2.839.900 USD and the 2015
free cash flow as 6.083.500 USD — possibly due to rounding discrepancies.

78

assumptions are debatable, the Tribunal finds that, all in all, the model created by
Claimant’s expert represents a fair estimate of how Gala Radio would have
developed until 2015, if it had been awarded the necessary licences to become a
national network in 2001. In the opinion of the Tribunal, in that case, and with the
additional support of a talk radio in AM format, it is reasonable to project that
Gala Radio would have managed to produce a free cash flow of roughly 3 M USD
in 2008 and of 6 M USD in 2015. To achieve these results, Mr. Lemire would
have needed to provide an additional funding for CAPEX of 2,757,430 UAH (less
than 350,000 USD) — an investment which appears to be within his financial
capabilities.

Criticism by EBS
290. EBS has criticized Goldmedia’s cash flow predictions for a number of reasons*”:

291. EBS argues first of all that the 2001 - 2006 numbers are based on 2007 rates,
deflated by US average consumer price index, not by the Ukrainian domestic
inflation rate. The Tribunal does not share EBS’ argument, because until 2008
prices in Ukraine fluctuated consistently with the Dollar, and thus it is logical to
apply US inflation rates before that year.

292. Secondly, EBS submits that Goldmedia’s proposed average rate for Kyiv is 49%
higher than Gala Radio’s actual rate, without any justification, and that the
benchmark radios should be Hit and Europa Plus, not Nashe and Russkoe Radio.
The Tribunal again disagrees, and accepts Goldmedia’s detailed calculations
explained in Exhibit 29 to its GSR**, Goldmedia has factored in that the increase
in the advertising prices will not be higher than the expected inflation®”, and has
taken the average price of the first four movers*”® — all reasonable assumptions.

293. Thirdly, EBS has stated that Gala Radio’s official accounting underreports income
and underestimates personnel costs, and that Gala Radio’s books are not reliable.
EBS made this allegation for the first time in its final report, but did not present
any hard evidence in support. EBS simply asserts that most of the Ukrainian
media market is working in a non-transparent way and that 75 - 80% of Gala
Radio’s employees are working at the minimum wage salary level®”. In the
Tribunal’s opinion, this is clearly insufficient to prove the serious allegation that
the whole Ukrainian media sector, including Gala Radio, is working with two sets
of accounting books — one official, but false, the other unofficial but correct??,

 

5 GSR, pp. 36 to 38.

5 ESR, p. 40.

5° GSR, p. 39.

*°7 GSR, p. 36.

%°8 HTRI, p. 165.

5 ESR, p. 36.

50 Dr. Voss in his Separate Opinion submits that “[hlowever, the financial statements are bound to be
inaccurate since they fail to reflect Claimant’s actual contributions to Gala and thus overstate its profits
or understate its losses, as the cast may be” (para. 372). The Tribunal has concluded that Mr. Lemire’s
personal assets and those of Gala Radio are somewhat commingled, and that Mr. Lemire has invested
approximately 2.4 M USD of his own monies, which are not reflected in Gala’s balance sheet. The
Tribunal consequently agrees with Dr. Voss’ statement. But Dr. Voss then takes his argument one step
further, concluding that Gala’s “profits and loss accounts [...] were evidently inaccurate” (para. 373).
This statement is unproven. There is no evidence on the record quantifying the impact on the profit and

79

294. The Tribunal’s conclusion is reinforced by the testimony of Dr. Wiegand,
Claimant’s expert. Asked by counsel, he confirmed that he had not found any
irregularities in Gala Radio’s accounts and that all financial statements which he
had been shown were audited by an independent certified accountant*!!,

295. Summing up, the Tribunal is satisfied that the free cash flow predictions made by
Claimant’s expert with regard to Scenarios I and II are reasonable, that they
present a fair estimate of Gala Radio in “as is” and in “but for” conditions, and
that these projections — summarized in Exhibit 50°!? of Goldmedia’s GSR — are

the appropriate numerical basis for the DCF analysis*'.

 

   
   

account, if Mr. Lemire’s investments had actually been put on the balance sheet of the company. The
issue has not been addressed by any of the experts. Neither have the alternatives for capitalization of the
investments been discussed or analysed. Dr. V. estimate that capitalization would increase losses is
unproven speculation.

SU HTRI, p. 122.

 

 

7.

378 and 379 of his Separate Opinion, Dr. Voss adds one further criticism: in his opinion
are the primary indicator of future profits”; and since Gala Radio’s earnings are volatile and
there is an accumulated net loss for the entire period, in his opinion the estimates of lost profits are not
supported by the earning record. The Tribunal agrees that under normal circumstances, lost future profits
must be supported by a record of earnings. But what Dr. Voss does not see is that this general rule cannot
be applied for the calculation of damages in cases of violation of the FET Standard. In these
circumstances, damages must be established by deducting Gala’s “as is” value, from its hypothetical “but
for” value. The “as is” value will be low, because earnings will be depressed as a consequence of
Respondent’s wrongful actions. The “but for” value, however, has no relationship with Gala Radio’s
actual profits: it is premised on Gala’s hypothetical (not on its actual) earnings record, if Ukraine had
adhered to the FET Standard.

   

 

  

80

3.5. Conclusion

296. The Tribunal has already decided that the correct discount rate is 18.51%, as
calculated by EBS applying the Bludgeon Approach. This discount rate must be
inserted into the Scenario I and II free cash flow predictions worked out by
Goldmedia. This calculation is not available in the spread sheets prepared by
Goldmedia — because Goldmedia uses a different discount rate — but it is provided
by EBS in Appendix A - 3 to its ESR*"*, The resulting amounts (which have not
been disputed by Claimant or by Goldmedia) are the following:

- net present value of the discounted cash flows in Scenario I: 126,290 USD;

- net present value of the discounted cash flows in Scenario II:
8,844,140 USD*;

- loss suffered by the investor: 8,717,850 USD*!®.

297. In view of the above reasoning, the Tribunal concludes that the total
compensation which Respondent is to pay to Claimant as a result of Respondent’s
violation of the FET standard defined in the BIT amounts to 8,717,850 USD*””.

54 The numbers used by Goldmedia and EBS are the same, with small rounding differences.

55 In para. 369 of his Separate Opinion, Dr. Voss states that “/iJn the Majority’s determination,
additional profits due to fourteen frequencies that Gala should have won during the Interregnum would
have catapulted Gala’s present enterprise value from USD 126.290 to 8.844.150, i.e., they would have
multiplied Gala's value by 70. This conclusion in my view, reflects audacious speculation.” What
Dr. Voss does not take into account is that the “as is” enterprise value is small, because Gala Radio has
been affected by Respondent’s wrongful acts. And the “but for” enterprise value is (comparatively) large,
because as a broadcaster with nation-wide coverage Gala Radio would have been able to reap the benefit
of economies of scale, applying the same rates for advertising as its privileged competitors and earning a
much higher income, without significantly increasing its costs. The Tribunal, after carefully weighing the
available evidence and analysing in detail the submission of both experts, is convinced that the free cash
flow calculations made by Claimant’s expert are fair and reasonable.

$168 844,140 USD — 126,290 USD.

57 Tn paras. 540 to 545 of his Separate Opinion Dr. Voss includes certain references to European
Procurement Law contained in Directive 92/13/EEC and to the 2009 German “Gesetz gegen
Wetthewerbsbeschriinkungen”. These laws have not been pleaded by any of the parties, have never been
discussed in the course of the arbitration until Dr. Voss presented his Separate Opinion and, in the opinion
of the Tribunal, have no bearing whatsoever on the calculation of damages for an international wrong
committed by Ukraine against an American investor.

Furthermore, Dr. Voss’ assertion that under Directive 92/13/EEC Claimant’s claims would be dismissed
(i) because of Gala’s failure to participate in the tenders, (ii) because of Gala’s failure of proving a real
chance in particular tenders and (iii) because any recovery is limited to damnum emergens, is but a
personal and unsubstantiated opinion. Even if Directive 92/13/EEC had any relevance to the case (quod
non), Dr. Voss’s conclusions seem to be at odds with Article 2.1 (d) of the Directive which, in cases when
a procurement decision has been declared illegal, does not limit the type of damages which can be
awarded.

Finally, Dr. Voss’ statement that para. 126 of the “Gesetz gegen Wetthewerbsbeschrénkungen” limits any
compensation to the expenses incurred, excluding /ucrum cessans, is also his personal unproven opinion.
The final words of para. 126 (“Weiterrei Anspriiche auf S. ssersatz bleiben iihrt”) seem
to imply the contrary.

 

 

 

 

 

 

81

298.

299.

300.

301.

302.

3
'8 Some large corporate enterp!

The amount of damages has been established applying a DCF model, developed
on a number of assumptions, some of which necessarily involve more estimation
than certitude, and the resulting amounts are not free of doubt and debate. It is
thus important that the overall result be tested against other parameters, in order to
confirm the reasonability of the calculation.

Amounts Invested

(i) The first test of reasonability involves comparing the compensation to be
awarded with the amount invested by Claimant.

Investment and damages are of course separate concepts: investment refers to the
resources which Claimant brought into Ukraine in order to create and fund Gala
Radio, and damages to the loss of value which Gala Radio suffered as a
consequence of the breaches in the BIT. Although the amounts invested do not
constitute a ceiling to the compensation, there must, with respect to most
enterprises, be a common sense correlation between both concepts: the amounts
invested influence the size of the enterprise, and the size of the enterprise, together
with the investor’s activities and skills, define the earning expectations and the
value of the business*!®, And in certain cases, arbitral tribunals have rejected
calculations based on DCF methodology by reason of the disproportionality of the
sums invested and the damages sought” ”.

The true amounts invested have been much debated between the parties. Claimant
has submitted that his total investment amounts to approximately 4.5 M USD,
plus the personal dedication of Mr. Lemire, valued for a minimum of 5 M usD*”.
Respondent has acknowledged an investment of only 0.9 M USsD*".

In fact, it is not easy to define the exact amount of Mr. Lemire’s investment,
because, as he himself has accepted, his personal assets and those of Gala Radio
have been somewhat commingled. The Tribunal is satisfied that the total
proven amount of investment made by Mr. Lemire since 1995 is in the region of
between 2 and 3 M USD: 1.3 M USD real estate*”*, 0.8 M USD assets”, 0.3 M
USD loans? (the marketing expenses seem to have been funded by Gala Radio ,
and as such do not qualify as investment™®). To this must be added his own
management time during 15 years, which undoubtedly represents a significant
economic value, at any rate well in excess of the modest salary he was attributed
by Gala Radio; as well as the hypothetical additional amounts which Mr. Lemire

 

diversify discrete investments, accepting the high likelihood of zero

returns for individual projects (i.e. costly dry holes in the petroleum industry) by reason of confidence in
the probability that they will be compensated for by high returns on others. Claimant in this case was not

a diversified investor of such dimensions

 

5! Wena Hotels Ltd. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, (CSID Case No. ARB/98/4), Award of December 8,
2000, para. 123; Técnicas Medioambientales S.A. v. México, (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2), Award of
May 29, 2003, para. 186.

520 CMRI, para. 22.

°°! RMRI, para. 121.

52 CMRI, para. 20.

°°3 CMRI, para. 13.

54 CMRI, para. 17.

*°5 CMRI, para. 20.

6 RMRI, para. 113.

82

would have invested if he had been granted the additional licences which were
denied to him*”.

Risk Environment

303. (ii) Another important factor which must be taken into account is the risk
environment in which Mr. Lemire made his investment. Mr. Lemire was not a
passive investor in a mature market. He had the courage to venture into a
transitional State and to create from scratch a completely new business.
Transitional economies need such investors, who take considerable risks and
commit themselves with great energy, notwithstanding the absence of clear
recovery horizons. Such investors come and go, many of them risking and losing
everything because their idea was not sound, or they were too quickly
discouraged, or the venture turned out to require greater resources than what they
were able to mobilise. When they lose, they have no right to compensation. Legal
liability by the host state arises only if the duties of legal investment protection
have been breached, and is transformed into monetary recovery only when there
has, in consequence, been an appreciable loss.

304. The Tribunal has found that Mr. Lemire is in this situation; the Tribunal has made
an evaluation of the loss suffered, using the DCF methodology submitted by the
experts. It has applied this procedure and established a number. Is this amount a
fair reflection of the actual loss, reasonably proportional to the investment?

305. Mr. Lemire is not to be equated with a US investor who purchases Treasury
bonds, or invests in a residential project in a region known for steady economic
growth and increased demand for housing. The risk/reward ratio which
Mr. Lemire and such a passive investor can expect are radically different. Two
additional factors stand out: Mr. Lemire has devoted a significant proportion of
his career to the Gala Radio project in Ukraine, and he brought and implemented a
new conception of commercial radio which was entirely new in this ex-USSR
environment. Mr. Lemire seemed to have been on his way to becoming a
dominant figure in the radio industry in Ukraine. Once he proved that it could be
done, others with greater political clout shouldered him aside, and this was clearly
facilitated by the conduct of the State.

306. On that basis, the Tribunal finds that there is indeed an adequate proportionality
between the compensation awarded to Mr. Lemire and his investment — not in
cash alone but in a combination of cash, risk-taking, personal commitment, and
the essential contribution of a path-breaker.

*°7 In para. 370 of his Separate opinion, Dr. Voss argues that if the investment made by Mr. Lemire since
1995 is — as the Tribunal finds — in the region of between 2 and 3 M USD, and this determination is
related to Gala’s actual net enterprise value of some 126.290 USD assumed by the Tribunal, then Gala
must have generated a net loss of some 2 M USD between 1995 and 2010. Dr. Voss’ argument is difficult
to follow. First of all, Dr. Voss is comparing an accounting item (investments) with an enterprise value
calculated under a DCF analysis — apples with oranges. But that is not all: applying basic accounting and
financial logic, it is not true that (i) amounts invested minus (ii) DCF enterprise value equates to
(iii) losses.

 

 

83

307.

308.

309.

Comparable Transactions

(iii) EBS, Respondent’s expert, has made the effort of submitting a valuation of
Gala Radio based, not on a DCF analysis, but on recent mergers and acquisitions
of comparable companies in Ukraine. As EBS itself acknowledges, the number
of transactions is limited, the available information incomplete or not confirmed,
and the exercise is not fully reliable.

Subject to these caveats, and assuming that Gala Radio had only been able to
secure a 5% market share, EBS calculates that the value of Gala Radio as a
national network operating additionally a second AM talk network would amount
to approximately 5 M USD. It must be stressed that EBS’ calculation is based on
an assumed 5% market share. In the Tribunal’s opinion, this figure is low, because
it does not take into consideration that during the late 90’s Gala Radio was the
number | or number 2 radio station in Kyiv and that it was deprived of its first
mover advantage. It seems reasonable to accept that, but for the wrongful breach
of the BIT, Gala Radio would have grown into one of the main radio broadcasters
in Ukraine, with more than a 5% market share, and consequently with a value well
above the 5 M USD proposed by EBS.

If one accepts EBS’ calculation that a reasonable valuation of Gala Radio in “but
for” conditions would significantly exceed 5 M USD, and if one remembers that
the actual “as is” value of the company is very low or almost nil, the figures again
confirm the reasonableness of the compensation established by the Tribunal.

8 ESR, p. 25.

84

IV.2. THE EXISTENCE OF MORAL DAMAGES

310. The First Decision devoted section VII.4.3 to a preliminary analysis of Claimant’s
request for a compensation for moral damages, which he claimed in an amount of
3M USD. The Arbitral Tribunal noted that Gala Radio was not treated in an even-
handed fashion by the National Council as its regulator, and identified three sets
of facts which, in theory, could lead to the awarding of moral damages:

- the rejection of all (bar one) of Gala Radio’s applications for new
frequencies™”;

- the fact that Gala Radio was never inspected until 2005, and in the next
three years was the object of five inspections, of which four were
unscheduled and warnings against Gala Radio followed**,

- Gala Radio’s application for extension of its licence was delayed and was
granted in the same session when a substantial increase in the renewal fees
was approved**!,

311. The Tribunal acknowledged that moral damages could only be awarded in
exceptional circumstances*” and postponed the decision on whether the facts of
the case constituted “exceptional circumstances”, until further briefed on the
context and causation of the moral damages**.

   

First Decision, para. 486.

85

312.

313.

314.

315.

316.

1. Claimant’s Case

Mr. Lemire considers that the “exceptional circumstances” test is met. He refers
to the Lusitania Cases as a standard for such exceptional circumstances. In that
case, the Commission found that injuries inflicted which “result in mental
suffering, injury to his feelings, humiliation, shame, degradation, loss of social
position or injury to his credit or reputation” should receive compensation
“commensurate to the injury™.

Claimant also submits that the intensity and duration of Respondent’s breaches of
the BIT in relation to the allocation of frequencies, as well as of Respondent’s
other breaches, have caused Claimant intense moral injuries, tantamount to bodily
injury, which merit compensation in the amount of 3 M usD*®,

Allegations regarding BIT Breaches Related to the Awarding of Frequencies

As regards the breaches in the awarding of frequencies, Claimant stresses that
these warrant not only an economic compensation, but also the award of moral
damages as compensation for the efforts in applying for frequencies. The efforts
referred to by Claimant consist in the preparation of numerous applications
throughout the last decade, as well as attendance at meetings, the recording of the
National Council’s sessions and the necessary follow-up**°. Claimant also lists the
disrespect suffered by Mr. Lemire and his team during the procedures, where he
was refused the floor during tender meetings.

As a result of these practices Mr. Lemire claims to have suffered “constant
indignity, frustration, stress, shock, affront, humiliation, shame,
degradation...”**". More specifically, Claimant states that the constant rejections
resulting from the BIT breaches incurred by Ukraine eroded his image, turning
him from a “great pioneer” into a “loser incapable of expanding his business and
playing in a bigger league”**, thus depriving him of the first mover advantage
and a promising leadership position in the radio industry.

Moreover, Mr. Lemire claims that the constant portrayal of him as a loser by
Respondent continued even after the Tribunal’s Decision acknowledging
Ukraine’s breaches.

54 More than 50 cases decided by the Mixed Claims Commission (United States and Germany), included
in Volume VII of the November 1, 1923 to 1930, Reports of International Arbitral Awards prepared by
the UN, [“Lusitania Cases”).

555 CMRI, para. 93.

536 CMRI, para. 81.

557 CMRI, para. 81.

538 CMRI, para. 82.

86

317. Asa result of these practices Claimant submits that his other activities (such as the
development of his group of companies and business in general or the enjoyment
of life) were disrupted.

 

Allegations regarding other Breaches

318. As regards damage resulting from other breaches, Claimant stresses Respondent’s
acts and omissions, which, as the Arbitral Tribunal acknowledged, resulted in a
one-sided treatment of Gala Radio”, such as for instance the number of
inspections suffered, or the warnings issued by the National Council against Gala
Radio, warnings which later on were set aside by the Ukrainian courts.

 

5° CMRI, by reference to the First Decision, paras. 484 and 485.

 

87

319.

320.

321.

322.

323.

324.

2. Respondent’s Case

Respondent considers that moral damages cannot be awarded, since the facts of
the case do not rise to the standard set by international investment tribunals.
Ukraine compares the circumstances of these proceedings to those found in
Desert Line Projects v. Yemen*® and draws the conclusion that the standard of
“exceptional circumstances” refers to cases where the government exerts

malicious physical duress and displays “egregious behaviour”.

According to Respondent, the “great efforf’? which Claimant allegedly had to
deploy is not sufficient to meet the standard necessary to award moral damages,
since the sufferings Mr. Lemire says he endured are not comparable to military
siege or physical arrest. Ukraine further states that Gala Radio’s situation was no
different than that of other national broadcasters, which were subject to the same
monitoring and inspection procedures and were treated in a similar way in the
renewal of their licences™”.

Respondent also makes reference to the decision in Siag**, where the claim for
moral damages was rejected under the basis that the “exceptional circumstances”
threshold is very high and applies only to extreme cases of harassment. Ukraine
maintains that there is no evidence that Claimant was maliciously treated or that
he or his company suffered any physical harm or direct threats. In fact,
Respondent considers that it was the National Council who was harassed and
intimidated by Mr. Lemire™,

Ukraine also rejects Claimant’s representation that he has become “a beggar
merely trying to survive?**, Respondent considers that Gala Radio has shown a
certain level of success, which places the company in a respectable position
within the Ukrainian broadcasting market, as proven i.e. by the awards received
for its performance.

In any case, Respondent considers that Claimant has failed to demonstrate that the
award of moral damages is necessary to place Mr. Lemire in the position he

would have been in had there been no breaches of the BIT™*.

If the Arbitral Tribunal were to determine that Claimant is entitled to moral
damages, Respondent considers that the amount requested by Claimant is
disproportionate and unsupported, since he has provided no basis for his

9 Desert Line Projects LLC v. Republic of Yemen (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/17), Award of February 6,
2008 [Desert Line”.

“1 RMRI, para. 406.

* RMRI, paras. 409 et seq.

“8 Waguih Elie George Siag and Clorinda Vecchi v. The Arab Republic of Egypt, (ICSID Case No.
ARB/05/15), Award of June 1, 2009 [“Siag”].

“4 RMRI, para. 415.

345

RMRI, para. 416, by reference to CMRI, para. 82.

© Standard set by the Factory at Chorzow case, according to Respondent.

88

quantification”. Furthermore, Respondent points out that the amounts awarded
for moral damages before international human rights courts and tribunals are
much lower than that requested by Claimant.

“7 RMRI, para.418.

89

325.

326.

327.

328.

3. The Arbitral Tribunal’s Decision

The Arbitral Tribunal will first (3.1) elaborate on the standards for the awarding
of moral damages and then (3.2) apply these standards to three distinct sets of
facts: (A) breaches in the awarding of frequencies; (B) inspections and
(C) renewal of licences, and (3.3) finally will state its conclusions.

3.1. The Standards for Moral Damages

The Arbitral Tribunal has acknowledged in the First Decision that moral damages
may be awarded, but only under exceptional circumstances. No precise definition
exists on what constitutes “exceptional circumstances”. The definition must be
induced from existing case law. Both parties have submitted case law on this
issue:

The Desert Line Case
This case™* is a prominent example in the award of moral damages.

Claimant was a construction company which was engaged by the
Republic of Yemen to build asphalt roads. In early 2004, after
completing all constructions works, claimant requested payment of
amounts due. The parties commenced an arbitration, which ended in
an award favourable to claimant’s interests. Claimant then complained
about some clerical and calculation mistakes in the award. An
altercation followed between claimant’s personnel and the Yemeni
army, which resulted in a four-day arrest of three of claimant’s
personnel. Later that same year respondent applied for the annulment
of the award and the parties exchanged proposals for a settlement
agreement, which was signed at the end of the year. Claimant
challenged the validity of the settlement agreement and thereafter
commenced an ICSID arbitration.

The award acknowledged that claimant was subject to what it describes as a siege
with heavy artillery, an armed assault, an act of terror in its worst image™?, that
claimant suffered threats and attacks on the physical integrity of its investment*”
and that the settlement agreement was imposed onto claimant under physical and
financial duress”. The award described the cause of the moral damages as the
“stress and anxiety of being harassed, threatened and detained” and “intimidated”
and the “significant injury to [claimant’s] credit and reputation and [claimant’s]
los[s] [of its] prestige”. The award further characterises the prejudice suffered

 

*8 Desert Line, see footnote 340 supra.
* Desert Line, para. 166.

550 Desert Line, pi
55! Desert Line, pi
Desert Line, para. 286.

352

   

90

by claimant as “substantial”, since it affected the physical health of claimant’s
executives and claimant’s credit and reputation*. The Tribunal finally awarded
1M USD for moral damages, including loss of reputation.

The Lusitania Cases

329. The Lusitania Cases are some of the earliest international decisions dealing with
the concept of moral damages.

The decisions go back as far as to World War I and grew out of the
sinking of the British ocean liner Lusitania, which was torpedoed by a
German submarine off the coast of Ireland on May 7, 1915, during the
period of American neutrality. Of the 197 American citizens aboard
the Lusitania at that time, 69 were saved and 128 lost.

330. The Umpire*™* acknowledged the mental suffering or shock caused by the violent
severing of family ties by reason of the deaths**. The decision further elaborated
on the concept of damages, finding that “one injured is ... entitled to be
compensated for an injury inflicted resulting in mental suffering, injury to his
feelings, humiliation, shame, degradation, loss of social position or injury to his
credit or to his reputation” **; excluding, however, exemplary (punitive,
vindictive) damages*” :

 

The Siag Case

331.

Respondent has presented this case to support its allegations that no moral
damages shall be awarded.

Claimants, Mr. Siag and his late mother Mrs. Vecchi, filed a claim
against the Republic of Egypt for alleged expropriation of a property
on which claimants planned to implement a luxury resort. Egypt
seized claimants’ property with five separate decrees and took
physical control of the property on two occasions. Each seizure was in
time revoked by Court decisions; Egypt, however, disregarded such
decisions and new seizures followed. The seizures were carried out by
force, which included the beating of one of Mr. Siag’s employees,
who required hospital care, and led to the arrest of Mr. Siag and three
of his lawyers.

332.

N

Claimants did not seek an award on punitive damages, but submitted that Egypt’s
conduct entitled claimants to enhanced damages and so urged the Tribunal to
impose a measure of damages which would afford full reparation by indulging all
reasonable inference in favour of Claimants**. In a dictum the tribunal made a

 

553 Desert Line, para. 290.

34 Of the Mixed Claims Commission United States-Germany in accordance with the Agreement of
August 10, 1922, extended by Agreement of December 31, 1928, within the Treaty of Peace between the
United States and Germany, signed at Berlin, August 25, 1927.

555 Tusitania Cases, p. 35.

*6 Tusitania C:
*7 Lusitania C:
558 Siag, para. 505.

 

91

333.

334.

335.

336.

337.

clear distinction between two issues: one is the question whether punitive
damages are available; another is whether recovery for an unlawful expropriation
should proceed on a more generous basis than that for a lawful expropriation. On
the first question, the award stated that punitive damages were, by their very
nature, not compensatory and that the prevailing view of tribunals is that, in
international law, they are generally not available except in extreme cases of
: a 35 .
egregious behaviour”. On the second question, the tribunal was not prepared to

draw any inferences other than those justified by evidence™.

KK

The conclusion which can be drawn from the above case law is that, as a general
tule, moral damages are not available to a party injured by the wrongful acts of a
State, but that moral damages can be awarded in exceptional cases, provided that

- the State’s actions imply physical threat, illegal detention or other analogous
situations in which the ill-treatment contravenes the norms according to
which civilized nations are expected to act;

- the State’s actions cause a deterioration of health, stress, anxiety, other
mental suffering such as humiliation, shame and degradation, or loss of
reputation, credit and social position; and

- both cause and effect are grave or substantial.

3.2. Application of the Standards to the Facts

Claimant submits that Respondent should compensate him for the moral damages
allegedly caused by the irregular awarding of frequencies, the excessive
inspections and the attempt to charge abusive renewal fees. The Arbitral Tribunal
will apply the required standards, defined in the preceding section, to the three
sets of acts identified by Respondent:

A. Breaches in the Awarding of Frequencies

Claimant argues that he suffered two kinds of injuries provoked by the National
Council’s procedures for awarding radio licences: (i) the disproportionate and
excessive efforts which Claimant had to incur in the preparation of applications
and (ii) the disrespect and humiliation caused by the constant rejections.

(i) The Arbitral Tribunal finds that excessive or disproportionate efforts which an
applicant may have incurred when requesting administrative licences, by their
nature, are most unlikely to give rise to moral damages, since the injury does not
meet any of the three standards required for the existence of moral damages.

The Arbitral Tribunal acknowledges that Claimant has devoted a significant effort
to preparing and submitting more than 200 applications to the National Council
and that he may have been despondent, when all applications bar one were
rejected. But the Arbitral Tribunal does not consider that Claimant suffered
extraordinary stress or anxiety — especially since Mr. Lemire is an experienced

5% Siag, para. 545.
5° Siag, para. 547.

92

338.

339.

340.

341.

342.

professional and a seasoned entrepreneur. And the economic compensation which
the Tribunal has already awarded constitutes sufficient redress for incidental
difficulties which Mr. Lemire may have endured.

(ii) Claimant has also submitted that recurring rejections of applications had a
negative impact on his entrepreneurial image. The Tribunal accepts that the
second requirement for the existence of moral damages — a requirement which
inter alia includes loss of reputation — is probably met. However, this is not
enough: the main question is to determine whether the injury inflicted is
substantial.

The Arbitral Tribunal has pondered the circumstances of the case and decides that
the gravity required under the standard is not present. The Arbitral Tribunal
accepts that Mr. Lemire was first invited into Ukraine as a leading investor in the
nascent radio industry and then suffered an unlawful treatment by the Ukrainian
media regulator. The Tribunal sympathizes with Mr. Lemire’s predicament, but
feels that the injury suffered cannot be compared to that caused by armed threats,
by the witnessing of deaths or by other similar situations in which Tribunals in the
past have awarded moral damages. And the acknowledgement in the First
Decision that Ukraine has indeed breached the BIT, and the present award of
substantial compensation, are elements of redress which may significantly repair
Mr. Lemire’s loss of reputation.

B. Inspections

In its First Decision the Tribunal established that Gala Radio was in a short time
period inspected five times by the National Council, that four of these procedures
were unscheduled, and that two cases finalized with the National Council issuing
warnings against the radio broadcaster, which were eventually set aside by the
Ukrainian Courts.

The Arbitral Tribunal accepts that inspections by a regulator, if improperly used
as tools of intimidation against regulated entities, constitute egregious behaviour
and an abuse of power, which can cause extreme stress and anxiety to the
supervised and result in an entitlement to be compensated for the moral damage
inflicted. But this is not the case at hand. Claimant has not alleged, and the
Tribunal has not found any indication, that the National Council tried to
intimidate Gala Radio through its inspections. Additionally, the two warnings
issued by the National Council were annulled by Court decisions. There is no
evidence that Ukraine had orchestrated a cat-and-mouse game of some kind. It
thus appears that Claimant’s situation prior to the inspections has already been re-
established and, thus, no lasting prejudice was caused.

C. Renewal of Licence

The National Council initially decided that Gala Radio’s renewal of licence
should be charged at the new increased fee rate, but the National Council finally

93

reassessed its decision, and accepted to significantly reduce the amount, applying
the previous formula*”,

343. This situation is similar to that of the inspections analysed in the preceding
section. The National Council’s initial decision was incorrect, Claimant may have
suffered some degree of stress or anxiety until the mistake was corrected, but in
the end Mr. Lemire’s arguments were accepted and he has paid the renewal fee at
the correct lower rates. There is no warrant for Claimant to be awarded additional
moral damages.

3.3. Conclusion

344. Summing up, although the Tribunal acknowledges that Mr. Lemire was mistreated
by his regulator, the National Council, and has sympathy and understanding for
the stress and anxiety which he must have felt at certain times during his long
fight in the defence of his rights, the Tribunal is of the opinion that the moral
aspects of his injuries have already been compensated by the awarding of a
significant amount of economic compensation, and that the extraordinary tests
required for the recognition of separate and additional moral damages have not
been met in this case.

345. Additionally, it must be remembered that Mr. Lemire may not have been
consistently adroit: his continuous appeals to the Courts to obtain redress and to
the American Embassy to secure protection, his repeated letter writing to a wide
array of authorities, and the video recording of the sessions of the National
Council, may have appeared rude and disrespectful to the Ukrainian authorities*”.
Finally, another important aspect to bear in mind is that the Ukrainian legal
system has, to some extent, afforded Claimant an effective means for appealing
the regulator’s decisions. In the case of the renewal fees, the Ministry of Justice
has sided with Claimant against the National Council**, These elements reinforce
the conclusion that a separate redress for moral damages is not appropriate.

Decision, para. 473.
Decision, para. 482.
First Decision, para. 483.

 

363

94

346.

347.

IV.3. INTEREST

1. Claimant’s Case

Claimant had initially requested that Respondent be ordered to pay interest at a
rate of LIBOR 43° compounded semi-annually on the amounts to be paid by
Respondent as of the date they were determined to have been due to Claimant.
However, he later decided to reduce the interest rate claimed in his Reply
Memorial and PHB to a rate of LIBOR +2*°° compounded semi-annually “to keep
in line with the practice of ICSID Arbitral Tribunals”.

To support his assessment of the practice of arbitral tribunals, Claimant makes
reference to the awards in the cases PSEG Global, Inc. et al. v. Republic of
Turkey’, Sempra Energy International v. The Argentine Republic* and Rumeli
Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri A.S. v.
Kazakhstan™®.

5 Claimant’s PHB, para. 151.

565 CMRI, para. 99.

°° CMRI, footnote 126.

387 PSEG Global Inc. Et al. v. Republic of Turkey (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/5), Award of January 19,
2007, [*PSEG”], para. 90.

38 Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16), Award of
September 28, 2007, [*Sempra”], para. 137.

5 Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri A.S. v., Republic of Kazakhstan
(ICSID Case No. ARB/05/16), Award of July 29, 2008, [“Rumeli”], para. 227.

95

348.

349.

350.

2. Respondent’s Case

Respondent considers that if compensation should be awarded to Claimant, he
should only be entitled to simple interest at the LIBOR rate*””, as decided in the
MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTH Chile S.A v. Republic of Chile™".

Respondent submits that tribunals in recent investment treaty cases have
concluded that simple interest suffices for claimants to be fully compensated. It
does not consider that there are any particular circumstances in this case justifying
the award of compound interest”. It refers to the award in the case CMS”,
where the Tribunal decided that the interest rate should be simple rather than
compounded semi-annually.

Furthermore, Respondent points out that no justification was given by Claimant to
uphold his request for the application of a rate of LIBOR +2 compounded semi-
annually*™,

570 RMRI, para. 449.

*7! Respondent has referred in RMRI footnote 594 to MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTH Chile S.A v.
Republic of Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/99/7), Award of May 25, 2004, [“MTD”], para. 280. However,
the Arbitral Tribunal notes that the correct ICSID Case No. for those parties is ARB/O1/7 and that there is
no paragraph 280; the issue of interest is addressed in para. 251.

5” RMRI, para. 448.

373

CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8), Award of May

12, 2005, [*CMS”], para. 471.

3

+ RMRI, para. 448.

96

351.

352.

353.

354.

355.

3. The Arbitral Tribunal’s Decision

Claimant has requested that, if compensation is awarded, interest should accrue
with LIBOR as the rate of reference. Respondent, although it has denied
Claimant’s right to be compensated, has accepted that if the Tribunal were to
award compensation, interest should be calculated by reference to LIBOR. The
Tribunal agrees.

LIBOR represents the interest rate at which banks can borrow funds from other
banks in the London interbank market and is fixed daily by the British Bankers’
Association for different maturities and for different currencies. LIBOR is
universally accepted as a valid reference for the calculation of variable interest
rates. In the present case, an additional reason for the selection of LIBOR is that it
is consistent with Article III.1 of the BIT, which provides that compensation for
expropriation shall include “interest at a commercially reasonable rate, such as
LIBOR plus an appropriate margin”. Although the rule refers to expropriation, it
can be extended without difficulty to compensation for violations of other
provisions of the BIT.

Since the compensation is expressed in USD, the appropriate rate of reference for
the calculation of interest should be the LIBOR rates for six month deposits
denominated in USD, calculated as of the date of delivery of this Award. The rate
shall be adjusted every six months thereafter, to reflect changing market
conditions.

Although the parties have agreed on the generic use of LIBOR as a reference rate,
they disagree on two issues: (i) whether the LIBOR rate should be increased by a
margin of 2% as Claimant suggests; and (ii) whether the interest rate should be
simple or compounded semi-annually.

(i) Margin

As regards the addition of a margin to the LIBOR reference rate, the Tribunal
sides with Claimant. LIBOR reflects the interest at which banks lend to each other
money. Loans to customers invariably include a surcharge, and this surcharge
must be inserted in the calculation of interest to reflect the financial loss caused to
Claimant by the temporary withholding of money. A claimant to whom money is
awarded would not be fully compensated, if the interest rate applied did not
include an appropriate margin. This is acknowledged by Article III.1 of the BIT,
which expressly provides that the LIBOR rate should be increased by “an
appropriate margin”.

97

356.

357.

358.

359.

360.

361.

315

Claimant has proposed a margin of 2%. The Tribunal concurs: 2% is a reasonable
margin, which reflects the surcharge which an average borrower would have to
pay for obtaining financing based on LIBOR*”.

(ii) Simple or semi-annually compounded interest

Claimant has requested that the interest should be compounded semi-annually,
while Respondent proposes that simple interest be applied. It is important to
clarify what Claimant is requesting: he is not asking that interest be continuously
capitalised and itself bear interest, in accordance with the compound interest
formula. Such a request is incompatible with LIBOR, which is always calculated
applying the simple interest methodology.

What Claimant requests, and the question to be decided by the Tribunal, is
whether the unpaid LIBOR interest, calculated as simple interest and accruing at
the end of each six month period, should be added to the principal, and as such
accrue interest in the succeeding interest periods. Claimant submits that this
should be done, Respondent that it is inappropriate.

The question whether interest should be accumulated periodically to the principal
has been the subject of diverging decisions*”°. While older case law tended to
repudiate this possibility, recent case law tends to accept annual or semi-annual
capitalisation of unpaid interest™”’,

The Tribunal sides with the more modern decisions. Loan agreements in which
interest is calculated on the basis of LIBOR plus a margin usually include a
provision that unpaid interest must be capitalised at the end of the interest period,
and will thereafter be considered as capital and accrue interest. The financial
reason for this provision is that an unpaid lender has to resort to the LIBOR
market, in order to fund the amounts due but defaulted, and the lender’s additional
funding costs have to be covered by the defaulting borrower.

This principle implies in our case that, if Claimant were to take out a LIBOR loan
to anticipate the amounts to which he is entitled under the Award, the bank would
insist that unpaid interest be capitalised at the end of each interest period.
Consequently, if Claimant is to be kept fully indemnified for the harm suffered,
interest owed under the Award should be capitalised at the end of each six month
interest period. The Tribunal, thus, decides that due and unpaid interest shall be
capitalized semi-annually, from the dies a quo.

LIBOR plus a 2% margin was applied in a number of recent investment arbitration decisions: PSEG,

para. 90; Sempra, para. 137; and Rumeli, para. 227.

*7© Respondent has drawn the attention of this Tribunal to cas

s MTD, para. 251 (which is incorrectly

 

quoted) and CMS, paras. 470 to 471. However, the Arbitral Tribunal notes that in the former, the interest
awarded was compounded; and in the latter, simple interest was only awarded for a period of 60 days
after the date of the decision or the date of effective payment, if before; thereafter the interest would be
compounded semi-annually.

37” MTD, para. 251; PSEG, para. 348; LG& E, para. 106; see also Marboe, para. 6.233.

98

362.

363.

364.

(iii) Dies a quo and dies ad quem

There is one final issue to be decided: when interest should start accruing, and
when it should stop. Claimant has left the determination of the dies a quo rather
vague, referring to the date on which the compensation is determined to have been
due to Claimant.

The Tribunal is of the opinion that the appropriate dies a quo is the date of
delivery of this Award. This is the date when the actual amount of damages is
established, the date when Respondent’s obligation to pay the compensation arises
and, consequently, the appropriate date for interest to start accruing.
Notwithstanding the above, the Tribunal acknowledges that Respondent, being a
State, requires a certain period of time to perform the legal formalities required for
the payment of a sum of money. Therefore, Respondent shall have a 60 day grace
period from the date of delivery of this Award to pay the amounts owed, without
interest. If after such period of time any amounts remain pending. interest shall
accrue on such amounts as from the date of delivery of the Award”,

Interest shall continue to accrue, until all amounts owed in accordance with this
Award have been finally paid.

*8 ‘The Arbitral Tribunal in Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. The Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/7), Award of November 13, 2000, para. 97, granted the same grace period: “The Kingdom of
Spain shall make such payment within a period of 60 days as of the date of this Award. Should the
payment of this amount not be made within the period specified above, the amount shall accrue interests
at a rate of 6% per annum compounded monthly as of the date of the Award to the date of payment”.

99

Iv.4. Costs

1. Claimant’s Request

365. Claimant’s total arbitration costs are quantified at 1,764,348 USD, all of which
have been paid, and are broken down as follows*”:

- ICSID and the Tribunal USD 424,921
- International Counsel USD 956,950
- Ukrainian Counsel USD 86,000

- Damages Expert USD 138,687
- Expenses USD 157,790

366. Claimant submits that his costs are reasonable and, since all jurisdictional issues
and principal claim were won, it is only fair that all costs be awarded**”. If,
against Claimant’s expectations, the Tribunal were to award only partial costs, the
Tribunal should bear in mind that the requested amount already represents only a
part of the total costs which Mr. Lemire will incur. Claimant’s counsel is working
in consideration of a success fee, which has not been included in the above

: : ae 43:
calculation, because it has not yet been invoiced**.

57° Claimant’s final statement of costs of August 6, 2010.
380 HTRI, p. 4.
3! HTRI, p. 4.

100

367.

368.

369.

370.

371.

372.

2. Respondent’s Request

Respondent quantified its fees, costs and expenses as follows**?:

- Fees and Disbursements of international counsel USD 3,042,206
- Fees and Disbursements of Ukrainian counsel USD 1,330,338
- Fees and Disbursements of EBS USD 55,270

- Advance on Costs for the Arbitration USD 400,000

The total amounts to 4,827,814 USD, of which 1,549,180 USD have been paid.
Respondent requires that it be awarded all or, substantially all, of its costs**?,

Respondent advances three reasons: (2.1) Claimant asserted but then conceded
four significant claims; (2.2) the Tribunal’s First Decision dismissing the majority
of Claimant’s claims; and (2.3) Claimant’s general conduct throughout the
arbitration.

2.1. The Abandonment of Claims

Claimant has abandoned some of his initial claims, namely those related to the
Beauty Salon in Kyiv, to Kiss and Energy trademarks, to the “affiliation
agreements” and to the “continuous interference” on the FM 100 frequency in
Kyiv.

Respondent spent a significant amount of time and resources in order to address
these claims which were later abandoned by Claimant™*, Some of the claims were
discussed in witness statements, in the Counter-Memorial, the Rejoinder and the
PHB**, and other compelled investigations of the facts**®,

2.2. The Dismissal of Claims

Respondent requests that Claimant should bear most, if not all?®”, of these costs
under the principle of “loser pays’***, The Arbitral Tribunal dismissed all of
Claimant’s claims related to the Settlement Agreement”, the claims related to the
tender of November 20, 2002 and of October 19, 2005, those related to the local
music requirement of the Ukrainian Law on Broadcasting and those related to the
alleged breach of the Clause contained in Article II.3 (c) of the US-Ukraine BIT

5® Respondent's final statement of costs of August 9, 2010.

383

RMRI, para. 442.

5 RMRI, para. 426.

585 Such as the trademarks, affiliation agreement and “continuous interference” issues.
58 Such as the beauty salon issues.

587 RMRI, para. 423.

588 RMRI, para. 423.

5 RMRI, para. 431.

101

373.

374.

which permits a breach of contract to be characterised as a breach of the BIT
(the Umbrella Clause)*”’.

2.3. The Misconduct

According to Respondent, Claimant’s conduct throughout this case has
significantly and unnecessarily increased the cost of Ukraine’s defence*'.
Claimant also attempted to reverse the burden of proof in relation to Gala Radio’s
unsuccessful applications for frequencies in various tenders*””. In addition,
Claimant took a combative attitude during the arbitration on the issue of document
production and substantiating his. claims*”.

Respondent finally raises an argument to dismiss Claimant’s request for costs,
based on the lack of causation. Taking such lack of causation into consideration,
and when the minimal economic effect of awarding even a significant number of
additional frequencies to Gala Radio is factored, it becomes apparent that
Claimant has, at best, mounted an expensive and over-inflated claim, for which
the defence costs are more than the amount at issue. Thus, the breaches of the BIT
found in the First Decision do not represent a “win” in favour of Claimant*”*.

5°° RMRI, para. 434.
°°! RMRI, para. 423.
5° RMRI, para. 438.

393

RMRI, para. 441.

54 RMRI, para. 437.

102

3. Claimant’s Reply

375. Claimant characterises Ukraine’s approach on costs as novel. Despite having lost
its jurisdictional and liability claims, it does not shy away from claiming costs and

a 3
also complaining about costs 95.

376. If this arbitration procedure has been costly, it is not only attributable to the
complexity of the issues in dispute, but also to the fact that Ukraine engaged in a
number of unnecessary and costly measures. First, it unsuccessfully challenged
one of the arbitrators. Second, it has delayed the renewal of Claimant’s licence,
then tried to charge an exorbitant renewal licence fee that led to a request for
interim measures. Third, it advanced new arguments and factual contentions, and
submitted voluminous new documentation, at untimely stages of the process*”*,

5 HTRI, p. 3.
°° HTRI, p. 3.

103

377.

378.

379.

380.

381.

382.

4, The Arbitral Tribunal’s Decision
Under Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention:

“\.. the Tribunal shall, except as the parties otherwise agree, assess
the expenses incurred by the parties in connection with the
proceedings, and shall decide how and by whom those expenses, the
fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the charges for
the use of the facilities of the Centre shall be paid”.

Article VIL4 of the BIT states as follows:

“Expenses incurred by the Chairman, the other arbitrators, and other
costs of the proceedings shall be paid for equally by the Parties. The
Tribunal may, however, at its discretion, direct that a higher
proportion of the costs be paid by one of the Parties”.

In accordance with these rules, there being no specific agreement among the
parties as regards legal expenses, the BIT provides as a general principle that costs
shall be paid equally, but it grants the Tribunal full discretion to assess the fees
and costs of the arbitration and the legal expenses incurred by the parties and to
decide how and by whom these fees, costs and expenses are to be borne”,

The traditional position in investment arbitration is to split the arbitration costs
equally among the parties*’®, The Arbitral Tribunal, however, welcomes the
newly established and growing trend, that there should be an allocation of costs
that reflects in some measure the principle that the losing party should contribute
in a significant, if not necessarily exhaustive, fashion to the fees, costs and
expenses of the arbitration of the prevailing party”,

The final result of this procedure is that the Tribunal (i) has found that Respondent
breached the BIT in most (but not all) of the situations alleged by Claimant,
(ii) has awarded compensatory damages in an amount of 8,717,850 USD, (but
significantly below the amount claimed), and (iii) finally has rejected all claims
for moral damages. Claimant is the overall winning party, without having
completely prevailed in a single issue, and after having abandoned a number of
claims initially submitted. Claimant therefore should only be entitled to a partial
reimbursement of his global arbitration costs.

Respondent also filed on August 29, 2008, a proposal for the disqualification of
one arbitrator. On September 23, 2008, the other members of the Tribunal

*°7 See also Rule 47(1) (j) ICSID Arbitration Rules.

*°8 Cristoph H. Schreuer “The ICSID Convention: A Commentary”, Second Edition, 2009, p. 1232.

*°° EDF, para. 327; Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24)
Award of August 27, 2008, para. 316; Phoenix Action, LTD. v. The Czech Republic, (ICSID Case No.
ARB/06/05), Award of April 15, 2009, para. 151.

104

383.

384.

dismissed the proposal. Since this proposal for disqualification was rejected, the
Tribunal finds that the full costs and expenses incurred by this incident are
attributable to Respondent.

Taking all these factors into consideration, the Arbitral Tribunal hereby orders
Respondent to reimburse Claimant a proportion of the reasonable costs and
expenses of pursuing this arbitration in an amount equivalent to 750,000 USD.
This amount, if unpaid within 60 days from the delivery of this Award, shall
accrue interest in accordance with Section 111.3“.

The Secretariat is to provide the parties a detailed breakdown of the fees paid to
the arbitrators and of the costs incurred. Any excess amounts shall be reimbursed
equally to the parties.

4 In para. 413 of his Separate Opinion, Dr. Voss applies para. 92(1) of the German Code of Civil
Procedure, and comes to the conclusion that in this case Respondent is entitled to reimbursement from
Claimant in an amount of approximately 4 M USD. Para. 92(1) of the German Code of Civil Procedure
has not been pleaded by any of the parties. Even if it had been pleaded, the Tribunal fails to understand
how this domestic German rule could have any bearing on the allocation of costs and expenses in
international investment arbitration under the Treaty and the ICSID Convention.

105

V. DECISION

On the basis of the reasons given both in its First Decision and in the present Award, the
Tribunal, by majority decision, hereby:

1. Orders Respondent to pay to Claimant 8,717,850 USD as compensation for
Respondent’s violation of the FET standard defined in the BIT, within 60
days from the delivery of this Award;

2. Orders Respondent to pay to Claimant 750,000 USD as compensation for the
costs and expenses incurred in this arbitration, within 60 days from the
delivery of this Award;

3. Orders Respondent to pay to Claimant interest on the amounts established in
the two preceding paragraphs, if such amounts have not been paid within 60
days from the delivery of this Award; interest shall (i) accrue as from the
date of delivery of this Award until full payments of any amounts owed, (ii)
be calculated at the LIBOR rate for six month deposits denominated in USD,
on the date of delivery of this Award, and adjusted every six months
thereafter, plus a margin of 2% and (iii) be capitalised every six months from
the date of delivery of this Award;

4. Dismisses all other claims.

Dr. Voss dissents from this Award and, as authorized by Rule 47(3) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules, attaches his individual opinion. In accordance with Rule 47(2) of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules, the Award is signed by the members of the Tribunal who
voted for it.

106

Ov < Abclum.

Professor Juan Fernandez-Armesto Mr. Jan Paulsson

President Arbitrator
3/3
Date: N9,%, m Date: 3/ i

 

107

