CITATION: Nelson v. The Government of the United Mexican States, 2022 ONSC 1193
COURT FILE NO.: CV-21-00663626-00CL
DATE: 2022-02-16

ONTARIO

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE

(COMMERCIAL LIST)
BETWEEN:
JOSHUA DEAN NELSON

Applicant Mark A. Gelowitz, Sonja Pavic and Riyaz
—and— Dattu for the Applicant

THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED
MEXICAN STATES

the Respondent

)
)
)
)
)
)
)
) Vincent De Rose and Jennifer Radford for
Respondent }
)
)
)
)
)
)

HEARD: November 23, 2021

PENNY J.

(1)

[2]

[3]

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT.

The Applicant, Mr. Joshua Dean Nelson, seeks to set aside an arbitral award dated June 5,
2020 (as corrected on July 31, 2020) made by a tribunal consisting of three arbitrators
constituted under Chapter 11 of the North American Free Trade Agreement in an
international arbitration proceeding between Mr. Nelson and the Government of the United
Mexican States.

The application is made under Article 34(2)(a)(ii) of the Model Law on International
Commercial Arbitration, which provides the court with discretion to set aside an award on
the basis that: “the party making the application... was otherwise unable to present his
case.” Here, the applicant claims he was denied natural justice and procedural fairness
because: (a) the award is based on a theory of the case not pleaded or argued by either of
the parties; and, b) the tribunal ignored or failed to take the applicant’s expert evidence into
account on issues which formed the basis on the tribunal’s award.

For the reasons that follow, the application is dismissed.

)22 ONSC 1193 (CanLII)

20

Page: 2

Background

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

Mr. Nelson is an experienced businessperson in the telecommunications industry. In 2010,
he invested in Tele Facil México, S.A. de C.V. (“Tele Facil”), a corporation organized
under the laws of Mexico. On May 17, 2013, Tele Facil obtained a 30-year concession
from Mexico’s Ministry of Communications and Transportation to operate a public
telecommunications network.

Tele Facil required interconnection rights with a Mexican carrier to allow Tele Facil’s
customers to communicate with customers on other networks. Tele Facil approached
Teléfonos de México and Teléfonos del Noroeste (which I will refer to jointly as
“Telmex”), Mexico’s largest telecom providers.

On August 26, 2013, Telmex offered Tele Facil a draft interconnection agreement for a
period expiring on December 31, 2017. The proposed agreement included Telmex’s
standard reciprocal interconnection rate that Tele Facil would charge for incoming calls.
The standard reciprocal interconnection rate proposed was USD 0.00975 per minute of use.
Telmex made no provision for what is called “indirect interconnection” and proposed
certain portability charges. Tele Facil did not immediately respond to this draft offer.

Meanwhile, on March 6, 2014, the Federal Institute of Telecommunications (“IFT”)
declared Telmex to be a preponderant economic agent in the telecommunications sector.
Twenty days later, on March 26, 2014, the IFT issued specific asymmetrical regulations
which included the obligation of Telmex to provide indirect interconnection and a special
interconnection rate of approximately USD 0.00172. This was, obviously, a significant
reduction from the standard reciprocal rate offered to Tele Facil in the August 26, 2013
draft.

In a letter dated July 7, 2014, and sent the following day, Tele Facil provided its comments
on the draft standard interconnection agreement that Telmex had sent on August 26, 2013.
Tele Facil requested that Telmex include provisions allowing indirect interconnection and
to eliminate portability charges. The language used in this letter is significant to the issues
in the arbitration and in the award. In abbreviated form, the letter says:

Re: Comments on the draft interconnection agreement

In follow-up to the various negotiation meetings held at your client’s office... and
in order to reach an agreement for the interconnection of the corresponding public
telecommunications networks of both companies, attached please find Tele
Facil’s comments on the draft framework agreement...

We appreciate you taking into consideration our comments and modify the
version we have received so that Tele Facil may be in a position to sign the draft
agreement.

1193 (CanLll)

ONSC

a
a
So
a

[9]

[10]

(11)

(12]

(13]

[14]

Page: 3

On July 11, 2014, three days after providing its comments to Telmex, Tele Facil initiated
disagreement proceedings under Article 42 of Mexico’s Federal Telecommunications Law
(“FTL”) before the IFT to resolve alleged “divergences” between Tele Facil and Telmex
over: (i) indirect interconnection; and (ii) portability charges.

In its response to Tele Facil’s disagreement proceedings, Telmex submitted a different draft
agreement than the one presented to Tele Facil on August 26, 2013. This draft did not
include portability charges and allowed indirect interconnection. Telmex also argued that
the parties had a disagreement on the applicable rates and requested the IFT to determine
the rates.

On November 26, 2014, the IFT, by unanimous decision, issued Resolution 381. In
Resolution 381, the IFT:

a) concluded that Telmex, in the course of the interconnection disagreement proceeding,
had accepted the provision of indirect interconnection service and eliminated the portability
clause;

b) dismissed Telmex’s argument in connection with an alleged disagreement on
interconnection rates and concluded that these rates “were defined in the draft agreement
for the provision of fixed local interconnection services and its exhibits, sent by Telmex to
Tele Facil on August 26, 2013; and

c) ordered the parties to “interconnect their telecommunications networks and initiate the
provision of the corresponding interconnection services” and “execute the interconnection
agreement of their telecommunications networks” within 10 business days following the
notification of the resolution.

On December 10, 2014, Telmex sent to Tele Facil a new draft agreement. Telmex took the
position that, under the new regulatory framework, it could no longer lawfully offer the
USD 0.00975 reciprocal rate. The new draft agreement included indirect interconnection
and did not include portability charges, as directed by the IFT. It also included an annex
specifying that the rate of USD 0.00975 would only be valid until December 31, 2014.

Tele Facil refused to accept this limitation on the rate and, on December 19, 2014,
requested the IFT to enforce Resolution 381. At around the same time, Telmex challenged
Resolution 381, through an amparo indirecto before a specialized Mexican court called the
First District Court for Administrative Matters, specialized in Economic Competition,
Broadcasting and Telecommunications. The amparo is a proceeding roughly analogous to
judicial review in Canada. Both Telmex and the IFT’s Compliance Unit also sought
“confirmation of criteria” from the IFT concerning the meaning and effect of Resolution
381 as it related to rates.

On April 8, 2015, the IFT, by a majority vote, issued Decree 77 in response to Telmex’s
confirmation request. Decree 77 determined that the IFT’s powers were restricted to
resolving only conditions not agreed upon by the parties which were, in the case of Tele
Facil and Telmex, indirect interconnection and portability charges. Therefore, Resolution

1193 (CanLll)

ONSC

a
a
So
a

(15]

[16]

(17]

[18]

Page: 4

381 did not confirm or in any way establish the interconnection rate between the parties;
nor did Decree 77. Decree 77 simply ordered the parties to interconnect their systems
physically within ten business days and obligated the parties to execute the corresponding
interconnection agreement without specifying any deadline for doing so.

Telmex offered a new interconnection agreement to Tele Facil, which was declined.
Accordingly, on June 16, 2015, Telmex submitted a new interconnection disagreement to
the IFT, claiming that there was a disagreement on different terms, including the applicable
interconnection rate for 2015.

On October 7, 2015, the IFT issued Resolution 127 deciding Telmex’s interconnection
disagreement proceeding. Resolution 127 held that the original interconnection agreement
between Telmex and Tele Facil was null and void because it was never signed by Telmex.
The IFT found that the applicable interconnection rate for calendar 2015 would be USD
0.000253. Two of the five IFT commissioners dissented.

On November 11, 2015, Tele Facil filed an amparo action against the IFT concerning
Resolution 127 on the ground that it had illegally left without effect Resolution 381. The
Mexican court dismissed Tele Facil’s amparo action. Tele Facil filed an appeal of this
decision which was also dismissed.

The Mexican court also dismissed Telmex’s earlier amparo action. Both Tele Facil and
Telmex appealed this decision but those appeals were ultimately withdrawn.

The Arbitration

{19}

[20]

[21]

Tele Facil decided that further challenges before the IFT and the local courts would be
prolonged, costly and futile. Therefore, Mr. Nelson initiated the NAFTA arbitration against
Mexico in 2016. In the arbitration, he alleged that Mexico’s measures resulted in an
expropriation of Tele Facil’s interconnection rights in violation of Article 1110 of NAFTA,
and that he and Tele Facil had been denied fair and equitable treatment by Mexico contrary
to Article 1105 of NAFTA.

The applicant alleged that there were three measures that resulted in expropriation: (i) the
“confirmation of criteria” proceedings initiated by Telmex and the Compliance Unit of the
IFT that allegedly avoided the enforcement of Resolution 381; (ii) Decree 77 through
which Resolution 381 was allegedly repudiated and; (iii) Resolution 127 that, contrary to
Resolution 381, imposed a new interconnection rate detrimental to Tele Facil but favorable
to Telmex.

The process followed by the arbitration was as follows:
° On November 7, 2017, the applicant filed his statement of claim. The claim was

280 pages in length and was accompanied by 7 witness statements, 4 expert reports,
95 factual exhibits and 101 legal exhibits.

1193 (CanLll)

ONSC

a
a
So
a

[22]

[23]

Page: 5

° On March 14, 2018, the respondent filed its statement of defence. The defence was
97 pages in length and was accompanied by 2 witness statements, 2 expert reports,
62 factual exhibits and 13 legal exhibits.

. On June 5, 2018, the applicant filed his reply. The reply was 256 pages in length
and was accompanied by 2 witness statements, 5 expert reports, 18 factual exhibits
and 53 legal exhibits.

. On September 10, 2018, the respondent filed its rejoinder. The rejoinder was 96
pages in length and was accompanied by 4 witness statements, 3 expert reports, 23
factual exhibits and 6 legal exhibits.

. Thus, at the close of pleadings, the tribunal had jointly received from the parties
729 pages of written submissions, 15 witness statements, 14 expert reports, 198
factual exhibits and 173 legal exhibits.

. The hearing on jurisdiction, merits and quantum was held in Washington, DC from
April 22 to April 26, 2019. In total, sixteen witnesses and experts provided direct
evidence and were cross-examined during the hearing.

. On August 15, 2019, both parties filed detailed post-hearing briefs. The applicant’s
post-hearing brief was 60 pages in length and the respondent’s post-hearing brief
was 52 pages in length.

° On June 5, 2020, the Tribunal delivered a lengthy and final award of some 117
pages, unanimously dismissing the applicant’s claim in its entirety and declaring
that the respondent did not breach any of its obligations under NAFTA.

Among other things, the tribunal found that an essential, threshold question was whether
the applicant had interconnection rights which it lost as a result of the respondent’s
impugned actions. These rights, the applicant had argued, derived from: i) the alleged
agreement between Telmex and Tele Facil on the terms of a standard interconnection
agreement proposed by Telmex (via Tele Facil’s “acceptance” of the August 2013 draft
interconnection agreement); and, (ii) the IFT’s Resolution 381.

Following a careful review of the events and circumstances leading up to July 2014 and
the language of Tele Facil’s July 2014 letter itself, the tribunal found that nothing in the
circumstances or in text of the letter suggested that Tele Facil accepted the draft
interconnection agreement, conditionally or unconditionally. The tribunal found, to the
contrary, that the letter did no more than indicate that Tele Facil was requesting
modifications to the draft, that the agreement needed to be signed and that for Tele Facil to
be in a position to sign, the modifications would have to be included. Accordingly, the
tribunal found that the July 2014 letter did not constitute a letter of acceptance but merely
contained comments on the draft provided by Telmex, acknowledged that the agreement
would still have to be signed and that Tele Facil would sign if its proposed changes were
made.

1193 (CanLll)

ONSC

a
a
So
a

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

Page: 6

Based on these findings, the tribunal concluded that the applicant had not proven, for the
purposes of its claim in the arbitration, that under Mexican civil and commercial law there
was an agreement on interconnection rates between Tele Facil and Telmex resulting from
the draft submitted by Telmex in August 2013.

Further, after Telmex provided the August 2013 draft, the Mexican government and the
IFT enacted significant regulatory changes to Telmex’s status and to the rate regime
applicable to Telmex. Under the new regime, Telmex could not charge a reciprocal rate of
USD 0.00975 as proposed in the August 2013 draft. Because Telmex took the position
there was no agreement on the applicable interconnection rates, Telmex submitted the rate
issue in disagreement proceedings to the IFT. The IFT decided the disagreement on the
applicable rates in Resolution 127 in Telmex’s favour.

The tribunal concluded that Tele Facil, rather than trying to conclude an agreement with
Telmex in 2013/2014, saw an opportunity to steal a march when Telmex’s status and rate
regime was changed by regulation in March 2014. After almost a year of inactivity on the
draft agreement offered by Telmex in August 2013, Tele Facil submitted its “comments”,
assiduously ignoring the reciprocal rate issue, and almost instantly, before even hearing
back from Telmex on these “comments”, brought disagreement proceedings before the
IFT.

The tribunal concluded that in the absence of sufficient evidence of the existence of an
interconnection agreement between Telmex and Tele Facil, the inevitable conclusion was
“that Tele Facil had no ‘rights under the Interconnection Agreement’ that could have been
determined by Resolution 381.”

Even if Tele Facil had a valid and binding agreement with Telmex under Mexican law, the
question remained whether Resolution 381 granted interconnection rights to Tele Facil.
The tribunal found that under Article 42 of the FTL, the IFT only had authority to resolve
interconnection conditions that could not be agreed upon by the telecommunications
network carriers. When Tele Facil initiated disagreement proceedings under Article 42, it
submitted only two disagreements: indirect connection and portability charges. Tele Facil
did not submit any disagreement on the rates. Although Telmex tried to submit rates as a
disputed issue, the IFT held Telmex had not done so properly and that this dispute was
therefore “inadmissible” in the Tele Facil-initiated proceedings before them.

For this reason, the tribunal concluded that the IFT did not, and could not, decide the issue
of the applicable rates in Resolution 381. Rather than making any finding on rates, the IFT
in Resolution 381 merely assumed there was no dispute on rates because no party had put
this issue properly before it. In effect, Resolution 381 did not decide a dispute on the rates
because the IFT believed that there was no dispute. This was, effectively, the conclusion
of the IFT in its decision in Decree 77.

Thus, Resolution 381 did not result in the conferral of any “rights” on Tele Facil to
interconnect and to charge a differential rate of USD 0.00975 when it was only paying
Telmex (under the new laws and regulations which intervened post-August 2013 draft)

1193 (CanLll)

ONSC

a
a
So
a

Page: 7

USD 0.00172. And, for the same reason, Decree 77 and Resolution 127 (and the dismissal
of Tele Facil’s amparo actions in the Mexican court) could not, by definition, take away
rights that Tele Facil never had.

Analysis

Jurisdiction

(31]

The “seat” of this arbitration was designated to be Toronto, Ontario. Accordingly, the
award is subject to review by the Ontario Superior Court of Justice under the Model Law.

Standard of Review

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

Article 34 of the Model Law, as modified by s. 6(2) of the International Commercial
Arbitration Act, 2017, S.O. 2017, c. 2, Sched. 5, provides that an arbitral award may be set
aside on an application to the court if one of the specified grounds is established. This
application seeks to set aside the award based on Article 34(2)(a)(ii) of the Model Law,
which provides that: “the party making the application... was otherwise unable to present
his case.”

Article 34(2)(a)(ii) embodies well-established principles of fairness and natural justice.
While decisions of an international arbitral tribunal generally attract a high level of
deference, they are not immune from being set aside by the courts of the seat of arbitration
if minimum standards of due process and substantive fairness are not met. Ontario courts
have held that the standard of review for setting aside an award under Article 34(2)(a)(ii)
is whether the tribunal’s conduct is “sufficiently serious to offend our most basic notions
of morality and justice” and “that it cannot be condoned under the law of the enforcing
State”: Consolidated Contractors Group S.A.L. (Offshore) v. Ambatovy Minerals S.A.,
2017 ONCA 9339, at para. 65, leave to appeal refused, 2018 CarswellOnt 17927 (S.C.C).

In Consolidated Contractors, the Court also confirmed that a party may be said to have
been “unable to present his or her case” under Article 34(2)(a)(ii) when:

(a) the award is based on a theory of liability that either or both of the parties were not
given an opportunity to address, or based on a theory of the case not argued for by either
of the parties;

(b) a party was not given an opportunity to respond to arguments made by an opposing
party; or

(c) the tribunal ignored or failed to take the evidence or submissions of the parties into
account.

A party is not permitted to review the award on its merits under the guise of alleged
breaches of Article 34(2)(a)(ii). Where a party merely disagrees with the outcome, the court
should not permit reargument of the merits in the guise of a claim for breach of procedural

1193 (CanLll)

ONSC

a
a
So
a

Page: 8

fairness: Consolidated Contractors Group S.A.L. (Offshore) v. Ambatovy Minerals S.A.,
2016 ONSC 7171, at para. 89.

The Issues
[36] The applicant makes two arguments for why the award should be set aside.

[37] | First, the applicant argues that, rather than considering and resolving the competing expert
evidence advanced by the parties on the question of whether Tele Facil obtained
interconnection rights under Mexican law, the Tribunal instead decided the issue on a novel
theory not advanced or argued by either party. This conduct violated the applicant’s right
to present its case and to be heard.

[38] Second, the applicant argues that the tribunal failed to consider the applicant’s expert
evidence and submissions on the core issue in the arbitration. This, he argues, also offends
minimum standards of procedural and substantive fairness and should result in the award
being set aside.

Application

Did the Tribunal Decide the Case on A Basis not Argued?

 

[39] _ The principle that a tribunal cannot decide a case on a basis that was not pleaded or argued
is well established and not in doubt. The issue joined in this case is a question of fact — was
the basis upon which the tribunal determined that Tele Facil never had interconnection
rights priced at USD 0.00975 pleaded or argued?

[40] The applicant says he could not have anticipated that the tribunal would decide the case
based on the form and content of Tele Facil’s July 2014 letter. That theory, he says, was
not advanced by the respondent and the tribunal gave no indication to the parties that it
considered this issue to be a determining one.

[41] Iam not able to accept this submission.

[42] _ In its claim, Tele Facil asserted that it accepted Telmex’s offered rates, that there were no
negotiations on rates and that rates had been agreed upon. Telmex took the position in its
defence that no agreement was ever signed and that Tele Facil never notified Telmex of
any acceptance of the August 2013 proposal or any aspect of it.

[43] The applicant’s experts on Mexican civil and administrative law testified that there was
consent from both parties about the rates, and therefore an agreement. The respondent’s
expert testified at length that, once Tele Facil gave what may have been a conditional
acceptance of Telmex’s offer, that is, acceptance subject to two required changes before
Tele Facil would sign, Telmex was no longer bound by its earlier draft proposal. As a
result, the consent of both parties to the rate, which was required for there to be an
agreement, was never given.

1193 (CanLll)

ONSC

a
a
So
a

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]

Page: 9

Tele Facil’s fact witnesses were cross-examined on the meaning and effect of Tele Facil’s
July 7, 2014 letter. One of Tele Facil’s legal experts was also cross-examined on whether
the July 7, 2014 letter constituted an acceptance of Telmex’s offer or was a counter offer.

After the completion of evidence, the tribunal expressly asked the parties to address the
meaning and effect of the July 7, 2014 letter in oral submissions by answering the following
question:

Question Four: What are the most relevant legal and evidential materials on the
record to help the Tribunal decide whether under Mexican law the July 7, 2014,
letter (Exhibit C-0024) constitutes an acceptance of an offer by Telmex or a
counter-offer from Tele Facil to Telmex or a third category?

Both the applicant and the respondent addressed this question in oral submissions on the
final day of the hearing. Moreover, both parties were invited to address this issue further
in their written post-hearing briefs which were submitted more than 3 months later.

The respondent addressed the negotiations leading up to the July 7, 2014 letter, as well as
whether the July 7, 2014 letter constituted acceptance of Telmex’s previous offer, in its
post-hearing brief. The applicant chose not to do so.

Thus, whether Tele Facil’s letter of July 7, 2014 created a binding interconnection
agreement with Telmex was addressed in the parties’ pleadings as well as the written
reports prepared by the legal experts and was the subject of cross-examination and
questions from the tribunal members during the hearing. Both parties put their positions
squarely before the tribunal on this issue.

There was no failure of fairness or natural justice.

Did the Tribunal Fail to Consider Relevant Evidence?

[50]

The applicant submits that the expert evidence on Mexican civil and administrative law
(two experts for the applicant, one for the respondent) addressed a core issue in the
arbitration — whether the USD 0.00975 interconnection rate was agreed to by the parties
and confirmed in law by the IFT in Resolution 381. Yet, the applicant argues:

. there is not a single reference to or acknowledgement of the position of the
applicant’s experts in the 117 pages of the award

. the tribunal made some reference to views expressed in the respondent’s expert
report, but wholly failed to acknowledge or consider the evidence of the applicant’s
experts that supported the applicant’s position, and

. the tribunal acknowledged that to come to a determination as to the legal effect of
Resolution 381, it must consider “the powers of the IFT under Mexican law”, yet
the award contains no reference whatsoever to the experts’ evidence concerning the
IFT’s authority and powers.

1193 (CanLll)

ONSC

a
a
So
a

(51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]

[56]

(57]

Page: 10

It is generally accepted that a trier of fact cannot ignore or fail to evaluate relevant portions
of the evidence. A similar concept has been applied in the context of international
commercial arbitrations. For example, in Oil Basins Ltd v. BHP Billiton LTD & Ors, [2007]
VSCA 255, the Victoria Court of Appeal in Australia affirmed a lower court judgement
which had set aside an arbitral award on the grounds that the tribunal had failed to deal
with extensive expert evidence. In that case, both parties had submitted expert evidence
regarding the meaning of the term “overriding royalty,” which was a key issue in the
proceeding. The award made no reference to the evidence of the losing party, beyond a
bare statement that the tribunal preferred the evidence of the other party’s witness. The
lower court found that since the submissions and evidence were neither peripheral nor
obviously untenable, but instead were “at the heart of the matter,” the tribunal was obliged
to give intelligible reasons for its rejection. The Court of Appeal affirmed the decision,
finding that the reasons were inadequate because of the tribunal’s “failure to condescend
to any analysis of the competing evidence and reasons for rejecting it”: at para. 40.

While it may be literally true that the applicants’ experts were not mentioned by name in
the award, it must be understood that the parties submitted their respective expert evidence
as exhibits to their pleadings and their pleadings addressed that expert evidence in detail.

Throughout the award, the tribunal cited extensively from the applicant’s claim and reply.
Many of the paragraphs cited by the tribunal expressly address the applicant’s expert
evidence.

For instance, in considering whether the respondent breached Article 1110 of NAFTA, the
award cites paragraphs 381, 388-390, 394, 400, 408 and 424 of the statement of claim, and
paragraphs 178-181 and 189 of the reply. All these paragraphs specifically address the
applicant’s expert evidence as provided by Ms. Clara Luz Alvarez or Mr. Gerardo Soria.

Similarly, in considering whether the respondent breached Article 1105 of NAFTA, the
Award cites paragraphs 494, 496-497, 503-504, 506, 509, 540-542, 544, 546-547, 549,
556-557, 561-563, 567 and 576 of the applicant’s statement of claim, and paragraphs 281,
299, 301-302, 305, 345 and 354 of the respondent’s reply. Once again, all these paragraphs
address the applicant’s expert evidence as provided by Ms. Clara Luz Alvarez or Mr.
Gerardo Soria.

In other words, the tribunal set out in great detail what the arguments of each party were
and what those arguments were based on. The evidence was not repeated verbatim in the
award but detailed and extensive citations were made referring to the parties’ positions and
evidence on each issue and argument.

Importantly, the tribunal did not just stop there and go on to state a bald conclusion. In 23
pages of additional reasons, from paras. 221 to 284 of the award, the tribunal set out, again
in great detail, its analysis and precise reasoning for why it rejected the applicant’s
arguments on: a) whether there was an agreement between Tele Facil and Telmex on rates;
and b) whether Resolution 381 established Tele Facil’s rates for interconnection.

1193 (CanLll)

ONSC

a
a
So
a

Page: 11

[58] The tribunal’s analysis does not take the form of “Clara Luz Alvarez says X and we do not
accept her evidence as conclusive on the point because...”. But the fact is that the experts’
arguments are fully referenced and the tribunal’s reasons for why it reached its conclusions
are set out in detail. No one could reasonably be in any doubt about whether the tribunal
considered the applicant’s evidence or why the tribunal decided the case the way it did.

Conclusion

[59] For the foregoing reasons, the application for relief under Article 34(2)(a)(ii) of the Model
Law from the decision of the tribunal in this case is dismissed.

Costs

[60] _ The parties agreed that costs of $100,000 (all inclusive) should be awarded to the successful
party. The United States of Mexico is therefore awarded costs in that amount.

Penny J.

Released: February 16, 2022

CITATION: Nelson v. The Government of the United States of Mexico, 2022 ONSC 1193
COURT FILE NO.: CV-21-00663626-00CL
DATE: 2022-02-16
ONTARIO
SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE
(COMMERCIAL LIST)
BETWEEN:

JOSHUA DEAN NELSON

Applicant

—and—

THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED MEXICAN
STATES

Defendant

 

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT

 

Penny J.

Released: February 16, 2022

1193 (CanLll)

ONSC

a
a
So
a

